AN ACT Prescribing certain Times to DELINQUENTS For perfecting their
Compositions Effectually, under several Penalties.

seal of the Commonwealth

Die Lunae, 9 April, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament'.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet, at the Sign of the
Golden-Dragon, near the Inner Temple, April 12. 1649.

AN ACT Prescribing certain Times to DELINQUENTS For perfecting their
Compositions Effectually, under several penalties.
Whereas by Ordinance of Parliament of the sixth of February, 1646. it is
Ordained, That the Commissioners for compounding with Delinquents, have power
to suspend the sequestration of the Estates of such Delinquents as shall
compound with them, the Delinquents having paid the moiety of the Fines
compounded for, and given Security to the said Commissioners for the remainder
thereof, according to the proportion to be set by both Houses of Parliament:
Provided, That every such person so compounding, do within six weeks pay the
remainder of his said Fine, and sue forth his Pardon under the Great-Seal,
after his Composition shall be allowed by both Houses of Parliament, otherwise
the suspension to be void: Yet many whose Compositions have been set, and
allowed by both Houses of Parliament, have not paid in the second moiety of
their said Compositions, according as by the said Ordinance is appointed; by
reason whereof, the Commonwealth has been disappointed of those moneys which
were intended from the said Treasury for the public service; to supply which,
the Treasurers at Goldsmiths-Hall have been necessitated to take up at Interest
great sums of money upon the credit of the said Compositions, for which the
said Treasury stands engaged: The Commons assembled in Parliament being very
sensible, how much the said Compounders have abused the said Act of Grace, Do
therefore Enact and Declare, That this Clause only in the said proviso of the
said Ordinance (viz. That every such person so compounding, do pay in the
remainder of his said Fine within Six weeks after the Compositions shall be
allowed by both Houses of Parliament) shall be, and is hereby Repealed and made
void. And to the end that a present supply of Moneys may be brought in to the
said Treasury, It is Enacted and Ordained by the Commons assembled in
Parliament, That all such persons, whose Compositions have been set or allowed
by both Houses of Parliament, shall pay or cause to be paid in to the said
Treasury before the Sixth day of May, in the year of our Lord God, 1649. the
full sum or sums remaining due upon their said Compositions respectively; and
in default thereof, shall pay Interest for the same, after the Rate of Eight
pounds per cent. from the time or times at which the same became due and
payable respectively, together with one fourth part more of the whole sum of
their respective Compositions, as an additional Fine. And it is further Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, That all such persons, whose Fines or Compositions
have been set by the said Commissioners, and allowed of by the House of Commons
only, shall pay or cause to be paid in to the said Treasury, before the
twentieth day of May, 1649. the full sum of their said Fines, or so much
thereof as remains due upon their said Compositions respectively; and in
default thereof, to pay Interest for the same, after the rate of Eight pounds
per centum, from and after the said twentieth day of May, 1649. together with
one fourth part more of the whole sum of their respective Compositions, as an
additional fine: And that all such persons whose fines for Compositions have
been set by the said Commissioners, before the seventh day of April, 1649. but
before the same day have not been reported unto, or allowed by the Commons
assembled in Parliament, shall pay, or cause to be paid in to the said
Treasury, the one Moiety of their respective fines, before the sixth day of
May, 1649. (if such Moiety be not already paid) and the other Moiety thereof,
within six weeks after their said fines respectively shall be allowed by the
said Commons, or by such as by their authority shall be authorized and
appointed thereunto; or otherwise, in default of such payment of the said
several Moyeties, or either of them, shall pay Interest for the same at the
rate aforesaid, from the time or times at which the same shall be become
payable, by virtue of this Act, together with the like penalty, as aforesaid,
of one fourth part more of the whole sum of their respective Compositions, as
an additional fine: And that all such persons, whose fines for Compositions,
shall after the said seventh day of April, 1649. be set by the said
Commissioners, or by such others as shall be by the Commons in Parliament
assembled authorized thereunto, shall pay or cause to be paid in to the said
Treasury, the one Moiety of such their respective fines, within fourteen days
after the setting thereof, and the other Moiety within six weeks after such
their several fines shall be allowed of by the Commons in Parliament assembled
as aforesaid, or by such as by their Authority shall be authorized and
appointed thereunto; or otherwise, in default of such payment of the said
several Moyeties, or either of them, shall pay Interest for the same at the
Rate aforesaid, from the time or times at which the same shall become due and
payable by virtue of this Act; together with the like penalty as aforesaid, of
one fourth part more of the whole sum of their respective Compositions, as an
additional fine. And it is further Enacted and Ordained, That in case any of
the persons abovementioned, that make default in paying in his or their full
Compositions, within such time and times as are above limited, that then the
Real and Personal Estates of such Defaulters shall be forthwith Sequestered,
until they respectively conform thereunto: And the said Commissioners at
Goldsmiths Hall, or any five or more of them, are hereby authorized and enabled
to Sequester, or to take order for the Sequestring of the Real and Personal
Estates of such Delinquents and defaulters; and to direct to the respective
Committees for Sequestrations in the several counties, or such other Committees
for Sequestrations as shall be appointed by Parliament, a Warrant for the
purposes aforesaid, and for the removing of every such person and persons out
of the possession of his or their house or houses, who are hereby required to
obey and perform the same: And all Governors of Garrisons, and other Officers
and Soldiers in the service of Parliament, are hereby required to be ayding and
assisting unto them in the execution thereof for the purposes aforesaid. And
for the more effectual prosecuting of the said Sequestrations, It is further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Commissioners, or any five or
more of them, shall and may nominate, and appoint, and authorize, by Warrant
under their Hands, a Solicitor or Solicitors for Sequestrations in the several
counties of England and Wales, to prosecute the seizing, sequestring and
securing the Real and Personal Estates of such Defaulters as aforesaid, and
every of them; and shall and may appoint a Collector or Collectors for the
gathering and receiving of the Rents, Issues and Profits of the Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments of the said persons so making default as abovesaid:
Which said Solicitors and Collectors shall from time to time observe such
Orders and Directions as they shall receive from the said Commissioners, or the
said Committees for the said respective counties, in such case where the said
Commissioners shall not have given former Directions. And it is further Enacted
and Ordained, That the said Solicitors for Sequestrations respectively, shall
return unto the said Commissioners, according to his or their best knowledge,
Duplicates of the Rent-Rolls of the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
appointed to be sequestered as aforesaid, within six weeks after the
Sequestration thereof, and shall take and return Inventories of the Personal
Estate of such as shall be sequestered as aforesaid, within six weeks after the
Sequestration thereof (and in default thereof, such Solicitor shall lose the
benefit of his Salary by this Act to him appointed) and after such return made,
shall and may, with the advice, approbation and direction of the respective
Committees of the county, or any three of them, sell the Goods of such person
and persons at the best rate or value he or they can get for the same. And to
the end that the Commonwealth may receive the benefit of the Sequestrations, It
is Enacted and Ordained, That the said Commissioners, or the said Committees
for the said counties respectively, or any three of them, shall and may, and
are hereby authorized and enabled to make a Lease or Leases by Deed Indented,
of any the Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of such person and persons
(as shall make default as aforesaid) or any part thereof, for such number of
years as they shall conceive most advantageous to the Commonwealth, reserving
the best Rent they can get for the same. Provided always, the Lease or Leases
so to be made, do not exceed the term of three Years, nor be made to the
Delinquent, or to any to his use and benefit: And in case any such Lease shall
be made unto or to the use of such Delinquent or Delinquents, then such Lease
to be merely void; and upon information and proof thereof made to the said
Commissioners, the said Commissioners or any three of them, shall have power to
make a Lease thereof at the same Rent, for the like number of years, to him or
them that shall make such information, being of ability to pay the Rent
reserved. And it is further Enacted, That all such Rents, Issues and Profits as
shall be received by reason of the Sequestrations of such Defaulters, shall be
paid to the said Treasurers of Goldsmiths-hall, to be disposed of to such uses
as the Parliament shall hereafter appoint: And whereas diverse Delinquents have
submitted to a Composition, and brought in their particulars, but have
neglected to prosecute the same, It is therefore Enacted and Ordained, That all
such Delinquents shall within twenty eight days after the seventh of April,
1649. effectually prosecute their said Compositions, and in default thereof,
shall lose the benefit of Composition, and their Estates to be finally
confiscate, and to be disposed of to the use of the Commonwealth. Provided
always, That this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend to take
away the benefit of any Articles not forfeited, nor to restore the benefit of
any Articles forfeited: And because diverse of those who are entrusted in the
execution of the Ordinances relating to Sequestrations, do suffer diverse
Delinquents to dwell in their houses, and themselves, or some to their uses, do
Rent of the Sequestrators their Lands and Tentments at low and easy rates, by
reason whereof, and because such Delinquents are allowed the fifth part for
their wives and children, and are thereby encouraged to forbear and delay their
Compositions, It is therefore Enacted, That the said Commissioners, or the said
Committees for the respective counties, or any three or more of them, shall
remove out of the possession of their Houses and Lands such Delinquents, or any
others entrusted for them, unless they and every of them shall come in and
compound at or within the days above limited; for the effecting whereof, all
Governors of Garrisons and Soldiers, in the service of Parliament, are required
to be aiding and assisting to the said Commissioners and Committees
respectively, And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
several and respective Solicitors for Sequestrations employed by the said
Commissioners, shall take the same Oath that Solicitors for Sequestrations are
by a former Ordinance appointed to take: Which said Oath the said Commissioners
or any three of them are hereby authorized to administer: And that the said
Committees for Sequestrations of the respective counties, for the Leasing out
of Delinquents Estates, and the said Solicitors and Receivers may have
encouragement effectually to prosecute the said service, It is hereby Enacted,
That the said respective Committees shall have for every twenty shillings Rent
reserved upon every Lease Sealed and Delivered by the said Committees as
aforesaid, six pence in the pound; and every respective Solicitor shall be paid
for his or their Salary, for every twenty shillings that shall be paid in to
the said Treasurers by reason of the said Sequestration, the sum of three pence
in the pound; and the respective Collectors shall have and receive for his and
their Salaries, the sum of two pence in the pound for every twenty shillings
paid in to the said Treasurers: Which said several sums the said Treasurers are
to allow, and make payment of accordingly. And it is further Enacted, That the
said Treasurers shall have, take and receive out of all such Moneys as shall be
paid in to them by virtue of this Act, the like Salary as they have for other
Compositions Moneys paid in to them. And whereas the Parliament, out of their
desire to establish Maintenance for a Preaching Ministry, have given way, That
the said Commissioners should buy in Impropriations and Tithes of Delinquents
that should compound with them, at such rates as they should contract for the
same; In pursuance whereof the said Commissioners have contracted with several
persons for Tithes and Impropriations of the value of Ten thousand pounds per
annum, or thereabouts, for which the said Commissioners have abated in the
whole out of the several Compositions, the sum of One hundred thousand pounds;
the greatest part of which Impropriations and Tithes are not as yet settled,
according to order in that behalf made, It is therefore hereby Enacted and
Declared, That all such persons as have been ordered by the said Commissioners,
or any Committees there for that purpose authorized, to setle any Rectory, or
Maintenance out of any Rectory, Parsonage or Tithes, for which they have had
allowance and abatement in their said fines, shall within eight weeks after the
seventh day of April, 1649. setle the same upon such Trustees as the said
Commissioners shall appoint, for such uses as the Parliament shall hereafter
direct: And in default thereof, such of the said Delinquents as have paid any
part of their fines, and have thereupon obtained Letters to suspend their
Sequestrations, shall be forthwith resequestred, until they respectively shall
setle the said Rectories or Maintenance respectively as aforesaid, and pay such
Arrerages as have grown due since the time the same were ordered to be settled
by the said Commissioners: And that all such persons as shall from henceforth
be Ordered to setle any Rectory, Parsonage or Tithes, or any Allowance out of
them to the use aforesaid, shall within eight weeks after the date of the said
Order, setle the same under the same penalties as is last aforesaid. And
forasmuch as the great businesses of the Commonwealth do as yet hinder the
making of Reports from Goldsmiths-Hall, It is therefore Enacted, That the said
Commissioners for Compositions, or any five or more of them, upon the
Compounders paying in of the Moiety of his fine, or satisfying the same by
settlement of any Rectories or Tithes, or any allowance out of them, and not
otherwise, shall or may grant to such Compounder, an Order to suspend the
Sequestration of his Estate: And upon his paying in, or like satisfying as
aforesaid the whole fine, to discharge the Estate from Sequestration; Which
said Orders respectively shall be effectual to suspend or discharge from
Sequestration so much as he has compounded for. And whereas diverse persons
being sequestered, or questioned for Delinquency, have made their Appeals unto
the late Committee of Lords and Commons for Sequestrations, and have procured a
suspension of their Sequestrations, and thereby enjoyed the benefit of their
Estates, and by reason thereof do not effectually prosecute their said Appeals,
It is therefore Enacted and Declared, That the Barons of the Court of Exchequer
shall, and are hereby constituted and appointed Commissioners for Appeals in
case of Sequestrations, before whom such persons as aforesaid may prosecute
their Appeals: And the said Commissioners for Appeals, or any two or more of
them, shall have the same power and authority to all intents and purposes, to
take cognizance of such Appeals already made, and to receive any new Appeals of
like kind, and to examine, hear and determine the same, and to proceed in all
things in relation thereto, as the late Committee of Lords and Commons for
Sequestrations lawfully had, or might have exercised for that purpose by virtue
of any Ordinance of Parliament in that behalf made: And that all such persons
that have already made such Appeals as aforesaid, and yet have not effectually
prosecuted the same, they and every of them are hereby required effectually to
prosecute such their respective Appeals before the said Commissioners for
Appeals hereby constituted, within two months next after the seventh day of
April, 1649. or otherwise, in case of failer thereof through wilful default or
neglect of such person appealing, then every such suspension of his or their
Sequestration, procured as aforesaid respectively, shall from thenceforth be
taken off, be Null and void. And the Committees for Sequestrations in the
respective counties of England and Wales, are hereby enjoined thereupon to
resequester the Estate of every such Delinquent; which if they shall neglect to
do, or take effectual order for, then the said Commissioners for Compositions,
or any five or more of them, are hereby authorized to do, or to take order for
the same. And that this work may the more certainly and speedily be done, the
said Commissioners for Appeals are enjoined from time to time to certify, or
cause their Clerk to certify to the several Committees for the respective
counties, the Names of such Delinquents, and every of them, making such default
or neglect as aforesaid. And it is further Enacted, That this present Act be
forthwith printed and published; and that the Commissioners aforesaid do
forthwith send the same to the respective Sheriffs of the several counties of
England and Wales, who are hereby required to publish the same in the chief
Market Towns of the said counties, on the next Market day after the receipt
hereof; and the day of Publication hereof, to certify to the said
Commissioners at Goldsmiths-Hall.

Die Lunae, 9 April, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


