The Age of Wonders OR MIRACLES are not CEASED.

BEING A true but strange Relation of a Child born at Burslem in
Staffordshire, who, before it was three quarters old, spoke and prophesied
strange and wonderful things touching the King, three nights together,
contained in this ensuing Relation, as it was affirmed in a Letter by Mr.
Colclough, Justice of the Peace, to Colonel Pury; and attested upon Oath by
Elizabeth Locket and her Husband, the Child's Nurse.

With diverse other remarkable Predictions, Signs and Wonders, in relation to
Monarchy, and the Child born with three Crowns.

PSALM. 8.2. Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings have thou Ordained strength
because of thine enemies.

March. 23. 1659 London, Printed for Nehemiah Chamberlain, and are to be sold
at the East end of St. Paul's, 1660.

The Age of Wonders.
IT is an ungratious quality of our English Islanders, rather then not to be
babbling, to belie, deprave and scandalize one another, whereas the condoling
our own miseries and glorifying God for the wonders which he daily reveals,
and the deliverances which we continually find, are subjects more becoming our
Meditations.

God will never shorten the evidence of his own Essence and omnipotence, were
it only to the confutation and condemnation of Athiests, the holy Ghost is not
confined to the rules of Nature, but does declare his wonderful and secret
determinations oft-times by supernatural means, and not seldom by crossing the
course of Nature.

Not to ravel out the Scriptures which are full of such presidents, we need go
no higher then the present times wherein we live, which may not unjustly be
called The Age of Wonders; Where are our Histories Sacred and profane which
can produce the parallel to the late years wherein we have lived for admirations.

Not to mix ink with the Sacred Royal blood, so unnaturally, Sacriligiously and
inhumanely drawn, which yet seems to sleep (a Wonder in comparison of Gods
Revenge for Murder, which has never been known to fail, even to the most
inconsiderable instance) we shall do well to take some Doctrines from Infants
as well as from irrational and sometimes from inanimate Creatures, all of them
naturally incapable by speech to utter any thing to our understanding, and
first for Infants; To omit those serene and innocent Martyrs of Pharaoh and
Herod, who (notwithstanding their incapacity of speech) confessed and showed
forth the praise and glory of God, not in speaking but in dying, let us go no
higher then a dozen years, within which time we shall make evident, that three
cradle Infants have made audible and wonderful revelations in order to the
restoring of Monarchy into this wretched Kingdom. One, a Boy, about the coming
in of the present King Charles born a Sudbury, at eleven weeks old, was plainly
heard as well by his Parents as others, to speak, before his Majesty's march to
Worcester, and say A King, which he often repeated, a truth generally known to
the inhabitants of those parts.

A second, is another Boy, as yet under two years old and living, was born with
Teeth in his mouth, with two tongues in his mouth, and three Crowns upon his
head where others have but one, he walked in his Mothers hand at six months
old, and from his birth spoke, and ever in his speech named A King, which to
this day he not only continues with other expressions, but if any one in his
presence do but name the word King, the boy seems to be over-joyed; how he
behaved himself sometime since in the Commons House of Parliament, where, in
his deportment and expressions, he foretold their declining, is better to be
taken from their own Officers.

A third, which is a Female Child, we have certified from Burslem in
Staffordshire, which Child is nursed by Elizabeth Locket the Wife of John
Locket in the said Parish of Burslem, who are people of very honest
conversation; The said nurse about a Month or five weeks since undressing the
Child at eight of the Clock in the evening, the said Girl Infant (being much
under three quarters of a year old) was heard plainly to say A King, which she
repeated seven times after each other, and did the same three nights together,
about the same hour in the evening, which child never spoke before, nor since.
This Relation was sent in a Letter to Colonel Pury, and is offered to be
deposed upon oath by John Colclough Esquire, one of the Justices of Peace in
the said County of Stafford, and this the said John and Elizabeth Locket
dwelling in Burslem aforesaid.

In this Miraculous Predection of an Infant, more things are observable then
may be slightly passed over; First for an Infant to speak is so wonderful, as
we have not seen the like Recorded, no not of the Son of God himself, who did
fully accomplish all manner of his Relations to Humanity, sin only excepted,
before he is mentioned to speak, but in these Infants the growth of Teeth, and
strength to other Organs of speech seemed to be perfected, only for declaring
a Miracle; The two first Children were born with Teeth, of which the last had
only three a long while, the number of the first, or the relation of any born
with the last, is not yet brought to our knowledge, therefore we will observe
something upon the Number Three.

Number is an Art, it is no Natural gift, for the Indians who want the use of
Letters, have not the gift of Numbering, further then by their fingers they can
prompt their memory, and even at that help, few of them can arrive at the
number of a hundred, and by our own Children we find, that though we bring them
early to the comprehension of Letters, yet they can retain no great number,
till age have strengthened their memories.

The Heathen Philosopher says, That the first part of Wisdom, is well to
Number, and the Divine Royal Prophet, makes it a chief of his Prayers to Number
his days, that he may apply his heart unto Wisdom; Whereby it is evident that
a principal part of Wisdom rests upon the Art of Arithmatick; in short it is
the strongest link in the Chain of Assotiation, nor Government, nor Laws, nor
Trade can subsist or continue without numeration.

At this time we shall have occasion to touch and only to touch three of the
said numbers, that is to say, one, Three and Seven; by that number, or rather
beginning of numbers one, we are lead to the serious consideration of the Word
KING, which was the subject, and the whole Subject of all the three Childrens
miraculous speech, like the one Prophet amongst the Lions, or like the three
children in the fiery Furnace, whose discourse was of one God in Three Persons,
as this is of KING Monarchal by three Children.

One is a number uncomposed, and not numerable because it cannot be divided,
nevertheless it creates and produces innumerable accounts, and being again
repeated, it makes two, and so runs ad infinitum, and indeed one and two are
the Number of God who is Infinite, one relating to the Godhead which is
indivisible, and one and two, making three (which is Infinite) to the personal
Description of the Sacred Trinity; God therefore willing to make a wonderful
Revelation of his Essential and Personal presence with Kings, who are his
Chosen and Anointed Servants, has given Supernatural Power to Babes and
Sucklings, to reveal this Mystery to them who are Babes in Grace, that they may
become Babes of Grace by their obedience to his Ordination, for though the
Powers that are indifinitely the ordained Powers of God, yet some are of wrath,
as those seem to be which are composed, and others of Mercy which best suits
with Monarchy, judgment being within the Office of Magistrates, but Mercy
only within the the Power of Kings.

It is therefore an evidence of Gods great Mercy intimated to these distracted
Nations, in conveying to the people by these innocent Mouths the Name of King,
who is the Image and Earthly Angel of God, by whom he has given more
deliverance to his Church in all Ages, then by any multiplied Magistrates; his
Israel was never so much under slavery, as when they had no King, for because
every man did what was good in his own eyes, no man did what was right or
acceptable in Gods eyes, which are single, pure, and can behold do compositions
which are not of his own Creation.

The next number we are to consider is Three, which we apply as well to the
Infants speaking, as to the repetition of the Word KING; The number it self is
a most Sacred Number, denoting the Holy, Blessed and Sacred Triniry in Unity,
which God delineated to mankind by Kings, who in their Government have no
less then a Divine Trinity, themselves are the Fountain of Mercy, their Divine
Counselors are the Sanctum Sanctorum of Wisdom, and their politic Magistracy
are the Conduits by whom Justice flows to their people.

In this number of Three, all things are confirmed, there are Three which bear
witness in Heaven to the Eternal Godhead, and there are Three which in earth
do witness the Truth of this; There are Three Dominions under a King Monarchal
in his God-like Power over his people, Aristocratical in his constant Counsel
of Nobles, and Democratical in his Legal Contistutions by Parliaments, and in
the mouth of these Three witness all Peace, Unity and Amity is composed between
a King and his people,; These are like three Angels which appeared to Abraham,
which foretold the blessed Events which should come to pass, which we have
heard with our ears from Antiquity, and do see with our eyes performed in their
Unity, and must therefore (unless we be Athenists and Infidels) believe, with
our hearts shall be confirmed to all Eternity; Therefore this still and secret
Revelation by three Babes, is a great and indubitable confirmation to us, that
God is in their peaceable infallible Voice.

Our little Female Prophetess is not without her Mystical Excellencies and
Numbers, the Holy Scripture has recorded to the end of time the prophesies of
diverse Women, some in the Birth of their Children have given them names
foretelling their dispositions; Holy Huldah in the old Testament, and St. Anna
in the new, were Prophetesses most famous though of great age and experience,
but that an Infant of about seven months old should articularly and audibly
become the prophetical bringer of such happy Tidings to a distracted people,
that the God of mercies after such Gyantick provocations as these sinful
Nations have produced, should renew his mercies and again become their King,
and in earnest of this unmeasurable Blessing give them his Deputy anointed by
his own appointment, and in all Sacred accomplishments made the Image of his
own Son, and declared all this out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings in whom
he has ordained supernatural strength, what is it but that he may still and
pacify his and his Anointed, and his chosen peoples enemies.

And further in this his mighty, though small Champion, he has showed his
Visible Power, by Testimony of his Sacred Number of Seven; For this Infant
continued naming the Word KING seven times, and did so every night, for three
nights and no more, both which numbers were exactly observed by such as heard
the Infant deliver this wonderful Truth.

This number of Seven is accounted the most excellent of numbers, and has been
the Conduit to convegh diverse of Gods great blessings to us; the first
Consecration of it, was to his own rest, after the Creation in the next place
he used it to number our days into weeks; Again he made it the Messenger of
Jubilee and Deliverance to his People from their hard-hearted Oppressors and
Pursuers, he made it the Measure of his Gracious Plenty and Provision in
Egypt, which he had prepared to be a Storehouse, Trial and Advancing of his
Chosen Israel; and Finally he made it the Accomplisher of that distance between
his Mighty Resurrection and Glorious Ascension.

These and many other great Mysteries has he most Graciously coushed under
this his Sacred Gift of Numeration, which when they are become such Miraculous
Conveyances of his Sacred and Secret Mercies to Mankind, who is he that shall
dare to resist them when his power and Justice and mercy so evidently appear in
them, and not be found to fight against God himself.

Let our Brethren therefore take Gamaliels counsel, and seeing they have
desparately tried and sadly found that these late Rebellions against Gods holy
institution of Monarchy, are not of him, they having been so far from
prevailing, as not only their Inventions and Inventors are alike confounded and
come to naught, but that the abused people also whom they made their unhappy
and now most miserable Instruments, are brought into calamities irrecoverable,
as to themselves and their own power; Let them we say return least they be
found fighters against God, who will assuredly go on in his punishments upon
all them who do not honor and obey, and say,

GOD SAVE THE KING.
FINIS.

