A Perfect Narrative Of the Phanatick WONDERS SEEN In the West of ENGLAND. WITH
A True Relation of the Particulars thereof: Sent in a Letter to a worthy
Gentleman, belonging to an Alderman of the City of London.

Attested under the Hands of
John Shipman, Minister. Thomas Watkins, Churchwarden. John Betterton,
Constable. Francis Cripps, And William Chaundler.
LONDON: Printed for Charles Gustavus, 1660.

A Perfect Narrative OF THE Phanatique Wonders seen in the West of England:
With a true Relation thereof touching the full particulars, etc.
IT is a true saying of one of the Ancients, that Time and the Eye try out
Truth, but Falsehood wins Credit only on a sudden, and by uncertainties. And
since Time, the most sure and impartial Judge, has sentenced those glorious
Pretenses with which our late Politicians did veyl themselves, to be nothing
else by gilded Hypocrisies; so also shall we present the World with the odious
Frauds of some Phanatique Impostures; who in a late Seditious Pamphlet,
endeavored to suggest unto the People a wonderful Story of an Army of Frogs at
Fairford in Gloucestershire: Whereas, indeed, the true particulars thereof had
long since been communicated to public View, had they not miscarryed in the
hands of the Carryer: But a true Copy thereof being transmitted to the hands of
a worthy Gentleman, at an Aldermans house in the City of London, be pleased to
take a view thereof, VIZ.

Loving Cozen,
THE best of my Affections salute you, etc. These are to represent, That for
your last Letter give you thanks: And whereas you write, that you admire you
did not hear from me in Answer to your last Letter, I did write; And the
Carryer promised me the delivering it with his own hands, for whose neglect I
am sorry. And as concerning the Paper-book enclosed in your Letter, I received:
In answer whereunto, as near, and as credibly as possibly I can, I have
endeavored; to wit, June the 16th last past, it pleased God to send Us plenty
of Rain and Thunder showers, which was very welcome, God send us thankful
Hearts, and free us from lying Tongues: After which Rain, my Landlord Esquire
Barker having some old Fish Ponds in his Orchard and Ou^lets. These Ponds being
filled afresh with the Rain and other Supplies, there did (which will appear by
perfect Evidence, an Annual Customary thing not only in that place, but in all
other about our Neighborhood Parishes) ^ssue forth of these Ponds and Ditches
great store of young Froggs and Water Toads, which in length were an Inch or
hardly so long, shifting and hopping to and fro, being out of their Watery
^ement: Insomuch, that if any would have taken the pains to view them, shifting
some one way, some another, they might have seen thousands of these silly poor
Varments, which was as usual as the year did proceed: Which silly Creatures,
without any manner of preju^ice or off^nce unto Man* Woman, or Child, that
^vening and Night were cleared* Wherefore, in Answer to the Verity of your
Book, and these Zealots that were the Founders, for the od^ousness thereof, I
shall leave that to the Judgments of you and your Friends had the Prayers of
these Zealots prev^lencie: But God will not hearken to Prayers where Malice is
the Foundation. We may perceive by these true Informers, who would turn
Magicians, if they knew how to raise the Plagues of Egypt amongst Us, were not
God's Mercies superabundant, who has chained up their malice? But now, like
Demetrius, their Trade and hopes of enjoyment, that which was never left them
by Inheritance, being void, they summon up the Brethren to cry down by their
vicious and abhorred Lies. And whereas in your Letter you pity the persons
concerned, might they, or could they have or find out any sure ground how they
might find out or know these true Informers, what the Law of Man would, for
such abominable gross Liars afford, in no wise be wanting; but for that it is
at present omitted for want of a groundwork.

As for the Verity hereof, the Persons who have subscribed their hands, will,
and are ready for the maintaining the same.

Wherefore, loving Kinsman, if it may not be too much prejudice unto you, That
the mouths of such abominable Liars may be stopped, that you use a means
(through this Letter) for the prevalency of a Book to be printed to the
contrary; which if you can, and do perform Us this favor, it shall not (God
willing) to the uttermost be forgotten, withal desiring with what expedition
may be, a speedy return of some few Copies. Thus expecting your loving Answer,
I leave you to the preservation of Him that is the Preserver of Us all, and
rest,

Fairford the 13th. 1660. Your loving Uncle, G. BROWN.


The Truth of this Narrative, contained in the precedent Letter, is attested
under the Hands of

John Shipman, Minister. Thomas Watkins, Churchwarden, John Betterton,
Constable. Francis Cripps, William Chaundler.
Thus having fully evinced these Politic Contumelies, of their Libellous and
def^mtory Reports, may we not clearly discern their Phanatick mischiefs in
which they are implicated? Their Desires are impossible, their Attempts are
wicked, and their Reports are false and scandalous: And is it possible that
after all this, any Person should be such a superlative Phanatick, as to need
extrinsick Arguments to reclaim them? Surely it cannot be; except he be rooted
in his Error, as they say Marsus Diaboli roots it self in the Earth, which can
never be pulled up without breaking. However, I do not doubt, but as Sue^onius
reports, that Aug^stus Caesar walking by a Pond where the Froggs were croaking,
commanded them to keep silence, and they were never after heard to make any
Noise in that Place: So all that harsh roaring, and discordant clamor both in
their Libellous Paper, and Airy Invention, will ere long, it is hopes, by the
Command of our Gracious Sovereign be silenced and restrained.

FINIS.

