AN ACT Declaring the Grounds and Causes of making PRIZE THE SHIPS and GOODS
that shall be taken from time to time by the Parliaments Ships at Sea, and for
the encouragement of Officers, Mariners and Seamen.

blazon or coat of arms of the Commonwealth of England

Die Martis, 17 April, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament'.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet, at the Sign of the
Golden-Dragon, near the Inner Temple, April 20. 1649.

AN ACT Declaring the Grounds and Causes of making Prize the Ships and Goods,
that shall be taken from time to time by the Parliament Ships at Sea, and for
the encouragement of Officers, Mariners and Seamen.
Whereas the Parliament of England has heretofore, by several Ordinances and
Acts made and promulged, for the necessary Defense of the Dominions and
Commonwealth of England and Ireland, according to the Laws of Reason and
Nations, forbidden Commerce and Trade to any ports or places within those
Nations, being in rebellion and hostility against the Parliament of England;
and more particularly by an Ordinance dated the 30 of November, 1643. power was
given to seize and surprise all and all manner of Ships and Vessels, with the
Ordnance, Ammunition, Victuals, Goods, Commanders and Soldiers therein, that
should be met withal in or outward, bound from any Port or place within the
Dominions of these Nations, being in Hostility against the Parliament, or
coming from, or returning to any such Port or place; or that should be found to
have Traded with the Inhabitants of any such port or place since their
defection from the Parliament, and also to seize, surprise and take all Ships,
Vessels, Ordnance, Ammunition, Victuals and Goods belonging to and Rebel or
Rebels in Ireland, and all manner of Pirates and Sea-Rovers, of what Nation
soever, and their Ships and Goods, and the same to procure to be adjudged in
the High-Court of Admiralty for lawful prize; And by another Ordinance of the
29 of January, 1645. power was given for the setting forth ships to Sea,
equipped, furnished and armed, in Warlike manner, and the same to employ for the
seizing, taking, and surprising of all ships and vessels belonging to any of
the subjects of these Dominions, which should be met withal in or outward,
bound from any port or place, being in Hostility against the Parliament;
together with all the Ordnance, Ammunition, Victuals, Goods, Commanders and
Soldiers therein; as also for the seizing, surprising and taking of all Ships
and Vessels whatsoever, with the Ordnance, Ammunition, Victuals and Goods
therein, belonging to any Rebel or Rebels in Ireland; and also the ships and
goods of any other person whatsoever, Foreigner or other, which shall be going
to, or coming from any port or place in Ireland, in Hostility against the
Parliament; as also for the seizing, surprising and taking of all and all manner
of ships and vessels belonging to any Foreigner, or of any Foreign Nation going
to any port or place in Hostility against the Parliament, with Arms,
Ammunition, or other Contrabanda goods, for supply of the Forces raised against
the Parliament, and adjudging and condemning the same, together with the goods
themselves, and all such other goods as belong to the Masters or Laders of such
Contrabanda goods; and likewise for the seizing, surprising and taking all
Pirates and Sea-Rovers, of what Nation soever, and their ships and goods
whatsoever, according to the authority, meaning and true intent of the said
Ordinance of the said 30 of November. 1643. and by another Ordinance printed
April 6. 1644. power was given for the equipping, arming and setting forth
ships to Sea, to seize, surprise and take all ships and vessels, with the
Ordnance, Ammunition, Goods, Commanders and Soldiers therein, that they should
find were sent, or to come to any parts of this Nation, to the prejudice
thereof: And further likewise Ordained, That there should be true and faithful
Inventories taken of the Ships, Ammunition, Moneys, Goods, Plate, Pillage and
Spoil which should be taken, and a true appraisment made of the same; and the
same, together with all papers and writings found in any ships or other vessels
so taken, to be carefully preserved, and two or three of the Officers of every
ship or vessel so taken, either to be brought up and examined in the Court of
Admiralty, concerning the property of the said ships and goods, and such other
Questions and Interrogatories as should be thought fit to be administered unto
them; or otherwise, that the said Officers of the said ships or vessels so
taken, should be examined before the chief Officer of the next port of England;
and the said Examinations, with the said papers, inventories and apprizements,
to be sent unto the Register of the High Court of Admiralty aforesaid, to the
end that thereby, and by such other proofs and evidences as should be produced
in the said Court, the taking and surprising of the said ships, vessels and
goods might be justified, and sentence of condemnation be promulged; or
otherwise, if there should be found just cause for restitution to the first
owners or former proprietors, that Justice should be duly administered, and
Restitution awarded: And by an Act of this present Parliament, made in
February, One thousand six hundred forty eight, Ordered the Two and twentieth
of February aforesaid to be printed and published, entitled, An Act for
encouragement of Officers and Mariners, and Impresting Seamen, It is Enacted
and Ordain-amongst other things, That if the ship or ships employed in the
service of the Parliament, mentioned in that Act, should take or surprise any
of the Revolted ships, that then they should be rewarded as in that Act is
contained: And also in case they should surprise or take any Merchants ships,
English or Stranger, declaring himself against the Parliament, or carrying any
Ordnance, Ammunition, Corn or any other provisions, to assist against the
Parliament, that the ship and goods so taken before they break bulk, shall
first be adjudged in the Admiralty Court, with diverse other clauses and
provisions, as well in the said last mentioned Act, as in the said former
Ordinances, and other Ordinances contained: The Parliament of England
conceiving it requisite, as well for the encouragement of the Mariners and
Seamen, and well-affected, the better to perform their duties, as for the
taking away of all excuse from such as shall hereafter offend, and be found
culpable after the making and publishing of this Act, That therefore, and for
diverse other weighty reasons, there should out of all the said former
Ordinances and Acts, and such other supplements as should be necessary for the
guard of the Narrow Seas, proeection and preservation of Trade, and necessary
defense and safeguard of these Nations and Commonwealth, be one entire Law and
Act of Parliament, framed, made, and duly published, according to the Law of
Nations, manifesting and reciting therein entirely together, that they may be
readily discerned at one view, the several and particular cases, which they for
their necessary preservation, and other the weighty reasons aforesaid, do
Declare and Ordain to be just causes of seizure and adjudication for lawful
prize, together also with the other clauses and regulations hereafter in this
Act set forth: It is therefore Established, Ordained and Enacted, and be it
Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the authority of the same, That it
shall and may be lawful, as well for any of the Parliament ships, or other
ships or vessels whatsoever, set out or to be set out or employed by them in
their service, as also for any other ships, vessels, or private Men of War,
approved or to be approved thereto, by the immediate authority of the
Parliament, or by the Council of State established by Parliament, to seize,
surprise, and take, not only all and every the Revolted shipes that have
treacherously betrayed their Trust, and made defection from the Parliament; but
also all such other ships or vessels whatsoever, and all the Ordnance,
Ammunition, Provisions, Victuals, Wares, Merchandises and Goods whatsoever in
the same ships or vessels, belonging to any Foreigner or other person
whatsoever, that have or shall associate or join with the revolted ships, or
any of them, or carry them any Arms, Ammunition, Victuals or Provisions, or
shall yield them any assistance against the Parliament; and also all other
ships and vessels whatsoever, of this or any Foreign Nation whatsoever (with
all the Ordnance, Ammunition Provisions and Goods whatsoever, therein to be
found) which shall accept, receive or take any Commission or Commissions, or
Letters of Marque, or other authority from or under Charles Stuart, son to the
late deceased King of England, or any other Son of the said late deceased King,
or from or under Prince Rupert, calling himself Prince Palatine; and also all
the ships, vessels and goods, Commanders and Soldiers of the said Charles
Stuart, Son to the said late deceased King, and of the said Prince Rupert, and
both and either of them: And also all other ships and vessels, with the
Ordnance, Ammunition, Victuals, Provisions, Goods, Wares and Merchandises
whatsoever (of any of the people of these Nations, or any Foraign Nation
whatsoever) therein carrying any manner of Contrabanda goods, that shall be met
withal in any port or place, or inwards or outward, bound from any port or
place within the Dominions of England, and Ireland, or Wales, being, or that
then shall be in Hostility against the Parliament, or that shall be found
Trading, or within the space of six months before the seizure, to have Traded
in the time of their defection within any such port or place aforesaid, being
as aforesaid in Defection or Hostility against the Parliament: And also all the
Ships, Vessels, Arms, Ammunition and Goods whatsoever, of any persons
Foreigners, of what Foreign Nation soever, or other persons whatsoever, which
shall be going to any port or place, then being in Hostility against the
Parliament, with Soldiers or Arms, Ammunition or other Contrabanda goods, for
supply or assistance of any Forces raised or to be raised against the
Parliament, or which shall be designed, sent or ordered to carry, transport or
bring any Commanders, Soldiers, Forces, Arms or Ammunition into England, to the
disturbance of the Peace, or prejudice thereof; and also all the ships,
vessels, provisions and goods of what kind soever, belonging to any Rebel or
Rebels in Ireland: All which, and every of the particulars aforesaid, shall be,
and shall in the High Court of Admiralty of England, upon due proof, and
according to legal course in that case, be adjudged and condemned for lawful
prize. And for that Ireland has of long time been, and still is, dependant of
England, and subject to such Laws, Orders, Regulements and Constitutions as are
or shall be made by the Parliament of England; and for that not only diverse
provinces, ports and places in Ireland, but even the province of Munster it
self, with all the ports and places under the command of the Lord Inchiquin,
have lately treacherously betrayed the trust reposed in them by the Parliament
of England, and made defection, and Rebelled, and are in rei veritate, and so
by the Laws of Nations ought to be accounted to be notorious Rebels, that ought
not to hold any manner of correspondency abroad, nor to enjoy the liberty of
commerce or traffic: And for that the Parliament does speedily intend, by the
assistance of God, to use all lawful and just means for their suppression, and
punishment of their said Rebellion, and reduction of all those ports, provinces
and places in Ireland, to fidelity and due obedience; and for the Reasons
aforesaid does declare and manifest, That they prohibit and forbid all manner
of Commerce, Traffic and correspondency whatsoever, to be used or held with
any of the said Rebels in Ireland, or within any of the Provinces, Ports,
Harbors, Rivers or places of Ireland, in the possession, or under the power of
the Rebels to the Parliament of England; Be it therefore further Enacted by
this present Parliament, and by the authority of the same, that it shall and
may be lawful, to any of the Fleet or ships set forth or to be set forth or
employed by or under the Parliament, or any private Men of War, or ships to be
allowed or approved by the immediate power of Parliament, or the Council of
State established by Parliament, To seize, surprise and take all and all manner
of ships, vessels and goods, of what nature or kind soever, belonging to all
persons whatsoever, whether Foreign or other, which shall be found or met
withal in any Port, Harbor, Creek, River or place in Ireland, being in the
possession of ye said Rebels of Ireland, or any of them, or under their power
and command, or being in hostility against the Parliament of England; and also
all ships, vessels and goods, of what Nation soever, that shall be going to, or
coming from any such port, harbor or place in Ireland, in ye hands or
possession of the said Rebels, or any of them, or in hostility against the
Parliament of England as aforesaid. And be it likewise Enacted by the authority
aforesaid, That whatsoever prize or prizes shall be so seized, surprised or
taken in all or any of the cases aforesaid, by virtue of this Act, shall be
safely preserved and kept, without pillaging, spoiling, imbezling, or in any
sort breaking of bulk, until after judgment shall be given concerning the same
in the High Court of Admiralty of England. And that no Captain, or any other
officers or Mariners that shall so take such prize or prizes, shall break bulk,
nor imbezle, nor suffer to be imbezled, purloined, taken or stolen away, any of
the Tackles, Apparel, Furniture or Goods, of or in any of the said ships or
vessels so taken as prize, but shall cause the same entire to be brought into
some English Port, where the same shall be secured by the chief Magistrate of
that Port, or such as he shall employ for that purpose, with some two or more
such persons to look thereunto, as the Officers and Mariners interessed shall
entrust, until the same shall be viewed, inventoried, apprized and further
secured, by such person or persons as shall be appointed thereunto by the
Council of State, on the one part, and the persons trusted as aforesaid, in
behalf of the Officers, Mariners and Seamen interessed, on the other part; and
until Judgment shall be given in the said Court of Admiralty, upon and
concerning the said respective ships and goods so taken as aforesaid in due
course of Law. And to the end that there may be a fair, legal and just
proceeding in the said Court of Admiralty, upon and concerning all and singular
the said premises, in all and every the cases aforesaid, Be it Enacted by the
authority aforesaid, That all and every the charter, parties, cockets, bills of
lading, Commissions, Letters of Mart, private Letters, Instruments, Contracts
and all other documents and writings whatsoever, that shall be taken or found
in every and any of the said ships or vessels so to be taken or surprised by
virtue of this Act, or found upon any of the persons in the same, shall be duly
and safely preserved, and sent up or transmitted into the said Court of
Admiralty. And that also two or three of the officers or principal persons of,
or found in every such ship or vessel so taken as aforesaid, shall either be
brought up or sent to be examined upon oath in the said Court of Admiralty, as
well touching the said writings found in the said ship or vessel, and the
proprietors, owners and masters of the same ships, and the goods therein, and
the places from whence they came, and whether they were bound, and such other
questions and interogatories as in each particular case shall be found meet to be
administered unto them; or otherwise in case they cannot be conveniently sent up
to the said Court, That then the said Officers, and two, three, or more of the
principal men so taken or found in the said ships or vessels, shall be duly
examined upon Oath, before the chief Officer of some port in England, or some
Justice of the Peace, of and concerning the matters, particulars and premises
before recited: And as well all and every their such Examinations, as also all
and singular the said Writings found aboard the said ships, shall be duly
transmitted and sent in to the said Court of Admiralty. And it is further
Enacted, That the Judges of the said Court of Admiralty, upon perusal of the
said Examinations, and of the said Writings so transmitted unto them, and such
other evidences and proofs as shall in due course of Law be made or exhibited
before them, as well on the one side, for proving and justifying the same to be
prize, as for and on the behalf of all other persons that shall in the
proceeding of the said causes appear, and put in any claims, or undertake the
defense for the said ships or goods so taken, or any of them, shall duly proceed
to judgment; and upon due and deliberate consideration of the said proofs on
both sides, and the allegations and pleas on either side, shall in all and
every the particulars and cases declared to be prize by this Act, by definitive
sentence to be promulged in the said Court, adjudge and condemn the said ships
and goods so taken, to be duly taken, and to be good and lawful prize. And
where it shall upon proof fall out of the particulars and cases declared by
this Act as aforesaid to be prize, there ye said Judges shall, according to the
merits of the cases, award restitution to the owners, masters or proprietors,
and in all cases duly administer true justice to either party, according to ye
true intent and meaning of this Act: Provided always, that if any prize or
prizes so taken, or any part thereof, shall appear and be proved in the said
Court of Admiralty, to be any ship or goods belonging to any of the
well-affected and good People of England or of Ireland, remaining and
continuing under the protection of the Parliament, and before taken or
surprised from them by any Enemy or Rebel, or disaffected person, and
afterward again surprised and retaken by any of the Fleet or Ships employed or
to be employed in the service of the Parliament, or any private Man of War, or
other ship or vessel under the protection or obedience of the Parliament, That
then such ships and goods, and every such part and parts thereof as aforesaid,
belonging to the said good people aforesaid, shall be adjudged to be restored,
and shall be by Decree of the said Court of Admiralty accordingly restored to
such former owner and owners, or proprietors; paying for and in lieu of
salvage, only one eight part of the true value of the ships and goods
respectively so to be restored, unless such ships so retaken, shall appear to
have been after their taking by the Enemies, Rebels or disaffected, set forth
by them as Men of War on their behalf: In which case the said true and first
owners and proprietors to whom the same shall be restored, shall be adjudged to
pay, and shall pay for salvage the full moiety of the true value of the said
ships so retaken and restored. And the said Parliament of England does Declare,
That as they do make, promulge and set forth this Act for the seizing and
taking of prizes, in the particular cases, and upon the just and weighty
Reasons aforesaid, for their necessary defense and preservation, according to
that Liberty which the Laws of Nature, Reason, and Nations allows them in these
Cases, without Infringing or Intrenching upon any the Leagues, Treaties, or
Articles of Peace heretofore made between any Foreign Kings, Princes, States
or Nations, and the said Dominions of England and Ireland; so they do intend to
uphold, maintain, and keep, and are ready to renew the Leagues and Amities
between these and Foreign Nations, Kingdoms and States, and freely to permit,
suffer, and give encouragement to all Foreigners and Strangers; and all the
Subjects of Foreign Nations and Countries in amity with these Nations, to use,
exercise, have and enjoy the full liberty of all manner of Trade and commerce,
as well to and with the city of London, as also to and with all and every the
ports and places within England and Ireland, standing right, and keeping their
fidelity to the Parliament, they paying the Customs, and discharging such
duties as are rightfully due and accustomed. And for the encouragement of
Seamen and Mariners to apply themselves the more willingly to the service of
the Commonwealth; Be it also Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That
whatsoever ship or ships of the Parliament, employed immediately under them in
this Service, shall take, surprise or reduce any of the said Revolted ships, or
any private Man of War, or other Man of War belonging to the said Charles
Stuart, Son to the said late deceased King, or the said Prince Rupert, or that
has or shall take or receive any Commission from or under them, or either of
them, or any other person, to fight against the Parliament, or disturb the
peace of this Commonwealth, or infest the Seas, and hinder the free Trade and
Traffiique of Merchants, and other good people by Sea or otherwise, shall have
for reward, over and above their wages, one moiety of the full value of all and
every such Ship or Ships surprised or taken as aforesaid, and of the goods
therein taken, to be distributed amongst the Captains, and other Officers and
Mariners of the said ship or ships, according to the Custom of the Sea, Tun for
Tun, and Man for Man; and the other moiety shall be put into a common Treasury,
for the relief of the Officers and Mariners which shall be sick or wounded, and
the Widows, Children and Impotent parents of such as shall be slain in the
service of the Commonwealth at Sea: The settling of which Treasury in trusty
hands, and the ordering thereof for the use aforesaid, is referred to the
Council of State. And for their further encouragement, in case they shall sink,
fire, or by any other ways or means destroy the Admiral of the Revolted ships,
or of any other Fleet that shall fight, or declare their intentions to fight or
maintain Hostility against this Commonwealth, they shall receive of the State
Twenty pounds Sterlin for each piece of Ordnance in such Admiral so destroyed;
and if the Vice Admiral, sixteen pounds for each Gun; and if the Rere-admiral,
twelve pounds Sterlin for each Gun; and if any other ship of War of the said
Revolted ships, or such Fleet aforesaid, Ten pounds for each Gun, to be
distributed to the Captain, Officers and Mariners of the respective ships that
shall be acting in the said service, and to be paid them together with their
wages: And also in case any of the States ships employed in the service of the
Commonwealth, shall surprise or take any Merchants ships, either English or
Strangers, offending in any of the cases or particulars, declared by this Act
to be prize, and that the same shall be in the said High Court of Admiralty
adjudged prize, according to the true meaning of this Act, That then after such
adjudication so given, the said ships and goods so adjudged shall be sold by
the Candle, and the proceed thereof divided into three equal parts; that is to
say, One third part to be paid to the Captain or Captains, and other Officers
and Mariners surprising or taking the same; and one other third part thereof to
be disposed of for the use of the Commonwealth, as the Parliament shall
appoint; and the other third part thereof to be delivered into the Treasurry
before appointed, for the relief of sick and maimed Seamen, and the Widows,
Children and Impotent Parents of the slain as aforesaid. And further, in case
any Merchant ship or ships, employed in the service of the State, shall take or
surprise any Merchant ship as aforesaid, Then the ship or ships so taken, being
adjudged in the said Court of Admiralty to be prize as aforesaid, shall be sold
as aforesaid, and the proceed thereof divided into three equal parts; that is
to say, One third part thereof to the Captain or Captains, and other Officers
and Mariners surprising or taking the same; and one other third part thereof to
be paid in to the Treasury beforementioned, to be disposed of to the use
aforesaid; and the other third part thereof to be equally divided into two
parts; viz. One part thereof to the Owners of the said ships; and the other
part thereof to the State. And it is hereby Declared and Enacted, That such
ship or ships of the Fleet, that shall be in sight or pursuit of the aforesaid
prize or prizes, when they shall happen to be so taken, and such only shall
have a proportionable share in the said prize or prizes, according to the
Custom of the Sea, Tun for Tun, and Man for Man. Provided always, That the
Tenths of all prizes that shall be taken, customarily due to the Lord High
Admiral, shall be paid in to the hands of such Treasurers as the Council of
State shall appoint for the profits of the Admiralty; the said Tenths to be
disposed by order of the said Council of State, for meddals or other rewards,
to such Officers and Seamen of the Fleet, as by certificate under the hand and
seal of the Commissioners commanding the Fleet at Sea, or any two of them,
shall be found to have done any singular, eminent and extraordinory service
therein: And the said Council of State, is hereby required to take special care
for the observing of this Act, in all points concerning the encouragement of
Officers, Mariners and seamen to engage in this service, that none may be
defrauded of any benefit or advantage, growing due unto them by virtue of this
Act, or any thing therein contained, according to the tenor and true meaning
thereof.

And be it further Enacted, That if in any of the cases aforesaid, after
sentence definitive given in the said Court of Admiralty, any appeal shall be
made from any such sentence, That then the parties appealing, shall within
fifteen days after their appeal so made or interposed, sue out their Commission
of delegacy under the Great Seal, and within two days after the obtaining
thereof, present the same before two or more of the Judges Delegates therein to
be named, and procure from them not only an inhibition, but also a monition to
the Register of the Admiralty, to transmit the process with all speed; and
shall also within six days after the presentation of the said Commission,
exhibit and give in their Libel appellatory, and Instrument of appeal, that the
same were interposed before any public Notary, and proceed in the said causes
of appeal with effect, under the pain that the said appeals be pronounced to be
deserted, and remitted back to the Court of Admiralty. And for the more speedy
and effectual proceeding in the said causes of appeal, and that right and
justice may be duly therein administered, and yet no procrastinations used, nor
frivolous delays allowed, Be it Enacted, That if no new matter shall within six
days after the transmission of the said process be pleaded, That then the
Judges of appeal shall proceed to conclude the cause, and assign the same for
sentence: And if any new matter shall be alleged, such as shall be concludent
and admissible by Law, That then the Judges of appeal shall assign both parties
some certain short term, ad pro ponendum omnia que consistunt in facto; and
such a competent time to make their proofs thereupon as shall be requisite, and
so proceed to publication and conclusion of the cause, that the same may be
finally sentenced and adjudged according to the rights and merits of the case,
without any other or farther stop or removal whatsoever.

And as well the Judges of the said Court of Admiralty, as also the Judges of
appeal, are required and commanded to administer Justice truly and
indifferently, in all and every the cases aforesaid that shall respectively
come before them, according to the true intent and meaning of this Act, and
according to the Civil Law, and Law of Nations, that no person may have just
cause to complain either for delay or lack of justice. And be it further
Enacted and Ordained, That the Council of State shall be, and are hereby
enabled by Warrant by them directed to the said Court of Admiralty, to give
license to all such well affected persons as they shall approve of, to sue out
Commissions or Letters of Reprizal out of the said Court, to enable them to set
forth to Sea such particular ships, and private Men of War, under such Captains
and Officers as the Council of State shall approve of, in Warlike manner, armed,
equipped and furnished, for guard of the freedom of Trade, and safeguard of the
Seas, and taking and surprising of prizes in all and every the cases
particularly before recited in this Act, and bringing the same to judgment in
the High Court of Admiralty; and having and converting the same to their own
uses, and the use of their Captains, Officers and Mariners surprising the same,
the tenths of all such prizes, or the full and true value thereof first being
duly paid to the State, together with the Customs and Excize likewise due and
accustomed. Provided always, That there be first for every such ship or private
Men of War suing for such Commission, good security given in to the said Court
of Admiralty, not to prejudice nor harm the Friends or Allies of this
Commonwealth, nor any other person in any other cases, then in the cases
declared in this Act to be prize; nor to pillage, spoil nor break bulk, before
adjudication first passed in the said Court of Admiralty; and to transmit and
send up thither, all the Papers, Writings and Demands that shall be found
aboard the ships surprised, and to bring or procure, two or three, or more of
every ship taken, to be duly examined, and to observe such other instructions
and conditions as the Council of State shall further direct. And to the end
that due intimation and publication of this Act may be made, and public
notice thereof be taken, Be it Ordered and Enacted, That this present Act shall
be published by a Sergeant at Arms, three several days upon the Exchange
London, at the time of the concourse of Merchants thither; and also copies
thereof, subscribed by the Clerk of the Parliament, to be sent by the Speaker
of the Parliament, to the Ambassadors and Ministers of Foreign Nations here
resident, to be by them made known to the Subjects of those Princes or States
which they represent, or from whom they are employed.

Die Martis, 17 Aprilis, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


