THE Wandering whore CONTINUED: A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Magdalena a Crafty Bawd,
Julietta an Exquisi^e Whore, Francion a Lascivious Gallant, And Gusman a
Pimping Hector.


Discovering their diabolical Practices at the Half-crown CHUCK-OFFICE.

With a more perfect LIST of the names of the Crafty Bawds, Common Whores,
Wanderers, Pick-pockets, Night-walkers, Decoys, Hectors, Pimps and Trappanners.

Delivered to the Publisher hereof by a late Hector, several deep Pyemen, and
decayed Gamesters amongst them.

Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus.

London: Printed in the Year 1660.

THE WANDERING WHORE.
Gusman. HAve you any work for the Coopers daughters in Katherine-wheel Ally in
Bishopsgate-street, they cure the Priapismus, Satyriasis, and Standing-Ague
infallibly, with an Universal Medicine, dancing Bobb-in-jo, stark naked into
the bargain: In their absence (which is seldom) Betty Lawrence, their neighbor
and Sister in iniquity, will serve the Cure, suffering you to whip the skin off
her buttocks, as Wats the Hosier (besides two others) did, only paying her
Crowns apiece for her patience and punishment. All such as are too hot in the
God-piece, may have right-cooling Snow-water at the New-house without the
Postern by Moor-gate, the virtues whereof are choice and singular, in so much
that it cures any of the abovementioned distempers, if you take a dose morning
and evening after this manner.

Recipe Mamillarum duarum manipules duos, ventris inferioris (prope vnlvum)
quantitatem sufficientem, pone linguam intra labra, rem in re, fiat ejectio and
mixtio seminis secundum artem.

Had this Receipt the virtue and quality of curing the French Pox, Running of
the Reins, filthy corrupt constitutions in the bodies of our society, it might
be put down and received by them for the true Aqua Mirabilis, with which,
should Thom. Lawton in Petty-France but wash his face with before a
Looking-glass, he might read the hainousness of his crimes imprinted in his
forehead, if he did not expect to see old Nicks picture there instead of his
own: First, for deceiving Mr. Hodgson an honest man and lawful husband of an
unchaste wife: secondly, for tempting her to be a whore with him, when there is
no question but she was so with others, for all she cried out O! I love that
pretty black Rogues face of thine, who for her fact must be enrolled with our
society, of whom you may read a perfect List of names, and Habitations.


A more Perfect List of the names of the Crafty Bauds, Common Whores,
Wanderers, Pick-pockets, Night-Walkers, Decoys, Hectors and Trappanners, in and
about the City, and Suburbs of London.
Crafty Bawds.
DAmrose Page Priss, Fotheringham at the Chuck Office Mal. Ceco Mrs. Stone Mrs.
Creswel Mrs. Garrish Mrs. Habbiger Turks head in Moorfields Mother Baker Su.
Lemmon Mrs. Whetston Mrs. George Mother Lockyer Mother Baxter Mrs. Adams Mrs.
Jones Mrs. Salmon Mrs. Saunders Mrs. Kemp Mrs. Abigail Mrs Simpson Black Pegg
Doctor Sherleys wife Mrs. Dennis Mrs Glover Mrs. Love Betty Buly Mrs Windbo Mrs
Roberts Mrs Sammond Nel Lawrence Mrs Woodhurst Mrs Lockyer Mrs Themzin Mrs
Pickering Mrs Kempster Mrs Brooks Virginia, going to Hackney Grow,
white-cross-street Mrs Osbeidg, Bedlam Mrs Gletherel Mrs Waller, Thomazin in
white Chapel Mrs Thomas, Stepney Jeremyes and Servicess Booths by Hackney
river Mrs Bull Mrs Halspenny Mrs Harrison Three Sugar-loaves in Grub-street
Ship, George, and three turns long Ally Jones, at the Cock in long Acre Mrs
Davies a Midwife Mrs Barber, a Midwife in Holborn Mrs Howard, in Lincolns
In-f^ild Mrs Hughes Mother Cunny The Cherry Garden Black Swan, in St.
Martins-Le-grand Mrs Br^oks, Mile-end Hanna Hickman, Baud and Wh^re Margaret
Leech Margery Wilson Mrs Page, Old-street Ann Price Houkins, Baud Paskin, at
the Armitage Margery Lawton Alice Hulburt Mrs Burges Joyce Ebbs Nel Yate Mrs
Wellaston M^s Stockwel Mrs Lawton, by Hattonw^ll Mal Ledger Mrs Sadler Mrs
Gibbins Rose Caddin Frank Tilt Jane Hayward Nan Bennes Bess Mundel, keeps three
Baudy-houses in Dogand Bitch-ard Jacobs Well, in Jewenstreet Nan Evans Mrs
Jones in Cross-lane The Last and Lion, in East-smith-feild.
Common Whores, Wanderers, Pick-pockets and Night-walkers.
Mrs. Snow Nan Langsden Mrs Reading Betty Edwards Betty Holly Mal. Nun Welsh
Nan Mal Avory Esther Clark Nan Love Mrs. Warren Nell Gulliford Sarah and Nan
Fullam Betty Young Faith Clayton -- Cross Betty Orange Mrs. Curtes Betty
Laurence Mrs. Honor Queen of Morocc^ Mrs. Holliland Mrs. Diamond Mrs. Sherley
the younger Mrs Smith Jane Stamford Mrs. Spencer Mrs. Taverner Mrs. Marten Mrs
Watson Mrs. Berry Mrs. Green Green Mall, alias Joan Godfrey Ma^l Chauncy Ketty
Cox Moll Hegg Mall Horsfield Mall Savory Peg Williams Alice Spilman Kate Hare
Mall Tremain Mrs. Westover, Bandstring-seller to the Offices in Chauncery-lane
Peg Cross Nan Bret Ursula Higgins Betty White Betty Farmer Margery Noble Jane
Dixon Mall Peak Sarah Martin Nan Gl^scock Mrs Mate Toothless Betty Bess Goring
Grizzel Wood Mrs Cupid Mal Gray Nan Cooper Betty Cooper Mrs Ames Nan Wats Betty
Bates Betty Eton Mal. Bell Butter and Eggs Jane Thebey Mrs Owen Mal Fink Betty
Baxter Betty Gansford Black Betty Nan Tailor Beck Lunn Mrs Love Mrs Lote Bess
Whittle Bes^ Bluns Mrs Simmonds Bet^y Downs Luce Brook Nel Syder Mal Craford
Mal Bell Mrs Wood Mal Rose Mrs Blower pocky Frank Poulter, alias Ulls Faith
Anderton Dutch Whore Wilkis a weavers Wife at smock Ally-end Mrs ^awes Denues
wife in Shoreditch Mrs Sw^^ls maid Bess M^s ^oy Mrs B^lls Daughters Mrs Bourn a
Scribes wife Mrs Tippit Shards wife in Dunning-Alley Mrs Mails by the Curtain
Playhouse Su Hedge Jone Thorn at Newington butts Ensign Websters wife Mrs
Harfed -- Robinson, Woodst Compter Mr^ Sweetman Long-haird M^s Spencer in
Spittle-fields Mrs Wroth, Grubstreet Mrs Phillips Peg Angel Greens Satchel --
Mall Rose Nan Rash Betty Knight Su Ha^is Nan Braithwait Boulrun the bailiffs
wife W^l Martins wife Mrs Fransces, alias M^^ Robinson Pim^ Hollilands Poekey
pug-nasty Mrs Spicer in Mobb-lane, alias Browns Mrs (...)-m^roy Mrs Carr in
Rose-lane Mrs Bansly Tanners wife Wheeler str. Mrs Di^ Jone Glisson, alias
Roberts Frank Evitt Tracyes ^ife Mrs Taverner Wheelerstreet Frank Rigs alias
Robinson, a thieving whore Betty Wilson -- King Sarah Price Kate Wilkinson
Grace Steel Elizabeth Smith Betty Blunt M^ry De-gret, Mobb to Tho. Crouch
Allice Jones Mall Cole Nan Low -- Fox Mary Paget Mrs Cadman Sarah and Joyce
Price Bess Cox Cock Birch Sarah Bostwid Jone Bonner Jone Bouden Nan Southern
Frank Palmer Silver-lac't Bess Frank Ouden Fair Rosamond Suger-C -- a constant
wanderer and night-walker Mrs Dedman P^g Hodgson Nan Stephens Sarah Blades Mrs
Bliss Mrs Russel Mrs Sherman Mrs King a Sempstress.
Decoys, Hectors, and Trapanners.
ARmstrong Pet^ Fox Tho. Hurst Will Taverner Dick Cartwright George Clark Barret
Holliland, a great Cheat Gladwin, an ignorant whelp Len. Langsden Tho. Stern
Bar Higgins Tho. Dodson Not Lummocks, Apoth. Anniseed Robbin Will. Nash. Man
Middleton Frank Ashburn Jack Jones Wat. Gulliford Carter, Rabbit-seller Dick.
de Lane Jo. Cecks Robin Thrower Tho. Rand Will. Merit Wat. Stainton. Ra^m^n,
Trump-alley Crone Green by Newgate Harry Martin Vintner Pimp Skipwith. Ned
Brooks Tracy a Hector Brown a Chyrurgion Ratford a Trooper Tho. Player Ned
Traford Harry Bird Will Dossel Will Usius Jack Daines Tailor the Prigg Little
Taffy Sam Pink, a slovenly pimp James at Dog-yard Gundamore Shatterwait, scribe
Hopper, Writing-master Winch the Nailer Jack Berry, and Jack Harris
Billiard-players Pimp Howard Fair Rosamonds pimp George Paskins, a Kid-^^^iber,
at the Crooked-billet at the Armitage Pimp Glover Jack Gould Jack Wallis Ralph
Ashington, alias Shitten-arse, Grocer Tho. Ebbs Dick Steckwel Will Ledger Will
Sadler Wat. Gibbins Tho. Hayward C -- Jackson Pimp Sherman Hammond Will Gill


Francion. Many of these are new Madams to me, but old Traders no question with
others, I Will visit their Quarters one after another, though I Am clapp't three
times over with the Pox, and so become a Gentleman, but hear me Seignior
Gusman, do know Mrs. G -- near the Coffee-house in the Postern by More-gate?
there is a tearing Girl with Silver-lace upon her Petticoat a Quarters breadth,
with Lemmon-colour'd Ribbins a-la-mode-france, with Pendants in her ears,
neck-lace of counterfeit pearl, and dress't with a Caul in her hair.


Gusman. Know her! There Is scarce a Baudy-house, whore, or Hector in London but
I either know of them, or will know them, by such as keep them Company, one of
them told me, that after G -- had fallen to decay in his own trade, his wife set
up here is by opening her fore doors, and lying backwards, for sufferance
whereof this Cornudo had two shillings and sixpence a time paid by his wife,
who handled the theorick and practick part with such free will that by her
Report her husband received seventeen Half-crowns for his part in one day,
besides some overplus Knocks she never reckoned to him.


Francion. Had I known this story beforehand, I would never have ventured in
her (...) Low Country, though she would have paid me for the drudgery; for, the
Cat-ey'd Cullinder-fac'd Gipsy is only pleasing to the eye in her trick't-up
bravery (...) a distance, and rough s^in'd in her Embr^ces as the Sunburned
Portugal; there is the Governess of the Chuck Office has been far handsomer,
till (...) had her under his Cure of the Pox: I was told by one Hurst a Farrier
by Finsbury and diverse others, that ^riss, stood upon her head with naked
breech and belly whilst four Cullyrumpers chuck't in si^teen Half-crowns into
her Comodity: I fear the foul disease is so deeply rooted in her rotten
husband, (as appears by his staff since he was at Enfield,) that he will
shortly be put in the Bill of Mortality: to prevent which, I advise him to
enter Kings-land Hospital, and there make his last Will and Testament, leaving
the Estate he has got by Fools, Whores, and Rogues, to some of his own
profession.


Gusman. It Is a true Proverb, (and as often seen verified amongst us, as upon
any other persons in the world,) that ill-gotten Goods never prosper, and
though his gettings have been inordinate, his Expenses have over-ballanc't
them, so that his estate will quickly be numbered, and as suddenly distributed:
If you fancy variety of faces, Mounsieur Francion, visit the Cherery-garden,
Hatton-wall, Blomesbury, Deury-lane, Dog and Birch yard, Fleet-lane,
Turnball-street, Rosemary lane, long Acre, Lincolns-infields; Spittle-fields,
Wheeler-street, Mobb-lane, Smock-ally, the Row at the six Windmills,
Petticoatlane, Dunnings-ally, Long-ally, More-fields, Cheapside, Cornhill,
Leaden-hall-street, etc. Where when you meet with a complete lusty Girl to your
mind, say with the witty wanton Poet;

Let me thy naked parts feel without light
And with sweet sports protract the pleasing night.

Francion. I have ranged thorough most of those quarters already for a fresh C
-- for,

Love has wings, and loves to range,
And I love those that love to change.
Therefore if thou can do the business, here is a Crown, an Angel, a Pound,
nay, Five pounds for a pnre untoucht Maidenhead: for I am even surfeited with
Citizens wives, who are eager after S --


Gusman. I can do the feat for you, paying well beforehand, only advising
with Magdalena a little, therefore whether will you have a black, brown,
flaxen, tall, short, slender, thick, fat, or lean wench to try your valor on?


Francion. I will not have her clarifi'd or pockisi but a pure maid, such as was
py'd by her Mr. the B -- in the Truckle-bed, nor such as In bred Spend-all in
Throckmorton-street, trades with near the Chuck-Office, (when he should be at
Church,) or in the usurers walk, not playing at Bobb-cherry with his maid the
Tell-tale, nor such a one as old Salmons maid, who whilst her Mr. wooed to
enter her fort, she stood upon her guard, and called Corporal, bidding him
stand off with a Pox of his P -- in his hand


Magdalena. Thou have been pretty punctual in thy observations as to the names,
persons, and places where our sociery and retinue resoit, but there are other
remarkable persons, such as your running-Bauds, Kid-Nappers, your he and
she-Shop lifters, and your foylers, who are forgotten amongst us; there is old
Damrose Page has got many a pound by it, therefore let us not loose the benefit
of their Acquaintance, we may chance to buyld a Hospital, at our own
proper-cost and charges, as well as she did Houses in Radcliff-highway.


Gusman. That I have ready for you already, which I shall put in rank and file
against our next meeting: For by the advice of one of their own society, I took
a rough draught of them, from the Collectors Lift for Pole-mony about Dog and
Bitch-yard, Turnbullstreet, Cress-lane, with other their Rendezvouzes, and you
shall not sail of them, such as Will, and Bess Cox, Bess Norgate, Amy Butler,
Peter Goodjeway, and Thom. Orrel, with diverse others of whom you shall shortly
hear more in the strange and true Conference between Damrose Page and Priss
Fotheringham during their Imprisonment in Newgate, etc. With the manner of
Hammonds erecting of the Prick-Office at the Last and Lion in East-smith-field.
It will be very proper to have an additional List of the names, of our deepest
Pyemen and decayed Occupiers, whose names may stand upon record amongst us, as
the Benefactors in St. Bartholomews Hospital, as good Examples fot others. But
loose not an opportunity which is now offered in the presence of your constant
Cully, and deep Pyeman Francion: His teeth water for a new face, money and Cunny
are good Commodities.


Magdalena. Show him into a convenient Room, and end in Mrs. Cupid, the Dutch
whore, fair Rosamond, Sugar C -- who are all as good Maids as any use to be
after thirteen amongst us, and let him make his own choice, and I will have my
own Price, be diligent in your attendance, carrying Wine and Tobacco, whether
they call or no, come he must pay for it, trading's dead and little, make large
improvement on it when it is offered.


Gusman. Should we once leave our old Custom of Chearing, our best (as well as
worst) Cullies, we must leave off to live, but hang Conscience and honesty,
it is absurd policy, dishonest actions are proper with other Persons, in other
places, and for our profit, dishonsty with Riches is honesty, honesty with
Poverty is dishonesty, all people know that to be as true as that St. George
killed the Dragon: they must therefore find it, if not expect it, for we have
devices and subtilties far exceeding the Mountebanks Orbiton or Balsam, that
were our Girls C -- as large as Satchel C -- Greens wife who has both holes
broken into one, we can reduce those preternatural defects, to their Pristine
posture and constitution.


Magdalena. Thou say true Gusman, beware the four wenches smell not rammish
(as all whores do) under their Armpits, or have any Crablice breeding there for
fear of discovering the loss of their Maiden-heads, but give them Instructions
to paint, Powder, and perfume their clothes and carcasses, have fine clean
Holland-smocks, kiss with their mouths open, put their tongues, as all wantons
do, in his mouth, and suck it, their left hand in his Cod-piece, the right hand
in his Pocket, commend his Trap stick, pluck their coats above their thighs,
their smocks above their Knees, bidding him thrust his hand to the best C -- in
christendom, tickling the Knobs thereof till they burst out with laughing, as W
-- the Butchers son in the Stocks did Honor Brooks the rammish Scotch whore at
D -- between her Legs, not forgetting that Ursula had half a crown for showing
her Twit-twat there, and half a crown for stroaking the marrow out of a man's
Gristle: but stay Gusman read the Proclamation ere you go.


Gusman. O Yes! O Yes! O Yes! Any man or woman, in City or in Country, that
will see an Ugly she-monster of deformed shape, impudent and brazenfac't
carriage, uncivil behavior, filthy constitutions, and preternatural
disposition in her body, grindes Ginger in her a -- hole betwixt her buttocks,
and by that means has weakened the retentive faculty in her posteriors, to the
p -- and s -- of her flesh-stocks, Let all such as fear not the losing of their
Eyesight, come put in their nose, as Chaucers twelve Friars did at the
dividing of a fart amongst them, and they may have it of a sluttish wench at
the sign of, Have you any wood to cleave, etc.


Magdalena. Well, I Will send her all the Hectors, and ^oaring Trappanners that
love picking of wenches plackets more then Pockets to plague the jade, unless
she enters her name amongst us; come Julietta, what observations were omitted
concerning your venetian practices in our first days discou^se, deliver me and
this auditory a true and brief account.


Julietta. Our rules amongst us, are with much strictness observed, for paying
an annual tribute to the Senate, we have as secure protection as any people in
the Dukedom of Venice, no Tax or imposition exceeding ours in quantity, and
what children are got in Bastardy amongst us, are educated at their charge, if
you are but minded to go to a certain stately buylding, where is a grate, and
one continually there placed to receive it in, the Priests have a place
peculiar to themselves, for what Brats they get are carried else where, where
on the outside of the wall, hangs a rope with a basket at the end on it, where
they are drawn up in a basket, if you ring the Bell, which hangs close by: if
any Merchant, Gentleman or others, leave his slipper at the door, whilst he is
with us, none dares to enter amongst us, for we have our Ruffians (such as your
Hectors) that will tear the nations, this Custom's as ordinary, as drinking in
^le-houses and Taverns: then in our private rooms, we have the picture of the
Italian padlock, Peter Aretines postures curiously painted, with several
beautiful pictures stark-naked (not such Landskips as P -- in C -- at Priss
Fotheringhams) one holding a Chamber Pot betwixt her Legs, another striving
might and main to enlarge the Orifice of her Mysrerium magnum that unfathomed
bottom, a third laughing at the large pair of cheeks and haunches she has got,
a fourth pointing at one that has lost the hair off her Whib-bob, and instead
thereof has a huge black beard for her strummulo or merkin, and if any of our
wanton Girls catch the Neaploitan disease, it is a constant custom to send them
to the Hospitals appointed where they are clarified before they enter upon any
new engagement by our Chyrurgeons.


Magdalena. Your account is very concise and complete, I hear Francion call,
(after his knocking) it is surely for the Reckoning.


Francion. There Is ten p^eces to clear all charges and expenses, does it please
old Matron?


Magdalena. Most noble Francion, most heartily welcome, the most welcome guest
in the whole world, what can be grasp't within my power, shall truckle at your
command, for I am your devoted se^vant.


Julietta. Ah marry Sisters! this is none of your pitiful Sneakesbyes and
Raskalls that will offer a study C -- but eighteen pence or two shillings, and
repent of the business afterward


Gusman. He came in season, his money is in season. Quod omnium rerum est
primum, I only wish the next days account may end, with so welcome a
Conclusion as this.


Second Days Action.
FINIS
An Advertisement.
Whereas several of the persons concerned in the following Dialogues, have
threatened the Publisher hereof, and offered large Sums for his Apprehension,
fearing the discovery of their bold and impudent practices and Cheatings; Let
all persons know the design and intent hereof, is to rou^ those Caterpillars,
and to give the Magistrate notice of the vileness and wickedness of their
Actions, hoping a severe and strict Observance will be taken for their
suppression.

Farewell.

