AN ACT OF THE COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: For settling the Militia of the
City of WESTMINSTER, and Liberties thereof, with the Parishes and places
adjacent of the County of Middlesex, within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, and
late Lines of Communication, except the Hamblets of the TOVVER.

London Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop in Fleet Street, at the Sign of the
Golden-Dragon, near the Inner Temple. 1649.

AN ACT OF THE COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: For settling the Militia of the
City of Westminster, and Liberties thereof, etc.
THE Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into their serious consideration
the present condition and state of things, in relation to the Interest of
England, and particularly to the City of Westminster, and Liberties thereof,
with the parishes and places adjacent of the County of Middlesex, within the
weekly bills of Mortality, and late Lines of Communication, excepting the
Hamblets of the Tower; Do enact and ordain, and be it enacted and ordained by
the authority of the same, That William Lord Mounson, Mayor General Skippon,
Sir Gregory Norton Knight and Baronet, Sir Henry Mildmay Knight, Sir Henry Vane
sen. Knight, Sir James Harrington Knight, Sir John Hippesley Knight, Humphry
Edwards, John Trenchard, Cornelius Holland, Edmund Ludlowe, Michael Oldsworth,
Nicholas Love, Lawrence Whittaker, and John Moore, Esquires; Edward Berkhead
Esquire, Thomas Fawkenbridge Esquire, George Manley, Josias Berners, Richard
Graves, Nicholas Martin, John Heylin, and Edward Dendy Junior, Esquires,
William Parker Doctor in Physic James Prince, Silvanus Tailor, Edward Carter,
Richard Big, Walter Frost, Nicholas Bond, Arthur Squibb, John Humphries, John
Cook, (...) Hunt, John Goyner, Edward Martin, George Crompton, John Robinson,
Noah Banks, Peter Lindsey, Richard Bates, Samuel Smith, John Clendan, Francis
Blake, Ralph Gray, Edward Neale, William Dashwood, William Dippar, William
Stone, Peter Guilliams, James Ravenscroft, Thomas Bradshaw, Josias Fendall,
Thomas Evans, Edward Bows, William Haberfeild Gent. or any seven or more of
them, be, and are hereby constituted and appointed a Committee for the Militia
of the said City of Westminster, and Liberties thereof, and of all the parishes
and places aforesaid: And that they or any seven or more of them shall have
power, and are hereby authorized, to assemble and call together all and
singular person or persons within the said City of Westminster, and Liberties
thereof, and the parishes and places aforesaid, that are meet and fit for the
Wars; and them to train, exercise, and put in readiness, and them after their
abilities and faculties, well and sufficiently front time to time to cause to
be arrayed and weaponed, and to take the musters of them in places most fit for
that purpose: And that they shall have power, to lead, conduct, and employ, or
cause to be led, conducted and employed, the persons aforesaid arrayed and
weaponed, for the suppression of all rebellions, insurrections and invasions
that may happen within the said City, and Liberties thereof, parishes, places,
and limits aforesaid: And likewise shall have further power and authority to
lead, conduct, and employ, or cause to be led, conducted and employed, the
persons aforesaid arrayed and weaponed, as well within the said City and
Liberties thereof, parishes, places, and limits aforesaid, as within and into
any other part of the Commonwealth of England, or Dominion of Wales, for
suppressing of all rebellions, insurrections and invasions that may happen,
according as they shall from time to time receive directions from the
Parliament of England, or council of State by them authorized and appointed:
And that the said Committee of Militia, or any seven or more of them, shall
have power, and are hereby authorized to constitute and make Colonells,
Captains, and other Officers; and to continue or remove such Colonells,
Captains, and other Officers, from time to time, as they or any seven or more
of them as aforesaid, shall set cause and think fit; And that the said
Committee or any seven or more of them as aforesaid, shall have the same power
and authority within the limits aforesaid, as the late Committee there had, by
two former Ordinances of Parliament, bearing date the 9th day of September, and
the 22th of January, 1647. to all intents and purposes whatsoever: And for the
speedy raising of moneys necessary for the carrying on of that service, Be it
further enacted and ordained by the authority aforesaid, That the said
Committee or any seven or more of them, shall have power, and are hereby
authorized to cause a rate and assessement, not exceeding the sum of one
thousand pounds to be made upon all persons, as well inhabitants as others,
having any real or personal estate, within the said parishes, places, and
limits aforesaid: And that the said Committee or any seven or more of them,
shall have the same power, and give such allowances for the collecting and
receiving thereof, as is given to the respective Commissioners named in the
Ordinance of the 15th. of March, 1647. for raising of moneys to be employed
toward the maintenance of the Forces under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax
Knight: And that the said Committee or any seven or more of them, shall have
likewise power to call before them, as well all Receivers, Treasurers,
Collectors, and their, and every of their Executors, and Administrators of all
moneys which shall be collected and levied by virtue of this Ordinance, as also
all other Receivers, Treasurers, Collectors, and their, and every of their
Executors and Administrators of all moneys formerly assessed, levied, or
received for the service of the Militia, within the limits aforesaid, by virtue
of any Ordinance or Ordinances of Parliament; which Receivers, Treasurers, and
Collectors, and their, and every of their Executors and Administrators, are
hereby required to render just and due account thereof to the said Committee,
or any seven or more of them, and to pay such moneys as are or shall be found
remaining in their hands, upon their respective Accounts and Collections, unto
such person or persons as the laid Committee, or any seven or more of them from
time to time, by virtue of this Ordinance, or the said Ordinance of the 22th of
January last, shall nominate and appoint to be Treasurer or Treasurers, Receiver
or Receivers thereof; And that the Acquittance of such Treasurer or Treasurers,
Receiver or Receivers, under his or their hands, of the Receipt of all or any
part of such moneys, shall be a sufficient warrant and discharge to such
Collectors, Treasurers and Receivers, and their Executors, and Administrators
as shall pay the same: And in case such Treasurer and Treasurers, Receiver and
Receivers, Collector and Collectors, or any of them, their or any of their
Executors or Administrators shall refuse or neglect to render an account as
aforesaid, and to pay in the moneys remaining in their, or any of their hands,
being in Arrears by virtue of any former Ordinance, or by this present Act;
that in such case, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Committee,
or any seven or more of them, to levy the same by distress and sale of the
goods of such person and persons so refusing or neglecting as aforesaid,
restoring the overplus to the owners: And the said Commitee, or any seven or
more of them, shall have likewise power, and are hereby authorized, from time
to time, to nominate and appoint Treasurers, and by order under their hands, or
the hands of any seven or more of them, to dispose of all moneys raised or to
be raised by the means aforesaid, for the payment of such debts and giving of
such allowances and salaries, as by the former Committees of Militia appointed
by Ordinance of Parliament within the limits aforesaid, or by this Committee
have been or shall be contracted for the service of the said Militia, and not
otherwise: And be it further enacted and ordained by the authority aforesaid,
That if the persons to be arrayed and weaponed as aforesaid, or any of them,
shall by the said Committee, or any seven or more of them be deemed and
adjudged for, or by reason of his, her or their age, quality, sex, or any known
or open disaffection to the Public, unfit to have or bear their own arms, That
in such case the said Committee, or any seven or more of them shall have power,
and are hereby authorized to order and appoint some other honest, fit, and
well-affected persons to bear the arms of the persons so excepted; and shall
and may order every such excepted person to find arms, and to pay to every such
person as shall bear the same for them, for every days drawing forth, the sum
of sixteen pence: And if any such person excepted as aforesaid, shall refuse or
neglect to find such arms wherewith they or either of them from time to time
shall be charged, or to pay the sum of 16d. for every days drawing forth as
aforesaid, that then the said Committee, or any seven or more of them upon
complaint thereof made unto them, shall send for such person before them, and
shall upon his, her, or their refusal to pay the same, commit such person to
prison, there to remain without bail or mainprise, until such person shall
conform and pay the same: And be it further enacted and ordained by the
authority aforesaid, that all such persons within the particular limits
aforesaid, as shall be thought fit to bear arms, and shall be listed upon the
Trained-band Companies, and shall not from time to time appear completely
armed, and serve at the beat of Drum, or other summons, that in such case the
Colonells, Captains, and Lieutenants of the said Trained-bands within the
limits aforesaid, may inflict the punishment of two days imprisonment, without
bail or mainprise, or the mulct of five shillings for the supply of the
service. And be it further enacted and ordained by the authority aforesaid;
That all high and petty Constables, and all other officers and ministers within
the limits aforesaid, are hereby required to be aiding and assisting to the
said Committee, Colonells, Captains, Lieutenants, and their Marshalls of the
said Trained-band Companies in execution of the premises, as they will answer
the contrary at their perils: And all and every person and persons who shall
act or do any act or thing whatsoever, by virtue of this or any former Order
or Ordinance of Parliament concerning the said Militia, shall be saved
harmless and indempnified concerning the same by authority of Parliament, and
shall also have the benefit and advantage of the Ordinances of Parliament
formerly made for saving harmless, and indempnified all persons that have
acted by Authority, and for the service of the Parliament. Provided always,
that this Act shall continue in force for one whole year, from the 14th. of
March, 1648. and no longer.

Hen. Scobell Cleric. Parliament.

FINIS.

