HIS MAJESTY'S SPEECH TO THE Gentry of the County of YORK, Attending his
Majesty at the City of York, on Thursday the 12th of May, 1642.
Gentlemen,
I Have cause of adding not altering, what I meant to say when I gave out the
summons for this days appearance, I little thought of these Messengers, or of
such a Message as they brought, the which, because it confirms me in what I
intend to speak, and that I desire you should be truly informed of all
passages between me and the Parliament, you shall here read, First, my answer
to the Declaration of both Houses concerning Hull, the answer of the Parliament
to my two Messages concerning Hull, together with my Reply to the same, and my
Message to both Houses declaring the Reasons why I refused to pass the Bill
concerning the Militia.

All which being read his Majesty proceeded.

I Will make no paraphrases upon what ye have heard, it more benefiting a
Lawyer then a King, only this observation, since Treason is countenanced so
near me, it is time to look to my safety: I avow it was part of my wonder,
that men (whom I thought heretofore discreet, and moderate) should have
undertaken this employment, and that since they came (I having delivered them
the Answer: you have heard, and commanded them to return personally with it to
the Parliament) should have flatly disobeyed me upon pretense of the
Parliaments command. My end in telling you this, is to warn you of them, for
since these men have brought me such a Message, and disobeyed so lawful a
Command. I will not say what their intent of staying here is, only I bid you
take heed, not knowing what doctrine of disobedience they may preach to you,
under color of obeying the Parliament. Hitherto I have found and kept you
quiet, the enjoying of which was a chief cause of my coming hither (Tumults
and disorders having made me leave the South) and not to make this a seat of
War, as malice would (but I hope in vain) make you believe; Now if
disturbances do come, I know whom I have reason to suspect.

To be short, you see that my Magazine is going to be taken from me (being my
own proper goods) directly against my will; The Militia (against Law and my
consent) is going to be put in Execution: And lastly, Sir John Hothams Treason
is countenanced; All this considered none can blame me to Apprehend dangers.
Therefore I have thought fit (upon these real Grounds) to tell you, That I am
resolved to have a Guard (the Parliament having had one all this while upon
imaginary Iealousies, (only to secure my person. In which I desire your
concurrence and assistance, and that I may be able to protect you, the Laws,
and the true Protestant profession from any Affront or Injury that may be
offered, which I mean to maintain my self without charge to the Country,
intending no longer to keep them on foot, then I shall be secured of my just
Apprehensions by having satisfaction in the particulars before mentioned.

Printed at York, and now reprinted at London by Alice Norton, for Humphrey
Tuckey, at the Black spread Eagle in Fleet Street. 1642.


