blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ACT Touching Corn and Meal.
FOrasmuch as of late time there has been great spoil and destruction made of
Wheat, and other Corn and Grain of all sorts, and converting the same into Meal
and Flower, and selling the same in private Houses, Warehouses and Shops,
without bringing of the same into common and public Markets; Be it Enacted by
this present Parliament, and by Authority thereof, That from and after the
twentieth day of November, One thousand six hundred and fifty, no manner of
person directly or indirectly, by himself or others, shall buy any Wheat or
other Grain, with intent to put the same to sale in Meal, Flower or otherwise,
but such only who shall to that purpose obtain a License, granted in the open
Sessions of the Peace, and Signed and Sealed with the proper Hands and Seals of
five or more Instices of the Peace, then sitting, for such City, County or
place where such sale shall be made, upon pain and forfeiture of treble the
value of the said Grain or Meal, and two Months Imprisonment without Bail or
Mainprize. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Meal
shall from the said Twentieth day of November, One thousand six hundred and
fifty, be sold in any Shops, Houses, Warehouses, or other places within the
City of London, or within Twenty miles thereof; Nor from and after the
Twentieth day of February, One thousand six hundred and fifty, in any other
City, Town, Borough, or other place within this Commonwealth, in any Shops,
Houses, Warehouses or other places, but only in the common public
Marketplace usual for that purpose, upon the like pain and forfeiture as
aforesaid. And be it further Enacted, That no Meal shall be sold, but in the
same quality and condition as the same goes truly and really from the Mill,
without any mixture whatsoever; And also that no person shall use any
Boulting-Mill, or other Instrument for Dressing, Boulting or Sifting any Corn
or Grain whatsoever, with intent to sell the same in Meal or Flower, upon the
like pain and forfeiture as aforesaid: All which said Forfeitures shall and may
be recovered by Bill, Plaint, Indictment or Information in any Court of Record,
by any person who will sue for the same; the one moiety thereof to such person
suing, besides his Costs in prosecuting the same, and the other moiety to the
Poor of the Parish where the Offense shall be committed: Provided such Bill,
Plaint, Indictment or Information, be had or commenced within six Months after
the Offense done or committed: Provided also, such License as is aforesaid
shall not be granted, but upon the parties first entering into Security by Bond
or Recognizance, well and truly to observe and perform in all things the
Provisions in this Act mentioned, according to the true intent and meaning
thereof. And be it further Enacted and Declared, That the buying of Corn, to
the intent to sell the same in Meal or Flower, without License obtained as
aforesaid, shall be adjudged, reputed and taken an unlawful Engrossing, and the
Offender and Offenders therein shall be punished as Ingrossers of Corn and
other dead Victual are punished by the Statute of 5 and 6 Edw. 6. Entitled,
Who shall be Adjudged a Forestaller, who a Regrator, and who an Ingrosser, and
the Punishment of them. And because the punishment of many Abuses are daily
prevented, and Prosecutors discouraged by the familiar bringing of Writs of
Certiorari, and Writs of Habeas Corpus in Indictments, Actions and Informations
commenced upon Penal Laws; Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from
and after the said Twentieth day of November, One thousand six hundred and
fifty, no Writ of Certiorari or Habeas Corpus shall be granted or allowed in
any Action, Bill, Plaint, Indictment or Information, commenced or to be
commenced upon this or any other Penal Law, concerning the buying, selling,
searching, viewing, ordering or disposing of any Corn, Wine, Beer, Ale, Fish,
Flesh, Salt, Butter, Cheese, or other dead Victual whatsoever; But that the
granting or allowing the said Writs in the Cases aforesaid, shall be utterly
void and Null; And all Judges, Justices-, Stewards of Courts, Prosecutors,
Plaintiffs and Informers, and all other persons interessed therein, or who have
cognizance thereof, shall and may proceed as if the said Writ of Certiorari or
Writ of Habeas Corpus had never been granted or allowed, Any Law, Statute,
Usage or Custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And for ease of
Pleading to all manner of persons which shall or may be sued upon this Act, or
for any other matter, cause or thing whatsoever, in any Court of Record within
the Commonwealth of England; Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
from and after the said Twentieth day of November, One thousand six hundred and
fifty, it shall and may be lawful, to and for any person or persons, Defendant
or Tenant, for or by reason of any matter to be pleaded, set forth or alleged
in Bar to any Action, Real, Personal or Mixed, that shall be commenced in any of
the Courts aforesaid, to plead the General Issue of Not guilty, or the like
General Issue proper to the nature of the Action or Suit commenced; and for his
or their Discharge or acquitting, to give any such matter in Evidence to the
Jury that shall try the same, and the said matter shall be as available to such
person or persons, Defendant or Tenant, to all intents and purposes, as if the
said matter had been specially pleaded, set forth or alleged in Bar of such
Action, Any Law, Statute, Usage or Custom to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Die Mercurii, 23 Octobr. 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1650.


