AN ACT For removing all Papists, and all Officers and Soldiers of Fortune, And
diverse other DELINQUENTS From London and Westminster, and confining them within
five miles of their dwellings; and for encouragement of such as discover
Priests and Jesuits, their Receivers and Abettors.

Anglo-Irish Protectorate blazon or coat of arms

Die Martis, 26o Februarii, 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London: Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England. 1649.

AN ACT FOR Removing all Papists, and all Officers and Soldiers of Fortune, and
diverse other Delinquents from London and Westminster, and confining them within
five miles of their dwellings; and for encouragement of such as discover
Priests and Jesuits, their Receivers and Abettors.
THe Parliament of England taking notice of the great confluence and resort of
Papists, Officers and Soldiers of Fortune, and other disaffected persons (Who
have born Arms against them, and adhered to the Enemy in the late Wars) unto
the Cities of London and Westminster, and other the parts adjacent; and having
certain Information of many Designs now in hand, endeavored to be carried on by
Correspondencies with the Son to the late Tyrant, his Agents and Accomplices, and
by the Conspiracies of old and new Malignants, in favor of his pretenses
against the Commonwealth and present Government; the subtitle Contrivers of
which Plots may for the effecting of the same, probably and with much ease make
use of such dangerous and discontented persons now in and about the said
Cities, if suffered there to remain, Do for the prevention of such
inconveniences and disturbances as may thereby arise, Think fit to Order and
Ordain, and be it by their Authority Enacted and Ordained, That all Papists
whatsoever, and all Officers and Soldiers of Fortune, and other persons who
have born Arms against the Parliament, or have adhered unto, or willingly
assisted their Enemies in the late War, being not under restraint, and not
hereafter excepted, shall at or before the Twentieth day of March, One thousand
six hundred forty nine (or if then under restraint, within Five days after
their respective enlargement) depart out of the said Cities of London and
Westminster, and late Lines of Communication, and all other places within
twenty miles of the said late Lines: And if any such person shall continue
within the said late Lines, or the said distance of twenty miles from the said
Lines, after the said Twentieth day of March, or if then under restraint, shall
continue within the distance aforesaid, above five days after his or their
enlargement, such persons shall be apprehended and imprisoned without Bail or
Mainprize, until such of them as shall be thought fit to be Bailed, pay all
charges of their Apprehension and Imprisonment, and give good security for
their departure as aforesaid, within five days after their enlargement, and not
to return within the time limited by this Act; and the manner of taking the said
Security is hereby referred to the care and direction of the Council of State,
who are also authorized and required to cause such of the said Prisoners as
have not yet compounded for their Delinquencies, and whom they judge dangerous
and fit to be made examples of Justice, to be proceeded and dealt with
according to their demerits. And for the better execution of this Act, It is
further Ordained and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord Major
of the City of London, and all Justices of the Peace within the said City and
late Lines of Communication, and of the several Counties of Middlesex,
Hertford, Essex, Kent and Surrey; and the respective Committees and
Commissioners for the Militia within the said City and Liberties, the City of
Westminster, Borough of Southwark, hamlets of the Tower and Suburbs, or any two
or more of them in their respective Liberties and Jurisdictions, shall and may,
and are hereby authorized and required to cause strict Wards and Watches to be
kept, and to make frequent searches for, and apprehend, or cause to be
apprehended, all Papists and other such Delinquents as aforesaid, which shall
be found within the distance aforesaid, after the said twentieth day of March;
and all such persons so apprehended and taken, and brought before them or any
two of them as aforesaid, to examine, or cause to be examined before one or
more Justice of the Peace of the Liberty where the inpprehension is; who is
also to take Depositions upon Oath against the said Parties, and to commit them
over to some common Goal or Prison, and bind over Prosecutors and Witnesses to
appear, prosecute and testify at the next General Sessions or Goal Delivery
for the place; and of their doings therein, shall under their Hands and Seals
in writing forthwith acquaint the Council of State, to the end the Offenders
may be dealt with according to Law and Justice, and according to the directions
beforementioned: mnd all Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables; and all Captains of
Guards, Officers and Soldiers, and other the good People of this Commonwealth,
are required to be ayding to the said Justices of Peace, Committees and
Commissioners, their Agents, Officers and Ministers, in the execution of this
Act; and in case any Jailer, Constable, or other Officer to whom any the
persons aforesaid shall be committed, shall permit such person or persons to go
at liberty, without the special Warrant or discharge of the Magistrate by whom
they were committed, or other sufficient Authority in that behalf, that the
same shall be taken and adjudged an Escape, and the Offender shall be proceeded
against as for an Escape, according to Law. And for the better discovery,
prevention and avoiding of such traiterous and dangerous Conspiracies as are
daily devised and plotted against the safety of the Parliament and this
Commonwealth, by such Papists and ill-affected persons as aforesaid, who taking
liberty to convene together, and without restraint wandering and shifting from
place to place, become Spies and Intelligencers for the Common Enemy, continue
personal Correspondencies each with other, and gather thereby the more strength
and opportunity to corrupt and seduce the good People of this Commonwealth, and
to form, contrive and effect their said ill Designs, whereof of late years
there has been sad experience; Be it Enacted and Ordained by the authority
aforesaid, That all the said persons appointed to depart as aforesaid, shall
from and after the First day of October, One thousand six hundred and fifty
(and all other Papists, and other adherents to the Enemies in the late Wars,
shall at or before the Twentieth day of March, One thousand six hundred forty
nine, if they be within this Commonwealth not authorized to stay as aforesaid,
and not restrained or stayed, either by Imprisonment or by such sickness and
infirmity of body, as they shall not be able to travel without imminent danger
of life: And in such cases of absence out of the Land, restraint or stay, or
being authorized as aforesaid, then within twenty days next after they shall
return into the Land, and be enlarged from such imprisonment or restraint, and
shall be able to travel, or after their said authorized time of stay
determined) repair to the place of dwelling where they usually heretofore made
their common abode; or not having any certain abode, shall repair to the place
where such person was born, or where the Father or Mother of such person shall
then be dwelling, and give such notice of their coming as is afterward
expressed; and shall not at any time after pass or remove above five miles from
thence, upon pain of Imprisonment, and Sequestration of all their Estates Real
and Personal, as in case of Delinquency, to be inflicted upon them by the
Committee or Commissioners for Sequestration where they shall respectively be,
or their Estates lie, and such other proceedings to be had with and against
them, as is usual in other cases of Sequestration for Delinquency. Provided
always, and it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all such persons who
are to make their repair, and not to remove above five miles as aforesaid,
shall within twenty days after their coming to any of the said places (as the
case shall happen) notify their coming thither, and present themselves, and
deliver their true names in writing to the Minister of the Parish, and to the
Constable, Headborough, or Tythingman of the Town, who shall thereupon
presently enter the same into a Book, to be kept in every Parish for that
purpose; and the said Minister, Constable, Headborough or Tythingman, shall
certify the same in writing to the Justices of the Peace of the same County,
at the next General or Quarter Sessions to be held in the same County; and the
said Justices shall cause the same to be entered by the Clerk of the Peace in
the Rolls of the same Sessions, upon pain of forfeiture of five pounds for
every default of not presenting or entering as aforesaid, to be levied upon the
goods of the Defaulter for the use of the Poor, and maimed Soldiers of the
County, by Warrant from the Justices of Assize or Circuit, or Justices of Peace
at their Quarter Sessions; who are hereby authorized and required within their
several Limits respectively, to enquire of, and punish the said defaults: And
to the end the Commonwealth he not pestred and overcharged with the multitude
of such seditious and dangerous people as is aforesaid, who having little or no
ability to answer or satisfy any competent penalty for their disobedience and
contempt of the Laws, and being committed to Prison, do live for the most part
in better case there, then if they were at liberty, or are otherwise
overchargeable to be kept; Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That if any such person so confined as aforesaid, not having Lands, Tenements,
Rents or Annuities, of an absolute Estate of Inheritance or Freehold, of the
clear yearly value of Twenty Marks, above all charges to their own use and
behoof, or Goods and Chattels in their own right, and to their own proper use
and behoof, above the value of One hundred pounds, shall not within the time
before in this Act in that behalf limited and appointed, repair to their place
of usual dwelling and abode, if they have any, or else to the place where they
were born, or where their Father or Mother shall be dwelling, and give such
notification of their coming and being, as is before limited and directed,
shall upon his Oath abjure this Commonwealth; or if such Offender shall refuse
to abjure, or not go to the Haven or Port to be appointed, or after departure,
return into this Commonwealth without License of the Parliament, the said Oath
and Abjuration, Entering and Recording thereof, to be in such manner and form as
is in like case prescribed by the Statute made in the 35th year of the late
Queeen Elizabeth, for confining of Popish Recusants; That then in every such
case, the person so offending shall be adjudged a Felon, and shall suffer and
lose as in case of Felony, without benefit of Clergy. Provided nevertheless,
And the Council of State are hereby authorized, to dispose of any such persons
last mentioned, before abjuration, for the service and benefit of Foreign
Plantations, in such sort as to them shall seem meet; in which case the
abjuration shall be forborne. And it is further Provided, Ordained and Enacted
by the authority aforesaid, That if any of the persons confined as is
aforesaid, shall be urged by process without fraud or covin, or be bound
without fraud or covin to appear in any of the Courts of Justice of this
Commonwealth; or shall have other necessary occasion or business to go and
travel out of the compass of the said five Miles, That then and in every such
case, upon License in writing under the Hands and Seals of four of the Justices
of the Peace of the County, Limit or Division, or place next adjoining to the
place of abode of the said confined party; in every of which Licenses shall be
specified and contained, both the particular cause of the said License, and the
time how long the said party licensed shall be absent, in traveling, attending
and returning; It shall and may be lawful for such licensed person to go and
travel about such their necessary business, and for such time only for their
traveling, attending and returning, as shall be comprised in the said License,
so as the said party so licensed first take the Engagement, of being true and
faithful to this Commonwealth, as it is now Established, without King or House
of Lords; and also take his or her Corporal Oath before the said four Justices
of the Peace, or any of them (who shall have authority by virtue of this Act to
minister the same) that he or she has truly informed them of the cause of his
or their Journey, and shall not make any causless stays: And the Council of
State shall have like power to grant such Licenses upon like occasions, and all
and every other Licenses shall be utterly void and of none effect. Provided,
That no person, who by the Laws of this Commonwealth may be questioned for
Treason, Felony, breach of Peace, or any other Crime, or for any Civil cause,
shall be hereby exempted from any Legal Prosecution, but that every such person
may be prosecuted and dealt withal according to his merit, and according to Law
and Justice in that behalf, This Act, or any thing therein contained in any
wise to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided, That nothing in this Act shall
extend to such Delinquents aforesaid, who having their usual Habitations within
the late Lines of Communication, or within the said space of Twenty Miles, have
made their Compositions, and paid in or secured their Fines; or whose
Delinquencies have been pardoned by the Parliament, not having acted any thing
against it since that time, so as such persons give in a note of their names
and places of residence to such persons, and in such manner, and upon such
penalties to be presented and Recorded, as is in like case before limited,
before the twentieth of March, One thousand six hundred forty nine; and so as
they procure a true Certificate in writing of their taking the Engagement, to
be true and faithful to the Commonwealth of England, as the same is now
Established, without a King or House of Lords, to be Entered and Recorded as is
beforementioned, or to such as shall be authorized by the Parliament or Council
of State; or being really attending their Compositions at Goldsmiths-Hall,
shall be permitted by the Commissioners for such Compositions, to continue
within the said late Lines for and during the perfecting of their Compositions
only, such parties entering their Engagements before the said Commissioners, To
be true and faithful to this Commonwealth, as the same is now Established,
without a King or House of Lords; and giving a note also to the said
Commissioners of the places of their abode, whilst they are attending their
said Compositions, which Commissioners are to make due Entry of the same in
their Books: And all persons whatsoever mentioned or concerned in this Act, are
to take notice of the same, and to conform thereunto respectively. And for that
it is well known that there are many Priests and Jesuits, who are Traitors by
the Law, come over from beyond the Seas, acting the part of Incendiaries here,
and lurking to do mischief; It is further Enacted and Declared, That like
reward shall be given to those who shall discover such persons after the
conviction of them, or shall discover their knowing Receivers and Abbettors, as
is by a late Act conferred and Ordained for the Apprehenders of Highway men;
which each Sheriff where the Trial and Conviction is, shall duly pay to the
discoverer, and have the same allowed to him upon his accounts; and the Barons
of the Exchequer are required to make allowance of the same: And all Judges of
the Law, and Justices of the Peace, are required in their several Circuits and
Sessions to give in charge, and take enquiry and account of the due Execution
of this Act; and all other Ministers of Law and Justice, are also upon all
occasions within their respective Limits, to do their duties in and concerning
the same. And it is lastly Ordered, That this Act be forthwith printed, and
published by sound of Trumpet and beat of Drum, at all usual places within the
said Cities, and late Lines of Communication, in such sort as the Council of
State shall appoint, who are authorized and required to cause the same to be
executed accordingly; and to send this Act to the Sheriffs of the several
Counties within this Commonwealth, who are to publish the same solemnly at the
two next County Courts after their respective Receipt thereof. And this Act is
to have continuance and be in force until the twentieth day of March, which
shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and fifty, and no
longer.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


