AN ACT FOR Providing MAINTENANCE for Preaching-Ministers, And other PIOUS USES.

Die Veneris, 8 Junii, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament'.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England, and
are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet, at the Sign of the Golden-Dragon,
near the Inner Temple, 1649.

Die Veneris, 8 Junii, 1649. AN ACT For providing maintenance for Preaching
Ministers, And other Pious uses.
Whereas it has been found by long experience, That the Government of the
Church of England by Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries,
Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and other their Officers depending on
that Hierarchy, has been a great impediment to the perfect Reformation and
growth of Religion, and very prejudicial to the Civil State and Government of
the Commonwealth; And therefore has been by authority of Parliament abolished
and taken away, and all their Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
appointed to be sold for the payment of ye just debts of the Commonwealth, and
other necessary charges occasioned by the late Civil War, promoted mainly by,
and in favor of the said Hierarchy; saving and excepting all Tithes
appropriate, Oblations, Obventions, Portions of Tithes appropriate, of or
belonging to the said Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and Deans and Chapters, and
others of the said Hierarchy, and to all and every of them; all which, together
with Twenty thousand pounds yearly Rent belonging to the late King and Crown of
England, hereafter mentioned, The Commons assembled in Parliament, have thought
fit to be reserved and settled for a competent maintenance of Preaching
Ministers, in such Cities, Towns and places, where it is wanting throughout
England and Wales: Be it therefore Enatted, and it is Enacted and Ordained by
this present Parliament, and by the authority thereof, That all Tithes
appropriate, Oblations, Obventions, Pentions, Portions of Tithes appropriate,
Offerings, Fee-farm Rents, issuing out of Tithes of the said Archbishops and
Bishops, the said Deans, Deans and Chapters, and others of the said Hierarchy,
with all and every their appurtenances, of what nature and quality soever they
be, which at any time within ten years before the beginning of this present
Parliament were belonging to them, or any of them, which they, or any of them
had, held, and enjoyed in the right of his or their Archbishopricks, or
Bishoprics, Deanaries, Dignities, Offices, and Functions or places
respectively, together with all Charters, Deeds, Books, Accounts, Rolls, and
other Writings and Evidences whatsoever, concerning the premises, or any of
them belonging thereunto, shall from and after the 6th day of January, which
shall be in the year 1649. be vested and settled, and judged and deemed to be,
and are hereby in the real and actual possession and seisin of Sir Henry
Holcroft Knight, Sir John Thorowgood of Kensington Knight; William Steel Esquire
John Coke Esquire Francis West Esquire Lieutenant of the Tower, Henry Danvers Esquire John
Brown Esquire George Cooper Esquire Mr. Richard Reed, Mr. Richard Young, William Skinner
Esquire Nicholas Marten Esquire and Mr. John Pocoke, their Heirs and Assigns: And they
the said Sir Henry Holcroft, Sir John Thorowgood, William Steel, John Coke,
Francis West Lieutenant of the Tower, Henry Danvers, John Brown, George Cooper,
Mr. Richard Reed, Mr. Richard Young, William Skinner, Nicholas Marten, and John
Pocoke, and the survivor and survivor of them, and their Heirs and Assigns,
shall have, hold, possess and enjoy, all the said premises to them, their Heirs
and Assigns, without any Entry or other Act whatsoever, and for themselves,
their Leasees, Farmers and Tenants, discharged and acquitted of all Titles,
Troubles and Encumbrances, as freely, and in as large, ample and beneficial
manner, to all intents and purposes, as any of the persons or Corporations whose
offices or places by any Ordinance or Act of this present Parliament, are taken
away and abolished, did hold or enjoy, or of right ought to have held or
enjoyed, at any time by the space of ten years before the beginning of this
Parliament, or at any time since any Order or Ordinance, Act or Acts of
Parliament to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And whereas by Act of
Parliament, made the Six and twentieth year of the Reign of the late King Henry
the Eighth, concerning first fruits of of all Ecclesiastical Dignities and
Livings, payable to the Crown; and also concerning one yearly Rent of Pension,
amounting to the value of the tenth part of all the Revenues, Rents, Tithes and
other profits, as well Spiritual as Temporal, belonging to any Archbishopric,
Bishopric, Abbacy, Monastry, Priory, Archdeaconry, Deaconry, Cathedral and
Collegiate Church, Parsonage, Vicarage, Chantry, or other Benefice or Promotion
Spiritual, in England and Wales, payable yearly to the King and his Successors;
which said Act of Parliament is revived and continued by another Act of
Parliament made primo Elizabethae, for restitution of first fruits and tenths
to the Crown, with some alterations and additions; and also repealing other
Acts of Parliament touching the said first fruits and tenths; and by the said
Statute, uniting and annexing the same to the Crown Imperial of the Kingdom of
England for ever; which Office of Kingship is abolished by an Act of this
present Parliament: Be it therefore Ordained, and it is hereby Ordained and
Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all the said first fruits and tenths,
as well Spiritual as Temporal, payable or intended to be paid, by virtue of the
said Acts of Parliament of vicesimo sexto Henrici 8o and primo Elizabethae, or
either of them, or by virtue of any other Act of Parliament made since that
time, concerning first fruits and tenths, payable unto any Kings or Queens of
England, other then such first fruits and tenths as are chargeable upon, or
issuing out of any Lands or possessions heretofore belonging to any
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, or other persons depending on
that Hierarchy, whose Offices and Titles by any Act or Ordinance of this
present Parliament are abolished and taken away, shall be, and are hereby
vested and settled, adjudged and deemed to be, and are hereby in the very real
and actual possession and seisin of Sir Henry Holcroft, and the rest of the
abovenamed Trustees, their Heirs and Assigns; and they the said Trustees, and
the Survivors and Survivor of them, and their heirs and assigns, shall have,
hold, possess and enjoy all the said first fruits and tenths (except before
excepted) with their appurtenances, to them, their heirs and assigns, as
freely, and in as large, ample and beneficial manner, to all intents and
purposes, as the late King at any time during his Reign held and enjoyed the
same, any Act or Acts of Parliament to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. Nevertheless, in trust and confidence, and to the intent and
purpose that they the said Sir Henry Holcroft, Sir John Thorowgood, William
Steel, John Coke, Francis West Lieutenant of the Tower, Henry Danvers, John
Brown, George Cooper, Mr. Richard Read, Mr. Richard Young, William Skinner,
Nicholas Marten, and Mr. John Pocoke, or any five or more of them, and the
Survivors and Survivor of them, his and their heirs and assigns, shall in the
first place satisfy or pay yearly, all such Sallaries, Stipends, Allowances
and provisions, as have been limited or appointed for preaching the Gospel,
Preaching Ministers, or Schoolmasters or others in England or Wales, settled or
confirmed by Ordinance or Order of Parliament; and afterward such provisions,
settlements, yearly allowances and augmentations, as have been made or
confirmed by authority derived from this Parliament, for preaching Ministers or
Schoolmasters, for so long time, and in such manner as in and by the authority
of Parliament is limited, ordered, and appointed; or until the Parliament shall
otherwise order, direct, and appoint the same, any Act or Acts, or Ordinance of
Parliament to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding: For which purposes the
sum of Eighteen thousand pounds per annum, of the said Twenty thousand pounds,
shall be disposed of and employed in lieu of such Augmentation or Maintenance
as has been by authority of Parliament settled or given to, or for the
Maintenance of them out of the Lands of the Deans and Chapters, until the sum
of Eighteen thousand pounds per annum, be raised out of the Improvements of the
Tithes and Impropriations belonging to the said Deans and Chapters, or by such
other ways or means as shall be hereafter appointed and directed by authority
of Parliament; and also that Two thousand pounds per annum of the said Twenty
thousand pounds, shall be disposed, employed and paid for increase of the
maintenance of the Masterships of Colleges in both Universities of this
Nation, where maintenance is not sufficient: And the said Trustees, or any five
or more of them, the Survivors and Survior of them their heirs and assigns,
shall dispose of all and singular the aforesaid Tithes, First Fruits and
Tenths, and of every part and parcel thereof, with their appurtenances, and of
the Revenues, Rents, Issues and profits thereof, to the uses, intents and
purposes before expressed; and also for the maintenance of preaching Ministers
throughout England and Wales, in such places where such maintenance is wanting
in such manner and form, and to such persons, and for such other good uses, to
the advancement of true Religion, and the maintenance of Piety and Learning, as
by this or any other Act or Acts of Parliament, now or hereafter to be made,
shall be set down and Declared, and not otherwise, nor to any other intent, use
or purpose whatsoever, nor to grant any Lease or Estate of any the said Tithes,
and other the premises, or any part thereof, for above Six years in possession
and in being, reserving thereupon a yearly Rent to the full value thereof; and
that all Leases, Gifts, Grants, Conveyances, Assurances and Estates whatsoever,
hereafter to be made by the said Trustees, the Survivors and Survivor of them,
or the greater part of them, his and their heirs and assigns, other then as
aforesaid, shall be utterly void and of none effect, to all intents,
constructions and purposes, Any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted, That the several and respective
Receivers of the Revenue of this Commonwealth, for the respective Counties in
ENGLAND and WALES, shall be, and are hereby required and authorized to receive
the said first fruits and tenths, as well Temporal as Ecclesiastic, and the
same from time to time to pay in to the Exchequer; and if any person or persons
shall refuse or neglect to pay in his and their first fruits and tenths, as
usually they have done, That then the Barons of the Exchequer are hereby
enabled and authorized to issue out the like Process, and to proceed in like
manner against such persons, as in like cases they do against others. And be it
further Enacted and Declared, That the Committee of the Revenue, and such other
person or persons who have, or shall have the issuing out of such moneys as
shall be paid in to the Exchequer, are hereby required and enjoined from time
to time to issue out and pay the said First Fruits and Tenths, to such person
or persons as the said Trustees, or any five or more of them shall authorize to
receive the same, and not to any other use, person or persons whatsoever.
Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That if it shall so fall out, That
all the said First Fruits and Tenths, Spiritual and Temporal, settled and
vested by this present Act as aforesaid, shall not be sufficient to make up the
full sum of Twenty thousand pounds per annum, to be issued out yearly for the
uses and purposes beforementioned, That then some other part of the yearly
Revenue, payable in to the Exchequer, shall be provided, set out and charged
yearly to supply the defects and want thereof; saving unto all and every person
and persons, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, Bodies Politic and
Corporate, and their Successors, other then the persons and Corporations, and
every one of them, whose Office or Offices, Dignity, place or places, by any
Act or Ordinance of this Parliament are abolished or taken away, his or their
Heirs and Successors, All such Right, Title, Interest, Possession, Claim,
Demand, Annuities, Fees, Offices, Rents and other profits, which they or any of
them lawfully have, or of right ought to have, or might have had, of, in or to
any the Tithes, Impropriations, Rents and Premises, or of, in or to any part or
parcel thereof, in such like Manner, Form and Condition, to all intents and
purposes, as if this Act had never been had nor made. Provided always, That
after the expiration of the several and respective Leases of any of the
Impropriations, Tithes appropriated, Portions of Tithes appropriated, of or
belonging to the late Archbishops or Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, and
other Officers depending upon the said Hierarchy, such quantities and
proportions of the said Tithes, as shall and will, together with the present
Tithes the Incumbent in such Church or Chapel receives (from which the said
Tithes were or are appropriated) make the maintenance of the Incumbent in such
Church or Chapel, One hundred pounds by the year; and also the Tithes
appropriate of lesser value, though they be not sufficient to make the like
maintenance for the Minister as aforesaid, shall be after the expiration of the
respective Leases, and are by the authority of this present Parliament, united
and annexed to the said respective Churches, and Chapels, for the maintenance
of a godly and Orthodox Minister in them respectively; and where the
Impropriate Tithes of the said Archbishops and Bishops, hereby annexed to the
respective Churches, shall not be sufficient to make up the maintenane of the
Minister there, One hundred pounds by the year, such quantity and proportion of
the surplusage, and overplus of the appropriate Tithes or Pensions of the late
Bishops, or Rents that shall be reserved upon the same, shall be disposed and
paid by the said Trustees, or any five of them, for the making up of the
maintenance of the Minister in such Church or Chapel One hundred pounds per
annum; any thing in this present Act to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding: And to the intent and purpose that speedy care and course may
be taken for providing of a competent maintenance, for supply and encouragement
of Preaching-Ministers in the several Parishes in England and Wales, Be it
likewise Ordained and Enacted, That the Lords Commissioners of the Great-Seal
of England for the time being, shall by virtue of this Act, have full power and
authority, and are hereby authorized and required, to award and issue forth
several Commissions under the said Great-Seal, into all and every the counties
and cities in ENGLAND and WALES, to be directed unto such and so many persons,
as by the Parliament now assembled shall be nominated, assigned and appointed;
thereby Authorizing and Requiring them, or any five or more of them, and giving
them full power and authority, by the Oaths of good and lawful men, as by all
other good ways and lawful means, to enquire and find out the true yearly
value of all Parsonages and Vicarages presentative, and of all other Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical Benefice and Livings, unto which any cure of Souls is
annexed, lying and being within such counties and cities; and of all such
particularly to enquire, and certify unto the Court of Chancery, what each of
them are worth truly and really, by the year, and the Names of the present
Incumbents, Proprietors and Possessors thereof, and of such person and persons
as receive the profits, and to whose use, and who supplies the cure, and what
he has for his Salary, and how many Chapels are belonging to Parish Churches,
and how situate and fit to be united within the Limits of such Counties and
Cities within which they are directed and authorized to enquire; and how the
several Churches and Chapels are supplied by Preaching-Ministers, that so
course may be taken for providing both for preaching, and for Maintenance where
the same shall be found to be needful and necessary. And it is hereby further
Enacted, That the said Trustees, the Survivors and Survivor of them, or the
greater part of them, his and their Heirs and Asssigns, shall have power, and
are hereby authorized to name and appoint such Collectors, Receivers,
Treasurers, and other Officers as they shall think fit and convenient, for
collecting, Levying, and Receiving of all or any of the said moneys, as also
for issuing out of the same for the purposes aforesaid, by Warrant under the
Hands of the said Trustees, their heirs or assigns, or any three or more of
them, in such manner as they shall think fit and appoint; and to call to an
account from time to time upon Oath, all such Collectors, Treasurers, and other
persons, who shall receive any the Rents, Moneys, and Profits beforementioned,
and to give such fitting and reasonable allowance for the same, by yearly
stipend respectively, or otherwise as the said Trustees, or the greater part of
them shall think fit, and so order and appoint in writing under their Hands.

Provided also, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, do not at all
extend to adnul or make void an Act of this present Parliament, (entitled, An
Act for the settling of the Rectory or Parsonage House of Burford in the County
of Oxon, and some of the Gleab-Land on William Lenthal Esquire now Speaker, and his
Heirs) or any thing therein contained, but that the same shall, and may remain
to the said William Lenthal, his Heirs and assigns for ever accordingly; Any
thing in this present Act contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Die Veneris, 8 Junii, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric Parliamenti.


