AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT FOR The Removing of Obstructions in the Sale OF THE
HONORS, MANORS and LANDS Of the late King, Queen and Prince.

seal of the Commonwealth

Die Lunae, 18o Februarii, 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London: Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England. 1649.

AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT FOR The Removing of Obstructions in the Sale of THE
HONORS, MANORS and LANDS Of the late King, Queen and Prince.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same,
That the persons nominated and appointed to be a Committee for Removing
Obstructions in the Sale of the Lands of the late Deans, and Deans and
Chapters, by an Act of this present Parliament, published in print the
Twentieth of June, One thousand six hundred forty and nine, or any five or more
of them, shall be, and by the Authority aforesaid are constituted and entrusted
to be a Committee for Removing Obstructions in the Sale of the Honors, Manors,
Castles, Parks, Lands, and other Hereditaments, sometimes belonging to the late
King, Queen and Prince, and to every and any of them, in pursuance of an Act of
Parliament for sale of the said Lands, entitled, An Act of the Commons in
Parliament assembled, for sale of the Honors, Manors and Lands heretofore
belonging to the late King, Queen and Prince. And be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the said Committee be hereby authorized and entrusted
to order, determine and put in execution, All and every the Powers and
Authorities mentioned and contained in an Ordinance of Parliament of the 21 of
November, One thousand six hundred forty and eight, (in order to the removing
of Obstructions in the sale of the said Honors, Manors, Lands and premises) as
fully to all intents and purposes, as the Committee named in the said Ordinance
might have done, in order to the removing of Obstructions in the sale of the
Lands of the late Archbishops and Bishops; And the Trustees, Contractors,
Treasurers, Comptroller, Surveyors, and all other persons employed in and about
the sale of the said Honors, Manors and Premises, are required and enjoined to
observe the Orders and Directions of the said Committee, in the execution of
the Power and Authority hereby granted unto them. And be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That all and every the immediate Tenants of the said
Honors, Manors, Lands, and other Hereditaments, and of every or any of them,
who shall become Purchasers of any part of the premises as immediate Tenants,
shall pay one full moiety of the values of their respective Purchases in Money,
as the same shall be valued in their respective Contracts; and shall pay the
other moiety of their respective Purchases, in such Debentures as the Trustees
for sale of the said Lands are authorized to allow of, and accept in payment
for the said Lands; The said payment to be made at such times as by the said
Act for sale of the said Lands is limited and appointed. And be it further
Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all and every person and persons who
shall become purchasers of any the Lands and premises in the said Act
mentioned, as imediate tenants or assignees, shall upon signing his and their
respective Contracts pay down in ready money, in part of his and their
purchase; the sum of eight pence for every pound that the said respective
Purchases shall amount unto, according to the valuation agreed upon in their
Contracts respectively; that is to say, unto the Treasurers named in the said
Act, one penny for the use of themselves toward their Salaries; unto the said
Treasurers, one other penny toward the Salaries appointed unto the other
Officers named in the said Act, and unto the Contractors named in the said Act,
for the use of them the said Contractors; and of the said Trustees toward
their Salaries, six pence equally to be divided between them: And whereas by
the said recited Act, it is provided, that the allowances due to the Trustees,
Contractors, Treasurers, Comptroller of Entries, Register of Debentures, and
the charges of Surveying, and all other incident charges shall be paid and
defrayed out of such Moneys as shall come in by sale of the Premises, and by
the Rents, Issues and Profits of the Premises, while the same remain unsold.
And it is therein further provided, That if money do not come in to satisfy
the Salaries allowed by the said Act to the said Contractors, Trustees and
Treasurers, That then they shall and may have part of the Premises in lieu of
the said Salaries, as it shall be Ordered by authority of Parliament. And
whereas by another Act, entitled, An Act with further Instructions to the
Treasurers, Trustees, Contractors, Register, Surveyors, and other persons
employed in the Sale of the Premises, and for the stating of Accounts, The said
Trustees and Treasurers are appointed to allow and pay unto the Committee for
Accounts in the said last recited Act named, such Salaries and Allowances, as
to the said Trustees, with the approbation of the Committee for removing
Obstructions in the sale of the said Lands shall be thought fit. To the end
therefore that the said Salaries, Allowances, and incident charges may be duly
paid and secured, according to the true intent of the said recited Act; and
that the Officers and Soldiers (who shall become Purchasers of the premises, or
any part thereof, as Original Creditors in satisfaction of their Arrears) shall
not be enjoined to pay any money upon their Contracts, toward the satisfying
of the said Salaries, for so much of their respective purchases as their
Original debts amount unto, Be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all
and every sum and sums of money which shall be advanced by sale of the
premises, or any part thereof, unto immediate Tenants or Assignees, or unto any
Purchaser who shall pay all or any part of the price of his purchase in ready
money; and likewise all the Rents, Issues and Profits of the premises, while
the same remain unsold, shall be, and hereby are declared and appointed to be
employed in the first place for the payment and discharging of the said
Salaries, Allowances, and incident Charges in the recited Acts mentioned; and
that so much thereof as is allowed to the said Trustees and Contractors, by
virtue of this and the said former Acts, shall be from time to time equally
paid to the said Trustees and Contractors: And the said Treasurers shall, and
are hereby enabled and required to issue out and pay all such money as shall be
paid unto their Treasury, by virtue of this or the said former Acts (their own
proper Salary deducted) according to such Warrants as they shall from time to
time receive from the said Trustees, or any five or more of them, according to
the Rules and Directions, and for the ends and purposes contained in this
present and the said former Acts; and the acquittances of the respective
persons to whom the said Warrants shall be made, shall be a good discharge to
the said Treasurers; which said Warrants the said Trustees are authorized and
appointed to issue out accordingly: And to the end that competent security for
the discharging of the said Salaries, Allowances, and other incident Charges
(in case the said money to be received by Contract, Sale, or by the Rents,
Issues and Profits of the premises fall short) may be provided out of some part
of the premises, so as the whole may not be charged therewith, or obstructed in
the sale thereof, Be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the said
Trustees in the said Act for sale of the said Lands named, and the Survivors
and Survivor of them, and the Heirs of the Survivor of them, shall from
henceforth stand seized of those Parks, called Clarendon Park, and Bowood Park,
alias Kings Bowood Park in the County of Wilts, and of all the Royalties,
Privileges, Franchises, Immunities and Appurtenances to them or either of them
belonging, to the uses, intents and purposes following; that is to say, That
the said Contractors for sale of the said Lands, or any five or more of them
shall and may contract for; and that the said Trustees, or any five or more of
them, shall and may make sale of all Coppices, Cordwoods, Pollards and
Underwoods, growing or being upon the said two Parks, or either of them (all
Timber Trees only excepted) to such person and persons as they shall think fit,
at the best and most improved Rates they can get for the same for ready money,
to be paid to the Treasurers in the said Act named, toward the satisfying and
discharging of the said Salaries, Allowances, and incident charges; and in case
the money which shall be raised before the first day of February, which shall
be in the year of our Lord God 1650. by sale of the said Woods and Underwoods,
and by sale of other the said Manors, Lands and premises, shall not be
sufficient to pay and discharge the said Salaries, Allowances and incident
charges; and that the same shall not by that time be supplied by Order of
Parliament in ready money, That then the said Contractors, or any five or more
of them, shall and may Contract for; and that the said Trustees or any five or
more of them, shall and may make sale of the said two Parks, with all their and
either of their appurtenances (except such Timber Trees fit for the use and
service of the Navy, as are excepted from Sale in the first recited Act for
sale of the said Lands) to such person and persons, Bodies Politic or
Corporate, as they shall think fit, at the best and most improved Rates they
can possibly get for the same in ready money, to be paid to the said Treasurers
in the said first recited Act named, for the uses and purposes aforesaid, Any
Clause or Article in the said former Acts or any of them to the contrary
notwithstanding. Provided always, and be it by the authority aforesaid further
Enacted, Ordained and Declared, That this Act, or any thing therein contained,
shall not extend, nor shall be taken, deemed, intended or construed to be, or
extend to the making void, taking away, extinguishing, or any way to the
prejudicing or impairing of the Right, Title, Estate, Interest and Profits of
Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, or of any other person or persons, of,
in and to the Custody, Lieutenantry, Herbage, Pannage, and other Profits,
Offices and Perquesites, of, in and to Clarendon and Bowood aforesaid, or
either of them, by virtue of any lawful Grant, Patent, Usage or Custom; but
that the said Right and Title of the said Earl and his Heirs-Male, and of all
other persons, of, in and to the same, or either of them, or any part of them;
or either of them, of, in and to the Offices, Profits, commodities and
advantages thereof, shall remain, continue, and be as free and clear, and as
freely and clearly preserved in as full and ample manner, as if this Act had
never been made, Any thing herein to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.
And be it further Enacted, That if all the said Salaries, Allowances and
incident Charges shall be paid before the said First of February, which shall
be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and fifty, That then the
said two Parks shall be sold for the payment of the Arrears of the Soldiers,
according to the direction of the said former Act: And whereas by the said
recited Act for sale of the said Lands, It is Ordained, That the said Trustees
shall call in such Debentures as were heretofore given out for Arrears of
Soldiers in the said Act specified, by such certain day as they should think
fit, not exceeding six Months from the first of July, One thousand six hundred
forty and nine, and should cancel the same, and in stead thereof should give
out new Debentures or Bills, as by the said Act is at large expressed; Be it
further Enacted, That the said Trustees shall and may appoint further time for
the bringing in of the said Debentures (if they see cause) not exceeding six
Months from the first day of January, One thousand six hundred forty and nine;
And shall proceed to give out new Debentures or Bills in stead thereof, as by
the former Act is directed: Which new Debentures or Bills shall be good and
valid in the Law to charge the Commonwealth, as if the same were given out
according to the Direction of the said first recited Act. And be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That (for the more speedy sale of the
premises, and preservation of the pre-emption intended by the former Act unto
immediate Tenants and Original Creditors) the Contractors in the former Act
named, shall and may expose the said respective Honors, Manors, Lands and
premises to sale, and make publication thereof upon such days and times, and in
such manner as they shall conceive may tend most to public advantage, and due
satisfaction of the Arrears of the Soldiers; and that the time of pre-emption
given unto immediate Tenants and Original Creditors by the said former Act,
shall begin from the respective days of exposing to sale the said respective
Honors, Manors, Parks, Lands, and other the premises and publication thereof as
aforesaid. And be it further Enacted, That the Commissioners for the Navy shall
have further time, until the first day of May, One thousand six hundred and
fifty, for the surveying and marking of the Timber Trees excepted from sale,
and reserved for the use of the Navy; and that Surveyors for that service be
indifferently appointed and chosen by the said Trustees and the said
Commissioners of the Navy, who upon Oath (which the said Trustees have hereby
power to administer) are required to survey and mark the said Timber, according
to the true intent and meaning of the said former Act, and according to such
further Rules and Instructions as are or shall be agreed upon by the said
Trustees and the said Commissioners of the Navy; and (in such particulars
wherein they cannot agree) according to such Rules and Instructions as they
shall receive from the Committee for the removing Obstructions in the sale of
the said Lands.

Die Lunae, 18 Februarii, 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


