seal of the CommonwealthAN ACT Concerning Mortgages, Extents, etc.
Upon DELINQUENTS ESTATES.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and by Authority of the
same, That all such persons as have since the twentieth day of May, One
thousand six hundred forty two, entered upon, or shall hereafter enter upon, or
possess the Estate of any Delinquent, by virtue of any Extent, Mortgage,
Judgment, Forfeiture or otherwise, for which as yet no Composition has been
made, Do pay into the Treasury at Goldsmiths-Hall, such Sum and Sums of Money
as the said Delinquent should or ought to have paid for his Composition,
according to the respective Rules and Proportions prescribed, and appointed by
Authority of Parliament, for so much of every such Delinquents Estate as every
such person has so entered upon and possessed, or shall hereafter enter upon or
possess; consideration being therein had to all such just Debts as are or may
be Legally charged upon the said Estate, and which the Parliament have Declared
shall be allowed, and not otherwise; and upon payment of the said Composition,
every person so paying as aforesaid, is hereby authorized and enabled to enjoy
the said Estate, as well till the said Fine, as his own just Debt owing him by
such Delinquent as aforesaid, be fully satisfied: And in case any person having
such Extent, or being so possessed of any Delinquents Estate, shall not before
the Thirtieth day of August, One thousand six hundred and fifty, deliver in a
true particular thereof to the Commissioners at Goldsmiths-Hall, and pay in and
secure the Fine and Composition, according to the Rules set and appointed, that
then the same estate shall be forthwith seized, and Sequestered to the Use of the
Commonwealth; and the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof paid into the Treasury
at Goldsmiths-Hall, for the Use of the Commonwealth, Notwithstanding any
Extent, Seizure or Entry made or had thereupon: And the said Commissioners have
the same Authority hereby given them, To proceed to Sequester all such Estates
as aforesaid, and to use such means for discovery thereof, and bringing in of
the Rents and Profits arising out of the same, as by any Act, Ordinance or
Order of Parliament they are enabled to do in other cases.

Die Jovis, Primo Augusti, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


