seal of the Commonwealth AN ACT disabling the ELECTION OF Diverse persons to
any Office or Place of Trust within the City of LONDON, And the Votes of such
persons in such Elections.
THe Parliament of England do Enact and Ordain, and be it hereby Enacted by the
Authority of the same, That no person or persons whatsoever, that has been
Imprisoned, or has had his Estate Sequestered for Delinquency, or has assisted
the late King against the Parliament, in the first or second Wars; or has been
ayding or assisting in bringing in the Scots Army to Invade the Commonwealth of
England, in the year One thousand six hundred forty eight; or did subscribe or
abet the treasonable Engagement in the year One thousand six hundred forty
seven; or that did assist or abet the Tumults within the Cities of London and
Westminster, or in the Counties of Kent, Essex, Middlesex or Surrey, in the
year One thousand six hundred forty eight, shall be elected or chosen, or put
into the Office or Place of Lord Major, Alderman, Alderman-Deputy, or
Common Counsel man, or into any other Office, or other Place of Trust within
the City of London, for the space of one whole year now next ensuing, or be
capable to give his Voice for the Choosing of any person to any the Offices
aforesaid. And it is hereby further Enacted, That no person whatsoever, that
subscribed, promoted or abetted any Engagement in the year One thousand six
hundred forty eight, relating to a Personal Treaty with the late King at
London; or that shall not Subscribe the Engagement of this present Parliament,
viz. I Do Declare and Promise, That I will be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth of England, as the same is now Established, without a King or
House of Lords,

shall be elected or chosen, or put into any the aforesaid Offices and Places,
for the space of one whole year. And it is hereby further Enacted by the
authority aforesaid, That if any person or persons, comprehended under the
aforesaid Exceptions, being chosen, shall presume to Sit in the Court of
Aldermen, Common Counsel, or execute any the aforesaid Offices, contrary to the
true intent of this Act, shall forfeit the sum of two hundred pounds; the one
half whereof shall be within twenty days paid to him or them that shall make
proof thereof; and the other moiety to be paid unto the Corporation for the
Poor: and it is hereby Declared, That all such Elections are Null and void: And
the Lord Major for the time being, is hereby required from time to time to give
Order, that this Act be published at all Elections, and that the same be
strictly and punctually observed; and for the better execution of this Act, Be
it therefore Enacted, That the Lord Mayor of London, the Sheriffs and Aldermen,
and Justices of the Peace within the said City of London, or any two of them,
shall and are hereby authorized and required to commit to Prison all such
persons, as after due proof upon Oath to be made unto them, or any two of them,
of any person that shall make any Disturbance at any Election, contrary to this
Act, and to levy the said Fine of two hundred pounds, by Distress and sale of
the Goods of the person or persons so offending contrary to this Act.

Die Veneris, 14 Decembr. 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of
England 1649.


