blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ACT FOR Impresting of Seamen.
Whereas the effectual and speedy setting forth of the Fleet or Fleets for the
next years service, and the well Manning thereof, is at this time of great
necessity, considering not only the homebred distractions of this Nation and
of Ireland, but the great preparations which are making already in Foreign
parts, in aid and assistance of the Malignant, Popish, and ill-affected Party
in these Nations; Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by this present
Parliament, and by the Authority thereof, That in case the Council of State, or
the Admirals of the Fleet or Fleets for the time being appointed by Parliament
shall find, That notwithstanding the Act for Encouragement of Officers and
Mariners, appointed and provided for the inducement of Seamen to engage more
willingly in the Service of this Commonwealth, yet there shall not be the
appointed number of Seamen voluntarily Engaging in this Service in due time,
for the setting forth of the said Fleet or Fleets, but that there be a
necessity of Impresting of Mariners for this Service; Then the Council of
State, or the said Admirals or any two of them, shall or may at any time or
times, from the First day of April, One thousand six hundred and fifty, until
the First day of April, which shall be in the year One thousand six hundred
fifty one, by their Commissioner or Commissioners, Officer or Officers
authorized thereunto, by warrant under their or any two of their Hands and
Seals, or any one authorized by the other two, Raise, Levy and Impressed, such
and so many Mariners, Sailors, Watermen, Chyrurgions, Gunners, Ship-Carpenters,
Cawkers, Coopers and Whoymen, as also Carmen for carriage of Victuals, etc. as
shall be requisite and necessary for the Service aforesaid, or for any such
further defense for the good People of England and Ireland; which said
Mariners, Sailors, and other such persons, and such other persons so to be
Levied and Imprested as aforesaid, and every of them, shall have paid and
delivered unto him or them upon such his or their Impresting, by the person
that shall so Impressed him, for Conduct-money for every Mile from the place
where he shall be so Impressed, to the Ship or place where he shall be appointed
to make his repair, the sum of One penny half penny per Mile to each man; and the
like sum of One penny half penny for every Mile from the place of his discharge,
unto the place of his abode; and shall be allowed for this service, the same
wages and entertainments in all respects which has been allowed by the
Parliament this last year, to any such person or persons employed in the said
service: And if in the case aforesaid, any Mariner, Saylor, Waterman,
Chyrurgion, Gunner, Ship-Carpenter, Cawker, Whoyman or Carman, shall wilfully
refuse to be Imprested in and for the said service, or shall voluntarily hide
or absent himself at the time of such Press, to avoid the said Service; or
receiving his said Conduct moneys, do not appear at such places and times as by
his Ticket he is appointed, That then any such person or persons so offending,
shall suffer imprisonment for the space of three Months, without Bail or
Mainprize. Provided always, and be it Enacted and Ordained, That no money or
other reward shall be taken directly or indirectly, nor any corrupt practice
used by any the persons authorized by virtue of this Act, in or for the
pressing, changing, sparing or discharging of any person or persons, or be
Impressed as aforesaid, as they will answer such offense at their utmost perils
before the Parliament, or such as shall by Parliament be authorized thereunto:
And all Justices of the Peace, Majors, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other
inferior Officers, are hereby required and enjoined to be ayding and assisting
from time to time to the persons authorized, or to be authorized by virtue of
this Act, according to the true intent and meaning thereof. Provided always,
That this Act shall not extend to the pressing of any Master, Masters-mate,
Gunner, Carpenter or Boatswain of any Ship or Vessel that is or shall be in
employment. And lastly, for the further and better encouragement of Seamen and
Watermen to apply themselves the more willingly to this service, It is further
Enacted and Ordained, and be it Enacted and Ordained by this present
Parliament, and the Authority thereof, That all Mariners, Saylors, and likewise
all Watermen who have served an Apprenticeship by the space of seven years in
their said Professions, or that are Servants and Apprentices by Indenture to
any such Waterman, shall hereby be freed and exempted from being prested to
serve as Soldiers in any Land service.

Die Sabbathi, 2o Martii, 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1649.


