blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ACT FOR The better advancement of the Gospel and Learning in IRELAND.
FOr the Encouragement and increase of Learning, and the true Knowledge and
Worship of God, and the advancement of the Protestant Religion in Ireland, Be
it Enacted by the Parliament of England, and by the authority thereof, That all
Honors, Castles, Lordships, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Revenues,
Rents and Profits, which did heretofore belong unto the late Archbishop of
Dublin, and which did belong unto the late Dean, Dean and Chapter of St.
Patrick in Ireland, or to either or any of them; and the Farm of Ardbrackan,
with the Parsonage of Trym, belonging to the Bishopric of Mead in Ireland,
shall be, and are hereby settled, established and vested in and upon Henry
Ireton, President of the Province of Munster in Ireland, William Basile Esquire
Attorney General in Ireland for the State, Col: Robert Venables, Sir Robert
King Knight, Col: Henry Cromwell, John Cook Esquire Doctor Henry Jones, Doctor
Jonathan Goddard, Col: Hierome Sanky, Doctor John Harding, James Whitelock Esquire
John Owen Clerk, Robert Stapleton, Gent. Jenkin Lloyd, and Ralph Cudworth
Clerk; To hold to them the said Henry Ireton, William Basile, Robert Venables,
Sir Robert King, Henry Cromwell, John Cook, Henry Jones, Jonathan Goddard,
Hierome Sanky, John Harding, James Whitelock, John Owen, Robert Stapleton,
Jenkin Lloyd, and Ralph Cudworth, their Heirs and Assigns for ever, in trust to
and for such uses, intents and purposes, for the settling and maintenance of the
College now in or near the City of Dublin, commonly called, Trinity College,
and of a Master, Fellows, Scholars and Officers there; and for the erecting,
settling and maintenance of one other College in the said City of Dublin, and
of a Master, Fellows, Scholars and Officers therein, and of public
Professors in the University there; and also for the erecting, establishing and
maintenance of a Free School, and of a Master, Vshers, Scholars and Officers
there, in such manner, as by the said Trustees or any five or more of them, by
and with the consent and approbation of the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
signified under his Hand and Seal, shall be from time to time directed and
appointed: And the said Lord Lieutenant of Ireland is hereby Authorized and
Appointed, by Warrant in writing under his Hand and Seal, from time to time to
place in the said University, Colleges and Free-schools respectively, such
persons to be Governors, Masters, Public Professors, Fellows, Scholars and
Officers; and to appoint unto them and every of them, such yearly Allowances,
Stipends or Salaries out of the premises during their respective lives, or for
such lesser time as he in his judgment shall think fit; and like wise to
remove and displace such of them as he at any time shall hold expedient; and
also by like Warrant in writing under his Hand and Seal, to cause such
Conveyances, Grants, and Assignations of the premises or any part of them, to
be made by the said Trustees or any five or more of them, unto such person or
persons as the said Lord Lieutenant by such Warrant as aforesaid shall from
time to time direct and appoint. And the said Trustees, or any five or more of
them, are hereby authorized and appointed to make such Conveyances, Grants and
Assignation of the premises, or any part thereof, as they shall be from time to
time directed by the said Lord Lieutenant as aforesaid: And all such Grants,
Conveyances and Assignments as shall be made by the said Trustees as aforesaid,
shall be good and effectual in the Law. And the said Trustees, or any five or
more of them, by and with the consent and approbation of the said Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, signified by writing under his Hand and Seal, are hereby
authorized and appointed to consider of, and to put in writing such Rules,
Directions, Statutes, Ordinances and Instructions, as they in their judgments
shall think fit, for the erecting, settling, maintaining and Government of the
said University, Colleges and Free School, and of the Masters,
Publique-Professors, Fellows, Scholars and Officers there, and to be in them
and every of them; and the same to send over in writing to the Parliament of
England, there to receive such alterations, addition or confirmation, as by the
said Parliament of England shall be thought fit. And in the mean time, and
until such alterations, additions or confirmation shall be made by the
Parliament of England; the said Lord Lieutenant of Ireland is hereby authorized
and appointed, by Warrant in writing under his Hand and Seal, to put in
execution all or any of the Rules, Directions, Statutes, Ordinances and
Instructions, as shall be so agreed upon and put in writing as aforesaid; and
the same shall be good and effectual to the intents and purposes aforesaid,
until other order for the alteration, addition or confirmation of them or any
of them, shall be given by the Parliament of England as aforesaid. Provided
always, That this Act shall not extend to take away the Right, Estate or
Interest of any person or persons whatsoever, other then of the said late
Archbishop, Bishop of Mead, and of the said Dean, Dean and Chapter; and of any
that have been in Arms against the Parliament of England, or voluntarily
assisted or adhered to the Enemies thereof; and other then such who claim by
any Lease, Grant or Conveyance from the said late Archbishop, Bishop of Mead,
or from the said Dean, Dean and Chapter, and from any that have been against
the Parliament, such Grant, Lease or Conveyance having been made since the
First day of October, in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred
forty and one.

Die Veneris, 8o Martii, 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1649.


