AN ACT For setting apart Tuesday the Eighth of October next, for a Day of
Public THANKSGIVING.

Together with a Narrative and Declaration OF The Grounds and Reasons thereof.

seal of the Commonwealth

Die Martis, 17 Septembr. 1650.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act, Narrative and Declaration be
forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1650.

AN ACT For setting apart Tuesday the Eighth of October next, for a Day of
Public THANKSGIVING.
Together with a Narrative and Declaration OF The Grounds and Reasons thereof.
IF any Nation in the World has at this day upon them mighty and strong
Obligations unto the Lord, for his peculiar Manifestations of Mercy and
goodness unto them; wherein he has filled with Admiration and Astonishment,
all that have been Spectators and Observers of the outgoings of his Power, in
Deliverances and Preservations; It is the Parliament and People of England, in
the midst of whom the Lord has walked most eminently for these Ten years last
past, and constantly exercised them, by various and wonderful Providence;
being pleased to make use of a few weak and unworthy Instruments, contemptible
in the eyes of men, to bring great things to pass, and carry on his own Work,
that the Power might appear to be of God, and not of Man; and this in the
weakest and lowest conditions of his Servants, when we have been reduced to the
greatest Straights, and had, as it were, the sentence of death in our selves;
and our Enemies heightened and hardened by their Power and Multitudes, in their
Confidences, even to Pride and Arrogance, ready to swallow us up and destroy
us: So that upon most of the Victories vouchsafed unto us, there has been
written in broad and visible Characters, This has God wrought, Thus far has
God helped us.

And as it is the duty of all persons in this Commonwealth, especially those
that fear the Lord, to observe these his mavelous and gracious Dispensations,
and be taught by them not only to submit unto, and close with the Actings and
Appearances of the Lord (who works all things according to the Council of his
own Will) but to be enlarged in Rejoycings and thankful Acknowledgements, and
to trust him in like straights for time to come; So the memorial of such
Mercies and glorious Deliverances of the Almighty, deserve to be transmitted to
Posterity, and for ever recorded unto his Praise.

In the Number of these, and as that which may have the first place, The
Parliament is most exceedingly affected with the late Wonderful and gracious
dealing of the Lord, toward their Army under the Command of their present
General, General CROMWELL in Scotland, and with the glorious Victory which he
has there wrought for them in an unexpected season against the Scots: For
which inestimable Blessing of God unto the Parliament and People of England,
enriched with so many remarkable circumstances, that all along evidence his
Divine Presence, this Commonwealth can never be sufficiently thankful;
especially if it be considered, That in this is given in a Seal and
Confirmation from Heaven, of the Justice of our Cause, and of the Sincerity of
his Servants, that are his unworthy Instruments in the carrying of it on, after
that most Solemn Appeals were made on both sides to God himself, the Righteous
Judge, in this necessitated War between England and Scotland; And that all
means of Christian love and tenderness toward those that bear the Name of
Godly in the Scottish Nation, have been used to inform, and persuade them, and
prevent (if it had been the will of God) a decision by the Sword, and the same
rejected.

And indeed, such is the riches and fullness of this high and unexpressible
Mercy, that the value and consequence thereof, is not in a short time to be
apprehended, but is of that nature, as succeeding Generations will be tasting
the sweet and good of it, as often as they look back upon it, and penetrate
into it. For in the bosom of it is comprehended the safety of all that has
been fought for these many years late past: And together with this Victory, God
has renewed Being and Life it self to this Commonwealth, and the Government
thereof; whose total Ruin and Subversion was not only contrived and designed,
but almost ripened unto an Accomplishment, by all the Enemies of it, under the
fairest Vizards and Disguises they could clothe themselves with; that is to
say, of The Cause of God, The Covenant, and Privileges of Parliament, the more
easily to seduce and deceive a Party within this Nation, who lay waiting for
it, and to concentre in one all the Strength that could be heaped up together,
of various destructive Interests unto the Power of Godliness, and true Liberty
and Freedom of the People, the maintenance whereof is so much in the desires
and endeavors of this Commonwealth.

In this Combination the Popish, Prelatical, Profane and Malignant Parties
stood behind the Curtain, and seemed for a season to be quite laid aside, that
the Cause of God, the Covenant, and Work of Reformation might bear the Name,
and the Promoters thereof the only Power and Sway, through whose seeming
Credit and Authority our hands might be weakened, our Cause blemished, and
general Insurrections from all parts of England procured, and so obtain that
through Deceit and Hypocrisy joined with Power, which by Force alone they
durst not attempt, as having found by frequent and dear Experiences, the mighty
hand of God drawn out against them, as often-soever as they appeared in a way
of mere and open Force: And now when the Design was thus subtly and
dangerously laid, and the Enemy in his own thoughts was in so fair a way of
accomplishing thereof, that they doubted nothing less, then of having our Army
at their mercy, and of marching up unto London without opposition, with their
new King at the Head of theirs: The following Narrative will declare how
suddenly the Lord turned himself against them, and arose like a Giant refreshed
with Wine, bestowing upon England the most seasonable and wonderful Victory
over his Enemies, that it has ever known, or been made partaker of.

The Narrative.
AFter the march of our Army into Scotland, upon the grounds of Justice and
Necessity, and in the prosecution of those ends heretofore declared by us; And
that all means had been used by the General, and his Council of War, for to
prevent the effusion of Blood, and bringing the guilt of it upon their own
heads, which might incur upon their obstinacy, especially of such as we
believed might fear God in the Scottish Nation: Our Army did often press upon
them, and several times tempt them to engage with us; which they did as often
avoid, waiting for their advantage over us by our weaknings and sickness, and
their own strengthening, by the continual access of forces to them. And when it
was found, notwithstanding all ways used by us, it would work no effect to
fight us; It was at length by the General and his Council concluded to march
with the Army back as far as Dunbar, for the more convenient supplying it with
victuals, and providing for our sick and weak men, who fell so fast down of the
Flix, that we were compelled to Ship away at Muscleborough Five hundred of them.

The Enemy mistaking the Grounds of our March, took Courage on a sudden,
persuading themselves we now durst not Engage with them, as verily imagining we
had with our sick men shipped away our Ordnance already (which was indeed only
sent with a Party before toward Haddington) and having been informed that we
intended after we were come to Dunbar, to send away all our Infantry by Sea,
and with our Horse to return back into England; Between which and our Quarters
then, they knew there were many Passes, where they might have an advantage
easily to annoy us.

Upon our rising therefore from Muscleborough the last of August, our Army
having with them but four days Provision, The Enemy, who by the coming of their
Kings Guard of English, and several other Recruits from the North to them, were
made effectively Twenty two thousand men, ours being weakened to Eleven
thousand, rise also and marched close after us, attempting the disordering of
our Rear, especially upon the lodging our Army at Haddington; whither coming
near night, and having passed most of our men over the River, the Enemy fell on
so hot, that though we brought up our Rear-Brigade of Horse to succor our
Rear-Forlorn, which the Enemy had fallen and broke in upon, yet we could not have
come off without a considerable loss, the Enemies whole Army being near at
hand, had not the goodness of God seasonably interposed by his Providence, and
so ordered it, that a dark Cloud passing over the Moon, we had the opportunity
given us of drawing off our Horse again, undiscerned by the Enemy, and of
sheltring it with our Foot, and the rest of the Army by Haddington Town-side,
the Enemy having got nothing by the scuffle.

The whole Body of the Enemies Army lying within two Miles of the Town, about
midnight they sent up a Party of Horse and Foot to try what success they should
have upon our Quarters. The General having notice of their approach, commanded
out Captain White with his Troop to charge them, which he accordingly did; but
meeting with greater numbers, both Horse and Foot then was expected, was put to
a Retreat, the Enemy pursuing to the Town-Wall: But the General drawing out
another Party, they retired to their Army, leaving without any loss of ours,
some few of their men slain.

The next morning (the Enemy lying upon a very good Ground for Battle) our Army
put themselves into order, as thinking it had been the Enemies intention to
fight: And moving toward them there, where the Enemy had drawn some of his men
over a Pass, the Enemy thinking not then his best time, commanded his men back
again, and the River interposing, our Army in this order faced them four or
five hours, when a motion was made by some of the Officers to send to them to
offer them Battle; but this Proposal took no effect, as not judging it fit to
anticipate the time and design of Providence, which they had ever found best
patiently to wait upon.

Perceiving therefore they would come to no resolution to fight, our Army
proceeded in their march again to Dunbar; and the Enemy having received a fresh
Recruit of Three new Regiments, sent some of our men that they had taken
Prisoners in to inform us of their supply, and that they were now bent to fight
us. Their Considence upon this supply; and their former mistakes of us, being
greatned to a very high degree, so that they followed our Army with that
eagerness, that before we got within a mile of Dunbar (where we came that
night) their whole Bodies of Horse and Foot were in our Rear, within Canon
shot, where our Army being to pass over a small River that had pretty high
Banks, made a Halt, and drew up in Battalia: The Enemy again declined to join,
and espying an advantage he had, drew off to the Right Hand, marching in great
haste to possess himself of some Hills that did intercept between us and
England; which he accordingly did (we being not able to prevent it, without
leaving our Train and Provisions behind us) his Camp overlooking our Army, and
sending afterward a considerable number of Horse, did possess himself likewise
of the Pass at Copperspeth; we placing our Tents in the mean time close by the
Sea, and leaving Dunbar behind us.

Here begun the pride of the Scots Army so to swell, as they quite forgot an
overruling Providence, their Scouts upbraiding us, They now had us safe
enough, and that though they had afforded us a Summers Quarters, they hoped to
have it quickly repaid them, when they come to take up their Winter Quarters,
intending, as they said, to convoy up our Rear for us to London; yea, so far
had their Passion blinded them, and their Presumption prevailed upon them, That
as we were informed by some of their own, they sat in Consultation what
Conditions it was fit they should offer us, whether or no Quarter was to be
allowed to any for their lives, and to whom only, and upon what terms.

And indeed, many were the difficulties that it pleased the Lord at that time
to set before our Army, the ground the Enemy had gotten being inaccessible, and
not possible for us to engage him upon, without apparent hazard; on either
hand, and on the Rear of our Army was the Sea, and before them only a narrow
Pass, and the Hills where the Enemy lay; nor were we without straights in our
selves, our Army being so sickly, as a hundred of them fell down of a day, and
our Provisions growing scanty for those that were well.

But in this began the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of God, the more to break
forth in upholding, notwithstanding the hearts both of the Officers and
Soldiers, quietly and patiently to expect the glorious Appearance of his Divine
Presence in this their Distress, of which they had often times humbly boasted,
and by which they had no time hitherto been deserted.

All the next day we lay still; toward the Evening, on Monday, the Enemy drew
out nigh three parts of four of their Horse, South of Dunbar, intending to
interpose and shut up quite the way of our Army to Berwick; which the General
observing, declared to Major General Lambert, That now in his apprehensions
there was an opportunity given of attempting something upon the Enemy; which
the Major General having at the same time upon his spirit also, was about to
prevent him in; and after advice taken with the Council of Officers (who were
all consenting) it was resolved to be ordered in this manner, That Six Regiments
of Horse, and Three Regiments and half of Foot, under the command of the Major
General, should first fall on, and that Four Regiments and half of Foot, and
Two Regiments of Horse should bring up the Canon and Rear; the time of the
Onset to be break of day.

The night proved blustering and wet, so that our Army fell not upon the Enemy
at the hour appointed, till it was somewhat later in the Morning; their Motions
being soon descryed by the Enemy, who before any of ours came up, had put
himself in so good a posture to receive them, as he had the advantage of his
Canon and Foot against our Horse only, which according to order first charged
the Enemy, while that our Foot was coming up, opposition was made by the Enemy
with very great Resolution; a very hot dispute at Swords point being between
our Horse and theirs. Five Companies of our Foot that were first commanded out,
after they had discharged their duty, being over-powred by the Enemy, received
^ome repulse, which they soon recovered; the Generals Regiment timeously coming
in, who (God eminently assisting them with Courage) at the push of Pike, did
break the stoutest Regiment the Enemy had, and totally routing them, did full
execution upon them; which proved as great an advantage to us, as it was a
terror and amazement to the residue of their Foot; nor was the issue in the
mean time less successful in our Horse, who being carried on by the same Divine
Power and Presence, did with a great deal of spirit and valor daunt the
Resolution of the Enemy, charging through and through the Bodies both of the
Enemies Horse and Foot, who after the first Repulse were as Stubble before
them. And now the best of the Enemies Horse and Foot, being in less then an
hours dispute broken, and their whole Army put into confusion, it became a
total Rout, our men having the chase and execution of them near eight miles; in
all which Fight, notwithstanding it is credibly affirmed, our Army lost not
thirty men, so great was the mercy and protection of God over them.

And thus in the thing wherein they dealt proudly, the Lord showed himself to
be above them, causing their foot to slide in the duest time, even when he had
reduced our Army into such straights, that room was only left for Believing.

While our Army having rested themselves, and given thanks to God for this
great Victory, were preparing their march to Edinburgh, news was brought to the
General, That Edinburgh and Leith were both quitted: The Provost of Edinburgh
having acquainted the people of the overthrow of their whole Army, unsafety of
their present condition, and that visibly there was nothing appeared that could
protect them: Whither our Army sooner after marching, did quietly take up their
Quarters, not meeting with the least resistance; The Enemy being retired to the
other side of Sterling.

In this Battle were killed upon the place and near about it, above Four
thousand men.

Of private Soldiers taken Prisoners, above Ten thousand.

Of their Horse taken, killed, and made unserviceable, about Two thousand.

Commission Officers taken Prisoners, as Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, etc.
about Two hundred and ninety.

Two of their Committee of Estates taken Prisoners, the Lord Lybberton and Sir
James Lunsden, who was also Lieutenant General of their Foot, and some of their
Ministers.

The Foot Arms taken, were about Fifteen thousand.

About Two hundred Colors taken.

Two and Thirty pieces of Ordnance, with the rest of their Artillery, Bag and
Baggage, and all their Ammunition taken.

There was not above Five thousand Horse and Foot of ours engaged in this
Battle.

The Enemies word was The Covenant, ours The Lord of Hosts, who manifested
himself to be with us.

Their King, as some of their Prisoners said, was within a day or two expected
to come into their Army.

The serious consideration of all which, as it does give the Parliament cause
of great Thankfulness unto God, for this his unspeakable Goodness: So they do
most earnestly desire, That the whole Nation, together with themselves, may be
deeply sensible of the same; And therefore they do Enact and Ordain, and be it
Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and the Authority thereof,
That Tuesday the Eighth day of October, One thousand six hundred and fifty, be
set apart, and appointed for a day of Public Thanksgiving and Holy Rejoicing
in all the Churches and Chapels within England, Wales, and Town of Berwick
upon Tweed, for this great Mercy; And that the Ministers of the respective
Parishes and places aforesaid, be, and hereby they are Required and Enjoined to
give notice on the Lords day next preceding the said Eighth day of October, of
the day so to be observed; to the end the people of their several Congregations
may the more generally and diligently attend the public Exercises of Gods
Worship and Service there to be dispensed upon that occasion: At which time,
that the prople may be the more particularly and fully informed of this great
Deliverance and Success, the said Ministers are hereby Required and Enjoined to
publish and read this present Act and Narrative. And for the better
Observation of the Day, the Parliament does hereby inhibit and forbid the
holding or use of all Fairs, Markets, and servile works of men's ordinary
Callings upon that day; And all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace,
Constables, and other Officers, be and are hereby Enjoined to take especial
care of the due observance of the said day of Thanksgiving accordingly.

Die Martis, 17 Septembr. 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act, Narrative and Declaration be
forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


