AN ACT For Discharging from IMPRISONMENT Poor Prisoners, Unable to satisfy
their CREDITORS.

Die Veneris, 21 Decembr. 1649.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of
England. 1649.

An Act for dischargeing from Imprisonment poor Prisoners, unable to satisfy
their Creditors.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority thereof, That
if any person who is, or shall be on the 21 of December. One thousand six hundred
forty and nine, in Prison in any County, City, Town or place, within England,
the Dominion of Wales, or the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, upon any Execution,
or any other Process, where the cause of Action was originally for Debt, or for
breach of Promise, Contract or Covenant, shall by his Petition desire any
Justice of Peace of the County, City, Town or place, wherein he is so
Imprisoned, to make a warrant in the nature of a Habeas Corpus cum causa, under
his Hand and Seal, to the Sheriff, Jailer, or Keeper of the said Prison, to
bring without delay the body of the same Prisoner, and return the cause or
causes of his Imprisonment before him, to the intent that the said Justice of
Peace may administer unto the said Prisoner, the Oath herein after mentioned;
That then the said Justice of Peace, upon such Petition so made, shall be
authorized and enjoined by this present Act, forthwith to make a warrant under
his hand and Seal, in the nature of a Writ of Habeas Corpus cum causa, to the
said Sheriff, Jailer, or Keeper of such Prisoner, returnable at a short day
then next following, according to the distance of the place, to bring the Body
of the said Prisoner, and to return the cause or causes of his Imprisonment
before him; And if upon the return of the said Warrant in the nature of a Writ
of Habeas Corpus cum Causa, it shall appear that the said Prisoner is in Prison
for any the causes aforesaid, at the Suit of one or more person or persons,
upon any Execution or Executions, or other Process, That then the said Justice
of Peace, upon the request of the said Prisoner, shall and is hereby authorized
to administer to the said Prisoner this Oath; viz. Mutatis mutandis in respect
of the person or persons so taking the same,

THat Bona side he or she is not worth in Possession, Reversion or Remainder of
any Estate real or personal, except only the Debts due to him or them from the
Parliament, for the service of the Commonwealth, to the value of five pounds,
besides necessary wearing Apparel, and Bedding for himself, wife and children,
and Tools necessary for his Trade or Occupation, not exceeding the value of
Five pounds; and has not directly or indirectly sold, leased, or otherwise
conveyed or entrusted his or her Estate, or any part thereof, thereby to expect
any profit, benefit or advantage, or to deceive or defraud his Creditors.

And upon the said Prisoners taking or refusing to take the said Oath, The said
Justice of Peace is hereby required and enjoined, to remand the Body of the
said Prisoner to the Prison from whence he came; And in case the said Prisoner
shall take the said Oath, Then the said Justice of Peace shall without delay,
by writing under his Hand and Seal, make Certificate or Certificates, as well
of the said Prisoners taking of the said Oath, together with the time and place
of the taking thereof, as of the said warrant in the nature of a Habeas Corpus,
with the return thereof, unto the Court or Courts from whence the Process or
Processes of Execution or Executions issued upon which such prisoner was
imprisoned: And upon return of the said Certificate or Certificates into the
Court or Courts aforesaid, the Judges of the said Court or Courts are hereby
authorized, enabled and required thereupon, to issue out, or cause to be issued
out, four days of course, under the Seal or Seals of the said Court or Courts
(at the suit of the said Prisoner) one or more Writ or Writs of Scire facias,
with a Non omittas propter aliquam libertatem, grounded upon the said
Certificate or Certificates (every of the said Writs to have thirty days at the
least between the Test and the return thereof) directed to the Sheriff or
Sheriffs of any county, or any Major or Bailiff of any City, Borough or Town
Corporate in England or Wales, wherein the party or parties (upon whose Action,
Suit or Prosecution the said Prisoner is imprisoned) or his or their Executors
or Administrators, or some of them respectively shall be supposed to be
dwelling, and thereby to command the same Sheriff or Shetiffs; Bailiff, or any
other Officer authorized by the Law, to give fourteen days warning at the least
before the return of the said Writ or Writs, to the person of such person or
persons, at or upon whose Action, Suit or Prosecution the said Prisoner is
imprisoned, or to his or their Executors or Administrators, or some of them
respectively, in case he or they, or some of them respectively may be found;
and in case be or they, or some of them respectively cannot be found, then to
leave a writing under his hand and seal, at the least fourteen days before the
return of the said Writ or Writs, at the dwelling place or places of him, them,
or some of them respectively, therein reciting the said Writ or Writs, and
thereby requiring him or them to appear in the same Court or Courts, at the day
and place in the said Writ or Writs limited, to show cause, according to the
purport of the said Writ or Writs, wherefore the said Prisoner shall not be
enlarged out of Prison according to this Act; whereupon the Sheriff or
Sheriffs, or any other legal Officer, shall make his or their return or returns
of his doings therein accordingly; and if the said Sheriff or Sheriffs, or any
other legal Officer shall return, that he has warned the said person or
persons, or left such writing or warning at his or their dwelling place or
places, according to the command of the said Writ or Writs; and if the person
or persons so warned, or for whom such writing of warning shall be left to
appear as is aforesaid, shall not at the day or days of the return of the same
Writ or Writs appear in person, or by his or their Attorney or Attorneys, or
shall appear and confess the surmise of the said Writ or Writs to be true, or
if he or they after such appearance, shall plead nothing in Bar of the said Writ
or Writs, and the surmise therein contained, or shall not plead thereunto as
hereafter is directed and expressed, Then and in such case, the said Court or
Courts shall, and are hereby enabled and authorized to give Judgment by
Confession, nihil dicit non lum informatus, or otherwise as is usual in like
cases, for the enlarging and discharging the said Prisoner out of Prison, and
thereupon to award a Writ unto the Keeper of the said Prisoner for his
enlargement and discharge accordingly: And in case the said person or persons
so warned, or for whom such warning shall be left as aforesaid, shall appear
upon the return of the said Writ or Writs, then he or they shall not plead any
thing to hinder the enlargement of the said Prisoner, other then that the said
Prisoner has a greater Estate real or personal then is expressed in his said
Oath; or that the said Prisoner has directly or indirectly conveyed or
entrusted his or their Estate, or some part thereof, expecting to have some
benefit or advantage, or to deceive or defraud his Creditors; or that the said
Prisoner has been in Arms against the Parliament of England, or has adhered
to the Forces raised against the same: And if he or they shall plead unto the
same, That the said Prisoner has a greater Estate real or personal then is
expressed in his said Oath; or that the said Prisoner has directly or
indirectly conveyed or entrusted his or their Estate, or some part thereof,
expecting to have some benefit or advantage, or to deceive or defraud his or
her Creditors; or that the said Prisoner has been in Arms against the
Parliament of England, or has adhered unto the forces raised against the same,
Then the said prisoner by his Attorney shall thereunto reply, and take issue
thereupon; and if by verdict of twelve men it shall be found for the prisoner,
then the said Court shall give Judgment for the enlarging and discharging of
the said Prisoner out of Prison, and thereupon award a Writ unto the Keeper of
the said Prisoner for his enlargement and discharge accordingly; but in case
the said Verdict shall be found against the Prisoner, then the said Prisoner
shall remain and continue in Prison, in Execution or otherwise, as formerly he
did, and as if this Act had never been had or made. Provided always, and be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every such Prisoner
and Prisoners as shall desire the benefit of this Act, shall be admitted by
virtue of this Act, to sue out and prosecute all and every the said Writs,
Warrants, Returns and Proceedings beforementioned, in forma pauperis. Provided
also, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
notwithstanding the discharge of the person of such Prisoner as is aforesaid,
all and every such Judgment had or taken against him, shall be, and stand good
and effectual in the Law, to all intents and purposes, against the Lands,
Tenements and hereditaments, Goods and Chattels of the said Prisoner or
Prisoners so discharged as aforesaid, and that it shall and may be lawful, to
and for every Creditor of such Prisoner or Prisoners so discharged as
aforesaid, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, to take out any new
Execution against the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels of
such Prisoner or Prisoners this wearing Apparel, Bedding for him and his and
Tools necessary for his Trade and Occupation, not exceeding the value of Five
pounds only excepted) for the satisfaction of his or their said debt, in such
fort, manner and form as he or they might have done, if the person or persons of
such prisoner or prisoners had never been taken in execution, Any thing in this
Act, or any Law, Statute, Ordinance or Usage to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. Provided also, and be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That if at any time within seven years after the taking of the said
Oath, the said prisoner or prisoners shall upon any Indictment or Indictments,
be convicted by his or their own confession, or by verdict of twelve men, of
false swearing in any point or article contained in the said Oath, as he or
they shall or may be by force of this Act, Then such prisoner or prisoners so
convicted as aforesaid, shall suffer all such pains and forfeitures, as by the
Statute of Quinto of Queen Elizabeth are to be inflicted upon any person
convicted of wilful perjury: And also the said Court or Courts by which he or
they were discharged, shall award a Capias ad satisfaciend' infinite, or other
Process directed to any Sheriff or Sheriffs, for the apprehending of the said
prisoner; and upon the return of a Cepi Corpus, the said Court shall remand the
said Prisoner unto the prison from whence he was dismissed, there to remain in
Execution, in such manner and condition as he was before his said enlargement:
And then and from thenceforth he shall be adjudged to be in Execution, as fully
as if he had never been discharged thereof; and the Execution and Executions
upon his Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels, if any such shall
happen to be after his or their said discharge out of prison, and before he
shall be so remanded, shall stand also good and effectual in Law, Any Law,
Custom or Usage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Hen: Scobel, Cleric, Parliamenti.

Die Veneris, 21 December. 1649.
The RATES of the EXCIZE or NEW-IMPOST, Set and imposed by Parliament on the
several Commodities Imported, hereafter mentioned, to be Paid and Collected
from the 21 day of December, 1649.
l. s. d. Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament,THat all Tobacco which
is not of English Plantations, as well already Imported, having not paid
Excize, as hereafter to be Imported, shall pay per pound weight Two shillings
Excize, to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 00
02 00 Resolved, etc. That all Tobacco of the English Plantations, as well
already Imported, not having paid Excize, as hereafter to be Imported in
English Ships or Vessels, shall pay Four pence per pound weight, to be paid by
the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 00 00 04 Resolved, etc.
That all Tobacco of the English Plantations, as well already imported, which
has not paid Excize, as hereafter to be imported in Foreign Ships or Vessels,
shall pay Six pence per pound weight, to be paid by the first Buyer thereof
from the Merchant or Importer 00 00 06 Resolved, etc. That all Pepper, as well
already Imported into this Nation immediately from India, which has not paid
the Excize, as which shall hereafter be Imported immediately from India, shall
pay Three pence in the pound weight for Excize, to be paid by the first Buyer
thereof from the Merchant or Importer 00 00 03 Resolved, etc. That all Pepper,
as well already Imported, not immediately brought from India, which has not
paid Excize, as that shall hereafter be Imported, being not immediately brought
from India, shall pay Four pence per pound weight for Excize, to be paid by the
first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 00 00 04 Resolved, etc. That
all Refined Sugars double or single in the loaf, as well already Imported,
which has not paid Excize, as which shall be hereafter Imported, shall pay per
pound weight Six pence, to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant
or Importer 00 00 06 Resolved, etc. That all White Sugars of the growth of
English Plantations, as well which are already Imported, not having paid the
Excize, as which shall hereafter be Imported, shall pay per pound weight Three
pence, to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 00
00 03 Resolved, etc. That all other Sugars, under Whites, from English
Plantations, as well which are already Imported, not having paid Excize, as
which shall hereafter be Imported, shall pay per pound weight Two pence, to be
paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 00 00 02
Resolved, etc. That all White Sugars from other places, as well which are
already Imported, not having paid Excize, as which shall hereafter be Imported,
shall pay per pound weight Three pence half penny, to be paid by the first Buyer
thereof from the Merchant or Importer 00 00 03 Resolved, etc. That all other
Sugars, under Whites, as well Muscovado's as others, which come from other
places, as well already Imported, not having paid Ezcize, as which shall
hereafter be Imported, shall pay per pound weight Two pence half penny, to be
paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 00 00 02
Resolved, etc. That all Candy white Sugar, as well which are already Imported,
not having paid Ezcize, as which shall hereafter be Imported, shall pay per
pound weight for Excize Eight pence, to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from
the Merchant or Importer 00 00 08 Resolved, etc. That all Candy brown Sugar, as
well which are already Imported, not having paid Excize, as which shall
hereafter be Imported, shall pay per pound weight for Excize Six pence, to be
paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 00 00 06
Resolved, etc. That all other Grocerywares not herein formerly mentioned, as
well which are already Imported, not having paid Excize, as which shall
hereafter be Imported, shall pay after the Rate of Five pounds per Cent.
according to the values set upon them in the Book of Rates of Merchandises, to
be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 05 00 00 per
Cent. Resolved, etc. That all Drugs, as well already Imported, not having paid
the Excize, as which shall hereafter be Imported, shall pay after the Rate of
Five pounds per Cent. according to the values set upon them in the said Book of
Rates, to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 05
00 00 per Cent. Resolved, etc. That all Mercery Wares, as well which are
already Imported, not having paid the Excize, as which shall hereafter be
Imported, shall pay after the Rate of Seven pounds ten shillings per Cent.
according to the values set upon them in the said Book of Rates, to be paid by
the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 07 10 00 per Cent.
Resolved, etc. That all raw Silk, as well which are already Imported, not
having paid the Excize, as which shall hereafter be Imported, shall pay after
the Rate of Five pounds per Cent. according to the values set upon them in the
said Book of Rates; to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or
Importer 05 00 00 per Cent. Resolved, etc. That all Silks in the Gums ready
thrown, as well which are already Imported, not having paid Excize, as which
shall hereafter be Imported, shall pay after the Rate of Seven pounds ten
shillings per Cent. according to the values set upon them in the said Book of
Rates, to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 07
10 00 per Cent. Resolved, etc. That all other Silks dyed, as well which are
already Imported, not having paid Excize, as which shall hereafter be Imported,
shall pay after the Rate of Seven pounds ten shillings per Cent. according to
the values set upon them in the said Book of Rates, to be paid by the first
Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 07 10 00 per Cent. Resolved, etc.
That all Saltery Wares, as well which are already Imported, not having paid
Excize, as which shall hereafter be Imported, shall pay after the Rate of Seven
pounds ten shillings per Cent. according to the values set upon them in the
said Book of Rates, to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or
Importer 07 10 00 per Cent. Resolved, etc. That all Linen fine and course, as
well already Imported, not having paid Excize, as which shall hereafter be
Imported, shall pay after the Rate of Five pounds per Cent. according to the
values set upon them in the said Book of Rates, to be paid by the first Buyer
thereof from the Merchant or Importer 05 00 00 per Cent. Resolved, etc. That
all Upholstry, Haberdashery, Soap, Paper, Skins, Leather, Glasses, and Earthen
Ware, as well already Imported, not having paid Excize, as which shall
hereafter be Imported, shall pay after the Rate of Five pounds per Cent.
according to the values set upon them in the said Book of Rates, to be paid by
the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 05 00 00 per Cent.
Resolved, etc. That all Spirits Imported, made of French Wines, called
Brandwine, as well which are already Imported, not having paid Excize, as which
shall hereafter be Imported, shall pay after the Rate of Four pence per Gallon,
to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 00 00 04
Resolved, etc. That all foreign Spirits and domestic, fraudulently sold in
stead of Aqua-vitae or Strong-water, shall pay One shilling per Gallon 00 01 00
Resolved, etc. That all Strong Water perfectly made, as well already Imported,
not having paid Excize, as which shall hereafter be Imported, shall pay after
the Rate of One shilling per Gallon, to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from
the Merchant or Importer 00 01 00 Resolved, etc. That for every Tun of Wines,
as well already Imported, not having paid the Excize, as which hereafter shall
be Imported, shall be paid Five pounds for Excize, and so after that Rate for a
greater or lesser quantity, the same to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from
the Merchant or Importer 05 00 00 Resolved, etc. That all foreign Salt, as
well already Imported, which has not paid Excize, as which shall be hereafter
Imported, shall pay Three half pence upon every Gallon, to be paid by the first
Buyer of such Salt 00 00 01 Resolved, etc. That all Salt made or to be made,
within England, Wales, or Town of Berwick, which is or shall be shipped or
conveyed by water, shall pay One half penny upon every Gallon, to be paid by the
first Buyer of such Salt, at the place of landing or unloading thereof 00 00 00
Resolved, etc. That all other Salt made or to be made within England, Wales, or
Town of Berwick, and not shipped or conveyed by water, shall pay One half penny
upon every Gallon, to be paid by the first Buyer of such Salt, upon the first
delivery thereof 00 00 00 Resolved, etc. That all Salt upon Salt that is made
of Salt within England, Wales, or Town of Berwick, which has once paid Excize,
shall pay One farthing upon every Gallon, to be paid by the Maker of such Salt
upon Salt, before such time as the same shall be put to sale 00 00 00 Resolved,
etc. That no Salt expended upon Fishing shall be liable to this Excize 00 00 00
Resolved, etc. That all other Goods and Merchandises (except Bullion, Corn,
Victual, Arms, Ammunition, and Spanish Wools) as well which are already
Imported, not having paid Excize, as which shall hereafter be Imported, which
are not by any of the Votes abovesaid to be chargeable with the Excize (other
then such Goods and Merchandises as shall hereafter by Parliament be charged
with Excize) shall pay after the rate of Five pounds per cent. to be paid by the
first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 05 00 00 per Cent. Resolved,
etc. That all other Goods and Merchandises to be Imported, upon which no values
are set in the Book of Rates, shall pay Five pounds per cent. to be paid by the
first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 05 00 00 per Cent.

Resolved, etc. That the Commissioners of Excize, and their Sub-Commissioners
and Officers, shall Collect, Receive, and take the Excize and Impost set and
rated upon the Goods and Merchandises above mentioned, and no other Excize or
Impost upon the sa^d Goods and Merchandises.

Resolved, etc. That the several Votes abovesaid, touching the Excize, be
forthwith Printed and Published, and that the same be sent to the Commissioners
for Excize, an^ that they, and all Sub-Commissioners, and all other Officers
and Ministers of the Excize under them, be authorized and enjoined to put the
same in Execution forthwith, an^ to Collect and gather the Excize according to
the said Votes, and according to their former Powers, and under the pains and
penalties expressed in the former Ordinances an^ Acts of Parliament, touching
the Excize and New-Impost.

Die Veneris, 21 Decembr. 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That these Votes be forthwith printed and published

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printed to the Parliament of
England, 1649.


