February.3. 1648 An Act of maintenance at Edinburgh. vide 7th. voll. fol. 82.

A DECLARATION OF The Parliament of ENGLAND, For Maintaining the Fundamental
Laws of this NATION.
THe Parliament of England now assembled does Declare, That they are fully
Resolved to maintain, and shall and will uphold, preserve and keep the
Fundamental Laws of this Nation, for and concerning the preservation of the
Lives, Properties and Liberties of the People, with all things incident
thereunto; with the Alterations touching Kings and House of Lords, already
Resolved in this present Parliament, for the good of the People, and what shall
be further necessary for the perfecting thereof; And do require and expect,
That all Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, and all Officers and Ministers of Justice
for the time being, do administer Justice, and do proceed in their respective
Places and Offices accordingly; Which Resolution, with the Reasons thereof,
shall be hereafter published in a larger Declaration touching the same. And it
is hereby Ordered and appointed, That this Declaration shall be forth with
proclaimed in Westminster Hall, and at the old Exchange; And the Judges in
their respective Courts at Westminster, and at the first sitting thereof, are
to cause this Declaration to be publicly Read; and the Sheriffs in their
several Counties are to cause this Declaration to be likewise published.

Die Veneris, 9 Febr. 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Declaration be
forthwith Printed and Published; And that the Members of this House do take
care to disperse the said Declaration into the several Counties with all speed.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
Febr. 10. 1648.


