AN ACT For taking of the ACCOUNTS Belonging to the Navy and Customs.

seal of the Commonwealth

Die Mercurii, 8 Augusti, 1649.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament'.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England, and
are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet, at the Sign of the Golden-Dragon,
near the Inner Temple, 1649.

AN ACT For taking of the ACCOUNTS Belonging to the Navy and Customs.
Whereas the Receipts of the Customs and Subsidy rising upon Goods and
Merchandise Exported and Imported, and other Revenues appointed for ye
maintenance of the Navy, having been by several Acts and Ordinances of this
present Parliament, committed to the care and management of several persons as
Commissioners and Collectors thereof; whose Accounts, as also the Accounts of
the Collectors for Prize-Goods, the Treasurer and Victuallers for the Navy, the
Lieutenant and other Officers of the Ordnance, and several other Officers
relating to the Service of the Navy, and the Revenues, Stores and Provisions
thereof, do for the most part of them remain unperfected, and are like still so
to do, if some speedy and effectual course be not taken for dispatch thereof in
a settled and orderly way: For remedy whereof, and to the end the Commonwealth
may receive satisfaction concerning the Issuings and Disbursements of the said
Receipts and Revenues; and that the persons trusted therein that have or shall
faithfully discharge the trust to them respectively committed, may be thereof
fully acquitted and discharged; and contrariwise, those that have not, nor
shall discharge their trust therein may be duly proceeded against: Be it
therefore Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the authority thereof,
That all and every person or persons who since the sitting of this present
Parliament, have been, or at any time hereafter shall be by Parliament
appointed Commissioners and Collectors of the Customs, Subsidies, and other
Revenues within England and Wales, and the Town and Port of Berwick, Collectors
for Prize-Goods, Treasurer and Victuallers for the Navy, Lieutenant, or any
other Officers of the Ordnance, and all other Officers and persons whatsoever,
relating to the Service of the Navy, or any the Receipts thereunto set apart or
assigned, and the Stores and provisions thereof, that have not as yet
accounted, or having begun their Accounts, shall not at the time of the passing
of this present Act, have perfected the same, shall and are hereby required
forthwith to account, and so from time to time for the future, before the
Auditors of the Prests that now are, which shall be appointed by authority of
Parliament, for all such sum and sums of Money, Ammunition or other Stores or
provisions belonging to the Navy, Prize-Goods, or other Wares or Merchandise,
or other things whatsoever, belonging to the Commonwealth, by them and every of
them respectively received or collected, or to their respective charge, care or
trust committed, or come unto their hands; and of their Disbursements,
Payments, Issuings and Dispositions thereof respectively, according to the
Warrants, Vouchers and Discharges in that behalf appointed by authority and
direction of Parliament. And for the better enabling the said Auditors to
proceed in the taking and auditing of the said accounts, and to charge or
surcharge all and every the said persons by this Act accomptable with such sums
of money, and other provisions, stores and other goods, for which by the
respective trusts to them committed as aforesaid, they stand accomptable to the
Commonwealth* Be it hereby further Enacted and Ordained, That the Committee
heretofore authorized by Parliament for taking the general Accounts of the
Kingdom, their Deputies, Subcommittee, Registers and Clerks, the Remembrancers
and Clerks of the Exchequer, all Customers, Comptrollers, Collectors and other
Officers for the Customs, and all Cheque-Officers and Comptrollers upon any the
Receipts, Collections, Provisions, Stores and other Goods aforesaid; as also
all Commissioners, Subcommissioners, Collectors, Auditors or Comptroller of the
Excize, separated and distinguished for the service of the Navy, do forthwith,
and from time to time deliver unto the said Auditors of the Prests, all Books
of Accounts, Blank Books, Inventories, Apprisements, Books of Cheque and
Comptrol, and all other Writings whatsoever, relating to the premises, as
remain in their custody, whereby the said Auditors of the Prests may be enabled
to charge the accounts of the said several persons by this Act accomptable
respectively, with such sum and sums of money, provisions, stores, and other
goods, as they and every of them ought justly to be charged with, and for which
they stand accomptable to the Commonwealth. And be it hereby further Enacted
and Ordained by the authority aforesaid, That the said Accounts so taken and
audited, and hereafter to be taken and audited by the said Auditors of the
Prests, shall be declared before the Barons of the Court of the public
Exchequer, in such way and manner as formerly they used to be declared before
the Lord Treasurer, or Commissioners for the Treasury for the time being,
Chancellor and Barons of the Exchequer; and when declared, they shall be by the
said Auditors of the Prests transmitted to the Clerk of the Pipe, to be by him
engrossed upon the great Roll of the Pipe, or Roll of Foreign Accounts,
according to the usual course and custom of the Exchequer; and the Clerk of the
Pipe is hereby authorized and required to give such Discharges and Quietus est
to all the said Accomptants that shall finish and perfect their Accounts, to
charge the supers depending upon any of the said Accounts, and to do and
perform all other thing and things concerning the same, as has been heretofore
usually done in the like kind, according to the ancient course and custom of
the said Court of the public Exchequer; and if it shall happen that any the
said person or persons, or the Executors, Administrators or Assigns of any such
person or persons that ought to account as aforesaid, shall not enter upon
their respective accounts before the said Auditors of the Prests, and pay in
all the moneys in their hands unto the Treasurer of the Navy, or having entered
upon the same, shall not perfect the same, That then such proceedings shall be
had against all such person or persons aforesaid, as heretofore has been
accustomed, according to the ancient course and custom of the Exchequer.
Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not extend
to the hindering of any of the aforesaid person or persons from pleading to
their several charges, where there may be just matter of plea, but that the
same course shall be continued therein, as heretofore has been used, according
to the ancient course and custom of the said Court of the public Exchequer.

Die Mercurii, 8 Augusti, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament'.


