An Additional Act For the better Observation of the LORD'S DAY, DAYS OF
THANKSGIVING AND HUMILIATION.

Die Veneris, Decimo nono Aprilis, 1650.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1650.

An Additional Act For the better Observation of the LORD'S DAY, DAYS OF
THANKSGIVING AND HUMILIATION.
FOr the more effectual executing of all such Laws, Statutes and Ordinances of
Parliament, for the due Observation and Sanctification of the Lord's Day, days
of Public Humiliation and Thanksgiving; And for the further preventing the
profanation thereof, It is Enacted and Declared by this present Parliament,
and by the Authority of the same, That all and every High Constable, Petty
Constable, Headborough, Churchwarden or Overseer of the Poor or other
Officers, or any of the Governors of the Company of Watermen, upon their own
view of knowledge of any the offense or offenses committed or done against any
Article, Clause or Provision of any the said Laws, Statutes or Ordinances; and
all and every person and persons whatsoever, by Warrant from any Justice of
Peace, Major, Bailiff or other Head-Officer, are hereby authorized and required
to seize and secure all such Wares or Goods cried, showed forth or put to sale
upon the days and times aforesaid, contrary to this present Act, or any Statute
or Ordinance of Parliament, to the end proceedings may be thereupon had,
according to the true intent and meaning of this present Act, or any the said
Laws, Statutes and Ordinances. And it is further Enacted, That no Traveller,
Waggoner, Butcher, Higler, Drover, their or any of their Servants, shall travel
or come into his or their Inn or Lodging, after Twelve of the Clock on any
Saturday night; nor shall any person travel from his House, Inn or other place,
till after one a clock on Monday morning, without good and urgent cause, not
incurred through the neglect or occasion of the person so doing, to be allowed
by any Justice of the Peace or Head Officer before whom complaint shall be
made; upon pain that every such Traveller, Waggoner, Butcher, Higler, Drover
and their Servants, and also every Innkeeper and Alehouse-keeper that shall so
entertain him or them, shall each of them forfeit Ten shillings for every such
offense. And if any Writ, Warrant or Order (except in case of Treason, Murder,
Felony, or breach of the Peace, profanation of the Lord's Day, days of
Thanksgiving or Humiliation, or suspicion of them or either or any of them)
shall be from and after the First day of May, in the year One thousand six
hundred and fifty, served or executed upon any the aforesaid days, every such
execution of such Writ, Warrant or Order upon the said days respectively, shall
be, and is hereby declared to be of no effect; and the person or persons that
shall serve or execute such Writ, Warrant or Order, or cause the same to be
served or executed, shall forfeit and pay to the use of the poor of the Parish
where such Offense shall be committed, Five pounds, to be levied upon his or
their Goods and Chattels in manner aforesaid, rendering the overplus. And it is
further Enacted and Declared by the authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons shall use, employ or travel upon the Lord's Day, or the said days of
Humiliation or Thanksgiving, with any Boat, Wherry, Lighter, Barge, Horse,
Coach or Sedan, either in the City of London or elsewhere (except it be to or
from some place for the service of God, or upon other extraordinary occasion,
to be allowed by the next Justice of Peace to the place where the said fact
shall be committed; upon pain that every such person or persons that shall use
such Boat, Wherry, Lighter, Barge, Horse, Coach or Sedan, contrary to the true
meaning of this present Act (except it be in the cases aforesaid) shall for
every such Offense forfeit and lose the sum of Ten shillings; and that every
Boat-man, Sedan-man, Coachman or other person, that shall so labor or travel
in or with any such Boat, Wherry, Lighter, Barge, Sedan, Horse or Coach, shall
forfeit for every such offense, Five shillings. And it is further Enacted and
Declared, That every person and persons which upon the said Lord's Day, days of
Humiliation or Thanksgiving, shall be in any Tavern, Inn, Alehouse,
Tobacco-house or Shop, or Victualling-house (unless he lodge there, or be there
upon some lawful or necessary occasion) to be allowed of by such Judge,
Justice, or other person who is authorized by this Act to put the same in
execution; and every person or persons which upon the said days shall be
dancing, profanely singing, drinking or tippling in any Tavern, Inn, Alehouse,
Victualling-house, or Tobacco-house or Shop, or shall harbor or entertain any
person or persons so offending; or which shall grind or cause to be ground in
any Mill, any Corn or Grain upon any the said days, except in case of
necessity, to be allowed by a Justice of the Peace, every such Offender shall
forfeit and pay the sum of Ten shillings for every such offense, to be levied
as aforesaid. And for the more vigorous and due execution of the Laws, Statutes
and Ordinances aforesaid, and of this present Act, It is hereby further
Enacted, That every Justice of the Peace, Head-Officer or Officers of every
Town Corporate or place, and every Constable, Headborough, Churchwarden,
Overseer of the Poor, and Governors of the Company of Watermen, and other
persons authorized as aforesaid, are hereby required and enjoined to make
diligent search for the discovering, finding out, apprehending and punishing of
all Offenders against this and other Laws, Ordinances and Acts made for the
observation of the Lord's Day, and days of Public Fasting and Thanksgiving:
And if any the said Justices of the Peace, and other Officers aforesaid, upon
view or information of any the said offenses to be committed, shall be
negligent, or refuse to do his duty in putting this or other the said
Ordinances, Laws or Acts in execution, every such Justice of the Peace, or
other Head-Officer, upon proof thereof before the Lord Chief Justice of either
Bench, or Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, or before any Judge or Judges of
Assize, by one or more witnesses, or by view or confession of the party, shall
for every such Offense incur the penalty of Five pounds, and upon refusal of
payment thereof, to be levied on his Goods or Chattels, by Warrant from the
said Lord Chief Justices, or Lord Chief Baron, Judge or Judges of Assize
respectively, by distress and sale of the Goods of every such person, returning
the overplus; and every High Constable, Petty Constable, Churchwarden and
other Officer, shall forfeit and pay for his neglect aforesaid, the sum of
Twenty shillings; and for default of payment thereof, the same to be levied by
Warrant from any Justice of the Peace, directed to the High Constable of the
Hundred, or other Officer where the Offense shall be committed, for the levying
of the said penalty by way of distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, and
returning the Overplus as aforesaid: And all other penalties imposed by this
Act, for which no way of levying is provided by the said former Laws and
Ordinances, shall be levied by Warrant from any one Justice of Peace, Major,
Bailiff or Head Officer, by Distress and sale of the Offenders Goods; and for
want of payment thereof, or such distress to be found, by setting the Offenders
in the Stocks or Cage for the space of six hours. And it is likewise Enacted
and Declared, That all Judges, Justices of Assize, and Justices of Peace at
their Assizes or Quarter Sessions, shall in their several and respective
Circuits and Courts give in charge to the Grand Jury, to inquire of and present
all neglects of Justices, Constables, and other Officers in the due execution
of this present Act, and other Laws, Ordinances and Statutes made for the
observation of the Lord's Day, and days of Public Fasting and Thanksgiving,
who are hereby strictly commanded to present the same. And it is also hereby
Enacted, That the Lord Major and Aldermen, Sheriffs and Justices of Peace of
the City of London, County of Middlesex, and City of Westminster, and Borough
of Southwark, together with the Heads and Governors of the several Inns of
Court and Chancery; and all and every Justice of Peace, Majors, Bailiffs, and
other Head Officers, and every of them, are hereby authorized and required to
take a speedy and effectual course, by such means as they shall think most meet
within their respective Jurisdictions, to restrain as aforesaid the
profanation of the said days; upon pain that the Lord Major, Aldermen,
Sheriffs and Justices in London, and Middlesex, and Westminster, Heads of the
several Inns of Court and Chancery, Justices and other Head Officers, which
shall neglect to do what belongs to their several duties and places therein,
shall forfeit the sum of Five pounds, to be levied in such manner as the Fines
imposed on Justices of Peace for their neglects are hereby appointed to be
levied as aforesaid. And it is Enacted and Declared by the authority aforesaid,
That this Act be forthwith printed, and bound up together with all the former
Statutes and Ordinances now in force, for observation of the Lord's Day,
Public Fasting and Thanksgiving days, and published by the Justice of Peace,
or Chief Officer or Officers aforesaid, and read at their next Quarter Sessions
after they shall receive the same; and also by them sent unto or left at the
several houses of the Ministers of the respective Parishes within their
respective limits, who are hereby required and appointed in all the Churches
and Chapels within this Commonwealth, publicly to read or cause to be read,
all and every the said Statutes and Ordinances so bound up together, the next
Lord's Day after he or they shall receive the same, before the morning Sermon;
and that afterward once every year (viz.) Upon the first Lord's Day in March,
before the morning Sermon, they read or cause to be read likewise this present,
and the former Acts and Ordinances aforesaid; the due performance whereof the
said Justices of Peace and other Head Officers are commanded to inquire after,
and certify the names of the persons making default in reading and publishing
the premises, acording to this present Act, to the Speaker of the Parliament,
and in the intervals thereof, to the Council of State; and the Justices of
Peace at their Quarter Sessions, shall duly cause this Act, together with the
said Statutes and Ordinances to be openly read. And it is lastly Enacted, That
in any Action brought against any Justice of Peace, Constable, or any other
Officer or person acting or doing, or commanding to be acted or done any thing
in pursuance of this or any former Law, Act or Ordinance now in force touching
or concerning any the Offenses or matters aforesaid, the Defendant in every
such Action shall and may plead the General Issue, and give the special matter
in Evidence; and upon the Nonsuit of the Plaintiff, or verdict passing for the
Defendant, the party Defendant shall have and recover his and their treble
Costs, or at the election of such party, shall have his reparation by the
Committee of Parliament for Indemnity. And it is hereby Ordained, That all
persons whatsoever shall be ayding and assisting to all Justices of Peace, Head
Officers, Constables, and other Officers and persons, in the execution of this
or the said former Acts and Ordinances in and concerning the premises.

Die Veneris, Decimo nono Aprilis, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


