AN ACT For the Admitting of the Six Counties of NORTH WALES TO A General
Composition For their DELINQUENCY.

seal of the Commonwealth

Die Veneris, 10 Augusti, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament'.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England, and
are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet, at the Sign of the Gold-Dragon, near
the Inner Temple, 1649.

AN ACT For the admitting of the Six Counties of North Wales to a General
COMPOSITION For their Delinquency.
Whereas the five Counties of Northwales; viz. Montgomery, Denbigh, Flint,
Merioneth and Carnarven, with the Island and County of Anglesey, have been for
many years together, since the beginning of these late Wars, wholly under the
power of the late Kings Army and Forces; by reason whereof, many well-affected
persons to the Parliament within the said Counties, have been forced through
compulsion or fear, for the avoiding of present ruin to themselves and
Families, to comply with the said Forces in unwarrantable acts and Engagements,
whereby they are become involved in a general guilt and defection from the
Parliament, and the authority thereof: The Commons of England assembled in
Parliament (at the humble and earnest Request of diverse of the Inhabitants of
the said counties) taking the same into serious consideration; and being
willing that some distinction may be made between such persons as have been
eminently active in the raising and promoting of the said War, and those that
were moved by constraint or fear to a compliance with the Enemy, being under
their power, and are now resolved to adhere to the Interest of this
Commonwealth, as it is now established; and being likewise willing, that such
money as is by any Ordinance or Order of Parliament charged upon the Estates of
new Delinquents in Northwales, and payable to persons well-affected to the
Parliament, and to the present Constitution of this Commonwealth should be paid
accordingly, Do Declare and Ordain, and be it Ordained and Enacted by this
present Parliament, and by authority of the same, That the Inhabitants of the
said five counties of Northwales; (viz.) Montgomery, Denbigh, Flint, Carnarvon
and Merioneth, and of the said Island and county of Anglesey, and every of them
(except such persons as are hereafter in this Act excepted) be and are hereby
admitted to a general Composition; and that the sum of Four and twenty thousand
pounds be raised upon the said Five counties, and the said Island and county of
Anglesey; that is to say, On the county of Montgomery, the sum of Three
thousand pounds; On the county of Denbigh, the sum of Three thousand pounds; On
the county of Flint, the sum of Two thousand pounds; On the county of
Carnarvon, the sum of Four thousand pounds; On the county of Merioneth, the sum
of Three thousand pounds; On the Island and county of Anglesey, the sum of Nine
thousand pounds, to be paid in manner and form following (that is to say) the
first moiety amounting to the sum of twelve thousand pounds, within ten weeks
after the passing of this Act, and the other moiety being Twelve thousand
pounds, to be paid within ten weeks then next ensuing; which said sum of Four
and twenty thousand pounds is to be paid to the Treasurers at Wars for the
Army, who are hereby authorized to receive the same, and any two of them, to
give receipts or acquittances under their hands and seals for the same; which
said receipts or acquittances shall be a sufficient discharge, to all intents
and purposes, to the said respective counties and Island, and unto such as they
shall appoint to pay the same, according to the true intent of this Act: And to
the end the said sum of Four and twenty thousand pounds may be equally and
indifferently taxed, proportioned and levied upon the respective Inhabitants of
the said counties, unto whom the benefit of this Act is to extend; Be it
further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That Thomas Mitton, John Jones,
John Carter, George Twisleton, Thomas Mason, Thomas Madrin, Edmund Glyn, Esqs
Robert Soutley Esquire Thomas Ball Esquire John Peck Esquire Richard Bassnet Gent. Edward
Wyn Esquire Thomas Crichley Gent. Daniel Lloid Gent. Watkin Kyffin Gent. William
Wyn Gent. Gerard Harbor Esquire Gruffith Glin Gent. Richard Anwil Esquire Captain
Thomas Pugh, Lewis Lloid Esquire Peter Meirick Esquire Major Edward Moor, Roger Hanmer
Esqs Sir John Trevor Knight, John Puleston Esquire one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas, Thomas Ravenscroft Esquire John Aldersey Esquire Luke Lloid, Humphrey
Dymmock, Esqs Andrew Ellice Esquire Thomas Dymmock Esquire, Daniel Mathews Gent.
Hugh Courtney Gent. Sir John Wittewrong Knight, Evan Lloid, Hugh Price, Richard
Price, Richard Gruffith Robert Gruffith, Rice Vaughan Esqs Samuel Big Gent.
Edward Owen of Castle-Dail, Owen Salusbury, Esquire Gruffith Nanney, John Lloyd,
Lewis Owen, Robert Vaughan, Esqs Robert Owen, Thomas Michael, Gent. William
Williams Esquire, be and hereby are constituted and appointed Commissioners for
the said several and respective counties and Island; which said Commissioners
or any five of them, have hereby full power and authority to do all and every
such act and acts as may further the rating and collecting of the said sum of
Twenty four thousand pounds upon the said respective counties and Island, in
the manner and proportion aforesaid; and to remove all lets and obstructions,
and determine all differences that may hinder the effectual prosecution of this
work; and to supervise and regulate proceedings to the best of their
judgments, according to the true intent and meaning of this Act.

Provided always, That no welaffected person in any of the said Counties and
Island, be compelled to pay any Rate or Tax toward the raising of the said
sums or any of them. Provided also, That this Act shall not extend to discharge
or pardon any person excepted from pardon, or from Composition for his Estate,
by the Propositions sent to the late King at Newcastle, nor by any Act, Order
or Vote of Parliament not yet repealed.

2. Nor any Member of Parliament, that has deserted his Trust, and adhered to
the Enemy. 3. Nor any person that has assisted the Irish Rebellion, or held
correspondency or Intelligence with the Rebels in Ireland. 4. Nor any person
that having been in Arms against the Parliament, does reside in France or
Ireland, or in any other parts beyond the Seas. 5. Nor any person that has
given Intelligence to, or held correspondency in any thing against the
Parliament, with CHARLES STUART the late Kings Son, or his Adherents, in any of
the parts beyond the Seas. 6. Nor any Delinquent, or otherwise scandalous
Minister or Clergy man (as to Ecclesiastical Promotions only) that is already
duly Sequestered or Sequestrable, nor at all to pardon such of them as have
plotted or contrived the Revolt of the said Island of Anglesey. 7. Nor any
Papists in arms, nor any other Papists for the two Thirds of their Estates
Sequestered or Sequestrable, according to former Orders or Ordinances of
Parliament for their nonconformity. 8. Nor any persons that are now Prisoners
of War. 9. Nor any person that has public Money in his hands, for which he
ought to account, and shall not discover and pay the same to the Treasurers for
the Army, for the use of the Commonwealth, within three months after the
passing of this Act. Provided further, That this Act shall not extend to
discharge any person that has his Fine set at Goldsmiths Hall, from the
payment of the same to the Treasurers there accordingly. Provided also, That
this Act shall not extend to make any person capable to bear any Office in the
Commonwealth, contrary to any former Act or Ordinance of Parliament, without
consent of Parliament.
Provided likewise, and be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That
all persons within the said respective counties and Island, that have been
engaged against the Parliament (not comprised within the former Exceptions,
Qualifications or Crimes, to the discharging or pardoning whereof this Act is
not to extend) that are not worth in Lands four pounds per annum, or in
personal estate Forty pounds, and shall declare unto the said Commissioners or
any five of them, their firm resolutions, faithfully to adhere to the interest
of this Commonwealth, shall not be taxed or compelled to pay any part of the
said sum of Twenty four thousand pounds, but are hereby freely pardoned and
discharged of their Delinquency: And be it further Enacted by the authority
aforesaid, That all the Inhabitants in the said several and respective counties
of Montgomery, Denbigh, Flint, Merioneth and Carnavon, and in the said Island
of Anglesey (that have Estates above the values aforesaid in the said
respective counties) or any of them (except the persons before excepted, and
comprised in the said former Qualifications, unto whom the benefit of this Act
is not to extend) and shall duly pay their proportions of the said sum of
Twenty four thousand pounds, according to the true meaning of this Act, and
constantly and faithfully adhere to the present established interest of this
Nation, be and are pardoned and acquitted of and for any act of Delinquency or
offense committed or done by them, or any of them, against the Parliament, to
the time of the passing of this Act; and are hereby permitted to enjoy all
their several and respective estates, without molestation, to all intents and
purposes whatsoever, free from any act done or to be done against them, or any
of them, by virtue, color or pretense of any Act, Ordinance or Order of
Parliament, for Sequestration of Delinquents estates. Provided moreover, and be
it Enacted and Ordained by the authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons that have complied with the late Kings Forces, or are liable to
Sequestration within the said several and respective counties, and Island of
Anglesey, or any of them, shall refuse to pay his or their proportion, as the
same shall be rated or taxed, and approved of by the said Commissioners, or any
five of them (toward the raising of the aforesaid Fine) within the time herein
limited for the payment of the same, such person and persons so refusing, are
not to have any benefit or immunity by this Act, but are left to be effectually
proceeded against, according to the several Ordinances of Sequestrations. And
be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That such sum and sums of
Money as are by any Ordinance or Order of Parliament charged upon the estates
of New Delinquents in Northwales, and payable to persons well-affected to the
Parliament, and to the present Constitution of this Commonwealth (not exceeding
in the whole the sum of Four thousand pounds) be according to the true intent
and meaning of the said several Ordinances and Orders, paid and discharged out
of the said sum of Twenty four thousand pounds. And the Treasurers at Wars are
authorized and required to pay and discharge the same accordingly; and to the
end this present Act, and the several former Ordinances of Sequestrations may
be the better put in execution, Be it further Enacted by the authority
aforesaid, That the said Thomas Mitton, John Jones, John Carter, George
Twisleton, Thomas Mason, Thomas Madrin, Edmond Glyn, Robert Sontley, Thomas
Ball, John Peck, Richard Bassnet, Edward Wyn, Thomas Crichley, Daniel Lloyd,
Watkin Kyffin, William Wyn, Gerard Harbor, Griffith Glyn, Richard Anwyl,
Captain Thomas Pugh, Lewis Lloyd, Peter Meirick, Major Edward Moor, Roger
Hanmer, Sir John Trevor, John Puleston, Thomas Ravenscroft, John Aldersey, Luke
Lloyd, Humphrey Dymmock, Andrew Ellice, Thomas Dymmock, Daniel Mathews, Hugh
Courtney, Sir John Wittewrong, Evan Lloyd, Hugh Price, Richard Price, Richard
Gruffith, Robert Gruffith, Rice Vaughan, Samuel Big, Edward Owen of
Castle-Dail, Owen Salusbury, Gruffith Nanney, John Lloyd, Lewis Owen, Robert
Vaughan, Robert Owen, Thomas Michael, William Williams, or any three or more of
them, shall be and hereby are constituted and appointed to be a Committee, for
the putting in execution all and every the Ordinances of Sequestrations of
Delinquents and Papists estates, according to the true intent and meaning of
this Act, and of the said several Ordinances; which said Committee, or any
three or more of them, are hereby authorized and required to Sequester, or
cause to be sequestered the estates Real and Personal of all and every person
and persons (being Delinquents or Papists) within the said several Counties and
Island, whose estates by the true meaning of this Act ought to be sequestered,
and unto whom the benefit of this Act is not extended; and the said estates so
sequestered, to dispose of as by the several Ordinances or Orders of Parliament
in that behalf is required; observing in the execution of the premises, such
further Orders and Directions as they shall from time to time receive from the
Committee of Goldsmiths-hall. And be it further Enacted by the authority
aforesaid, That the said Commissioners or any five of them, shall have and
hereby have full power and authority to hear and examine Complaints, as well
touching the inequality of Assessments of former and future Taxes levied, or to
be levied in the said respective Counties, or any of them for the Service of
the Parliament: As also touching allowance to be made by Landlords to their
Tenants in respect of Taxes, and to order such relief therein as shall be
agreeable to Equity and Justice, and to the true intent and meaning of the
several Ordinances of Parliament in that behalf made: And be it further Enacted
by the authority aforesaid, That the said Commissioners, or any five of them,
in the said respective counties, shall have power, and are hereby authorized to
collect and receive of the persons that are to have benefit by this Act, so
much money as shall defray the necessary charge of prosecuting this service:
Provided, That the same exceed not the sum of One hundred pounds in each
county: And that no one Commissioner be allowed for his charges, in attending
the said service, above the rate of Five shillings per diem, for every day that
he shall be actually employed in the said service: And be it further Enacted by
the authority aforesaid, That all former suspensions of Sequestrations, made by
Sir Thomas Middleton, by virtue of an Ordinance of Parliament, authorizing him
so to do, or made by any other person or persons employed in the service of the
Parliament in the said counties, not authorized thereunto by any Act, Ordinance
or Order of Parliament, be from henceforth void and of none effect. And be it
further Declared and Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the payment of
any part of the said Fine, or of any other sum of money by any of the
Inhabitants of the said counties, in pursuance of this Act, shall not be
construed, or taken to be a sufficient matter of evidence or confession, for
the conviction of such person to have acted any thing against the Parliament:
And whereas Col: Thomas Mason, Capt. Richard Price, Capt. Thomas Ball, and
Richard Cheadle Esquire have done very good and faithful service to the
Commonwealth, some of them having had their houses burnt, and their whole
estates kept from them for diverse years by the enemy (to their total ruin) for
their affection to the Parliament; by reason whereof they are become incapable
of serving the Commonwealth, according to the trust reposed in them, unless
they receive some seasonable supply and reparation toward their Arrears,
Disbursements and sufferings; Be it therefore enacted by the authority
aforesaid, That the sum of Two thousand pounds out of the first money that
shall be raised by Sequestration of, or Composition with any new Delinquents in
the said counties, not pardoned by this Act, shall be disposed of toward
satisfaction of the Arrears, Disbursements, and Reparation of the losses and
sufferings of the said persons, as the Parliament shall hereafter order and
appoint: And likewise, That the debts and engagements of William Lloid Esquire late
High Sheriff of the county of Carnarvon, now deceased, not exceeding One
thousand pounds, be according to a Vote of the Commons assembled in Parliament,
of the tenth of June, One thousand six hundred forty eight, discharged out of
the Rents, Fines or Compositions of the said new Delinquents not pardoned by
this Act.

Die Veneris, 10 Augusti, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament'.


