AN ACT FOR The better Propagation and Preaching of the GOSPEL IN WALES, And
redress of some Grievances.

seal of the Commonwealth

Die Veneris, 22o Februarii, 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


London: Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England. 1649.

AN ACT FOR The better Propagation and Preaching of the GOSPEL In WALES, and
redress of some Grievances.
THe Parliament of England taking into their serious consideration the great
Duty and Trust that lies on them to use all lawful ways and means for the
propagation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ in this Commonwealth, in order
thereunto, Do Enact and Ordain, and be it Enacted and Ordained by this present
Parliament, and by the Authority thereof, That Col: Thomas Harrison, Col:
Philip Jones, Col: John Jones, Sir John Trevor Knight, Henry Herbert Esquire
William Herbert, William Packer, William Blethin, Christopher Catchmay, Reece
Williams, John Nicholas, Edward Herbert, Robert Jones, Bussey Mansel, Edward
Prichard, John Price, Rowland Dawkins, William Boteler, Edward Stradling, John
Herbert, Richard Jones, Jenkin Frainlyn, John James, Wroth Rogers, John
Herring, Stephen Winthrop, Esqs Sir Erasmus Philips, Sampson Lort, Henry
Williams, Silvanus Tailor, Richard King, John Williams, John Dancy, Thomas
Watkins, James Philips, John Lewis, William Barbar, Esqs John Daniel, John
Bowen Gent. John Puleston one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas,
Humphrey Mackworth, William Littleton, Robert Duckenfield, Thomas Baker, Hugh
Price, Evan Lloyd, Richard Price, Robert Griffith, Edward Owens, George
Twisleton, John Carter, Thomas Mason, Lighton Owens, Rice Vaughan, Thomas Ball,
Hugh Courtney, Edward Tailor, Roger Soutley, Esqs Daniel Lloyd, David Moris,
William Win, Gentlemen; Thomas Swift Esquire Hugh Prichard Gent. John Sadler,
John Peck, Luke Lloyd, Andrew Ellis, Ralph Crechley, Esqs Lewis Price of
Llannoonog, Henry Williams, John Brown, Gent. are hereby constituted and
appointed to be Commissioners in the Counties of Montgomery, Denbigh, Flint,
Carnarvan, Merioneth, Anglesey, Monmouth, Glamorgan, Pembroke, Carmarthen,
Cardigan, Brecknock and Radnor, and every of them, to put in execution the
several powers and authorities herein hereafter mentioned and directed (that is
to say) That they the said Commissioners or any five or more of them, shall
have full power and authority, and are hereby enabled and authorized to receive
all articles or Charges which shall be exhibited against any Parson, Vicar,
Curate, Schoolmaster, or any other now having, or that shall have any
Ecclesiastical benefit or promotion within the said counties or any of them,
for any Delinquency, Scandal, Malignancy, or non-Residency; and upon such
Articles so exhibited, to grant out Warrants in writing under the Hands and
Seals of the said Commissioners, or any five or more of them, to be directed to
the party against whom such Articles shall be exhibited, requiring his
appearance before such Commissioners, at a certain day and place in the said
Warrant mentioned, to answer the said Charge or Articles respectively; and
after notice of the said Warrant personally made or given to the said party
Articled against, or left at his dwelling House or ordinary place of abode, and
that notice proved by Oath to be made by the space of ten days before the day
of appearance in the said Warrant mentioned (no just Cause being made and
proved to excuse the not appearing) and likewise after answer made by such as
shall appear according to summons, Then the said Commissioners, or any five or
more of them, are hereby enabled and authorized to proceed to examination of
witnesses upon Oath; the said Examinations and Depositions of such Witnesses to
be put in writing, as well on the behalf of the Commonwealth to prove such
Charges and Articles, as on the behalf of the parties articled against to make
good their Answers; which Oaths the said Commissioners, or any two or more of
them, have hereby power to administer: And after due examination and proof made
by confession of the party complained of, or by the Oath of two credible
Witnesses, actually to amove, discharge and eject all such Ministers and other
persons from their respective Cures, Benefices, Places and Charges, as they the
said Commissioners, or any five or more of them, upon such hearing shall
adjudge to be guilty of any the Crimes aforesaid, in the said Articles
contained and comprised; and after such Judgment given, in case any person
shall find himself agrieved with such Judgment so given, Then it shall and may
be lawful, to and for any twelve or more of the said Commissioners, upon
Petition preferred to them by the party grieved, to review, examine and reverse
the same, if they or the greater part of them see just cause so to do: And if
notwithstanding the said ejected person shall not find relief within six Weeks
after his Petition so preferred, Then the said Commissioners, or any five or
more of them, shall at the request of the parties agrieved respectively,
certify the respective Proceedings and Proofs in such cases respectively, to
the Committee of Parliament for Plundered Ministers; who are hereby authorized,
upon the return of such Certificates, and view of such Proceedings and Proofs,
without further examination of Witnesses in such cases, to examine the Grounds
of the said respective Judgments appealed from, and to affirm or revoke the
same, as they shall find it most agreeable to Justice, and the tenor of this
Act. And be it further Enacted and Declared, That the said Commissioners or any
five or more of them, have hereby power and authority to allow the Wife and
Children of such Minister or Ministers so ejected and amoved, for their
maintenance, a proportion not exceeding a fifth part of the Living, Parsonage,
Benefice, Vicarage, Charge or other place, out of which the said Ministers
shall be respectively removed (all Parish Charges, Public Taxes, and other
Duties being first deducted out of the whole.) And be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That if any Parson or Vicar holds or enjoys, or which
shall hold or enjoy plurality of Benefices or Ecclesiastical Promotions (one or
more of which being within the Counties aforesaid) and upon a Warrant directed
to him under the Hands of the said Commissioners or any five of them, requiring
him at a certain day and place in the said Warrant mentioned, to make choice
and elect which of the said Benefices and Ecclesiastical Promotions he desires
to hold; and upon notice of the said Warrant, shall not within forty days after
the said notice, make his Election, testified under his Hand before five or
more of the said Commissioners, which of the said Benefices or Promotions he
desires to hold, then from and after such default (no just cause being proved
to excuse the same) all his right, title or interest in and to all such
Benefices and Promotions to cease, determine and be utterly void. And to the
end that godly and painful men, of able gifts and knowledge for the work of the
Ministry, and of approved conversation for Piety, may be employed to preach
the Gospel in the counties aforesaid (which heretofore abounded in Ignorance
and Profaneness) And that fit persons of approved Piety and Learning, may have
encouragement to employ themselves in the education of Children in Piety and
good literature, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Commissioners, or any five or more of them, be and are authorized and enabled
to grant Certificates by way of approbation to such persons as shall be
recommended and approved of by Henry Walter, Walter Cradock, Richard Simonds,
Roger Charnock, Jenkin Lloid, Morris Bidwel, David Walter, William Seaborn,
Edmond Ellis, Jenkin Jones, George Robinson, Richard Powel, Robert Powel,
Thomas Ewen, John Miles, Oliver Thomas, Doctor John Ellis, Ambrose Moston,
Stephen Lewis, Morgan Lloid, William Jones, Richard Edwards, Vavosor Powel,
Richard Swain, Rowland Never, Ministers of the Gospel, or any five or more of
them, for the preaching of the Gospel in the said Counties, as well in settled
Congregations and Parochial Charges, as in an Itinerary course, as the said
Commissioners (by the advice of such the said Ministers as shall recommend and
approve of the said persons respectively) shall adjudge to be most for the
advancement of the Gospel, or for the keeping of Schools, and education of
Children: And to the end that a fitting maintenance may be provided for such
persons as shall be so recommended and approved of, as also for such others
approvedly godly and painful Ministers now residing within the said Counties,
for whose support and maintenance there is little or no settlement made or
provided; Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That
in order to the said maintenance, and in the regulating, ordering and disposal
thereof, they the said Commissioners, or any twelve or more of them, are hereby
authorized and enabled by themselves, or others deriving authority from them,
to receive and dispose of all and singular the Rents, Issues and Profits of all
and every the Rectories, Vicarages, Donatives, sine Cura's, Portion of Tenths,
and other Ecclesiastical Livings, which now are, or hereafter shall be in the
disposing of the Parliament, or any other deriving Authority from them; as also
to receive and dispose of the Rents, Issues and Profits of all Impropriations
and Gleab-lands within the said Counties, which now are, or hereafter shall be
under Sequestration, or in the disposal of the Parliament, by virtue of any
former Statute, or any Act or Ordinance of this present Parliament. And be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Commissioners, or any
twelve or more of them, shall and may out of the said Rents, Issues and Profits
of the said Rectories, Vicarages, Donatives, sine Cura's, Portion of Tenths,
and other Ecclesiastical Promotions; as also out of the Rents, Issues and
Profits of the said Impropriations and Gleab-lands, order and appoint a
constant yearly maintenance for such persons as shall be recommended and
approved of as aforesaid, for the work of the Ministry, or the education of
Children; as also for such other Ministers as aforesaid, now residing within
the said Counties; provided that the yearly maintenance of a Minister do not
exceed One hundred pounds, and the yearly maintenance of a Schoolmaster exceed
not Forty pounds; and that godly Ministers (who have or shall have Wife or
Children, may not too much be taken off from their duties in the Ministry,
with the care and consideration of maintenance for their Wives and Children
after their decease, but that some care thereof may be had by others, whereby a
greater encouragement may be given to them to set themselves the closer to the
work of the said Ministry; Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
said Commissioners, or any twelve or more of them, are hereby enabled and
authorized to make such yearly allowance to the Wife and Children of such godly
Minister after his decease, as to the said Commissioners or any twelve of them
shall seem reasonable, for the necessary support and maintenance of the said
Wife or Children, or any of them; Provided always, That such allowance so to be
made to such Wife and Children, do not exceed the yearly sum of thirty pounds:
And if any person or persons being Tenant or Occupier of any Lands, Tenements
or Hereditaments, liable and subject to the payment of any Tenths or other
Duties, in right payable or belonging to any Parsonage, Vicarage, or any the
abovesaid Ecclesiastical Promotions, shall refuse payment thereof, Then the
said Commissioners or any two or more of them, are hereby authorized and
enabled to put in execution against every person and persons so refusing, the
powers and authorities vested and settled by this present Parliament in the
Justices of the Peace, for the relief of Ministers from whom such Tenths and
Duties are detained and subtracted. And be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the said Commissioners or any twelve or more of them, out of
the said Tenths, Rents and Profits by them receiveable by force of this Act,
shall and may allow such moderate Salary or Wages to such person or persons who
shall be employed in the receiving, keeping and disposal thereof, or any part
thereof, as they shall conceive to be necessary and reasonable. And be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every person and
persons qualified and approved of as above said, for the preaching of the
Gospel as aforesaid, who shall be vested and settled by the said Commissioners
or any twelve or more of them, in any Rectory, Vicarage or Parochial Charge,
which the said Commissioners or any twelve or more of them have hereby power to
do, shall be deemed and adjudged to be seized of the same, as fully and amply,
to all intents and purposes, as if such person and persons were presented,
instituted and inducted to and in the same, according to former Laws in such
cases used and provided. And whereas the remoteness of the said Counties from
the Courts of Justice at Westminster, occasioneth many acts of high
Misdemeanors, Oppression and Injury to be committed there, which oftentimes
escape unpunished, and the parties agrieved thereby, for want of means to seek
relief by due course of Law, left remediless; To the end therefore that such
Misdemeanors, Oppressions and Injuries may the better be enquired after, and
the parties grieved thereby, without much expense of moneys or loss of time,
may be in some way of relief, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the said Commissioners or any five or more of them, shall have, and hereby have
full Power and Authority to receive all Complaints which shall be brought
before them, of any such Misdemeanors, Oppression or Injury, committed by any
person or persons within the said Counties or any of them; and by Warrant
directed to the party complained of, under the Hands and Seals of the said
Commissioners or any five or more of them, to appear before them at a certain
day and place in the said Warrant mentioned, requiring an Answer to the said
Complaints; and after answer made, then with the consent of both parties,
testify under their Hands and Seals, to proceed to hear and determine the
same. And whereas sufferings of that nature generally fall upon persons
well-affected to the Parliament, and such as have acted in and for their
service; which said persons are not of ability to travel to London, to be
relieved by the Committee of Parliament, commonly called The Committee of
Indemnity, Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid,
That the said Commissioners or any five or more of them, shall be, and are
hereby made and constituted a Committee of Indemnity, to all intents and
purposes, within the Counties aforesaid, for the hearing and determining of all
matters and things properly relieveable and determinable by the said Committee
of Indemnity. Provided always, That if any person or persons shall find him
or themselves agrieved at the proceedings of the said Commissioners, acting as
a Committee of Indemnity, then the said person or persons so agrieved, shall
and may prosecute his and their Petition or Appeal for relief, in such manner
and form as in and by this Act is prescribed in the cases of ejected Ministers,
and bring the same to a final determination, before the said Committee of
Indemnity sitting at Westminster; which said Committee are hereby authorized
to hear and determine the same, as they shall see just cause. And be it further
Enacted, That all Power and Authority formerly vested in any Committee within
the said Counties or any of them, for the placing of Ministers in
Ecclesiastical Livings or Promotions, be from henceforth determined: And that
no person or persons shall be from henceforth vested and settled in any Rectory,
Vicarage or Ecclesiastical Promotion within any of the said Counties, unless
such person or persons so to be vested or settled, be recommended and approved
of for the work of the Ministry, according to the tenor and true meaning of
this Act: And that this Act shall continue and be in force for the space of
Three years, from the Five and twentieth day of March, One thousand six hundred
and fifty, and no longer.

Die Veneris, 22 Februarii, 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


