AN ACT For suppressing The Detestable SINS OF Incest, Adultery and Fornication.

blazon of the Commonwealth

Die Veneris, Decimo Maii, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1650.

AN ACT For Suppressing The detestable Sins OF Incest, Adultery and Fornication.
FOr the suppressing of the abominable and crying sins of Incest, Adultery and
Fornication, wherewith this Land is much defiled, and Almighty God highly
displeased; Be it Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That if
any person or persons whatsoever, shall from and after the Four and twentieth
day of June, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and fifty, Marry,
or have the carnal knowledge of the Body of his or her Grandfather or
Grandmother, Father or Mother, Brother or Sister, Son or Daughter, or
Grandchilde, Fathers Brother or Sister, Mothers Brother or Sister, Fathers
Wife, Mothers Husband, Sons Wife, Daughters Husband, Wives Mother or Daughter,
Husbands Father or Son; all and every such Offenses are hereby adjudged and
declared Incest: And every such Offense shall be, and is hereby adjudged
Felony; and every person offending therein, and confessing the same, or being
thereof convicted by verdict upon Indictment or Presentment, before any Judge
or Justices at the Assize or Sessions of the Peace, shall suffer death as in
case of Felony, without benefit of Clergy: And all and every such Marriage and
Marriages are hereby declared and adjudged to be void in Law, to all intents
and purposes; and the Children begotten between such persons, notwithstanding
any contract or solemnization of Marriage, to be illegitimate, and altogether
disabled to claim or inherit any Lands or Inheritance whatsoever, by way of
descent from, or to receive or challenge any Childs Portion in any Goods or
Chattels of their said Parents, or any other Ancestors of such Parents. And be
it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That in case any married woman
shall from and after the Four and twentieth day of June aforesaid, be carnally
known by any man (other then her Husband) (except in Case of Ravishment) and of
such offense or offenses shall be convicted as aforesaid by confession or
otherwise, every such Offense and Offenses shall be and is hereby adjudged
Felony; and every person, as well the man as the woman offending therein, and
confessing the same, or being thereof convicted by verdict upon Indictment or
Presentment as aforesaid, shall suffer death as in case of Felony, without
benefit of Clergy. Provided, That this shall not extend to any man who at the
time of such offense committed, is not knowing that such woman with whom such
Offense is committed is then married. Provided also, That the said penalty in
the case of Adultery aforesaid, shall not extend to any woman whose Husband
shall be continually remaining beyond the Seas by the space of three years, or
shall by common fame be reputed to be dead; nor to any woman whose husband
shall absent himself from his said wife by the space of three years together,
in any parts or places whatsoever, so as the said wife shall not know her said
husband to be living within that time. And be it further Enacted by the
authority aforesaid, That if any man shall from and after the Four and
twentieth day of June aforesaid, have the carnal knowledge of the body of any
Virgin, unmarried woman or widow, every such man so offending, and confessing
the same, or being thereof convicted by verdict upon Indictment or Presentment,
as also every such woman so offending, and confessing the same, or being
thereof convict as aforesaid, shall for every such offense be committed to the
common Goal, without Bail or Mainprize, there to continue for the space of
three Months; and until he and she respectively shall give security, to be
taken by one or more Justice or Justices of the Peace before whom such
Confession or Conviction shall be had, to be of the good behavior for the space
of one whole year then next ensuing. And be it further Enacted by the authority
aforesaid, That all and every person and persons who shall from and after the
Four and twentieth day of June aforesaid, be convicted as aforesaid, by
Confession or otherwise, for being a common Bawd, be it man or woman, or
wittingly keeping a common Brothel or Bawdy House, shall for his or her first
offense be openly whipped and set in the Pillory, and there marked with a hot
Iron in the forehead with the Letter B. and afterward committed to Prison or
the House of Correction, there to work for his or her living for the space of
three years, without Bail or Mainprize, and until he or she shall put in
sufficient Sureties for his or her good behavior during his or her life: And if
any person by confession or otherwise shall be convicted of committing, after
such Conviction, any of the said last recited offenses, every such second
offense shall be, and is hereby adjudged Felony; and the person and persons so
offending shall suffer death, as in case of Felony, without benefit of Clergy.
And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Justices of
Assize in their respective Circuits, and the Justices of Peace in every county,
at their usual and General Sessions, are hereby authorized and required to give
in charge to the Grand Jury to enquire of all and every the Crimes aforesaid:
And the said Justices of Assize, Justices of the Peace in their General
Sessions, and all and every Major and Justices of Peace of any City, Borough or
Town Corporate, that have power to hear and determine Felonies at their usual
Sessions, shall have full power and authority to enquire by verdict of twelve
or more good and lawful men, within the said respective Counties and places
aforesaid, of all and every the crimes and offenses aforesaid; and upon
Indictment or Presentment, to hear and determine the same, as in other cases of
Felony or Trespass, Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.
Provided, That no Attainder for any offense made Felony by this Act, shall make
or work any corruption of Blood, loss of Dower, forfeiture of Goods,
disinherison of Heir or Heirs. Provided also, That no person or persons shall
incur any of the penalties in this Act mentioned, unless the said person or
persons be thereof indicted within twelve Months after the offense committed.
Provided also, That it shall be lawful for any person or persons who shall be
indicted for any the offenses aforesaid, to produce at their respective Trials
any witness or witnesses, for the clearing of themselves from the said offenses
whereof they shall be so indicted: And the Justices before whom such Trial
shall be so had, shall have power, and are hereby authorized to examine the
said witnesses upon Oath. Provided, That no parties confession shall be taken
as Evidence within this Act against any other, but only against such party so
confessing; nor the husband shall be taken as a witness against his wife, nor
the wife against her husband, for any offense punishable by this Act.

Die Veneris, decimo Maii, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


