AN ACT For preventing Injuries and Wrongs done to MERCHANTS at Sea, In their
Persons, Ships or Goods; And prohibiting Mariners from serving under Foreign
Princes or States without License.

seal of the Commonwealth

Die Sabbathi, 13o Aprilis, 1650.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1650.

AN ACT For preventing Injuries and Wrongs done to Merchants at Sea, In their
Persons, Ships or Goods, And prohibiting Mariners from serving under Foreign
Princes or States without License.
Whereas since the late Act made the Five and twentieth of June, One thousand
six hundred forty nine, (entitled, An Act touching Letters of Mart) The
Parliament having received Information, That diverse French Ships, and others of
Foreign Nations, have taken upon them de facto, to visit the said English
Ships, and to make search what goods they carried, and under color thereof,
have spoiled diverse of their Ships, and seized others, and committed several
wrongs and abuses, to the great damage of the good People of this Commonwealth;
For remedy whereof, and for the better enabling the Merchants to preserve their
Ships and Goods against such Wrongs and Injuries for the future, Be it Enacted
and Ordained by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That
the Council of State for the time being, established by Parliament, shall have
full and absolute power, and are hereby authorized and enabled, not only to
hear and examine all Petitions and Complaints of this nature; and thereupon,
and upon consideration of the circumstances of the case, and observations of
such solemnities specified in the said former Act of the Five and twentieth of
June, to grant and give Warrant for special and particular Letters of Mart to
the parties injured and damnified in this kind, in such sort and manner as they
are enabled to grant in any other case by that said former Act; But also to
grant and give Warrant for, and cause to be issued out under the Seal of the
Court of Admiralty, in the Name of the Keepers of the Liberty of England,
established by Parliament, special and particular Commissions to all or any
such Merchants Ships, or, other English Ships, as the said Council of State
shall find meet, to enable them and give them free License and Authority, not
only to deny and make defense against any such visitation or commands, to be
visited by any such French or other Foreign Ships for the time to come; but
also as they may find opportunity to fight with, surprise and take all and
every such French Ships or Vessels, and other Foreign Ships (together with all
the Ordnance, Ammunition, Tackle, Furniture, Goods, Wares and Merchandises
found in or belonging to the same) that shall so require or command them to be
visited, or attempt to spoil, annoy, molest, disturb or hinder them in their
trading or merchandising voyages, under color of such undue visitation.
Provided always, That if they shall happen so to surprise or take any such
French Ships or Foreign Vessels as aforesaid, That after the said Surprizal
and Fight ended, they shall not kill or slay any of the persons therein taken,
nor commit any manslaughter in cold blood, but shall use them civilly, only
restraining and detaining them as Prisoners (if they may without prejudice to
their Ship or their voyages) to be sent over into England, to be proceeded
against or disposed of as the Council of State shall advise; otherwise if they
shall find it hazardous or damageable so to do, Then to set them on shore
where they may have opportunity, so always that they retain three at the least
of the principal that shall be taken to be brought or sent into England, and
examined in the Admiralty Court, upon all such questions as shall in that Court
be thought fit, for the discovering the truth of the matter, how and in what
sort the said Foreign Ships did first require or attempt to fight with the
English, or command them to suffer themselves to be visited, or what other
injuries or abuses they offered them, with all other circumstances requisite in
the case. And provided further, That the Takers shall be obliged to proceed in
the Court of Admiralty of England, against all Ships and Goods so taken, and
bring the same to Judgment, according to the course of that Court; and if it
shall be duly proved and made appear, that they were taken by reason of their
undue commitment of any of the particulars before recited, mentioned and
provided against in and by this Act, That then and in that case, the Judges of
the said Court shall give Judgment that the same were lawfully taken, and that
the same were and are lawful Prizes to the Owners and Captain, or Master and
Mariners of the Ship or Ships, takers whereof; two thirds to be to the Owners
in respect of their extraordinary charge to Arm and Man their Ships in an
extraordinary manner for this occasion; and the other third to be to the Master
and Mariners, to be shared amongst them according to custom of the Sea in such
case. Provided also, That the Tenths of all such Prizes, or the true and full
value thereof without deduction, shall be duly paid to the Collectors of
Prize-Goods, to be disposed of by the Council of State as they shall see cause,
for the use of the Commonwealth. And provided further, That for every such
Commission before the same issue forth under the Seal, security shall be taken
with Securities by Recognizance in the Admiralty Court in the sum of Two
thousand pounds, not to harm or prejudice the Merchants or good People of this
Commonwealth, or any of the Friends or Allies of this Nation, in any other case
then in the cases before recited, mentioned and provided against in and by this
Act; and likewise to observe and follow all such other Clauses, Instructions
and things, as the Council of State shall at the time of giving Warrant for any
such Commission think meet, and order or appoint. And whereas diverse English
Mariners and Seamen, have of late time served in the Ships of Foreign
Princes, and in Foreign Vessels (contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this
Nation) and therein done dis-service to and against the English Merchants; Be
it Enacted, That all English Mariners and Seamen, that are now serving abroad
in the Service of any Foreign Prince or State, shall within the space of four
Months next ensuing, withdraw themselves from such Foreign Service, and
repair home to serve the Commonwealth of England according to their duty, under
pain to be severely punished: And to the end that no English Ship, either
Merchants or other, may be hereafter lost, taken or yielded up by the treachery
or cowardice of any Mariner, or other aboard the said Ship; Be it also Enacted
by the authority aforesaid, That if any Captain, Master or Commander of any
English Ship, shall from henceforth through falsehood, or any other ground or
reason, neglect to do his duty in defense of the Ship wherein he is Master or
Commander; or if any Mariner, or other person whatsoever aboard any such Ship,
shall treacherously offer to cry for Quarter, or to yield up the said Ship,
without the special order of the said Captain, Master or Commander in Chief, or
shall dishearten any of the rest of the Mariners, or refuse to stand to his
Arms in time of fight or danger, That in every such case, the Offender or
Offenders being duly tried and proved to be guilty, shall incur and suffer the
pains of death, or such other punishment as the nature or quality of the
Offense shall deserve: And if any English Mariners and Seamen, shall from and
after the passing of this Act depart out of England, and enter into any
Foreign Service (without special License first obtained) that every such
Offense shall be punished with death. Provided, That the penalties in this Act
contained, prohibiting Mariners to be entertained in the Service of Foreign
Princes, shall not extend to Mariners serving in English Ships, under English
Commanders, entertained in the Service of such Foreign States in the way of
Merchandise, as are in Amity with this Commonwealth. And whereas diverse guilty
persons, subject to the ancient Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, there to be
tried and punished for their criminal Offenses, have lately committed foul
misdemeanors upon the Sea, and in Ships and otherwise, giving out, That the
Criminal part of the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court was taken away by a
late Act of Parliament, made the Twentieth of September, One thousand six
hundred forty nine (entitled, An Act for punishment of Crimes committed upon
or beyond the Seas) and that therefore they hoped to avoid such punishment as
was due unto them, whereas the Parliament did not intend by the said Act, nor
any Clause therein, to abridge or diminish (much less to take away) the Power
or Jurisdiction of the Admiralty in Criminal causes; Be it therefore Declared
and Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That
the Council of State in whom the power of the Admiralty is placed, and the
Court of Admiralty and Judges thereof, and all and every of them, shall and may
hear, order and determine all and all manner of Crimes, Contempts, Misdemeanors
and Offenses whatsoever, done or committed, or to be had, done or committed
within or against the Precincts and Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, as fully,
freely and entirely as they or any of them might have done before the making of
the said Act of the Twentieth of September, and in as large and ample manner as
if that Act had never been made; and that Commissions of Oyer and Terminer
shall issue out under the Great Seal, directed to the Judges of the Admiralty,
and other discreet persons, for the trial of Maritine Offenders, as by the Laws
and Customs was formerly used in the Admiralty.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


