AN ACT FOR THE Punishment of Crimes Committed upon, or beyond the SEAS.

seal of the Commonwealth

Die Jovis, 20 Septembr. 1649.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament'.

London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of
England: and are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet, at the Sign of the
Golden-Dragon, near the Inner Temple, 1649.

AN ACT FOR THE Punishment of Crimes Committed upon, or beyond the SEAS.
FOr the more convenient and speedy punishment of Crimes and Offenses done and
committed, and hereefter to be done and committed upon and beyond the Sea, The
Parliament of England now assembled do Enact and Declare, and be it Enacted and
Declared by Authority of the same, That all such Treasons, Felonies, Piracies,
Robberies, Murderers and Confederacies thereof, which have been at any time
since the Five and twentieth day of MARCH, in the year of our Lord, 1646.
committed, or hereafter shall be committed in or upon the Sea, or in any Haven,
River, Creek or place, where the Admiral or Admirals had, have, or pretend to
have Power, Authority or Jurisdiction; and all stealing, or taking, or
treacherous carrying away of any Ship, Barque or Boat, Ordnance or Ammunition
(appointed for the public Service of the State, or for any private benefit of
the Owners) from such places and employment, and without lawful warrant and
authority from the public State, or such private persons respectively thereto
first had and obtained; And all Murders and Manslaughters committed by any of
the Natural Leighs of this Nation, upon or against any of the good people of
the same in any the Foreign parts wheresoever (upon any matter, cause or
occasion originally beginning within this Land, during such time as such
persons had their abode within the same) shall be henceforth enquireable,
triable and determinable before the Judges and Justices of Oyer and Terminer,
and of Jail-delivery in the several and respective Shires and Limits of their
Commissions, where any such offenders shall be found: And the said Judges and
Justices by virtue hereof, and of the several Commissions of Oyer, Terminer,
and Jail-delivery to them directed, shall give the same in charge at such time
as they shall hold their Sessions by virtue of such Commissions; And shall have
full power and authority to enquire of all the Crimes and Offenses aforesaid,
and of every of them, by the Oaths of twelve good and lawful men, Inhabitants
in the Shire limited in their Commission, in such like manner and form, as if
such Crimes and Offenses had been committed upon the Land within the same
Shire. And if any person or persons (not formerly disposed of, or otherwise
ordered by the Parliament or the Council of State) shall be indicted for such
Crime, Offense or Offenses done, or hereafter to be done upon the Seas, or in
any other place above-limited, That then such Order, Process and manner of
proceedings shall be used, had, made and done, to and against such person and
persons so being indicted, as is used by the course of the Law of this Land,
and as if the said Crime and Offense, or Crimes and Offenses had been committed
or done upon the Land; and that the trial of all and every the Crimes and
Offenses beforementioned in this Act, if the offense be denied by the offender
or offenders, shall be had by twelve lawful men, inhabiting in the Shire or
Shires limited within such Commission or Commissions, which shall be directed as
aforesaid; and no challenge or challenges to be had for the Hundred: And such
person or persons so found guilty of any Crime or Crimes aforesaid, by Verdict,
Confession or Process, shall without allowance of benefit of Clergy, suffer such
punishment by pains of Death, and loss of Lands and Goods, as in other cases of
Treason, Murder, Manslaughter, Robbery, or other Felony done upon the Land is
used. And for the better bringing of such persons to due pubishment, Be it
Enacted, and by authority of this present Parliament it is further Enacted,
That as often as any person or persons suspected to be guilty of the Crime or
Crimes, and offenses aforesaid, shall be brought before any Justice or Justices
of the Peace, or other chief officer or officers of such place or county, the
said Justice and Justices, chief officer or officers shall take examinations of
witnesses in writing upon oath (which hereby they are and shall be enabled to
administer) and information of all or so many of the principal persons that
shall be so brought before them by warrant of the said Justice or Justices,
Officer or Officers or otherwise, and of such persons as shall bring such
offender or offenders before them, as he or they shall think meet and
convenient, to discover the particular matter or matters in fact; and after
such Examinations and Informations had and made, shall commit the said offender
or offenders in safe custody to the Goal of the said place or County, if he or
they shall see just cause; and shall send a transcript of all the said
Examinations and Informations so taken, under his or their Hand and Seal,
enclosed under Seal to the Council of State, who are hereby authorized and
enabled to dispose of the said offender or offenders, or so many of them as
they shall think meet, and send their directions concerning the same unto the
Justices or chief Officers of the place aforesaid, who are hereby likewise
authorized and enjoined to conform themselves unto such Directions; and to some
such offender or offenders, not otherwise disposed of as aforesaid, unto the
next Sessions of Jail-delivery, or Oyer and Terminer for the Shire, to be
proceeded against according to his or their Crime or Crimes: And for the
maintenance of such person or persons so taken and imprisoned as aforesaid, or
so many of them as are not able to maintain him or themselves, during his or
their Imprisonment, It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That he
or they shall be maintained as other prisoners not able to maintain themselves,
at the charge of such Shire where they are in prison, by allowance out of the
public Treasury of that Shire, for the prisoners of the Upper Bench and
Marshalsey; and the said allowance shall be made by the Justices of the Peace
at their Quarter Sessions to be holden for the said Shire. And it is further
Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That in all cases where such
person or persons shall be committed to safe custody as aforesaid, the Keepers
of the respective Goals or Prisons shall receive such person or persons to them
committed, and them hold in safe custody, and shall not suffer them to go at
large, unless they shall be discharged from Imprisonment by the Order and
Direction of the Parliament or Council of State, or legal trial as aforesaid:
And in case the Keeper or Keepers of such respective Goals, shall suffer such
persons after such commitment to make any escape, in such manner that they shall
not have such persons before the said Judges or Justices at the next Sessions
of Jail-delivery, or Oyer and Terminer for the Shire, the said Keepers of such
Goal or Goals shall be proceeded against by Indictment, and suffer punishment,
as in other cases of escapes of Felons by the Law they ought to suffer. And it
is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all cases aforesaid,
Commissions of Oyer and Terminer shall be issued forth by the Lords
Commissioners of the Great Seal, so often as by the Council of State shall be
thought meet, and according to their Directions, as touching the places and
limits of such Commissions.

Die Jovis, 20 Septembr. 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


