AN ACT For the present examining and stating the ACCOUNTS OF THE Officers and
Soldiers NOW In the Parliaments Service within this Nation.

Anglo-Irish Protectorate blazon or coat of arms

Die Lunae, 28 Maii, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament'.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet, at the Sign of the
Golden-Dragon, near the Inner Temple, May 31. 1649.

AN ACT FOR The present Examining and Stating the Accounts of the Officers and
Soldiers now in the Parliaments service within this NATION.
THe Commons of England assembled in Parliament, taking into consideration the
Arrears of pay to Officers and Soldiers now in their service in this Nation,
within the Establishment for England or Ireland, due for their service in any
Army, or Garrison, or under any General or Commander in the service of the
Parliament within this Nation (other then in the late new Model under the now
Lord Fairfax) and being resolved to have their Accounts for such services
forthwith examined and stated, and Debenters, with visible security given for
such Arrears (as well as for those under the said new Model, which are already
provided for;) and considering, That the said Officers and Soldiers, being many
of them engaged for the service of Ireland, and the rest attending daily
service within this Nation, cannot without prejudice to the public, leave
their Charges or Colors, to prosecute and perfect severally the stating of
their accounts before the Committees or Commissioners authorized for stating
the Accounts of the Soldiery; and also considering the delay that would be to
the dispatch thereof in any other way then as hereafter follows, Do therefore
enact and ordain, and be it Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament,
and by authority thereof, That the Accounts of the said Officers and Soldiers,
for any such Arrears as aforesaid (not stated and certified heretofore by Order
or Direction of Parliament) shall be forthwith taken, examined, stated and
certified by the several persons, and in the manner and form hereafter
expressed; that is to say, For the Forces formed in Regiments; the Field
Officers of the respective Regiments, or any one of them, with the respective
Captains, or chief Officers present of their several Troops or Companies, shall
take, examine, and state the said Accounts, and certify the said Arrears of
the inferior Officers and Soldiers of the several Troops or Companies under
them respectively; and for the Captains, or present chief Officers of the
several Troops and Companies, and the Staff-Officers of such of the said
Regiments as are designed, and do engage to go for Ireland, the respective
Field-Officers, or any two of them, shall take, examine, and state their
Accounts, and certify their said Arrears; and the Colonels shall do the like
for the Field-Officers under them of their respective Regiments: And for such
Officers, and others of the Train of Artillery as go for Ireland, the
Lieutenant General, and Comptroller of the Train, shall examine and state their
said accounts, and certify their said arrears; and for such of the General
Officers and Staff-Officers of the Army as go for Ireland, the Lord General, or
such other persons as he shall appoint and entrust for that purpose, shall
examine and state their said accounts, and the Lord General shall certify
their said arrears; But for such of the said Forces as go not for Ireland, the
said accounts of all the Captains, or present chief Officers of the several
Troops and Companies, and of the Field and Staff-officers of the several
Regiments, as also of the Train-Officers, and the General Officers, and
Staff-officers of the Army, and also the accounts of the Colonels of those
Regiments that go for Ireland, shall be taken, examined and stated, and
Debenters shall be given them for their said arrears by the Committee for the
Army, or by such other persons as are or shall be by them, or otherwise by
authority of Parliament appointed thereunto. And for the more certain and
effectual performance of this work, Be it further Enacted by the authority
aforesaid, That every person claiming any such arrears as aforesaid, and
desiring to have his accounts stated, and certified for the same, shall produce
for every such arrear so claimed respectively, a certificate under the Hand and
Seal of his Captain or Lieutenant, or some other Commission-Officer superior to
himself, or (in case of Service in particular Counties) then under the hands of
two or more of that Committee, under whom he pretends such arrear became due
respectively; expressing in what Troop or Company, and of what Regiment, or in
what Garrison or Counties, and for what space of time, and in what year or years
of our Lord such his Service was, and to the best of their knowledge what pay
he received for the same, or what remained due to him in arrear at his
discharge; and also shall make Oath, that he has not used, nor is privy to any
fraud, deceit, or indirect dealing, in or for the framing or procuring of such
certificate, and that to the best of his knowledge such Certificate is true and
just; and that he has not otherwise had his Accounts stated, or any Debenter
given before for the same Arrear so claimed, other then what he shall then
produce, acknowledge and deliver in to the said Officers; and he shall also
upon the same Oath, discover whether he or any other for him to his knowledge,
has at any time received any moneys, or any thing else since his discharge
from that service, toward satisfaction of the Arrears claimed thereupon, and
how much has been so received; and in the same Oath he shall also discover,
whether he has at any time received any other money or goods, for or under
pretense of the public service, for which to his best knowledge or
remembrance he ought to be, and yet remains accomptable to the State, and for
such money or goods (if he has not already accounted) he shall then discharge
himself by a true account; to the truth of which account, he shall make oath in
such form as hereafter follows; viz.

I A. B. do swear, That the Account by me given in at this time, is true and
just, to the best of my knowledge and remembrance, and that therein I have not
wittingly concealed any money or goods, which to my best remembrance I have
received or taken for the use of the Parliament or Commonwealth, for which I am
justly accompatble to the State; neither have I to my best remembrance wilfully
imbezelled, or to my private use or benefit, converted any such money or goods
received by me for the use of the public, and for which I stand accomptable
as aforesaid, other then such, or to such value as I have charged my self with
in my said Account. So help me God.

And such certificates, together with such oaths of the parties producing the
same, and claiming arrears thereupon as aforesaid, shall be a sufficient ground
for the Officers and others authorized as aforesaid, to proceed upon in the
stating of all and every the said accounts respectively, and in the certifying
of the arrears thereupon as is hereafter directed: And because it may possibly
fall out in some cases, That such certificates as aforesaid cannot be had or
produced, by reason of the death of some, or refusal of other Officers from
whom such certificates should be had, or by their being disabled to make such
Certificates, either through their defection from the Parliaments Cause, or
their departure and absence out of the Land, or else by reason of the loss of
Muster-Rolls or Certificates through the many casualties of War; in such cases
the Field-Officers, and others entrusted with the stating of accounts as
aforesaid respectively, after strict enquiry into the truth of the matter, and
taking the Oath of the party concerned, that his case is such; and after
examination of him, or any other upon Oath, to what other circumstances they
shall think fit to satisfy themselves, that the case is such, shall or may
admit the Oath of the party, and (if he be engaged for Ireland) of one witness,
or otherwise of two lawful witnesses, taken either before the said Officers
themselves, or before any Justice of Peace or Committee, and from him or them
certified concerning the time of such parties Service in any Garrison or other
Army then the said new Model; and concerning the arrear due to him for the
same, as a sufficient evidence to proceed upon, and state his accounts, and
certify his arrears for the same, the party himself making Oath also to such
other questions and things concerning the truth of his account, as is before in
other cases directed; and for the better discovery of the truth in or
concerning any such accounts as aforesaid, the said Field-officers, and others
entrusted in this service, are hereby authorized, to administer an Oath or
Oaths to all and every person and persons, with whom they shall have to do, in
relation to the stating of any the accounts in all such cases, and concerning
such matters or things where any Oath is required or directed as aforesaid: and
all Officers of War, Muster masters, Secretaries, Auditors, Treasurers,
accomptants, and other persons whatsoever, that now have, or formerly had
relation to the affairs of the late Wars, are hereby required, upon request of
any Officer or Soldier concerned, and addressing himself to them, or upon
request under the hand of any the Field-Officers or others entrusted as
aforesaid, shall testify under their Hands and Seals according to their best
knowledge, any thing within their cognizance that may further or conduce to the
better ascertaining of the said accounts, or any of them. And it is further
Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That after the said accounts, or any of
them so taken and examined as aforesaid, the respective Field-officers, and
others entrusted therewith, shall state the said accounts severally, making
deductions for what the respective accounts shall appear to be chargeable with,
toward satisfaction of the seveal arrears so claimed; and also defalkation for
Free Quarter, according to the Instructions prescribed by Ordinance of
Parliament, bearing date the 24 of December, 1647. and shall thereupon make
computation of what remains in arrear to any such Officer or Soldier, for any
such service as aforesaid, severally; and upon and according to the accounts so
stated, shall make a list or lists of the names of the several Officers and
Soldiers, whose accounts they have so stated; viz. One list of such as were in
actual service in the same Troop or Company, at the time of disbanding
Supernumeraries in the year 1647. another of such as were in service at the
same time, in any other Troop or Company (if there be any such) expressing in
what Troop, or Company and Regiment any of them then were; and another list of
such as were not in actual service at that time, but now are (if any such be)
and in each list expressing upon every man's name, for the arrear of every or
any such service, claimed as aforesaid severally, what Army or Garrison, and in
whose Troop or Company, and of what Regiment (if it were in Regiment) and in
what capacity, and for what space of time, and in what year or years of our
Lord such service was in, the sum of pay due for the same, what pay he received
in that service before his discharge, what other deductions are to be made for
Free Quarter, or otherwise, and what clear arrear remains due thereupon
respectively; and the list or lists so made, shall certify under their hands
and seals, and the same sealed up together; as also the several Certificates,
Accounts, Oaths, Examinations, and other Evidences whereupon the same were
grounded (being filed together in order, and sealed up) shall return and send
by the hands of some Commission-Officer or Officers under their respective
commands, unto the Committee for the Army, or else to such other Committee,
Commissioners or Trustees, as before return of the said lists and accounts
shall by authority of Parliament be appointed and entrusted to receive the
same; who according to the Computations in the said lists (looking into them,
that they be not mistaken, and that the defalkations for Free Quarter be duly
made, according to the said Instructions) shall give Debenters for the said
clear Arrears to every such Officer and Soldier respectively (in such form as
the Committee for the Army have used for others, or as by the authority
aforesaid shall before the said returns be further appointed) which shall be
good in Law, as Obligations of the Commonwealth, and be satisfied out of the
securities assigned, or to be further settled for the same by the Parliament.
Provided always, that no Officer or Soldier who has been cashiered by sentence
of a Court of War, and was by such sentence to lose his Arrears, shall have any
benefit by this Act, or of any security given for such Arrears. Provided also,
That none who have deserted their Colors in that Service for which they claim
any such arrear, without license and due discharge from some Commission-Officer
under whom they served respectively, shall have any benefit of this Act, or of
any security as to the Arrears claimed in that particular Service. And it is
also Provided and Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That no Officer or
Soldier whatsoever, who have revolted from the Parliament, and turned to the
Enemy, or after any disbanding or discharge from the Parliaments Service, went
to serve the Enemy against the Parliament, shall have any benefit of this Act,
or of any security at all for any their arrears, but shall wholly lose the
same. Provided also, That no Certificate from any officer that has been
cashiered for false Musters, Plundering the Country, or any Cozenage to the
State, or that has revolted from the Parliament, and engaged in the Enemies
Service after he had served the Parliament, shall be accepted as sufficient
evidence for any Arrear claimed thereupon, unless the certificate were made
before such cashiering or revolt. Provided also, and it is further enacted,
That if any Officer or Soldier shall make, procure, or wittingly produce a
false certificate or Oath concerning his service or arrears in the stating
thereof as aforesaid, to the prejudice of the Commonwealth, upon discovery and
due conviction thereof, every such offender shall not only forfeit all his
arrears (if any remain due to him at the time of the discovery) but shall also
be liable to imprisonment and sequestration of his Estate, to the use of the
Commonwealth. Provided also, That the accounts for the Officers and Soldiers of
such Forces as are now in Garrison, and were not part of the marching Army in
the said new Model; and also the accounts of such other Forces not in Garrison,
as were raised and employed by any Committee, for the service of particular
Counties, and not taken into the general Establishment before the fifteenth of
January, 1647. shall (for their service before their taking into the general
Establishment) be audited, stated and certified as aforesaid, by the Committees
of the several counties wherein such Garrisons lie, or for the service whereof
such Forces were first raised respectively, as by the Parliament has been
formerly appointed, and not by their Officers, as in this Act is provided,
except such of the said Forces as are now appointed and do engage for Ireland,
whose accounts shall be stated and certified by their respective Officers as
before in this Act is directed. Provided also, That no accounts of any the
Forces aforesaid within the establishment made in the year 1647. for any
arrears growing due since the 15th of January, 1647. or since their taking into
the said establishment, shall be otherwise stated or certified then by the
Committee for the Army, or such as they shall entrust and employ, who are
likewise to state all accounts, and certify all arrears for Service within the
said new Model before the said Fifteenth of January, One thousand six hundred
forty seven.

Die Lunae, 28 Maii, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric' Parliament'


