AN ACT For making Ships and Merchandises Taken, or to be taken from The KING
of PORTVGAL Or any of His SUBJECTS, TO BE PRIZE.

seal of the Commonwealth

Die Veneris, 8 Novembr. 1650.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1650.

AN ACT For making Ships and Merchandises Taken, or to be taken from the KING
OF PORTUGAL Or any of His SUBJECTS, TO BE PRIZE.
WHereas the Parliament of England did lately send forth a Fleet to Lisbone, in
pursuit of Prince Rupert and his Adherents, for Reducing of the Revolted Ships
(part of the Navy of this Commonwealth) which the Adherents of the said Rupert
Treacherously ran away with in the year One thousand six hundred forty eight,
and after many Robberies and Piracies by them committed at Sea, put into the
Harbor of Lisbone, belonging to the King of Portugal, for safeguard and
protection.

And whereas upon the arrival of the Parliaments Fleet before Lisbone,
Application was made by the General thereof to the King of Portugal, and
liberty desired, That they might assail Prince Rupert, and the said Revolted
Ships, in the said Port; who denied to condescend thereunto, and professed to
maintain that Port and Territory as Neutral, and a place of Safety to both
parties: Notwithstanding which, several Barbarous Murders have been committed
by the said Rupert and his Associates, upon diverse of the Parliaments Fleet
whom they met on the Shore in the said Harbor, and Imprisonment enjoined to
others there, for their good affection to this State; besides diverse Spoils and
Horrible Offenses perpetrated by the said Revolted Fleet: For all which, no
Justice has been executed upon any the Offenders, though often Represented and
Demanded of the said King and his Ministers, in the Name of this Commonwealth,
according to the Law of Nations, to the great Loss and Damage of this
Commonwealth: The Parliament thereupon finding, That (by the Law of Nations)
there did justly lie Reprisals against the King of Portugal and his Subjects,
and their Ships and Goods, for Recovery of the Damages sustained by this State,
Did empower the Council of State to Grant Letters of Reprisal against the
Portugals, and their Ships and Goods, on behalf of this Commonwealth; By virtue
whereof diverse Ships have since been taken, having Goods therein belonging to
Portugals: Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and
by the Authority of the same, That all Ships, Vessels, Tackle, Ordnance,
Ammunition, Wares, Merchandises or Goods whatsoever, belonging to the King of
Portugal or any of his Subjects, which are or shall be seized, surprised or
taken by all or any part of the Fleet or Ships in the Service or Pay of the
Commonwealth, or by virtue of Reprisals granted against the said Portugals,
shall be proceeded against according to the course of Justice, in the Admiralty
Court, and brought to Trial and Judgment there: And the Judges of that Court
shall be, and are hereby Enabled to take full Cognizance thereof, and of all
the Dependances thereupon, and of all the Cocquets, Books, Bills of Lading,
Commissions, Letters and Writings found aboard such Ships and Vessels; and upon
due Examination and Proof to be made or exhibited before them (a^^ording to the
course used touching Prizes) That the said Ships and Goods are of the
Portugals, or do belong to, or Consigned for the Account of the said King of
Portugal or his Subjects, or any of them; and upon observation of what is
Required by the Law of Nations therein, to proceed to Sentence and
Adjudication, and Condemn the same to be good and lawful Prize, and shall be
disposed of as in and by this Act is hereafter limited and appointed.

And whereas many Merchants and other persons have had their Goods and Effects
seized upon, and diverse have been Imprisoned by the King of Portugal and his
Ministers, for their Duty and Faithfulness to this Commonwealth; The Parliament
taking the same likewise into Consideration, do think fit, That some Reparation
be made unto them for such their Losses and Sufferings, and do further Enact
and Ordain, That the neat Proceed of all the Portugal Ships and Goods, that are
or shall be seized and adjudged in pursuance of the said Reprisals, and of this
Act (after all incident Charges of Condemnation, Taking up, and Sale of the
said Prizes, together with the Tenths, and Salary of the Collectors for Prize
Goods, which from henceforth is to be only Three pence in the pound, are
deducted) shall be divided into six equal parts, Three six parts thereof to the
Use of the Commonwealth, toward Satisfaction of their great Charges and
Damages sustained as aforesaid, to be employed for the Use of the Navy; One
other sixth part to the Use of the Mariners, who have been or shall be employed
in the taking of any of the said Reprisal Ships ^r Goods (where no Imbezlement
has or shall be made) and the two remaining Sixth parts to be distributed to,
and amongst such faithful and well-affected People of this Commonwealth, whose
Goods and Effects have been so unduly seized, or their persons Imprisoned for
their Duty and Faithfulness to this Commonwealth; which distribution shall be
made and proportioned (as to the parts thereof) in such sort as the Council of
State shall think meet.

Provided always, That no proportion at all shall be allotted, nor distribution
made to any other person, but to such only as shall sufficiently appear to the
Council of State to have faithfully adhered to the Parliament, and to have
been, and so still to continue well-affected to this Commonwealth; and who
shall likewise make it appear by Proof, That they had really and bona Fide
Goods and Effects which have been seized upon by that King or his Ministers, or
their persons Imprisoned since the coming of the Parliament Fleet, and riding
before Lisbone in pursuit of the said Revolters.

Die Veneris, 8 November. 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


