seal of the CommonwealthAN ACT FOR The more frequent Preaching of the Gospel,
and better maintenance of the Ministers in the City of Bristol.
Whereas there are eighteen Parish Churches, besides the Cathedral, within the
City and county of Bristol, which is a number more then sufficient, and the
means for the subsistence of those few Ministers now officiating, depends in
the voluntary Contribution of the People; The Parliament of England having
resolved by all ways and means to promote the preaching of the Gospel, and
taking the premises into consideration, Do Enact and Ordain, and be it Enacted
by authority of Parliament, That it shall be lawful to and for the Major and
Sheriffs of the City of Bristol for the time being, Richard Aldworth, Richard
Vickres, William Came, Luke Hodges, Henry Gibs, Joseph Jackson, Hugh Brown,
Aldermen; Edward Tyson, Robert Aldworth, John Hagget, James Powel, George Heart,
Josias Clutterbuck, William Grig, George Lane, Robert Hains, Jeremy Holwey,
Robert Vickris, Dennis Hollister, George Bishop, Thomas Harris, Citizens and
Burgesses of the same City, or any five or more of them, to unite and
consolidate the said Parishes into fewer number, and the same to certify under
the Hands and Seals of five or more of them into the Chancery; and after such
Certificates had and made of such union and consolidation, the same shall be a
good and sufficient union in Law, to all intents and purposes to continue for
ever. Provided, That after such unions and consolidations, the true and
rightful Patrons shall make their Presentations by turns, the aforesaid persons
or any five or more of them appointing which Patron shall make the first
Presentation unto the Church or Churches unto which the other is united. And be
it further Enacted and Established by the authority aforesaid, That the said
Major, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and the rest of the persons aforenamed, or any five
or more of them, calling to their assistance three able and well-affected
Inhabitants of each Parish, shall have hereby power to tax, rate and assess a
certain sum upon the Rents or true yearly values of all Houses, Shops,
Warehouses, Cellars, Stables, and all other Lands and Tenements whatever within
the said City and Liberties thereof; the said Tax not to exceed One shilling
and six pence per annum in the pound, as the said Houses, Shops, Warehouses,
Cellars, Stables, and all other Tenements are, may or shall be worth to be
yearly Let and Leased; and so for every Ten shillings, Nine pence per annum:
And where any person or persons shall be known to employ a great Stock in
Trade, the said Commissioners or any five or more of them, calling to their
assistance three able and sufficient Inhabitants of that Ward or Parish in
which the person or persons to berated dwells, shall and may, and are hereby
authorized to assess such person or persons for his or their Stock employed as
aforesaid, for every hundred pounds, five shillings; which said Tax shall be
paid by the Landlord or Tenant, or by both, as the aforesaid persons shall
think meet: And if any Inhabitant, Citizen, Landlord, Tenant or Occupier of any
the said premises, shall refuse to pay the aforesaid Tax and Rate, when
quarterly it shall be demanded, That then it shall be lawful either for such
Collector or Collector as shall be appointed by the persons abovenamed under
five Hands and Seals to receive the same, to distrain, and the distress to
fell, retaining the value of the said rate and charge of Distress, and
returning the overplus to the Owner; or otherwise in default of payment within
six days after demand of the said Rate and Tax, each of them shall forfeit the
double value of the said Rate, to be sued for and recovered in an Action of
Debt in the Sheriffs Court within the said City, who by authority of this
present Parliament are hereby enabled, and have power given them to have
Jurisdiction, Conuzance, and to hold Plea in this matter, and cause the said
Action to be commenced and sued by and in the name of the Treasurer as shall be
nominated and appointed by the Major and the rest of the persons aforenamed.
And the said Major, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and the rest of the persons abovenamed
or any five or more of them, are hereby authorized from time to time, by their
warrants directed to the said. Treasurer, to order the payment and issuing out
of all the said sums of money so rated, collected and recovered, to all those
Ministers which are or shall be placed in the aforesaid City, and approved of
by the Parliament, or such as the Parliament shall appoint, in such proportion,
manner and form as they in their discretions shall think fit.

Die Lunae, primo die Aprilis, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London: Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England. 1650.


