AN ACT, With further INSTRUCTIONS TO THE Trustees, Contractors, Treasurers and
Register, For the Sale of the Lands and Possessions of the late Deans,
Subdeans, Deans and Chapters, etc.

AND For the better and more speedy execution of the former Acts, Ordinances
and Instructions made concerning the same.

seal of the Commonwealth

Die Martis, 31 Julii, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament'.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England, and
are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet, at the Sign of the Golden-Dragon,
near the Inner Temple, 1649.

AN ACT, WITH Further Instructions to the Trustees, Contractors, Treasurers and
Register, for the Sale of the Lands and Possessions of the late Deans,
Subdeans, Deans and Chapters, etc.
And for the better and more speedy execution of the former Acts, Ordinances
and Instructions made concerning the same.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the authority of the same,
That all and every person and persons, who by an Act of this Parliament
(Entitled, An Act of the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, for the
Abolishing of Deans, Deans and Chapters, Canons, Prebends, and other Ofces and
Titles, of or belonging to any Cathedral or Collegiate Church or Chapel within
England or Wales) are not disabled to hold or use the Place, Function, Office,
Title or Style of Precenter, or any other Title, Style, Place, Function or
Office, of or belonging to any Cathedral or Collegiate Church or Chapel within
England or Wales, the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and Isles of Guernsey and
Jersey, or any of them, are and be from the Nine and twentieth day of March, in
the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty nine, disabled to hold the
same, or any such Place, Function, Office or Style as aforesaid; And that all
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rectories, Parsonages, Vicarages, Advowsons,
Donations, Nominations, Rights of Patronage and Presentation, Tithes, Parlis,
Commons, Annuities, Rents, Reversions, Services, Courts Leet, Courts Baron, and
other Courts, Franchises, Liberties, Privileges and Immunities, Rights of
Action and Entry, Conditions, and all other possessions and Hereditaments, with
their and every of their appurtenances, of what nature or quality soever they
be, which now are, or at any time within ten years before the beginning of this
present Parliament, of Right were belonging to every or any such Precenter, or
other person or persons aforesaid, and which they or any of them had held or
enjoyed in Right, or by reason of his or their said place, function, office,
title, style or employment respectively; together with all Charters, Deeds,
Court-Rolls, Accounts, Evidences and writings belonging to them or any of them
which concern the same premises, or any of them, shall be, and are hereby
vested and settled, and are hereby adjudged to be, and shall be deemed and taken
to be in the Real and Actual Possession and Seisin of sir John Wollaston
Knight, Thomas Noel, William Hobson, Thomas Arnold, Owen Roe, Stephen Estwick,
Robert Titchborn, George Langham, John Stone, Mark Hildesley, John White,
William Wyberd, Daniel Tailor, William Rolf and Rowland Wilson, Esqs (Trustees
in the said recited Act named) their Heirs and Assigns; and that they the said
Trustees, and the Survivor and Survivors of them, and his and their Heirs and
Assigns, shall from henceforth hold such of the premises (hereby settled and
vested in them) and such of the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments by
the said recited Act vested in the said Trustees and their Heirs, as on the
Eight and twentieth day of March last past were holden of any common person or
persons by the same Tenures, Rents and Services by which the same were then
held; and shall from henceforth hold all the rest of the said Manors and
Premises, as well those which are hereby, as those which by the said recited
Act are vested or settled in the said Trustees and their Heirs, of the Manor of
East-Greenwich in Free and Common Soccage, by Fealty only, and not by any
other tenure or service whatsoever; and that they the said Trustees, and the
survivor and survivors of them, and his and their Heirs, shall from henceforth
stand seized of all the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and other
things hereby, or by the said recited Act, vested in them and their Heirs as
aforesaid (except Rectories, Parsonages, Vicarages, and such other things as in
the said Act are excepted) to the uses, intents and purposes herein and
hereafter declared, and not upon any other trust, nor to any other use, intent
or purpose whatsoever (that is to say) That out of the money which shall be
raised by sale of such of the premises as shall be sold, and out of the Rents,
Revenues, Issues and profits of the premises, which shall grow due before such
sale, the several sums of moneys, which hereby, or by the said Act are, or are
intended to be paid and satisfied; together with all charges to be paid or
born, for or by reason of the execution of the trust in them reposed (and not
otherwise provided for) may be paid and satisfied; and after the same shall be
paid and satisfied, they and the Survivors and Survivor of them, his and their
Heirs shall stand seized of the residue of the premises then remaining
undisposed of, for the use and benefit of the Commonwealth, as by the
Parliament shall be appointed. And it is hereby further Enacted in all things
(not hereby otherwise directed) which concern the premises hereby vested and
settled in the said Trustees and their Heirs, and the Rents, Issues and Profits
thereof, or which have reference thereunto, as in and by the said recited Act,
and such other Acts and Instructions as have been since that made or given, It
is Enacted concerning the Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and other
things by the said first recited Act vested or settled in the said Trustees and
their Heirs, and the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof, or any other thing in
reference thereunto; And that the said Trustees, Contractors, Treasurers and
Register respectively, and all purchasers and others whom it does or shall
concern, shall have the like powers, privileges and authorities in all things,
and are hereby authorized and empowered to have and do all such and the like
acts and things in reference to the premises hereby vested or settled in the
said Trustees and their Heirs, and the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof, in
the like sort as they have or may do by force of the said other Acts and
Instructions in reference to the premises, by the said first recited Act vested
or settled in the said Trustees and their Heirs, and the Rents, Issues and
Profits thereof. And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That
such of the Contractors named in the said first recited Act, who on or before
the First day of December, One thousand six hundred forty and one, in his or
their own right had, and now has, or which before or since, that as Executor
or Administrator to any other, had and now has, any legal term in any of the
premises hereby, or by the said first recited Act vested in the said Trustees
and their Heirs, may purchase the Reversion and Inheritance thereof, without
incurring any of the forfeitures expressed in the said Act; and shall have and
enjoy such and the like benefit, discharges, liberties and advantages in
reference thereunto, as any other Purchaser of any of the premises may, or
ought to have or enjoy, Any thing in said the first recited Art to the contrary
notwithstanding Provided in the cases aforesaid, That the Committee of
Obstructions, or any five or more of them, shall make the Contract according to
the Rules and Values in the first recited Act mentioned: And provided also,
That no Contractor do procure himself to be an Executor or Administrator by
fraud or coven, thereby to obtain an Interest of a Reversion or Reversions to
become a purchaser. And it is hereby further Enacted, That the said Trustees,
Contractors, Treasurers and Registers named in the said first recited Act, and
all other persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, and every of them, shall in
reference to the premises hereby, or by the same first recited Act vested or
settled in the said Trustees and their Heirs, and in all things touching the
same, observe and pursue, and have the benefit of these Instructions following;
(viz.)

I. THat the times formerly limited, and now near elapsed, for bringing in of
the moneys to be doubled upon the credit of the Deans and Chapters Lands, shall
be enlarged, and have continuance unto the last day of August, One thousand six
hundrd forty nine, for all those who live in London, or within twenty miles
distant from the same; and unto the last day of September following, for all
others of this Nation, or resiant therein. II. That all persons, Bodies
Politic and Corporate, whose moneys advanced for the purchase of the Rebels
Lands in Ireland, are admitted to be doubled upon the credit of the said Deans
and Chapters Lands, who have or shall within the times hereby before limited,
double the same, and bring in their moneys, shall have allowance for the same
after the rate of eight pounds per centum per annum, from the time of their
first advance thereof, and shall have their Bills cast up accordingly. III.
That the Receipt or Certificate of the High Sheriffs of the several counties
and cities, who by the Act for the speedy reducing of the Rebels in Ireland,
Were authorized to receive moneys advanced in their respective counties, for
purchase of the said Rebels Lands, and to give Receipts for the same; as
likewise the Receipt or Certificate of the Treasurers at Grocers-hall London,
for moneys advanced and paid in to their Treasury, upon the purchase of the
said Rebels Lands, or any two of them, shall be a warrant to the said Trustees
to admit to double upon, in like manner as the Receipts or Certificates of the
Treasurers of those moneys at Guild Hall, or the Survivor of them, are directed
or intended to be. IV. That all such Merchant strangers, Mariners and others
who advanced Moneys for the relief and preservation of Ireland, and paid the
same into the Chamber of London, in the year One thousand six hundred forty
two, and their assigns bringing unto the said Trustees a Receipt or Certificate
for the same under the hand of the Chamberlain of London, or his Deputy for the
time being, shall be and hereby is admitted to double the same, with the
Interest thereof, upon the credit of the said Deans and Chapters Lands, and
shall have such allowance of Interest, and the like privileges and advantages
as any others admitted to double have or ought to have. V. That all such
persons who raised or furnished any Horse, with or without Furniture, for the
preservation of the City of London, which were listed and valued by Commissary
Thomas Walker, and afterward sent out into the public Service, and there
continued or left, and not returned to the Owners, shall by themselves or their
assigns, upon producing to the said Trustees a certificate thereof under the
Hand of the Colonel or Major of the Regiment, or Captain or other chief Officer
of the Troop wherein the said Horses were abroad in the public service, be
admitted to double the Moneys at which the said Horses and Furniture were
valued by the said Commissary, as Moneys owing upon the public Faith, upon
the credit of the said Deans and Chapters Lands, and shall have such
allowances, privileges and advantages as other persons admitted to doubling
have. VI. That the Register or his Deputy, or any of his Clerks, shall not make
forth any Particular upon any Survey, but upon such only as shall be first
allowed and signed by the Surveyor-General; according to which Surveys so
allowed and signed, particulars shall be made and not otherwise. VII. That the
Contractors or any of them shall not make any Contract upon any particular, but
such only as shall be first signed by the Register, or his sworn Deputy; and
every particular so made and signed, shall be a good and sufficient Warrant to
the Contractors, or any five or more of them to contract upon, for the sale of
all or any of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and other things therein
comprised. VIII. That the Contractors or any five or more of them, after any
such Contract made upon any such particular rated and signed by the Register or
his sworn Deputy, shall thereupon by writing under their Hands, to be
subscribed under such particular, attest that Contract, and make request, and
give Warrant to the Trustees, or any five or more of them, to draw up and seal
Conveyances thereupon to the purchasers; whereupon the Register or his Deputy
(having first entered the same, and all proceedings thereon, shall deliver the
same to the said Trustees or any five or more of them, who are hereby
authorized to make and seal Conveyances accordingly. IX. That the said
Trustees, or any five or more of them, shall from time to time, by writing or
writings under their hands and seals, nominate and appoint such and so many
Receivers as they shall think fit, to receive the Rents, Issues and Profits of
the premises, which by this or the said first recited Act, are vested or settled
in the said Trustees and their Heirs; and from time to time, when and as often as
they shall think fit, remove them or any of them, and nominate and appoint
others in their stead and place; and shall take of every such Receiver, such
security as they shall think fit, for payment into the Treasury, of so much as
from time to time shall be received by every of those Receivers respectively:
And the said Trustees, or any five or more of them, are hereby authorized to
make and give such Allowances to every such Receiver for his service therein,
as shall be allowed of, with the approbation of the Committee of Obstructions,
or any five or more of them, and for payment thereof, and of such Fees and
Allowances as the said Trustees, or any five or more of them are by the first
recited Act authorized to give or make, The said Trustees, or any five or more
of them, are hereby authorized from time to time, to make warrants under their
Hands to the Treasurers, or any two of them, who are hereby required and
authorized, out of the moneys which shall be paid into the Treasury, to pay the
same accordingly: And that the said Trustees, Contractors, Treasurers and
Register, and every of them respectively, and all others whom it may concern,
in relation to the premises, which by this, or by the said first recited Act,
are vested or settled in the said Trustees or their Heirs, shall have the like
powers and authorities, and are in all things not hereby, or by the said first
recited Act, or such other Acts or Instructions as have been since that made,
otherwise directed to proceed in like sort, and to observe the like Rules and
Instructions as the Trustees, Contractors, Treasurers, Register, or other
persons for or concerning the late Bishops Lands, have or may, or might by
force or virtue of any Ordinance of Parliament to have, do or observe in
relation to those Lands.
Die Martis, 31 Julii, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament.


