Votes and Resolutions OF THE PARLIAMENT, Concerning the Encouragement to be
given to MARINERS and SEAMEN In the Service of the Commonwealth.

Wednesday the 22th of December, 1652.

ORdered by the Parliament, That these Votes and Resolutions be Printed.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.

Votes and Resolutions OF THE PARLIAMENT, Concerning the Encouragement to be
given to MARINERS and SEAMEN In the Service of the COMMONWEALTH. Resolved upon
the Question by the Parliament,
THat the Rates and Proportions of Pay set down in the List following, be
allowed to the Officers of the several Ranks of ships therein named, to
commence from and after the First of January next; whereupon the Gratuities
allowed of late years to some Officers in the States Ships are to cease, they
being included in the Rates abovementioned: And that with all convenient speed
the States Ships be distributed into Ranks, and a certain number of Men and
Guns apportioned to the Rank of each Ship, not to be varied but by special
Order from the State.

A LIST, containing the Monthly Wages of all Officers, Seamen and others,
serving in the States ships at sea.
Officers Names. 1 rank 2 rank. 3 rank. 4 rank. 5 rank. 6 rank. l. s. d. l. s.
d. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. A Captain, 21 0 0 16 16 0 14 0 0 10 10 0
8 8 0 7 0 0 A Lieutenant, 4 4 0 4 4 0 3 10 0 3 10 0 A Master, 7 0 0 6 6 0 4 13
8 4 6 2 3 17 6 The Captain to lie Master. A Masters Mate or Pilot, 3 6 0 3 0 0
2 16 2 2 7 10 2 2 0 2 2 0 A Mid-shipman, 2 5 0 2 0 0 1 17 6 1 13 9 1 10 0 1 10
0 A Boatswain, 4 0 0 3 10 0 3 0 0 2 10 0 2 5 0 2 0 0 A Boatswains Mate, 1 15 0
1 15 0 1 12 0 1 10 0 1 8 0 1 6 0 A Quarter Master, 1 15 0 1 15 0 1 12 0 1 10 0
1 8 0 1 6 0 A Quarter Masters Mate, 1 10 0 1 10 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 1 6 0 1 5 0 A
Carpenter, 4 0 0 3 10 0 3 0 0 2 10 0 2 5 0 2 0 0 A Carpenters Mate, 2 0 0 2 0 0
1 16 0 1 14 0 1 12 0 1 10 0 A Gunner, 4 0 0 3 10 0 3 0 0 2 10 0 2 5 0 2 0 0 A
Gunners Mate, 1 15 0 1 15 0 1 12 0 1 10 0 1 8 0 1 6 0 A Quarter Gunner, 1 6 0 1
6 0 1 5 0 1 5 0 1 5 0 1 5 0 A Chyrurgion, 2 10 0 2 10 0 2 10 0 2 10 0 2 10 0 2
10 0 A Chyrurgions Mate, 1 10 0 1 10 0 1 10 0 1 10 0 1 10 0 1 10 0 A Corporal,
1 15 0 1 12 0 1 10 0 1 10 0 1 8 0 1 5 0 Yeomen of the Jeers, Sheats, Haliards
and Tacks 1 12 0 1 10 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 A Purser to be Clerk of the Cheque, 4 0 0 3
10 0 3 0 0 2 10 0 2 5 0 2 0 0 A steward to take charge of the Victuals, 2 0 0 1
16 8 1 10 0 1 10 0 1 6 8 1 5 0 A Cook, 1 5 0 1 5 0 1 5 0 1 5 0 1 5 0 1 4 0 A
Master Trumpeter, 1 10 0 1 8 0 1 5 0 1 5 0 1 5 0 1 4 0 Other Trumpeters, 1 4 0
1 4 0 A Cockswain, 1 12 0 1 10 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 1 6 0 An Armorer, 1 5 0 1 5 0 1 5
0 1 5 0 A Gun-Smith, 1 5 0 1 5 0 These to have the Pay of an able Seaman.
Yeoman of the Powder-Room, A Stewards Mate, A Cooks Mate, A Cockswains Mate,
These to have the Pay of an able Seaman. A Swabber, A Cooper, besides Three
shillings and four pence a Month, Adds money. These to have the Pay of an able
Seaman.



As to Wages for common Seamen; Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament,
THat from and after the First of January next, the wages of all able Sea men,
fit for the Helm and Lead, Top and Yard, be augmented from Nineteen shillings
now given, to Twenty four shillings each man by the Month; whereof One
shilling to be paid to the Chest, Minister and Chyrurgion as formerly, and the
rest to the Party.

Resolved, etc. That the Wages of all others, who are not capable of performing
the Duties aforesaid, be continued at the Rate of Nineteen shillings a month,
as now they are, Boys and Gromets excepted.

Resolved, etc. That Gromets be allowed Fourteen shillings and three pence a
month, and Boys Nine shillings and six pence; whereof One shilling to be paid
to the Chest, Minister and Chyrurgion, as formerly.

Resolved, etc. That the Captain, Master and Boatswain of each Ship, do before
the payment of their respective Ships companies, rate the wages of each Ships
company, certifying the same against each man's name according to their
Abilities; and to that end, to sign the Sea-Books with the Purser: And in case
of the discharge of any from the Ship, the aforesaid persons are to certify
upon the Ticket whereby they are discharged, their abilities, and rate them
according to the aforesaid distinctions.

Resolved, etc. That in case through favor, affection or otherwise, there be
found partiality in rating of them, then the Treasurer and Commissioners of the
Navy, or any of them who shall be present, have power to determine all such
cases, or any other differences that may arise.

Resolved, etc. That such Mariners and Seamen as shall voluntarily come in to
the States Service, shall have the same Allowance of Conduct-money as the Pressed
men have, they making it appear to the Commissioners of the Navy, how far they
have traveled to enter themselves into the States Service; and shall also have
the benefit of the Chest.

As to the Shares in Prizes; Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament,
THat there being many and great disappointments attending the service, and
discouragements to the Seamen by the present way of sharing Prizes; All
Captains, Seamen and others, that do or shall serve in any of the States own,
or Merchants ships employed in their service, shall (for time to come in lieu
of all Prizes) have and receive from the State, for every ship or Prize they
shall lawfully take, whether Merchantmen, or men of War, laden or light, the
sum of Ten shillings for every Tun the said ship shall measure, according to
the ordinary rule of Shipwrightshall; and Six pounds thirteen shillings and
four pence for every piece of Ordnance, whether Iron or Brass, the same to be
paid by the Collectors for Prize-Goods, within three days after the payment of
the wages of such Seaman (in case Adjudication be made of the ship in the
Admiralty Court) to be shared and divided amongst them proportionably,
according to the respective Places and Offices in the ship in which they
served, and according to the custom of the Seas in that case. And further, That
it be lawful for all Captains, Seamen and others, serving as aforesaid, to
take and have to themselves as Pillage, without further or other account to be
given for the same, All such Goods and Merchandise as shall be found by them or
any of them, in any ship (they shall take in Fight as Prize) upon or above the
Gun-deck of the said ship, and not otherwise: And for every Man of War sunk or
destroyed by firing or otherwise, to have Ten pounds a Gun, only to be divided
as aforesaid, to be paid by the Commissioners for Prize-Goods within three days
after the payment of the ship as aforesaid, upon Certificate of the matter of
Fact stated by the Council of War.

Resolved, etc. That all common Seamen, who have served Four months or
upwards, since the War began with the Dutch, and do continue in the Service; or
being discharged, shall voluntarily come in to the Service for this year
ensuing, within Forty days, to commence from the First of January next, shall,
out of the proceed of Prizes already taken or to be taken, have allowed unto
them one months pay at the coming in, and paying off their several ships in
which they shall so serve, to be paid unto them by the Treasurer of the Navy.

As to sick and wounded Men; Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament,
THat for supplying of necessary provisions unto sick and wounded men on board,
there be allowed by the State, Five pounds for six months Service for every
hundred men.

Resolved, etc. That upon the discharge of sick and wounded men from the Ships
in the States service, care be taken for the payment of their Tickets and
Conduct-money.

Resolved, etc. That directions be given to all Majors, Bailiffs or other
Magistrates in any Port-Towns, to take care for all necessary accommodations at
the charge of the State, for the relief and cure of such sick and wounded men
as shall be sent on shore.

Resolved, etc. That a convenient house be provided in or near Dover, Deal or
Sandwich, as an Hospital for the Receipt and Accommodation of wounded men that
shall be there sent on shore.

Resolved, etc. That the moiety of all Hospitals in England, employed for the
care of wounded and sick people, be reserved during this War at Sea, for such
as shall be wounded in the service of the Naby, as they shall become void, from
and after the first of January next.

Resolved, etc. That the Tenths of all Prizes taken or to be taken, customarily
due to the Lord High-Admiral, be appointed for defraying the charges of sick
and wounded men as aforesaid, and for the relief of widows Children and
impotent Parents of such as shall be slain in the Service of the Commonwealth
at Sea; and for Meddals, or other rewards to such Officers and Seamen of the
Fleet, as shall be found to have done any eminent or extraordinary service.

Resolved, etc. That it be referred to the Commissioners appointed by Act of
Parliament, for ordering and managing the Affairs of the Admiralty and Navy,
with power to see the Particulars aforementioned put in execution, and to give
such Orders from time to time, as shall be requisite for the effecting thereof;
and to cause publication to be made of the premises, in such manner as they
shall think fit.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


