August.12. 1651. An Act concerning ye Militia's in ye respective Counties
within this Com^onwealth. vide voll. 10th fol. 14. single sheet.

Aug 13. 1651 An Act with instructions to ye Com^issioners of ye respective
Militia's. vide voll. 10th. fol. 16. single sheets.

blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ACT Impowering the MILITIA OF THE City of London TO RAISE HORSE.
WHereas by one Act, Entitled, An Act of the Commons assembled in Parliament,
for settling the Militia of London and Liberties thereof; the persons therein
named, or any nine or more of them, were constituted and appointed a Committee
for the Militia of the City of London, and Liberties thereof; and on the Ninth
of February, One thousand six hundred forty eight, and Twelfth of this instant
August, One thousand six hundred fifty one respectively, diverse other persons
were added to the said Committee; Be it Enacted and Declared by this present
Parliament, That the persons before mentioned, or any nine or more of them,
shall be, and are hereby authorized and enabled, to do and execute all and
every the Powers and Authorities granted by the said Act: And by another Act,
Entitled, An Act enabling the Militia of the City of London to raise Horse
within the said City and Liberties, for defense of the Parliament, City of
London and Liberties thereof, and the parts adjacent: And by any other former
Act or Ordinance of Parliament; which said persons so Authorized as abovesaid,
are hereby further Empowered, Ordered and Directed, to raise such number of
Horse as the Council of State shall appoint; and to charge upon the Citizens
and other Inhabitants of the said City, such Horses, Arms and Furniture, and a
Months pay for each Rider, as the said Committee shall think fit and appoint:
And in case any of the said Citizens or other Inhabitants shall not Furnish the
said Horses, Arms, Furniture, and Months pay as aforesaid, within the time
that shall be limited them by the said Committee for that purpose; then each of
them failing therein, shall forfeit, and forthwith pay for each Horse, Arms and
Furniture which he shall neglect to send in, Thirty pounds; and the said
Committee have hereby power to Levy, or cause the same to be Levied by way of
Distress, and sale of the Offenders Goods, and shall employ the said Money
raised thereby for the Service aforesaid, and restore the overpluss, if any be,
to the respective Owners thereof; which Horses, Arms and Furniture raised
according to this Act, and brought in within the time limited, are to be valued
by Commissioners appointed for that purpose, and Tickets to be given to the
Owners for the same, and shall be restored to the respective Owners, when the
intended Service is performed, or such damage as shall be sustained by not
restoring, or by spoiling the said Horses, if restored, to be set and valued by
the Commissioners aforesaid, shall be paid or reimbursed by appointment of
Parliament, out of, or by way of Assessment or otherwise. And the said
Committee are hereby also Empowered, Ordered and Directed, to do and execute
all such further Acts and things, as they from time to time shall receive from
this present Parliament or Council of State. Provided, That this Act shall
continue and be in force till the First day of December, One thousand six
hundred fifty one, and no longer.

Friday the Fifteenth of August, 1651.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


