PROPOSITIONS Approved of and Granted by the Deputy-General of Ireland TO
Colonel Richard Laurence, For the Raising in England and Transporting into
IRELAND, A Regiment of Twelve hundred Footmen, FOR THE PLANTING and GUARDING
The City of Waterford, and Towns of Ross and Carwick, with other places
adjacent.

Die Martis, 25 Februarii, 1650.

ORdered by the Parliament, That these Propositions, together with the Votes of
the Parliament thereupon, be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

LONDON: Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1650.

PROPOSITIONS Approved of and Granted by the Deputy-General of Ireland TO
Colonel Richard Laurence, For the Raising in England and Transporting into
Ireland, a Regiment of Twelve hundred Footmen, for the Planting and Guarding
the City of Waterford, and Towns of Ross and Carwick, with other Places
adjacent.
IMprimis, That all persons engaging as aforesaid, shall have appointed them,
and be put into possession of convenient Dwelling houses, suitable to their
Conditions, Families and Callings, within the Walls and Guards of the aforesaid
places, for which they shall stand Tenants to the State, at reasonable Rents,
not exceeding one Moiety of the Rent they were set for before the Reducing of
them; And shall hold the same by Lease for Three years or more: And in case the
State should find cause to put the said Houses to Sale, The said Tenants shall
have the first refusal of them, and shall be admitted Purchasers at Twelve
pence per Pound cheaper then any other (with due consideration for what they
shall Disburse in the needful Repairing, or in Improving of them, to be either
allowed them in their Purchase (if they do Purchase them) or Repaid to them (if
they do not) from them that do) And in such cases where the Tenants are Poor,
and not able to Purchase their Habitations as aforesaid, They shall then have
liberty to sell their interest to any Friend, and with him to Condition for
their own Continuance, or otherwise to their best advantage, as they shall see
good. (Provided they sell not their interest to any Enemy to the State, or
person not Licensed to Purchase Houses in such places.)

II. The said persons shall have Granted unto them the Benefit and Privilege
of a Corporation (together with other English Protestants that are or shall be
admitted to inhabit in each of the said places respectively) with all the
Immunities, Privileges and Liberties usually belonging to such
Corporation-Towns, and not prejudicial to the Commonwealth, or common good of
others.

III. All the Land formerly belonging to the Inhabitants of the said Towns, and
appurtenances to the Houses, or lying within the Liberties thereof, or within
two English Miles of the same (now in the States possession, or liable to
Sequestration) shall be assigned, and set apart for the use and occupation of
the aforesaid Persons, and others that shall be admitted to dwell in them as
aforesaid, or of such of them as shall desire to employ their Stock in
Husbandry; which Lands they shall hold and enjoy from the State upon the same
Conditions they do their Houses aforesaid, except in point of Rent (which shall
be according to what any person permitted to inhabit as aforesaid will give,
and to be free from other Contributions and Country Charges, except common
Charges for the Corporation, which shall be imposed and taxed by and amongst
themselves only.

IV. The said Persons shall not be put upon any Military Service or Employment,
without their voluntary consent, further then in the defense of themselves, and
the Garrisons in which they shall live; for which Service they shall be freed
from Taxes and Contributions as aforesaid, (other then the Rents to the State)
for what they have within the respective Towns and Liberties where they serve,
and other then the Customs and Excize (which no Member of the Army is freed
from:) And for such of them as shall do common Duty in keeping Guards, and
being upon the Watch when their turn comes (besides those forementioned
Encouragements as Inhabitants) they shall receive Pay, and other Encouragements
equal to any other Soldiers undertaking the Service for Garrison only; And such
as will engage as Soldiers for all Services, shall have equal Pay with any
other Soldiers.

V. For such as are Persons of competent Estates, and able to Transport
themselves at their own Charge, and to employ and settle themselves in
profitable Trades and Callings when they are landed, they must depend upon
their future Profits and Advantages to answer their Charge and Expense in the
Removing and Transportation; But for such others who have little or nothing to
depend upon, more then their own Industry and Hand-labour, after their Landing,
and shall be willing to do such Duty as shall be necessary for the Guarding and
Securing the Places in which they shall settle, they, or their Officers who
shall be at charge of their Conduct to the Waterside, and Transportation into
Ireland as aforesaid, shall receive the same Allowance at their Landing,
toward the same, which has been, and now is allowed to others for that
purpose, by the aforesaid Colonel Richard Laurence, or his Assigns, not
exceeding twenty shillings per Man.

VI. That Care shall betaken to procure or move the Council of State, for their
effectual Order to all Mayors, Sheriffs, Constables, Justices of Peace, or
Officers belonging to the Custom-houses in every Port Town in England, to be
aiding and assisting to the said Persons in the presting of Boats and Ships for
the Transportation of themselves, Families and Goods, into Ireland, they paying
for the same the usual Rates; And that the said Persons may be admitted to
bring over their Household Stuff, Clothes, Provisions, and other Necessaries for
their own particular use, and not for Merchandise, free from Custom and Excize,
both in England and Ireland.

VII. That if any Person shall bring over with them a Servant or Servants, for
the better Accommodation of themselves, and enabling of them to follow their
Calling, That no Officer, or other person be admitted to Entertain any such
person in the States Service, or their own, for such time as the Contract shall
last betwixt the Master and Servants; and the said Servants to be liable to the
same Punishments the Law of England does inflict, in case they shall leave or
forsake their said Masters without their Consent and License, before the end of
such time as they shall Contract with them for.

These things I do agree to, and grant, so far as is or shall be within my
power, and shall earnestly recommend them to the Parliament or Council of
State; That (if they be approved of) the Parliament would be pleased to Confirm
them. Given at Kilkenny, December 12. 1650.

H: IRETON.

REsolved by the Parliament, That this House does agree to the Substance of the
said Propositions.

Ordered by the Parliament, That it be referred to the Lord Deputy General of
Ireland, and the Commissioners of Parliament there, to take care that the said
Propositions be put in Execution; and that care be had that it be with such
Circumstances, and in such manner, as may be most for the Security, Service, and
Advantage of the Commonwealth, and without prejudice to the Public good.

Die Martis, 25 Februarii, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That these Propositions, together with the Votes of
the Parliament thereupon, be printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


