AN ACT FOR REGULATING The Making of STUFFS IN Norfolk and Norwich.

seal of the Commonwealth

Die Jovis, 14 Novembr. 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1650.

AN ACT FOR REGULATING The Making of STUFFS IN Norfolk and Norwich.
WHereas diverse Abuses and Deceits have of late years been had and used in the
Making of Worsteds and other Stuffs, commonly called Norwich Stuffs, and in the
Reeling of the Yarns whereof the said Stuffs are either wholly or in part made;
All which tends to the debasing of the said Manufacture, unto the prejudice of
the Public: For prevention of all which Abuses and Deceits, It is Enacted by
this present Parliament, That from henceforth there be and shall be a
Corporation within the said City and County of Norwich and County of Norfolk;
consisting of Two Presidents, Twelve Wardens, and Forty Assistants: All which
are to be Master Weavers within the places aforesaid; and one of the said
Presidents, and Six of the said Wardens, and Twenty of the said Assistants,
shall be yearly Chosen upon the last Wednesday in the Month of November, at
some public place, by the Master Weavers, or the greater part of them
present, of the said City and County of Norwich; and the other of the said
Presidents, six Wardens, and Twenty Assistants, shall be Chosen on the same day
in some public place by the Master Weavers, or the greater part of them
present, of the County of Norfolk: And the said Twelve Wardens shall within
Fourteen days after they shall be so Chosen or Elected, take the Oath ensuing,
to be administered to them by the Mayor of Norwich for the time being or his
Deputy, or any one Justice of the Peace of the County of Norfolk for the time
being, if he be present, otherwise by the said Mayor or his Deputy only, which
they have hereby power to administer accordingly; (viz.)

I A.B. do Swear, That I will well, faithfully and honestly perform and
discharge the Office of a Warden of the Corporation of Worsted-Weavers,
according to the best of my skill, power and knowledge.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Presidents, Wardens and Assistants for the time being, shall for ever hereafter
in Name and Fact be one Body Politic and Corporate in Law, to all intents and
purposes, and shall have a perpetual Succession, and be called by the Name of
the Presidents, Wardens and Assistants of the Worsted-Weavers of the City and
County of Norwich and County of Norfolk; and sue or plead, and be sued or
impleaded by the Name aforesaid, in all Courts and places of Judicature within
this Nation; and by that Name shall and may, without License in Mortmain,
purchase, take or receive any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of the Gift,
Alienation or Demise of any person or persons, who are hereby without further
License enabled to transfer the same, and any Goods or Chattels whatsoever, for
the use and benefit of the Corporation aforesaid, not exceeding the yearly
Value of One thousand pounds. And for the Regulation and good Government of the
said Trade and Manufacture, The said Corporation, or any Thirteen or more of
them, whereof one President and Seven or more Wardens to be present, shall have
hereby Power and Authority from time to time to meet and keep Courts, for the
ends in this Act mentioned, within the City of Norwich, at such time and place
as shall be appointed by the said Presidents or one of them, and Wardens or the
greater number of them for the time being, who are hereby Required upon the
desire of any Eight or more of the said Assistants at any time to warn and keep
a Court accordingly; And the said Corporation, or any Thirteen or more of them,
whereof one President and Seven or more Wardens to be present as aforesaid, or
the greater number of them, shall have, and hereby have Power and Authority
from time to time to make and appoint a Common Seal, or several Common Seals
for the use of the said Corporation, and to make Bylaws, Rules and Ordinances
for and concerning the Regulation of the Premises, and of such Particulars as
shall be by them or the greater number of them, found requisite for the better
Regulation of the said Trade and Manufacture, and the due Execution of this
Act; which Bylaws, Rules and Ordinances being Confirmed and Ratified by the
Mayor and one Justice of the Peace for the time being of the said City and
County of Norwich, and two other Justices of the Peace of the said County of
Norfolk, or the greater number of them, shall be obeyed and kept by the several
persons within or under the Government of the said Corporation or Regulation.
And for the better Regulation and carrying on of the work aforesaid, and
avoiding of all Frauds and Deceits therein, Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That all Yarns called Worsted-Yarns, or used by the
Worsted-Weavers, shall be made without fraud, and shall before the same be put
or offered to sale, be Reeled on a Reel of a full Yard about, every Reel-staff
containing Fourteen Leas, and every Lea containing Forty thrids, Twelve of
those Reel-staves making a Dozen, and Twelve of those Dozens making a Gross;
And in case any person or persons shall after the Tenth of October, One
thousand six hundred and fifty, offer to put to sale any the Yarns aforesaid
within the City of Norwich and County of Norfolk, made and Reeled in any other
manner then as aforesaid, That then it shall and may be lawful to and for the
Presidents, Wardens and Assistants aforesaid, or any two or more of them, to
seize, take and carry away all such Yarn as is defective and false as
abovesaid; The same to be within Eight days after such Seizure brought into the
Common Hall of the Corporation aforesaid, and within Twenty days after such
Seizure, to be brought to a Trial by a Jury of Twelve honest and able
Artificers of the same Regulation, whereof Six to be of the City and County of
Norwich, and other Six of the County of Norfolk: Which Twelve Artificers the
Mayor of the City of Norwich, or his Deputy, for the time being, are hereby
authorized to Summon and Warn to appear at the Guildhall of the said City, at
time certain by him to be appointed, and to be Impannelled, and Sworn to
enquire of the defects of the said Yarn, contrary to this present Act: Which
Oath the said Mayor or his Deputy are hereby authorized to give. And for such
and so much Yarn aforesaid as shall be so found, and presented by the said Jury
to be defective, the said Jury shall have, and hereby have power to set and
impose such Fine or Fines upon the Owners thereof, as in their discretion shall
be thought meet, not exceeding the value of the moiety of such defective Yarns;
which said Fines the Owners of the said respective Yarns shall pay unto the
Wardens of the said Corporation, or one of them, to and for the use of the Poor
of the said Corporation, within Forty days after the same Fine shall be so set;
or in default thereof, the said Wardens shall put to sale the said Yarns,
rendering the Overplus to be raised by sale thereof, unto the said Owners upon
demand. And it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained, That if the said Yarn
shall not be presented, and found by a Jury of Twelve men as aforesaid, to be
defective as aforesaid, so as the same shall appear to be seized without just
cause as aforesaid, That then he or they that shall so seize the same, shall
forfeit to the Owner or Owners of the Yarn so seized, the treble value of the
Yarn so seized, and three times so much Damages as he or they shall and may
sustain by such Seizure, or by means or reason thereof; The same to be adjudged
and taxed by the Mayor of the said City of Norwich for the time being, and be
levied by sale of the Offenders Goods, by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of
the Mayor of the City of Norwich for the time being, if such Seizure shall be
made within the said City of Norwich or County of the same; And if such Seizure
shall be made within the County of Norfolk, The same to be adjudged and taxed
by any one or more Justices of the Peace within the said County of Norfolk, and
to be levied by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any one or more such Justice
or Justices of the Peace of the said County of Norfolk. And it is hereby
further Enacted, That all sorts of Stuffs, whether wooven of Wool only, or of
Wool and other Materials within the City and County of Norwich, and County of
Norfolk, or either of them, shall be under the Power, Government and Regulation
of the said Corporation, in such manner as by this and other Acts of Parliament,
and the Bylaws made and to be made by virtue hereof, are or shall be
Established (except such Stuffs as are under the Regulation of the Wardens, and
Fellowship of the Mystery of Russel Sattins, Sattins Reverses, and Fustian of
Norwich making, within the said City of Norwich) And that all Stuffs made or to
be made under the Regulation aforesaid, before the same shall be offered or put
to sale, shall be brought to some convenient place or places within the said
County of the City of Norwich, and County of Norfolk, to be appointed by the
said Wardens, or the more part of them, to be viewed and searched by the said
Wardens or any two of them; and if the same shall be found to be well and
sufficiently made and wrought, according to the Rules and Ordinances of the
said Corporation for the time being, Then all such Stuffs shall be by the said
Wardens or any two of them, sealed and allowed accordingly, without any Sum of
Moneys paid or to be paid for the same: And if upon search or view thereof, any
such Stuffs shall be found, and appear to be defective, contrary to the Rules
and Ordinances of the said Corporation, Then such defective Stuffs shall be
seized by the said Wardens, or any two of them; And shall be from time to time
ordered and brought to Trial, proceeded on and Fined in such manner and form as
is in this present Act before limited and appointed for the defective Yarns
aforesaid: And if any person shall buy or sell any piece of Stuff made under
the Regulation of this Corporation unsealed, and being thereof convicted by his
own Confession, or the Oaths of two or more Witnesses, before the Mayor of the
said City of Norwich, or his Deputy, for the time being, or before any Justice
of the Peace for the time being for the County of Norfolk, who have hereby
power to administer an Oath for that purpose, the said person, if he be a
Buyer, shall forfeit for every piece of Stuff so brought unsealed, Four
shillings; and if a Seller, for every piece so sold, shall forfeit other Four
shillings, to the use of the Corporation aforesaid: And if any person
counterfeit any Seal of the said Wardens, or Seal any piece of Stuff with any
Seal as shall be counterfeited, Every person so offending, and being thereof
convicted as aforesaid, shall forfeit the Sum of Twenty pounds, to and for the
use of the Poor of the said Corporation: which said Penalties and Forfeitures
respectively, shall be levied by sale of the Goods and Chattels of the Offender
or Offenders, by warrant to be granted from the said Mayor or Justice of Peace
respectively, before whom such Conviction shall be; and for default of Goods
and Chattels whereon to levy the said Forfeiture of Twenty pounds, the party so
offending shall suffer Six Months Imprisonment, without Bail or Mainprize. And
the said Presidents, Wardens and Assistants, or any two or more of them, shall
have, and hereby have power to enter into the House and Workhouse of any
Artificer within the said City of Norwich and County of Norfolk, under the
Regulation of the said Corporation, at all times of the day, and usual times of
working and opening of Shops; and into the Shops, Houses and Warehouses of any
Merchant, Common Buyer, Dealer in, and Retailer of any the said Stuffs; and
into the Houses or Workhouses of any Dyer, Sheerman, Calender, and all other
Workmens houses and places of sale or dressing of the said Stuffs, or selling
of Yarns, and may there search and view the Yarn and Stuffs respectively,
whether they be ordered and made according to the Laws, Orders and Ordinances
of the said Trade: And if any Stuff or Materials aforesaid shall be found
faulty or defective, to seize, take and carry away the same, to be ordered,
brought to Trial, and proceeded in manner and form as is before in this Act
mentioned and appointed for defective Yarns and Stuffs. And all Mayors,
Justices, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables and Officers, shall be ayding and
assisting to the said Presidents, Wardens and Assistants, or any of them, as
often as they shall be thereunto required: And in all Actions or Suits that
shall be brought against any person or persons, for any acting according to the
true intent and meaning of this Act, That such person or persons shall or may
plead the General Issue of Not-guilty, and give the special Matter in Evidence;
And shall recover double Costs, if the Verdict pass for him and them, or that
the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs be Nonsuited. Provided always, That this Act, nor
any thing therein contained, shall not be prejudicial or hurtful to the Weavers
of the Towns of Great-Yarmouth and Lyn in the said County of Norfolk, or either
of them, to deprive them or either of them of such Liberties or Privileges as
are granted unto them by an Act of Parliament made in the Fourteenth year of
the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, or by any other Act of Parliament
whatsoever. Provided, That this Act shall continue for the space of Three years
from the First of November, One thousand six hundred and fifty, and no longer.

Die Jovis, 14 Novembr. 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


