seal of the Commonwealth
AN ACT For Regulating the making of STUFFS IN Norfolk and Norwich.
WHereas diverse Abuses and Deceits have of late years been had and used in the
making of Worsteads and other Stuffs, commonly called Norwich Stuff^, and in
the Reeling of the Yarns, whereof the said Stuffs are either wholly or in part
made; all which tends to the debasing of the said Manufacture, unto the
prejudice of the public: For prevention of all which Abuses and Deceits, It
is Enacted by this present Parliament, That from henceforth there be and shall
be a Corporation within the said City and County of Norwich and County of
Norfolk, consisting of two Presidents, twelve Wardens, and forty Assistants;
all which are to be Master-Weavers within the places aforesaid: And one of the
said Presidents, and six of the said Wardens, and twenty of the said
Assistants, shall be yearly chosen upon the last Wednesday in the month of
November at some public place, by the Master-Weavers, or the greater part of
them present of the said city and county of Norwich; and the other of the said
Presidents, six Wardens, and twenty Assistants, shall be chosen on the same day
in some public place, by the Master-Weavers, or the greater part of them
present of the county of Norfolk: And the said twelve Wardens respectively,
shall within fourteen days after they shall be so chosen or elected, before the
Major of Norwich for the time being, or his Deputy, or any one Justice of the
Peace of the county of Norfolk for the time being (if he be present) otherwise
before the said Major, or his Deputy only, declare as follows;

I A.B. do promise, That I will, under the Penalties and Forfeitures contained
in this Act, well and truly perform and discharge the Office of a Warden of the
Corporation of the Worstead-Weavers, according to this Act, and the Rules and
Orders made and to be made by the said Corporation by virtue of the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Presidents, Wardens and Assistants for the time being, shall for ever hereafter
in Name and Fact be one Body Politic and Corporate in Law, to all intents and
purposes, and shall have a perpetual Succession, and be called by the name of
the Presidents, Wardens and Assistants of the Worstead-weavers of the city and
county of Norwich and county of Norfolk; and sue or plead, and be sued or
impleaded by the name aforesaid, in all Courts and places of Judicature within
this Nation; and by that name shall and may without License in Mortmain,
purchase, take or receive any Lands, Tenments or Hereditaments of the Gift,
Alienation, or Demise of any person or persons, who are hereby without further
License enabled to transfer the same, and any Goods or Chattels whatsoever, for
the use and benefit of the Corporation aforesaid, not exceeding the yearly
value of One thousand pounds. And for the Regulation and good Government of the
said Trade and Manufacture, The said Corporation or any Thirteen or more of
them, whereof one President and seven or more Wardens to be present, shall have
hereby power and authority from time to time, to meet and keep Courts for the
ends in this Act mentioned, within the city of Norwich, at such time and place
as shall be appointed by the said Presidents or one of them, and Wardens or the
greater number of them for the time being; who are hereby required, upon the
desire of any Eight or more of the said Assistants, at any time to warn and
keep a Court accordingly: And the said Corporation, or any thirteen or more of
them, whereof one President, and seven or more Wardens to be present as
aforesaid, or the greater number of them, shall have, and hereby have power and
authority from time to time, to make and appoint a common Seal, or several
common Seals, for the use of the said Corporation; and to make Bylaws, Rules
and Ordinances for and concerning the Regulation of the premises, and of such
particulars as shall be by them, or the greater number of them, found requisite
for the better regulation of the said Trade and Manufacture, and the due
execution of this Act; which Bylaws, Rules and Ordinances being confirmed and
ratified by the Major, and one Justice of the Peace for the time being of the
said city and county of Norwich, and two other Justices of the Peace of the
said county of Norfolk, or the greater number of them, shall be obeyed and kept
by the several persons within or under the Government of the said Corporation
or Regulation. And the said Court have hereby power to impose a Fine or Penalty
upon any person or persons of the said Corporation, that shall not conform to
such Rules, Orders and Ordinances so made as aforesaid: Provided, the said Fine
or Penalty on any person for not conforming, exceed not the sum of ten
shillings for one Offense; the said Fines and Penalties to go to the use of the
said Corporation.

And it is further Enacted, That the Weavers of the said Corporation that are
within the City and County of Norwich, shall from time to time give notice unto
the Weavers of the said County of Norfolk, of the time and place, when and
where they shall intend to consider of the making of any Bylaws, Orders, or
Ordinances as aforesaid, by Publication of such their purpose and intent to
their open Court, Fifteen days at least before they shall proceed to make the
same.

And it is further Enacted, That if any person or persons shall be duly chosen
as abovesaid, to be a Warden or Wardens of the said Corporation, and after
such election and due notice thereof given him or them, he or they shall refuse
or wilfully neglect to undergo and execute the place and duty of a Warden or
Wardens according to the purport of this Act, such person or persons so
refusing or neglecting, shall each of them have a Fine imposed on them by the
said Corporation, the said Fine not exceeding Ten pounds; the said Fine to go
to the use of the Corporation.

And for the better Regulation and carrying on of the Work aforesaid, and
avoiding of all Frauds and Deceits therein, Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That all Yarns called Worstead-yarns, or used by the
Worstead-weavers, shall be made without fraud, and shall before the same be put
or offered to sale, be reeled on a Reel of a full yard about, every Reel-staff
containing Fourteen Leas, and every Lea containing Forty thrids. Twelve of
those Reel-staves making a Dozen, and Twelve of those Dozens making a Gross:
And in case any person or persons shall after offer to put to sale any the
Yarns aforesaid within the City of Norwich or County of Norfolk, made and
reeled in any other manner then as aforesaid, that then it shall and may be
lawful to and for the Presidents, Wardens and Assistants aforesaid, or any two
or more of them, to seize, take and carry away all such Yarn as is defective
and false as abovesaid; The same to be within Eight days after such seizure,
brought into the Common Hall of the Corporation aforesaid; and within Twenty
days after such seizure, to be brought to a Trial by a Jury of Twelve honest
and able Artificers of the same Regulation, whereof Six to be of the City and
County of Norwich, and other Six of the County of Norfolk; which Twelve
Artificers, the Major of the City of Norwich or his Deputy for the time being,
are hereby authorized to summon and warn to appear at the Guild Hall of the
said City at time certain by him to be appointed, and to be impannelled and
sworn to enquire of the Defects of the said Yarn, contrary to this present Act,
which Oath the said Major or his Deputy are hereby authorized to give: And for
such and so much Yarn aforesaid as shall be so found, and presented by the said
Jury to be Defective, the said Jury shall have, and hereby have power to set
and impose such Fine or Fines upon the Owners thereof, as in their discretion
shall be thought meet, not exceeding the value of the Moiety of such Defective
Yarns; which said Fines the Owners of the said respective Yarns shall pay unto
the Wardens of the said Corporation or one of them, to and for the use of the
Poor of the said Corporation, within Forty days after the same Fine shall be so
set; or in default thereof, the said Wardens shall put to sale the said Yarns,
rendering the overplus to be raised by sale thereof unto the said Owners upon
demand.

And it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained, That if the said Yarn shall not
be presented and found by a Jury of Twelve men as aforesaid to be defective as
aforesaid, so as the same shall appear to be seized without just cause as
aforesaid, That then he orthey that shall so seize the same, shall forfeit to
the owner or owners of the Yarn so seized, the treble value of the Yarn so
seized, and three times so much damages as he or they shall and may sustain by
such seizure, or by means or reason thereof; the same to be adjudged and taxed
by the Major of the said City of Norwich or his Deputy for the time being, and
be levied by sale of the Offenders goods, by warrant under the hand and seal of
the Major of the City of Norwich or his Deputy for the time being, if such
seizure shall be made within the said City of Norwich or County of the same:
And if such seizure shall be made within the County of Norfolk, the same to be
adjudged and taxed by any one or more Justices of the Peace within the said
County of Norfolk, and to be levied by Warrant under the hand and seal of any
one or more such Justice or Justices of the Peace of the said County of Norfolk.

And it is hereby further Enacted, That all sorts of Stuffs, whether woven of
Wool only, or of Wool and other materials within the City and County of
Norwich and County of Norfolk, or either of them, shall be under the Power,
Government and Regulation of the said Corporation, in such manner as by this and
other Acts of Parliament, and the Bylaws made and to be made by virtue hereof,
are or shall be established (Except such Stuffs as are under the Regulation of
the Wardens and Fellowship of the Mystery of Russel-Sattins, Sattins-Reversees,
and Fustian of Norwich making, within the said City of Norwich;) And that all
Stuffs made or to be made under the Regulation aforesaid, before the same shall
be offered or put to sale, shall be brought to some convenient place within the
said County of the City of Norwich, to be appointed by the said Wardens or the
more part of them, to be viewed and searched by the said Wardens or any two of
them; And if the same shall be found to be well and sufficiently made and
wrought according to the Rules and Ordinances of the said Corporation for the
time being, Then all such Stuffs shall be by the said Wardens or any two of
them, sealed and allowed accordingly, without any sum of moneys paid or to be
paid for the same: And if upon search or view thereof, any such Stuffs shall be
found and appear to be defective contrary to the Rules and Ordinances of the
said Corporation, Then such defective Stuffs shall be seized by the said
Wardens or any two of them, and shall be from time to time Ordered and brought
to Trial, proceeded on, and fined in such manner and form as is in this present
Act before limited and appointed for the defective Yarns aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted, That if any Warden or Wardens shall at any time
seal or cause to be sealed any Stuffs made under this Regulation, which shall
afterward be discovered by any person to be defective, and found so to be by a
Jury impanneled as aforesaid, The said Jury shall have, and hereby have power
to set and impose a Fine upon the Wardens of the said Corporation for every
such defective piece so sealed, as they in their discretion shall think fit,
the said Fine not exceeding Forty shillings, the same to be divided into three
equal parts; One third part whereof to go to the use of the Informer, another
third part to the Corporation, and the other third part to the use of the Poor
of the said Corporation. Provided, That if the said Wardens shall be unjustly
molested, and that such Stuffs upon trial shall be found by the Jury to be good
and duly made, the person or persons so causelessly molesting, shall pay to the
said Wardens so unjustly molested, treble the damages they shall or may sustain
by such molestation, the said forfeitures and damages to be adjudged and taxed
by the Major of the city of Norwich, or any one or more of the Justices of the
Peace of the county of Norfolk respectively as aforesaid; And if any person
shall buy or sell any piece of Stuff made under the regulation of this
Corporation unsealed, and being thereof convicted by his own confession, or the
oaths of two or more witnesses before the Major of the said city of Norwich, or
his Deputy for the time being, or before any Justice of the Peace for the time
being for the county of Norfolk, who have hereby power to administer an Oath
for that purpose; the said person, if he be a buyer, shall forfeit for every
piece of Stuff so bought unsealed, Four shillings,; and if a seller, for every
piece so sold, shall forfeit other Four shillings, the same to be divided into
equal halfs, one moiety whereof shall go to the use of the Corporation
aforesaid, and the other moiety to the use of the poor of the said Corporation:
And if any Stuff made under the said Regulation, shall be found in the
possession of any person or persons (except of the first Owner or Maker
thereof) the person and persons in whose custody the same shall be so found,
shall be adjudged guilty of deceit, and shall be liable unto the payment of the
Fines and Forfeitures payable by this Act, both from the Seller and Buyer of
Stuff unsealed as foresaid: And if any person counterfeit any Seal of the said
Wardens, or seal any piece of Stuff with any seal that shall be counterfeit,
every person so offending, and being thereof convicted as aforesaid, shall
forfeit the sum of Twenty pounds to and for the use of the poor of the said
Corporation; which said Penalties and Forfeitures respectively, with all other
Fines and Forfeitures mentioned in this Act, shall be levied by Distress and
Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the Offender or Offenders, by Warrant to be
granted from the said Major or Justice of Peace respectively, before whom such
conviction shall be, rendering the Overplus to the Owner or Owners thereof; and
for default of Goods and Chattels whereon to levy the said Forfeiture of Twenty
pounds, the party so offending shall be committed to the public Workhouse,
there to be continued at hard labor during the space of three Months, unless
he shall at any time within the said term pay the Forfeiture of Twenty pounds
as aforesaid: And the said Presidents, Wardens and Assistants, or any two or
more of them shall have, and hereby have power to enter into the house and
workhouse of any Artificer witin the said City of Norwich and county of
Norfolk, under the Regulation of the said Corporation, at all times of the day,
and usual times of working and opening of Shops, and into the Shops, Houses and
Warehouses of any Merchant, common Buyer, Dealer in, and Retayler of any the
said Stuffs; and into the Houses or Workhouses of any Dyer, Sheerman,
Calender, and all other workmens houses and places of sale, or dressing of ye
said Stuffs, or selling of yarns, and may there search and view the Yarn and
Stuffs respectively, whether they be ordered and made according to the Laws,
Orders and Ordinances of the said Trade: And if any Stuff or Materials
aforesaid shall be found faulty or defective, to seize, take and carry away the
same, to be ordered, brought to trial, and proceeded in manner and form as is
before in this Act mentioned and appointed for defective Yarns and Stuffs. And
all Majors, Justices, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables and Officers shall be
aiding and assisting to the said Presidents, Wardens and Assistants or any of
them, as often as they shall be thereunto required; and in all Actions or Suits
that shall be brought against any person or persons for any acting according to
the true intent and meaning of this Act, that such person or persons shall or
may plead the general Issue of Not guilty, and give the special Matter in
Evidence, and shall recover double Costs, if the Verdict pass or fhim and them,
or that the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs be nonsuited.

Provided always, That this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not be
prejudicial or hurtful to the Weavers of the Towns of Great Yarmouth and Lyn in
the said county of Norfolk, or either of them, to deprive them or either of
them of such Liberties or Privileges as are granted unto them by an Act of
Parliament made in the Fourteenth year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth,
or by any other Act of Parliament whatsoever.

Saturday the 12. of November, 1653.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.


