March.22. 1652An Act for continuance of ye Customs until the 26. of March
1654. vide voll. 10th. fol. 86. single sheets.

blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ACT FOR Probate of Wills, And granting ADMINISTRATIONS.
FOr the Administration of Justice in the cases of Probates of Wills, and
granting of Administrations in the late Provinces of Canterbury and York, Be it
Enacted by this present Parliament, and the Authority thereof, That Sir Anthony
Ashley Cooper Baronet, Sir Henry Blunt, Matthew Hales, William Steel, John
Sadler, Charls-George Cock, Thomas Manby, Thomas Blunt, Josias Berners, John
Desborow, Samuel Moyer, Matthew Thomlinson, John Fountain, John Fowk, William
Packer, Esqs Mr. Hugh Peter's, Sir William Roberts, John Mansel, John Rushworth,
John Sparrow junior, Esqs or any five or more of them, shall be, and are hereby
constituted and appointed Judges for the Probate of Wills and granting of
Administrations in all and every the counties and cities of England and Wales;
And shall and may use, exercise and put in execution, all such further Powers
and Authorities touching the Probate of Wills and granting of Administrations,
with the Incidencies and Dependancies thereupon in the late Provinces of
Canterbury and York, that Sir Nathaniel Brent lawfully did or might have done
in the late Province of Canterbury: And shall and may, if they see cause,
divide themselves into several places for the executing of the power given them
by this Act, so as there be five of them present there; and that they, or any
five or more of them, shall and may issue out Commissions, Process and Proceed,
to Hear, Sentence and Decree all matters touching Wills, Administrations and
Inventories; and also the Incidencies, Emergencies and Dependancies thereupon
in all places in England and Wales, as the said Sir Nathaniel Brent lawfully
might have done in the late Province of Canterbury: And that they do and
execute all other things necessary and incident to the execution of the
premises; and that they or any five or more of them, shall and may hear,
sentence and decree all matters and things touching Wills, Administrations and
Inventories, that were depending before the said Sir Nathaniel Brent the day of
his decease, Saving unto every person and persons, Body Politic and
Corporate, All such Right, Title and Interest, that they or any of them have
for the execution of any of the Authorities concerning the Premises, given by
this Act.

And be it further Enacted, That the Profits which shall arise during the
continuance of this Act, by lawful Fees for the Probate of Wills, and granting
Administrations; And likewise all Fees to be taken by the Registers, shall be
employed for the use of the Navy, and the satisfying such Clerks, and such
other Ministerial Officers as shall be necessary for to be employed in the said
service: and that Dennis Bond, Cornelius Holland, Francis Allein and John
Downs, Esqs Commissioners for inspecting the Treasury, or any three of them do
and shall direct and appoint, the Fees and Salaries that shall be allowed and
paid unto such Clerks and such Ministerial Officers as shall be employed as
aforesaid; which said Fees and Salaries shall be paid out of the said growing
Profits, by Warrant from the said Commissioners or any three of them: And the
remainder of the said Profits shall be paid according to the Warrant of the
said Commissioners, for the use of the Navy.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Commissioners shall and may call all
such persons to an Account that shall receive any of the said Profits: And in
case such person shall refuse to Account, or pay the Moneys so received, That
then they or any three of them may secure the person of such Offender, until he
shall Account or pay in the Moneys.

Provided always, That this Act shall be in force until the First day of
October, which shall be in the year One thousand six hundred fifty and three,
and no longer.

Friday the Eighth of April, 1653.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1653.


