AN ACT FOR Increase of Shipping, And Encouragement of the NAVIGATION OF THIS
NATION.

seal of the Commonwealth

Thursday the Ninth of October, 1651.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England, 1651.

AN ACT FOR Increase of Shipping, And Encouragement of the NAVIGATION OF THIS
NATION.
FOr the Increase of the Shipping and the Encouragement of the Navigation of
this Nation, which under the good Providence and protection of God, is so great
a means of the Welfare and Safety of this Commonwealth; Be it Enacted by this
present Parliament, and the Authority thereof, That from and after the First
day of December, One thousand six hundred fifty and one, and from thence
forwards, No Goods or Commodities whatsoever, of the Growth, Production or
Manufacture of Asia, Africa or America, or of any part thereof; or of any
Islands belonging to them, or any of them, or which are described or laid down
in the usual Maps or Cards of those places, as well of the English Plantations
as others, shall be Imported or brought into this Commonwealth of England, or
into Ireland, or any other Lands, Islands, Plantations or Territories to this
Commonwealth belonging, or in their Possession, in any other Ship or Ships,
Vessel or Vessels whatsoever, but only in such as do truly and without fraud
belong only to the People of this Commonwealth, or the Plantations thereof, as
the Proprietors or right Owners thereof: And whereof the Master and Mariners
are also for the most part of them, of the People of this Commonwealth, under
the penalty of the forfeiture and loss of all the Goods that shall be Imported
contrary to this Act; as also of the Ship (with all her Tackle, Guns and
Apparel) in which the said Goods or Commodities shall be so brought in and
Imported, The one moiety to the use of the Commonwealth, and the other moiety
to the use and behoof of any person or persons who shall seize the said Goods
or Commodities, and shall prosecute the same in any Court of Record within this
Commonwealth. And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Goods or Commodities of the Growth, Production or Manufacture of Europe, or of
any part thereof, shall after the First day of December, One thousand six
hundred fifty and one, be Imported or brought into this Commonwealth of
England, or into Ireland, or any other Lands, Islands, Plantations or
Territories to this Commonwealth belonging, or in their possession, in any Ship
or Ships, Vessel or Vessels whatsoever, but in such as do truly and without
fraud belong only to the people of this Commonwealth, as the true Owners and
proprietors thereof, and in no other, except only such Foreign Ships and
Vessels as do truly and properly belong to the people of that Country or
place, of which the said Goods are the Growth, Production or Manufacture; or to
such Ports where the said Goods can only be, or most usually are first Shipped
for Transportation; And that under the same penalty of forfeiture and loss
expressed in the former Branch of this Act, The said Forfeitures to be
recovered and employed as is therein expressed. And it is further Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That no Goods or Commodities that are of Foreign
Growth, Production or Manufacture, and which are to be brought into this
Commonwealth, in shipping belonging to the people thereof, shall be by them
Shipped or brought from any other place or places, Country or Countries, but
only from those of their said Growth, Production or Manufacture; or from those
Ports where the said Goods and Commodities can only, or are, or usually have
been first Shipped for Transportation; And from none other places or Countries,
under the same penalty of forfeiture and loss expressed in the first Branch of
this Act, the said Forfeitures to be recovered and employed as is therein
expressed. And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no sort
of Cod-fish, Ling, Herring, Pilchard, or any other kind of salted Fish,
usually fished for and caught by the people of this Nation; nor any Oil made,
or that shall be made of any kind of Fish whatsoever, nor any Whale-fins, or
Whale-bones, shall from henceforth be Imported into this Commonwealth, or into
Ireland, or any other Lands, Islands, Plantations, or Territories thereto
belonging, or in their possession, but only such as shall be caught in Vessels
that do or shall truly and properly belong to the people of this Nation, as
Proprietors and Right Owners thereof: And the said Fish to be cured, and the
Oil aforesaid made by the people of this said Commonwealth, under the penalty
and loss expressed in the said first Branch of this present Act* the said
Forfeit to be recovered and employed as is there expressed. And it is further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no sort of Cod, Ling, Herring,
Pilchard, or any other kind of Salted Fish whatsoever, which shall be caught
and cured by the people of this Commonwealth, shall be from and after the First
day of February, One thousand six hundred fifty three, Exported from any place
or places belonging to this Commonwealth, in any other Ship or Ships, Vessel or
Vessels, save only in such as do truly and properly appertain to the people of
this Commonwealth, as Right Owners; and whereof the Master and Mariners are
for the most part of them English, under the penalty and loss expressed in the
said first Branch of this present Act; the said Forfeit to be recovered and
employed as is there expressed. Provided always, That this Act, nor any thing
theren contained, extend not, or be meant to restrain the Importation of any of
the Commodities of the Streights or Levant Seas, laden in the Shipping of this
Nation as aforesaid, at the usual Ports or places for lading of them
heretofore, within the said Streights or Levant Seas, though the said
Commodities be not of the very Growth of the said places. Provided also, That
this Act nor any thing therein contained, extend not, nor be meant to restrain
the Importing of any East India Commodities laden in the Shipping of this
Nation, at the usual Port or places for Lading of them heretofore in any part
of those Seas, to the Southward and Eastward of Cabo Bona Esperanza, although
the said Ports be not the very places of their Growth. Provided also, That it
shall and may be lawful to and for any of the People of this Commonwealth, in
Vessels or Ships to them belonging, and whereof the Master and Mariners are of
this Nation as aforesaid, To load and bring in from any of the Ports of Spain
and Portugal, all sorts of Goods or Commodities that have come from, or any way
belonged unto the Plantations or Dominions of either of them respectively: Be
it also further Enacted by ye authority aforesaid, That from henceforth, it
shall not be lawful to any person or persons whatsoever, to load or cause to be
laden and carried in any Bottom or Bottoms, Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels
whatsoever, whereof any Stranger or Strangers born (unless such as be Denizens
or Naturalized) be Owners, part Owners, or Master, Any Fish, Victual, Wares, or
things of what kind or nature soever the same shall be, from one Port or Creek
of this Commonwealth, to another Port or Creek of the same, under penalty to
every one that shall offend contrary to the true meaning of this Branch of this
present Act, to forfeit all the Goods that shall be so Laden or carried, as
also the Ship upon which they shall be so laden or carried, the same Forfeit to
be recovered and employed as directed in the First Branch of this present Act.
Lastly, That this Act nor any thing therein contained, extend not to Bullion,
nor yet to any Goods taken, or that shall be taken by way of Reprizal by any
Ship or Ships, having Commission from this Commonwealth. Provided, That this
Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend, nor be construed to
extend to any Silk or Silk-wares which shall be brought by Land from any parts
of Italy, and there bought with the proceed of English Commodities, sold either
for Money or in Barter; but that it shall and may be lawful for any of the
people of this Commonwealth to ship the same in English Vessels from Ostend,
Newport, Roterdam, Middleburgh, Amsterdam, or any Ports thereabouts; The Owners
and Proprietors first making Oath by themselves, or other credible Witness,
before the Commissioners of the Customs for the time being or their Deputies,
or one of the Barons of the Exchequer, that the Goods aforesaid were so bought
for his or their own proper Account in Italy.

Thursday the 9th of October, 1651.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


