depiction of the state arms of the Commonwealth (1649-60) consisting of the
cross of St. George (patron saint of England) and the Irish harp
FURTHER INSTRVCTIONS Unto Charles Fleetwood Esquire; Lieutenant General of the
Army in Ireland, Edmund Ludlow Esquire; Lieutenant General of the Horse, Miles
Corbet Esquire; and John Jones Esquire;
YOU are authorized and required, either by Proclamation or otherwise as you
shall think fit, to publish and declare, That for the better security of all
those parts of Ireland which are now intended to be planted with English and
Protestants, and to the end that all persons in Ireland who have right to
Articles, or to any favor and mercy held forth by any the Qualifications in
the Act of Parliament, entitled An Act for settling of Ireland, may enjoy the
benefit intended unto them and every of them respectively by the said Act, it
is thought fit and resolved, That all and every the persons aforesaid shall,
before the first day of May, which shall be in the year 1654. remove and
transplant themselves into the Province of Connaght and the County of Clare, or
one of them, there to inhabit and abide, and shall have set forth unto them and
every of them respectively such Proportions of Land, and for such Estates or
terms, and under such Conditions, Reservations, and Covenants, as shall be
answerable in value unto so much of his and their Estates as by such Articles
or Qualification respectively he or they were to enjoy, in such place and
manner, as you, or such as shall be authorized by you, shall appoint and
direct; And that whatsoever person or persons aforesaid, shall after the said
first day of May 1654. be found inhabiting or remaining in any part of the
Provinces of Lemster, Munster, or Ulster (except in the said County of Clare)
or (without a pass from you, or any one of you, or under the Hand and Seal of
such person or persons as shall be authorized by you to that purpose)
traveling in any of the said Provinces (except the said County of Clare) he
and they shall be reputed as Spies and Enemies, and shall for the same Offense
suffer death; And that all and every person and persons aforesaid, who shall at
or before the said first day of May 1654. quietly and peaceably remove into the
said Province of Connaght or County of Clare shall be pardoned all Offenses
(except all and every person and persons both principal and accessaries, who
since the first day of October 1641. have or shall kill or slay, or otherwise
destroy any person or persons in Ireland, which at the time of their being so
killed, slain or destroyed, were not publicly entertained, and maintained in
Arms as Officers or private Soldiers for and on the behalf of the English
against the Irish; And all and every person and persons both Principal and
Accessaries who since the first day of October 1641. have killed, slain, or
otherwise destroyed any person or persons entertained or maintained as Officers
or private Soldiers for and on the behalf of the English against the Irish,
the said persons so killing, slaying, or otherwise destroying, not being then
publicly entertained and maintained in Arms as Officers or private Soldiers
under the Command and pay of the Irish against the English) and shall be no
more molested for the same. Provided, that none of the persons aforesaid shall
be admitted to live in, or enter into, any Port Town or Garrison within the
said Province of Connaght or County of Clare (without license from you or any
one of you, or such person or persons as you shall authorize thereunto nor
shall have or keep any Arms used in War, or Ammunition; But that all and every
person and persons offending in either of the premises shall be tried by
Martial Law, and, being convicted, shall suffer death; Provided also, that this
shall not extend to the Pardoning, Tollerating, or Admitting any Popish Priest,
Jesuit, or other person in Orders by authority from the Sea of Rome; Provided
also, that this shall not extend to the removal of any person who did not
adhere unto or join with the Rebels before the fifteenth day of September 1643.
and who did at that time and ever since profess the Protestant Religion; Nor to
any Woman who before the second day of December 1650. was married to any
English Protestant, Provided, that such Woman do renounce Popery, and profess
the Protestant Religion; Nor to any Male child or children under the age of
fourteen years, or Females under the age of twelve years, whom any of the
English have already, or shall be willing hereafter to entertain as Servants,
and to instruct and train up in the true Protestant Religion, which said
persons and children shall be suffered to live in any of the Places allotted
for the habitation of the English.

And you are further to declare, That in case any person or persons of the
English nation, or any other person or persons professing the Protestant
Religion, and has, during the late Wars in Ireland, constantly adhered to the
English against the Rebels, who has or have Land within the said Province of
Connaght or County of Clare, and has not forfeited the same by Rebellion or
Delinquency, shall desire to exchange the same, or any part thereof, or remove
themselves into such Counties or Provinces as are inhabited by the English,
that just Surveys shall be taken of the Lands and estate of such person and
persons, and so much, or the value thereof, shall be set out unto them in lieu
thereof, out of the forfeited Lands in some other Province or County, as shall
be thought fit.

2. You are hereby authorized and empowered to nominate Commissioners, and to
authorize them to allot unto any person or persons, who, by Articles granted
unto them, or by virtue of the Qualifications in the said Act, were to enjoy
any part of their estates, a like proportion of Land by measure, or in value,
in the Province of Connaght or the County of Clare, of the like estate of
Inheritance of Freehold, or for the like term of years or number of lives, to
be by them held and enjoyed in lieu or satisfaction of such part of their
estate, which by such Articles or Qualifications he or they were to enjoy; And
also to grant unto such of the said persons, or others as you shall think fit
to be Lease-holders from the Commonwealth, such convenient parcels of Land in
the said Province of Connaght or County of Clare, as by the said Commissioners
shall be judged fit, for any term not exceeding one and twenty years, or three
lives, reserving to the use of the Commonwealth, upon every such demise, such
reasonable rents, as, with respect to the values of the said Lands in the year
1640. shall be by you thought fit.

3. You are hereby authorized to give order and direction for the speedy
removal of all or any the persons aforesaid unto the Lands so allotted unto
them, in such numbers and proportions as may consist with safety and security
of the rest of the Inhabitants; So as all the said persons be so removed before
the first day of May 1654. and within two months after the respective
allotments so made, and directions given them by you to take the same into
possession.

4. Whatsoever person or persons so to be removed, as aforesaid, shall after
the said first day of May 1654. be found in any part of the Provinces of
Lemster, Munster, or Vlster (except the County of Clare) or any way, without
such pass as aforesaid, traveling in any of the said Provinces (except in the
said County of Clare) or inhabiting or being in any Port Town or Garrison
within the said Province of Connaght or County of Clare, without such license
as aforesaid, or having any Ammunition or Arms used in War, All and every such
person and persons shall be tried by Martial Law, and, being convicted of such
offense, shall suffer death; and you are hereby authorized from time to time to
issue out Commissions for the speedy apprehending, trial, and execution of such
Offenders.

5. You are also to authorize the said Commissioners to cause exact surveys
upon oath to be made of the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of such person
and persons of the English nation, or other persons aforesaid, in Connaght or
in the County of Clare, as shall desire such exchange as aforesaid, which being
returned unto you, you shall out of the Lands forfeited to the Commonwealth, or
the Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of the persons so removed, cause Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments of the like quantity or value, in such other
Province or County as you shall think fit, to be set forth unto such person and
persons, to be enjoyed for such estate or term, and under the like Covenants,
Conditions and reservations, as such Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments in the
said Province or County, and so exchanged, were held, and shall cause an exact
particular thereof, together with the survey aforesaid, to be returned to the
Register for the said forfeited Lands, to remain of Record.

6. You are hereby authorized to set out unto John Blackwell the younger of
Mortclack in the County of Surrey Esquire; his heirs and assigns, in satisfaction
of the sum of two thousand three hundred and fifty pounds, advanced in several
sums by way of Adventure upon the Propositions for Rebels lands in Ireland,
and assigned unto him, so many Acres of meadow, arable, and profitable pasture
of the said forfeited lands together with the Bogs, Woods and barren Mountains
thereunto belonging) as are due unto him according to the proportions and rates
for the respective Provinces in the Act of Parliament in that behalf expressed,
and the measure allowed by the respective Acts and Ordinances upon which the
said several sums were advanced respectively, in such place and places as the
said Joh. Blackwell, his heirs or assigns, or his or their Trustees in that
behalf appointed, shall make choice of, and desire, within the Counties of
Dublin, Kildare and Cork, or any other County which is not particularly by
these Instructions, nor shall be by you in pursuance thereof, designed and set
apart for the satisfaction of the Adventurers and Soldiers, and not being by
any Act, Ordinance or order of Parliament, or by authority derived from
Parliament, set out, allotted or granted to any particular person or persons,
and to put the said John Blackwell, his heirs or assigns, or his or their
Trustees, into the possession of the premises so to be set forth and allotted
to him, to be by him, his heirs and assigns held and enjoyed, in as full and
ample manner, and with the like advantages, liberties and privileges as any the
Adventurers for lands in Ireland may and ought to hold and enjoy the lands set
forth unto them, and as if the same lands and premises so set forth unto the
said John Blackwell, his heirs and assigns, had come unto him or them by lot;
And that you cause an exact survey upon oath to be made of the premises in
writing, and returned unto the Register for the said Lands, to remain of Record.

SATURDAY JULY 2. 1653.
At the Council of State at White Hall, Ordered, that these Instructions be
forthwith Printed and Published.

JOHN THURLOE Secr.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, Henry Hills and Thomas Brewster, Printers
to the Council of STATE, and are to be sold at the Black spread-Eagle, and at
the Three Bibles at the West End of Paul's, or at the sign of Sir John
Old-Castle in Py-Corner, 1653.


