AN ORDINANCE For the better ORDERING AND DISPOSING THE ESTATES UNDER
Sequestration.

seal of the commonwealth of England

Friday, 10. February, 1653.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, that this
Ordinance be forthwith printed and published.

HENRY SCOBELL Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1653.

seal of the commonwealth of EnglandAN ORDINANCE For the better ordering and
disposing of the ESTATES under SEQUESTRATION.
BE it Ordained by his Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the advice and
consent of His Council, That Josias Barners, Edward Winslow, Richard Moor, John
Upton, Edward Carry, and Rice Williams, Esquires, or any four of them, be, and
are hereby constituted and ordained, Commissioners for the mannaging, ordering,
and disposing of the Estates of all Delinquents now sequestered, or which shall
be adjudged Delinquents, upon cases now depending, and of all Estates now under
Sequestration for Recusancy. And that the said Commissioners, or any four of
them, shall from and after the tenth day of February in the year one thousand
six hundred fifty and three, have power, and are hereby authorized to manage,
order, set, let, or dispose of all and every the said Estates, during such time
as the same shall remain under Sequestration. Provided, no Lease thereof to be
granted, exceed the term of one year; And that the whole Rents, Revenues and
Profits of the said Sequestrations and Sequestered Estates shall be paid in at
Goldsmiths Hall to the hands of Richard Sherwin and John Leech, Esqs who are
hereby constituted and appointed Treasurers of the said Receipt. And the said
Commissioners are hereby authorized and required to call all Commissioners for
Sequestrations, Treasurers, Receivers, and other persons employed by the former
Commissioners for compounding, in the several Counties, to an Account for all
and every Sum and Sums of money in their or any of their hands, of the said
Sequestered Estates, or any of them. And be it Ordained by the Authority
aforesaid, That all and every the Commissioners for Sequestrations in the
respective Counties, and all and every the Farmours, and Tenants of the said
Sequestered Estates, and all others, who have any part of the Rents or other
profits of the said sequestered Estates in their hands, shall forthwith pay in
the same unto the Treasurers before named, whose acquittance shall be a
sufficient discharge to the persons so paying in the same, for so much as shall
be so paid in by them as aforesaid; and if they, or any of them shall make
default or neglect to pay in the same before the five and twentieth day of
March 1654. That then they and every of them so making default, shall forfeit
unto the Commonwealth so much more as the said Commissioners herein named shall
think fit, not exceeding the moiety of such moneys as shall be discovered to be
in their hands, or du upon their Account to be levied upon their Lands, Goods
and Chattles by order of the said Commissioners; And the said Commissioners are
hereby Authorized and empowered to continue or remove from time to time such of
the persons now employed as Commissioners for Sequestrations in the respective
Counties, as they shall see cause, and to place other honest and able Persons
in their Room, as also other Officers and Agents, and to reduce them to such a
number only as shall be necessary for the carrying on of this service, and may
most conduce to the lessening of the public charge. And the Commissioners for
Sequestrations in the Country shall have and retain to their own use, for their
Salary, twelve pence in the pound of all such moneys as shall be paid by them
into the Treasury at Gold-Smiths-Hall, out of the profits of the said
Sequestered estates, and that all other Officers that shall be employed by the
said Commissioners in this Ordinance before named, shall have such salary and
allowance as the said Commissioners shall think fit; And the said Commissioners
before named shall have and exercise such and the like Powers and Authorities
for compounding with all or any the persons named in one Act of Parliament,
Entitled, An Additional Act for sale of several Lands and Estates forfeited to
the Commonwealth for Treason, and with the Heirs, Executors, or Assigns, of
such person or persons, as the late Commissioners for Compounding, by virtue or
the said Act, had or might lawfully use or exercise according to the directions
set down in the said Act, and shall also have power to receive, examine, hear,
and determine all matters concerning Claims, Charges or Encumbrances upon any
the estates before mentioned, and to allow such of them as shall appear to have
been Bona fide made or charged before the Cause of Sequestration committed and
also to examine, hear and determine all Questions touching the Delinquency of
any of the persons not formerly judged, and to receive all informations
touching any Debts, or other Estate belonging to any Delinquent or Papist under
Sequestration, and to inquire into and examine what Estates, Charges or
Encumbrances have been heretofore allowed upon the said Sequestered estates, for
life, years, or otherwise, which are expired or satisfied, and to take order
for the re-sequestring of such Estates; And the said Commissioners herein named
shall have power, and are hereby authorized to receive the whole or the
remaining part of the Fines which have been set for the Composition of any
Delinquent who has elapsed the time of payment of all or any part thereof
(either without interest, if the Commonwealth has enjoyed the whole estate, or
with interest, if the Delinquent has enjoied the same) Provided, the said
fines, or the remaining part of such fines, be paid into the Treasury
aforesaid, before the said twenty fifth day of March now next coming; Provided
also, that if it shall appear unto the said Commissioners, that any of the Fines
not yet paid in, were unduly charged or miscast, the said Commissioners shall
have power and authority to rectify the same, and upon payment of such Fines,
remainder of such Fines as are unpaid, or the Fines so rectifyed, the said
Commissioners shall have power to discharge the Sequestrations.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
aforenamed be empowered to issue out their order for payment of such quit-rents,
out-rents, and issues, as are duly charged upon, or issue out of the Estates
under Sequestrations, and the arrears thereof, since the four and twentieth of
December 1649. and also to issue Warrants from time to time for repayment of
moneys there deposited, or unduly received, or that shall hereafter be so
deposited or unduly received, as they shall see cause. And be it likewise
Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every Delinquent whatever not
having compounded, or being inserted into any Act for sale, or the Heirs,
Executors, or Assigns of any such Delinquent deceased, who shall discover any
part of the real or personal estate of any such Delinquent, which estate is not
under actual Sequestration, nor disposed of by the Parliament, shall be admitted
to compound for such estate so by him discovered, at the rates following (that
is to say) for real estates at one full years value, and for personal estates
at one sixth part, and that the Commissioners aforenamed shall admit them to
such Composition accordingly; And that such Fine as shall be set by the
Commissioners according to the rules aforesaid being paid, the Estate so
compounded for shall be from thenceforth absolutely discharged from being
liable to any Sequestration, Forfeiture, or other Question for or in respect of
the Delinquency of such Delinquent. Provided, that such Discovery and
Composition be perfected, and the money paid before the twentieth day of April,
1654. And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Commissioners herein named, and the Commissioners for Sequestrations in the
respective Counties, shall have power, and are hereby authorized, to examine
witnesses upon oath, if they shall see cause, in all Cases depending, or which
shall depend before them, and concerning any estate under Sequestration.

And lastly it is Ordained, That the Commissioners herein named be authorized
and empowered to hear and determine all Causes which were on the one and
thirtieth of January last depending before the Commissioners for Compounding,
according to the Acts and Ordinances for giving Indemnity, as the said
Commissioners might and ought to have done by force of an Act, entitled, An
Act for transferring the powers of the Committee for Indemnity.

Friday, February 10. 1653.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and his Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith printed and published.

Henry Scobell Clerk of the Council.


