seal of the CommonwealthAn Additional Act FOR Stating and Determining the
Accounts of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army in IRELAND.
WHereas by an Act of the last Parliament, bearing date the Fifteenth day of
August, 1652. (Entitled, An Act for stating and determining the Accounts of
such Officers and Soldiers as are or have been employed in the Service of this
Commonwealth in Ireland) Provision is made for stating the Arrears of the said
Officers and Soldiers for the time then past, or for Compounding for the same,
according to the Rules and Directions therein given: But forasmuch as a further
Arrear is incurred since the passing of the said Act, Be it Declared and
Enacted by this present Parliament, and it is hereby Declared and Enacted by
the Authority thereof, That Nicholas Domvile Gent. Robert Jeofferies Gent. and
other the Commissioners in the said Act named, or any two of them, shall be and
are hereby empowered to state, certify, and give Debentures for all or any the
Arrears of the said Officers or Soldiers, which have or shall grow due for
their service in Ireland, until the Three and twentieth day of October next
coming, in this present year One thousand six hundred fifty three; and if any
of the said Officers or Soldiers are or shall be disbanded before that time,
The said Commissioners are required and authorized to state their Accounts,
unto the time of their Disbanding, and to give forth to them Debentures
accordingly: And in case of the decease of any Officer or Soldier before the
said Three and twentieth of October, or the time appointed for their
Disbanding, or of their leaving the Army or Service by License, or of being
Cashiered, and not Sentenced by the Court Martial to lose his or their Arrears;
The said Commissioners are hereby authorized to state his or their Accounts to
the time of such decease, departing or cashiering, and to give forth Debentures
to them, their Executors or Administrators accordingly; or in case they or any
of them shall choose to proceed by the way of Composition for their Arrears,
The said Commissioners are therein to allow them for the Arrears incurred,
since the date of the said former Act. And be it further Enacted and Declared
by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Commissioners be and are hereby
Empowered to Compound for Arrears according to the said Act, with the lawful
Attorney or Attorneys of any Officer or Soldier, who by reason of distance of
place, or because of attendance on their duty, or for other causes cannot
personally repair to the said Commissioners; as also with the Attorney or
Attorneys of the Executor or Administrator of any Officer or Soldier deceased;
and such Compositions with them made, shall be as good and effectual to all
intents and purposes, as if it had been made with the person or persons
immediately to whom the said Arrears were due.

Provided always, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to the giving to any Officer or Soldier, who are adjudged by the said
former Act to have forfeited their Arrears, any benefit or advantage of their
Arrears so forfeited; nor to the taking away any Limitations or Restrictions
provided by the said former Act, concerning the Certificates or Vouchers to be
produced to evidence any Arrears, nor to the making void any penalty laid by
the said former Act on any that shall produce false Certificates or Vouchers,
thereby fraudulently to demand Arrears.

Monday the 8th of August, 1653.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1653.


