blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ACT For settling the JURISDICTION OF THE Court of Admiralty.
FOrasmuch as many Inconveniences do daily arise in relation both to the Trade
of this Commonwealth, and to the commerce with Foreign Parts, through the
uncertainty of Jurisdiction in the Trial of Miratine Causes, Be it Enacted by
this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That the Court of
Admiralty shall have Cognizance and Jurisdiction against the Ship or Vessel,
with the Tackle, Apparel and Furniture thereof, in all Causes which concern the
Repairing, Victualling and furnishing Provisions for the setting of such Ships
or Vessels to Sea, and in all causes of Bottomry: And likewise in all causes of
Contract made beyond the Seas, concerning Shipping or Navigation, or Damages
happening thereon, or other Damages arising at Sea in any Voyage; And likewise
in all causes of Charter-Parties or Contracts for Freight, Bills of Lading,
Mariners wages, or damages in Goods laden aboard Ships, or damages done by one
Ship or Vessel to another, or by Anchors, or want of laying of Buoys: Except
always, That the said Court of Admiralty shall not hold Pleas, or admit Actions
upon any Bills of Exchange, or Accounts betwixt Merchant and Merchant, or their
Factors.

And be it Enacted, That in all and every the matters aforesaid, the said
Admiralty Court shall and may proceed and take Recognizances in due form, and
hear, examine and finally End, Decree, Sentence and Determine the same,
according to the Laws and Customs of the Sea; and put the same Decrees and
Sentences in execution, without any let, trouble or impeachment whatsoever, Any
Law, Statute or Usage to the contrary heretofore made in any wise
notwithstanding; Saving always and reserving to every person and persons that
shall find or think themselves agrieved by any Sentence defintive, or Decree
having the force of a definitive sentence, or importing a Damage not to be
repaired in the definitive Sentence given, or interposed in the Court of
Admiralty; in all or any the Cases aforesaid, their Right of Appeal, in such
form as has heretofore been used, from such Decrees or Sentences in the said
Court of Admiralty.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That John Godolphin
Doctor of the Civil Law, William Clark Doctor of the Civil Law, and
Charls-George Cock Esquire shall be, and are hereby appointed and constituted the
present Judges of the said Court of Admiralty; and they or any two of them, are
Authorized, Empowered and Required to exercise the Office and Offices of Judges
of the said Court: And that each and every of them that shall be present at the
giving any Definitive Sentence in the said Court, shall at the same time, or
before such Sentence given openly in Court, deliver his Reasons in Law of such
his Sentence, or of his Opinion concerning the same; And shall also openly in
Court give answers and solutions (as far as he may) to such Laws, Customs or
other matter, as shall have been brought or alleged in Court, on that part
against whom such Sentence or Opinion shall be given or declared respectively.

Provided, and be it Enacted, That if any of the said Judges of the said Court
of Admiralty, shall in the execution of his said Office, either directly or
indirectly, upon any Claim or Pretense whatsoever, take or receive by himself
or others, of any of the People of this Commonwealth, or of any other person
whatsoever on this side or beyond the Seas, any Bribe or Bribes, Fee or Fees,
sum or sums of Money (other then such Salaries, Fees, and sums of Money, as
shall be granted and allowed unto them for their service by Order of
Parliament) and shall be thereof convicted before the Council of State (who are
hereby required to send for the party offending, upon complaint made) by proof
upon Oath of two substantial Witnesses, or other clear Evidence, That then
every such Judge so offending, shall forfeit the said Salary or Stipend to the
Commonwealth, and shall be immediately removed from his said Place and Office
of Judicature, and be rendered incapable of all Public Trust and Employment in
the Commonwealth of England for ever after.

Provided, That this Act shall continue and be in force until the Five and
twentieth day of March, One thousand six hundred fifty and four, and no longer.

Saturday the 30th of July, 1653.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1653.


