AN ACT FOR SEVERAL Lands and Estates Forfeited to the COMMONWEALTH FOR
TREASON, Appointed to be sold For the use of the NAVY.



Wednesday, 4th August, 1652.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.

AN ACT For several Lands and Estates Forfeited to the COMMONWEALTH FOR
TREASON, Appointed to be sold for the use of the NAVY.
WHereas the Estates of William Lord Craven, Thomas Cook of Gray's Inn in the
County of Middlesex Esquire John Forcer of Haberhouse in the County of Durham,
Ralph Pudsey of Stapleton in the County of Durham, Robert Blundel of
Ince-Blundel in the County of Lancaster, Thomas Clifton of Litham in the County
of Lancaster, Richard Massey of Rixam in the County of Lancaster, Edward
Scasebrook of Scasebrook in the County of Lancaster, George Smith of
Quenneborough in the County of Leicester, John Jones of Dingastow in the County
of Monmouth, Lancelot Errington of East Denton in the County of Northumberland,
Nicholas Errington of Pont-Island in the County of Northumberland, Henry
Errington of Befront in the County of Northumberland, John Lawson of St.
Anthonies in the County of Northumberland, Sir Edward Ratcliff of Dilston in
the County of Northumberland Knight and Baconet, Peter Gifford of Chillington
in the County of Stafford, Walter Fowler of St. Thomas in the County of
Stafford, Thomas Brook of Madely in the County of Salop, John Weston of Maze in
the County of Surrey, Philip Hungate of Saxton in the County of York, Robert
Dolman of Badsworth in the County of York, Francis Biddulph of Biddulph in the
County of Stafford, Philip Anne of Burwallis in the County of York, Sir Walter
Vavasor of Haslewood in the County of York, William Middleton of Stockhal in
the County of York, John Wiseman of Wimbish in the County of Essex Esquire Henry
Killigrew of Lanrack in the County of Cornwall, Sir Henry Farrar of
Skillingthorp in the County of Lincoln, and Henry late Viscount Dunbar of
Holdernes in the County of York deceased, Have been, and are hereby Declared
and Adjudged to be justly forfeited by them for their several Treasons against
the Parliament and People of England; Be it therefore Enacted by this present
Parliament, and the Authority thereof, That all the Manors, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, with their and every of their Appurtenances whatsoever,
which they the said William Lord Craven, Thomas Cook, John Forcer, Ralph
Pudsey, Robert Blundel, Thomas Clifton, Richard Massey, Edward Scasebrook,
George Smith, John Jones, Lancelot Errington, Nicholas Errington, Henry
Errington, John Lawson, Sir Edward Ratcliff, Peter Gifford, Walter Fowler,
Thomas Brook, John Weston, Philip Hungate, Robert Dolman, Francis Biddulph,
Philip Anne, sir Walter Vavasor, William Middleton, John Wiseman, Henry
Killigrew, sir Henry Farrar and Henry late Viscount Dunbar, or any of them, or
any for their use or uses, or in trust for any of them, were seized or
possessed of in Possession, Reversion or Remainder, on the Twentieth day of
May. One thousand six hundred forty two, or at any time since; And all Rights
of Entry, and the whole Estates, Rights, Titles and Interests of them and every
of them, in or to the said Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, which
they or any of them had the said Twentieth day of May, One thousand six hundred
forty two, or at any time since (Excepting Rectories impropriate, Tithes,
Composition for tithes, Portions of Tithes, Donatives, Oblations, Obventions
and Rents issuing out of tithes) Be and are hereby Vested, Adjudged and Deemed
to be, and are hereby in the real and actual possession and seizin of William
Skinner, William Robinson, Sampson Sheffeild, Samuel Gooking, Henry Sealy,
William Lisle and Arthur Samuel, Esqs and the Survivors and Survivor of them,
and their Heirs and Assigns; And that they and the survivors and survivor of
them and their Heirs, shall and may have the Benefit and Advantage of the said
Rights of Entry unto the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and
every of them; And that they, their Heirs and Assigns, shall hold all and every
part and parcel of the said premises of the Manor of East Greenwich, in free
and common Soccage by Fealty only, and by no other Tenure or Service
whatsoever: Nevertheless upon trust and confidence, That the said William
Skinner and other the persons aforenamed, or any five or more of them shall
have, hold and enjoy all and singular the premises and every of them, for the
only Use and Benefit of the Navy; Saving to all and every person and persons,
Bodies Politic and Corporate, their Heirs, Successors, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them (other then the said William Lord
Craven, Thomas Cook, John Forcer, Ralph Pudsey, Robert Blundel, Thomas Clifton,
Richard Massey, Edward Scasebrook, George Smith, John Jones, Lancelot
Errington, Nicholas Errington, Henry Errington, John Lawson, sir Edward
Ratcliff, Peter Gifford, Walter Fowler, Thomas Brook, John Weston, Philip
Hungate, Robert Dolman, Francis Biddulph, Philip Anne, sir Walter Vavasor,
William Middleton, John Wiseman, Henry Killigrew, sir Henry Farrar and Henry
late Viscount Dunbar or any of them, and all others claiming and to claim by,
from or under them or any of them, since the Twentieth day of May One thousand
six hundred forty two; and other then the Rights and Title of Dower of the
respective Wife and Wives of them or any of them) All such Estates, Interests,
Rents, Encumbrances, Charges, Rights in Law or Equity, which they or any of
them had or ought to have had, in or to the said Manors, Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments or any of them, before the said Twentieth day of May, One
thousand six hundred forty two; As also all and every the Estates and Interests
given, granted, demised, allowed of or confirmed by any Act, Order or Ordinance
of Parliament, or lawful Authority derived from them, unto any person or
persons, Body Politic or Corporate, who have constantly adhered and been
faithful to this Parliament, and whose Estates have not otherwise been revoked
or altered by this Parliament: If such person or persons, Bodies Politic or
Corporate, their Heirs, Successors or Assigns, do before the First day of
October, which shall be in the year One thousand six hundred fifty and two,
deliver in writing unto the Commissioners appointed by an Act, Entitled, An
Act for Transferring the Powers of the Committees for Obstructions, or any four
or more of them, a Particular of such his or their Right, Title, Interest,
Claim, Demand, Encumbrance or Estate in Law or Equity, and shall obtain an
Allowance thereof by the said Commissioners or any four or more of them, at or
before the First day of November, which shall be in the year of our Lord God,
One thousand six hundred fifty and two; which said Commissioners are hereby
appointed to be Commissioners for removing of Obstructions in the Sale of all
and every the premises hereby appointed to be sold; And shall have, use and
exercise all and every the like Powers and Authorities in reference to the
premises hereby appointed to be sold, as the said Commissioners may or ought to
do in relation to the sale of any other the Lands and Estates in an Act,
Entitled, An Act for Sale of several Lands and Estates forfeited to the
Commonwealth for Treason, mentioned; And the Trustees, Treasurers, Register,
Register-Accomptant, Surveyor-General, and all other persons employed in and
about this Service, are Required to observe such Orders and Directions as from
time to time they shall receive from the said Commissioners; And the said
Commissioners shall and may allow all incident charges for the necessary
carrying on of this service; And the said Trustees or any five or more of them
respectively, shall and may, and are hereby required and authorized to
contract, bargain, sell, alien and convey, All and every the said Manors and
Premises, and to execute all Powers and Authorities in the sale thereof,
according to the Rates and Proportions, Rules and Directions limited and
expressed in the said former Act for Sale of several Lands and Estates
forfeited to the Commonwealth for Treason, and in such manner as they may or
might have done in the Sale of any the Manors or Lands vested and settled in
them by the aforesaid Act: And that all and every Bargains and Sales,
Conveyances and Assurances to be made of any Estate or Estates in Fee-simple,
or for term of Life or Lives of any the premises, according to such Contracts
as shall be agreed upon between the Purchaser or Purchasers, and the said
Trustees, or any five or more of them respectively, shall be good and effectual
in Law, to all intents and purposes: And all and every Purchaser and Purchasers
of the Premises, or any part thereof, his and their Heirs, Successors and
Assigns respectively, shall have, hold and enjoy the premises that shall be by
him or them so Purchased, discharged of all Trusts and Accounts, whereunto the
said Trustees, or any or either of them, are or may be liable by virtue of this
Act; and of all Suits and Questions that may arise, or be moved upon pretense
of Sale at Vndervalues; and of all Claims and Demands whatsoever; and of all
Encumbrances made by the said Trustees, or any claiming under them or any of
them: And that the same shall not be liable unto, but freed and discharged of
and from all and all manner of Statutes, Judgments, Recognizances, Dowers,
Ioyntures, and other Acts and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done or
suffered, or to be had, made, done or suffered, by, from or under the said
Trustees, or any of them respectively, other then such Conveyances and
Assurances as shall be had, made, done or suffered, in performance and
pursuance of the Sales and Contracts respectively made, according to the
meaning of this present Act. And if any Action shall be brought against the
said Trustees, Treasurers, or other Officers or Officer, or any of them in
execution of this Act, or any former Act, Ordinance, Orders or Instructions
whereunto it relates; That then he or they are hereby enabled to plead the
General Issue, and to give this Act in Evidence: And if Judgment shall be had
for the Defendant or Defendants in such Action, he and they shall recover
double Costs. And whereas the Parliament do find it necessary to raise a
considerable Sum of Money for the carrying on the Services of the Navy, Be it
therefore Enacted, That the sum of Two hundred thousand pounds shall be
borrowed upon the Security of the Lands of the said persons, whose Estates are
by this Act appointed to be sold by way of doubling, the like sum as it is or
shall be due unto any person or persons, body politic or corporate, upon the
Public Faith; or which might have been Doubled by virtue of any Act, Order or
Ordinance of this present Parliament, and has not formerly been Doubled upon
the credit of Bishops, and Deans and Chapters Lands; or upon the Lands of the
late King, Queen and Prince; or upon the Fee-Farm Rents: And that all and every
person and persons, Body Politic or Corporate, for every sum or sums of Money
he or they shall further lend, may and shall be secured the moneys formerly
owing as aforesaid; And such other moneys as he or they shall advance for the
raising of Two hundred thousand pounds, upon the Lands of the said persons in
this Act named, in such sort as by the beforementioned Act, Entitled, An Act
for the Sale of several Lands and Estates forfeited to the Commonwealth for
Treason, is Enacted or Provided: And the said Trustees are hereby Empowered and
Authorized to pursue the Rules and Instructions for Doubling of money, as is
appointed and declared in the several Acts of this present Parliament for the
sale of Dean and Chapters Lands. And be it surther Enacted, That Sir John
Wollaston Knight. and Alderman of the City of London, Thomas Andrews, John Dethick
and Francis Allein, Aldermen of the said City, shall be Treasurers for the said
Service; and that they or any two of them, are hereby empowered and authorized
to receive the said Two hundred thousand pounds, and all other such sum and
sums of money as from time to time ought to be paid in to the Treasury by
virtue of this Act, which shall be issued out and paid according to such
Orders, Warrants, Directions and Instructions, as they shall from time to time
receive from the Parliament, for the use of the Navy as aforesaid. And be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Register named in the said
Act (Entitled An Act for the Sale of several Lands and Estates, forfeited to
the Commonwealth for Treason) and his Deputy, are hereby authorized and
required, upon a Warrant or Warrants from the said Trustees, to make out, rate
and sign, one or more Particulars of all and every the premises hereby
appointed to be sold: And that the respective Trustees do upon such Particular
proceed to Contract with any Purchaser or Purchasers for the same, and to make
sale thereof accordingly. And be it further Enacted and Ordained, That the
respective Trustees, Treasurers, Register, Register-Accomptant, and
Surveyor-General, named in the aforesaid Act for sale of several Lands and
Estates forfeited to the Commonwealth for Treason, shall do, execute, observe
and keep, all and every the like powers, Authorities, Orders, Directions and
Instructions, in relation to the premises hereby appointed to be sold, or any
of them, as they and every of them ought to do, or to have done in reference to
other the Manors, Lands, Tenenements and Hereditaments of the said Traitors and
persons in the said former Act mentioned; and shall have and receive such and
the like Salaries and Fees for them and their Clerks respectively, and in such
sort and manner, as they and every of them respectively are and ought to have
and receive for their respective Services and Employments, touching the sale of
other the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, by the aforesaid Act
appointed to be sold.

Provided also, That if any person or persons shall Double any sum of money
upon forged Debentures, or other false Certificates, or any other fraudulent
way or means, and thereof shall be convicted by oath before the Commissioners
for Obstructions, within one year after such Doubling, every such person so
offending shall forfeit treble the said Sum, the one Moiety thereof to the use
of the Commonwealth, and the other Moiety to such person or persons as shall
discover the same before the said Commissioners for Obstructions in this Act
named, and shall be committed to prison, and his Estate s^questred by the said
Commissioners for Obstructions until payment thereof.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That all and every person or
persons having any Estate, Right, Title or Interest, of, in or unto any the
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments by this Act intended or mentioned to be put
to Sale, or that has any Statute, Judgment, Recognizance or Rent which were
without fraud, and for good and valuable Consideration had, made and
acknowledged before any Treason respectively committed by any of the persons in
this Act named, whose Estates are appointed to be sold, and shall obtain an
Allowance thereof by the said Commissioners for removing of Obstructions,
before the First day of December, One thousand six hundred fifty and two, That
then the same shall be good and effectual to such person or persons, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns respectively, to all Intents and
Purposes, according to the Tenor thereof, Any thing in this Act to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by this present Parliament, and by Authority
thereof, That all Reversions and Remainders expectant upon any Estate Tail,
upon any Conveyance made by the said Traitor or Traitors, or any other person
or persons, by or under whom they or any of them Claim, of any the Manors,
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of any the Traitor or Traitors in this Act,
or in the aforesaid Act for Sale of several Lands and Estates forfeited to the
Commonwealth for Treason, named, not actually bested in the possession of such
Tenant in Tail by the death of such Traitor or Traitors, before the Five and
twentieth day of March, One thousand six hundred fifty two, which by Fine and
Recovery might be Docqued by any of the said Traitor or Traitors, are and shall
be to all Intents and Purposes Forfeited for their said Treasons; And as well
the said Traitors and their Heirs and Assigns, and all other persons and their
heirs in Reversion or Remainder upon any such Estate, shall be for ever barred,
as if such Traitor or Traitors had actually levied a Fine, and suffered a
Recovery for doing thereof, Any Allowance, Law, Statute or Usage to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That the Trustees in this Act
named, shall be, and are hereby Authorized and Required to Convey unto George
Joyce of Portland, in the County of Dorset Esquire his Heirs and Assigns for ever,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments appointed by this Act to be sold, of the
clear Yearly value of One hundred pounds per Annum, over and above all Charges
and Reprises, any thing in this or any former Act contained to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, That this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall not extend
nor be prejudicial unto, bar or destroy, extinguish nor take away any Right,
Interest, Reversion or Remainder saved or preserved, or mentioned or intended
to be saved or preserved unto Charles Fleetwood Esquire and unto Frances his late
wife, their or either of their Heirs or Assigns, unto any Manors, Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments whatsoever, mentioned in or by the late Act for Sale
of several Lands and Estates forfeited to the Commonwealth for Treason, by
Order of Parliament published the Sixteenth day of July, One thousand six
hundred fifty and one.

Provided nevertheless, and it is further Enacted, That in recompense and
satisfaction of such Judgments, Statutes, Recognizances, Mortgages and other
Iucumbrances, as by the true intent and provision of this Act are to be
satisfied; The said Trustees or any five or more of them, upon the return of
the respective Surveys, are hereby Empowered and Authorized to set out such
proportion of the Lands so surveyed, as will be sutficient to satisfy such
Encumbrance and Encumbrances; And after such Encumbrances proved, and the Debts
allowed of by the Commissioners for removing of Obstructions, to sell and
convey such proportionable Part of the said Lands so furveyed, to such Creditor
or Creditors or their Assigns, in recompense and satisfaction of such
Encumbrance and Encumbrances, either for Life, Lives, Years or in Fee; the said
Trustees taking care in satisfying such Encumbrances, to satisfy the same in
such priority and course as the same ought to be satisfied by the Laws of this
Land; and upon such Conveyance and Conveyances made, the said Creditor and
Creditors, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall acknowledge
Satisfaction upon Record, or otherwise release and discharge such Judgments,
Statutes, Recognizances, Mortgages and other Encumbrances respectively, as the
Council of the said Trustees and for the Commonwealth shall direct and advise:
And such Acknowledgement, Release and Discharge shall be good and effectual in
Law to discharge the said Debts and Encumbrances, as against the residue of the
said Lands intended to be sold by this Act, Any Law, Statute or Usage to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Wednesday, 4th August, 1652.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


