AN ACT Appointing a Committee for the Army, AND TREASURERS AT WAR.

Anglo-Irish Protectorate blazon or coat of arms

Wednesday the 25th of July, 1653.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.



London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1653.

AN ACT Appointing a Committee for the Army, And Treasurers at WAR.
FOr the more effectual and speedy bringing in, and orderly issuing forth and
disposing of the Moneys payable upon the Six Months Assessment, of One hundred
and twenty thousand pounds a Month, continued from the Four and twentieth day
of June, 1653. to the Five and twentieth day of December following, by a
Declaration and Order of his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, with the
Advice of his Council of Officers, Entitled, A Declaration and Order of his
Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, and his Council of Officers, for the
continuance of the Assessment for six Months, from the 24th of June, 1653. to
the 25th of December following, at the rate of One hundred and twenty thousand
pounds by the Month, toward the maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this
Commonwealth: And of all and every other sum and sums of Money, set apart and
appointed by any Order, Ordinance or Act of the late Parliament, for the use
and payment of the Forces of this Commonwealth, in England, Ireland and
Scotland, or that shall be set apart and appointed for their use, before the
Five and twentieth day of December aforesaid; Be it Enacted by this present
Parliament, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority thereof, That William
Sidenham, Richard Norton, Colonel John Clerk, William Lockart, Edward Clud,
Ralph Wolmer, John Pine, Richard Lucy, William West, George Fleetwood, Richard
Cust, Edward Horsman, William Neast, Robert Bennet, John Anlaby, James Philips
and Richard Price, Esqs or any five of them, shall be, and are hereby appointed
and authorized to be a Committee for the Army: And the said Committee for the
Army, or any five of them, are hereby appointed and authorized to have the care
and managing of the whole business of bringing in the moneys appointed to be
assessed, levied, collected and paid, in all and every the counties, cities,
towns and places in England and Wales, toward the said six Months Assessment
of One hundred and twenty thousand pounds a month; and of all other moneys due
and in arrear from the said counties, cities, towns and places, upon any Act,
Order or Ordinance of the late Parliament appointing moneys for the use of the
said Forces; and shall have full power, and are hereby authorized to set down
and give such order, as they shall think meet and fit for the full assessing,
reassessing, due collecting, levying and payment of all and every the said
Assessments, sums of Money and Arrears; and such Orders and Directions as shall
be therein given by the said Committee, or any five of them, shall be observed
and obeyed by all and every the Commissioners, Receivers, Collectors, Sub
collectors, and other persons that have been or shall be entrusted with or
employed in the assessing, levying, collecting, receiving or payment of all or
any part of the Assessments or Sums beforementioned. And the said Committee
for the Army, or any five of them, are hereby further authorized and empowered,
upon any complaint to be made of any neglect of duty, or other miscariages of
any person or persons already employed, or that shall be hereafter employed or
concerned in the assessing, levying, collecting, receiving or payment of any
part of the Assessments or Sums before mentioned, to hear, examine and
determine of and concerning the same, and as well therein, as in all matters of
difference between any the counties, cities, towns or places aforesaid; or
between any the Hundreds, Divisions, Townships or Hamblets therein, to order,
conclude, adjudge, execute and do, as they in their good discretion shall think
fit: And to punish all and every such person or persons as shall neglect or
abuse any Trust committed, or that shall be committed unto them, in or
concerning the premises, be it by Fine or Imprisonment of the parties
offending, the Fine not exceeding twenty pounds, to be employed to the use of
the Army; and to cause the full and speedy assessing, collecting and bringing
in of all the aforesaid moneys, either by making Dispatches, giving Directions,
Rules or Instructions, appointing of Forces, or otherwise to cause obedience
thereunto.

And be it further Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the said Committee, or any five of them, shall and are hereby
Empowered and Authorized, to nominate, appoint and employ in the execution of
the Trust hereby committed unto them, such Clerks, Agents, Messengers or
Servants, and to make and give unto them such Salaries, Allowances and
Satisfactions as they shall think fit.

And be it further Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the said Committee for the Army, or any five of them, shall
have Power, and are hereby Authorized to use their endeavors for the borrowing
of such Money, as they shall find necessary for the supply of the said Forces,
not exceeding the sum of Two hundred thousand pounds, and to give power by
their Warrant to the Treasurers at War, to repay the same with Interest (after
the rate of six pounds for every Hundred pounds by the year, for so long time
as the same shall be forborne and unpaid) out of any such moneys as either are or
shall be appointed for the use of the said Forces.

And be it Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the said Committee for the Army, or any five of them, shall be, and are hereby
authorized from time to time, to order, direct, appoint and send such sum and
sums of money into Ireland and Scotland, for the use and payment of the Forces
in either of the said places, out of the said six Months Assessments, of One
hundred and twenty thousand pounds by the Month; or out of any other Sums that
have been or shall be appointed for the use of the Army, as they shall from
time to time find necessary to be allowed and sent to any of the said Forces;
and to Impressed and take up all such Carriages by Land, and such Ships or
Vessels, not being in Pay or Service of the Commonwealth, as they shall find
necessary for the safe Carriage or Transporting of any such Treasure, as shall
be by them appointed and assigned to be sent into Ireland or Scotland, for the
use of the Forces there, or to any other place for the use of any other Forces
in the service of the Commonwealth; and to pay for such Carriages and Ships, as
they shall have occasion to use for the purposes aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Committee
for the Army, or any five of them, shall have power, and are hereby authorized
by their Warrants from time to time to issue forth, and dispose of all and
every such sum and sums of money, as are appointed to be paid and received
toward the said six Months Assessment, of One hundred and twenty thousand
pounds by the Month; or as have been appointed to be received, and are or
shall be received for the use of the Army, by the Treasurers at War hereafter
in this Act named; or by any other person or persons formerly appointed and
constituted to be Treasurers at War, by virtue of any Act, Order or Ordinance
of the late Parliament, for the use and payment of the Forces established or
appointed by the late Parliament, or the Authority or Direction thereof, or by
the Council of State, or that shall be appointed by this present Parliament, or
the authority or direction thereof; and for the payment and satisfaction of
such provisions of Clothes or Victuals, as shall be by Order of Parliament, or
by ye Council of State from time to time contracted for, and bought for the use
of the said Forces; and for the payment and satisfaction for such Drugs and
Medicaments, or other Necessaries for any sick or wounded Soldiers (whilst
they continue in the Army) as the said Committee for the Army, or such number
of them as aforesaid shall find necessary to be by them bought and provided,
for the use of all or any part of the aforesaid Forces: And for all other the
incident charges of the Army, and other the purposes in this Act before
expressed.

Provided, That the daily pay by such Warrants allowed to the respective
Officers and Soldiers in England and Scotland, shall not exceed the Allowance
made by the late Parliament, in the Establishment passed by them, commencing
the Twentieth of October, 1651. And that the Monthly charge of the said
Forces, shall not exceed the monthly sum appointed by the late Parliament, in
their Order of the First of January, 1652.

Provided also, That no part of the One hundred and fifty thousand pounds, by
Order of the late Parliament of the Seventh of April, 1652. set apart for the
satisfaction of the Arrears due to the Army for Service in Scotland, shall be
disposed or appointed to any other use, then for the satisfaction of the said
Arrears, until such Arrears are satisfied; save only, That in case it shall
appear upon the clear stating and perfecting of the said Arrear, and computing
the sums thereupon due and unsatisfied, that any part of the said One hundred
and fifty thousand pounds can be spared for any other use; That then the said
Committee for the Army, shall and may by their Warrants issue forth and dispose
of the overplus money, which shall so remain over and above, what shall be
requisite for the satisfaction of the said Arrear, to any the uses and purposes
before in this Act expressed.

Provided also, That the sum of Forty thousand pounds a month, shall out of
each of the said Six months Assessment of One hundred and twenty thousand
pounds, be set apart and appointed for the use of the Navy: and shall (together
with all other sums remaining unpaid, of the moneys formerly appointed for the
use of the Navy, out of the last Six months Assessment of One hundred and
twenty thousand pounds a month, ending the 24th of June, 1653.) be by Warrant
of the said Committee for the Army, paid to the Treasurers of the Navy for that
use.

Provided also, That the said Committee for the Army, or any five of them,
shall and may, and are hereby authorized by their Warrants, to issue forth and
dispose of all or any part of the Assessments for the Army, appointed by any
Act, Order or Ordinance of the late Parliament, before the 25th of December,
1651. which were in arrear, and not paid in to the Treasurers at War the
seventh of April, 1652. and have since that time been paid, or shall hereafter
be paid unto the former Treasurers at War; or unto any other persons that are
or shall be appointed to receive the same, for the satisfaction and payment of
such Free Quarter and Provisions, as were taken by any the Forces that in the
year 1651. marched out of Scotland into England, upon the Armies advance from
Scotland to the late Siege at Worcester; or by any other Forces at the Siege of
Worcester, in the time of their march, or during their continuance in
Worcestershire by reason of the aforesaid Siege.

And be it further Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the said Committee for the Army shall in every Warrant granted
by them, express for what purpose the money contained in the same is to be
issued: And the Treasurers at War hereafter in this Act named, and all other
former Treasurers at War, are hereby enjoined and required to observe such
Warrants or Orders, as they shall receive from the Committee for the Army, or
any five of them, for the purposes aforesaid; which Warrant or Warrants,
together with the Receipt thereupon, under the hand of the person or persons to
whom any sum shall be directed to be paid, or his or their Assignee or
Assignees, shall be to all and every the said Treasurers at War a sufficient
Discharge.

And be it Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
John Blackwel the younger Esquire and Richard Dean Esquire shall be, and are hereby
appointed to be Treasurers at War, for the receiving, paying and issuing forth
of the said Six months Assessment of One hundred and twenty thousand pounds a
month; and of the One hundred thousand pounds by Order of the late Parliament,
of the first of January, 1652. appointed to be paid out of the moneys arising
upon the sale of, and Composition for Delinquents Estates, for the use of the
Army: And of all other moneys that before the expiration of the said six
months Assessment shall be appointed for the use and payment of the Forces
aforesaid, and charges incident thereunto: And also for the receiving, paying
and issuing forth of all other moneys, that by any Act or Order of the late
Parliament have been since the sixteenth of December, 1651. appointed for the
use of the Army, and which have not been, or shall not before the Nine and
twentieth of July, 1653. be received by the Treasurers at War formerly
appointed to receive the same: And the respective Receivers-General, that are
or shall be appointed to receive any part of the said six months Assessment,
shall forthwith after the receipt thereof, transmit and pay or cause to be
paid, the moneys by them so received, unto the said Treasurers at War, or where
or to whom they shall appoint to receive the same; and the Receipt of the said
Treasurers at War shall be to the respective Receivers-General, and to all
other persons who shall by virtue of this Act pay any money unto them for the
purposes aforesaid, a sufficient discharge: And the said Treasurers at War, for
their pains in receiving, paying, and issuing forth of all such moneys as shall
be by virtue of this Act received by them, and defraying the necessary charges
and expenses they shall be put unto in the doing thereof: And in consideration
that they shall execute the employment of Treasurers at War for six months,
from the Four and twentieth of June, One thousand six hundred fifty three,
shall have and receive the sum of Twelve hundred pounds, together with such
extraordinary Charges as shall be occasioned by the Portage or Transporting of
moneys by Land or Sea; which the said Committee for the Army, or any five of
them, are hereby authorized and appointed by their Order, to allow unto them
from time to time as they shall think fit.

Wednesday the 27th of July, 1653.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.


