An Additional Act FOR SALE OF THE FEE-FARM RENTS.

seal of the Commonwealth

Thursday the Third of June, 1652.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.

An Additional Act For Sale of the Fee-Farm Rents.
WHereas by an Act of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Additional Act for
the Sale of the Fee-Farm-Rents, and for the doubling of Money thereupon, The
Trustees and Contractors appointed for sale of the said Rents, have in
pursuance of the said Act made several Contracts and Sales of part of the
premises, by which the sum of Two hundred and fifty thousand pounds appointed
by the said Act to be advanced and secured, is advanced and secured: And
notwithstanding there yet remains Five thousand pounds by the year of the said
Rents unsold; The Parliament taking into consideration the present occasions
the Commonwealth has of Moneys for carrying on of the Public Service, Do
Enact and Declare, and be it Enacted and Declared by the Authority of this
present Parliament, That the sum of Twenty five thousand pounds shall be
borrowed upon the security of such part of the premises as shall remain over
and above the Two hundred and fifty thousand pounds, appointed to be Doubled by
the Act of Parliament aforesaid, by way of Doubling the like sum as shall be
due unto any person or persons, Body Politic or Corporate, which by an Act of
this present Parliament (Entitled, An Act of the Commons of England in
Parliament assembled, for the abolishing of Deans, Dean and Chapters, Cannons,
Prebends, and other Offices and Titles of or belonging to any Cathedral or
Collegiate Church and Chapel within England and Wales) or by any additional
Act, Instructions or Votes in Parliament might have been doubled upon the
Security held out by the said Act. And be it further Enacted, That it shall and
may be lawful to and for any person and persons, his or their Executors and
Administrators, Body Politic or Corporate, to grant such his and their
Publique-Faith Moneys, or other Moneys so admitted to be Doubled as aforesaid,
and the Bills, Certificates or Receipts for the same, and the Interest due and
to be due thereupon unto any other person and persons; and all and every such
Assignee and Assignees, Bodies Politic and Corporate, shall have the like
benefit and advantages, to all intents and purposes as the first Lender or
Owner might have had within the intent of this Act: And that it shall and may
be lawful for any person or persons, Body Politic or Corporate, who shall
advance by way of Doubling as aforesaid, any sum or sums of money toward the
raising of the said sum of Twenty five thousand pounds upon the security of the
premises, to assign the moneys which shall be due unto him or them upon such
Doubling, and the Interest and benefit thereof to any other person or persons,
Body Politic or Corporate, that shall become a Purchaser of any part of the
premises: And that all and every sum and sums of Money due by or upon such
doubled Bills, shall be accepted, reputed and taken in satisfaction of the
whole, or any part of the Moneys contracted for upon such Purchase, as if the
same had been paid in ready Moneys: And all Officers concerned therein, are
hereby authorized and required to admit and allow the same, and to proceed
accordingly. And be it Enacted and Ordained, That Colonel Robert Manwaring
shall be Register-Accomptant for the said premises, And that he shall ascertain
the Principal and Interest (where Interest is allowed) of such moneys as shall
be Doubled by virtue of this Act, and the same to certify unto the Treasurers
formerly appointed for the said premises; and upon such Certificate of what
Principal and Interest is due to any as shall be Lenders within the intent of
this Act, the said Treasures, or any two of them are hereby authorized to give
to such Lender or Lenders a Receipt or Receipts, as well for the old Debt and
Interest stated and certified (as aforesaid) as also for the moneys lent
toward the advancement of the said sum, provided that the said
Register-Accomptant do not certify any Debt unto the said Treasurers, but such
as shall be first allowed of by the Trustees for the said premises, or any five
or more of them. And be it further Enacted and Declared, That such Lender or
Lenders, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns shall have allowed to him
and them, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in the purchase of any
part of the premises, Six pounds per centum by the year where Interest is
allowed for such moneys as shall be due unto him or them upon the said
Treasurers Receipts as aforesaid. And it is further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That every person and persons, Body Politic or Corporate, who
shall lend any Moneys on the said Security as aforesaid, and shall have his or
their Debt and Interest stated and certified by the said Register Accomptant as
aforesaid, shall pay in to the Treasurers in the first recited Act named, the
Moneys wherewith he ought to double as aforesaid, within Ten days next after
the Certificate thereof made to the said Treasurers, or otherwise shall forfeit
his or their Moneys allowed to be doubled by the said Trustees as aforesaid,
unless he or they show good cause to the Treasurers, or any two them, to be
allowed by them or any two of them for his or their neglect. Provided only,
That the said Trustees shall not nor do not after the Twentieth day of March,
in the year One thousand six hundred fifty one, sell any of the Fee-farm Rents,
or other Rents mentioned in the said Acts under Ten years purchase. And it is
further Enacted, That the said Trustees and Contractors for sale of the said
Rents, shall and may sell any of the Fee-farm Rents, or other Rents mentioned
in the said Act, and in two other Acts of this present Parliament, the one
Entitled An Act for selling the Fee-farm Rents belonging to the Commonwealth
of England, formerly payable to the Crown of England, Duchy of Lancaster, and
Duchy of Cornwall: And by an other Act, entitled, An Act for the further
Explanation of the former Act, Entitled, An Act for selling the Fee-farm Rents
belonging to the Commonwealth of England, formerly payable to the Crown of
England, Duchy of Lancaster, and Duchy of Cornwall. And the said Trustees and
Contractors, or any five or more of them, are hereby enabled and authorized to
sell and convey any part of the premises unto any person or persons, Body
Politic or Corporate, as shall be a Purchaser thereof according to the Rules,
Instructions and Directions as are given and set down in the said Acts or
either of them: And the Purchaser or Purchasers, his or their Heirs or Assigns,
shall and may have, take and use the same, such or the like benefits and
advantages, means, Process and Proceedings for the recovery thereof, as any
Purchaser or Purchasers of any of the Fee-farm Rents, or other things
mentioned, or intended in or by any of the aforesaid Acts, may, can or ought to
have or take by virtue and force of any the said Acts. And be it further
enacted, That the Trustees, Contractors, Comptroller, Register and
Register-Accomptant named in the said Acts or any of them, shall and may put in
execution, the same Powers and Authorities, in relation to the premises set to
sale by this Act, as they have done or might have done by virtue of any of the
said Acts of Parliament appointing the sale of the aforesaid Fee-farm Rents.
And be it further enacted and ordained, That the said Register-Accomptant shall
have paid unto him, for him and his Clerks, and other charges for their service
in and about the Premises, out of such Moneys as shall be doubled upon the said
security, the sum of One hundred pounds for his service herein; And the said
Treasurers are hereby enabled and authorized to make payment thereof
accordingly: provided that the Trustees, Contractors, Treasurers, Register and
Comptroller shall have and receive only two pence upon every pound so
contracted for upon doubling, presently at the making of the said Contract,
which shall be allowed in part of the sum contracted for, to be in lieu of the
Sallaries for themselves and their Clerks, and to be distributed amongst them
according to the directions of the first recited Act. And be it further enacted
and ordained by this present Parliament, And it is enacted and ordained by
authority of the same, That all Moneys called Creation Money, charged or
chargeable upon or out of any Honors, Manors, Lands, Tenements or
hereditaments, or upon any body Politic and Corporate, or payable out of the
public Revenue of the late Crown, unto any Duke, Marquis, Earl, Viscount or
Baron, shall from the thirtieth of January, One thousand six hundred forty
eight, cease, determine and be utterly void; And such Duke, Marquis, Earl,
Viscount and Baron, and every other person, Body politic and Corporate, shall
pay his and their full Fee-farm Rent and other rents chargeable as aforesaid,
and payable by any Letters Patents or other Grant to the Commonwealth, or such
person or persons as shall purchase the same, without any reteiner, deduction
or defalkation. And it is further enacted and ordained by the authority
aforesaid, That all such Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, whereof
the said Trustees in the said Act named were at the time of the making of the
said Act, or at any time since seized or possessed, which were at the time of
making of the said Act charged or chargeable with the payment of any Fee-farm
Rents, are and shall be and stand charged and chargeable therewith,
notwithstanding any Unity of possession for or by reason of the said Act, and
are and stand hereby revived: And that all and every person or persons who has
or shall purchase the said Fee-farm Rents, shall and may quietly and peaceably
hold and enjoy the same to them and their heirs and assigns; according to their
respective purchases; and shall have the same and the like benefit of Nomine
penae's, powers to distrein, and other advantages, ways and means for the
recovery of the said Rents and all arrears of them, as the late King, Queen and
Prince, or any of them, or any other person or persons in trust for them, or to
their use, had or could, or might have had, the aforesaid Act or any thing
therein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And it
is further enacted and ordained by the authority aforesaid, That the Clerk of
the Pipe, the several Auditors, Deputy or Deputies, and all other officers
whatsoever of the Exchequer, or of any other Court or office of Record, shall
and do from time to time, make forth such Certificats and particulars of all
the Fee-farm Rents, Bayliwicks, Liberties, Hundreds, Franchises, and other
Rents saleable by any of the aforesaid Acts, according to such order or
direction as they or any of them shall from time to time receive from the
Trustees named in the first mentioned Act, or any five of them, which order and
directions the said Trustees or any five or more of them are hereby empowered to
give and make forth; and the said Clerk of the Pipe, Auditors and other
officers before mentioned, and every of them respectively are hereby required
to observe accordingly; for which several and respective Certificats and
particulars, the said Clerk of ye Pipe, Auditors and other of the said
officers, shall be and are hereby allowed to receive and take six shillings and
eight pence by the press, and three shillings four pence the half press, and no
more: And the said Clerk of the Pipe, Auditor, and other the said respective
officers, and their deputies or Clerks, are hereby required and enjoined, not
to receive of any of the purchasers of the Rents aforesaid, any other Fee or
reward, nor any thing by way of Gratuity, or for expedition or otherwise for
the said Certificates or particulars, besides the said Fee of six shillings
eight pence by the press, and three shillings four pence the half press, hereby
allowed as aforesaid; which said presses and half presses are to be made
according to the usual manner of the Exchequer: And the said Trustees are
hereby authorized and empowered to require from all Sheriffs, Receivers,
Bailiffs, Collectors, Reeves or others, who have at any time since the making
of the said first mentioned Act, Collected or received, or shall at any time
hereafter Collect or receive any of the said rents in the aforesaid Acts or
either of them mentioned, full and true Rentals of all their Receipts and
Collections, and shall deliver the same to the said Trustees upon oath; which
oath the said Trustees or any three of them are hereby authorized to administer
accordingly. And it is further enacted and ordained, That the Register in the
first recited Act named, or his deputy, do rate and ascertain the true values
of every particular upon which any Contract shall be made, and do weekly make
Certificate unto the Treasurers named in the first recited Act, and also to the
Register-Accomptant in the last recited Act appointed, of all rents and rates
of particulars or Certificates and values, as shall be from time to time
certified unto the Trustees from and by the Clerk of the Pipe, the respective
Auditors, or any other the beforementioned officers of the Exchequer, or of any
other Court or office of Record; and of all Moneys payable upon any Contract
made upon any such particular or Certificate, and the full value how much is
the sum of the first Moiety to be paid in hand to the said Treasurers, as also
to the said Register-Accomptant, and how much is the moiety to be forborne, and
for what time, and how and in what manner the sum or sums to be forborne are to
be secured. And whereas diverse Rents have been sold and are still to sell,
whereof no Grant or Letters Patents can be found in any Court of Record; Be it
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where payment has been made at any
time within fifteen years last past, that such sales as are or shall be made of
any such Rents, shall be as good and effectual in the Law, as if Letters
Patents or other Grant thereof should be produced: And forasmuch as many
Honors, Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and other Hereditaments
were granted by the late King, or any his Predecessors, to diverse persons in
Tail-general or in Tail-special, rendering Rent; which Rents, by reason of the
dying of the Tenant in Tail without Heirs in Tail will determine, Be it Enacted
by this present Parliament, and the Authority thereof, and it is hereby Enacted
and Declared, That in all cases where the late King or his Predecessors have
made any grant of any honors, manors, lordships, messuages, lands, tenements
and other hereditaments in Tail general or in Tail special, rendering a Rent to
the Kings of England and their Successors, That such Purchasers, their Heirs,
Successors and Assigns, shall have, hold and enjoy the said Fee-farm Rent which
they have purchased or hereafter shall purchase, to them, their heirs,
successors and assigns, according to their respective Deeds of purchase,
notwithstanding the Estate-tail upon which the said Rent was reserved is
determined, or shall hereafter determine: And where any Honors, Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments granted as aforesaid, have been aliened by the
Grantee, with consent of the late King or any of his Predecessors, out of which
any Fee-farm Rent has been reserved, the Purchaser or Purchasers shall have,
hold and enjoy the Rent so purchased by him or them, to his or their Heirs,
Successors and Assigns, notwithstanding the Estate-tail upon which the said
Rent was or is reserved, is determined, or hereafter shall determine. Provided,
That such Rent or Rents have been in charge, and paid within the space of
fifteen years, before the twentieth of December, 1651. And whereas the Trustees
have by their Surveyors made survey of diverse Hundreds, and other Liberties
saleable by the aforesaid Acts; That in such case Henry Colbrand Register, or
his Deputy, is hereby authorized and required to make Particulars of them, and
the said Trustees to sell and convey them accordingly. And be it further
Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the like Power to all intents and
purposes be hereby given to the said Trustees, to grant any the said Rents and
premises under the yearly value of Fifty shillings upon a Particular or
Certificate, by a Memorandum of the Rent or duty, and the estate and sum for
which the same is granted, as fully and amply to the advantage of the
Purchaser, as by any Act or Acts aforesaid they might or could have done upon
the sale of any the premises already made by the said Trustees for any lesser
sum. And it is further Enacted and Declared, That all sales and conveyances of
any of the said premises, as well of Rents issuing out of any Rectory or Titles
impropriate as otherwise, whether sold already, or hereby intended to be sold
by the said Trustees, be and hereby are confirmed to the Purchasers, their
Heirs and Assigns, as if the said Rents and other the said premises had been
herein particularly named and expressed, Any other Act or Law to the contrary
notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted and Declared, that where any of the
said Fee-farm rents, or other rents formerly appointed or hereby appointed to
be sold by virtue of this or any the aforesaid Acts, and issuing and payable
out of any the Delinquents Estates already appointed or to be appointed to be
sold, they shall be good and effectual to the Purchaser or purchasers of the
said Fee-farm rents and other rents, their Heirs and Assigns for ever, Any Act
or Law to the contrary notwithstanding.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


