AN ACT For making NAVIGABLE THE River of Wye.

seal of the Commonwealth

Thursday, the 26th of June, 1651.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England, 1651.

AN ACT For making Navigable the River of Wye.
WHereas the making and effecting of a Passage for Barges, Boats and Liters by
the River of Wye, running through the Town of Guildford in the County of Surrey
into the River of Thames, at a Town called Weybridge, will be very advantageous
for the Commonwealth, Be it therefore Ordained and Enacted by the Authority of
this present Parliament, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Major
for the time being, and approved Men of Guildford; or James Pitson, John How
of Guildford Esqs; John Waltham of Shallowford, and Richard Scotcher of
Guildford aforesaid Gent. or any other person or persons at their own Costs and
Charges, to cleanse, scour, and make Navigable the said River of Wye, and to
cut and dig a new River or Trench for the better effecting of the said
Navigation, in the most convenient places where they shall think fit; and to
take away all Trees and Roots, and remove all Impediments that may any way
hinder the said intended Passage or Navigation; And to erect and make Locks,
Weres, Turnpikes, Pens for water, and Wharfs to lay on Timber, and all other
Materials that shall be brought to or from Guildford, where they shall think
fit; and to amend and alter such Bridges as may hinder the said Passage,
leaving them as fit for Carts, Wagons, Horse and Foot, as they were before;
and to do all other things necessary for the better convenience of the said
River and Passage, and for the repairing and amending of the same from time to
time, and at all times hereafter. And for that the making of the said Rivers
and Passages Navigable, may not be prejudicial to the Inheritance and profit of
diverse persons that have Land adjoining to the said Rivers and Passages, and
through which the said Rivers and Passages shall be cut; Be it therefore
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lords Commissioners for
the Great Seal of England, may appoint and authorize by Commission under the
Great Seal of England, twelve Commissioners within the County of Surrey,
whereof three to be named by the said Lords Commissioners, and three to be
named by the said Major for the time being, and the approved men of the Town of
Guildford, or the major part of them, and six by the Freeholders of the
County, at some County there to be holden, whereof notice shall be given at the
County Court before, to the end as many Freeholders may appear at the Election
as will; which said Commissioners, or the greater part of them, informing
themselves by Examination of Witnesses upon Oath (which hereby they shall have
power to Administer) shall have full power and authority to determine, appoint
and set down, what and how much satisfaction every person or persons shall have
for or in respect of any loss or damage by cutting of their Land, by making the
said Passage or Navigation at such Rates and Prices as they shall think fit, in
case the said Major and approved men, or the said James Pitson, John How, John
Waltham and Richard Scotcher, or other persons authorized by them shall not
agree beforehand with ye parties so to be damnified as aforesaid. And the said
Commissioners or major part of them shall have full power and authority by this
Act, to determine all Controversies which shall or may happen touching the
meaning and construction of this Act; And the Rates, Prices and Determinations
so set down by them, shall bind all parties whatsoever; And the agreement or
Order and determination so to be made, shall be set down under the Hands and
Seals of the said Commissioners or the major part of them. And be it further
Enacted, That the said Major for the time being, and approved Men of Guildford
aforesaid, or major part of them, or the said James Pitson, John How, John
Waltham and Richard Scotcher, or such other person or persons as shall be
authorized by them to effect the said work, shall not take above the price of
Four Shillings the Load, accompting Twenty hundred weight to the Load for any
or every Load (and a Chaldron of Coals to be accounted for a Load of Coals)
that shall be carried from the said Town of Guildford unto Weybridge-Haw, and
afterward such Rate or Price as other Boats and Barges have for carrying from
thence unto the City of London: And that it shall and may be lawful for the
said Major for the time being, and approved men of Guildford, or the major part
of them, or the aforesaid James Pitson, John How, John Waltham and Richard
Scotcher, or for any other person or persons to be authorized by them, who
shall undertake to make the said River or Passage at their own Costs and
Charges, to receive and take the several Rates and Prices before mentioned or
expressed, for the carriage of every Tun to and from the several places before
named; and shall not take above Twelve pence of every Passenger that shall be
carried between Guildford and the said City of London, and after the same Rates
proportionable for any part of the said Passage, and shall not take above or
more then the Rates aforesaid: And shall peaceably and quietly take and enjoy
the same Rates and Taxes to them, their Heirs or Successors and Assigns for
ever, in recompense of their great charge in making and maintaining the said
Rivers or Passages Navigable, by force and virtue of this present Act; and all
other person and persons whatsoever, who shall disburse any money toward the
making of the said Rivers and Passages, shall also enjoy the profit thereof,
according to their several Agreements made or to be made with those that
undertake this work, in as ample manner as those that undertake the same may or
ought to do by force and virtue of this Act, and according to the true intent
and meaning thereof. And whereas the said Major and Corporation of Guildford
are the Procurers of the said Passage, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the Commissioners aforesaid, or the more part of them, by
virtue of this Act, shall have power and authority from time to time to ordain
and make Orders and Constitutions, for the good and orderly way of all Boats
and Boatmen belonging to the said Passage; and to set, lay and execute such
reasonable Penalties upon the breakers thereof, as they shall think fit: And be
it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when any of the said
Commissioners shall happen to dye, that then and so often it shall and may be
lawful for the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal for the time being from
time to time to supply one Commissioner, or so many Commissioners as shall make
and fill up the number of twelve Commissioners, to be chosen as aforesaid
respectively by the several parties, if any by them so Elected as aforesaid
shall happen to dye, upon the Request of the surviving Commissioners. And
because the said Passage from Weybridge to Guildford is directly against the
Stream, so as the Boats and Barges must of necessity in some places and at some
times be towed or drawn up by strength of Men, Lines and Ropes, Winches,
Engines, and other means convenient for that purpose; Be it therefore further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful to and for
such Watermen, Boatmen and Bargemen, and other helpers of them, to have and use
a certain Path of one foot and an half in breadth on either side of the said
River of Wye, for drawing up by strength of men, lines, ropes, winches, and
other Engines, their Boats, Barges and other Vessels, passing and repassing the
said River of Wye, without ye hindrance, trouble or impeachment of any person
or persons whatsoever. Provided always, That it shall not be lawful to the said
Major and Corporation of Guildford, or to the said James Pitson, John How, John
Waltham and Richard Scotcher, or their Assigns, to dig, trench or cut, or make
any Wharf in or upon the Lands of any person or persons respectively, until a
full agreement with the respective Lords, Owners or Occupiers of the said Lands
be had and made by the Commissioners appointed as aforesaid, according to the
true meaning of this present Act, Any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


