AN ACT FOR Setting apart Friday the Four and twentieth Day of October, One
thousand six hundred fifty one, For a Day of Public Thanksgiving: Together
with a NARRATIVE DECLARING The Grounds and Reasons thereof.

Anglo-Irish blazon or coat of arms

Friday the 26th of September, 1651.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act and Narrative be forthwith printed
and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England, 1651.

AN ACT For setting apart Friday the Four and twentieth Day of October, 1651.
FOR A Day of Public Thanksgiving: Together with a NARRATIVE DECLARING The
Grounds and Reasons thereof.
THe Works of Providence, by which the Lord has pleaded the Cause of this
Parliament and Commonwealth in the sight of the Nations round about, are
Glorious, and will be sought out by all those that have pleasure in them; and
therefore must not pass under the common Title of Events and Chances of War:
The Lord having so done this mavelous Work for Time and Place, with a
Concurrence of all other remarkable Circumstances, That it ought to be had in
Everlasting Remembrance, both by our Selves, and by the Generations which shall
be born; as will eminently and convincingly appear by this brief ensuing
Narrative.

AFter the Lord (the Great and Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth) was pleased
so Signally to bear Witness to the Justice and Necessity of our Armies marching
into Scotland, by giving Sentence (when Solemn Appeals were made unto him by
both Parties) on our side, in that glorious Victory vouchsafed unto our Army
the Third day of September, One thousand six hundred and fifty, against the
Scots near Dunbar: The same Divine Providence led on our Forces there to the
gaining of many Towns and Garrisons; and in particular, Leith, Edinburgh, and
not long after, the Castle there, though in the Esteem of the Enemy
impregnable. But the Enemy not resting in that decision, did reinforce
themselves, and relying on the advantage of the Town and Pass at Sterling, and
other Intrenchments, would by no Provocation or Endeavors on our part used, be
drawn forth to an Engagement, though our Forces faced them up to their Works,
when the Scots (as some of themselves have since confessed) were Twenty seven
thousand, and ours nothing near that number, suffering a strong Garrison of
theirs to be stormed and taken within the view of their Camp, without once
offering to relieve it. The Consideration hereof, and of the Charge and
Difficulties of a Winters War (which the Enemy seemed chiefly to Design, and
might the better effect whiles they had Sterling, and thereby the Command of
the rich Country of Fife at hand to Quarter their Forces in, and by means of
St. Johnstons (a second Pass) the whole North of Scotland to furnish them with
Recruits of Men and Supplies of all Provisions; and likewise many Sea Ports to
let in Foreign Assistance) produced a Resolution to put over a Force into Fife
(notwithstanding all Hazards) to straiten their Quarters and hinder their
Supplies; Which Attempt the Lord was pleased to Crown, not only by giving us
speedy and happy Footing, but a notable Victory to that part of our Army
commanded by the Major General, over the Forces of the Enemy, whereof the
greatest number were a commanded Party of their choice Men out of their whole
Army: In which Defeat near One thousand five hundred were taken Prisoners,
together with Sir John Brown their Commander in Chief, and the greatest part of
the residue slain, Forty two Colors taken, and all this (which made the Mercy
the more remarkable) with the loss only of Four of our Men slain on the place,
and some wounded. About this very time the General marched up near Sterling to
engage the Enemy, who having quitted their Camp at Torwood, were marched
through Sterling, Sixteen Miles toward our Forces in Fife; And finding the
Enemy would not Engage (having disposed on this side the River such Force as
could well be spared to hinder the Enemies Levies and Provisions; or if they
should Advance for England, to be upon our Borders, and to join with other
Parties there in Readiness to retard their March) The General Remarch'd to the
South-Ferry, and Landed the Residue of his Army in Fife; upon which, the strong
Castle of Enisgarvy, in the Middle of the River, with Sixteen Pieces of Canon,
and Brunt-Island, were Surrendered, and the Army marched forthwith toward St.
Johnstons. The Enemy being thereby awakened, sent a Party of about One thousand
Foot, with a Governor, into St. Johnstons, who arrived there Two hours before
the General sat down with the Army: And finding by this Interposition his
Northern Supplies cut off, marched directly for England with an Army of Sixteen
thousand Horse and Foot, and a Light Train of Artillery; being come near
Carlisle, their King caused himself to be Proclaimed King of England, and
sending out his Declarations full of fair Promises to all that should come in
to him or not oppose him, marched forward, being attended in his Motions by
some of our Horse. The General (St. Johnstons being Surrendered, leaving a
Garrison there, and about Seven thousand Horse and Foot under the Command of the
Lieutenant General of the Ordinance, for reducing the Castle of Sterling and
other Garrisons, and preventing any Levies by the Enemy) with the rest of the
Army came back for Lies, and the same day sent away Five Regiments of Horse
and Dragoons to fall into the Rear of the Enemy, whiles himself with the rest
of his Horse, his Body of Foot, and Train of Artillery, Advanced after with all
possible speed toward England. The Enemy being come to Warrington, and
attempting the Pass there, our Forces (who a day or two before were joined and
got into his Van) thought not fit long to Dispute it, in respect the River was
in many places Fordable, the Lands and Enclosures inconvenient for the Horse;
and the Foot, whom they found at the Bridge, though full of Courage, and
desirous to Engage, no way proportionable to the Enemies great numbers, the
General also being at that time about Four days March off them, but marched off
to Knotsford Heath; where in the way the Enemy twice Charging our Rear-gard,
was beaten back with the loss of about Thirty of theirs (slain and taken
Prisoners) we not losing above Three or four in the March, and at the Pass: On
that Heath our Forces drew up in a Posture to receive and fight the Enemy, but
he declined it, and marched to Nantwich.

In their passage through Lancashire, the Enemy had left the Earl of Derby with
Three hundred Foot and a Troop of Horse, which he brought from the Isle of Man,
together with Sir William Widderington, Sir William Throckmorton, Sir Timothy
Fetherstonhaugh, Major General Sir Thomas Tildsey, Colonel Boynton, with many
Commanders and other Gentlemen of quality, to raise Six thousand Foot and One
thousand five hundred Horse in that County, as an Additional Strength to their
Army; Major General Massey being also left with him to assist that Work, whiles
the Enemy himself marched on in a direct course to Worcester, in his way
summoning Shrewsbury, and attempting by Letters and Declarations to gain more
assistance, but without success.

The Two and twentieth of August, with five hundred Horse and Dragoons, about
Noon, he entered Worcester, then which no Place seemed more to answer all his
Ends, it being a City seated on the Severn, within twelve Miles of five
Counties, near unto Gloucester, the Forest of Dean and Southwales, where Massey
(who was a little before called off from the Earl of Derby to serve this
Design) pretended his greatest Interest to be; and by gaining that Place, the
Enemy well knew he should be Master of all the Passes upon Severn, from
Shrewsbury to Gloucester, and (there not being One hundred of the Parliaments
Forces within twenty Miles of him) he might lie the more secure for refreshing
his wearied men, employ his Interest to get what Additional Strength he could
from those Parts, or at least make it a winter War; and thereby gain time for
Foreign Assistance, and better opportunity for his Agents to stir up Tumults
in England, and for the Raising a new Army in Scotland under the Earl of Leven
(whom he had left General there for that purpose) to come also into England:
Our Forces in Worcester being few, and finding the Place untenable (though
threescore only of them beat the Enemy twice out of the Town, and killed and
wounded some of them) withdrew in safety to Gloucester.

The General with his Forces (which on the Third of August were at St.
Johnstons in Scotland) upon the Twenty eighth of the same month with a
continued March, except one days Rest, took up his Headquarters within two
Miles on the East side of Worcester, being from St. Johnstons about three
hundred Miles, the rest of the Forces which had hitherto attended the Enemy
being joined with him; the Lieutenant General, with the Forces under him,
quartered the same day about seven Miles from Worcester near Upton Bridge, of
which Pass the Enemy was possessed, and in Upton Town on the other side the
River, was Major General Massey with Sixty Dragoons and Two hundred Horse to
secure it. Whiles a small Party of ours went to view the Bridge, without Design
or expectation at that time to gain the Pass, and finding the Bridge broken
down by the Enemy (one piece of Timber only left, which reached from one Arch
to another) twenty Dragoons and dismounted Troopers with Carbines being
commanded over to possess the Church near the Bridge, crept over the piece of
Timber, and got to the Church, whereupon the Enemy took the Alarm, and advanced
toward them and offered them quarter, and were attempting to fire the door;
mean while a hundred Dragoons more came up, and in like manner got over and beat
off the Enemy, whose whole Party was now come down upon them; in which Action
Major General Massey had his horse killed under him, himself received several
Shots and was wounded, and forced to retreat with his Party in disorder toward
Worcester. The Lord having been pleased thus unexpectedly and happily to give
us this Pass, the Lieutenant General marched over, and lodged part of his
Forces that night in Upton.

Whiles the General was on his March from Scotland, he sent off Colonel Lilborn
with his Regiment of Horse to wait upon the Enemies Rear; who finding the Earl
of Derby raising Forces in Lancashire, in his endeavoring to prevent him was
forced to engage, where the Lord was graciously pleased by that Regiment of
Horse (though harrazed by a tedious March from Scotland) and three Companies of
Foot, to defeat the Earl of Derby's whole Forces, being One thousand five
hundred Horse and Foot near Wiggon in Lancashire, where were slain Sir William
Widderington Major General, Sir Thomas Tildsey, Colonel Boynton (sometimes
Governor of Scarborough for the Parliament, which Place he betrayed to the
Enemy) and Colonel Trollop, and taken, Four hundred Prisoners, together with
Sir William Throckmorton, Sir Timothy Fetherston-haugh, and several Colonels
and Commanders of quality: The Earl of Derby with about thirty Horse escaping,
carried the News of his own Defeat to Worcester. In which Mercy the Lord was
graciously pleased to appear for our small Forces (who were engaged upon great
Disadvantages of place and number beyond their intentions) and that most
seasonably, in destroying that growing Army, and giving in the same as a Pledge
of what he would yet do for his People.

These glad Tidings were followed by the News from Scotland of the Surrender of
Sterling Castle, in which were many thousand Arms, Forty Pieces of Ordnance,
Six and twenty Barrels of Powder, the Public Records of Scotland, the Sword,
Cloth and Chair of State. Not long after this followed the Routing of the New
Levies of the Enemy in the West of Scotland, taking the Lord Osbarston and
others prisoners; The gaining Anstruther by Storm with Fifteen Ships in the
Harbor, the Surprising the Earl of Leven General of their Forces in Scotland,
the Earl Craford-Lindsey Lieutenant General, the Earl Marshal, with four Lords
more, and diverse Knights, Ministers and Gentlemen of quality; with the
scattering and dispersing of Four thousand, which at that time were
Rendezvouzed at Ellit in Perth, to relieve Dundee then besieged by our Forces;
the taking many Prisoners at Dumfreeze and Dissipating them, attempting again
new Levies there, and the gaining Dundee it self by Storm, in which were Forty
Pieces of Ordnance, Six hundred of the Enemy slain, with Major General Lumsden
the Governor, Colonel Coningham late Governor of Sterling, and many others of
quality, four hundred taken Prisoners, great store of Ships and other Vessels
found in the Harbor; to which was since added, the giving up of St. Andrews,
Montross and Aberdeen.

On Saturday the Three and twentieth of August, the Scotch King with his whole
Army marched into Worcester, and applied himself to the Fortifying thereof, and
had soon made up some Works, and repaired the Royal Fort on the East side of
the City, and planted Canon upon it, the General being encamped before the
Town: On the Third of September (being the self same Day of the month upon
which a year before we obtained that Memorable Victory at Dunbar) our Forces at
Upton, under the Command of the Lieutenant General, in pursuance of former
Councels (the Execution whereof Providence had delayed till this day, without
any such Predetermination on our part) advanced toward the Enemy at Worcester,
but by reason of some hindrances reached not to Teame River (which lying on
the West side of Severn, empties it self thereinto about a Mile beneath
Worcester) till between two and three of the Clock in the Afternoon, Boats also
being brought up at the same time, two Bridges were made over the Rivers. The
Enemy taking no Alarm till the Van of our Forces were marched within the sight
of the Town, did now draw down his Horse and Foot from his Leaguer at St.
Jones's, lyning all the Hedges from their Pass at Poyick to the River Severn
with Musketeers to oppose our Advance: The General commanded some Forces over
Severn toward the Enemy, whiles others were sent over Teame to the same
ground; the Enemies Foot with some difficulty were beaten from the Hedges,
which they for some time disputed, and were at length driven back to the Body
of their Horse and Foot, which was then drawn up in Wickfield near Poyick
Bridge, being the same Field where the late king first engaged the Forces of
the Parliament, in the same month of September, One thousand six hundred forty
two: Our horse and Foot marched up with great resolution to the Enemies Body,
and came to push of Pike with them, and through the Goodness of God drove back
and wholly routed them, killing many upon the place, and pursuing the rest to
the Drawbridge and Gate of the City. Whiles this was in action, some Horse and
Dragoons sent to a Pass over Teame about two Miles above Poyck Bridge (which
the Enemy had broken down) gained that Ford, where our Horse passed over, and
pursued such of the Enemies Horse as could not get into the Town, and secured
that Bridge at the West-gate, that none might escape that way.

The greatest part of our Army was now drawn over to the west of Severn, where
it was conceived the Stress of the Battle would be, which the Enemy perceiving,
and supposing them too far engaged to get back over the Bridge of Boats that
night, he poured forth at the several Gates of the City all his Horse and Foot
upon that part of our Forces left on the East side of the River, which being
seasonably discovered, our General himself hastened back to that part of the
Army, which the Enemy presently charged with good Resolution; yet through the
good hand of our God upon that part of the Army, after about two hours sharp
Dispute, they were beaten back into the Town, and our men passing by their
great Fort and Canon, entered the Town with the Enemy, whiles others of our
Forces ran up and stormed the Royal Fort it self, possessed themselves of it,
turning the Canon upon the Enemy.

The Scotch King (having in vain used all Endeavors to make the Horse and Foot
in the Town face about for Defense thereof) fled away, and about Three thousand
Horse and some High-land Foot, leaving the rest in the Town, fled toward
Bewdley, whether the General sent the day before One thousand Horse and
Dragoons to secure that Pass, who took more Prisoners then themselves were in
number, and many of those who escaped them and the Horse sent in their Pursuit,
were met with by other of the Army and Country Forces (Expresses being the
same night the Battle was fought sent into all the Northern Counties and
Scotland, giving notice of the Successes) so as they were gathered up by
Hundreds and Fifties, that very few of those who fled from Worcester escaped.

Thus was our gracious God pleased to appear as The Lord of Hosts. (which was
our Word in this and the Battle at Dunbar) with and for his People, in
destroying this desperate and insolent Enemy, and working a glorious salvation
for us.

Of the Enemy, which were about Sixteen thousand Horse and Foot, there were
slain in and about Worcester and in the Pursuit, about Three thousand; The
Prisoners taken in the Town and in their Flight, about Twelve thousand; amongst
whom were Duke Hamilton, the Earls of Derby, Cleveland, Rothes, Lauderdale,
Kinmore; the Lords, Montgomery, Peasly, Cranston, Grandison, with many other
persons of quality; as also David Lesley Lieutenant General of their Army,
Lieutenant General Middleton, Major General Massey, and diverse other General
Officers, besides Seven hundred other Officers, above an hundred Colors, with
all their Arms, Artillery, Bag and Baggage; and all this with the loss of about
Two hundred of our men, whereof but Three Commission Officers, and about Three
hundred of our Soldiers wounded.

THe Parliament taking the Premises into their serious consideration, and being
exceedingly affected with the glorious Appearances of God for them, and for all
the good People throughout England, Ireland and Scotland, in vouchsafing these
wonderful and unparalled Successes and Victories to their Armies and Forces
(wherein the forwardness of the Counties to send out their respective
Militia's, and the Courage and Resolution of their Soldiers expressed in this
Service, by owning this Cause and present Government against the Common Enemy,
is a Mercy greatly to be acknowledged by us, and receive a lasting Memorial)
Have thought fit to Enact and Ordain, and be it Enacted and Ordained, That
Friday the Four and twentieth day of October, One thousand six hundred fifty
one, be observed and kept as a day of Public and Holy Rejoicing and
Thanksgiving unto the Lord, in all the Churches and Chapels, and Places of
Divine Worship within England, and also in Ireland and Scotland: And that the
Ministers of the respective Parishes and Places within this Commonwealth, be
and are hereby required and enjoined to give notice on the Lord's Day next
preceding the said Four and twentieth day of October, of the day so to be
observed, to the end the People may more Generally and Diligently attend the
Public Exercises of Gods Worship to be Dispensed upon that occasion; at which
time, that the People may be the more particularly and fully informed of this
great Mercy, The said Ministers are hereby required and enjoined to publish and
read this present Act and Declaration; and for the better Observation of the
day, The Parliament does hereby inhibit and forbid the holding and use of all
Fairs, Markets, and servile works of men's ordinary Callings upon that day; and
all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Constables and other Officers, be
and are hereby enjoined to take special care of the due Observation of the said
day of Thanksgiving accordingly.

Friday the 26th of September, 1651.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act and Narrative be forthwith printed
and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


