seal of the CommonwealthAN ACT For the Continuance of the Committee for the
Army AND Treasures at WARS.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament, and it is hereby Enacted by the
Authority of the same, That for the more orderly receiving and issuing forth of
the Moneys payable upon the Six Months Assessments appointed by Act of
Parliament, (Entitled, An Act for an Assessment for six Months, from the Four
and twentieth of June, One thousand six hundred and fifty, for the Maintenance
of the Forces Raised by Authority of Parliament for the Service of England and
Ireland, at the Rate of Ninety thousand pounds per Mensem for the first Three
Months, and at the Rate of Sixty thousand pounds per Mensem for the last Three
Months) and of all other Moneys either by virtue of that Act, or any other Act
or Order appointed for the maintenance of the Forces in England and Ireland,
The several persons nominated by an Act (Entitled, An Act appointing
Treasurers at Wars for receiving and issuing forth of the Moneys to be
Assessed, Levied and Paid by virtue of an Act of the Seventh of April instant,
for Ninety thousand pounds per Mensem) to be of the Committee for the Army, and
other the persons nominated by the last recited Act, to be Treasurers at Wars;
and all others Who since by any Act or Order of Parliament have been added to
the said Committee, shall be, and are hereby continued and authorized to be a
Committee for the Army and Treasurers at War respectively, in their several
capacities, for the receiving, issuing forth and paying out all the Moneys
appointed or to be appointed by virtue of the first recited Act, or of any
other Act or Order of Parliament, for the use and payment of the Forces (and
charges incident thereunto) by Authority of Parliament, or Order from the
Council of State, from time to time Established or appointed for the Service of
England and Ireland: And the said Committee or any five of them, are hereby
appointed and authorized to have the care of managing the whole business of
bringing in the Moneys assessed, or to be assessed by virtue of the first
recited Act, or of any other Money for the use or payment of the said Forces;
and shall have, and are hereby authorized to use, exercise and put in
execution, all and every of the Powers and Authorities, in as full and ample
manner, to all intents and purposes, as the Committee for the Army had, or were
mentioned to have by virtue of an Act (Entitled, An Act for the Continuance of
the Committee of the Army and Treasurers at Wars) or of any other Act, Order or
Ordinance mentioned, included or recited in that Act. And it is further
Enacted, That the said Treasurers at Wars for the receiving, paying and issuing
forth of the said six Months Assessments, or any other Moneys appointed or to
be appointed for the use of the Forces aforesaid; and in consideration that
they shall execute the Employment of Treasurers at Wars, shall have the same
Salary and Allowances (for all the Money they shall so receive and pay by
virtue of the Act herein first recited, and this present Act, for the uses
aforesaid) as was mentioned to be allowed them by the last recited Act, or any
Act therein mentioned; together with the Allowance of Pay for two Wagons more,
according to the first Establishment of this Army (besides the Wagon allowed
them in the last recited Act) for the extraordinary Portage of Money, for so
long time as the Army shall be marching, or continue their Quarters in the
Field.

Die Martis, 25 Iunii, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1650.


