AN ACT For Settling of the MILITIA OF THE Commonwealth OF ENGLAND.

seal of the Commonwealth

Die Jovis, 11 Julii, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England. 1650.

AN ACT For Settling of the MILITIA OF The Commonwealth of England.
THe Parliament of England finding it necessary, That the Commonwealth be put
into a posture of Defense, for the preservation of the Peace and Liberties of
the People, after so much Blood and Treasure spent in the obtaining thereof,
against the Endeavors, Conspiracies and Practices of diverse Parties and
Interests, differing in themselves, yet united under several specious
pretenses, all tending to the utter overthrow of the Safety of the Nation: And
although acknowledging (which they desire with all thankfulness may ever be
remembered) That Designs of this nature, Almighty God, by a high and merciful
hand of Providence, has usually blasted and brought to naught; yet judging it
requisite, That the Commonwealth be not wanting to it self in the use of means
tending to its own preservation and just Defense, and conceiving it their duty
to make fitting provision accordingly, with a dependence upon the same Divine
Goodness for a Blessing upon their Endeavors, Hold fit to Ordain and Enact, and
be it Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and by the Authority
thereof, That the Commissioners for the Militia in the several Counties and
places of England and Wales, which now are, or hereafter shall be appointed by
the Parliament or Council of State, according to Order of Parliament in that
behalf, in their several precincts and places, shall observe and put in
execution these Instructions following:

FIrst, The said Commissioners, or any three or more of them, residing in the
several counties, cities or Towns, etc. shall meet the first Tuesday in every
Month in some convenient place within their respective counties, cities and
towns, and so from time to time, or oftener if need shall so require, within
their several limits, etc. at such time and place as shall be in that behalf
appointed.

Secondly, The said Commissioners and every of them, who have not already taken
it, are before they act upon these Instructions, to Subscribe the late
Engagement appointed by the Parliament, To be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth of England, as it is now Established, without a King or House of
Lords, in the presence of any three of the said Commissioners; and then any two
or more of them are to cause the same Engagement to be Subscribed before them,
or any two such persons as by the said Commissioners or any two or more of them
shall be appointed, by such Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Majors and Captains,
and by such other Officers, Troopers and common Soldiers, whom they shall think
fit to be trusted with Commands or Arms; and then the said Field-Officers and
Captains which have not been already Commissionated and Approved of by the
Council of State, are to be recommended by the said Commissioners, or any three
or more of them, to the said Council, to have Commissions, if they shall
approve of them; which being granted, Then any three or more of the said
Commissioners may grant Commissions to the inferior Officers, which are first
to be recommended to them by such Field Officer or Officers (or where none such
are, by such Captains respectively as are Commissionated as aforesaid) for
their approbation, and if they approve of them, they are to grant them
Commissions accordingly. Provided, That the Council of State, as they see
occasion, may alter or change the said Commissioners; and also Colonels,
Lieutenant Colonels, Majors, Captains, or other Officers, and put other fit
persons in their rooms.

Thirdly, The said Commissioners or any two of them, are by all good ways and
means to inform themselves, and from time to time to take from others
Informations, and Examinations upon Oath (which Oath they have hereby power to
administer) of all Conspiracies, Designs, Practices, secret and suspicious
Meetings of disaffected persons, whether expressed by words or actions, spoken,
printed, preached, written or published wheresoever, against the Peace and
Welfare of the Commonwealth, by securing, dispersing, or committing to prison
the parties whom they find to be especially active and dangerous, or to use
any other lawful ways and means for the dispersing or securing of them, in
order to be brought to Justice as they shall see cause.

Fourthly, The said Commissioners or any three or more of them, are authorized
and required to disarm and secure (by Imprisonment or otherwise) all Papists,
and other ill-affected persons that have of late appeared, or shall declare
themselves in their words or actions against this present Parliament, or
against the present Government Established; or have or shall hold
correspondency with Charles Stuart, the Son of the late King, or any of his
party, or with any other person or Nation, tending to the Disturbance,
Subversion or Alteration of this present Government; or have or shall minister
any Supplies to the Enemies of the Commonwealth; or raise, or endeavored the
raising of any Tumults, Mutinies or Insurrections, and to cause them to be
dealt with according to Law, and their several demerits.

Fifthly, That any three or more of the Commissioners shall have full Power and
Authority to charge any person with Horse and Arms, in the same county, shire,
city or Town Corporate, where his, her or their usual place of residence is or
has been, having respect unto, and not exceeding the limitations and
proportions hereafter mentioned; that is to say, No person shall be charged
with Horse and Arms, unless such person have the yearly Revenue of Two hundred
pounds per annum, or have a Personal Estate of Two thousand pounds in Goods or
Moneys, or an Estate equivalent thereunto, and so proportionably, as the
Commissioners in their discretion shall see cause and think reasonable; Nor
shall any person be charged with a Dragoon-horse and Arms, unless such person
have the yearly Revenue of Two hundred marks per annum, or who shall be worth
Two thousand marks in moneys, or other Personal Estate, or an Estate
equivalent: And the said Commissioners are not to charge any person with
finding of a whole Foot-Arms, that has not a yearly Revenue of Twenty pounds
per annum, or a Personal Estate of Two hundred pounds in Goods or Moneys; And
after the aforesaid Rates proportionably, for a greater or lesser Revenue or
Estate, it shall be lawful to and for the said Commissioners or any three or
more of them, to impose the finding and providing of Horse and Arms as
aforesaid, by joining two, three, or more persons together in the charge, as to
their judgments shall appear most conducible to the Service of the
Commonwealth. Provided, That no person who has not Ten pounds a year in Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, Leasehold or Copyhold, or a Personal Estate worth
Two hundred pounds, shall be compellable to contribute in finding Foot-Arms as
aforesaid; And that no person who has not One hundred pounds per annum in
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, Lease-hold or Copyhold, shall be compellable
to contribute in finding a Horse with Arms, or a Dragoon: And the said
Commissioners or any three or more of them, have power to hear and examine
Complaints upon Oath (which Oath they have hereby power to administer) and to
give redress as there shall be cause.

Sixthly, The said Commissioners or any three or more of them, are to take care
that such Horse and Arms as are so charged, and to be provided as aforesaid
(and all such other Horse and Arms as they shall hold fit to make use of for
the service of the Commonwealth) upon all occasions of Muster and Service, and
during the time of any Insurrection or Invasion in their respective counties,
cities, etc. be put into the hands of such well-affected persons, and fit for
War, as the said Commissioners or any three or more of them shall approve of;
which person and persons are hereby required to serve with such Horses and Arms
accordingly; and that such persons be Listed, Trained and Mustered in several
Troops and Companies, and formed into Regiments: And the said Commissioners or
any three of them, are hereby authorized and required to cause the said Forces
to be drawn out, and used for Suppressing and Resisting all Invasions,
Insurrections and Rebellions in their several Precincts within this
Commonwealth, and to bring to condign punishment the Enemies of the same; And
shall for that purpose from time to time keep correspondency, as occasion shall
be, with the chief Commanders of the Parliaments other Forces in the respective
counties, cities or towns adjacent, and act and proceed further, as they shall
from time to time receive Orders from the Parliament, or Council of State
settled by their Authority.

Seventhly, That the said Commissioners or any three or more of them in their
several counties, etc. shall require and direct all persons so charged with
Horse and Arms as aforesaid, to allow Two shillings a day to the Troopers that
serve with their Horse and Arms, for the maintenance of the Man and Horse, and
Twelve pence a day to their Foot-Soldiers, for so many days as they shall be
absent from their Dwellings and Callings by occasion of Muster or Exercise; And
for furnishing Drums, Colors, Trophies, Ammunition and other Emergencies, the
said Commissioners or any three or more of them, shall have power to lay a
sitting Rate upon their respective counties, not exceeding in one whole year
the proportion of one Months Assessment in each county, after the Rate of
Ninety thousand pounds per Mensem, charged for pay of the Army; which Moneys
are to be assessed, collected and paid, according to such Instructions as shall
be given from time to time by the Council of State, unto the Officers by the
said Commissioners to be appointed, under the Penalties, and by the ways and
means in the Acts prescribed for the Ninety thousand pounds per Mensem; And in
case of sudden Exigence for Resisting or Suppressing of Invasion or
Insurrection, whereby occasion will be to draw out such Soldiers into actual
Service, The persons so charged as aforesaid, shall provide each their Soldier
respectively, with pay in hand, not exceeding one Months pay, as shall be in
that behalf directed by the said Commissioners, or any three or more of them:
For repayment of which said Moneys, and for satisfaction of the Commanders and
Officers for their pay during such time, not exceeding one Month as aforesaid,
as they shall be with their Soldiers in such said actual Service, The
Parliament does hereby Declare, That provision shall be made for the same forth
of the public Treasury, and like course taken for pay and encouragement both
of Officers and Soldiers, if they shall be continued upon longer actual
Service, as is provided for the Army Forces under the immediate conduct and
command of the Lord General.

Eighthly, The said Commissioners or any three of them, may charge Carts,
Wagons, Wains and Horses, for the carrying of Powder, Match, Bullet, and other
Materials, allowing Two pence the mile outward only to every such Cart, Wagon
and Wain so taken upon the marching of any Regiment, Company or Troop, upon
occasion of Invasion, Insurrection, etc. and shall and may imprison Mutiniers
and disordered persons, and such as do not their Duties as common Soldiers at
the day of the Muster and Training, shall and may be by them punished for every
such Offense, Five shillings, or Twenty days Imprisonment, without Bail or
Mainprize; and when drawn out, and upon actual Service, occasioned by any
Insurrection, or Rebellion, or Invasion, then to be subject during that time to
the Rules, Orders and Instructions mentioned in the Lord Generals Instructions
for Regulating his Army: And that the said Commissioners or any three of them,
shall have power to Fine such persons as shall refuse, neglect or delay to send
in their Horse, Arms, Dragoons, Horse and Arms, and Foot-Arms, with their
Riders and Soldiers, upon Summons, for not appearing at Musters and
Training-days, the Fine not exceeding the sum of Forty shillings for every such
offense; and to Fine parties for not appearing with their Horse and Arms upon
any Rebellion, Invasion and Insurrection, the same not exceeding Twenty pounds,
and to be further punished as the Parliament shall think fitting, by
Sequestration or otherwise; And in case of refusal of payment of the several
Fines aforementioned, The said Commissioners or any three or more of them, by
Warrants under their Hands and Seals, are to cause the same to be levied upon
the Lands, Goods and Chattels of the party so offending, having Ten days
warning to pay in the said Fine, before levy thereof be made; And shall and may
Fine every Constable, or any other fit person, that shall be nominated and
appointed by any three or more of the said Commissioners to levy the said
Fines, and shall neglect or refuse to do the same; the said Fine for any one
Offense not to exceed Ten pounds, or to imprison them until they have paid the
said Fine, or yielded obedience to their Commands: And the said Commissioners
or any three or more of them, are to appoint for every Regiment a Marshal, to
see these and all other Penalties against these several Offenses, and their
Offenders, as in this Act is expressed, put in execution, as they shall receive
Direction from time to time from any three or more of the said Commissioners;
which Penalties so levied, are to be accounted for the Service aforesaid, for
the uses of the emergent occasions thereof in the respective counties, etc. the
said Commissioners allowing such Salary to the parties for punishing such
Offenders, and making such Levies, as any three or more of the said
Commissioners shall think fit from time to time to allow.

And it is Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That all Power of
Lord Lieutenants, and Deputy Lieutenants, and all former Power, Acts and
Ordinances of Parliament, concerning the way of Raising the Militia by Trained,
or Freehold-Bands, or Rates, or Taxes for them, shall from henceforth cease,
and be no longer of any force or effect.

And lastly, the said Commissioners, Monthly or oftener, if there shall be
occasion, are to give an account of their proceedings and actions to the
Parliament or Council of State.

Provided, That this Act, nor any thing contained therein, shall be in force
for any longer term then the First day of February, which shall be in the year
of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and fifty.

Die Jovis, 11o Julii, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


