AN ACT For the Establishing an High Court of Justice.

Together with 1. An Act probibiting the proclaiming of any person to be King
over England or Ireland, or the Dominions thereof.

2. An Act declaring what Offenses shall be adjudged Treason.

3. An another Act declaring what Offenses shall be adjudged Treason.

4. An Act for a Seal of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.

blazon of the Commonwealth

Tuesday the 22th of November, 1653.
ORdered by the Parliament, That the Act passed yesterday, Entitled, An Act
for the Establishing an High Court of Justice, be forthwith Printed and
Published: and that the several other Acts therein mentioned be printed
therewith.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.



London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of ENGLAND. 1653.

blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ACT FOR THE ESTABLISHING AN High Court of Justice.
FOr the preservation of the Common Peace, and for the better preventing of the
Miseries of a new and bloody war, endeavored to be stirred up by wicked
practices and correspondencies of the Enemies of this Commonwealth
(notwithstanding the manifold witness which the righteous Lord our God has
born against them and their cursed Designs;) And to the end and effectual
course may be settled for the timely punishing of any Actors or Contrivers in
such pernicious ways, whereby others may hear and fear, and do no more so; Be
it Enacted by this present parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That
John Lisle one of the Lords Commissioners for the Great Seal of England, John
Bradshaw Sergeant at Law, Charls-George Cock Esquire Matthew Sheppard Esquire William
Underwood Alderman of London, John Hayes Esquire George Langham Esquire Maurice
Thompson Esquire Richard Shute Esquire Mark Hildesley Esquire Thomas Allein Alderman of
London, Daniel Tailor Esquire Edmond Waring Esquire John Blackwel the younger Esquire
Nicholas Juxon Esquire Roger Frith Esquire Nathaniel Whetham Esquire Edward Cresset Esquire
Ralph Harrison Esquire Benjamin Valentine Esquire William Web Esquire Owen Row Esquire Thomas
Andrews Alderman of London, John Hardwick Esquire Richard Arnold Esquire Sir John
Thorowgood of Kensington Knight, Abraham Babington Esquire Richard Moor Esquire Edward
Whaley Esquire William Goff Esquire John Okey Esquire Thomas Juxon Esquire Mark Coe Esquire or any
thirteen or more of them, shall be Commissioners, and shall have full power and
authority, and are hereby authorized and required to hear and determine all
such Matters, Crimes and Offenses as are given them in charge by this present
Act; and to proceed to the Trial, Condemnation and Erecution of the Offender
and Offenders, and to inflict upon him, her or them, such punishment, either by
Death, Fine, Imprisonment, or other corporal punishment, as the said
Commissioners or the major part of them then present shall judge to appertain
to Justice, according to the nature of the Offense. And first, the said
Commissioners shall have power to proceed against any person or persons for the
several Offenses mentioned in one Act of the late Parliament, ordered to be
printed the Thirtieth day of January, One thousand six hundred forty and Eight,
Entitled, An Act prohibiting the Proclaiming of any person to be King of
England or Ireland, or the Dominions thereof. Secondly, The said Commissioners
shall have power to proceed against any person or persons for the several
Offenses mentioned in two Acts of the said late Parliament, each of them
Entitled, An Act declaring what Offenses shall be adjudged Treason; the one
ordered to be printed the fourteenth day of May, One thousand six hundred forty
and nine; and the other ordered to be printed the Seventeenth day of July, in
the said year One thousand six hundred forty and nine. Thirdly, The said
Commissioners shall have power to proceed against any person or persons for the
several Offenses mentioned in one other Act of the late Parliament, ordered to
be printed the Two and twentieth day of January, One thousand six hundred and
fifty, Entitled, An Act for a Seal of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England. Fourthly, The said Commissioners shall have power to proceed against
any person or persons that have, or shall Plot, Contrive, or Endeabor the
Betraying, Surrendering, or Yielding up any Cities, Towns, Forts, Magazines,
Ships, Uessels or Forces by Sea or Land, belonging to this Commonwealth; which
said Offenses shall be punished with Death.

And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Commissioners, or any thirteen or more of them, shall be, and are hereby
authorized and constituted an high Court of Justice, to meet and sit at such
convenient time and place from time to time, as by the said Commissioners or
the major part of thirteen or more of them, under their hands and Seals, shall
be appointed and notified by public Proclamation in the Great hall or Palace
Yard at Westminster, and to adjourn from time to time and place to place, as,
the said high Court or the major part thereof meeting shall hold fit; and to
take order for the charging of Offenders, with all or any of the Crimes,
matters and things contained and empowered by this present Act, and for the
receiving their personal answer thereunto; and for the examination of witnesses
upon Oath (which the Court has hereby authority to administer) or otherwise,
and taking any other Evidence concerning the same: And thereupon, or in default
of such answer, to proceed to final Sentence, according to Justice and the
Merit of the Cause, and such final Sentence to execute or cause to be executed
speedily and impartially: And the said Commissioners, or any thirteen or more
of them, shall have power and authority to appoint all Officers needful for the
putting in execution the matter and things in this Act contained.

And it is hereby further Enacted, That all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of the
Peace, Constables, Bailiffs and other Officers; and all Officers and Soldiers
of the Army, and other the good people of this Commonwealth, shall be ayding
and assisting to the said Commissioners in any of the premises.

And be it further Enacted, That every of the Commissioners beforenamed, before
he shall do or execute the Office of a Commissioner by virtue of this present
Act, shall take the Oath ensuing; viz.

YOu shall swear, That you shall well and truly, according to the best of your
skill and knowledge, execute the several Powers given unto you by this present
Act. And the Lords Commissioners for the Great Seal of England, or any one of
them, are hereby authorized to administer the said Oath accordingly.

Provided, That this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall extend to the
diminishing or lessening any power or authority formerly given to the Lord
General or his Council of War, or to the Generals at Sea by authority of
Parliament, for the execution of Martial Law.

Provided also, That this Act, and the authority hereby given, shall endure and
have continuance to the first day of August, One thousand six hundred fifty and
four, and no longer.

Monday the 21 of November, 1653.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forth with printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.



An Act prohibiting the Proclaiming of any person to be King of England or
Ireland, or the Dominions thereof.
WHereas Charles Stuart King of England, being for the notorious Treasons,
Tyrannies and Murders committed by him in the late Unnatural and Cruel wars
condemned to death; whereupon, after Execution of the same, several protences
may be made, and title set on foot unto the Kingly Office, to the apparent
hazard of the public Peace: for prevention thereof, Be it Enacted and
Ordained by this present Parliament, and by Authority of the same, That no
person or persons whatsoever do presume to Proclaim, Declare, Publish, or any
way promote Charles Stuart, Son of the said Charles, commonly called, The Prince
of Wales, or any other person to be King, or chief Magistrate of England, or of
Ireland, or of any the Dominions belonging to them or either of them, by color
of Inheritance, Succession, Election, or any other Claim whatsoever, without
the free consent of the People in Parliament first had, and signified by a
particular Act or Ordinance for that purpose, Any Statute, Law, Usage or Custom
to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained,
That whosoever shall contrary to this Act, Proclaim, Declare, Publish, or any
way promote the said Charles Stuart the Son, or any other person to be King, or
Chief Magistrate of England or of Ireland, or of any the Dominions belonging to
them, or to either of them, without the said consent in Parliament signified as
aforesaid, shall be deemed and adjudged a Traitor to the Commonwealth, and
shall suffer pains of Death, and such other punishments as belong to the Crime
of high Treason. And all Officers, as well Civil as Military, and all other
well affected persons, are hereby authorized and required forthwith to
apprehend all such Offenders, and to bring them in safe Custrody to the next
Justice of the Peace, that they may be proceeded against accordingly.

Die Martis, 30. Ianuarii, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
Printed and Published.

H: Scobell, (ler. Parl. D. Com.



An Act declaring what Offenses shall be adjudged Treason.
WHereas the Parliament has abolished the Kingly Office in England and
Ireland, and in the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, and having
Resolved and Declared, That the people shall for the future be governed by its
own Representatives, or National meetings in Council, Chosen and Entrusted by
them for that purpose, has settled the Government in the way of a Commonwealth
and Free State, without King or House of Lords; Be it Enacted by this present
Parliament, and by the authority of the same, That if any person shall
maliciously or advisedly publish by writing, Printing, or openly Declaring,
That the said Government is Tyrannical, Usurped or Unlawful; or that the
Commons in Parliament assembled are not the Supreme Authority of this Nation;
or shall plot, contrive, or endeavor to stir up or raise force against the
present Government, or for the subversion or alteration of the same, and shall
declare the same by any open deed, That then every such Offense shall be taken,
deemed and adjudged, by authority of this Parliament, to be High Treason. And
whereas the Keepers of the Liberty of England, and the Council of State,
constituted, and to be from time to time constituted by authority of
Parliament, are to be under the said Representatives in Parliament, entrusted
for the maintenance of the said Government, with several Powers and Authorities
limited, given and appointed unto them by the Parliament; Be it likewise
Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any person shall maliciously and
advisedly plot or endeavor the subversion of the said Keepers of the Liberty of
England, or the Council of State, and the same shall declare by any open deed;
or shall move any person or persons for the doing thereof, or stir up the
people to rise against them or either of them, their or either of their
Authorities, That then every such Offense and Offenses shall be taken, Deemed
and Declared to be High Treason. And whereas the Parliament, for their just and
lawful Defense, has raised and levied the Army and Forces now under the
Command of Thomas Lord Fairfax, and are at present necessitated, by reason of
the manifold Distractions within this Commonwealth, and Invasions threatened
from abroad, to continue the same, which under God must be the instrumental
means of preserving the well-affected people of this Nation in peace and
safety; Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person,
not being an Officer, Soldier or Member of the Army, shall plot, contrive, or
endeavor to stir up any Mutiny in the said Army, or withdraw any Soldiers or
Officers from their obedience to their Superior Officers, or from the preseut
Government as aforesaid; or shall procure, invite, aid or assist any foreigners
or Strangers to Invade England or Ireland, or shall adhere to any Forces raised
by the Enemies of the Parliament or Commonwealth, or keepers of the Liberty of
England, or if any person shall counterfeit the Great Seal of England (for the
time being) used and appointed by authority of Parliament, That then every such
offense and offenses shall be taken, deemed and Declared by the authority of
this Parliament to be High Treason; and every such persons shall suffer pains
of Death, and also forfeit unto the Keepers of the Liberty of England, to and
for the use of the Commonwealth, all and singular his and their Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels, as in case of High Treason
has been used by the Laws and Statutes of this Land to be forfeit and lost.
Provided always, That no persons shall be Indicted and Arraigned for any of the
Offenses mentioned in this Act, unless such Offenders shall be Indicted or
Prosecuted for the same within one year after the Offense committed.

Die Lunae, 14 Maii, 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



An Act declaring what Offenses shall be adjudged Treason.
Whereas the Parliament has abolished the Kingly Office in England and
Ireland, and in the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging; and having
Resolved and Declared, That the people shall for the future be governed by its
own Representatives or National Meetings in Council, thosen and entrusted by
them for that purpose, has settled the Government in the way of a Commonwealth
and Free State, without King or house of Lords: Be it enarted by this present
Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That if any person shall
maliciously or advisedly publish, by Writing, Printing, or openly Declaring,
That the said Government is Tyrannical, Usurped or Unlawful; or that the
Commons in Parliament assembled are not the Supreme Authority of this Nation;
or shall plot, Contribe or Endeavor to stir up, or raise force against the
present Government, or for the Subbersion or Alteration of the same, and shall
declare the same by any open deed, That then every such Offense shall be taken,
deemed and adjudged by Authority of this Parliament to be high Treason. And
whereas The Keepers of the Liberty of England, and the Council of State
constituted, and to be from time to time constituted by Authority of
Parliament, are to be under the said Representatives in Parliament, entrusted
for the Maintenance of the said Government, with several Powers and Authorities
limited, given and appointed unto them by the Parliament, By it likewise
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person shall malietously and
adbisedly plot or endeavor the subversion of the said Keepers of the Liberty of
England, or the Council of State, and the same shall declare by any open deed,
or shall move any person or persons for the doing thereof, or stir up the
people to rise against them, or either of them, their or either of their
Authorities, That then every such Offense and Offenses shall be taken, deemed
and declared to be high Treason.

And whereas the Parliament, for their just and lawful defense, has raised and
levied the Army and fortes now under the Command of Thomas Lord Fairfax, and
are at present necessitated, by reason of the manifold Distractions within this
Commonwealth, and Invasions threatened from abroad, to continue the same, which
under God, must be the instrumental Means of preserving the Well-affected
people of this Nation in peace and safety; Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That if any person, not being an Officer, Soldier or
Member of the Army, shall plot, contrive or endeavor to stit up any Mutiny in
the said Army, or withdraw any Soldiers or Officers from their obedrence to
their Superior Officers, or from the present Government as aforesaid; or shall
procure, invite, aid or assist any foreigners or Strangers to invade England or
Ireland; or shall athere to any forces raised by the Enemies of the Parliament
or Commonwealth, or Keepers of the Liberty of England; or if any person shall
counterseit the Great Seal of England for the time being, used and appointed by
Authority of Parliament, That then every such Offense and Offenses shall be
taken, dremed and declared by Authority of this Parliament, to be high Treason;
and every such person shall suffer pains of death, and also forfeit unto the
Keepers of the Liberty of England, to and for the use of the Commonwealth, all
and singular his and their Lands, Tenements and here ditaments, Goods and
Chattels, as in case of high Treason has been used by the Laws and Statutes of
this Land to be forfeit and lost. Provided always, That no person shall be
indicted and arraigned for any of the Offenses mentioned in this Act, unless
such Offenders shall be indicted and prosecuted for tht same within one year
after the Offense committed.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any person shall
counterfeit the Money of this Commonwealth, or shall bring any false Money into
this Land, counterseit or other, like to the Mouey of this Commonwealth,
knowing the Money to be false, to merchandise or make payment in deteit of the
people of this Nation; or if any person shall hereaster falsely forge and
counterseit any such kind of Coin of Gold or Silver, as is not the proper Coin
of this Commonwealth, and is or shall be current within this Nation, by consent
of the Parliament, or such as shall be by them authorized thereunto; or shall
bring from the parts beyond the Seas into this Commonwealth, or into any the
Dominions of the same, any such false and counterfeit Coin of Money, being
current within the same as is abovesaid, knowing the same Money to be false and
counterfeit, to the intent to utter or make payment with the same within this
Commonwealth, by Merchandise or otherwise; or if any person shall Impair,
Diminish, falsify, Clip, Wash, Round or file, Scale or Lighten, for wicked
lucre or gains sake, any the proper Moneys or Coyns of this Commonwealth, or
the Dominions thereof, or of the Moneys or Coyns of any other Realm, allowed and
suffered to be cutrant within this Commonwealth, or the Dominions thereof, That
then all and every such Offenses above mentioned, shall be and are hereby
deemed and adjudged high Treason, and the Offenders therein, their counselors,
procurers, ayders and abettors, being convicted according to the Laws of this
Nation of any of the said Offenses, shall be deemed and adjudged Traitors
against this Commonwealth, and shall suffer and have such pains of Death, and
forfeitures as in case of high Treason is used and ordained. Provided always,
and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act touching the Moneys
and Coyns aforesaid, or any thing therein contained, nor any Attainder of any
person for the same, shall in any wise extend or be judged to make any
corruption of Blood, to any the heir or heirs of any such Offender, or to make
the Wife of any such Offender to lose or forfeir her Dower, of or in any Lands,
Tenements or hereditaments, or her Title, Action or Interest in the same.

Die Martis, 17 Iulii, 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.



An Act for a Seal of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament, That the Seal engraven with the Arms
of England and Ireland (that is to say, A Cross and a harp) with this
Inscription in the Circle, That is to say (The Seal of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England) shall be the Seal of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, to be only used by Order of Parliament.

And be it further Enacted, That whosoever shall counterfeit the same, shall be
adjudged and taken to be guilty of high Treason, and shall be tried in such
manner, and undergo the like penalties as are appointed by any Act of Parliament
in case of high Treason.

Die Mercurii, 22. Iannarii, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.




