AN ACT FOR REVIVING of a former Act, Entitled, An Act against Unlicensed and
Scandalous Books and Pamphlets, and for better Regulating of Printing; WITH
Some Additions and Explanations.

Friday the 7th of January, 1652.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.

AN ACT FOR REVIVING of a former ACT, Entitled, An Act against Unlicensed and
Scandalous Books and Pamphlets, and for better Regulating of Printing; With
some ADDITIONS and EXPLANATIONS.
WHereas a late Act, Entitled, An Act against Unlicensed and Scandalous Books
and Pamphlets, and for better Regulating of Printing, has appeared by
experience to be a good and profitable Law for the ends therein expressed; and
that the discontinuance thereof has occasioned some lewd Pens and presses to
reassume their former boldness, in Writing, Printing and Dispersing
Unwarrantable, Seditious and Scandalous Papers, Books and Pamphlets, to the
great dishonor of God and offense of the Parliament, and insufferable contempt
of all good Order and Government: And whereas many of the Evils and
Exorbitances complained of in that Act, appear to have been much occasioned
through the multiplying of Printing-houses, without any Warrant or Authority,
and by reason of the Artifice and Subtilty of restless Spirits, unwilling to be
confined within the limits of orderly Government; The Parliament of England
taking the premises into their serious consideration, sinde it requisite to
revive and explain the said Law, and to supply the further Remedies following;
Be it therefore by the Authority of this present Parliament Enacted, Ordained
and Declared, That the said Act, Entitled as aforesaid, and all the Clauses
therein contained, Saving for so much thereof wherein alteration shall be made
by this present Act, be from henceforth Revived, and remain in full force and
virtue.

And be it by the Authority aforesaid Enacted and Ordained, That the Council of
State for the time being, be Empowered to inquire how many, and which of the
said Printing-houses now in being shall be continued; and how such others of
them, as shall be by the said Council judged meet to be suppressed, shall be
disposed of; and what number of Apprentices and Presses every Master-printer
(to be allowed by the said Council of State) shall have at one time; and to
have full Power to take such Order therein, as to them shall appear just and
convenient.

And forasmuch as the Life and Growth of all Arts and Mysteries consists in a
due Regulation thereof, Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Authority
aforesaid, That the Government and Regulation of the said Mystery of Printing
and Printers, shall from henceforth be and remain in the Council of State for
the time being; and that the Master, Wardens and Assistants of the Company of
Stationers London, shall follow and observe such Rules, Orders and Directions
concerning the Regulating of Printing, as they shall from time to time have and
receive from the said Council successively: And the said Council of State for
the time being, and Master, Wardens and Assistants of the said Company,
according to such Rules and Directions as they shall receive from the said
Council, are hereby Authorized and Required to use all good means with care and
diligence, for the preventing and punishing of Offenses and Misdemeanors
against this Act, and the Laws, Statutes and Ordinances heretofore made and now
in force, against Unlicensed and Scandalous Books and Pamphlets, and for the
better Regulating of Printing.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no
person or persons shall or may at any time or times hereafter, Excepting such
as shall be Licensed and Authorized by the Parliament or Council of State, or
may claim a Privilege thereunto by Patrimonial Right, Use or Exercise the Art,
Trade or Mystery of a Printer of Books, unless he or they heretofore have, or
hereafter shall have served as an Apprentice by the space of Seven Years in the
said Art, Mystery and Science of Printing, with some Lawful Master-Printer of
this Commonwealth of England; and that every such person and persons who shall
be so Qualified and Enabled to be a Printer, and shall take upon him the Trade
or Mystery of Printing as a Master-Printer, shall Use and Exercise the same in
his and their respective Dwelling Houses, and not elsewhere, Any Law, Statute,
Privilege, Usage or Custom to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding, under the Penalty of Forty pounds for every Month, and so
proportionably for any shorter or longer time, to be Forfeited by every person
offending against the Provision aforesaid. And whereas by the said Recited Act,
it is Provided amongst other things, That no Dry-fats, Packs, Maunds, Chests,
Fardels of Books Imported into this Commonwealth, be permitted by any Officers
of the Customs or Excise to be Opened or Conveyed away before Notice given; and
that the same be Searched and Viewed (within Forty eight Hours after such
notice) by the said Master and Wardens of the said Company of Stationers, or
such as they shall appoint; It is hereby now Enacted and Declared, That the
Lords-Days, and Days of Public Thanksgiving and Humiliation (if any such
shall happen within the said Forty eight Hours next after such Notice as
aforesaid) be not accounted nor reckoned as part of the said Forty eight Hours.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That what Books or other
things prohibited by this or the said Recited Act, the said Master and Wardens,
or such as they shall appoint, shall find and seize upon their Search and View
as aforesaid, they are hereby Authorized and Required to bring them, or cause
them to be brought to Stationers' Hall London, there to remain and to be
disposed of as by the said Act is directed: And to the end that the said
Searches and Views may be made without Spoil or Damage to the Owners of the
Goods so Imported, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
said Master and Wardens, or any of them, shall have Power to appoint some
convenient place where the said Search shall be made; and that no Merchant or
Owner of any such Books Imported, shall open their said Goods, or permit them
to be opened, but in the presence of the said Master and Wardens, or such as
they shall appoint, upon the Penalty or Forfeiture of Five pounds for every
such Offense; Provided that such Search and View be made within the time above
limited after such Notice as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
pecuniary Forfeitures and Penalties mentioned, as well in this Act as in the
said other Recited Act, which shall be incurred by any Offender or Offenders
against either of the said Acts, shall and may be Sued for in any Court of
Record whatsoever, within the Jurisdiction whereof such Offense shall be
committed, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn,
Wager of Law, or Protection shall be admitted or allowed to the Defendant or
Defendants: The one Moiety of all which Forfeitures, if recovered by the
Prosecution or Appointment of the said Company of Stationers, after Deduction
and Satisfaction of the Charges of Recovery, shall be by them received and
reserved, shall be for the Use of the Poor of their Company; and if by the
Prosecution of any other person, then to the Use of the Prosecutor; and the
other Moiety or one Half shall be to and for the Use of the Commonwealth, and
be accounted for accordingly.

And it is further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Council of State for the time being, shall hereby have like Power as in the
said former Act is contained, to all Intents and Purposes, for the more full
and effectual Execution of the same.

And be it further Enacted and Declared, That the Agent for the Army for the
time being, in stead of the Secretary of the Army formerly appointed, shall
have Power to License such Intelligence as may concern the Affairs of the Army
only, under the like Rules and Directions as are contained in the said Act of
September, One thousand six hundred forty and nine.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Clause or Clauses, either in this or the said Recited Act of September, One
thousand six hundred forty and nine, shall be Construed to extend to the
Prejudice or Infringing of any of the just Rights and Privileges of any of the
Printers of either of the two Universities in this Commonwealth; But that the
same shall be full as large and effectual to all Intents and Purposes, as if
this and the said Recited Act of September, One thousand six hundred forty and
nine, had not been had or made.

Friday the 7th of January, 1652.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


