AN ORDINANCE Appointing a COMMITTEE FOR THE ARMY, AND Treasurers at War.

Saturday, January 28. 1653.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and His Council, that this
Ordinance and Orders be forthwith printed and published.

HENRY SCOBELL Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1653.

AN ORDINANCE Appointing a Committee for the ARMY, AND Treasurers at War.
BE it Ordained and Declared by his Highness the Lord Protector, with the
Consent of his Council, And it is hereby Ordained, That for the more effectual
putting in execution of an Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for an
Assessment at the rate of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds by the Month
for six Months, from the five and twentieth of December 1653. to the four and
twentieth of June then next ensuing, toward the maintenance of the Armies and
Navy of this Commonwealth, and published in print by Order of Parliament of the
four and twentieth of November 1653 And for the Receiving, Disposing and
Issuing forth of the Moneys payable by virtue thereof, and of all other Moneys
that by any Act, Ordinance, or Order of Parliament have been, or are hereby, or
before the four and twentieth of June 1654. shall be appointed for, or toward
the maintenance of, the Armies of this Commonwealth, John Clerk, Edward Clud,
Richard Lucy, Edward Horseman, James Philips, Edward Gill, John Hildesley,
Jervas Bennet, Esqs. Captain Adam Baines, or any three or more of them, be a
Committee for the Army, And that John Blackwell the younger, and Richard Dean,
Esqs. shall be and are hereby continued and authorized to be Treasurers at War
for the said six months Assessment, from the five and twentieth day of
December 1653. until the four and twentieth of June 1654. and for all other
the sums of money for which they were appointed Treasurers at War by virtue
of an Act, Entitled, An Act appointing a Committee for the Army, and
Treasurers at War, published by Order of Parliament of the five and twentieth
of July 1653. And the said Committee for the Army are hereby appointed, and
authorized to have the Care and mannaging of the whole business of bringing in
the moneys appointed to be Assessed, levied, collected, and paid, in all and
every the Counties, Cities and places in England, and Wales, toward the said
six months Assesments of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds a month, and
of all other moneys du, and in arrear of any former Assessments; And for that
purpose, and also for the issuing forth and disposing of the said six months
Assessment, and all other the said moneys, in like manner as the Assessments
and sums (for the ordering and disposing whereof, the persons named in the said
last recited Act were appointed a Committee for the Army) were to be issued
forth and disposed, that is to say, For the issuing forth of forty thousand
pounds by the month out of the said six months Assessment of one hundred and
twenty thousand pounds a month to the Treasurer of the Navy for the use of the
Navy; and for the issuing forth and disposing of all other monys to be by
virtue hereof issued forth, and disposed by them for the same uses and purposes
for which the six months Assessments, and other sums in the said last recited
Act mentioned, were appointed to be by them disposed, or for such other uses as
are hereafter mentioned, The said Committee for the Army shall have, and are
hereby authorized to use, and put in execution, all and every the powers and
Authorities, in as full and ample manner to all intents and purposes as the
Comittee of the Army had or were mentioned to have by virtue of the said last
recited Act for the mannagement of the Matters and affairs thereby committed
unto them, and to proceed therein according to the powers, rules and
limitations in the said Act expressed. And the said Committee for the Army
shall be, and are hereby further empowered, and authorized to have and put in
execution the several Powers and Authorities which were by two several Orders
of Parliament of the fourteenth of April 1652. expressed to be given to the then
Committee for the Army, for the disposal of the Arrears of all Assessments in
the said Orders mentioned And shall be, and are hereby empowered to confirm, or
a ter any Order, or Warrant, which (being made by the then Committee for the
Army, relating to the said Orders of Parliament, or either of them) have not, or
shall not before the passing of this Ordinance be fulfilled, observed and fully
executed. And also the said Committee for the Army shall, and are hereby
empowered and authorized to proceed in the satisfying the remainder of the
Arrears due for service in Scotland, before the twentieth of October 1651. and
in defaulking such sums of money as upon examination shall appear to have been
paid to any person, for himself, or others, in lieu of those Arrears, more than
ought to have been paid according to the directions of an Order of Parliament of
the eighth of August 1653. made in that behalf. And the said Committee for the
Army shall likewise have all and every the powers and Authorities, which the
Committee for the Army had, or were mentioned to have by the Act herein last
before recited. And all and every the Commissioners for Assessments, Receivers,
Collectors, Sub-Collectors, and other persons concerned, or that shall be
concerned in the assessing, levying, collecting, and payment of any part of the
Assessments, or other sums before mentioned, or in the taking or making of
rates, or surveys for the Assessments, shall be, and are hereby required to
observe such Orders and Directions, as shall be made, and given forth in those
behalfs by the said Committee for the Army. And be it Ordained, and it is
hereby Ordained, That the Warrants and Orders of the said Committee for the
Army, to all, or any the purposes aforesaid, be by the said Treasurers at War,
and by Sir John Wollaston, Knight, and the rest of the former Treasurers at
War, and all others concerned therein, observed and obeyed accordingly; And the
warrant or warrants of the said Committee for the Army shall be to all, and
every the Treasurers at War aforesaid a sufficient discharge. And the said
Committee for the Army shall be, and are hereby authorized and required, to
exercise, and put in execution, all and every the powers and authorities given
to the Committee for the Army by an Act of Parliament published in print by
Order of Parliament of the nineteenth of October 1653. touching the stating and
determining the Accounts of all Officers and Soldiers, etc. Provided that the
said Committee for the Army do not state, or make any Certificate for any sum
claimed to be in Arrear and due before the fifteenth of January 1647. And be it
further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that the said Treasurers at War
hereby continued, shall have the same powers and Authorities to all intents and
purposes, and shall have and take the like Salary and allowances for six
months, from the five and twentieth day of December 1653. or proportionably
for so long time as they shall continue to be Treasurers at War, as they had,
and as were appointed to be made unto them by the Act herein before recited,
published in print the five and twentieth day of July 1653. And the respective
Receivers General, that are or shall be appointed to receive any part of the
said six months Assesments of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds a month,
commencing the five and twentieth of December 1653. shall forthwith after the
receipt thereof transmit and pay, or cause to be paid, the monys by them so
received, to the said Treasurers at War, or where, or to whom they shall
appoint to receive the same. And the receipt of the said Treasurers at War,
shall be to the respective Receivers General, and to all other persons, who
shall by virtue of this Ordinance pay any moneys unto them, for the purposes
aforesaid, a sufficient discharge. And the said Committee for the Army shall
be, and are hereby authorized and required by their warrant to Order and
dispose the monthly Assessment laid upon Scotland (by resolve of Parliament,
dated the twelfth day of November 1653.) for and toward the payment of the
Forces, and other necessary contingencies of the Military service there; And
the Treasurer, or Receiver General of the said Assessment is hereby ordered and
required to observe such warrant as shall be directed unto him by the said
Committee for the Army for the purposes aforesaid. And the said Committee for
the Army shall be and are hereby empowered to give warrant for the satisfying,
and allowing of all such Sums of money as were disbursed by any Receivers
General of the Assessments for the Army appointed before the five and twentieth
of December 1651. or by any former Treasurers at War, by any Order of
Parliament, or by any order or direction of any former Committee for the Army.
Provided that such disbursements were ordered and made for such purposes and
uses, for which the then Committee for the Army ought to have given their
warrant, and did not give the same. And forasmuch as the Forces in England,
Ireland, and Scotland do necessarily require, and call for the moneys appointed
for their use out of the one hundred thousand pounds charged for the use of the
Army, by Order of Parliament of the first of Januarie 1652, and arising by the
sale of and Composition for Delinquents Estates; and also for some further
supply to be made for them; Be it therefore Ordained, that all and every
such sum and sums of money as shall, on and after the thirtieth day of
Januarie 1653, be paid unto and received by the Treasurers at Goldsmith's-Hall
for Sequestrations or Compositions (except for pensions and paiments for the
use of maimed Soldiers already appointed out of their receipts) shall be paid
by the said Treasurers unto the Treasurers at War hereby appointed, until the
remainder of the said one hundred thousands pounds, or so much thereof as shall
not be satisfied by the moyetie of the moneys arising by sale of Delinquent's
Estates upon the Act of Parliament for sale of and Composition for those
Estates, shall be fully satisfied. And also until the sum of one hundred
thousand pounds more be fully satisfied and paid out of the said receipt for
the further supply of the Armies. And the Treasurers for Sequestrations and
Compositions are hereby required to make payment of the remainder of the said
first one hundred thousand pounds. And also of the other one hundred thousand
pounds to the said Treasurers at War accordingly, whose receipt shall be to
the Treasurers for Sequestrations and Compositions a sufficient Discharge.

And be it further Ordained that the said Committee for the Army shall be,
and hereby are empowered (by themselves, or such others as they shall appoint) to
call to Account any Receivers, Collectors, Sub-collectors, or other persons who
have received any sum or sums of money, paiable, or received by virtue of
any Act, Ordinance or Order of Parliament for the British forces in Ireland, or
for the relief or use of any the distressed British Inhabitants of Ireland, or
for other service or relief of Ireland; and all persons concerned in such
Account, are required to observe the orders and directions of the said Committee
for the purpose aforesaid. And the said Committee are hereby empowered to issue
forth their Orders or Warrants to any person or persons who have any of the
said moneys in their hands, requiring them forthwith to pay in the same unto
John Black well the younger, and Richard Deane Esquires, Treasurers at War,
whose receipt shall be a discharge for the moneys which shall be so paid unto
them; and if it shall appear unto the said Committee, that any person or
persons have wilfully detained in their hands any sum or sums of money as
aforesaid, and not performed their duty and trust in the due disposal thereof,
the said Committee for the Army (if they shall see cause) are hereby Authorized
to award and order such person or persons to pay Interest for the same, after
the rate of six pounds per Cent. for so long time as they have detained the
money in their hands. And be it further Ordained, that John Black-well the
younger, and Richard Deane Esquires, Treasurers at War, are hereby appointed
and Authorized to receiv all such sums of money (appointed for the British
forces, or distressed Inhabitants of Ireland) as shall be, by the said
Committee, by virtue hereof, ordered to be paid unto them, and to issue forth
the same for the uses for which the said moneys were raised and received. And
have been by any Act, Ordinance or Order of Parliament disposed and appointed,
according to such order as shall be by the said Committee for the Army given
therein; And the said Committee for the Army shall give their warrant for the
disposal thereof for the uses aforesaid, according to such direction as they
shall in that behalf receiv from the Lord PROTECTOR and his Council. And be it
further ordained, that if any Receiver-General, Collector, Sub-collector, or
other person or persons shall neglect or refuse to observe the Order, or Warrant
of the said Committee for the Army, and not pay in the money of them required,
that then upon Certificate thereof from the said Committee for the Army unto
the Commissioners for Sequestrations, the said Commissioners are hereby
required to sequester the Estate of such person or persons real and personal,
until such time as the Warrant or Orders of the said Committee shall be wholly
observed and fulfilled.

Saturdaie 28 Januarie, 1653.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the Council, That Thomas Rand,
William Palmer, Robert Yarborow, Nehemiah Rawson, William Harvey, William
Welby, Esquires, and the Mayor of Lincoln for the time being, be, and are
hereby added to the Commissioners for the Monthly Assessment within the County
of Lincoln, and are hereby empowered and authorized to act and put in execution
all and every the powers given to the Commissioners in the Act entitled, an
Act for an Assessment at the rate of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds by
the mouth for six months, from the 25 day of December 1653, till the 24 of June
then next ensuing, toward the maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this
Commonwealth, published in Print by order of the 24 of November 1653, in such
sort, to all intents and purposes as the said Commissioners therein named are
thereby empowered to do, as if the persons aforesaid had been named in the said
Act.

Ordered by his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR, and the Council, that Edward
Hooper Esquire, and Philip Stansby, be, and are hereby added to the
Commissioners for the Monthly Assessment, within the County of Dorset, and are
hereby required and authorized to act and put in execution all and every the
powers given to the Commissioners in the Act, entitled, an Act for an
Assessment, at the rate of 120000 l. by the month, for six months, from the 25
of December 1653, to the 24 of June then next ensuing, toward the maintenance
of the Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth, published in Print by Order of
the 24 of November last, in such sort to all intents and purposes as the said
Commissioners therein named are thereby empowered to do, and as if they had been
named in the said Act.

Ordered by his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the Council, that the Mayor of
Banburie for the time being be, and is hereby added to the Commissioners for
the Monthly Assessment within the County of Oxon; and is hereby required and
authorized to act and put in execution all and every the powers given to the
Commissioners in the Act, entitled, an Act for an Assessment, at the rate of
120000 l. by the month, for six months, from the 25 day of December 1653, to
the 24 of June then next ensuing, toward the maintenance of the Armies and
Navies of this Commonwealth, published in print by order of the 24 of November
last, in such sort to all intents and purposes as the said Commissioners
therein named are thereby empowered to do, and as if they had been named in the
said Act.

Ordered by his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR, and the Council, That Christopher
Peircehay Esquire, and Sir Robert Barwick Knight, be, and are hereby added to
the Commissioners for the Monthly Assessment within the County of York; and
are hereby required and authorized to act and put in execution all and every
the powers given to the commissioners in the Act, entitled, an Act for an
Assessment, at the rate of 120000 l. by the month, for six months, from the 25
day of December 1653, to the 24 of June then next ensuing, toward the
maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth; published in print
by order of the 24 of November last, in such sort to all intents and purposes
as the said commissioners therein named are thereby empowered to do, and as if
they had been named in the said Act.

Saturday, the 28th of Januarie, 1653.
ORdered by His Highness, the Lord PROTECTOR, and His Council, that the
Ordinance and Orders aforesaid be forthwith printed and published.

Hen. Scobell Clerk of the Council.

Printed by William Du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness the Lord
PROTECTOR. MDCLIII.


