AN ACT FOR THE SETTLING OF IRELAND.

royal Anglo-Irish blazon or coat of arms

Thursday, 12th August, 1652.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.

AN ACT FOR THE SETTLING OF IRELAND.
WHereas the Parliament of England, after the expense of much Blood and
Treasure for suppression of the horrid Rebellion in Ireland, Have by the good
Hand of God upon their undertakings, brought that Affair to such an Issue, as
that a total Reducement and Settlement of that Nation may, with Gods blessing,
be speedily effected: To the end therefore that the People of that Nation may
know that it is not the intention of the Parliament to extirpate that whole
Nation, but that Mercy and Pardon, both as to Life and Estate, may be extended
to all Husbandmen, Plowmen, Laborers, Artificers, and others of the Inferior
sort, in manner as is hereafter Declared; They submitting themselves to the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, and living peaceably and obediently
under their Government: And that others also of higher Rank and Quality may
know the Parliaments intention concerning them, according to the respective
Demerits and Considerations under which they fall; Be it Enacted and Declared
by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That all and
every person and persons of the Irish Nation, comprehended in any of the
following Qualificacations, shall be liable unto the Penalties and Forfeitures
therein mentioned and contained; or be made capable of the Mercy and Pardon
therein extended respectively, according as is hereafter expressed and
declared; That is to say,

I. THat all and every person and persons, who at any time before the Tenth day
of November, One thousand six hundred forty two (being the time of the sitting
of the first General Assembly at Kilkenny in Ireland) Have Contrived, Advised,
Councelled, Promoted or Acted, the Rebellion, Murders or Massacres done or
committed in Ireland, which began in the year One thousand six hundred forty
one; or have at any time before the said Tenth day of November, One thousand
six hundred forty two, by bearing Arms, or contributing Men, Arms, Horse,
Plate, Money, Victual, or other Furniture or Habilliments of War (other then
such which they shall make to appear to have been taken from them by mere force
and violence) aided, assisted, promoted, acted, prosecuted or abetted the said
Rebellion, Murders or Massacres, be excepted from Pardon of Life and Estate.

II. That all and every Jesuit, Priest, and other person or persons who have
received Orders from the Pope or Sea of Rome, or any Authority derived from the
same, that have any ways contrived, advised, councelled, promoted, continued,
countenanced, aided, assisted or abetted; or at any time hereafter shall any
ways contrive, advise, council, promote, continue, countenance, aid, assist or
abet the Rebellion or War in Ireland, or any the Murders or Massacres,
Robberies or Violencies committed against the Protestants English or others
there, be Excepted from Pardon for Life and Estate.

III. That James Butler Earl of Ormond, James Touchet Earl of Castlehaven,
Ullick Bourk Earl of Clanrickard, Christopher Plunket Earl of Fingal, James
Dillon Earl of Roscomon, Richard Nugent Earl of Westmeath, Morrogh O Brien
Baron of Inchiquin, Donogh Mac Carthy Viscount Muskerry, Theobald Taaff
Viscount Taaff of Corren, Richard Butler Viscount Mountgarret, (...) Roch
Viscount Fernjoy, (...) Montgomery Viscount Montgomery of Ards, (...) Magennis
Viscount of Iveah, (...) Fleming Baron of Slane, (...) Dempsey Viscount of
Glanmaleer, (...) Bermingham Baron of Athenry, Oliver Plunket Baron of Lowth,
Robert Barnwal Baron of Trymletstown, Miles Bourk Viscount Mayo, Connor Magwire
Baron of Eniskellen, Nicholas Preston Viscount Gormanstown, Nicholas Nettervil
Viscount Nettervil of Dowth, John Bramhal late Bishop of Derry, James Cusack
Esquire Thomas Tyrrel Esquire Peter Clinton Esquire Sir Phelim O Neil Knight; Sir George
Monroe Knight, Sir James Montgomery Knight, Sir Robert Stewart Knight, Sir Con
Magennis of the County of Down Knight, Sir Luke Fitzgerald of Tecroghan
Knight, Sir Richard Barnwal of Crickstown Knight, Sir John Nettervil Knt. Sir.
Thomas Esmond of the County of Wexford Knight, Sir John Magragh of the county
of Tipperary, Sir Theobald Bourk Son of the Viscount Mayo, Colonel Thomas
Preston, Hugh Buy O Neil, Luke Taaff Brother of the Viscount Taaff, Geoffry
Brown Esquire Geoffry Baron Esquire Patrick Darcy Esquire Nicholas Plunket Esquire (...) Fennel
Doctor of Physic, Hugh Mac Phelim Birn of the County of Wicklow, Florence Fitz
Patrick of the Queens County Esquire Colonel John Fitz Patrick Son of Florence,
Roger Moor of Ballyna in the County of Kildare, Tirlogh Roe O Neil Brother to
Sir Phelim O Neil, Mulmurry Mac Swyne, Donnel Oge Magennis, John Mortimer, Rory
Magwyre of the county of Fermanagh, Rory Mac Brien Oge Magennis, Even Magennis
of Castle-vellan, Edmund Buy Magennis, Shane Mac Brien O Neil, Tirlogh Magragh
son of James Magragh, Tirlogh mac Caffry O Donnel, Brien Modder O Quynne, Brien
O Mulcrevy, Patrick Groom O Mulcrevy, Tirlogh Groom O Quynne of Monagowre in
the county of Tyrone, Colonel Manus Roe O Cahan, Tool Mac Macan, Walter Bagnal
Esquire Edmund Bourk of Cloghan in the County of Mayo, (...) Pursel of Tipperary
Baron of Loghmo, Thomas Cantwel of Cantwels-Court in the County of Kilkenny,
Edward Hussy of Moyl Hussy in the county of Mead, Hugh Hussy of Galtrym,
John Bellew of Willystown in the county of Lowth Esquire Philip Mac Hugh O Reyly of
the county of Cavan, Mulmurry O Reyly of the county of Cavan, Colonel Mac Brien
Mac Mahown of the county of Monaghan, Lysagh Moor brother of Roger Moor
beforementioned, Neil Mac Kenna of the Trough in the county of Monaghan,
Richard Belling Esquire son of sir Henry Belling Knight; Laurence Dowdal of
Athlumney Esquire Captain Arthur Fox of Crumlin in the county of Dublin, Brien Mac
Phelim Birn of the county of Wicklow, Col. Luke Tool of Castle kevin in the
county of Wicklow; John Crean of Sligo, Anthony Brabazon of Ballinfloe in the
county of Roscomon, Piers Fitz Gerard of Ballisonan, commonly called Mac
Thomas, Lysagh Demsey of the Kings County Esquire Charles O Conner Dun of
Ballintober in the county of Roscomon Esquire Dermot O Brien of the county of
Clare, Richard Grace Mac Jasper of the Kings County, Philip O Dwyre of the
county of Tipperary, Owney O Dwyre of the county of Tipperary, Murtagh O Brian
of Annagh in the said county, John O Kennedy of Dunnally in the said county,
Murrogh ne Mart O Flagherty of the county of Gallowey, Teige O Flagherty of the
said county, Teige O Connor Roe of the county of Roscomon, Teige O Connor Sligo
of Sligo, Redmond Bourk Kilceman in the county of Gallowey, Thomas Bourk of
Anbally in the county of Galloway, John Brown of the Neal in the county of
Mayo, Charles O Connor and Hugh O Connor, brothers of Teige O Connor Sligo;
James Dillon brother to the Viscount Dillon of Costillogh, Touchet brother to
the Earl of Castlehaven, be excepted from pardon for Lift and Estate.

IV. That all and every person and persons (both Principals and Accessaries)
who since the First day of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, have or
shall kill, slay, or otherwise destroy any person or persons in Ireland, which
at the time of their being so killed, slain or destroyed, were not publicly
entertained and maintained in Arms as Officers or private soldiers, for and on
behalf of the English against the Irish; And all and every person and persons
(both Principals and Accessaries) who since the said First day of October, One
thousand six hundred forty one, have killed, slain, or otherwise destroyed any
person or persons entertained and maintained as Officers or private soldiers,
for and on the behalf of the English against the Irish (the said persons so
killing, slaying, or otherwise destroying, not being then publicly
entertained and maintained in Arms as Officer or private soldier under the
Command and Pay of the Irish against the English) be excepted from pardon for
Life and Estate.

V. That all and every person and persons in Ireland, that are in Arms or
otherwise in Hostility against the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England,
and shall not within Eight and twenty days after Publication hereof by the
Commissioners for the Parliament, or Commander in Chief, lay down Arms and
submit to the Power and Authority of the said Parliament and Commonwealth, as
the same is now established, be excepted from pardon for Life and Estate.

VI. That all other person and persons (not being comprehended in any of the
former Qualifications) who have born Command in the War of Ireland against the
Parliament of England, or their Forces, as General, Lieutenant General, Major
General, Commissary General, Colonel, Governor of any Garrison, Castle or Fort,
or who have been employed as Receiver-General or Treasurer of the whole Nation
or any Province thereof, Commissary-General of Musters or Provisions;
Marshal-General, or Marshal of any Province, Advocate of the Army, or Secretary
to the Council of War, or to any General of the Army, or of any the several
provinces, in order to the carrying on the War against the Parliament or their
Forces, be banished during the pleasure of the Parliament of the Commonwealth
of England, and their Estates forfeited and disposed of as follows, viz. That
two third parts of their respective Estates be had, taken, and disposed of for
the Use and Benefit of the said Commonwealth; And that the other third part of
their said respective estates or other lands, to the proportion and value
thereof (to be assigned in such places in Ireland, as the Parliament, in order
to the more effectual Settlement of the peace of this Nation shall think fit to
appoint for that purpose) be respectively had, taken and enjoyed by the Wives
and Children of the said persons respectively.

VII. That the Commissioners of Parliament and Commander in Chief have power to
declare, That such person or persons as they shall judge capable of the
Parliaments Mercy (not being comprehended in any of the former Qualifications)
who have born Arms against the Parliament of England or their Forces, and have
laid down Arms, or within Eight and twenty days after publication hereof by the
Commissioners for the Parliament, and the Commander in Chief, shall lay down
Arms and submit to the Power and Authority of the said Parliament and
Commonwealth, as the same is now established (by promising and engaging to be
true to the same) shall be pardoned for their Lives, but shall forfeit their
Estates to the said Commonwealth, to be disposed of as follows, (viz.) Two
third parts thereof (in three equal parts to be divided) for the Use, Benefit
and Advantage of the said Commonwealth, and the other third part of the said
respective Estates or other Lands, to the proportion or value thereof (to be
assigned in such places in Ireland, as the Parliament, in order to the more
effectual Settlement of the peace of that Nation shall think fit to appoint for
that purpose) be enjoyed by the said persons, their Heirs or Assigns
respectively. Provided, That in case the Commissioners and Commander in Chief,
or either of them shall see cause to give any shorter time then Twenty eight
days, unto any person or persons in Arms, or in any Garrison, Castle or Fort in
Hostility against the Parliament, and shall give notice to such person or
persons in Arms, or in any Garrison, Castle or Fort, That all and every such
person and persons who shall not within such time as shall be set down in such
notice, surrender such Garrison, Castle or Fort to the power of the Parliament,
and lay down Arms, shall have no advantage of the Time formerly limited in this
Qualification.

VIII. That all and every person and persons of the Popish Religion, who have
resided in Ireland at any time from the First day of October, One thousand six
hundred forty-one, to the First of March, One thousand six hundred fifty, and
have not manifested their constant good Affection to the Interest of the
Commonwealth of England (the said persons not being comprehended in any of the
former Qualifications) shall forfeit one third part of their Estates in Ireland
to the said Commonwealth, to be disposed of for the Use, Benefit and Advantage
of the said Commonwealth; and the other two third parts of their respective
Estates or other Lands, to the proportion or value thereof, to be assigned in
such place in Ireland, as the Parliament, for the more effectual Settlement of
the peace of that Nation, shall think fit to appoint for that purpose, be
enjoyed by such person or persons, their Heirs or Assigns respectively: And
that all other persons who have resided in Ireland within the time aforesaid,
and have not been in actual Service for the Parliament, or otherwise manifested
their good Affections to the Interest of the Parliament of England, having
opportunity to do the same, shall forfeit one fifth part of their Estates to
the Use of the said Commonwealth.

IX. That all and every person and persons (having no real Estate in Ireland,
nor personal Estate to the value of Ten pounds) that shall lay down Arms and
submit to the Power and Authority of the Parliament by the time limited in the
former Qualifications, and shall take and subscribe the Engagement, To be true
and faithful to the Commonwealth of England, as the same is now Established,
within such time and in such manner, as the Commissioners for the Parliament,
and Commander in Chief shall appoint and direct, such persons (not being
Excepted from Pardon, nor adjudged for Banishment by any of the former
Qualifications) shall be pardoned for Life and Estate for any act or thing by
them done in prosecution of the War.

X. That all Estates Declared by the former Qualifications concerning Rebels or
Delinquents in Ireland to be Forfeited, shall be construed, adjudged and taken,
to all intents and purposes, to extend to the Forfeitures of all Estates Tail,
and also of all Rights and Titles thereunto, which since the Five and twentieth
of March, One thousand six hundred thirty nine, have been or shall be in such
Rebels or Delinquents, or any other in trust for them or any of them, or their
or any of their uses, with all Reversions and Remainders thereupon, in any
other person or persons whatsoever: And also to the Forfeiture of all Estates
limited, appointed, conveyed, settled or vested in any person or persons
Declared by the said Qualifications to be Rebels or Delinquents, with all
Reversions or Remainders of such Estates conveyed, vested, limited, declared or
appointed to any the Heirs, Children or Issues of such Rebel or Delinquent;
which Estate or Estates, Remainders or Reversions since the five and twentieth
of March, One thousand six hundred thirty nine, have been or shall be in such
Rebels or Delinquents, or in any their Heirs, Children or Issues of such Rebels
or Delinquents; and to all Estates granted, limited, appointed or conveyed by
any such Rebels or Delinquents, unto any their Heirs, Children or Issue, with
all the Reversions and Remainders thereupon. Provided, That this shall not
extend to make void the estates of any English Protestants, who have constantly
adhered to the Parliament, which were by them Purchased for valuable
consideration before the Three and twentieth of October, One thousand six
hundred forty one; or upon like valuable consideration Mortgaged to them before
that time, or to any person or persons in trust for them for satisfaction of
Debts owing to them.

Provided, That if any person or persons Excepted by name or otherwise,
comprehended in these Qualifications, have been comprised within any Articles
granted unto them, or agreed upon between them and any Commander of the
Parliaments Forces thereto Authorized; That such person or persons shall
nevertheless enjoy the benefit of those Articles, in case the Commissioners of
Parliament in Ireland shall adjudge them to be Comprised therein; and that they
have observed and kept, and continue to observe and keep the Articles on their
parts. And that nevertheless it shall be in the Power of the Parliament, or
their Commissioners, if they see cause, to Transplant such persons from the
respective places of their usual Habitation or Residence, into such other
places within that Nation, as shall be judged most consistent with Public
Safety, allowing them such proportion of Land or Estate in the parts to which
they shall be Transplanted, as they had or should have enjoyed of their own
other where, in case they had not been so removed.

Thursday, the Twelfth of August, 1652.
ORdered by the parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


