AN ACT For calling home Seamen and Mariners, AND Inhibiting such to serve
abroad without LICENSE.

seal with shield and harp

Thursday the 9th of September, 1652.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.

AN ACT For calling home Seamen and Mariners And Inhibiting such to Serve
abroad without LICENSE.
WHereas by an Act of this present Parliament, passed in April One thousand six
hundred and fifty, Entitled, An Act for preventing Injuries and Wrongs done to
Merchants at Sea, in their Persons, Ships or Goods, and prohibiting Mariners
from serving under Foreign Princes or States without License, It was (for the
Reasons therein set forth) Enacted, That all English Mariners and Seamen that
were then serving abroad in the Service of any Foreign Prince or State, should
within the space of Four Months then next ensuing (and now past) withdraw
themselves from such Foreign Service, and repair home to serve the Commonwealth
of England according to their duty, under pain to be severely punished: And
that if any English Mariners and Seamen should from and after the passing of
the said recited Act, depart out of England, and enter into any Foreign Service
(without special License first obtained) That every such Offense should be
punished with Death, as by that Act more at large appears; which
notwithstanding, diverse English Mariners and Seamen do still continue abroad in
such Service, without repairing home to serve this Commonwealth as that Act
requires; and others have withdrawn without License, contrary to the Tenor of
the same Act, whereby they have given just cause for a Criminal Proceeding to
be had against them. Nevertheless, The Parliament being unwilling to look
severely upon such past Defaults, inclining rather to extend Grace and Mercy to
all such as shall yet come in and return to their Duties, within the time
hereafter limited and appointed by this Act, do hold forth favor and pardon;
and do hereby grant full and absolute Pardon and Remission to all such English
Mariners and Seamen, as having served in any such Foreign Service, shall within
the time herein afterward limited, come home and give up their Names as is
after mentioned. And be it Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and
by the Authority of the same, That all Ship-wrights, Ship-Carpenters, Mariners
and Sea men belonging to this Commonwealth, serving-abroad in any ship or
ships, Vessel or Vessels belonging to any Foreign Prince, State or Person; or
which shall be employed in building or repairing of any Ship or Vessel for any
Foreign Prince, State or Person whatsoever, shall within the several spaces of
time hereafter limited withdraw from such Service, and make their personal
repairs home; To wit, such as are in service of the French, or of the States
General of the United Provinces, or any of the People thereof now within any of
the same Provinces, or in the service of them, or any other Foreign Prince,
State or Person, in any of the Ships or Fleets in the Narrow Seas, or in the
Northern Seas, within Ten weeks next ensuing the Publication of this Act: And
for such others as are serving in the East Indies, that they and every of them
shall repair home within Two years after such Publication; and for such as are
serving in the West Indies, or any other far distant and Remote places, That
they and every of them shall repair home within twelve Months after such
Publication as aforesaid, and give notice of such their returning into their
Native Country, to the Governor or Chief Magistrate of the Port or place where
they arrive; who is to record the same in a book, and to certify the Tenor
thereof to the Council of State, or Committee or Commissioners of the Navy or
Admiralty for the time being; to the end care may be taken for their present
Employment when they shall make their Addresses for the same, upon pain of all
and every the Ship-wrights, Ship-carpenters, Mariners and Sea men offending in
the Premises, to be proceeded against, and Adjudged to suffer the pains of
Death, and likewise to Forfeit as in case of Felony. And it is Ordained and
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Offenses and every of them
shall be Enquired on, and Heard and Determined by and before such discreet
persons, as shall be appointed by the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of
England for the time being, to be Commissioners by Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, for the Trial of such Offenders: And the said Commissioners so to be
appointed as aforesaid, shall have full Power and Authority by virtue of this
Act, and are hereby enabled to Enquire, Hear and Determine of the Offenses
aforesaid, according to the Tenor and true Meaning of this Act, and to put
their Judgments in execution, and cause the same to be duly Executed.

Provided always, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That none shall
be Impeached for any Offense against this Statute, unless the same Impeachment
be prosecuted or begun within the year next after the Return of such Offender
into England; And that such person and persons as shall be Prosecuted or Tried
upon this Law, shall not only be received and admitted to make any lawful
Proof he or they can by witness or otherwise, for his or their Discharge and
Defense in that behalf; But that also it shall be in the Power of the said
Commissioners, where they upon the hearing of the Matter shall find it just or
meet in their Discretion so to do, to admit the Oath of such person and persons
so brought to Trial for his or their Excuse, by reason of Remoteness of place,
or invincible ignorance, or want of Opportunity to come home, or what other
matter shall be just.

Provided also, and be it Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
nothing in this Act contained shall be interpreted to the Excuse or Extenuation
of the Crimes and Offenses of any Ship-wright, Ship-carpenter, Sea man, Mariner
or other person belonging to this Commonwealth, who shall be taken in the
service of any other State or person against this Commonwealth; but that they
shall be liable to the severest Penalties of the Law in that behalf, as soon as
they may be Apprehended and brought forth to answer for such their Demerits,
any thing herein specified to the contrary notwithstanding: And to the end due
Notice may be taken of this Act, for the better Observance of the same by all
persons therein concerned, It is lastly Enacted and Ordained by the Authority
aforesaid, That this Act be duly published upon the Exchange London, three
several days at the time of the Concourse of Merchants there, by the Sergeant
at Arms attending the Parliament; which is and shall be construed to be the
Publication intended and formerly expressed in this Act: And nevertheless, it
is left to the Council of State to cause such further publication to be thereof
made in Maritine Towns or otherwise, as they shall judge fit and expedient.

Thursday the 9th of September, 1652.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


