blazon or coat of arms
AN ACT For Transferring the POWERS OF THE Committees for Indemnity.
BE it Enacted and ordained by this present Parliament, and by the Authority
thereof, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained, That all and every the Powers
and authorities which any Committee or Committees of Parliament had to give
Indemnity to, or to save harmless and indempnified any person or persons
whatsoever, who have acted by Authority, or for the Service of the Parliament,
be and are hereby transferted from the said Committee or Committees, and are
hereby vested and settled in and upon Samuel Moyer, James Russel, Edward
VVinslow, Josias Berners, William Molins, Arthur Squib and Richard Moor,
Esquires; who by this Act and by the Authority thereof, or any four or more of
them, are hereby authorized to do and execute all and every the Acts,
Ordinances and Orders of Parliament for Indemnity; and all and every the
Powers and Authorities in or by them, or any of them, given, granted, limited
or appointed, Any Law, Statute or Custom to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
persons abovenamed, or any four or more of them be empowered and authorized, by
proof upon Oath, which they or any four or more of them have hereby power to
administer, or by such other ways or means as shall be requisite and approved
of by any four or more of them, to examine, adjudge, and finally determine all
and every the Cases and Complaints, matters and things whatsoever, which at or
upon the Twentieth day of April, in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six
hundrey fifty and two, were complained of, undetermined, and depending before
the said Committes or Committees of Parliament; or hereafter shall be exhibited
and complained of to the persons abovenamed, or any four or more of them, in
pursuance of any Act, Ordinance or Order of Parliament, giving Indemnity for
any matter or thing whatsoever done by Authority, or for the service or benefit
of the Parliament; and to stay Proceedings in any Court of Justice or Equity in
the mean time.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
said Commissioners, or any five or more of them, be and are hereby empowered and
authorized to give and allow such Costs and Charges upon the dismission of any
Petition or Complaint exhibited before them, as to them or any five or more of
them shall seem just and reasonable.

Provided always, That all and every Judgment and Determination already had,
made and given by the Committee or Committees of Parliament aforesaid, or any
of them, shall by authority of this present Parliament stand good and
confirmed, according to the Tenor and Purport thereof: And that all Petitions,
References and Examinations made and taken upon Oath, by or before the said
Committee or Committees of Parliament, or any of them, in pursuance of the
Powers to them granted, shall be allowed and admitted by the persons
abovenamed, or any four or more of them, as if the same had been taken, had and
done by or before them or any four or more of them; and the persons abovenamed,
and every of them, are hereby enjoined and requited, at or before the First day
of July, in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred fifty and two,
to take the Oath hereafter expressed, before the Council of State appointed by
authority of Parliament, who are hereby authorized to administer the same in
these words following; That is to say,

I A. B. do swear, That I will, according to my best skill and knowledge,
faithfully discharge the Trust committed unto me, in relation to an Act,
Entitled, An Act for transferring the Powers of the Committees for Indemnity:
And that I will not for favor or affection, rewards or gifts, or hopes of
reward or gift break the same.

Provided, That this Act shall continue and be in force until the First day of
July, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty
and three.

Wednesday the 23d of June, 1652.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.


