AN ACT FOR THE Exposing to Sale diverse Castles, Houses, Parks, Lands and
Hereditaments Belonging to the late KING, QUEEN OR PRINCE, Exempted from Sale
by a former ACT.

seal of the Commonwealth

Friday the 31th of December, 1652.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.

AN ACT FOR THE Exposing to Sale diverse Castles, Houses, Parks, Lands and
Hereditaments Belonging to the late KING, QUEEN or PRINCE, Exempted from Sale
by a former ACT.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament and the Authority thereof, That for
Raising of Money for the Use of the Navy, The Mansion house commonly called
Hampton Court, in the County of Middlesex, with the Barns, Stables, Outhouses,
Gardens, Orchards, Yards, Court and Backside, belonging unto, or used or
enjoyed with the said Mansion House; with the Park commonly called the
House-Park, and the two other Parks there, the one called the Middle Park, and
the other called Bushy-Park, at Hampton Court, within the said county of
Middlesex; and the Hare-warren and the Meadows therewith used and enjoyed, and
all other Lands Woods and Timber thereunto belonging and yet unsold: All that
Park commonly called Hide-Park, in the county of Middlesex, with all houses,
Woods and Perquisits thereunto belonging: And all that Mansion House commonly
called Greenwich-house, in the county of Kent, with all the Barns, Stables,
Outhouses, Yards, Orchards, Gardens, Easements and Appurtenances thereunto
belonging, and therewith usually enjoyed; And all that Park near or adjoining
to the said Mansion house called, Greenwich-Park, with the Castle therein,
situate in the said county of Kent; And all those Buildings commonly known by
the name of the Queens New-buildings, and the Gardens, Orchards, Yards, Courts
and Back sides, belonging unto and now used and enjoyed with the said House in
Greenwich aforesaid: And all that Park adjoining to the Castle of Windsor, in
the county of Berks, commonly called the Little Park, together with all those
Meadows unto the said Park adjoining, commonly called the Kings Meadows or Park
Meadows: The Park called Cornbury Park, with the Appurtenances, in the county
of Oxford: The House called Vawx-hall, in the county of Surrey, with the
Grounds and Appurtenances thereunto belonging; and all Easements, Hereditaments
and Appurtenances to the aforesaid Premises and every of them belonging, or
usually therewith enjoyed as part, parcel or member thereof, on the First day
of April in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred thirty and five or at
any time since, or for which the late King, Queen or Prince, or any or either
of them have or has been answered the Profits, or have otherwise received the
same the day and year aforesaid or at any time since: And all that House, with
the Appurtenances, commonly called Somerset or Denmark-House, situate in the
Strand, in the said county of Middlesex, and all the Buildings and Outhouses
thereunto adjoining and appertaining, and now used with the same; and the
Gardens, Orchards, Yards, Courts and Back-sides belonging unto and now used
with the said House: All which Castles, Houses, Parks, Lands and Hereditaments,
with all and singular their and every of their Appurtenances; Except the
Liberty, Immunity and Privilege of all Waters, Watercourse, Conduits, Pipes,
Ponds, Sluices, Bays, Dams, or other Instruments and things now or heretofore
used for the carrying or conveying of Water, in or through any the Houses,
Lands or Premises, are and shall be by Authority of this present Parliament,
vested and settled, adjudged, deemed and taken to be in the Actual possession
and seisin of Thomas Cook of Pedmarsh in the County of Essex Esquire William
Bossevile Esquire John Sparrow of Gestrop in the County of Essex Esquire William
Kenrick of in the County of Kent Esquire Ralph Harrison of the City of London Esquire
William Scot of the Inner Temple London Esquire William Steel Esquire Councellor at
Law; Thomas Hubbard of Moor-fields in the County of Middlesex Esquire Cornelius
Cook of the Borough of Southwark Esquire John Hunt of London Esquire Sir Edward Barkham
Baronet, Sir William Roberts, Thomas Airs Esquire John White Esquire James Stockall Esquire
Edward Cresset Gent. Sir Richard Salstonstal Knight, Daniel Searl Merchant,
Nicholas Lampriere Esquire Nicholas Bond Esquire Richard Sidenham Esquire and Robert,
Fenwick Esquire the Survivor and Survivors of them, their Heirs and Assigns for
ever, under such Trusts and to such purposes only, as are abovementioned, and
as shall be hereafter declared and expressed by Parliament: Saving to all and
every person and persons, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, Bodies
Politic and Corporate, and their Successors, other then the said late King,
Queen and Prince, their or any of their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Successors, and all claiming by, from or under them or any of them, since the
Six and twentieth day of March, in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred forty and one, All Right, Title, Interest, Possession, Right in Law or
Equity, Entries, Annuities, Commodities, Fees and other Profits, which they or
any of them now have, and of right ought to have and enjoy, before the said six
and twentieth day of March, One thousand six hundred forty and one; so as such
person or persons do make his or their Title in Law or Equity appear, at or
before the First day of February, One thousand six hundred fifty and two, unto
the Commissioners for removing of Obstructions, named in one Act, Entitled, An
Act for transferring the Powers of the Committees for Obstructions; which said
Commissioners are hereby authorized and appointed Commissioners for removing of
Obstructions in sale of any of the premises, and shall have the same Powers and
Authorities, as any Committee or Commissioners for removing of Obstructions
might or ought to have executed by virtue of any Ordinance or Act of this
present Parliament.

Provided also, That where any such person or persons do lawfully claim as
aforesaid, any Right, Title or Interest of, in or to any of the Castles,
Houses, Parks, Lands and Hereditaments, by virtue or in right of any Office
thereunto belonging, the exercise whereof is now ceased, or by virtue of this
Act shall cease to be further used: That in every such case, the Commissioners
of Obstructions beforementioned, or any five of them, shall in lieu and
consideration thereof, make such allowance to every such person and persons, in
some proportion, of the said Parks, Lands and Hereditaments, or in moneys to be
raised by the sale thereof, as they shall adjudge reasonable, with regard had
unto the value of their respective Interests; and that upon and in
consideration of the said Allowances, the Right, Title and Interest of every
such person and persons, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
shall cease and determine; and they and every of them shall be for ever hereby
clearly concluded and debarred from making any further claim or demand
thereunto. And the said Trustees and Contractors, their Heirs and Assigns,
shall hold all and singular the Castles, Houses, Parks, Lands and Premises, and
every part thereof, as of the Manor or Seigniory of East. Greenwich, in Free
and Common Soccage, by Fealty only; and likewise freed, acquitted and
discharged, of and from payment of all manner of Tithes, as fully as the late
King, Queen or Prince, or any of them, did or might hold or enjoy, or ought to
have held or enjoyed the same.

And be it further Enacted, That William Web and Silvanus Tailor, appointed by
Authority of Parliament to survey the beforementioned Premises, shall have the
like Powers and Authorities as any the Surveyors in one Act of Parliament,
Entitled, An Act of the Commons in PARLIAMENT assembled, For Sale of the
Honors, Manors and Lands heretofore belonging to the late King, Queen and
Prince, may or might have exercised: And the said Trustees and Contractors, or
any five or more of them, shall and may, upon Return of any Survey of the
Premises or any part thereof, made and returned to the said William Web and
Silvanus Tailor, and thereupon giving public notice, by the space of Ten
days, what part or parcel of the Premises the said Trustees and Contractors, or
any five or more of them, will then expose to Sale upon that day; who thereupon
shall and may contract with any person or persons, Body Politic or Corporate,
who will give most for the same, not selling any Land under Thirteen years
value, and selling the Houses, Wood and Timber, at the best Advantage for the
Commonwealth: And upon paying into the hands of the Treasurers in the last
recited Act named, One moiety or more of the Purchase-money contracted for,
within Twenty days after making the Contract; and securing the rest in such
manner as the said Trustees and Contractors, or any five or more of them shall
direct, to be paid within Three months after the said Contract made, the said
Trustees and Contractors, or any five or more of them, shall make a Conveyance
of Bargain and Sale thereof; which being sealed, ex^^^ted and enrolled in the
Chancery, shall be good and effectual in Law to such Purchaser or Purchasers,
their Heirs and Assigns for ever, according to the intent and purport thereof.

Provided, That if any Purchaser or Purchasers, after his or their Contract
made, do or shall not proceed therein accordingly, That then the said Contract
shall be void; and the said Purchaser or Purchasers shall forfeit the fourth
part of the money contracted for, to the Uses in this Act named, and shall have
his or their Estates sequestered, by Warrant from the said Trustees and
Contractors or any five or more of them, until the said Fourth part of the
money contracted for be paid unto the said Treasurers, who thereupon shall
discharge the said Sequestration; And the said Trustees and Contractors, or any
five or more of them, shall and may proceed with any other person or persons
for the same.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Treasurers, or any two of them, shall
receive all such sums of money as shall be paid by virtue of this Act, and
shall give Receipts or Acquittances for the same; and shall issue out all such
moneys, in such manner as the Parliament or any Authority derived from them to
that purpose, shall from time to time direct or appoint.

And be it further Enacted, That Henry Colborn shall be Register, and shall and
do execute all things as a Register may or might do by virtue of the last
recited Act.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Trustees and Contractors, or any five
or more of them, shall and may appoint Council for the Commonwealth, and a^^
other Officers necessary for the carrying on and expedition of the sale of the
Premises.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders of any Honors, Manors,
Castles, Houses, Messuages, Chases, Parks, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments,
with their and every of their Appurtenances, and of all Royalties, Franchises,
Privileges and Immunities, to all and every of them belonging or appertaining,
or therewith lawfully used, occupied or enjoyed, as part or parcel thereof,
which were lawfully vested, settled, remaining or being in the said late King,
as in Right of the Crown of England, or Duchy of Lancaster, on the Six and
twentieth day of March, in the year of our Lord God One thousand six hundred
forty and one, or at any time since expectant upon any Estate Tail, Are and
shall be vested and settled in the Trustees and Contractors appointed by this
Act, for the Sale of the said other Lands herein before mentioned, their Heirs
and Assigns, as the said other Lands are by virtue of this Act, and to and for
the same uses; and shall be under the same Powers, Rules, Orders and
Directions, as the said other Lands are by this Act: And that the said Trustees
and Contractors, or any five or more of them, shall have the like power and
authority, and are hereby authorized and required to Contract for, Bargain and
sell (by Deed or Deeds, sealed and enrolled according to this Act) All and
every the said Reversion and Reversions, Remainder or Remainders, to the
respective Tenant or Tenants in Tail of any of the Premises (that shall desire
to buy the same) coming in before the Eight and twentieth day of February, One
thousand six hundred fifty and two; or to any person or persons, Bodies
Politic or Corporate, that shall or will buy or purchase, and give most for
the same, at such Values and Prices as the said Trustees and Contractors (or
any five or more of them) shall think meet and convenient, for the best
advantage of the Commonwealth: And that all and every such contract, bargain
and sale, conveyance and assurance, shall be good and effectual in Law, to all
intents and purposes, to all and every such Purchaser and Purchasers, their
Heirs and Assigns; and that they and every of them shall and may have, hold and
enjoy, all and every the said Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and
Remainders, in as large, ample and beneficial manner, as the said late King or
Crown lawfully had or held, or might lawfully have had, held or enjoyed the
same, Any Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries, Conveyance or Assurance, or
other Act or thing whatsoever had, made, levied, done or suffered, or to be
had, made, levied, done or suffered, by any Tenant or Tenants in Tail in
possession, not having the Reversion or Remainder in Fee-simple of the same
premises, whereof such Fine or Recovery is so had; or by any other person or
persons, by their or any of their assent, means or procurement (other then such
Leases as have been or shall be made of all or any the premises, according to
the Statute of the Two and thirtieth year of King Henry the Eighth, in that
behalf made) in any wise notwithstanding. And that all and every such fine or
fines, recovery or recoveries, conveyance or assurance, or other Act or thing,
other then by such Tenant in Tail in Possession, not having the Reversion or
Remainder in Fee-simple of the premises, whereof such Fine or Recovery is so
had, shall be utterly void and of no effect, as well against the said Trustees,
their Heirs and Assigns, as against all and every such Purchaser or Purchasers,
their Heirs and Assigns, as the same should have been against the said late
King, his Heirs and Successors or any of them, according to the Statute of the
Four and thirtieth year of the said King Henry the Eighth, Cap. 20. concerning
Recoveries against such Tenants in Tail, as if the said Reversion or
Reversions, Remainder or Remainders, had continued, remained or been in the
said late King or Crown, at the time of such Fine or Recovery or other
Assurance; The said premises to be holden of the Manor of East- Greenwich, in
Free and Common Soccage, by Fealty only, and not otherwise: Saving to all and
every person and persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, other then the said
late King, his Heirs and Successors, and all claiming from, by or under them or
any of them, since the Twenty sixth day of March, One thousand six hundred
forty and one, All Right, Title, Interest, Possession, Entries, Annuities,
Commodities, Fees and other Profits, which they or any of them now have, or of
right ought to have and enjoy, since the said Twenty sixth of March, One
thousand six hundred forty and one.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


