ARTICLES OF Peace, Union and Confederation, Concluded and Agreed between his
Highness OLIVER Lord PROTECTOR Of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and
IRELAND, and the Dominions thereto belonging. And the Lords the STATES GENERAL
of the United Provinces of the NETHERLANDS. In a Treaty at Westminster bearing
date the fifth of April Old Style, in the year of our Lord God 1654.

woodcut printer's device showing the Commonwealth coat of arms.

Printed and Published by his Highness special command.

London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.

ARTICLES OF THE PEACE.
I.
IT is agreed, concluded, and accorded, That from this day forward there shall
be a true, firm and inviolable Peace, more sincere Friendship, and nearer
Alliance, Union and Confederation than heretofore, betwixt the Commonwealth of
England, and the States General of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, and
the respective Lands, Countries and Cities, without distinction of Places,
under their obedience, and the people and inhahitants of them, respectively of
what quality and condition soever they be.

II.
Item, Agreed, That from henceforth all Enmity, Hostility, Discord, and War
betwixt the said two Commonwealths, their People and Subjects, shall cease, and
each party shall hereafter abstain from all Offenses, Spoils, Depredations, and
Injuries by Sea, Land and Fresh-waters in all their respective Lands,
Countries, Dominions, Places, or Governments whatsoever.

III.
Item, That all Offenses, Injuries, Charges and Damages, which either party
has sustained by the other since the (...) of May, in the year one thousand
six hundred fifty two, shall be taken away and forgotten in such manner as that
hereafter neither party shall pretend any matter against the other for or upon
occasion of any the aforesaid Offenses, Injuries, Charges and Damages; But
that there shall be a perfect abolition of all and every of them until this
present day. And all actions for the same shall be held and reputed void and
null.

IV.
That all Prisoners of both sides of what Condition, or in whatsoever Place
they be, shall be set at liberty, without ransom or consideration given for
them.

V.
That the two Common wealths shail remain confederate friends, joined and
allied together for the Defense and Preservation of the Liberties and Freedom
of the People of each against all whomsoever, who shall attempt the Disturbance
of either State by Sea or Land, or be declared Enemies to the Freedom and
Liberty of the People living under either of the said Governments.

VI.
That neither of the Commonwealths shall make, do, act, treat of, or attempt
any thing against the other, or the People of either, in any place either at
Land or Sea, or in any the Havens, Creeks, Precincts, or Freshwaters of either,
upon any occasion whatsoever. Nor that either of them, or the People of either
give, yield, or afford any aid, couniel, favor, or assent that any thing shall
be done, treated of, or attempted by any other whomsoever, to the injury and
wrong of the other, or the People of either, but shall expressly and with effect
contradict, gainsay, oppose, and really hinder all whomsoever abiding or
dwelling within either of the Commonwealths respectively, who shall be under
their power that act, do, treat of, or attempt any thing against either of the
Commonwealths.

VII.
That neither of the Commonwealths, or the People abiding, inhabiting or
dwelling within either of them respectively, or within their power, shall yield
give, or afford any aid counsel or favor to the Enemies or Rebels of either,
but shall expressly, really, and with effect hinder any inhabiting, dwelling or
abiding within either of them or within their power, from giving any aid or
assistance unto such Enemies or Rebels, by Men, Shipping, Arms, Ammunition,
Money, Victuals, or otherwise by Sea or Land; and all such ships, Arms,
Ammunition, Money, Goods, or Victuals, of or belonging to any person or persons
whatsoever, that shall be provided, employed or made use of, contrary to the
intent of this Article, shall be confiscate and forfeited to the respective
Commonwealths. And the person or persons who shall wittingly and willingly do,
attempt, counsel or be employed therein, shall be declared Enemies to both
Common wealths, and shall suffer the pains and penalties of Treason within the
Commonwealth where the Offense shall be committed. And to the end there may be
a specification made of what Goods shall be deemed, prohibit, or contraband,
Commissioners may in convenient time be appointed to determine herein Provided
in the mean time that this extend not to the impeachment of any thing contained
in the present Article.

VIII.
That the two Commonwealths shall truly and sincerely assist each other, as
need shall require, against the Rebels and Enemies of either, at Sea and Land,
with Men and Ships, at the Costs and Expenses of the party requiring the same,
in such proportion and manner and upon such Terms and Conditions as the two
States shall agree, and the present occasion require.

IX.
That neither of the Commonwealths, or the People of either shall receive into
any of their Jurisdictions, Countries, Lands, Ports, Creeks, or Precincts, any
person or persons, that are or shall be declared by either of the Common
wealths to be Enemies, Rebels or Fugitives of the other; Nor shall give, yield
or afford to any such declared Enemy, Rebel or Fugitive within the places
aforesaid, or other-where, though out of their Territories, Countries, Lands,
Ports, Creeks, or Precincts, any aid, counsel, Lodging, Entertainment,
Soldiers, Ships, Money, Arms, Ammunition or Victuals. Nor shall either of the
States permit such Enemies, Rebels or Fugitives to be received by any person
or persons whatsoever into their Jurisdictions, Countries, Lands Ports, Creeks,
or Precincts, nor shall suffer any Aid, Counsel, Lodging, Entertainment,
Soldiers, Ships, Money, Arms, Ammunition, or Victuals to be given, yielded or
afforded unto such Enemies, Rebels or Fugitives, but shall expressly and
effectually oppose, withstand, and really hinder the same.

X.
Item, It is agreed, That it either of the said Commonwealths shall by their
public and Authentic Letters, give notice, signify, or declare to the other
Common wealth any person or persons, to be, and have been their Enemy or
Enemies, Rebel or Rebels, Fugitive or Fugitives, and that they are, or reside
within the others Jurisdictions, Territories, Dominions, Lands, Ports or
Precincts, or therein be hid, or shelter themselves; Then that Common wealth
which shall receive such Letters, or unto which such notice shall be given, and
declaration made concerning such Rebels, Enemies or Fugitives, shall within the
space of twenty eight days to be reckoned immediately from the day of the
aforesaid notice given, charge and command such Enemy or Enemies. Rebel or
Rebels, Fugitive or Fugitives to withdraw and depart out of their
Jurisdictions, Territories, Dominions, Lands, and Precincts, and every of them.
And if any such Enemy, Rebel or Fugitive shall not withdraw and depart, as
aforesaid, within the space of fifteen days after such charge and command
given, That he or they shall be punished with death and lofs of Land and Goods.

XI.
That no Rebel or Declared Enemy of the Commonwealth of England, shall be
received into any of the Castles, Towns, Ports, Creeks, or other places
privileged, or not privileged, which any person of what degree and quality
soever he be, or shall be, has, or hereafter shall have and possess by any
Title whatsoever, within the Dominions and Jurisdictions of the United
Provinces; nor shall be suffered by any person of what degree and quality
soever to be received thereinto, or abide therein. Neither shall the Lords the
States General of the United Provinces, permit or suffer in any of the places
aforesaid, any assistance, counsel, or favor, in Ships, Men, Money, Victuals,
or in any other manner to be given by any person, of what degree and quality
soever to any such Rebel, or declared Enemy, but shall openly, and expressly
prohibit and hinder the same. And if any person or persons of what degree and
quality soever living or remaining within the Jurisdictions of the United
Provinces, or under their power, do to the contrary hereof: Then all and every
such person and persons so doing, as aforesaid, shall for their respective
lives, forfeit and lose all such Castles, Towns, Villages, Lands, and other
places, which they or any of them shall at such time have, or pretend to have,
by any Title whatsoever. And likewise that no Rebel or declared Enemy of the
States of the United Provinces shall be received into any of the Castles, Towns,
Ports, or other places privileged, or not privileged, which any person or
persons of what degree or quality soever he or they he, have or shall have,
hold or possess within the Commonwealth of England, or Dominions thereof, by
any title whatsoever; nor he suffered by any person or persons to be received
thereinto or abide therein. Neither shall the Commonwealth of England, permit
or suffer, in any of the places aforesaid, any counsel, assistance or favor in
Ships Men, Money, Victuals, or in any other manner to be given by any such
person or persons of what degree or quality soever he or they be, to any such
Rebel or declared Enemy; but shall openly and expressly prohibit and hinder the
same. And if any of the people of the Commonwealth of England, or under their
power, shall do or attempt any thing to the contrary hereof: That every such
person or persons, shall for their respective lives, forfeit and lose all such
Castles, Towns, Villages, Lands and other places, which they or any of them
shall at such time have or pretend to have, by any Title whatsoever.

XII.
That the Commonwealth of England, and the People and Inhabitants thereof, and
the said United Provinces, and the Subjects, and Inhabitants thereof, of what
quality or condition soever they be, shall be bound to treat each other on both
sides with all Love and Friendship: That they may come by Water or by Land,
into each others Lands, Towns, or Villages, walled or unwalled, fortified or
unfortified; their Havens, and all their respecrive Dominions in Europe with
freedom and security, and in them remain and continue as long as they please,
and there without hinderance buy Victuals for their necessary use. And may also
Trade and Traffic, and have commerce in any Goods or Commodities they please,
and the same bring in and carry out at their pleasures, paying always the
Customs that shall be settled, and saving always all and singular the Laws and
Ordinances of either Commonwealth respectively. Yet so that the People and
inhabitants of either, using Commerce in the Countries and Dominions each of
other, shall not be constrained to pay any greater Customs, Toils, or Tributes
then according to such proportion as other Strangers exercising Commerce in the
same places pay.

XIII.
That the Ships and Vessels of the said United Provinces, as well Men of War as
others meeting with any of the Ships of war of this Commonwealth in the
British Seas shall strike their Flag and lower their Top-sail in such manner as
has ever been at any time practiced heretofore under any former Government.

XIV.
Item, for the greater freedom of Commerce and Navigation, it is agreed, That
neither of the said Commonwealths shall receive into any of their Havens,
Cities or Towns, or permit, or suffer that any of the People or Inhabitants of
either of them respectively do receive, keep, harbor or give any assistance or
relief unto any Pirates or Sea-Rovers, but shall cause both the said Pirates and
Rovers, and also their Receivers, Concealers and Assistants to be prosecuted,
apprehended, and condignly punished, for terror to others. And all Ships, Goods
and Merchandise, by them Piratically taken, and brought into the Ports of
either State, that shall be found in being; yea, though they have been sold,
shall be restored to the right Owners, or made good to them, or such as have
their Letters of Attorney or Procuration to claim the same; due proof of the
Proprietors being first made in the Court of Admiralty according to Law.

XV.
That if either the Commonwealths of England, or the United Provinces of the
Low Countries shall hereafter make any Treaty of Amity, Alliance or Friendship
with any other Commonwealth Princes, or States, the one shall comprehend the
other, and the Dominions therein, if they shall desire to be comprehended: And
of all such Treaties each shall be bound to give notice to the other.

XVI.
That if it shall happen that during the Amity, Confederation and Alliance, any
thing shall be acted or attempted by any of the People or Inhabitants of either
of the said Parties against this Treaty, or any part thereof, either by Land or
Sea, or other Waters, this Amity, Confederation and Alliance between the said
Commonwealths shall not be herby interrupted or broken off, but shall continu
and remain in its full and whole power only in such case those particular
persons, who have offended against the said Treaty, shall be punished and no
other, And that justice shall be done, and satisfaction made to all persons
concerned within twelve months after demand thereof made, upon all such persons
who shall have don any thing against this Treaty, by Land or Sea, or other
waters in any part of Europe, or any place within the straights of Gibralter,
or in America, or upon the Coasts of Africa, or in any Lands, Islands, Seas,
Creeks, Bays, Rivers, or any other places on this side the Cape of Good-Hope.
And in all places whatsoever as aforesaid, beyond the said Cape, within 18.
months nert after demand of Justice, shall so as aforesaid be made: And in case
the persons so as aforesaid offending, shall not appear and submit themselves
to justice, and make satisfaction within the terms respectively here before
limited, the said persons shall be declared Enemies to both Commonwealths, and
their Estates, Goods, and effects whatsoever, shall be confiscate and employed
to a due and full satisfaction for the wrongs by them done, and their persons
be liable to such further punishment, when they shall come within the power of
either State, as the quality of their offense shall deserve.

XVII.
That the people of the Commonwealth of England and the Dominions thereof, may
freely unmolested, and securely travel in and through the Countries, and
singular the Dominions of the united Provinces in Europe, by land or by water,
to any place in them, or beyond them, and pass by any of their Towns, Garrisons,
or Forts in any places within the Netherlands whatsoever, or elsewhere, in any
of their Dominions in Europe, to follow their Traffic in all places there: as
also their Factors and Servants armed or unarmed; but if armed, not above forty
men in Company, as well without as with their Goods and Merchandizcs whither
they please. And likewise the people and Inhabitants of the united Provinces of
the Netherlands may enjoy the same liberties in all the Dominions of the
Commonwealth of England in Europe. They and either of them observing and
conforming in such their Trade and traffic to the Laws and Ordinances of each
Commonwealth respectively.

XVIII.
Item, Agreed, That if the Merchant Ships belonging to the people and subjects
of one or the other side, shall through tempest, Pirates, or any other
necessity, be driven into Port within the Dominions of either, it shall be free
for them to depart thence securely with their Ships and Merchandise, without
payment of any Customs or other duties, provided they break not bulk, or expose
any thing to sale, nor shall they be subjected to any trouble or visitation, so
be it they receive not aboard any persons or goods, nor shall do any thing
contrary to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of that place whither they come into
Port as aforesaid.

XIX.
That the Merchants, Masters, Pilots, or Mariners of either Commonwealth, their
Ships, Goods, Wares, and Merchandises, shall not be seized or arrested in the
Lands, Ports, Havens, and Rivers of the other, by virtue of any general or
particular Command, for any warlike or other service, except upon inevitable
necessity, and upon just satisfaction for the same, provided that hereby shall
not be excluded the Arrests and seizures in the ordinary way of Law and justice
of each Commonwealth respectively.

XX.
That the Merchants on both sides their Factors and Servants, as also the
Shipmasters and other Seafaring men may as well traveling and returning by Ships
over the Seas and other waters, as in the Havens of each other, and going on
shore, carry and use for the defense of themselves and their Goods, all sorts
of Arms for defense and offense; But being come to their several Lodgings or
Inns, they shall lay down their Arms there, and so leave them til they go again
to the ship, or on board.

XXI.
That the men of War of either Commonwealth, meeting or overtaking any Merchant
ship or ships at Sea, belonging to the other, or to the people or Inhabitants
thereof, holding both one course, or going both one way, shall be bound, so
long as they keep one course together, to take them under their protection, and
to defend them against all and every that shall attempt upon them.

XXII.
That if any Ship or Ships of the People or Inhabitants of either Commonwealth,
or of a Neuter, shall be taken in the Havens of either by any third party,
being none of the people or Inhabitants of either Commonwealth; They, in or
from whose Havens and Liberties the said ships shall be taken, shall be bound
together with the other party, to endeavor that the said taken ship or ships
may be followed, brought back, and restored to the Owners, but all at the
charges of the proprietors or interessed.

XXIII.
That Searchers and other Officers of that nature, on both parts, shall, in
execution of their Offices, regulate themselves according to the Laws of each
Commonwealth respectively, and shall not leavy or take more than they are
allowed by their Commission or Instructions.

XXIV.
That in case any wrong or injury be done by either Commonwealth, or by the
people or Inhabitants thereof, against the people or Inhabitants of the other,
either against any the Articles of this Treaty, or against Common right, there
shall yet no Letters of Reprizals Mark or Counter-mark, be granted by the one
or the other Commonwealth, till first Justice be there sought in the ordinary
course of Law; and in case that Justice be there refused or delayed, then, that
Demand be made thereof from the supreme power of the Commonwealth, whose People
or Inhabitants have suffered wrong, or from such as the supreme power shall
depute, to that Common wealth where Justice is as aforesaid denied, or delaid,
or to such power as shall be by them appointed to receiv such Demands, that
all such differences may be composed amicably, or in the ordinary course of
Law. But if there shall be yet delay, and that Justice be not don, nor
satisfaction given within three months after such Demand made, that then
Letters of Reprizall, Marque or Countermarque may be granted.

XXV.
That all persons on either side that shall go out to Sea upon particular
Commissions shall be bound before they take out their Commissions to put in
good and sufficient Security by responsible Men not of the Ships Company,
before the Judges of the Court whence the said Commission is issued, that they
shall do no wrong or injury to the People or Inhabitants of either side.

XXVI.
That the People of either side shall have free access to each others Ports and
may there stay and thence depart not only with their Merhants Ships and such
as are laden, but also with their ships of War, whether belonging to the State
or to such as have obtained particular Commissions, whither they shall arrive
either by stress of weather, or to avoid the danger of the Sea, or for
repairing their Ships, or for provision of victuals, So be it they exceed not
the number of eight Ships of War when they com in of their own accord, nor that
they continue or make stay in the Havens or about the Ports, longer than for
the reparation of their Ships, buying in of victuals, or for provision of other
necessaries. And whenever any greater number of Ships of war than is above
specified shall have occasion of access into those Ports, then shall it not be
lawful for them to make any entrance, without first obtaining leav for this
purpose from those to whom the said Ports belong, Unless they be constrained
by weather or any other force or necessity for avoiding the danger of the Sea.
And when it shall so happen, they shall presently make known the cause of their
coming to the Governor or chief Magistrate of the place and shall make no
longer stay there then the Governor or Chief Magistrate shall permit, and
during their stay in those Ports they shall commit no hostile Act, nor do any
thing to the prejudice of the said Ports.

XXVII.
That the Lords the States General of the United Provinces shall take care that
Justice be don upon those who were Authors or Abettors of the Murder
committed upon the English in Amboyna, as the Commonwealth of England was
pleased to qualify it, if any of them be yet alive.

XXVIII.
Whereas certain English Ships and Goods have been seized and detained within
the Dominions of the King of Denmark, since the 18. day of May in the year
1652. it is on both sides concluded, accorded and agreed, and the Lords the
States General have obliged themselves, as they also do by these presents, That
restitution shall be made of all and singular the English Ships and Goods,
detained as aforesaid, and remaining yet in Specie; together with the true and
just price of such as are sold, imbezled, or otherwise disposed of, within
fourteen days after the arrival of the Merchants and Masters interessed
therein, or their Assigns, for the receiving of them. And also that Damages be
given for the losses sustained by the English, by reason of the said detention;
according to what shall be arbitrated and awarded by Edward Winslo, James
Russel, John Becx, William Vander Cruyssen, Arbitrators indifferently chosen,
as well on the part of the Lord Protector, as the said States General (the form
or instrument of which Arbitration is already agreed upon) to examine and
determine the demands of the Merchants, Masters and Owners, to whom the said
Ships, Goods, and Damages appertain. Which Arbitrators are to meet at
Gold-smith's-Hall here in London, the 27. of June next, old Style, or sooner if
it may be; and shall the same day make solemn Oath before the Judges of the
High Court of Admiralty of ENGLAND, that they will proceed without respect or
relation had to either State, or any particular Interest whatsoever. And
moreover, the foresaid Arbitrators shall from the first day of August next,
unless they agree upon sentence sooner, be shut up in a chamber by themselves,
without Fire, Candle, Meat, Drink, or any other Refreshment, till such time as
they come to an Agreement concerning the Matters referred to them: And the
Sentence which they shall award shall be obligatory to both Parties. And the
States General of the United Provinces do firmly oblige themselves by these
Presents, to execute and perform the same; as also, to pay such sum of Moneys
here at London, as the said Arbitrators shall adjudg to be paid, for the use
of the said Owners, to such Person or Persons as the Protector shall nominate,
within 25. days after Adjudication made. And the said States General shall,
within two days after the Instruments of Ratification of the said Articles of
Peace are mutually delivered, pay here at London the sum of 5000 li. sterling,
toward the Charges of the Merchants, Masters, or their Assigns, for their
Journey to Denmark, and the sum of 20000. Rix Dollars, to such Persons as His
said Highness shall appoint, within six days after the arrival of the said
Persons there, for the use of the Merchants, Masters and Owners, toward
repairing their Ships, and fitting them for Sea. Which said sums shall be
accounted in part of payment of such sum, as shall be awarded by the said
Arbitrators. And that Caution and Security be given (the form of which Caution
is already agreed upon) by sufficient and responsible Men, living here in
London, and binding themselves in an Obligation of one hundred and forty
thousand pounds sterling (which Obligation is to be delivered at the same time
with the Instrument of Ratification) that Restitution shall be made according
to the premisse (...) the submission and payment as well of the 20000. Rix
Dollars, as of such sum, or other things, as shall be a adjudged and
determined, as aforesaid, shall on their part be duly performed. And if all
and singular the Conditions be not really and effectually performed on the
part of the Lords the States General in manner and time aforesaid, then the
said Obligation shall be forfeited, and the said sum of one hundred and forty
thousand pounds sterling shall be paid to such person and persons as his
Highness shall nominate, to the end the losses of the Merchants, Masters and
interessed may be satisfied.

XXIX.
Item, That whereas certain questions and differences have arisen between the
Common wealth of England and the King of Denmark, by reason of the detention of
the Ships and Goods mentioned in the former Article, and the States General of
the United Provinces have undertaken the restitution of the said ships and
goods, and agreed to give security and caution for the damages in the manner
expressed in the former Article; It is agreed and concluded that the same being
done and performed, all questions strifes, wrongs and acts of hostility
between the said Commonwealth and King, by reason of the said detention, shall
cease and be for ever forgotten, in such manner, that the said King with his
Kingdoms and Dominions shall, as a friend, be comprehended and included in
this Treaty and Confederation, so as to be restored to the same friendship and
alliance with either Commonwealth, in which formerly he was, before the said
detention, and as if it had never been. As also his Deputies and Ambaffadors
shall be admitted with like honor as the Deputies and Ambassadors of other
States are being friends and Allies.

XXX.
Item, Agreed, that, at the time of the deliverie of the instruments of
Ratification, four Commissioners shall be nominated on both sides to meet here
at London, upon the eighteenth day of May next old style, who shall be
autherized and empowered, as also by these presents they are authorized and
empowered to examine and determine all the losses and injuries which either side
alleges to have sustained from the other since the year one thousand six
hundred and eleven, unto the eighteenth day of May, 1652 old style, as well in
the East. Indies, as in Groenland, Muscovy, Brazeel, or in any other place: the
particulars of all which are to be delivered into the Commissioners nominated
as above, before the said eighteenth day of May under this restriction, that
after the said day presired no new allegations shall be admitted. And if the
abovesaid Commissioners shall not within three months space, to be accounted
from the said eighteenth day of May, come to an agreement, concerning the
differences aforesaid delivered in writing and expressed in particular. That in
such case the aforesaid differences shall be submitted, as by these presents
they are submitted, to the judgment and arbitration of the Protestant Cantons
of Swisserland, who by an Instrument for this purpose (the form of which is
already agreed upon) shall be desired to take upon them that Arbitration, and
appoint like Commissioners empowered and instructed to give final judgment
thereupon within six months next following after the expiration of the three
months aforesaid. And whatsoever the said Commissioners or the major part of
them, shall award and determine within the said six months, shall oblige both
parties, and be performed accordingly.

XXXI.
It is also agreed, That both Parties shall firmly and truly perform and
observe this present Treaty, and every Article and Thing contained and
concluded therein; and shall cause the same to be performed and observed by
their respective People, Subjects and Inhabitants.

XXXII.
For better Security that this Peace and Confederation shall be truly and
sincerely performed on the part of the Lords the States General, their People
and Subjects, it is agreed and concluded, and the Lords the States General, do
by these presents agree and firmly oblige themselves, that all and singular.
Whom, either They the States General, or the States Provincial, shall at any
time elect, constitute, or appoint Captain General, Chief Governor, or
Stadtholder, Commander of their Army or Forces at Land, or Admiral of any of
their Fleets, Ships, or Forces at Sea, shall confirm by Oath this Treaty, and
all the Matters and Things therein contained, and shall promise by Oath to
observe, and as much as in him or them lies, inviolably to perform and keep the
same. And as far as concerns them, cominand the same to be performed and put
in execution, and take care that they be performed and executed by others
accordingly.

XXXIII.
Lastly, it is agreed, That the present Treaty, and all and singular the
Matters and Things therein contained and agreed on, shall, within fifteen days
next ensuing, or sooner, if it may be, be confirmed and ratified in due and
authentic form, by the said Lord Protector, and the said States General of the
United Provinces by their Letters-Pattents under their Great Seals, and that
Instruments of Ratification shall be delivered interchangeably, within the
time aforesaid. And furthermore, that this Treaty and Confederation shall
immediately after delivery of the Instruments, be published according to the
usual Solemnity, and in the places accustomed; and that all Acts of Hostility
shall ceas on both sides from that time.


