AN ORDINANCE FOR UNITING SCOTLAND INTO ONE COMMONWEALTH WITH ENGLAND.



Wednesday April 12. 1654.

ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and his Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.

AN ORDINANCE FOR UNITING SCOTLAND Into one Commonwealth with ENGLAND.
HIs Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, etc. taking into consideration how much it might conduce to the glory
of God, and the Peace and welfare of the People in this whole Island, That
after all those late unhappy Wars and Differences, the People of Scotland
should be united with the People of England, into one Commonwealth, and under
one Government; And finding that in December one thousand six hundred fifty and
one, the Parliament then sitting did send Commissioners into Scotland to invite
the People of that Nation unto such a happy Union, who proceeded so far
therein, that the Shires and Buroughs of Scotland, by their Deputies convened
at Dalkeith, and again at Edinburgh, did accept of the said Union, and assent
thereunto. For the completing and perfecting of which Union, Be it Ordained,
And it is Ordained by his Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging, by and
with the advice and consent of his Council, That all the people of Scotland,
and of the Isles of Orkney and Zethland, and of all the Dominions and
Territories belonging unto Scotland, are and shall be, and are hereby
Incorporated into, Constituted, Established, Declared, and Confirmed one
Commonwealth with England; And in every Parliament to be held Successively for
the said Commonwealth, thirty persons shall be called from, and serve for
Scotland.

And for the more effectual preservation of this Union, and the freedom, and
safety of the People of this Commonwealth so united, Be it Ordained, And it is
Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all the people of Scotland, and of
the Isles of Orkney and Zethland, and of all the Dominions and Territories
belonging unto Scotland, of what Degree or Condition soever, be discharged of
all Fealty, Homage, Service and Allegiance, which is or shall be pretended Due
unto any of the Issue and Posterity of Charles Stuart, late King of England and
Scotland, or any Claiming under him; And that Charles Stuart, Eldest Son, and
James, called Duke of York, second Son, and all other the Issue and Posterity
of the said late King, and all and every person and persons, pretending Title,
from, by, or under him, are and be disabled to hold or enjoy the Crown of
Scotland, and other the Dominions thereunto belonging, or any of them, or to
have the Name, Title, Style, or Dignity of King, or Queen of Scotland, or to
have and enjoy the Power and Dominion of the said Kingdom and Dominions, or any
of them, or the Honors, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions and
Hereditaments belonging or appertaining to the said Crown of Scotland, or other
the Dominions aforesaid, or to any of them, any Law, Statute, Usage, Ordinance
or Custom in Scotland to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And it is further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Office,
Style, Dignity, Power and Authority of King of Scotland, and all right of the
Three Estates of Scotland, to convocate or Assemble in any General Convocation
or Parliament, and all Conventional and Parlamentary Authority in Scotland, as
formerly established, and all Laws, Vsages, and Customs, Ordaining,
Constituting, or Confirming the same, shall be, and are hereby, and from
henceforth abolished and utterly taken away, and made null and void.

And that this Union may take its more full effect and Intent, Be it further
Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Arms of Scotland, viz. a Cross,
commonly called Saint Andrews Cross, be received into and born from henceforth
in the Arms of this Commonwealth, as a Badge of this Union; and that all the
Public Seals, Seals of Office, and Seals of Bodies, Civil or Corporate, in
Scotland, which heretofore carried the Arms of the Kings of Scotland, shall
from henceforth instead thereof, carry the Arms of this Commonwealth.

And be it further Ordained by the authority aforesaid, That all Customs,
Excise, and other Imposts for Goods transported from England to Scotland, and
from Scotland to England, by Sea or Land, are and shall be so far taken off,
and discharged, as that all Goods for the future shall pass as free, and with
like Privileges, and with the like Charges and Burdens, from England to
Scotland, and from Scotland to England, as goods passing from port to port, or
place to place in England; and that all Goods shall and may pass between
Scotland, and any other part of this Commonwealth, or the Dominions thereof,
with the like Privileges, Freedom, Charges and Burdens, as such Goods do, or
shall pass, between England, and the said parts and Dominions, any Law,
Statute, Usage or Custom to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.
And that all goods prohibited by any Law now in force in England to be
transported out of England to any Foreign parts, or imported, shall be, and
hereby are prohibited to be transported or imported, by the same Law, and upon
the same penalties, out of Scotland to any Foreign parts aforesaid, or from any
Foreign parts into Scotland.

And be it further Ordained by the authority aforesaid, That all Cesses,
public Impositions and Taxations whatsoever, be imposed, taxed, and levied
from henceforth proportionably from the whole people of this Commonwealth so
united.

And further, to the end that all Dominion of Tenures and Superiorities
importing Servitude and Vassallage may likewise be abolished in Scotland, Be it
further Declared and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all Heritors,
Proprietors, and Possessors of Lands in Scotland, or the Dominions thereunto
belonging, and their Heirs, shall from and after the twelfth day of April in
the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty and four hold their
respective Lands of the respective Lord and Lords by Deed, Charter, Patent or
Enfeoffment, to be renewed upon the death of every Heritor, Proprietor,
Possessor (as now they do) to his Heir or Heirs, by and under such yearly
Rents, Boons, and Annual services, as are mentioned or due by any Deeds,
Patents, Charters or Enfeofments now in being, of the respective Lands therein
expressed, or by virtue thereof enjoyed without rendering, doing or performing
any other Duty, Service, Vassallage or Demand whatsoever by reason or occasion
of the said Lands, or any the Clauses, or Covenants in the said Deeds,
Charters, Patents or Enfeoffments contained, saving what is hereafter, herein
and hereby particularly expressed and declared, That is to say, Heriots where
the same are due, Fines (certain where the same is already certain, and where
the Fine is uncertain, reasonable Fines) upon the death of the Lord, and upon
the death or alienation of the Tenant, or any of them, where the same have
usually been paid, which said Fine (not being already certain) shall not at any
time exceed one years value of the Lands, and also doing suit and service to
such Court and Courts Baron, as shall be constituted in Scotland, in such
manner as is Ordained by one other Ordinance, Entitled, An Ordinance for
Erecting Courts Baron in Scotland.

And be it Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
Heritors, Proprietors, and Possessors aforesaid, and their Heirs, are and shall
be from henceforth for ever discharged of all Fealty, Homage, Vassallage and
Servitude, which is, or shall be pretended due from them, or any of them, unto
any their Lords or Superiors whatsoever, claiming Dominion or Jurisdiction over
them, by virtue of the said Patents, Charters, Deeds or Enfeoffments, and other
rights thereof, or of any Clauses or Conditions therein contained, other than
as is before Declared and Ordained. And that all the said Superiorities,
Lordships and Jurisdictions (other than as aforesaid) shall be, and are hereby
abolished, taken off, and discharged; and that all and every the said Deeds,
Patents, Charters, and Enfeofments in that behalf, be, and are hereby declared,
and made so far void and null; And particularly, That all and every the
Heritors, and others the persons aforesaid, and their Heirs, are and shall be
for ever hereafter freed and discharged of, and from all suits, and appearing
at or in any their Lords or Superiors Courts of Iustitiary, Regality, Stuartry,
Barony, Bayliary, Heritable Sherifship, Heritable Admiralty, all which,
together with all other Offices heritable, or for life, are hereby abolished,
and taken away; and that all and every the Heritors and persons aforesaid, and
their Heirs, are and shall be for ever hereafter freed and discharged, of, and
from all Military service, and personal attendance upon any their Lords or
Superiors in Expeditions or Travels, and of all Casualties, of Wards Lands
formerly held of the King or other Superiors, and of the Marriage, single and
double avail thereof, Non-Entries, Compositions for entries, and of all Rights
and Casualties payable, if they be demanded, only or upon the committing of
any Clauses irritant. And that the said Heritors and persons aforesaid be now
and from henceforth construed, reputed, adjudged, and declared free and
acquitted thereof, and of and from all and all manner of holding suits, duties,
services personal or real, and demands whatsoever, (other than is before
declared and Ordained) notwithstanding the present Tenor of any their Deeds,
Patents, Enfeofments; or any Clauses, Articles or Covenants therein contained
or mentioned to the contrary in any wise; And that in time to come all and
every Clause, Covenant, Article, Condition or thing to the contrary hereof,
shall be omitted out of all such Deeds, Patents, Charters and Enfeoffments.

And be it further Ordained, That all Forfeitures, Escheats, simple, or of
life, Rent Bastardy, and last Heir, which heretofore escheated, forfeited and
fell to the King, Lords of Regalitie, or other Superiors, shall from henceforth
fall, escheat, and forfeit to the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth for the
time being.

Wednesday April 12. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


