AN ORDER AND DECLARATION OF His Highness and His Council, FOR COLLECTING The
Excize in Scotland.

seal of the Commonwealth

Tuesday the Two and twentieth of May, 1655.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector, and the Council, That this Order
and Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness. MDCLV.

AN ORDER AND DECLARATION OF His Highness and His Council, For collecting The
Excize in Scotland.
WHereas by an Ordinance of His Highness the Lord Protector and the Council,
Entitled, An Ordinance for Uniting Scotland into one Commonwealth with
England, it is amongst other things Ordained, That all Cesses, Public
Impositions and Taxations whatsoever, be imposed, taxed and levied from
thenceforth proportionably from the whole People of this Commonwealth so
United: And whereas in pursuance of the Seven and twentieth Article of the
Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotlandand Ireland, it was before
the Third day of September last, Agreed and Declared in writing by His Highness
and the Council, That the constant Yearly Revenue appointed by the said Article
to be Raised and Established for maintaining the Forces in the said Article
mentioned, for the Defense and Security of this Commonwealth, and also for a
convenient Number of Ships for Guarding the Seas, should be raised, amongst
other things, by the Customs and Excize, the Rates whereof, together with the
ways and means of Levying and Bringing in the same, were before that time
settled by several Ordinances of His Highness and the Council, according to
which the same is Appointed and Ordered to be Collected and Levied in England
and Ireland; His Highness the Lord Protector, by the Advice of His Council, in
pursuance of the said Ordinance, Article of the Government, and the Agreement
and Declaration thereupon, to the end the said Duty of Excize may be Levied and
Paid equally in and through this Commonwealth, does Declare and Order, That
from and after the Twenty fourth day of JuneOne thousand six hundred fifty
five, the several Rates and Charges which by the said Ordinances or any of them
are imposed and laid, to be had, levied, demanded, collected, received,
recovered and paid in and through England and Wales, and are hereafter in this
Order and Declaration set down, and every of them, are by force of the said
Ordinance, Article, and the Agreement and Declaration aforesaid in pursuance
thereof, laid and imposed, and ought to be, and shall from and after the said
Twenty fourth day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty five, be had, levied,
demanded, collected, received, recovered and paid in the right of the Duty of
Excize in and through Scotland, and the Isles of Orkney and Zethland, and all
the Territories of Scotland, upon all Merchandises and Manufactures native and
foreign as follows; That is to say,

L. S. D. FOr every Barrel of Beer or Ale of above Six shillings the Barrel,
brewed by the common Brewer, or by any other person or persons, who shall sell
or tap out Beer or Ale publicly or privately, to be paid by the said Brewer or
such other person or persons respectively, two shillings 00 02 00 For every
Barrel of Six shilling Beer or Ale, or above Four shillings the Barrel, brewed
by the common Brewer, or by any other person or persons, who shall sell or tap
out such Beer or Ale publicly or privately, to be paid by the said Brewer, or
such other person or persons as aforesaid respectively, six pence 00 00 06 And
so proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity of Beer or Ale above Four
shillings the Barrel. Allum-Scotch the hundred weight, containing One hundred
and twelve pounds, to be paid by the maker, three pence 00 00 03 Coperas-Scotch
the hundred weight, containing One hundred and twelve pounds, to be paid by the
maker, three pence 00 00 03 Hops Scotch, the hundred weight, to be paid by the
Planter, two shillings 00 02 00 Saffron Scotch, for every twenty shillings
value, to be paid by the Planter, one shilling 00 01 00 Tin, for every twenty
shillings value, to be paid by the Buyer, one shilling 00 01 00 Iron Scotch,
for every hundred weight containing One hundred and twelve pounds, to be paid
by the maker, 6 pence 00 06 00 For all Aquavitae or Strong-water made or
distilled within Scotland, the Isles of Orkney and Zethland, whether of
foreign or domestique Spirits or Materials to be sold, upon every Gallon to be
paid by the first maker or seller thereof respectively, two pence 00 00 02 For
every Barrel of Soap made within Scotland, the Isles of Orkney and Zethland, of
what sort soever, to be paid by the maker, and so proportionably for hard soap
or soft soap, four shillings 00 04 00 For every ounce Troy of silver or gold
prepared, melted down, or disgrossed for Wire, to be paid at the bar where the
same shall be disgrossed, two pence 00 00 02 For every pound weight, containing
sixteen ounces Averdupois, of any Coper or other Metal, that shall be
prepared, made fit, or disgrossed to be paid at the Bar where the same shall be
disgrossed, one shilling 00 01 00 For all Linseed-oyl, Whale-oyl, Blubber-oyl,
Rape-oyl, Pilchard-oyl and all other Oils made within Scotland, the Isles of
Orkney and Zethland upon every Tun to be paid by the marker six shillings per
Tun 00 06 00 For every Fother of Lead containing two thousand pound weight, at
one hundred and twelve pounds to the hundred, to be paid by the maker or
smelter, six shillings eight pence 00 06 08 For all Salt made or to be made
within Scotland, the Isles of Orkney and Zethland, which is or shall be shipped
or conveyed by water, to be paid by the first Buyer of such Salt, at the place
of landing or unloading thereof, upon every Gallon a half penny 00 00 0 For all
other Salt made or to be made within Scotland, the Isles of Orkney and
Zethland, and not shipped or conveyed by water, to be paid by the first Buyer
thereof upon the first delivering, upon every Gallon a half penny 00 00 0 Upon
all Salt upon Salt that is made of Salt within Scotland, the Isles of Orkney
and Zethland, to be paid by the maker thereof, upon every Gallon a farthing 00
00 0 For all Syder and Perry made and sold by way of retail, whether it be by
the first maker, or any Buyer or Receiver thereof, from the first maker upon
every Hogshead, and so for a greater or lesser measure proportionably, two
shillings six pence 00 02 06 For all Metheglin or Mead, and such like Drink
sold out by retail, to be paid by the Retailer upon every Gallon, and so
prorato, one penny 00 00 01 For all Starch, upon every twenty shillings value
thereof, to be paid by the first maker, one shilling 00 01 00 For all sorts of
Glass or Glasses, upon every twenty shillings value thereof to be paid by the
maker, one shilling 00 01 00

Rates of Excize of Foreign Goods Imported.
L. S. D. FOr every pound of Tobacco which is not of the English Plantation, as
well already imported and remaining in the hands of the Merchant or Importer,
as to be imported, to be paid by the first Buyer, one shilling 00 01 00 For
every pound of Tobacco of the English Plantation, as well imported and
remaining in the hands of the Importer as to be imported, to be paid by the
first Buyer, three pence 00 00 03 For every Tun of Wine already imported or to
be imported, to be paid by the first Buyer, whether Retailer or private
Consumptioner, six pounds 06 00 00 For every Tun of Wine-vineger imported or to
be imported, to be paid by the first Buyer, forty shillings 02 00 00 For all
Spirits imported or to be imported, made either of French, Rheinish, or any
other Wines, upon every Gallon to be paid by the first Buyer, four pence 00 00
04 For all Spirits foreign or domestique, sold in stead of Aquavitae or strong
waters upon every Gallon, to be paid by the Utterer and Seller thereof, one
shilling 00 01 00 For all Strong Water perfectly made, imported or to be
imported, upon every Gallon to be paid by the first Buyer, one shilling 00 01
00 For all Beer or Ale imported for every Barrel, to be paid by the Importer,
five shillings 00 05 00 For all Pepper, Sugars, Sugars refined, white and brown
Muscavado's, Candy white and brown, and all other Grocery and Mercery Wares,
Wrought-silks, Silks in gum and ready thrown, Linens fine and course,
Upholstery, Haberdashery, Paper, Skins and Leather, upon every twenty shillings
value, to be paid by the first Buyer, one shilling 00 01 00 For all manner of
Drugs, according as they are distinguished by the Book of Rates for the Customs
in England, upon every twenty shillings value, to be paid by the first Buyer,
two shillings 00 02 00 For all foreign Soap imported or to be imported, soft or
hard, for every hundred weight thereof, containing one hundred and twelve
pounds, to be paid by the first Buyer, five shillings 00 05 00 For all Saltery
Wares not particularly rated in this Schedule, imported or to be imported, upon
every twenty shillings value thereof, as they or any of them shall be sold at a
price, to be paid by the first Buyer thereof, one shilling 00 01 00 For all
Hops foreign, the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds, to
be paid by the first Buyer over and above Customs, five shillings 00 05 00 For
all Hemp, Flax, Tow, Tarr, Rozen, Pitch, Wax, Tallow, Cable, Cableyarn, and all
manner of Cordage, upon every twenty shillings value, to be paid by the first
Buyer, six pence 00 00 06 For all sort of Glass or Glasses, and all manner of
Earthen Ware whatsoever, upon every twenty shillings value, to be paid by the
first Buyer, two shillings 00 02 00 For all manner of Woollen-cloth or Stuffs,
or other Woollen manufactures imported from foreign parts, for every Yard
measure over and above the Rates mentioned of Customs, to be paid by the
Importer, one shilling 00 01 00 For all Raw-silk imported or to be imported,
for every twenty shillings value thereof, and so proportionably for a greater
or lesser value, to be paid by the first Buyer, six pence 00 00 06 For all
foreign Salt imported which has not paid Excize, or to be imported, upon every
Gallon to be paid by the first Buyer, three half pence 00 00 0 For all
Bone-lace imported, for every twenty shillings in value, to be paid by the
first Buyer, three shillings 00 03 00 For all Dyed-silk imported, for every
twenty shillings in value, to be paid by the first Buyer, five shillings 00 05
00 For all Silk-lace imported, for every twenty shillings in value, to be paid
by the first Buyer, three shillings 00 03 00

That all other Goods and Merchandises mentioned in the Book of Rates for the
Customs in England, (except Bullion, Corn, Victual, Arms, Ammunition, Ordnance
of Brass or Iron, and Woolls of Sheep) imported or to be imported, which are
not in the said Rates of Excize before or otherwise charged, shall hereafter
pay Excize after the Rate of Five Pounds per Centum, to be paid by the first
Buyer from the Merchant or Importer, and the same is to be collected
accordingly.

L. S. D. For all other Goods and Merchandises imported or to be imported, upon
which no values are set, either in the said Book of Rates for Customs, nor in
these present Rates for Excize, upon every twenty shillings value thereof, as
they or any of them shall be sold at a price, to be paid by the first Buyer,
one shilling 00 01 00

That for all Inland or Foreign Commodities in this Order mentioned, whether
rated by the pound weight, hundred weight, Fodder, Pound value, Gallon, Barrel,
Tun, or other greater or lesser Measure or Weight whatsoever, the Excize shall
be duly paid for a greater or lesser quantity pro rato, according to the Rates
therein appointed and prescribed respectively: And as to the contents of a Tun
of all liquid commodities imported, It is hereby declared, That two Butts, two
Pipes, four Hogsheads of what sort soever, six Teirces, three Punchions or
Tertions, and eight Quarter-Casks, shall be accounted or reckoned for a Tun and
no other; And every Cask of any liquid commodities imported, which if full,
shall exceed a Quarter-Cask, shall be accounted for a Teirce; and every Cask
that shall exceed a Teirce, shall be accounted for a Hogshead; and every Cask
that shall exceed a Hogshead, shall be accounted a Punchion; and every Cask
that shall exceed a Punchion, shall be accounted a Butt or Pipe, without any
pretense of Vndergage whatsoever: All and every which Rates and Charges in
right of the said Duty of Excize, shall be from and after the said Four and
twentieth day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty and five, had, demanded,
levied, collected, recovered, received and paid, of, by and from all and every
person and persons therein concerned, and unto such person and persons as by
his Highness the Lord Protector, or Authority derived from him for that
purpose, shall be appointed and authorized to demand, levy, collect, recover
and receive the same, according to such Acts, Ordinances and Orders of
Parliament, and of His Highness the Lord Protector, with the Advice of His
Council, which were in force the Second day of September, One thousand six
hundred fifty and four, in England.

Tuesday the 22 th of May, 1655.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, That this Order
and Declaration be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


