AN ORDINANCE TOUCHING THE OFFICE OF Postage of Letters, Inland and Foreign.

Saturday September 2. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.

AN ORDINANCE Touching the Office of Postage of Letters, Inland and Foreign.
WHereas upon the one and twentieth of March, One thousand six hundred forty
and nine, It was resolved by the then Parliament, That the Office of Post
Master, Inland and Foreign, were and ought to be in the sole power of the
Parliament, and several Orders were made by the said Parliament, whereby the
management thereof was referred to the Council of State. And whereas on the
thirtieth day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty and three, the then
Council of State did by special Contract demise, and set to farm the said
Offices for the Postage of Letters both Foreign and Inland unto John Manley of
London, Esquire; at and under certain Rents, Covenants and Conditions for the
benefit and advantage of the Commonwealth: For the confirmation of the said
Contract, and the better regulation and due execution of the said Offices, and
to the end the same may be managed with most security and expedition in the
Carriage and return of Letters, as well of the Public as Private concernment,
and that the prices for portage of Letters may be reduced to a lower rate, and
more certainty than in former tunes, for the case and advantage of the people;
and also for the better enabling the said John Manley to perform the said
Contract on his part. and to observe and fulfill the Conditions and Covenants
hereafter in this Ordinance contained;

Be it Ordained by His Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the consent of
His Council, and it is Declared and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That
he the said John Manley, his Heirs and Assigns, from the said thirtieth day of
June, One thousand six hundred fifty and three, until the thirtieth day of July
which shall be in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty and five,
shall and may for and under the Rents, Conditions, Clauses, Provisoes and
agreements hereafter in this Ordinance set down and mentioned, have, hold,
execute and enjoy the said Office of Postage of Letters both Inland and
Foreign, together with all the powers, perquisits and profits to the same of
right appertaining, and herein hereafter expressed, and shall and may by
himself and such faithful, able, and well-affected Deputies and Underofficers
(for which he shall stand and be responsal) take and receive such Perquisits
and Profits only and no more as are herein hereafter particularly mentioned,
allowed and expressed, in manner and form as hereafter ensues.

I.
And first, The said John Manley shall have the sole Care and Charge of the
Postage and Carriage of all Letters and Packets, both Foreign and Inland to and
from all persons; and in all places of England, Scotland and Ireland, and to
and from all other places within the Dominions of this Common wealth, exclusive
to all others, except for such as shall be sent either by common and known
Carriers along with their Carts, Wagons or Pack-Horses, or by Messenger or
Messengers on purpose, or by some servant, or Friend or Friends, or by some
Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels not being Packet-Boats nor Vessels, or Boats
purposely or principally unployed to carry Letters; All which said
Packet-Boats, and other Vessels and Boats to carry Letters (except only such as
shall be employed by the said John Manley, together with all other Posts, but
such as shall likewise be thereunto Authorized and empowered by him) are hereby
expressly prohibited, forbidden and suppressed.

II.
Item, The said John Manley, by himself and his said Deputies, Agents, and
Underofficers shall, from time to time, and at all times during the
continuance of this Ordinance, safely and faithfully carry all ordinary and
extraordinary Letters and Dispatches to or from his Highness, and to or from
His Council, or Secretary of State, or any of them; And to and from all Members
of the Legislative power, and to and from the Commissioners or Committee of the
Admiralty or Navy, Generals of the Fleet, General Officers of the Army,
Committee of the Army, Committee for Scotch and Irish Affairs, and that by the
Common, Ordinary Male or other speedy and safe passage as the urgency of the
occasion shall or may require.

Provided, That whatsoever Letters or Packets (which shall not come or be
offered by some known Public Seal, or Impress to be for the Public, or some
of the Affairs above specified) shall, for the freeing them from pay or
Postage, have an Indorsement upon them in these words, or to this effect
following (viz.) These are for the service of his Highness, or for the service
of the Commonwealth, together with the names of such persons or their
Secretaries or Clerks, who attend them or those services respectively, indorsed
upon the same.

Item, That for all other Letters and Packets to or from private persons, and
for private occasions (and not at all relating to the persons and public
Affairs mentioned in the former Article being absolutely free from Pay and
Postage) he the said John Manley shall by himself his Agents, Deputies or
Underofficers receive and take for the carriage and postage thereof only
according to the Rates following, and no other or higher rates, viz. For every
Letter to or from any place within eighty miles distance from London, if a
single Letter, two pence, and if a double Letter, four pence. And for every
Letter at a farther distance than eighty miles if a single Letter, three pence,
if a double Letter, six pence. And for every Letter to or from Scotland, if a
single Letter, four pence, if a double Letter, eight pence. And to or from
Ireland, for every single Letter, six pence, and every double Letter, twelve
pence, and for treble or greater Packets of Letters proportionably.

III.
Item, To the end a Weekly intercourse may be continued between England and
Ireland, the said John Manley shall (over and besides the Packet Boats for
Foreign Posts) and is hereby obliged to maintain one or more Packet Boats to
pass and repass, if not hindered by wind and Weather, weekly between Milford and
Waterford, and between Chester and Dublin, or to settle such other ways and
means for a weekly correspondence between those places as may be equivalent
for speed and security with the ways aforesaid.

IV.
Item, The said John Manley shall be, and is hereby obliged to maintain and
keep one or more Foreign Packet-Boats to be weekly employed for the Foreign
Posts, as has been formerly used and accustomed.

V.
Item, That for the better carrying on of the Public service, especially of
the Navy, there shall be (besides the several Postages now in use) settled,
maintained and established by the said John Manley, a weekly Post between Dover
and Portsmouth, and between Portsmouth and Salisbury, and between London and
Yarmouth, and between Lancaster and Carlisle.

VI.
Item, That for the Foreign Letters imported and exported (other than for
Ireland and Scotland, the rates whereof are before particularly set down) the
said John Manley, shall have and by himself and his Deputies, Agents and under
Officers, receive and take for the Postages and Carriage thereof, the Rates
heretofore used and accustomed, and no other nor further rates nor value, for
that it is hereby Declared and Ordained, That there shall be no increase or
Rates, nor alteration concerning the same.

VII.
That for the more speedy and effectual dispatch of all the said Posts and
Premises, the said John Manley, shall be, and is hereby obliged to cause the
said Posts to run seven Miles and hour in Summer, viz. From the first of April
to the last of September; And five miles an hour in Winter, viz. For the rest
of the year.

VIII.
Item, That the said John Manley shall be and is hereby obliged to take order
for, and cause every his under Postmaster or Deputy, at his several Stage, to
have in readiness one good Horse or Mare to receive and carry the Male of
Letters from time to time, that the same may not be stayed at any Stage above
half a quarter of an hour at most: And for the more speedy dispatch thereof,
that no other person (besides the Post that carries the Male) be suffered to
ride Post with the Male.

IX.
That the said John Manley shall be, and is hereby obliged to provide
Post-hories at every Stage, for all such persons as shall by especial Warrant
of his Highness, His Council, any of the Generals at Sea, Commissioners of the
Admiralty and Navy, Secretary of State, General Officer of the Army, Commanders
of any Garrison, or Commanders of any Squadron or Ship of the Navy of the
Commonwealth, be authorized to ride Post.

X.
That for the reasons aforesaid none but the Post-Masters, deputed and approved
of by the said John Manley, upon the several Roads, shall horse any person
Post; and that the said Post-Masters upon the Roads, deputed by the said John
Manley, shall not receive or take, from any person or persons riding post as
aforesaid, above the rate of three pence a mile for each Post-horse, being the
Rates in such case formerly used and accustomed. And to the (...) there may be
a constant and sufficient movision at every Stage for the Horsing o^ such as
shall have such Warrant as aforesaid, to take Posthorses, the said John
Manley, shall be, and is hereby obliged to cause every Postmaster, deputed by
him, to keep usually and constantly at every Stage, the number of four good
Horses or Mares at the least for the said Post-service.

XI.
Item, That the said John Manley shall truly and faithfully pay unto such
Treasurer or Receiver, as His Highness the Lord Protector shall appoint, to the
use of the Commonwealth, the sum of ten thousand pounds yearly, by quarterly
payments, at and upon such days and times as he has promised and secured the
payments of the same.

And it is hereby Declared and Ordained, and be it Established and Ordained by
the Authority aforesaid, That to the end the said John Manley may be the better
enabled to pay the said yearly rent at the quarterly rent days as aforesaid,
and to do and perform the several Agreements on his part to be performed as
aforesaid, and for and in consideration of the said Rents and Agreements, That
he the said John Manley, for himself, his Deputies and under Officers, shall
have and enjoy the Privileges, Exemptions, Freedoms and Immunities hereafter
specified.

I.
That in respect of the necessary and constant attendance of the said John
Manley, and others employed under him in the execution of the Premises, as
well by day as by night; That therefore the said John Manley, as also his under
Postmaster or Deputy at every Stage, and two Servants at every of the said
Stages, are hereby, and shall be from time to time during the term aforesaid,
freed and discharged of and from all and all manner of Presses and Musters, and
of and from all and all manner of Summons and personal appearance and
attendance upon or at any Assizes, Sessions, Iuries, Inquesis, and other
Offices or Duties requiring personal attendance.

II.
That no person or persons whatsoever, besides the said John Manley, his
Deputies and Under-officers, shall be allowed or suffered to set up any Post,
or keep Horses, or any Packet-Boat or Boats for the carrying or sending of
Letters Inland or Foreign.

III.
That all Posts, and Carriers of Letters, post to or from Dover, Yarmouth,
Norwich, Winchester, Lynn, Bury, Oxford, Cambridge, Southampton, Plymouth,
York, Lincoln, Bristoll, etc. or to or from any other Town or Place within this
Commonwealth, or the Dominions thereto belonging, without Deputation, License
or Allowance of, from and under the said, John Manley, shall and are hereby
prohibited, forbidden and suppressed.

IV.
That if any person or persons whatsoever, shall offend against any thing in
these two last preceding Articles, or carry any Letters post, notwithstanding
the said pr^l^^^tion of the said two last Articles, or do any other Act or
Thing to the Damage, Prejudice or Hinderance of the said John Manley, in the
free holding and enjoying the said Office of Postmaster General as aforesaid,
or any of the Premises to him by this Ordinance granted or allowed; he the
said John Manley shall have by virtue hereof his special action upon the Case
against such person and persons so offending, to be commenced in the Court of
Exchequer, and if the Verdice pass for the Plaintiff, he shall by Judgment of
the said Court of Exchequer, recover double Damages, and have double Costs
awarded him in every such action.

V.
That no person or persons warranted to ride Post, shall ride above one Stage
upon the same Posthorses without consent of the Owners of the said Horses, or
the Post-Masters from whom he or they shall hire the same to the wrong of such
Horses, and prejudice of the Posts; and if any shall attempt to do the
contrary, the next Magistrate, Constable or Officer, upon Compliant thereof
made, shall stay the said Offenders, and discharge them off the said Horses,
and likewise cause them to make reasonable satisfaction for the wrong therein
done.

VI.
And it is hereby further Established and Ordained, That (in respect of the
said Rents to be paid for the increase of the Public Revenue, and Services to
be done and performed by the said John Manley as aforesaid) the said Office and
Offices of Postmaster General, and postage of Letters hereby granted to the
said John Manley, shall be absolutely freed and discharged of and from all
manner of Taxes and Assessments from time to time during such term as he shall
hold and execute the same, and that neither the said John Manley, nor any under
Deputy or Officer under him, shall for or in respect of the said Office or
Offices, or any of the premises hereby granted, be taxed or assessed, or any
ways be compelled to pay any rate, tax or assessment, but that he and they (at
and under the Rents and Conditions aforesaid) may be at all times during the
said Term hereafter there from freed to all intents and purposes.

Saturday September 2. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


