Several ORDERS Made and agreed upon By the Justices of the Peace for the City
and Liberty of WESTMINSTER, Upon Monday the 10. day of March, 1655.

Concerning the future Licensing of all Innkeepers, Victualers, and
Alehouse-keepers, within the said City and Liberty. Putting in execution the
Laws and Ordinances for the better Observation of the Lord's Day; And the Laws
and Statutes concerning the Punishment and Conveyance of Rogues, Sturdy
Beggars, and Vagrants, to the place of their birth: With a declaration of such
persons as are accounted Rogues by the several Statutes; and the penalties of
several persons, both Officers and private persons neglecting their duty
concerning them.

Setting forth what will be for the time to come expected from the
Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Constables and others, Inhabitants
within the said City and Liberty.



LONDON, Printed by W.G.

City, Borough, and Town of Westminster, in the County of Midd.
FOrasmuch as notwithstanding diverse Good, Acts, and Ordinances of Parliament,
made for the better observation of the Lords day, and the many endeavors used
for the due execution of them. It is observed that the said day is very much
pro^phaned, and the observation thereof much neglected within this City and
Liberty by Vineners, Inholders, Alehousekeepers, Victualers, Cooks,
Tobaccosellers, and such like, by suffering drinking, and tippling, in their
houser and by Butchers, Fruiterers, Polterers, and others, in selling, and
exposing to sale their commodities; and by others, in using unlawful Pastimes,
Traveling, and Working in their ordinary Callings and Professions upon the said
day, and by Bargemen, Boatmen, and Watermen, Sailing and Rowing upon the River
of Thames, and such as employ them; and by such as employ or travel with
Choaches, and Sedans, on that day, and by Tailors. Barbers, Millers, Cord
wayners or Shoomakers, carrying their Wares, and exercising their Callings upon
the same day. We have thought fit for the better discovering and suppressing
the several offenses aforesaid, and for the more exact execution of the
several Laws and Ordinances made for that purpose, to appoint, and do
accordingly appoint, the persons undernamed Inhabitants within the Parish of
(...)within the said City and Liberty dilligently, and by all lawful ways and
means to make discovery of all persons offending against any the Laws and
Ordinances aforesaid, to us or any other of the Justices of the Peace of the
said City and Liberty, or to any Constable or other Officer, who are authorized
by any of the said Acts or Ordinances to apprehend such Offenders; and for that
end do also will and require, and in the name of his Highness the Lord
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland etc. hereby
straightly charge and command all such Constables, and other Officers and
Ministers, within the Parish of (...)within the said City and Liberty to whom
it shall appertain, to be diligent in the execution of the powere and
authorities given them by the said Laws, or any of them; and also to be ayding
and assisting unto the said persons hereunder particularly named, and every or
any of them, in the finding out and causing to be apprehended all and every
such person and persons as shall offend in any of the kinds aforesaid, or
otherwise contrary to the laws aforesaid, and them to bring before us, or some
of us or some other of the Justices of the Peace of the said City and Liberty,
to the end such offenders, and every of them may be further dealt withal as to
justice shall appertain; and to the end that you and every of you may the
better understand what you may and ought to do herein, and will be expected
from you the Churchwardens, and Overseers of the poor of your Parish, are
hereby required to buy a convenient number of books, containing the Act and
Ordinances made for the better observation of the Lords day, and punishment of
such persons as shall therein offend, and to charge their disbursment therein
upon their accounts, which shall be allowed them upon the passing thereof.

Given under our hands this (...) day of (...) 165^
To And to the high Constable, of the said City and Liberty, and all petty
Constables, (...), Overseers of the poor, and to all Governors of the Company
of the Watermen, and all other Officers and Ministers within the said City and
Liberty to whom it shall concern.
City, Borough, and Town of Westminster, in the County of Mid.
At a meeting at the Vestry in Margarets Church in Westminster, on Monday the
10. day of March 1655. before the Right Honorable Sir John Barkstead Knight
Lieutenant of his Highness Tower of London, Sir John Thorowgood Knight. Edward
Bulstrode, Edward Grosvenor, Edward Carey, William Wheeler, Francis Blake,
Francis White, and Ralph Hall, Esqs His Highness Justices assigned to keep the
public Peace within the Liberty of the late Deane and Chapter of the Colegiate
Church of Peter's Westminster. of the City, Borough and Town of Westminster. in the County,
of Midd. and also to hear and determinediverse fellonies, trespasses and other
misdoings within the said City and Liberty committed.

IT is Ordered by the said Justices, that whatsoever Officer shall apprehend
any Rogues or Vagabonds, and correct or cause them to be corrected according to
Law, and shall deliver him, her, or them, over with a Certificate of his, her,
or their said correction, unto the next Officer, to be conveyed to the place of
his, her, or their birth or abode, as the case shall require, shall have two
shillings paid unto him for every such Rogue or Vagabond, by such officer to
whom they shall be so delivered; and that every such Officer so paying the
same, shall receive the like sum of the next Officer, and so from Officer to
Officer unto the last Officer of the place in the co^fines of this City and
Liberty; which said last officer shall be allowed his disbursment therein at
the determination of the time wherein he shall serve the same Office, he
producing unto the next Justice of the Peace a receipt under the hand of such
Officer to whom he paid the same, upon his receipt of such Rogues and
Vagabonds, the said receipt being allowed under the hand of the said Justice;
and in case any other person not being an Officer shall apprehend any Rogues or
Vagrants, and bring him, her, or them unto the Constable or other Officer of
the place where they were so apprehended, such Constable or other Officer shall
in like manner pay unto such person the sum of two shillings for every such
Rogue or Vagabond, and upon the performance of his duty in his, her, or their
correction or conveiance as aforesaid, shall be in li^e manner reimbursed; and
in case any of the Officers aforesaid shall refuse to perform this Order, in
paying the said money and conveying any such Rogues or Vagabonds that then upon
complaint thereof made by such person or Officer who shall be grieved thereby
unto a Justice of Peace, the said Justice is desired to bind him in a
Recognizance to appear at the next Sessions of the public Peace to be holden
for this City and Liberty, that such Officer so refusing may be proceeded
against according to Law for his said contempt: And it is also Ordered that
this Order be forthwith Printed and sent to the Justice of the Peace of each
several division by the Clerk of the Peace of the said City and Liberty, and
the said Justices are desired to call together the Churchwardens, and
Constables, of the several Parishes within their respective divisions and to
acquaint them with this Order, and to give the same in charge unto them for
their observance thereof accordingly; and to the end all Officers, Ministers,
and others who are herein concerned, may the better understand their duty, and
know the penalty that they incurr for their negligence therein; It is thought
fit that the said Justices of the Peace within their said divisions shall
disperse abroad among the Constables a Paper, signifying what persons are by
the Law and Statutes adjudged Rogues, with the penalty imposed upon each of the
said Officers for his neglect in the performance of his duty, that they may not
pretend ignorance when they come to be punished for the same.

The persons hereunder named being above the age of seven years are adjudged
Rogues by the Laws and Statutes of this Nation.
All persons calling themselves Scholars going about begging, all Seafaring
men pretending losses of their Ships and Goods on the Sea, going about the
Country begging, having no testimony under the hand of a Justice of Peace or
the times limited by the same for his journey expired. All idle persons going
about in any Country either begging or using any subtle craft or unlawful
Games and Plays or faining themselves to have knowledge in Physiognomy,
Palmistrey, or other like crafty science or pretending that they can tell
destinies, fortunes, or such other like fantastical imaginations.

All persons that be or utter themselves to be Proctors, Procurers,
Pate^t-gatherers or Collectors for Goales, Prisons, or Hospitals, all Fencers,
Bearwards, common Players of Interludes and Minstrels, wandering abroad, all
Juglers, Tinkers, Pedlars, and petty Chapmen, wandering abroad, all wandering
persons and common Laborers being persons able in body, using loytering, and
refusing to work for such reasonable wages as is taxed or commonly given in
such parts where such persons do or shall happen to dwell or abide, not having
living otherwise to maintain themselves.

All persons delivered out of Goales that beg for their Fees, or otherwise do
travel begging, all such persons as shall wander abroad begging, pretending
lesses ^y sire or otherwise, all such persons not being Fello^^, w^^ndring and
pretending themselves to be Egyptians, or wandering in the habit, fortue, atire
of counterfeit Egyptians; All such persons as shall wander up and down the
Country to sell Glasses, are adjudged, deemed, and taken as Rogues, Vagabonds,
and Sturdy beggars.

The penalties by Law to be imposed upon such persons as shall neglect their
duty in passing of Rogues,
I. That the Minister of the place shall Register the testimonial, signifying
the day and place of his punishment in a book kept for that purpose, upon
pain of five shillings.

II. That if a Constable, Tithingman, or Headborough, be negligent in the
Execution of his duty herein, he shall forfeit for every default twenty
shillings.

III. That if any person do in any wise disturb or let the execution of the
Law herein, or making rescusse against any Officer or person in the execution
of the Statute made 39. Eliz. Cap. 4. He shall forfeit for every offense five
pound, and be bound to his good behavior.

IV. That every person or persons that sees or knows any Rogue to resort to
his or their Houses to beg, gather or receive any Alms, shall convey him, or
cause him to be conveyed to the next Consta^ Tythingman upon pain of ten
shillings.

V. That the Constables or Headboroughs, having Warrants directed to them for
privy searchers for Rogues, and neglect to give an account in writing under
their hands to the Justices of the Peace, at the next meeting, such Rogues as
they have passed and conveyed since the last meeting of the said justices,
shall incur what fine the said Justices shall please to set upon them, not
exceeding forty shillings.

VI. That all fines and forfeitures appointed, or to grow by the Act of 39.
Eliz. Cap. 4 except such as be otherwise limited by the said Act, shall wholly
go and be employed for the use of the reparations and maintenance of the House
of Corection, and stock and store thereof, or relief of the poor; where the
offense shall be committed, at the discretion of the Justices of the Peace of
the same City and Liberty, and that all fines and forfeitu^es appointed to grow
by conviction of any person, shall by Warrant under the hands and Seas of any
two or more Justices of the Peace, etc. be Levied by distress and sale of the
Goods and Chattels of the Offender; which shall be good in Law against such
Offender, and that if any of the said Offenses shall be confessed by the
Offender, and that the same shall be proved by two s^ffici^nt ^awfull
Witnesses, before such two or more Justices of the Peace that then every such
person shall forthwith stand and be in Law convicted thereof.

City, Borough, and Town of Westminster in the County of Middl.
At a meeting at the Half Moon in the Strand on Friday the 29 day of March,
1649. Before Sir John Thorowgood Knight, Thomas Lathum, John Hooker, Edw.
Birkhead, Tho. Fauconberge, George Manley, and Edward Carter, Esquires Justices
assigned to keep the public Peace within the Liberty of the late Dean and
Chapter of the Collegiate Church of Peter's Westminster, of the City, Borough,
and Town of Westminster, in the County of Middl. And also to hear and determine
diverse Felonies, Trespasses, and other misdoings committed within the said City
and Liberty: These Articles were agreed upon, as follows, viz.

I. THat the said Justices in their several Divisions do consider and report in
writing to the next Sessions what number of Alehouses are needful and
sufficient in each Parish, for accommodation of Laborers and Travelers.

II. That all Cellars, Blind- or Ally- and Backward-Alehouses be forthwith
suppressed, and no more in such places licensed.

III. That all disorderly Alehouses be from time to time suppressed; and as the
Alehouse-keepers shall dye, and remove their habitations, no new Licenses be
granted to their Successors in their Houses, unless such Houses be fitted and
seated in very convenient places, until such time as the supernumerary
Alehouses be reduced to the numbers to be reported needful for each Parish, as
aforesaid.

IV. That the Justices here present do agree, That they will not License any
Alehouse but in their respective Divisions, unless the License be taken and
subscribed by one Justice of Peace of that Division, and those not to exceed
the number to be reported as aforesaid.

V. That if any new Licenses be granted, the Clerk of the Peace do the first
day of the next Quarter Sessions acquaint the Court with such Licenses, and by
whom granted: And the Clerk of the Peace do likewise send to each Justice of
the Peace a Catalogue of the names of all Licensed Alehousekeepers in the
Division where such Justice inhabiteth: And also from time to time to send the
names of all suppressed Alehouse-keepers.

VI. That no person that has adhered to, or voluntarily assisted the Enemy
against the Parliament, shall either be continued a Victualler, or hereafter
licensed.

VII. If any person that is well-affected to the Parliament, shall henceforth
desire to be licensed, that he be licensed in stead of any person that he shall
discover to be a Delinquent, or to have assisted or contributed to the Enemy,
the former Rules subscribed by the Justices being observed.

At another meeting in the Vestry of Margarets Church in Westminster. on Monday the
10. day of March, 1655. Before Sir John Barkstead Knight, Lieutenant of his
Highness Tower of London, Sir John Thorowgood Knight, Edward Bulstrode, William
Wheeler, Edw. Grosvenor, Francis Blake, Francis White, and Ralph Hall, Esquires
his Highness Justices assigned to keep the public Peace within the Liberty of
the late Dean and Chapter of the Collegiate Church of Peter's Westminster, of
the City, Borrough, and Town of Westminster, in the County of Middl. And also
to hear and determine diverse Felonies, Trespasses, and other misdoings
committed within the said City and Liberty: These Articles aforesaid were
agreed upon, confirmed, and assented unto; and also the Articles following were
ordered from henceforth to be observed.

THat all and every licensed Innkeeper, Alehousekeeper or Victualler, that
shall permit or suffer any Traveller, Waggoner, Butcher, Higler, Drover, or any
of their Servants, to come into his, her, or their house after twelve of the
clock on any Saturdaynight; or shall suffer any person to travel from his, her,
or their house, until after one of the clock on Monday Morning, without good
and urgent cause to be allowed by some Justice of the Peace; or shall permit
and suffer any person or persons to be or remain in his, her, or their houses,
contrary to the Law in that case made and provided, and shall be thereof
convict, shall forthwith be suppressed, and not again licensed, but upon good
cause showed to the Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions.

II. That all such Innkeepers, Alehouse-keepers, or Victuallers, as shall at
any time hereafter be convicted for profane Cursing or Swearing, Drunkenness,
suffering disorders in their houses; gaming, or playing at Billiard-Tables,
Shovelboard-Tables, Dice, Cards, Tables, Nine-pins, Pigeon-holes, Bowling
Alley, or Bowling-Green, or any other unlawful game in his, her, or their
House, Yard, Backside; or any other place to his, her, or their House
belonging; or who has or shall keep in his, her, or their House,
Billiard-Tables, Shovelboard-Tables, Dice, Cards, Tables, Nine-pins,
Pigeonholes, Bowling-Alley or Bowling-Green, or any of them, or any other
unlawful game; or shall want accommodation of lodging, for Soldiers, Laborers
or Travelers, shall be suppressed, and not again licensed, but as aforesaid.

III. That no Bailiff, or his Under-officer, Follower, or Servant, nor any
Beadle, be licensed or allowed to keep any Alehouse or Victualling-house; nor
they, nor any of them; or any Constable, Brewer, or any Parish-officer, shall
be taken as Surety for any Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper or Victualler, for the
performance of the Condition of his Recognizance for Victualling, within this
City and Liberty.


