seal of the commonwealth of England AN ORDINANCE Impowring the COMMISSIONERS
OF THE CUSTOMS, And others, for the better suppressing of DRUNKENNESS and
profane CURSING and SWEARING, in persons employed under them.
WHereas several persons, as Carmen, Porters, Watermen, and others, who are
employed upon the Keys, as also upon the River of Thames, in Ships, Boats, and
Lighters, and in Thames Street, and other Streets and Lanes adjacent within the
City of London, for shipping and unshipping, packing, carrying, craning, and
removing goods and Merchandise, and other affairs in matters relating
thereunto, are very ordinarily Drunk, and do also profane and blaspheme the
holy name of God by Cursing and Swearing, to the great dishonor of God, the
scandal of the Professors and profession of the Gospel among us, and of the
present Government; For the preventing whereof, Be it Ordained by His Highness
the Lord Protector, by and with the consent of His Council, That the
Commissioners for the Customs for the time being, be, and are hereby
authorized and required to take care that the Laws of this Nation against
Drunkenness, Swearing and Cursing be put in execution, against all such
persons as shall be guilty of the crimes aforesaid; And for that purpose
shall, and hereby have the power and authority of Justices of the Peace within
the said places. And every Officer and Officers, Deputy and Deputies of the
Commissioners of the Customs, having a Commission whereby they are Deputed and
authorized to be Officers and Deputies under the hand and Seals of the said
Commissioners, shall have, and hereby have power, and are authorized to
apprehend and attache, and in safe custody to bring before the said
Commissioners, or any one of them sitting at the Custom-hous London, every
person or persons whom they shall see to be Drunk, or shall hear to Swear,
Curs, and blaspheme the holy name of God, as is aforesaid, and shall have
power, and hereby have power, to execute any power or powers, authority or
authorities in this case, which by Law, any Constable may or ought to exercise
or use, although the said Officer or Officers have no particular Warrant of the
Commissioners, aforesaid, for apprehending any the offenders for the offenses
aforesaid, as in the like cases are usually issued unto sworn Constables, by
Justices of the Peace upon the like occasions; and all person and persons whom
any of the said Officer and Officers shall require to be aiding and assisting
unto them, in the apprehending and bringing before the said Commissioners any
such offenders, are hereby required to be aiding and assisting unto them
therein accordingly: And in case of refusal, such punishment and proceedings
shall be had and awarded against them, as by Law may be and ought to be upon
every person that shall refuse to be aiding and assisting unto any sworn
Constable or Constables, when required thereunto.

Friday 30 June, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Scobel, Clerk of the Council.


