blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ORDINANCE Appointing Commissioners for the better ordering and bringing in
the Duty of Excize, and the Arrears thereof.
FOr the more speedy and effectual getting in of all Arrears of Excize, Be it
Ordained by His Highness, the Lord Protector, with the consent of His Council,
and it is Ordained, That Sir William Roberts, Knight, John Stone, Gervas
Bennet, John Hildesley, Richard Lucy, Edward Clud, Tho. Wood, Anthony Rous,
James Phillips, and Nathaniel Barton, Esqs or any three of them, be authorized
and required, to consider and examine, by Oath or otherwise, what Arrears of
the Excize are not yet paid into the Treasury for the same, and what remains
in the hands of any Farmer, Commissioner, Sub-Commissioner, or other Person
whatsoever, or for which any person or persons stand engaged with any Farmer or
Sub-Commissioner, and to send for persons Accounts, Articles, Receipts, Bonds,
or any Writings concerning Excize, or relating thereunto; and to hear all
parties, and to determine all differences concerning the same, and to commit
any person to safe custody for contempt; and if any person shall refuse or
delay to pay into the said Treasury, all such Arrears of Excize, and every, or
any part thereof, as by the said Commissioners, or any three of them shall be
adjudged due to the Commonwealth, and ordered to be paid, upon such default
certified under the hand of the Treasurer, and from the said Commissioners, or
any three of them; the Commissioners for Compounding at Haberdashers-Hall,
shall Sequester the Estate of all such persons, both personal and real, till
such Arrears be paid with damages; and in case such Arrears and Damages shall
not be received and paid within Six Months after such Sequestration, then all
and every Estate so sequestered, and continuing so long in Sequestration, may
and shall be sold by such person as the Commissioners herein named shall
appoint, rendering the overplus to the person so offending, after such Arrears
of Excize shall be fully paid, with Damages for the same: and if any
Collector, Receiver, or any other Officer, or person at any time relating to
the Excize, shall pretend any thing due to him from the Commonwealth, or from
any Commissioners for the Excize, and upon that, or any other pretense, shall
detain any Money in his hands, or Arrears unpaid into the Treasury, the said
Commissioners, or any three of them, are hereby empowered to hear and determine
the same, and to make such Order and Allowance in all such cases as shall be
just; and the said Commissioners or any three of them, are empowered to hear and
determine all Suits, Bills, Complaints, or Differences, and to relieve any
person by delivering Bonds, releasing Extents, or otherwise, in all Cases
concerning Excize; as the Barons of the Exchequer, or the Committee of the late
Parliament, for Inspecting the Treasuries, Regulating Officers Sallaries, or any
other, might have done before this Ordinance, any Custom, Usage, Statute, Act,
or Ordinance, to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is further Ordained, That the said Commissioners or any three of them,
be authorized to give Order to the Commissioners of Excize, to Farm out the
Excize of such Counties, Places, or Commodities, in England, Wales, and Town of
Barwick upon Tweed, as to the said Commissioners shall appear to be most
advantageous for the Commonwealth, and the ease of the People; to Commence from
the 29 of December, 1653 and continue till the 25. day of March. 1654. So as
the same be not at a less rate then the Excize of such County, Place, or
Commodity, was farmed at the last year. And the said Commissioners, or any
three of them, are empowered to approve and allow of such Sallaries, or yearly
Wages, and other necessary Charges, as by the Commissioners for Excize shall be
allowed to their Officers and others, and expended for carrying on of that
Service; and shall have power to send for Parties, Witnesses, Writings, and
Records, and to commit to Prison, such as shall appear unto them, to hinder and
oppose the execution of the several Acts, Ordinances, and Orders of Parliament
for the Excize, or the Ministers employed in the said Service; and shall from
time to time, debate, consult, and devise of all ways and means for the
improvement of the Excize, for the best advantage of the Commonwealth, in
pursuance of the several Acts, Ordinances, and Orders of Parliament relating
thereunto, and to prepare such Laws for the Lord Protector, and His Council,
for removing of Obstructions and Improvement of the Excize, as they shall think
fit and necessary; and from time to time to determine all such Differences
which may happen and arise between the said Commissioners of Excize, and the
Comptroler. And the said Commissioners, or any three of them, are empowered to
release such person or persons from Prison, who shall be committed by the
Commissioners for the Excize, or their Sub-Commissioners or Farmers.

Thursday, the 29 of December. 1653.
ORdered by His Highness, the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by Will. du-Guard and Hen. Hills, Printers to His Highness,
the Lord Protector. 1653.


