AN ORDINANCE For settling of the ESTATES Of several Excepted Persons in
SCOTLAND in TRUSTEES to the uses herein expressed.



Wednesday April 12. 1654.

ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and his Council, That this
Ordinance beforthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.

AN ORDINANCE For settling the ESTATES of several Excepted Persons in SCOTLAND
in TRUSTEES to the uses herein expressed.
WHereas by an Ordinance, Entitled, An Ordinance of Pardon and Grace to the
People of Scotland, diverse persons, and their Estates are excepted and
reserved out of the said Ordinance, and all benefit thereof, and yet
nevertheless the Estates of the said several persons are thereby left subject
to diverse debts, charges and Encumbrances, and likewise several proportions of
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments are by the said Ordinance appointed to be
settled, for a Provision of the Wives and Children of diverse of the said
persons in such sort and under such Limitations, Provisoes and Conditions as
are expressed and contained in the said Ordinance. And whereas also the
Parliament has by several Votes and Orders given unto several persons, for
services done to this Commonwealth, diverse Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
out of the said Confiscated Lands in Scotland. For the more due and speedy
payment and satisfaction of the said Debts, Charges, and Encumbrances, and
settling the premises, so appointed by the said Ordinance, for the provision
of the said wives and Children, And for the better confirmation and assurance
of the premises so given by the Parliament unto the said respective persons, Be
it Ordained by his Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the advice and
consent of his Council, and it is Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all
and every the Honors, Manors, Castles, Houses, Messuages, Forests. Chases,
Parks, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in Scotland, which upon the
eighteenth of April, one thousand six hundred forty and eight, or at any time
since, did belong unto James late Duke of Hamilton, William late Duke of
Hamilton, John Earl of Crawford-Lindsey, James Earl of Calender, (...) Earl
Marshall, (...) Earl of Kelley, John Earl of Lowderdail, John Earl of Lowdoun,
(...) Earl of Seaforth, (...) Earl of Athol, (...) Viscount Kenmure, (...) Lord
Lorn, Eldest Son of the Marquess of Arguile, (...) Lord Machlin eldest Son of
the Earl of Lowdoun, (...) Lord Montgomery eldest son of the Earl of
Egglintoun, George Lord Spynie, (...) Lord Cranston, (...) Lord Sincleer,
Thomas Dallyel late Major General of the Foot in the Scottish Army, John
Middletoun, late Lieutenant General of the Horse in the Scottish Army, James
Viscount Newburgh, (...) Lord Bargany, Sir Thomas Thomson, James Edmeston Lord
of Womat, (...) Lord Napeir, and William Earl of Glancarn, and all Royalties,
Privileges, Franchises, Immunities, Rents and appurtenances, to the said
Honors, Manors, Castles, Houses, Messuages, Forests, Chases, Parks, and
Lands, or any of them in Scotland belonging or appertaining, which on the said
eighteenth day of April one thousand six hundred forty and eight, or at any
time since were lawfully used, or enjoyed with them, or any of them, as part or
parcel thereof, be, and are hereby vested and settled, and adjudged and deemed
to be, and are hereby in the real and actual possession and seizin of Sir John
Hope of Craighall, William Lockard the younger Esquire Richard Saltonstal, and
Edward Siler Commissioner at Lies, Lieutenant Colonel Wilks, Deputy Governor
of Leith, David Barkley Esquire John Harpar Advocate, and the Survivors and
Survivor of them, their heirs and assigns, for the uses and purposes, hereafter
in and by this Ordinance expressed, until the sale, disposition, and conveyance
thereof, or of such part thereof as shall be requisite for the purposes
aforesaid, shall be made in such manner, as is herein directed, and the
Remainder to the use of his Highness the Lord Protector and his Successors for
the benefit of the Commonwealth.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Sir John
Hope and the rest of the Trustees before named, the Survivors and Survivor of
them, shall cause a due and exact survey to be taken and returned unto them, of
all and every the estates of the persons aforesaid, at the time aforesaid, and
of the yearly value thereof respectively, as they were worth to be let in the
year one thousand six hundred forty and nine, and also return to be made unto
them of all and every the Claims of any Estate, Right, Title or Interest of any
other person and persons in or to any the premises, and of all Debts, Charges,
and Encumbrances, charged, or chargeable upon the same, or any part thereof
respectively, and which shall be allowed by the Commissioners named in the said
Ordinance of Pardon and Grace to the People of Scotland, for determining Claims
according to the Qualifications and Provisions contained in the said Ordinance,
and thereupon in the first place, in case the respective Lands of such person
excepted, be sufficient to satisfy all the Debts, Charges, and Encumbrances so
allowed, as aforesaid, and also the provision made by the said Ordinance for
the Wife, Child or Children of such person, That then the said Sir John Hope,
and the rest of the Trustees before-named, or any four of them, shall alot and
set out unto every of the Creditors of such person so much of the said Lands,
belonging unto such excepted person, at the rate of twenty years purchase at
the least, as shall be sufficient to satisfy such Debt, Charge and Encumbrance,
and to convey the Inheritance of the said Land so set out unto such Creditor
and Creditors, and his, her and their Heirs respectively in satisfaction of the
said Debt, Charge or Encumbrance, and thereupon to take up the security, and
that such Creditor and Creditors, his and their heirs, and assigns, shall from
henceforth have, hold and enjoy all and every the Lands, and Premises so set
out and conveyed, according to such conveyance freed and discharged, in manner
as is herein provided, of and from all and all manner of Bargains, Sales,
Gifts, Grants, Mortgages, Judgments, Decrees, Iointures, Dowers, or other
Encumbrances had, made, committed, or done by such person so excepted
respectively, or any claiming under him, since the eighteenth day of April one
thousand six hundred forty and eight. And that the said Trustees shall convey
and assure unto the Wife, Child or Children of such excepted person
respectively Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of the clear yearly value
appointed unto such Wife, Child or Children by the said Ordinance respectively,
under such yearly Rent and Rents, and in such manner, as is in and by the said
Ordinance limited and appointed.

And it is further Ordained, That the said Trustees herein named, or any four
of them, shall convey and assure unto the respective persons to whom the late
Parliament has by Vote or Order of Parliament given any lands in Scotland, and
to their Heirs and Assigns, the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which have
been already allotted and set out unto them upon Survey by the Commissioners
for Sequestrations in Scotland, out of the Estates of any the persons so
excepted as aforesaid, in pursuance of such Vote or Order, and which have been
by them or their Tenants or Assigns, possessed and enjoyed, according to such
survey, and allotment, in performance of the said respective Votes and Orders
under the Rents, Conditions and Limitations in such Vote, or Order expressed
(if any be) to be by them enjoyed accordingly.

Provided always, That in case the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of such
excepted person be not sufficient to satisfy the respective Debts, Charges and
Encumbrances of such respective person, and also to make up the full provision
aforesaid, for his Wife, Child, or Children, that then the said Trustees, or
any four of them, be empowered and authorized, and are hereby empowered and
authorized to distribute all and every the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments
of every such excepted person amongst the said Creditors, and the Wife, Child
or Children of such person, so far as the same shall extend proportionably,
every of them bearing a proportionable abatement of what the Premises shall
fall short to satisfy, and to convey and assure the same so proportioned
accordingly.

Provided also, That in case any of the said persons unto whom the Parliament
has given lands in Scotland, be already settled by the said Commissioners in
any of the Lands or Estate of such excepted person, whose Lands shall not be
sufficient to satisfy his Debts, and make provision for his Wife and Children,
as aforesaid, that yet nevertheless the said Commissioners shall convey and
assure unto such person and persons, and his and their Heirs, the Lands so
allotted and set out unto him as aforesaid, and in lieu thereof, shall allot
and set forth Lands of the same value, or to such value as the Lands of such
excepted person shall fall short as aforesaid, so as the same exceed not the
full value of the premises so allotted and set out by the said Commissioners
for Sequestrations unto such person, out of the Lands and Estate of some other
of the persons excepted in the said Ordinance, of whose estate there shall be a
remainder after the Debts, Charges and Encumbrances satisfied and provision
made for his Wife and Children, as aforesaid, and shall convey the same unto
the Creditors in such sort as is before Directed and Ordained.

Provided also, That if the said Commissioners for Sequestrations have allotted
and set out unto any of the said persons to whom the Parliament gave Lands, as
aforesaid, any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of any person or persons not
excepted by the said Ordinance from Pardon, that then the said Trustees or any
four of them, be empowered and authorized to set out, convey and assure unto
such person and persons, and his and their heirs, out of the estate and estates
of one or more of the said excepted persons, which shall remain after the
Debts, Charges and Encumbrances charged or chargeable upon such estate, and
such provision for the Wife, Child, or Children of such excepted person so
satisfied and made as aforesaid, in lieu of the Lands so set out and allotted
by the said Commissioners for Sequestrations unto such person and persons as
aforesaid. And for the defraying of the incident charges in and about settling
the premsses, Be it Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
person and persons who shall bring unto the Commissioners herein named, any
Claim of any Estate, Title, Interest, Debt, Charge, or Encumbrance to, out of,
or upon any of the premises hereby vested in the said Commissioners, and a
Certificate of the allowance thereof, under the hands of the Commissioners for
allowing Claims, shall, before any allotment or conveyance shall be made unto
him, her or them, by force of this Ordinance pay in ready money unto such
person or persons as the Commissioners herein named shall appoint for that
purpose, three pence in the pound sterling, according to the value of such
Estate, Title, Interest, Debt, Charge or Encumbrance, so claimed and allowed.
And in case the Sum so paid in at the rate aforesaid, shall not be sufficient
to defray the whole charge which shall arise by the surveying allotting, and
settling of the Estate of such excepted person in manner as aforesaid, that
then it shall be lawful to and for the said Commissioners herein named, or any
four of them, to demand and receive of each of the said persons so claiming,
such further Sum and Sums of money, as his proportionable part of the said
Charge shall amount unto, which the said respective Claimers are hereby
required to pay unto such Person and Persons so appointed by the Commissioners
aforesaid. All and every which Sum and Sums of money so paid in shall be issued
and paid out by warrant of the said Commissioners or any Four of them, for
satisfying and defraying the said Charges as they shall think fir. And the said
Commissioners herein named are hereby authorized and empowered to appoint
Surveyors, if they shall find, it necessary, and also Clerks, and other
necessary Officers for this Service and to administer an Oath unto such
Surveyors as they shall find necessary to employ, for the faithful discharge of
their duty herein, and also to allow such fitting Salarirs as they shall think
fit.

Provided that this shall not extend to charge any Wife, Child or Children of
the said excepted persons, nor any person to whom any lands have been given by
the Parliament, with the payment of any Sum or Sums of money toward the said
Charge.

Wednesday April 12. 1654.

ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


