depiction of the state arms of the Commonwealth (1649-60) consisting of the
cross of St. George (patron saint of England) and the Irish harp
AN ORDINANCE For alteration of several Names and Forms heretofore used in
Courts, Writs, Grants, Patents, Commissions, etc. and settling of Proceedings in
Courts of Law, Justice and Equity, within the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, according to the present Government.
OLIVER, LORD PROTECTOR of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and the Dominions thereto belonging, having the Exercise of the chief
Magistracy, and the Administration of Government within the said Commonwealth,
invested and established in His Highness, assisted with a Council, who have
Power until the meeting of the next Parliament (which is to be on the third day
of September, now next ensuing) to make Laws and Ordinances for the Peace and
welfare of these Nations, where it shall be necessary, which shall be binding
and in force until Order shall be taken in Parliament concerning the same.

And the said LORD PROTECTOR finding it to be most necessary, that some speedy
and effectual course be taken for settling the Names, and Forms to be used in
Parents, Commissions, and Procedings in Courts of Justice, the said LORD
PROTECTOR, by, and with the Advice and Consent of His said Council, and in
pursuance of, and according to the Power and Trust reposed in Him and them,
does Declare and Ordain, And be it by the Authority aforesaid Declared and
Ordained. That in all Courts of Law, Justice or Equity, and in all Writs,
Grants, Patents, Commissions, Indictments, Informations, Suits, Returns of
Writs, and in all Fines, Recoveries, Exemplifications, Recognizances, Process
and Proceedings of Law, Justice or Equity, within the said Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging, instead of
the Name, Style, Title and Test (of the Keepers of the Liberty of England by
Authority of Parliament) heretofore used, that from and after the six and
twentieth day of December, 1653 the Name, Style, Title and Test of the LORD
PROTECTOR, for the time being, of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging, shall be used, and no other; And
the date shall be in the year of our Lord and no other.

And that all Duties, Profits, Penalties, Issues, Fines, Amercements, and
Forfeitures whatsoever, which heretofore were sued for in the name of the
K^epers of the Liberty of England by Authority of) Parliament, shall from and
after the said six and twentieth day of December be prosecuted, sued forth, and
recovered in the said name of the LORD PROTECTOR for the time being, of the
Common wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto
belonging, and no other. And in all or any of the proceedings aforesaid, where
the words were, [The Jurors for the Commonwealth] or, [The Jurors for the
Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament, do say or present
from and after the said six and twentieth day of December it shall be, The Jurors
for the LORD PROTECTOR of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
etc. do say, or present, and no other.

And all Judges, Justices, Officers and Ministers of Justice whatsoever, are to
take notice hereof, and are hereby Authorized and Required to proceed
accordingly; And whatsoever shall from and after the said six and twentieth day
of December be done contrary to this Ordinance, shall be, and is hereby
Declared to be null and void.

And it is hereby further Declared and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid,
That all Writs, Commissions, Indictments, Informations, Actions, Suits, Bills
or Plaints now depending in any of the Courts of Record at Westminster, or any
other Court of Record, And all Pleas, Demurrers, Continuances, and Proceedings
whatsoever in all and every such Indictments, Informations, Actions, Suits,
Bills and Plaints shall be returnable, stand good and effectual, and be
prosecuted and sued forth in such manner and form, and in the same state,
condition and order (the said Changes and Alterations to be as in this
Ordinance are particularly expressed) as if the change of Government had not
been made, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding; And that any variance that shall be occasioned by reason
thereof, touching any the said Writs, Process, or Proceedings, in the Name,
Style, Test, or otherwise, shall not be in any wise material, as concerning
any default or error to be alleged or objected thereunto.

And it is further Declared and Ordained by the said LORD PROTECTOR, with the
consent of His Council. That from and after the said six and twentieth day of
this instant December, All Indictments, Presentiments, and Inquisitions for
Treasons, Felonies, Misprisions and other Trespasses and Misdemeanors
whatsoever, the pleadings therein, and the issues thereupon, shall and may be
joined with such person and persons so Indicted, Presented, or Prosecuted by
the Clerks of the several Courts wherein such Indictments, Presentiments or
Inquisitions shall be Proceeded upon, for and on the behalf of the LORD
PROTECTOR, as his Attorney, in such sort, manner and form, as they might have
done, before the tenth day of this instant December, for and on the behalf of
the Keepers of the Liberty, Any Law, Custom or usage to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding. And be it also Declared and Ordained by the Authority
aforesaid, That all Indictments, Presentiments, and Inquisitions taken by
Coroners, And all Actions, Informations and Suits, for and on the behalf of the
Keepers of the Liberty, or for and on the behalf of the said Keepers and some
Informer or Informers, and now depending, or which did depend, in any Court of
Justice, the tenth day of December instant, shall not be discontinued, or put
without day, by this change of Government, but that the Process, Pleas,
Demurrers, Issues and Continuances in every of the said Indictments,
Presentiments, Inquisitions, Actions, Informations and Suits, shall stand good
and effectual, and be continued, prosecuted, and sued forth, in such manner and
form, and in the same Estate, Condition, and Order, as the same were at the
tenth day of December aforesaid; And that all manner of Judicial process that
shall be had or pursued since the said tenth day of this instant December, upon
the said Indictments, Presentiments, Inquisitions, Actions, Informations or
Suits, or upon the Pleas, Demurrers, or Issues, and all proceedings thereupon,
shall be had, made and prosecuted in the Name of the LORD PROTECTOR, or as well
by Him as by the Informer or Informers; And that variance touching the same
Process and proceedings between the name of the said Keepers and the said LORD
PROTECTOR, shall not be in any wise material as concerning any default or error
to be alleged or objected for the same. And it is further Ordained, that all
Indictments, Presentiments, or Inquisitions, Actions, Suits, or Informations for
any offense committed or done in the time of the said Keepers of the Liberty,
etc. or for any Debt due to the late King or Keepers of the Liberty, etc. or
Cause of Action or Suit by Him or them, and were to be had, made, done, or
prosecuted in the Name of the said late King or the Keepers of the Liberty,
etc. and an Informer or Informers respectively, the same shall be had, made,
done, and prosecuted, in the Name, and on the behalf of the LORD PROTECTOR, or
in his Name, and the Name of some Informer or Informers, as the Case shall
require, in such sort as where such offenses were committed, or where such
Cause of Action was in one Kings time, and the Indictments, Presentiments,
Inquisitions, Actions, Informations and Suits, were to be in another Kings
time, saving that the Name of the said LORD PROTECTOR shall be used in the
stead and place of the succeeding King, or the Keepers of the Liberty, etc. And
it is likewise Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all Indictments,
Presentiments, Inquisitions, Actions, Informations, or Suits, for any offense
had, made, committed or done since the death of the late King, or for any debt,
duty, or matter growing due, or cause of Action arising since that time, shall
be had, made, done and prosecuted in the Name and for the behalf of the LORD
PROTECTOR of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, or in the Name
of Him and an Informer or Informers, as the Case shall require; And that the
Alterations, Additions, and Omissions in this Ordinance mentioned, shall extend
as well unto Appeals as Indictments, Presentiments, and Inquisitions, as the Case
shall require.

And it is further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That in all Oaths to be
given to any Grand Jury or Petty Jury, or to, or for any Witnesses to give in
Evidence to any such Jury or Iuries, and in all other Oaths wherein the name of
Keepers of the Liberty, etc. was wont to be used, the same shall be given in
the name of the LORD PROTECTOR instead of the name of the said Keepers, etc.
any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And it
is lastly Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That such forms and course of
proceedings as were heretofore used in the name and time of the Keepers of the
Liberty, etc. in Causes Criminal or Civil, and of which no alteration is made
in this Ordinance, shall stand and continue to be so used and observed as
formerly; And that all Indictments, Presentiments, Inquisitions, Commissions,
and Captions made with such Alterations, Additions, or Omissions, as aforesaid,
or with such other Omissions, Additions, or Alterations as shall be proper and
necessary for making good of Indictments, Presentiments, Commissions, Captions
and Inquisitions, and supplying the sense and meaning thereof, according to the
present Government of this Commonwealth under the LORD PROTECTOR as aforesaid,
shall stand and be good and effectual in Law to all intents and purposes, as if
the same had been particularly herein named, Any Law, Custom, or Usage to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Monday the 26. of December, 1653.
Ordered by His Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

HEN. SCOBELL, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to his Highness the Lord Protector,
MDCLIII.


