seal of the Commonwealth of England
AN ORDER AND DECLARATION OF His Highness and His Council, FOR Continuing the
Committee for the ARMY.
WHereas in pursuance of the seven and twentieth Article of the Government, His
Highness the Lord Protector and Council, did by their Order and Declaration,
(Entitled, An Order and Declaration of His Highness and the Council for an
Assessment of Threescore thousand pounds by the Month for Six Months, from
the 24. day of June, 1656. to the 25. of December following, and published in
print the Fifth day of February 1655.) appoint an Assessment for Six Months,
after the rate of Threescore thousand pounds by the Month, to commence from
the 24. day of June as aforesaid; And in the said Order and Declaration, did
enjoin and require the several and respective Commissioners, Receivers-General,
Collectors, Sub-collectors, who are or shall be entrusted or employed in the
assessing, levying, collecting, or receiving of the said Six Months
Assessments, or any part thereof, to observe such Orders and Directions as
shall from time to time be made and given forth by the Commissioners for the
Treasury, or by the Committee or Commissioners for the Army, or any three of
them: Now for the more effectual putting in execution of the said Order and
Declaration, It is Ordered by His Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the
advice and consent of his Council, That the several and respective persons, or
any three or more of them, named and appointed to be a Committee for the Army
in an Ordinance, Entitled, An Ordinance appointing a Committee for the Army
and Treasurers at War, published the 28. of January 1653. shall be, and are
hereby continued and authorized to be a Committee for the Army; which said
Committee for the Army, are hereby enjoined and required to put the said Order
and Declaration in execution accordingly.

And it is further Ordered, That all and every the Powers and Authorities,
Rules and Directions, which were by the last recited Ordinance, or by any Act
or Ordinance therein mentioned, expressed to be given to the said Committee for
the Army, for the bringing in, receiving, disposing, and issuing forth of the
Assessments, and Moneys in that Ordinance mentioned, shall be, and are hereby
given and continued to the Committee for the Army, for the bringing in,
receiving, disposing, and issuing forth of the said Six Months Assessment,
commencing the 24. of June 1656. to all intents and purposes, and of all other
Moneys, that are, or before the 25. of December, 1656. shall be appointed for,
or toward the maintenance of the Armies of this Commonwealth: And the
Treasurers at War, and also the several and respective Commissioners,
Receivers-General, Collectors, Sub-collectors, and all other persons, who are,
or shall be entrusted or employed in the Assessing, Levying, Collecting, and
Payment of the said Six Months Assessment, or any part thereof, shall observe
such Orders and Directions, as shall from time to time be made and given forth
by the said Committee for the Army, or any three or more of them, in the due
execution of the Powers and Trust hereby continued and committed unto them.

Thursday 10. of July, 1656.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, That this Order
and Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the
Lord Protector, 1656.


