AN ORDINANCE For the better Maintenance and Encouragement of Preaching
Ministers, And for uniting of PARISHES.

seal of the Commonwealth

Saturday September 2. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.

seal of the Commonwealth AN ORDINANCE For the better maintenance and
encouragement of Preaching Ministers, and for Uniting of PARISHES.
Whereas many Parishes in this nation are without ye constant and powerful
preaching of ye Gospel, through want of competent maintenance and encouragement
unto able and godly Ministers in such places: Some Parishes in regard of their
smalness, and of their propinquity and neighborhood hood, and the situation of
their Churches or places of meeting being very convenient to be united; and
other Parishes are so populous and of so great an extent, that all the
Inhabitants thereof cannot with convenience resort to their respective Parish
Churches; To the end some provision may be made herein, and the public
maintenance set apart for Ministers, and other pious uses, may be managed,
improved, and distributed for the future, so as may be most for the advancement
of the Gospel and encouragement of Public Preachers in all the Places of this
Commonwealth: And that the Augmentations granted, or which shall be granted
out of the same, may be more orderly issued and certainly paid, and the Revenue
not overcharged; And whereas some doubts have been made, whether the Rents,
Profits and Revenues of all Rectories Impropriate, Appropriate, Tyths,
Donatives, Oblations, Obventions, First Fruits, Tenths, Pentions, Portions of
Tyths appropriate, and other things vested and settled in the Trustees named in
one Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for providing maintenance for preaching
Ministers, and other pious uses; and in one other Act of Parliament, Entitled,
An Additional Act for providing maintenance for Ministers, and other pious
uses; or either of them for the uses therein mentioned, ought not by force of
the Ordinance, Entitled, An Ordinance for bringing the public Revenues of
this Commonwealth into one Treasury, to be paid into the Receipt of his
highness Exchequer.

Be it Ordained and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Ordinance, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend, or be construed to
extend to any the Rents, Profits, or Revenues by the said Acts or any, or
either of them, vested in the said Trustees.

But it is hereby Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
Rectories Impropriate, Appropriations, Tithes appropriate, Donatives,
Oblations, Obventions, First Fruits, Tenths, Pentions, Portions of Tyths, and
other the premises by the said Acts or either of them vested in the said
Trustees, and not exposed to sale by one other Act, Entitled, An Act for sale
of the Manors of Rectories and Gleab-lands late belonging to the Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, shall from henceforth be vested and settled
in the possession and seisin of William Steel Esquire Sergeant at Law, Recorder of
the City of London, Sir John Thorowgood of Kensington Knight, George Cowper,
Richard Young, John Pocock, Ralph Hall, Richard Sydenham, Edward Hopkins, John
Humfry and Edward Cresset, the Survivor and Survivors of them, and their heirs
to the uses, and upon the Trusts in the said Acts expressed, and to such
further uses as are hereafter expressed. And that they or any five or more of
them shall have use, exercise and enjoy all and every the powers and
authorities by the said Acts or any, or either of them given and committed to
the Trustees in the said two first recited Acts named to all intents and
purposes.

And that they the said Trustees, or any five or more of them shall, or may by
Action, Distress, Information, or by any other lawful ways, or means
whatsoever from time to time, sue for, recover, receive, collect and gather and
cause to be received, collected and gathered the Rents, Issues and Profits
thereof, as lawful and rightful Owners thereof in trust as aforesaid, and
manage the said Revenue in such way and manner as shall be most conduceable
for the carrying on of this service; And shall have the same, and the like
powers for removing such Obstructions as they shall meet with, concerning the
said Revenue, that any Commissioners have for removing Obstructions, concerning
the sale of Bishops, or Dean and Chapters Lands, and to compound for all Corn
rent, or other provision rent, reserved upon any Lease of any part of the
premises for an yearly rent in money.

And whereas several Delinquents, being seized, possessed, and interessed of
and in several Rectories, and portions of Tyths, or Impropriations
respectively, have had an abatement in their Compositions in respect of them,
or in lieu of so much of their Composition money as amounted unto the full
value thereof, did convey or agree to convey the same unto several Trustees for
Augmentation of Ministers maintenance in the Conveyances thereof, mentioned or
the same are otherwise settled and disposed of; which Trustees do many of them
altogether neglect the trust in them reposed, and the said Revenue is in no
part of it under any certain account.

Be it further Ordained, That all Trustees that stand seized or possessed of
any Impropriate Rectories, or Tyths, or any estate wherewith the same stand
chargeable respectively by virtue of any such conveyance, order or agreement as
aforesaid, be from henceforth divested of the possession, seisin, interest and
estate, which they have in the premises respectively by virtue of the said
conveyances or any agreement, or order in that behalf, and of all Trusts
concerning the same. And that the said William Steel, and the rest of the said
Trustees hereby appointed, their heirs, Executors and Assigns, shall stand
seized, and shall have, hold and enjoy the said Tithes, Estates and premises
so reserved or settled or agreed ordered to be settled, and all arrears
thereof, and all Evidences and Writings concerning the same to the same uses;
and they are by authority hereof vested, and possessed thereof, and of all
arrears thereof upon the same trusts as they the said Trustees had or ought to
have the same by virtue of the said Conveyances, Orders or Agreements
respectively, and to such other uses as are hereafter expressed. And that they
the said William Steel, and the rest of the aforenamed Trustees, or any five or
more of them, shall enquire into and make search for the several Grants made by
the said Delinquents as aforesaid, and settle the same, so as the Ministers
that ought to receive the benefit and advantage thereof shall and may enjoy the
same, and all arrears thereof with the least charge. And all persons employed
about the contracting for and settling of the same, or in whose hands any of
the said writings, or Conveyances, Counterparts, Orders, or other writings
concerning the same are, are hereby required upon the request of the said
Trustees under the hands of them, or any three of them, to show and produce as
there shall be occasion, or to deliver the same to the said Trustees, or any
three or more of them if the same be demanded.

And the said Trustees, or any five or more of them, are hereby authorized to
send into the high Court of Chancery for the returns or for the true Copies of
the returns of such Commissions as have issued under the great Seal by virtue,
and in pursuance of the said recited Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for
providing maintenance for preaching Ministers, and other pious uses. And the
Clerk (in whose Custody the same returns are) is hereby directed and required
as often as he shall be thereunto required by the said Trustees, to make copies
of all returns, and to deliver the same to the said Trustees, or any three or
more of them, or the Clerk formerly appointed by Parliament to the said Trustees
(who is hereby continued Clerk to the Trustees hereby appointed) for the
service of the said Trustees.

And in case the said Trustees by this Act appointed, shall find it requisite
by reason of any defect or imperfection of any return of the said Commissions
and Executions thereof, or by reason of the not executing of any former
Commission, or in default of the issuing forth of any such Commission, That
then in every such case upon their request certified and declared under the
hands and Seals of them, or any three of them, to the Lords Commissioners for
the Great Seal of England, wherein they are to certify the names of such
persons to whom they desire the said Commission or Commissions to be directed,
The said Lords Commissioners do issue forth such New Commission and
Commissions, according to the former tenor, into such Countries and Places as
shall be by the said Trustees so requested as aforesaid.

And it is hereby further Ordained, That all the Commissions from henceforth so
to be issued as aforesaid, shall also contain in them a further additional
clause, and power for the enquiring, touching the yearly value of all
Ecclesiastical Livings and Benefices without Cure of Souls, and what person or
persons do now receive the profits of the same, and for whose use, and who is
the Patron thereof, within the Limits of such Counties or Cities within which
they are directed to enquire, and to certify the same into the Chancery, and a
Duplicate thereof unto the said Trustees or their Register, for the use of the
said Trustees.

And if upon view and consideration of any of the said Retorns of the said
former Commissions already issued and executed, or of any the Commissions
hereafter to be issued forth, executed or returned, the said Trustees shall
find it convenient and advantageous as aforesaid, to make any Unions of two
Parishes or more, into one; and the whole Ecclesiastical Revenues, Tithes and
Profits belonging to the said Parishes so united, to be supplied for a
Provision for one godly and painful Minister to preach in such of the said
Parish Churches, where such Union shall be made, as they the said Trustees
shall so judge most convenient as aforesaid: That then the said Trustees as
often as they shall see cause to make any such Union, shall present the same to
His Highness and His Council, upon whose approvation the said Trustees, or any
five or more of them shall declare by some Instrument in writing under five or
more of their Hands and Seals, That they do thereby unite such two or more
Parishes into one, for the ends aforesaid, and thereby appoint where the
meeting of the Inhabitants of both the said Parishes for the Public worship of
God shall be, and the same Instrument after being enrolled in the Court of
Chancery, from and after such inrollment, the said Parishes shall stand and be
consolidated and united for the purposes aforesaid, and are hereby declared and
shall be from thenceforth deemed and adjudged, and taken to be consolidated and
united for the better maintenance of an able and godly Minister.

And all the said Inhabitants (living within the bounds and precincts of the
said united Parishes) shall from and after such inrolment made, pay unto the
Minister of the said united Parishes all their Tyths, Duties and Profits, which
were before payable or belonging to the Incumbents or Curats of the said
Parishes, and every or any of them; And shall likewise pay their rateable part
and proportion. for the repairing and amending of such Church or Public
meeting place within the Precincts of the said Union, and for all other things
necessary to be had or used in or about the said Church or meeting place.

And it is hereby further Ordained, That the Churchwardens shall be from time
to time chosen for the said Parishes so united distinctly as formerly, which
being so chosen shall all of them be Church Wardens of the said Church, as to
the repair and necessaries of the said Church, and Duties belonging to the same.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That where such Union
as aforesaid shall be made of two or more Parishes, whereof there be several
Patrons, That the respective Patrons shall present by turns to the avoidances
thereof, the Priority wherein shall be ascerrained by the said Trustees in the
aforesaid Instrument. And in case either of the said Livings so to be united as
aforesaid, exceed the other double or more in value, The Patron of the living
of greatest value shall present twice for the others once.

Provided, That in case it shall happen upon any union to be made as aforesaid,
the said Churches so to be united shall be full of Incumbents, That the said
Union shall take place upon the next avoidance of either of the said Churches,
or ejection or removal of either of the said Incumbents, and not before.

And it is hereby also Ordained, That notwithstanding any such Union to be made
by virtue hereof, each of the Parishes so united shall continue distinct as to
all Rates, Taxes, Parochial Rites, Charges and Duties, and all other
Privileges, Liberties and respects whatsoever other then what is herein before
mentioned and specified.

Provided also, That where any person or persons shall at their own charge
advance and settle a competent maintenance for the Minister of any Parish
Church to be approved according to the Ordinance for approbation of Public
Preachers, there shall be no Union for so long as such maintenance shall endure
of any such Parish by virtue hereof.

And where any such Union shall be made as aforesaid, it shall be lawful to and
for the said Trustees, or any five or more of them, to cause such Church or
Chapel as upon the said Union shall be found useless, to be taken down, and
the materials converted to a joint stock for the repairing, enlarging, and
accomodating of the Church, or Public meeting place which shall be continued
for the Inhabitants of the said Parishes, and not employed, to any other use.

And it is further Ordained, That the said Trustees, or any five or more of
them, shall have power to sever and divide Parishes, where they shall conceive
it needful, and fix such maintenance, out of the profits of the said Church so
to be divided, as they shall think fit, to be approved of by the Parliament, and
in the intervals of Parliament, by his Highness the Lord Protector and his
Council.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That in all cases where
the said Trustees shall think fit to unite two or more Parishes, so as
aforesaid, whereby the maintenance shall arise to the yearly value of one
hundred pounds or upwards, that in all such Cases, from and after the time
wherein such union and Consolidation shall take effect, any Augmentation,
granted to either of the places so united, or to either of the Ministers there,
shall from thenceforth cease and be discharged; And where the said Trustees
shall find any Augmentation granted unto any Country Parish, or to the Preacher
there, which together with the yearly profits and dues belonging to the said
Church shall amount unto above one hundred pounds per annum, that the said
Trustees shall have power to take off so much of the said Augmentation, as
together with the said yearly profits and dues does exceed one hundred pounds
per annum.

And the said Trustees, or any five or more of them have hereby power to review
all augmentations already granted, or was full and ample manner as the late
Committee for regulating the Universities were empowred to do; and with the
approbation of his Highness and the Council to allow, disallow or alter such
Augmentations, and to grant Augmentations and allowances out of the aforesaid
Revenue to such other Places, or Public Preachers, or Schoolmasters in such
Places, as they shall think fit, with the approbation of his Highness, and the
Council.

Provided, That this Ordinance or any thing therein contained shall not extend
to abate, diminish or discharge any augmentation of a greater value than
aforesaid, a ready granted by his Highness, and his Council, without the
consent of his Highness and his Council first declared in that behalf; nor to
restrain the said Trustees from granting Augmentations to Preachers in Cities
and Market Towns where there shall be cause of a greater proportion than as
aforesaid.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That they the said
Trustees, or any five or more of them do, and they are hereby authorized, to
take an exact Account of the yearly value of the whole Revenue hereby settled as
aforesaid, as also what Leases, are yet in being, and of how long continuance,
and what improvement may be made thereof upon the expiration of the said Leases
respectively, as also what augmentations, or annual payments or charges of any
charitable pious, or other uses the premises or any of them stand charged
with, and to what uses, and to cast up and compute the same; and to take care
that the same be managed, and the said profits, Rents and Revenues and all
Arrears thereof, collected and gathered with least charge, and with the best
advantage and security, and the payments made with least trouble to the persons
concerned; and to take an Account how the Rents and Profits of the Premises,
vested in the aforesaid Trustees by the aforesaid Acts, have been employed and
managed since the making of the said Acts, or either of them; and also to call
to an Account all Collectors, Receivors, and other Officers of the said
Revenue, and to send for all Books of accounts, and all other books and
writings needful for the effecting hereof, and examine or cause to be examined
their accounts, and the moneys in their hands, or in the hands of any Tenants
or others from within the same shall appear due from time to time to be paid
in; and to cause and exact Account to be made up yearly of all receipts and
payments; and to appoint Officers needful; and to allow fitting salaries and
allowances, and all incident charges necessary for the former or future
carrying on the said service; and to examine the salaries and allowances made
by the Trustees, in the aforesaid Acts named, unto their Clerks, Tresurers,
Collectors, Receivers, or other Officers, and to lessen or increase their
number, and allow or disallow the said Salaries or allowances if they shall see
cause; and to manage the whole revenue so as may be for the best advantage of
the said service.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be
paid unto each of the said Trustees for the said service one hundred pounds per
annum out of the Revenues aforesaid, to be paid half yearly by the Treasurers
by warrant from the said Trustees, or any six of them.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Trustees
do within four months deliver into his highness Court of exchequer a
particular of all the present Revenues aforesaid, and what Leases are in being,
and of how long continuance, and shall yearly exhibit under the hands of them,
or any five of them, into the Court of exchequer on the second Thursday of
every easter Term, a perfect account of all the Receipts and payments out of
the said Revenue.

And lastly be it Ordained, That as often as any four of the Trustees
beforenamed, or the Trustees hereafter to be named shall by or be deceased, the
six surviving Trustees shall, within two months next atter by Feoffinent, or
other good assurance, settle all and singular the premises to the use of
themselves, and such other persons as the Lord Protector and his Council shall
appoint upon the Trusts in and by this Ordinance expressed.

Saturday September. 2. 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and his Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


