seal of the CommonwealthAN ORDINANCE For further DOUBLING UPON Deans and
Chapters Lands.
HIs Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, having taken into
consideration, and being fully satisfied, That over and above the several Sums
of Three hundred thousand pounds, One hundred and twenty thousand pounds,
Twenty thousand pounds, and Two thousand pounds, by several Acts and Ordinances
appointed to be borrowed upon the securities held forth in several Acts of
Parliament, and Ordinances of His Highness and the Council; as also the sum of
Six thousand eight hundred ninety two pounds and five shillings, charged upon
the Lands of Deans, Deans and Chapters, Manors of Rectories, Gleab Lands, etc.
there is yet a further sum wanting to enable the Purchasers to satisfy the
money due upon their respective Contracts; which the remainder of the said
Lands, after all the moneys and debts already charged thereupon, will be
sufficient to satisfy: Be it therefore Ordained by His Highness the Lord
Protector, by and with the Advice and Consent of His Council, That over and
above the said several sums of Three hundred thousand pounds, One hundred and
twenty thousand pounds. and Twenty thousand pounds, and Two thousand pounds
borrowed as aforesaid; as also the said sum of Six thousand eight hundred
ninety two pounds five shillings, charged upon the said Lands of the Creditors
of Peter Smart deceased, the sum of Five thousand pounds shall be further
borrowed upon the security of the premises exposed to sale by the said Acts and
Ordinances, or either of them, in such sort, and according to the Rules,
Directions, Restrictions, Clauses, Conditions and Penalties, mentioned and
contained in the Ordinance, whereby the Twenty thousand pounds aforesaid was
appointed to be borrowed: And that all and every Person and Persons, Bodies
Politic or Corporate, to whom any Debts capable of Doubling by the Rules
aforesaid shall be due; and his and their respective Assigns, and all persons
doubling such Debts, and their respective Assigns, shall have all and the like
Liberties, Privileges, Benefits and Advantages respectively, in reference to
the premises, as any person or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, their or
any of their Assigns might or ought to have by the before recited Ordinances,
appointing the doubling of the said Twenty thousand pounds, and Two thousand
pounds, or either of them.

And be it further Ordained, That the respective Trustees, Contractors,
Register Treasurers, Registers-Accomptant, Survey or General, and all other
Officers attending the sale of the premises, and every of them, be hereby
authorized and required in all things relating to the sum and sums of money
which shall grow due upon doubling of any such Debts, by force of this Ordinance
to pursue the Directions in the beforementioned Ordinances, given in relation
to the moneys doubled, or which shall grow due upon the security thereof.

And whereas there is due unto Richard Shute of London, Merchant, the sum of
One thousand pounds by him advanced, upon an Ordinance of Parliament of the One
and Twentyeth of October, One thousand six hundred forty three, to the use of
Sir Thomas Middleton Kut. which by the said Ordinance the Committee for
Sequestrations for London were to repay within Six months, with alowance after
the rate of Eight pounds per cent. Whereupon nevertheless no money has been
yet paid; Be it Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Richard
Shute, his Executors or Assigns, shall be admitted to double the said sum of
One thousand pounds, and the Interest due for the same in part of the sum to be
doubled upon this Ordinance, as money due upon the public Faith: And that the
Trustees, Treasurers, Registers-Accomptant, and all other whom it may concern,
do admit and allow the said Richard Shute or his Assigns, to double the same
accordingly.

Saturday September. 2. 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and his Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by William du-Gard, and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.


