AN ORDER AND DECLARATION OF His Highness and the Council, FOR AN ASSESSMENT OF
Sixty thousand Pounds per mensem, for Six Months; From the Five and twentieth
of December 1655, to the Four and twentieth of June 1656.

Royal Anglo-Irish blazen or coat of arms.

Tuesday the 27th of November, 1655.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector, and the Council, That this Order
and Declaration be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, MDCLV.

AN ORDER AND DECLARATION OF His Highness and the Council, FOR An Assessment Of
Sixty thousand Pounds per mensem, for Six Months, from the Twenty fifth of
December 1655, to the Twenty fourth of June 1656.
WHereas in the Seven and twentieth Article of the Government of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, it is expressed as follows,
That a constant yearly Revenue shall be raised, settled and established, for
Maintaining Ten thousand Horse and Dragoons, and Twenty thousand Foot in
England, Scotland and Ireland, for the Defense and Security thereof, and also
for a convenient number of Ships for guarding the Seas, besides two Hundred
thousand pounds per Annum, for defraying other necessary Charges for
Administration of Justice, and other Expenses of the Government; which Revenue
shall be raised by the Customs, and such other ways and means as shall be
agreed upon by the Lord Protector and Council, and shall not be taken away or
diminished, nor the way agreed upon for Raising the same, altered, but by
consent of the Lord Protector and the Parliament; And whereas in pursuance of
the said Seven and twentieth Article of the Government upon Consideration had
by His Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, how the said Revenue might
be raised with greatest ease to the People, It was Agreed upon and Declared by
His Highness and His Council, That the same should be raised (among other
things) by the Customs and Subsidies upon Goods and Merchandises, and by the
Duty of Excize and New-Impost, and by a Tax of Eighty thousand Pounds per
mensem, to be raised in England, Scotland and Ireland, from and after the Five
and twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred fifty and four, whereof
the Proportion to be raised in England, is also agreed by His Highness and His
Council, not to exceed the Sum of Threescore thousand Pounds by the Month, to
be Assessed, Taxed, Levied, Collected and Paid, (saving as is hereafter
expressed) in such manner, and by such ways and means, as the Sum of One hundred
and twenty thousand pounds by the Month, by an Act of Parliament, Entitled,
An Act for an Assessment, at the Rate of One hundred and twenty thousand Pounds
by the Month, for Six Months, from the Twenty fifth day of December, One
thousand six hundred fifty and three, to the Four and twentieth day of June
then next ensuing, toward the Maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this
Commonwealth, was appointed to be Taxed, Assessed, Levied, Collected and Paid,
and according to the several Rates and Proportions of the Moiety of the
respective Sums by the said Act set upon the respective Counties, Cities and
Places therein mentioned; That is to say, UPon the County of Bedford, the Sum
of Eight hundred pounds. The County of Berks, the Sum of Nine hundred thirty
three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The City and County of the City of
Bristol, the Sum of One hundred forty six pounds thirteen shillings and four
pence. The County of Buckingham, the Sum of One thousand one hundred pounds.
The County of Cambridge, the Sum of Nine hundred and forty five pounds. The
Isle of Ely, the Sum of Three hundred and fifteen pounds. The County of
Chester, the Sum of Six hundred and sixty pounds. The City and County of the
City of Chester, the Sum of Seventy three pounds six shillings and eight pence.
The County of Cornwall, the Sum of One thousand four hundred pounds. The County
of Cumberland, the Sum of Ninety two pounds eleven shillings and four pence.
The County of Derby, the Sum of Eight hundred pounds. The County of Devon, the
Sum of Two thousand five hundred seventy four pounds thirteen shillings and
four pence. The City and County of the City of Exon, the Sum of Ninety two
pounds. The County of Dorset, the Sum of Eleven hundred twenty four pounds
three shillings and four pence. The Town and County of Pool, the Sum of Nine
pounds three shillings and four pence. The County of Durham, the Sum of One
hundred thirty one pounds fifteenshillings one penny farthing. The County of
York, with the City and County of the City of York, the Sum of Two thousand six
hundred and eight pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The Town and County
of Kingston upon Hull, the Sum of Fifty and eight pounds. The County of Essex,
the Sum of Three thousand pounds. The Couty of Gloucester, the Sum of One
thousand three hundred ninety four pounds. The City and County of the City of
Gloucester, the Sum of One hundred thirty nine Pounds six Shillings and eight
pence. The County of Hereford, the Sum of One thousand pounds. The County of
Hertford, the Sum of One thousand two hundred pounds. The County of Huntington,
the Sum of Five hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The
County of Kent, with the City and County of the City of Canterbury, the Sum of
three thousand one hundred thirty three pounds six shillings eight pence. The
County of Lancaster, the Sum of Eight hundred pounds. The County of Leicester,
the Sum of Nine hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The
County of Lincoln, with the City and County of the City of Lincoln, the Sum of
Two thousand three hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence.
The City of London, the Sum of four thousand pounds. The County of Middlesex,
with the City and Liberty of Westminster, the Sum of One thousand five hundred
thirty three pounds six shillings eight pence. The County of Monmouth, the Sum
of Four hundred pounds. The County of NORTHAMPTON, the Sum of One Thousand two
hundred pounds. The County of Notingham, the Sum of Seven hundred seventy four
pounds four shillings. The Town and County of the Town of Notingham, the Sum of
Twenty five pounds sixteen shillings. The County of Norfolk, the Sum of Three
thousand one hundred and six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The City
and County of the City of Norwich, the Sum of One hundred and sixty pounds. The
County of Northumberland, the Sum of One hundred fifty four pounds five
shillings six pence three farthings. The Town of Newcastle, the Sum of Thirty
pounds and ten shillings. The County of Oxon, the Sum of Nine hundred sixty six
pounds thirteen, shillings and four pence. The County of Rutland, the Sum of
Two hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The County of
Salop, the Sum of One thousand one hundred thirty three pounds six shillings
and eight pence. The County of Stafford, the Sum of Seven hundred eighty eight
pounds. The City and County of the City of Litchfield, the Sum of Twelve
pounds. The County of Somerset, the Sum of Two thousand three hundred thirty
three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The County of Southampton, with the
town and County of the City of Southampton, the sum of One thousand seven
hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of
Suffolk, the sum of Three thousand one hundred thirty three pounds six
shillings and eight pence. The county of Surrey, the sum of One thousand three
hundred forty one pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The Borough of
Southwark, the sum of One hundred fifty eight pounds six shillings and eight
pence. The county of Sussex, the sum of One thousand six hundred thirty three
pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Warwick, with the city and
county of the city of Coventry, the Sum of One thousand sixty six pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence. The county of Worcester, the sum of One
thousand and thirteen pounds six shillings and eight pence. The city and county
of the city of Worcester, the sum of fifty three pounds six shillings and eight
pence. The county of Wilts, the sum of One thousand six hundred sirty six
pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The county of Westmerland, the sum of
sixty three pounds eight shillings. The Isle of Anglesey, the sum of One
hundred and sixteen pounds six shillings and eight pence. The County of
Brecknock, the sum of three hundred and ten pounds. The county of Cardigan, the
sum of three hundred sixty six pounds. The county of Carmarthen, the sum of
three hundred and two pounds. The county of Carnarvan, the sum of One hundred
seventy three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Denbigh, the
sum of Two hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The
county of Flint, the Sums of One hundred and sixteen pounds six shillings and
eight pence. The county of Glamorgan, the Sum of three hundred ninety and three
pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Merioneth, the sum of one
hundred and six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The county of
Montgomery, the sum of two hundred fifty three pounds six shillings and eight
pence. The county of Pembroke, the sum of three hundred forty eight pounds.
The county of Radnor, the sum of two hundred and eighteen pounds. The Town of
Haverford-West, the sum of twelve pounds and ten shillings. The Town of
Berwick, the sum of five pounds


By which Agreement and Declaration of His Highness and His Council, It is
Provided, That in case the Moneys arising by the Customs, and other the
Revenues therein mentioned, should be improved and amount unto a greater yearly
value then they were at the time of making the said Agreement, or any other
Revenue or Moneys shall be added or accrue to the Use of Commonwealth, in such
Case there shall be a proportionable Abatement of the said Monthly Assesment;
His Highness the Lord Protector and His Council, in pursuance of the said
Twenty Seventh Article of the Government, and of the said Agreement and
Declaration aforesaid, and for preventing the Burden and Evils attending
Freequarter, which must otherwise unavoidably fall upon this Nation, do Declare
and Order, That the said Sum of threescore thousand pounds by the Month for
Six Months, commencing from the four and twentieth day of December, one
thousand six hundred fifty five, shall be Taxed, Assessed Levied, Collected and
Paid in the several Coudties and Places, in such manner, and by such ways and
means, and according to the several Rates and prooortions before hereby set
down and expressed; And do Order and Require the several Commissioners and
other Persons nominated and mentioned in the beforementioned Act, and such
others, as by any Order of that Parliament, or of His Highness the
Lord-Protector and His Council, have been since added as Commissioners, or so
many of them as by the said Act are thereunto respectively authorized, to Use,
Exercise and put in Execution all and every the Powers and Authorities for the
Assessing, Levying, Collecting and Paying the present Six Months Assessment
hereby appointed; as also the Arrears of all former Assessments, which they had
or were empowered to Use and Exercise by the said recited Act, for the
Assessing, Collecting, Levying and Payment of the aforesaid six Months
Assessment of One hundred and twenty thousand pounds by the Month: And for the
better effecting thereof, the several and respective Commissioners for the said
respective Counties, Cities and Towns, shall meet together at the most common
and usual place of Meeting, in each of the said Counties, Cities and Towns
respectively, on or before the twenty seventh day of December 1655. And the
said Commissioners, or so many of them as shall then and there attend and be
present, shall put this present Order in execution, for the directing,
managing, levying and bringing in the said Monthly Assessment hereby required;
and shall then, if they see cause, appoint a second general Meeting on or
before the tenth day of January then next following, to the end the Rules and
Directions aforesaid may be as is before declared, timely prosecuted and
observed, so as the full sum of the first Three Months Assessment, charged
upon each Division, Hundred, Parish and Place, may be at once wholly collected
and paid in to the respective Receivers General, at or before the thirty one
day of January now next coming, and the latter Three Months Assessment to be
also fully Collected and Paid in to the respective Receivers-General, at or
before the fourteenth of March then next following. And it is further Ordered,
That in case the way and manner of Assessing by a Survey and Poundrate, in such
sort as is prescribed by the said recited Act, shall prove prejudicial and
obstructive to the Bringing in of the Six Months Assessment aforesaid, by the
times limited for paying in of the same; That then, and in all such cases, the
said Commissioners in any of the said Counties, Cities, Towns and places in the
said Act mentioned, where such Obstructions shall be or happen, or the major
part of them present at their General-Meeting, may, and are hereby Authorized,
for the Removal of such Obstructions, to proceed according to the most just and
equal way of Rates held in such places, in the Proportioning, Levying and
Assessing the respective Sums charged upon them and every of them, according to
the Directions of an Ordinance of the Eighth of June, One thousand six hundred
fifty four, for an Assessment for Six Months thereby appointed: And the
several and respective Commissioners, Receivers-General, Collectors,
Sub-Collectors, and all other persons, who are or shall be Entrusted or
Employed in the Assessing, Levying, Collecting or Receiving of the said Six
Months Assessments, or any part thereof, are hereby Enjoined and Required to
observe such Orders and Directions as shall from time to time be made and given
forth by the Commissioners for the Treasury, or by the Committee or
Commissioners for the Army, or any three of them, in and concerning the
premises, Provided always, and it is hereby Ordered, That in stead of
Treasurers at Wars mentioned in the said Act, the Receivers-General for this
whole Six Months Assessment, shall be, and are hereby authorized and empowered
to Receive from the Receivers-General of the respective Counties, Cities and
Places, and every of them, All and every the Sums of Money hereby to be Taxed.
Assessed, Levied, Collected and Paid for the said Six Months Assessment, or
otherwise as aforesaid; and to give Acquittances and Discharges, and to make
such Alowances in and about the premises, in as full and ample manner to all
intents and purposes, as the Treasurers at War (mentioned in the said Act) by
the said Act, or by one Ordinance of the Nine and twentieth day of June, One
thousand six hundred fifty four, Entitled, An Ordinance for Continuing a
Committee for the Army, and Treasurers at War, were empowered and enabled to do:
And the said Receivers-General of the respective Counties, Cities and Places,
and every of them, are hereby Authorized and Required to make Payment of the
said several Sums which shall be by them received of all and every Collector
and Sub-Collector by virtue hereof, unto John Blackwel the younger, and Richard
Dean, Esquires, Receivers-General for this whole Six Months Assessment, at
Guild Hall London, to be by that paid in to, and accounted for in the Receipt
of His Highness Exchequer; and that all and every the Acquittance and
Acquittances of the said Receivers-General for this whole Six Months
Assessment, shall be unto the said Receivers-General for the said respective
Counties, Cities and Places, and to all other persons who shall by virtue
hereof pay any Moneys unto them for the purposes aaforesaid, a sufficient
discharge.

Wednesday Nov. 28 1655.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, that the several
persons here undernamed, be and are hereby constituted and appointed
Commissioners for the Assessment in the several Counties and places here
underwritten respectively, and they are hereby empowered to act as Commissioners
as fully to all intents and purposes, as any the Commissioners named in any
former Act, Ordinance or Order, may or have power to do.

For the County of Kent, Capt. Thomas Mannings. Mr. Robert Maschall. Mr. Will.
Jones. Capt. Laurence Knott. Peter Peke Esquire Capt. Thomas Wilson. Lieut. Col.
Crompton. Capt. Thomas Harrison. Major Edward Sharp. Mr. Antho. Bodell of
Tenterden. Mr. William Ward of Sandhurst. For the County of Suffolk, Benjamin
Gifford Governor of Languard-fort. For the County of York, the East, North and
West- riding, Col. Robert Lilburn. For the County of Devon. Henry Walter Esquire
Will. Fortescue. of Buckland Filly Esquire For the County of Berks, Capt. Edward
Scotton. Capt. Cannon. For the County of Southampton, Samuel Bull Gent.


Henry Scobel Clerk of the Council.


