AN ORDINANCE To enable such SOLDIERS As served the Commonwealth In the late
WARS, to exercise any TRADE.

seal of the commonwealth of England

Saturday September 2. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.

seal of the commonwealth of England AN ORDINANCE To enable such SOLDIERS As
served the Commonwealth In the late WARS, to exercise any TRADE.
WHereas there are diverse Soldiers who have served the Parliament and this
Commonwealth in these late Wars, some of which are Men yt used Trades, others
that were Apprentices to Trades who had not served out their times, and others
who are apt and fit for Trades; many of which, the Wars being now ended, would
willingly employ themselves in those Trades they were formerly accustomed unto,
or which they are apt and able to follow and make use of, for the getting of
their living by their labor and industry, but are hindered from exercising those
Trades in certain Cities, Corporations, and other places within this
Commonwealth, because of certain By laws and Customs of those places: And of a
Statute made in the Fifth year of the late Queen Elizabeth, prohibiting the use
of certain Trades by any person that has not served as an Apprentice to such
Trades by the space of Seven years: For remedy whereof, and to the end that
those persons that have adventured their Lives for the Safety and Preservation
of this Commonwealth, might not be deprived of a means of livelihood in the
places where they now do, or hereafter shall reside and inhabit; It is by His
Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and
Ireland, by and with the advice and consent of His Council Ordained, and be it
hereby Ordained, That all such Soldiers which have been employed in the Service
of the Parliament and Commonwealth, either in England, Scotland or Ireland, or
in any of the Dominions of the same, by the space of Four years, at any time
since the Year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundrtd forty two; And before
the Third of September, Anno Domini, One thousand six hundred fifty one, and
have not since revolted to the late Kings party, or deserted the Service of the
Parliament; or that have served by the space of two years in the Wars in
Scotland or Ireland; in the Service of the Commonwealth of England, since the
said Third day of September, One thousand six hundred fifty one; and before the
First day of this instant month of August, One thousand six hundred fifty
four; and that have heretofore used or exercised any Trade before that time, or
that were Apprentices to any Trade, though they did not serve out their
Apprentiship; or any other person employed as aforesaid in the Service of the
Parliament and Commonwealth, that is apt and able to practice any Trade, may
set up and exercise such several and respective Trades, Mysteries or
Occupations, whereunto he or they have been bound Apprentice and served any
part of his or their Time; or any Handicraft, or other Trade exercised about
Manufactures, though he was never bound Apprentice to the same, in any City or
Town Corporate, or in any other place whatsoever within this Commonwealth,
where they or any of them do or shall reside and inhabit, without any Suit, let
or molestation of any person or persons whatsoever, for or by reason of the
using of such Trade. And if any such Soldier or Soldiers shall be Sued,
Impleaded or Indicted in any Court whatsoever within this Commonwealth, for
using or exercising any such Trades as aforesaid, then the said Soldier or
Soldiers making it appear to the same Court where they are so Sued, Impleaded
or Indicted, that they have served the Parliament and Commonwealth in the late
Wars as aforesaid, shall, upon the General Issue pleaded, be found Not Guilty,
in any Plaint, Bill, Information or Indictment exhibited against them; and such
persons, who notwithstanding this Ordinance, shall prosecute their said Suit,
by Bill, Plaint, Information or Indictment, and shall have a Verdict pass
against them, or become Nonsuit therein, or discontinue their said Suit; such
person or persons shall pay unto such Soldier or Soldiers double Costs of Suit,
to be recovered as any other Costs at Common Law may be recovered: And all
Judges and Jurors before whom any such Suit, Information or Indictment shall be
brought, and all other persons whatsoever, are to take notice of this present
Ordinance, and shall conform themselves thereunto, Any Statute, Law, Ordinance,
Custom, Usage or Provision made to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided, That this Ordinance shall not extend to any such Soldier that has
been, or shall for any mis-demeanor hereafter be cashiered out of the Army: And
that no Soldier shall have the benefit of this Ordinance, that shall not prove
his Service as aforesaid, either by a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of
some Field Officer, and two Commission Officers of the Regiment wherein he
served, or some General Officer of the Army certifying his knowledge of the
Service aforesaid; and the said Certificate to be proved by one Witness at
least to be a true Certificate; or for default of such Certificate, by the
Oaths of Two credible persons at least.

Saturday September. 2. 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and his Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


