seal of the Commonwealth By the Lord Protector.
A Proclamation Of his Highness concerning a Cessation of all Acts of Hostility
between the Commonwealth of England, and that of the United Provinces, and
their respective people, and the restitution of all things taken and seized
upon by either party after the fourth of this instant May.
OLIVER Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and the Dominions thereto belonging. Whereas the Commissioners appointed by Us
to treat with the Ambassadors Extraordinary of the United Provinces; and the
said Ambassadors, by way of Explanation of the third of those Articles of
Peace, lately concluded between this Commonwealth, and that of the United
Netherlands, and for removing all questions and differences which may arise
thencefrom, Have agreed and concluded the following Article, viz. That whereas
in the third of those Articles of Peace, Union and Confederation made,
established, and promulged between the Lord PROTECTOR of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Lords the States General of the United
Provinces, It is agreed, That all Injuries, Charges and Damages, which either
party has sustained by the other since the 18/28 of May in the year one
thousand six hundred fifty two shall be taken away and forgotten in such manner
as that hereafter neither party shall pretend any matter against the other for
or upon occasion of any the aforesaid Injuries, Charges and Damages, but that
there shall be a perfect abolition of all and every of them until this present
day. And all Actions for the same shall be held and reputed void and null,
excepting such depredations as shall be committed by either side in these Seas
after the space of twelve days, and in all other places on this side the Cape
of St. Vincent, after six weeks, and from thence within the Mediterranean Sea,
and to the Equinoctial Line after ten weeks, and beyond the Equinoctial Line,
after the space of eight Months, or immediately after sufficient notice of the
said Peace given in those places. And whereas certain questions may possibly
arise about the fore-rehearsed words, which may minister occasion of debates
and disputes, The said Lord Protector, and the said States General, to the end
all manner of controversy and difference may be removed, which might arise by
reason of any thing in the aforesaid Article contained, Have unanimously
accorded and agreed, and do by these presents publish and declare to all and
singular their People and Subjects respectively, that immediately after
Publication of the Treaty of Peace, which is already done, all acts of
Hostility shall immediately cease in all places expressed in the said Article,
and in all others wheresoever. And that all depredations, damages and injuries
which shall be done or committed by one party against the other after the
fourth day of this instant May in all places whatever, mentioned in the
foresaid Article, or elsewhere, as well on this side the Line as beyond, shall
be acounted for* And all things taken or seized after the abovesaid fourth of
May, shall be restored without any form of Process, as also damages growing by
occasion thereof. And to the end this Agreement and Article may be the better
known, both parties shall Publish the same within their respective Territories
and Dominions, and straightly charge and command as well their Ships of War, as
others whether in Port, or at Sea, to observe the same.

Wherefore we having considered what is agreed as aforesaid, have confirmed and
ratified, as we do confirm and ratify the same by these presents, which we have
caused to be published, that all persons concerned therein may take notice
thereof. And we do hereby straightly charge and require all the Ships of War,
and others, either belonging to the State, or to any particular persons set
forth upon private Commissions, or otherwise, to observe the said Agreement.
And to the end none may pretend ignorance herein, The Commissioners of the
Admiralty are hereby required to give effectual notice hereof to all the Ships
of War of this State, either at Sea, or in Port, within these Dominions or
elsewhere. And the Judges of the High Court of Admiralty are also by virtue of
these presents, forthwith to call in upon their several Securities given in
that Court, all such Ships as have been set forth upon private Commissions
against the United Provinces, or the People thereof.

Given at Whitehall this first of May, in the year 1654. In witness whereof as
well the Lords Commissioners of His Highness, as the Ambassadors Extraordinary
of the States General, have signed these presents with their own hands. Done at
Westminster the 28. of April Old style, in the year 1654. H. Laurence Pres.
Gil. Pickering. E. Mountagu. Wall. Strickland. H. Beverningck. Will. Nieupoort.
Alar. P. Jongestall.


Printed and Published by His Highness special command.

London, Printed by Will. du-Gard and Hen. Hills, Printers to His Highness the
Lord Protector, 1654.


