AN ORDINANCE FOR INDEMNITY TO THE English Protestants of the Province of
Munster in IRELAND.

seal of the Commonwealth

Tuesday August 1. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.

seal of the Commonwealth
AN ORDINANCE For INDEMNITY to the English Protestants of the Province of
Munster in Ireland.
WHereas many English and British Protestants in the Province of Munster in
Ireland upon the defection of the Lords Ormond and Inchiquin were seduced and
drawn by the power and policy of the said Lords to follow them in their
treacherous revolt, whereof diverse being sensible of their offense, and
retaining still a good affection to the interest of the Commonwealth of
England, did give a real and eminent testimony thereof in their voluntary
rendition of the Towns of Cork, Youghal, Kinsale, Bandon, and diverse Forts,
Castles, and other Garrisons adjacent, and that at a time when the Army under
the Command of his Highness the Lord Protector then Lord Lieuten. of Ireland,
being at a great distance from them, and the winter season rendered ^h^ access
thereof unto them improbable; By means of which rendition diverse places of
great strength were gained without expense of blood and treasure, and the
necessities of the Army supplied by that plentiful Country, where many sick
and wounded Soldiers were tenderly cherished and provided for by the said
British and English Protestants; And diverse others of the said British and
English Protestants did before the first of December, One thousand six hundred
and forty nine submit themselves, and have ever since not only lived peaceably
under the Protection of, and obedience to the Commonwealth, but have by their
large contributions to the supply of the Army there evidenced their sense of
duty and good affection to the same; and the inferior sort of them, who
continued under the command of the said Earl of Ormond and Lord Inchiquin until
necessity enforced them to a submission, have since their said submission done
faithful service to this Commonwealth against the Rebels there; His Highness
the Lord Protector taking into consideration the concessions granted by his
Highness to invite the Return of the said Revolters to the obedience of the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, and being desirous that the same may
be duly performed and that all such as were misled into that defection by
misrepresentations from their Commanders, or by their power over them were kept
from a more early submission, might in respect of their service and
faithfulness since, taste of some grace and favor; And to the end their persons
may be secure, their minds composed, and they may be encouraged to persist in
their fidelity and obedience, and themselves, their wives and children be
enabled to live, and be useful to the Commonwealth; Be it Ordained by His
Highness by and with the advice and consent of His Council, That all persons
British and Protestants of, or in the Province of Munster in the Realm of
Ireland, shall be, and are hereby freed, acquitted and discharged of, and from
all Questions, Suit, Plea, Demand, Forfeitures, Pains, Penalties, Mulcts,
Corporal or Pecunia^y Restraints, Imprisonment or Imprisonments, Punishment or
Pun^shments, Trouble or Molestation whatsoever (other then is hereafter in this
Ordinance expressed) for any Matter or Thing by them or any of them committed
or done by Sea or Land against the Parliament or their Forces in the late War,
or any of the former Wars; and that for the matters aforesaid, there shall be
no Sequestration, Confiscation, Fine, Penalty, Forfeiture or Punishment imposed
or cont^nued upon them or any of them (otherwise than is in this Ordinance
hereafter expressed) but the same shall be put in perpetual oblivion. And also
that the Estates real and personal of all the British and Protestants of, or
in the Province of Munster aforesaid (except as is hereafter in this Ordinance
excepted and provided) shall be and are hereby freed, discharged and acquitted
of and from all Sequestrations, Confiscations, Fines, Penalties and Forfeitures
whatsoever, for any matter or thing by them or any of them committed or done in
the aforesaid Wars, and be immediately restored to all lawful Rights,
Freedoms, Privileges and immunities as fully to all intents and purposes, as
if they had made no defection, or committed or done any Crime, matter or thing
against the Commonwealth of England or the Authority thereof.

Provided, That this Ordinance or any thing herein contained shall not extend
to, or give any Power, Right, Privilege or advantage to any the person or
persons herein concerned to have or recover any arrear or satisfaction of
arrears due to him or them for his or their service done on the behalf of the
Commonwealth, before his or their defection under the Lords of Ormond and
Inchiquin, such only excepted for whom express provision is hereafter made in
this Ordinance.

Provided likewise, And be it Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all and
every the person and persons, who submitted to the Authority and Protection of
the Commonwealth of England before the first of December one thousand six
hundred forty and nine, but were not Instrumental in the rendition of the
Garrisons aforesaid, and have Estates (above all reprizes) in lands to the
clear yearly value of four hundred pounds and upwards, accoring to the value of
the said Lands in the year one thousand six hundred thirty eight, or in Goods,
or in goods and Chattles at this present to the value of eight thousand pounds
and upwards, shall be liable to satisfy and pay such Fine or Fines as shall by
persons thereto authorized be imposed on them, within twelve Months after the
seven and twentieth day of June one thousand six hundred fifty and four.

Provided also, and be it Ordained, That all and every the person and persons
who continued in Arms against the Forces of the Commonwealth of England, or
remained in obedience to the Enemy, after the first day of December one
thousand six hundred and forty nine, having Estates in Lands to the clear
yearly value (above all reprizes) of fifty pounds or upwards, according to the
value the said Lands were worth in the year one thousand six hundred thirty
eight, or at present in goods and Chattles to the value of five hundred pounds
or upwards, shall be and are hereby liable to satisfy and pay such fine or
fines, as shall by persons thereunto authorized be set and imposed on them
respectively, within twelve Months after the said seven and twentieth day of
June aforesaid.

Provided likewise that neither this Ordinance, nor any thing therein contained
shall extend or give any benefit or advantage to any person or persons therein
concerned, who since their aforesaid submission have acted or done any matter
or thing in opposition to the Comwealth of England or the Authority thereof.

And it is further Ordained and declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Commissioners for stating accounts in Ireland, named and appointed in an Act
for stating and determining the Accounts of such Officers and Soldiers as are
or have been improyed in the service of this Commonwealth in Ireland, shall be
and are hereby empowered and required to state all and every the Accounts of
such Officers and Soldiers for their Arrears grown due for service before the
said Revolt or Detection, whose names shall be certified by and according to
such Qualifications and Directions as they shall receive from the Lord Deputy
and Council in Ireland in that behalf. And the said Lord Deputy and Council are
hereby authorized and appointed to admit to this benefit, such only of the
persons included within the Concessions first abovementioned, as they (upon
the best inquiry and information they can gain upon the place) shall find to
have been forward in or promoting of the said return in Munster to the
obedience of this Commonwealth, and to lay down such general rules, or
Qualifications for the guidance of the said Commissioners of Accounts therein
as they shall see cause. And the said Commissioners for Accounts shall
thereupon proceed to state the Accounts of such of the said Officers and
Soldiers, or compounding with them for the same in like manner as they are by
the said Act (Entitled, An Act for stating and determining the Accounts of
such Officers and Soldiers as are or have been employed in the Service of this
Commonwealth in Ireland) authorized to do for the arrears of all other
Officers or Soldiers, who have constantly adhered to the Parliament, and to
give forth unto them Debeniurs accordingly, any thing in the said former Act
for stating Accounts, or any other Act, Declaration, Ordinance or Order or
Parliament to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Ordained and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That such
of the said Officers and Soldiers shall have and receive in satisfaction of
their sa^d Arrears so stated, forfeited Lands of the Rebels in Ireland, in
like manner, and upon the same terms as other Officers or Soldiers are or
shall be appointed by any Act of Parliament to rece^ve for their Arrears, grown
due for serv^ce before the nine and twentieth of June, one thousand six hundred
forty and nine.

Provided always, That no Officer or Soldier shall be capable of having or
receiving his Arrears as aforesaid, who has been in hostility against the
Parliament, or adhered to the Enemy since the first day of December one thousand
six hundred forty and nine, or has not manifesied constant good affect^^n to
the Parliament since the return of the said Garrisons and Forts in the Prov^nce
of M^^ster to their due obedience, or who has been cashiered and sentenced by
a Court Martial to loose his Arrears.

Provided also, That this Ordinance or any thing therein contained shall not
extend to the taking away any Limitations or Restrictions directed or Provided
by the Act for s^at^ng Accounts, concerning the Certificats or Vouchers to be
produced to evidence any Arrears, nor to the making void any penalty by the
said Act laid on any that shall make, procure or produce any false Certificate
or Oath, thereby faudulently to demand Arrears in prejudice of the Commonwealth.

Excepted and always reserved out of this present Ordinance and benefit
thereof, All and every the person or persons who are by name exempted from
pardon for life or Estate in one Act of Parliament; entitled, An Act for the
settling of Ireland, bearing date the twelveth day of August, one thousand six
hundred fifty and two, or who have no since the tenth of May, one thousand six
hundred and fifty, lived peaceably and inoffensively under the Protection of
this Commonwealth.

And furthermore, It is Ordained and declared by the Authority aforesaid, That
the Indemnity by this Ordinance granted by the General Words, Clauses, and
Sentences before rehearsed, shall be reputed, allowed and taken in all manner
of Courts of Justice, or elsewhere, most beneficial and available to all and
singular the persons to whom the same is hereby granted, and to every of them
in all things not in this present Ordinance excepted, without any ambiguity,
question, or other delay to be made, pleaded or objected by any person or
persons, for or on the behalf of the Commonwealth.

Tuesday August 1.1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


