AN ORDER AND DECLARATION Of His Highness and His Council, for Collecting the
EXCISE IN IRELAND.

Tuesday 22. of May, 1655.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, that this Order
and Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the
Lord Protector, 1655.

AN ORDER AND DECLARATION Of His HIGHNESS and His Council, for Collecting the
EXCISE in IRELAND.
WHereas by an Ordinance of His Highness the Lord Protector and His Council, of
the three and twentieth of June last, Entitled, An Ordiance for the further
encouragement of the Adventurers for Lands in Ireland, and of the Soldiers and
other Planters there, It is, among other things, Ordained, That the same
Custom, Subsidy and Impost which was then payable in England, for any
Commodities, Goods or Merchandises imported from, or exported into foreign
parts, and the same Excise payable upon the Consumption or use of any Commodity
in England, and no other, should be from thenceforth imposed, collected, levied
and paid in Ireland, according to the respective Books of Rates for the Custom
and Excise in England, paid by Englishmen, as the same then were, or thereafter
should be settled or altered by Act of Parliament. And whereas in pursuance of
the Twenty seventh Acticle of the Government of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, It was on the second of September last, agreed and
declared, by his Highness the Lord Protector and His Council, That the Revenue
by the said Article to be raised for the maintenance of the Forces and Ships,
for the safety of this Commonwealth, in the said Article mentioned, should be
raised (amongst other things) by the Duty of Excise and New Impost, The Rates
whereof were before the said Agreement and Declaration settled, as herein is
hereafter expressed; To the end the same Duty of Excise may be duly collected,
levied, and paid in Ireland, and the Rates and proportions duly observed
therein according to the said Ordinance, His Highness the Lord Protector, by
and with the advice and consent of His Council, does Order and Declare, That
the several Rates and Charges hereafter set down, and every of them, and none
other, in the Duty of Excise, shall be laid and imposed, and shall be Levied,
Demanded, Collected, Received, Recovered, and paid, in, and through out
Ireland, upon all Merchandises and Manufactures, Native and Foreign, being the
same which at the time of the making of the said Ordinance were paid in
England, and are still continued until the same shall be altered by Act of
Parliament, That is to say.

l. s. d. For every Barrel of Beer or Ale, of above six shillings the Barrel,
brewed by the common Brewer, or by any other person, or persons, who shall sell
or Tapp out Beer or Ale, publicly, or privately, to be paid by the said
Brewer, or such other person, or persons, respectively. two shillings. -- 0 2 0
For every Barrel of six shillings Beer or Ale, or above four shillings the
Barrel, brewd by the common Brewer, or by any other person, or persons, who
shall sell or Tap out such Beer or Ale, publicly, or privately, to be paid by
the said Brewer, or such other person, or persons as aforesaid respectively six
pence. -- 0 0 6

And so proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity of Beer or Ale above
four shillings the Barrel.

l. s. d. Alum Irish, the hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelve
pounds, to be paid by the Maker three pence -- 0 0 3 Coperase Irish, the
hundred Weight, containing one hundred and twelve pounds, to be paid by the
Maker three pence -- 0 0 3 Hops Irish, the hundred weight, to be paid by the
Planter, two shillings -- 0 2 0 Saffron Irish, for every twenty shillings
value, to be paid by the Planter one shilling -- 0 1 0 Tin, for every twenty
shillings value, to be paid by the Buyer, one shilling -- 0 1 0 Iron Irish, for
every hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelv pounds, to be paid by
the Maker six pence -- 0 0 6 For all Aqua Vitae or Strong Waters, made or
distilled within Ireland, whether of Foreign or Domestic Spirits, or Materials,
to be sold, upon every Gallon to be paid by the first Maker, or Seller thereof,
respectively two pence -- 0 0 2 For every Barrel of Soap made within Ireland,
of what sort soever, to be paid by the Maker, and so proportionally for hard
Soap, or soft Soap, four shillings -- 0 4 0 For every Ounce Troy of Silver or
Gold prepared, melted down or disgrossed for Wire, to be paid at the Bar where
the same shall be disgrossed, two pence -- 0 0 2 For every pound weight,
containing sixteen Ounces, Averdupois, of any Copper or other Metal that shall
be prepared, made fit, or disgrossed, to be paid at the Bar where the same
shallbe disgrossed, one shilling -- 0 1 0 For all Linseed Oil, Whale Oil,
Blubber Oil, Rape Oil, Pilchard Oil, and all other Oils, made within Ireland,
upon every Tun, to be paid by the Maker six shillings per Tun -- 0 6 0 For
every Fother of Lead, containing two thousand pounds weight, at one hundred and
twelve pounds to the hundred, to be paid by the Maker or Smelter six shillings
eight pence -- 0 6 8 For all Salt made, or to be made within Ireland, which is
or shall be shipped, or conveyed by water, to be paid by the first Buyer of
such Salt, at the place of Landing or unlading thereof, upon every Gallon a
half penny -- 0 0 0 For all other Salt made, or to be made within Ireland, and
not shipped or conveyed by water, to be paid by the first buyer thereof upon
the first delivering, upon every Gallon, a halfpenny -- 0 0 0 Upon all Salt
upon Salt that is made of Salt within Ireland, to be paid by the Maker thereof,
upon every Gallon a farthing -- 0 0 0 ^/^ For all Syder and Perry, made and
sold by Way of Retail, whether it be by the first Maker, or any Buyer or
Receiver thereof from the first Maker, upon every Hogshead, and so for a
greater or lesser measure proportionably, two shillings six pence -- 0 2 6 For
all Metheglyn or Mead, and such like Drinks, sold out by Retail, to be paid by
the Retailer upon every Gallon, and so pro rato, one penny -- 0 0 1 For all
Starch, upon every twenty shillings value thereof, to be paid by the first
Maker one shilling -- 0 1 0 For all sorts of Glass or Glasses, upon every
twenty shillings value thereof, to be paid by the Maker one shilling -- 0 1 0

Rates of Excise of Foreign Goods Imported.
FOr every pound of Tobacco, which is not of the English Plantation, as well
already imported, and remaining in the hands of the Merchant or Importer, as to
be imported to be paid by the first Buyer one shilling. 0 1 0 For every pound
of Tobacco of the English Plantation, as well imported and remaining in the
hands of the Importer, to be paid by the first Buyer three pence -- 0 0 3 For
every Tun of Wine, already imported, or to be imported, to be paid by the first
Buyer, whether Retailer or private Consumptioner, six pounds -- 6 0 0 For every
Tun of Wine-Vinegar, imported, or to be imported, to be paid by the first
Buyer, forty shillings -- 2 0 0 For all Spirits, imported, or to be imported,
made either of French, Rhenish, or any other Wines, upon every Gallon, to be
paid by the first Buyer, four pence -- 0 0 4 For all Spirits, Foreign or
Domestic, sold instead of Aqua Vitae, or Strong Water, upon every Gallon, to
be paid by the Utterer, and Seller thereof, one shilling -- 0 1 0 For all
Strong Waters perfectly made, imported, or to be imported, upon every Gallon,
to be paid by the first Buyer, one shilling -- 0 1 0 For all Beer or Ale
imported, for every Barrel, to be paid by the Importer, five shillings -- 0 5 0
For all Peppers, Sugars, Sugars refined, White and Brown Muscavadoes, Candy
White and Brown, and all other Grocecery and Mercery Wares, wrought Silk, Silks
in Gum, and ready thrown, Linnens fine and coarse, Upholstery, Haberdashery,
Papers, Skins, and Leathers, upon every twenty shillings value, to be paid by
the first Buyer, one shilling -- 0 1 0 For all manner of Drugs, according as
they are distinguished by the Book of Rates for the Customs, upon every twenty
shillings value, to be paid by the first Buyer, two shillings -- 0 2 0 For all
foreign Soap, imported, or to be imported, soft or hard, for every hundred
weight thereof, containing one hundred and twelve pounds, to be paid by the
first Buyer, five shillings -- 0 5 0 For all Saltery Wares not particularly
rated in this Schedule, imported, or to be imported, upon every twenty
shillings value thereof, as they or any of them shall be Sold at a price, to be
paid by the first Buyer thereof, one shilling -- 0 1 0 For all Hops foreign, the
hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelve pounds, to be paid by the
first Buyer, over and above Customs, five shillings -- 0 5 0 For all Hemp,
Flax, Tow, Tarr, Rosin, pitch, Wax, Tallow, Cable, Cable-yarn, and all manner
of Cordage, upon every twenty shillings value, to be paid by the first Buyer,
six pence -- 0 0 6 For all sorts of Glass, or Glasses, and all manner of
earthen ware whatsoever, upon every twenty shillings value, to be paid by the
first Buyer, two shillings -- 0 2 0 For all manner of Woolen-Cloath, or Stuffs,
or other Woolen Manufacture, imported from foreign parts, for every yard
measure, over and above the Rates mentioned of Customs, to be paid by the
Importer, one shilling -- 0 1 0 For all Raw silk, imported, or to be imported,
for every twenty shillings value thereof, and so proportionably for a greater
or lesser value, to be paid by the first Buyer, six pence -- 0 0 6 For all
foreign Salt, imported, which has not paid Excise, or to be imported, upon
every Gallon, to be paid by the first Buyer, three half pence -- 0 0 1 For all
Bone-Lace, imported, for every twenty shillings in value, to be paid by the
first Buyer, three shillings -- 0 3 For all dyed silk, imported, for every
twenty shillings in value, to be paid by the first Buyer, five shillings -- 0 5
0 For all Silk lace, imported, for every twenty shillings in value, to be paid
by the first Buyer, three shillings -- 0 3 0

That all other Goods and Merchandises mentioned in the Book of Rates for the
customs in England ( except Bullion, Corn, Victual, Arms, Ammunition, Ordnance
of Brass or Iron, and wools of sheep imported or to be imported, which are not
in the said Rates of Excise, before or otherwise charged, shall hereafter pay
Excise after the Rate of five pounds per Cent. to be paid by the first Buyer,
from the Merchant or Importer, and the same is to be collected accordingly.

l. s. d. For all other Goods and Merchandises, imported, or to be imported,
upon which no values are set, either in the said Book of Rates for Customs, nor
in these present Rates for Excise, upon every twenty shillings value thereof,
as they or any of them shall be sold at a price, to be paid by the first Buyer,
one shilling -- 0 1 0

That for all Inland or foreign Commodities in this Order mentioned, whether
rated by the pound weight, hundred weight, Fodder, pound value, Gallon, Barrel,
Tun, or other greater or lesser Measure or Weight whatsoever, the Excise shall
be duly paid for a greater or esser quantity pro rato, according to the Rates
therein appointed and prescribed respectively.

And as to the contents of a Tun of all liquid Commodities imported, It is
hereby declared, That two Buts, Two Pipes, Four Hogsheads, of what sort soever,
Six Teirtes, Three Punchions or Tertions, and Eight quarter Casks, shall be
accounted or reckoned for a Tun, and no others; And every Cask of any liquid
Commodities imported, which, if full, shall exceed a quarter Cask, shall be
accounted for a Teirte, and every Cask that shall exceed a Teirte, shall be
accounted for a Hogshead, and every Cask that shall exceed a Hogshead, shall be
accounted a Punchion, and every Cask that shall exceed a Punchion, shall be
accounted a But, or Pipe, without any pretense of undergage whatsoever.

And the Lord Deputy and Council of Ireland shall be, and are hereby Empowered
and authorized, from time to time, to nominate and appoint such, and so many
honest and able persons, as they shall think fit to be Commissioners for
Excise, or Governors of Excise or New Impost in Ireland; as also for
receiving, hearing, and determining all appeals, controversies, and differences
whatsoever, which shall be made, or arise, in or about the Management, Rating,
Levying, Collecting, or payment of the said Excise or New Impost in Ireland;
and all and every such person or persons as shall be by virtue hereof, or as
have been since the three and twentyeth day of June last, by the Lord Deputy
and Council of Ireland nominated, appointed, and constituted, for all or any
the purposes aforesaid, shall have, and are hereby empowered and authorized to
have, exercise, and put in execution, all and every the powers and authorities,
which in all, or any the matters aforesaid, or in reference unto the Imposing
of Fines, Forfeitures, making of Sales, Seisures Issuing of Warrants, summoning
of persons, administering of Oaths, taking of examinations, imprisoning of
offenders, taking distresses, giving Discharges, granting Indemnity, employing
of Agents, appointing Sub-Commissioners, Letting to farm, or otherwise,
Levying, Raising, Improving, Ordering, or Collecting the said New Impost of
Excise, Have been at any time heretofore given, or appointed to be given, or
granted, by virtue of any Act, Order, or Ordinance of Parliament, or of his
Highness the Lord Protector, in as full and ample manner, to all intents and
purposes whatsoever, as all or any the person or persons, in such Act, or Acts,
Orders, or Ordinances, named, or by virtue of any of them appointed, did or
might have done, executed, and performed.

Provided always, that if in the manner of appointing any Commissioners, or
Sub-Commissioners of Excise, or in respect of the extent of power to them, or
any of them, given, it shall seem necessary to the said Lord Deputy and Council
to vary from the ordinary way of proceeding, because of the different condition
of Affairs in Ireland, from other parts of this Commonwealth, That then and in
such Cases the said Lord Deputy and Council may differ from the usual way of
proceedings, or restrain any part of the powers given to such Commissioners or
Sub-Commissioners, as they shall see most expedient and effectual for the
regulating, and due management of the said Excise or New Impost.

And the said Lord Deputy and Council are hereby authorized, to make such
allowance of incident charges, as also such yearly Salary, by way of poundage
or otherwise, to such Governors, Commissioners, and Officers of Excise,
appointed, or to be appointed, as they shall think fit.

Tuesday May 22. 1655.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, that this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council,


