AN ORDINANCE For Relief of CREDITORS AND Poor Prisoners.

seal of the Commonwealth

Thursday June 8. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.

seal of the Commonwealth
AN ORDINANCE For Relief of CREDITORS AND Poor Prisoners.
WHereas by a late Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the Relief of
Creditors and Poor Prisoners, Henry Proby, Peter Elliston, and others in the
said Act named, or any three or more of them were thereby, as to all persons
that stood committed on the fifth of October, one thousand six hundred fifty
three, or which should be committed before the twentieth day of the said Month
of October, to the Upper-Bench Prison, or to the Prison of the Fleet, Gatehouse
in Westminster, Counter in Surrey, or Prison in White-Chappel, in any Civil
cause, and not from thence lawfully discharged, made Judges to hear and
determine the Causes of such persons imprisonment, and of the escape of such
Prisoners in a summary way, and to do as by the said Act is further directed.
The execution of which Act and of the Powers and Authorities given by the same
by Ordinance, of His Highness the Lord Protector and his Council, for weighty
Causes, was suspended until the one and thirtieth day of May, one thousand six
hundred fifty four. And forasmuch as upon sundry Complaints already made to his
Highness the Lord Protector and His Council, and due consideration had that the
Lands, Hereditaments, Goods and Chactles of diverse other persons then the said
Prisoners, whereof such persons were lawfully seized and possessed at the time of
the making the said Act, may by construction of several Clauses, therein be
sold, leased, granted, or otherwise disposed by the Judges in the said Act
appointed for satisfaction of the Creditors of such Prisoners as aforesaid, as
for the said Prisoners debts notwithstanding that such other persons so seized
and possessed, had at the time of making the said Act as sufficient an Estate
in, and right to, such Lands, Goods, and Hereditaments according to the Law to
all intents, as any other person had or has in any his Lands, Goods, or
Hereditaments whatsoever.

Be it therefore Ordained by his Highness the Lord Protector by the advice of
his Council, That Nathaniel Bacon, Francis Bacon, Arthur Barnardiston, Peter
Elliston, John Parker, Henry Pit, Edmund Giles, Robert Aldworth, John VVilsby,
Peter Breereton, Clement Ireton, and Robert Warcupp, Esqs or any five or more
of them, and no other person, shall be, and hereby are made Judges to hear and
determine from the eight day of June instant, the causes of imprisonment of any
such Prisoners, counted as aforesaid to any the Prisons before mentioned, and
to do and execute in persuance of the said Act for the relief of Creditors and
poor Prisoners, according to the explanations and alterations thereof, made by
this present Ordinance, and not otherwise: That is to say, that all the Estate
Real or Personal, of any such Prisoner, or other person, for whose debt the
said Prisoner is imprisoned, whereof he was seized or possessed to his own use
in possession, reversion, or remainder the said fifth day of October one
thousand six hundred fifty three, or sithence, or whereof he shall be seized or
possessed before the fifth day of October one thousand six hundred fifty four,
or which any person or persons was or were the said fifth day of October one
thousand six hundred fifty three, or sithence, or at any time before the said
fifth day of October next, shall become seized or possessed of in trust for any
such Prisoner, or other person, for whose debt the said Prisoner was
imprisoned, and which such Prisoner or Prisoners or other Person, the said
fifth day of October, or any time sithence might, or hereafter may, before the
said fifth of October next, lawfully convey or dispose for payment of his or
their Debts by Law or Equity, shall and may by the said Judges or any five or
more of them, be leased, granted, charged, sold, or any otherwise disposed, for
payment of such Prisoners or other persons Debts.

Provided always that upon any sale or other disposing of such estate as
aforesaid, all debts due to the Common wealth, Debts secured or due by
Statutes, Judgments, or Recognizances shall be first paid, to wit, the
principal Debt, Interest and Charges and no more, in such Order as by Law they
ought to have been before the making of the said Act for relief of Creditors
and poor Prisoners, and if any the said Prisoners, or other persons for whose
debt any such Prisoner was imprisoned, have heretofore made any conveyance or
settlement of any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, Goods or Chattles to any
person or persons, with power of revocation in such Prisoner or Prisoners, or
other such person, which power of revocation might have been by such Prisoner
or Prisoners, or other persous, executed the said fifth of October one thousand
six hundred fifty three, or since, or may be executed before the fifth of
October one thousand six hundred fifty four, all such Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, Goods and Chattles, shall be sold, leased or disposed by the
Judges hereby appointed, or any three or more of them, as fully to all intents,
for payment of such Prisoners or other persons debts, as if the said revocation
had been actually made by such Prisoner or person according to the true intent
and meaning of the said power of revocation. And the said Judges, or any five
or more of them, shall have power to examine any Mortgage formerly made of any
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, or any Lease or Leases upon condition, by
any such Prisoner or other person, or any his Ancestors, granted for security
of money lent, and where any such Prisoner, or other person, has lawful and
equitable right of Entry, or any condition broken or right of Redemption in Law
or Equity upon any Mortgage so made and not forfeited by the space of seven
years last past, the said Judges, first satisfiing the principal money for
which such Lands or Hereditaments, Goods or Chattles were mortgaged, and all
interest and other charges grown due, may sell or otherwise dispose of all such
Lands and Hereditaments, Goods and Chattles, Leased or Mortgaged, as aforesaid,
for payment of such Prisoners, or other persons debts, and the said Judges or
any five or more of them, are hereby further authorized to examine all
fraudulent Grants, Leases and Conveyances whatsoever made by any such
Prisoners, or other person for whose debt any such prisoner was imprisoned as
aforesaid of any their Lands, Hereditaments, goods or Chattles, and all
Judgments, Statutes, Recognisances, or Bonds by them entered into, and any
other Act or Acts done, with intent to defraud Creditors, which by any Law or
Statute now in force (other then by the said Act for relief of Creditors and
poor prisoners) are declared to be void against Creditors, and upon due proof
made unto a Jury of any such fraudulent Grant, Act or conveyance, or of any
wilful concealing such fraud, the said Judges may sell and dispose for payment
of such Debts as are before mentioned, all such Lands, Hereditaments, Goods,
and Chattles so granted, conveyed, extended or to be extended, had or to be had
in execution, in such manner as is before mentioned touching other the Lands,
Goods or Hereditaments, of any such Prisoner or other persons, and punish any
such concealment of fraud as by any Law or Statute in force (other then the
said Act for relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners) is appointed and Ordained,
and in case any such prisoner has escaped out of any the said prisons since
the fifth day of October one thousand six hundred fifty three, or hereafter
shall escape before the fifth day of October one thousand six hundred fifty
four, upon du proof made or to be made of such escape, the estate and trusts of
estate real and personal of such prisoner escaped, shall be sold and disposed
by the said Judges for satisfaction of the Creditors, at whose suit such
prisoner was imprisoned, in like manner (and no otherwise) as they might have
sold or disposed the Estate real and personal, if such prisoner had still
remained in custody.

Provided always, That upon any Sale, Lease, or other disposition to be made
as aforesaid of any prisoner, or other persons real or personal Estate, the
said Judges shall openly put a value upon the estate declared to be Sold,
Leased, or Disposed, and before the Sale or Disposition thereof, the said
prisoner or other person, concerned, his heir, executor or administrator, as
the case requires, shall have notice thereof, and if such Prisoner or other
person concerned, his Heir, Executor, or Administrator shall within six weeks
pay in ready money, as much as the said Estate, to be sold or otherwise
disposed, was valued at as aforesaid, or otherwise give security to the
Creditors for the said sum to their liking, the said Judges shall forbear to
make sale of such Estate; but in default of such payment, or security given,
they shall proceed to sale, or other disposition thereof at the highest rate
they can sell the same at, provided it be not less than the value of them
formerly set as aforesaid. And all and every sale or other disposition of any
Prisoner or other persons Estate made as aforesaid, shall be good and effectual
in Law against such Prisoner and such other persons, their Trustees and all and
every their Heirs general or special claiming by descent to all intents and
purposes, saving always to all persons, other than such whose Estates may be
sold as aforesaid, their respective right to any Lands, Hereditaments, Goods or
Chattels, that shall happen to be sold or disposed as aforesaid; as if the said
Act for Relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners, and this present Ordinance, had
not been made.

And it is hereby further Ordained, That no Estate real or personal of any
Prisoner or other person shall be taken to be any Estate to be sold, discharged
or disposed within the meaning of the said former Act entitled An Act for
Relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners, other than such Estates as are by this
present Ordinance declared to be Sold and Disposed for payment of Debts, in
manner before expressed. And that no Prisoner shall be accounted a Prisoner
whose Estate is to be Sold or Disposed within the meaning of the said Act, but
such as were actually Prisoners the fifth day of October, One thousand six
hundred fifty three, or before the twentieth of October then next following, or
who being Prisoners as aforesaid, are since dead, or shall die before the fifth
of October next, leaving their Debts undischarged.

Provided also, That the said Judges shall not intermeddle in the Sale or
Disposing of any Land Ordered or Decreed to be sold for payment of Debts by the
High Court of Chancery, but that the same be left to be wholly Disposed as the
said Court of Chancery shall Order and Provide.

And it is further Ordained, That all Persons, by the said Act for relief of
Creditors and poor Prisoners, made Judges, as to all Prisons and Persons,
committed to other Prisons than as before mentioned, within the respective
Counties, Cities, and Towns Corporate, within this Commonwealth, shall from
and after the eighth day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty four, proceed
in the Excecution of the said Act, as to the release of any Prisoners, in every
respect according to the meaning of the Act, Entitled, An Act for Relief of
Creditors and poor Prisoners, but not as to the Sale or Disposition of any
Lands or Goods but according to the Explanations and Alterations thereof made
by this present Ordinance, and not otherwise.

Provided also, That no Creditor shall have advantage or benefit of any Sale,
as aforesaid, made for or toward satisfaction of the Debt, unless he give a
legal Discharge of the whole or part of his said Debt, as the Case requires, to
be Ordered by the said Judges.

And be it further Ordained by Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful for the several Judges Authorized by this Ordinance, upon Good and
Sufficient Security taken of all such of the said Prisoners, as they think fit,
to permit the said Prisoners to go out of Prison for some convenient time, the
better to enable such Prisoners to assist in Sale of their Estates, or take
other Course for payment of their said Debts, and that such permission of such
Prisoners to go out of Prison upon Bail for the Cause aforesaid, shall not be
adjudged to be any Escape.

And it is lastly hereby Ordained, That the said Act for relief of Creditors
and poor Prisoners, and this present Ordinance for Explanation thereof, shall
continue in force until the fifth day of October, One thousand six hundred
fifty four, and no longer.

Provided always, That neither the said Act, Entitled, An Act for relief of
Creditors and poor Prisoners, nor this present Ordinance, nor any thing therein
contained, shall extend, nor be construed to extend to empower the Judges
aforesaid to examine, impeach, or avoid any Execution, Judgment or Decree, had
and obtained against such Prisoner or other person herein intended, save only
so far as to examine what is due thereupon.

Provided also, That this Ordinance or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend or be construed to extend to empower the Judges aforesaid to make Sale
of any the Lands formerly by the said Act, Entitled, An Act for Relief of
Creditors and poor Prisoners, exempted from Sale.

Friday June 9. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


