AN ORDER AND DECLARATION OF His Highness and the Council, FOR An Assessment Of
Sixty thousand Pounds per mensem, for Six Months, from the Five and twentieth
day of December, 1656.

Thursday the 24th of July, 1656.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector, and the Council, That this Order
and Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the
Lord Protector, 1656.

AN ORDER AND DECLARATION OF His Highness and the Council, FOR An Assessment Of
Sixty thousand Pounds per mensem, for Six Months, from the Five and twentieth
day of December, 1656.
WHereas in the seven and twentieth Article of the Government of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, it is expresed as follows,
That a constant yearly Revenue shall be raised, settled and established, for
maintaining ten thousand Horse and Dragoons, and twenty thousand Foot in
England, Scotland and Ireland, for the Defense and Security thereof, and also
for a convenient number of Ships for guarding the Seas, besides two hundred
thousand pounds per annum, for defraying other necessary Charges for
Administration of Justice, and other Expenses of the Government; which Revenue
shall be raised by the Customs, and such other ways and means as shall be
agreed upon by the Lord Protector and Council, and shall not be taken away or
diminished, nor the way agreed upon for raising the same, altered, but by
consent of the Lord Protector and the Parliament: And whereas in pursuance of
the said seven and twentieth Article of the Government, upon Consideration had
by His Highness the Lord Protector and his Council, how the said Revenue might
be raised with greatest ease to the people, It was agreed upon and Declared by
His Highness and His Council, That the same should be raised (among other
things) by the Customs and Subsidies upon Goods and Merchandises, and by the
Duty of Excise and New Impost, and by a Tax of eighty thousand pounds per
mensem, to be raised in England, Scotland and Ireland, from and after the five
and twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred fifty and four, whereof
the Proportion to be raised in England is also agreed by His Highness and His
Council, not to exceed the sum of Threescore thousand pounds by the Month, to
be assessed, taxed, levied, collected and paid, (saving as is hereafter
expressed) in such manner, and by such ways and means, as the sum of One hundred
and twenty thousand pounds by the Month, by an Act of Parliament, Entitled,
An Act for an Assessment, at the rate of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds
by the Month, for six Months, from the Twenty fifth day of December, One
thousand six hundred and fifty three, to the Four and twentieth day of June,
then next ensuing, toward the maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this
Commonwealth, was appointed to be Taxed, Assessed, Levied, Collected, and
Paid, and according to the several Rates and Proportions of the Moiety of the
Respective Sums by the said Act set upon the Respective Counties, Cities and
Places therein mentioned, That is to say, UPon the County of Bedford, the sum
of Eight hundred pounds. The County of Berks, the sum of Nine hundred thirty
three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The City and County of the City of
Bristol, the sum of One hundred forty six pounds thirteen shillings and four
pence. The County of Buckingham, the sum of One thousand one hundred pounds.
The County of Cambridge, the sum of Nine hundred and forty five pounds. The
Isle of Ely, the sum of Three hundred and fifteen pounds. The County of
Chester, the sum of Six hundred and sixty pounds. The City and County of the
City of Chester, the sum of Seventy three pounds six shillings and eight pence.
The County of Cornwall, the sum of One thousand four hundred pounds. The County
of Cumberland, the sum of Ninety two pounds eleven shillings and four pence.
The County of Derby, the sum of Eight hundred pounds. The County of Devon, the
sum of Two thousand five hundred seventy four pounds thirteen shillings and
four pence. The City and County of the City of Exon, the sum of Ninety two
pounds. The County of Dorset, the sum of Eleven hundred twenty four pounds
three shillings and four pence. The Town and County of Pool, the sum of Nine
pounds three shillings and four pence. The County of Durham, the sum of One
hundred thirty one pounds fifteen shillings one penny farthing. The County of
York with the City and County of the City of York, the sum of Two thousand six
hundred and eight pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The Town and County
of Kingston upon Hull, the sum of Fifty and eight pounds. The County of Essex,
the sum of Three thousand pounds. The County of Gloucester, the sum of One
thousand three hundred ninety four pounds. The City and County of the City of
Gloucester, the sum of One hundred thirty nine pounds six shillings and eight
pence. The County of Hereford, the sum of One thousand pounds. The County of
Hertford, the sum of One thousand two hundred pounds. The County of Huntington,
the sum of Five hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The
County of Kent, with the City and County of the City of Canterbury,, the sum of
Three thousand one hundred thirty three pounds six shillings eight pence. The
County of Lancaster, the sum of Eight hundred pounds. The County of Leicester,
the sum of Nine hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The
County of Lincoln, with the City and County of the City of Lincoln, the sum of
Two thousand three hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence.
The City of London, the sum of Four thousand pounds. The County of Middlesex,
with the City and Liberty of Westminster, the sum of One thousand five hundred
thirty three pounds six shillings eight pence. The County of Monmouth, the sum
of Four hundred pounds. The County of Northampton, the sum of One thousand two
hundred pounds. The County of Nottingham, the sum of Seven hundred seventy four
pounds four shillings. The Town and County of the Town of Nottingham, the sum
of Twenty five pounds sixteen shillings. The County of Norfolk, the sum of
Three thousand one hundred and six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence.
The City and County of the City of Norwich, the sum of One hundred and sixty
pounds. The County of Northumberland, the sum of One hundred fifty four pounds
five shillings six pence three farthings. The Town of Newcastle, the sum of
thirty pounds and ten shillings. The County of Oxon, the sum of Nine hundred
sixty six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The County of Rutland, the
sum of Two hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The
County of Salop, the sum of One thousand one hundred thirty three pounds six
shillings and eight pence. The County of Stafford, the sum of Seven hundred
eighty eight pounds. The City and County of the City of Litchfield, the sum of
twelve pounds. The County of Somerset, the sum of Two thousand three hundred
thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The County of Southampton,
with the Town and County of Southampton, the sum of One thousand seven hundred
thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The County of Suffolk, the
sum of Three thousand one hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight
pence. The County of Surrey, the sum of One thousand three hundred forty one
pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The Borough of Southwark, the sum of
One hundred fifty eight pounds six shillings eight pence. The county of Sussex,
the Sum of One thousand six hundred thirty three pound six shillings and eight
pence. The county of Warwick, with the city and county of the city of Coventry,
the Sum of One thousand sixty six pounds, thirteen shillings and four pence.
The county of Worcester, the Sum of One thousand and thirteen pounds six
shillings and eight pence. The city and county of the city of Worcester the Sum
of fifty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Wilts, the
Sum of One thousand six hundred sixty six pounds thirteen shillings and four
pence. The county of Westmerland, the Sum of sixty three pounds eight
shillings. The Isle of Anglesey, the Sum of One hundred and sixteen pounds
six shillings and eight pence. The county of Breknock, the Sum of Three hundred
and ten pounds. The county of Cardigan, the Sum of three hundred sixty six
pounds. The county of Carmarthen, the Sum of three hundred and two pounds. The
county of Carnarvan, the Sum of One hundred seventy three pounds six
shillings and eight pence. The county of Denbigh, the Sum of Two hundred thirty
three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Flint, the Sum of
One hundred and sixteen pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of
Glamorgan, the Sum of three hundred ninety and three pounds six shillings and
eight pence. The county of Merioneth, the Sum of One hundred and six pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence. The county of Montgomery, the sum of two
hundred fifty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of
Pembroke, the Sum of three hundred forty eight pounds. The county of Radnor,
the Sum of two hundred and eighteen pounds. The Town of Haverford-west, the
Sum of twelve pounds and ten shillings. The Town of Berwick, the sum of five
pounds.


By which Agreement and Declaration of his Highness and his Council, It is
provided, that in case the Moneys arising by the Customs and other the Revenues
therein mentioned, should be improved and amount unto a greater yearly value
then they were, at the time of making the said Agreement, or any other Revenue
or Moneys shall be added or accrue to the use of the Commonwealth, in such case
there shall be a proportionable Abatement of the said Monthly Assessment; his
Highness the Lord Protector and his Council, in pursuance of the said twenty
seventh Article of the Government, and of the said Agreement and Declaration
aforesaid, and for preventing the burden and evils attending Free Quarter,
which must otherwise unavoidably fall upon this Nation, Do Declare and Order,
That the said Sum of Threescore thousand pounds by the Month for six Months,
commencing from the Five and twentieth day of December, now next coming, shall
be Taxed, Assessed, Levied, Collected and Paid in the several Counties and
Places, in such manner, and by such ways and means, and according to the
several Rates and Proportions before hereby set down and expressed; And do
Order and Require the several Commissioners and other Persons nominated and
mentioned in the beforementioned Act, and such others, as by any Order of that
Parliament, or of his Highness the Lord Protector and his Council, have been
since added as Commissioners, or so many of them as by the said Act are
thereunto respectively authorized, to Use, Exercise, and put in execution all
and every the Powers and Authorities for the Assessing, Levying, Collecting and
Paying the present six Months Assessment hereby appointed; as also the Arrears
of all former Assessments, which they had or were empowered to Use and Exercise
by the said recited Act, for the Assessing, Collecting, Levying and Payment of
the aforesaid Six Months Assessment of One hundred and twenty thousand Pounds
by the Month: And whereas the timely providing of Stores, necessary supply and
maintaining of the Navy of this Commonwealth, as well for guarding the Seas,
and Trade, as for the safety of the Commonwealth against the enemies thereof
does require the present advance of part of the moneys to be raised by the said
six Months Assessment hereby appointed, the seasonable coming in whereof will
be of great advantage to the public service, which will be much prejudiced in
case the same should be delayed until the usual time of payment in of the same;
For the better effecting thereof, the several and respective Commissioners for
the said respective Counties, Cities and Towns, shall meet together at the most
common and usual place of Meeting, in each of the said Counties, Cities, and
Towns respectively, on or before the eighth day of October now next coming. And
the said Commissioners, or so many of them as shall then and there attend and
be present, shall put this present Order in execution, for the directing,
managing, levying and bringing in the said Monthly Assessment hereby required;
and shall then, if they see cause, appoint a second General Meeting on or
before the seventeenth day of October aforesaid, to the end the Rules and
Directions aforesaid may be as is before declared, timely prosecuted and
observed, so as the full sum of the first three Months Assessment, charged
upon each Division, Hundred, Parish and Place, may be at once wholly collected
and paid in to the respective Receivers-General at or before the tenth day of
November now next coming, and the latter three Months Assessment to be also
fully Collected and Paid in to the respective Receivers-General, at or before
the tenth day of February then next following. And it is further Ordered, That
in case the way and manner of Assessing by a Survey and Pound-rate, in such
sort as is prescribed by the said recited Act, shall prove prejudicial and
obstructive to the bringing in of the Six Months Assessment aforesaid, by the
times limited for paying in of the same; That then, and in all such cases, the
said Commissioners in any of the said Counties, Cities, Towns, and places in
the said Act mentioned, where such Obstruction shall be or happen, or the major
part of them present at their General Meeting, may, and are hereby Authorized
for the Removal of such obstructions, to proceed according to the most just and
equal way of Rates held in such places, in the Proportioning, Levying and
Assessing the respective sums charged upon them and every of them according to
the Directions of an Ordinance of the eighth of June, One thousand six hundred
fifty four, for an Assessment for Six Months thereby appointed: And the
several and respective Commissioners, Receivers-General, Collectors,
Sub-Collectors, and all other persons, who are or shall be Entrusted or
Employed in the Assessing, Levying, Collecting or Receiving of the said Six
Months Assessments, or any part thereof, are hereby enjoined and required to
observe such Orders and Directions as shall from time to time be made and given
forth by the Commissioners for the Treasury, or by the Committee or
Commissioners for the Army, or any three of them, in and concerning the
Premises. Provided always, and it is hereby Ordered, That in stead of
Treasurers at Wars mentioned in the said Act, the Receivers-General for this
whole Six Months Assessment, shall be, and are hereby authorized and empowered
to Receive from the Receivers-General of the respective Counties, Cities, and
Places, and every of them, All and every the Sums of Money hereby to be Taxed,
Assessed, Levied, Collected and Paid for the said Six Months Assessment, or
otherwise as aforesaid; and to give Acquittances and Discharges, and to make
such Allowances in and about the premises, in as full and ample manner to all
intents and purposes, as the Treasurers at War (mentioned in the said Act) by
the said Act, or by one Ordinance of the Nine and twentieth day of June, One
thousand six hundred fifty four, Entitled, An Ordinance for Continuing a
Committee for the Army, and Treasurers at War, were empowered and enabled to
do: And the said Receivers-General of the respective Counties, Cities and
Places, and every of them, are hereby Authorized and Required to make Payment
of the said several Sums which shall be by them received of all and every
Collector and Sub-Collector by virtue hereof, unto John Blackwel the younger,
and Richard Dean, Esquires, Receivers-General for this whole Six Months
Assessment, at Guild Hall London, to be by them paid in to, and accounted for
in the Receipt of his Highness Exchequer; and that all and every the
Acquittance and Acquittances of the said Receivers-General for this whole Six
Months Assessment, shall be unto the said Receivers-General for the said
respective Counties, Cities and Places, and to all other persons who shall by
virtue hereof pay any moneys unto them for the purposes aforesaid, a sufficient
Discharge.

Henry Scobel, Clerk of the Council.


