AN ORDINANCE Appointing a Committee of the Adventurers for Lands in IRELAND,
for determining differences among the said Adventurers.
WHereas the proportions of several Adventurers for Lands in Ireland, have
fallen by lot within one and the same Barony, which may occasion some
differences among the said Adventurers, in case the total of the escheated Land
within such Baronie shall not be sufficient to answer the proportions of Land
allotted to the respective Adventurers; Now for the better composing of any
differences that shall so fall out, and on the humble desire of the said
Adventurers, Be it Ordained by His Highness the Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, by and with the advice and
consent of His Council, That the persons hereafter named, being equally chosen
and nominated by the body of the said Adventurers: That is to say, Sir Thomas
Dacres, Sir John Clotworthy, Alderman Thomas Andrews, Alderman John Fowke,
Alderman Samuel Avery, Thomas Ayers, John Blackwell, Senior, William Webb,
William Hawkins, Charles Lloyd, George Almory, Thomas Barnardiston, John
Greensmith, Lawrence Bromefield, Thomas Brightwell, Deputy Hutchinson, Michael
Herring, Alexander Jones, John Wood, Thomas Steane, Sir David Watkins,
Alexander Bence, Thomas Gower, William Penoyer, Henry Colborne, William
Hickhocks, Thomas Vincent, Alderman Foot, James Russell, Alderman Waring,
Maurice Thompson, Francis Ash, John Mosyer, John Holland, Edmond Harrison, and
Ambrose Moore, Esquires, be, and hereby are empowered and authorized by
themselves or any eleven or more of them, or by such others as they or any
eleven or more of them shall from time to time nominate and appoint, in such
cases where several Lots have been drawn by several persons, of Lands lying in
the same Barony, to settle a way and method for determining by Lot, how many
and which of the said Adventurers proportions, falling within one and the same
particular Barony, wherein the escheated Lands shall fall short of the
Allotments, shall be continued and laid out in such Barony, or how much
thereof, and which of the said Adventurers shall take his proportion, or how
much thereof elsewhere, according to the Act of Parliament made in that behalf;
And the Lord Deputy of IRELAND, and Council there for the time being, are
hereby authorized to settle such persons as shall be so removed in such other
places as is provided by the Acts of Parliament in that behalf. And the
Committee and Committees hereby authorized, are also empowered to settle a
method by Lot, for ascertaining the subdivision of Adventurer's proportions,
that shall continue in all and every the several Baronies according to their
respective allotments. And further, That the said Lord Deputy and Council be,
and hereby are empowered and authorized, to hear and determine all differences
that shall happen and arise concerning any the premises, among the said
Adventurers, or any of them: Provided that this Ordinance shall continue in
force for one whole year, from the fifth of June last, and no longer.

Tuesday, 1 August, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Scobel, Clerk of the Council.


