An Additional ORDINANCE For the EXCISE.
WHereas by an Ordinance of the seventeenth of March last, Entitled, An
Ordinance for continuing the Excise, it is next after the Rates therein
specified, generally declared and provided, That all other goods and
Merchandises (Except Bolloin, Corn, Victual, Arms, Ammunition, Ordnance of
Brass or Iron, imported, or to be imported) not specified or therein rated,
should pay after the rate of five pounds per Centum, according as the same are
charged by the book of rates, for the Customs to be paid by the first buyer one
shilling.

Be it Ordained, and it is hereby Ordained and Declared by his Highness, with
the Advice and Consent of his Council, That the said Clause be Null and Void,
and instead thereof, Be it hereby Ordained and Declared, That all other goods
and Merchandises mentioned in the Book of Rates for the Customs (except
Bulloin, Corn, Victual, Arms, Ammunition, Ordnance of Brass or Iron, and Wools
of Sheep) imported or to be imported which are not in the said Rates of Excise,
before or otherwise Charged, shall hereafter pay Excise, after the rate of five
pounds per Centum, to be paid by the first Buyer from the Merchant or Importer,
and the same is to be collected accordingly.

And to the end the whole receipts of the Excise may be the better reduced into
one Cash, and the charge and number of Officers thereby retrenched, It is
hereby Ordained by Authority aforesaid, That from and after the twenty fifth
day of March last, the Revenue of the Excise shall be but one Receipt, and so
accounted for; and that all Receipts and Accounts heretofore taken or kept of
any payments of Excise or New Impost, by virtue of any Additional Act,
Ordinance, or Order of Parliament, and designed to any separate use or uses
whatsoever, shall from thenceforth forth cease and be void, and be brought and
reduced to one general Cash and Public Revenue. Provided nevertheless that
the Moity of all Fines and Forfeitures, imposed and received since the twenty
fifth of March last, or that hereafter shall be imposed and received, shall be
still kept in an Account apart, and be paid out toward the maintenance of
Widows and Mauned Soldiers, according to Ordinance of Parliament of the
thirteenth of July, one thousand six hundred and forty seven.

And it is hereby for the further relief of the said Widows and Maimed
Soldiers, Ordained, That from and after the said five and twentieth day of
March last, there shall be, out of the general Cash and Revenue of the Excise,
allowed the certain yearly sum of twenty six thousand two hundred and sixty
pounds, to be paid weekly by equal portions out of the said public Receipt
unto such Person or Persons as is, are, or shall be appointed thereunto by his
Highness and His Council, and be entrusted for employing and disposing thereof
to the use aforesaid. Which said yearly sum of twenty six thousand two hundred
and sixty pounds is to be in lieu of all and every sum and sums of money
assigned by any Act, Ordinance or Order of Parliament out of any the receipts of
the Excise, for relief of the said Widows and Maimed Soldiers, other than the
Moity of Fines and Forfeitures before excepted; and the present Commissioners
of the Excise, or any three of them, shall have power from time to time to
issue out all Moneys, either delivered over unto them, by the Commissioners
preceding them, or which has, or shall be received by them since the five and
twentieth of March last, according as they are or shall be directed by his
Highness the Lord Protector and His Council, or by Authority thereof. And the
said Commissioners for Excise, and their Sub-Commissioners are hereby empowered
to make Repayment of the Excise to any Person whatsoever, for any goods
imported upon the Exportation thereof, in such sort as the late Commissioners
might have done before the five and twentieth day of March last, It appearing
unto them that the duty of the said Goods have been fully paid; any former
Clause, Article or Provision to the contrary notwithstanding.

Thursday May 4.1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by William du-Gard, and Henry Hills. Printers to his Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.


