AN ORDINANCE For holding the Countie-Court for the County of CHESTER at the
Town of NORTHVVICH, during the Continuance of the Infection of the Plague in
CHESTER.

Tuesday 16th May, 1654.

ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the Council, that this
Ordinance be forthwith Princed and Published.

Hen. Scobel, Clerk of the Council.

LONDON, Printed, by William Du-Gard, and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector. 1654.

seal of the CommonwealthAN ORDINANCE For holding the County Court for the
County of Chester at the Town of Northwich, during the continuance of the
Infection of the plague in Chester.
WHereas the Shire-Hall of the County-Palatine of Chester is situate within the
Castle of Chester; which City is now visited with the Plague, by reason
whereof the Sheriff of the said County Palatine of Chester cannot, without
danger to the whole County, keep his Court in the said Shire-Hall, where the
same ought to be, and usually has been kept; Be it therefore Ordained by his
Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England Scotland and
Ireland, by, and with the consent of his Council, That the Sheriff of the said
County shall have full Power and Authority, and he has hereby full Power and
Authority given him upon the same Tuesday every Month as formerly, to keep his
said Countie-Court in the Town of Northwich, in the County of Chester, and to
adjourn the same from time to time to any other Market Town or Public place
within the said County, where he shall think convenient for the eas and
safety of the Inhabitants of the said County, until the said infection of the
Plague in Chester aforesaid shall reas, and no longer: at which time the said
Court shall or may be adjourned unto the said Shire-Hall again there to be
held and kept upon the same Tuesday every month in such manner as formerly it
has been used and accustomed, and that all Acts, Things and Proceedings in
Law, had and don, and to be had and don in the said County Court since the now
last Court, kept in the said Shire-Hall in the said Castle of Chester, and
until the said Court shall be adjourned to the said Shire-Hall again, shall
be, and shall be adjudged, deemed, taken and construed to be to all intents
and purposes of the same force, effect, and validity in Law, as if the same
had been kept still in the said Shire-Hall, the statute made in the three and
thirtieth Year of of the Reign of the late King Henry the eight or any other
Statute Law Order or Ordinance of Parliament usage or custom to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Tuesday 16th May, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and his Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and published.

Hen. Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


