ENGLANDS SLAVERY, OR BARBADOS MERCHANDISE;

Represented In a Petition to the High and Honorable Court of Parliament, by
Marcellus Rivers and Oxenbridge Foil Gentlemen, on the behalf of themselves
and threescore and ten more Freeborn Englishmen sold (uncondemned) into
slavery: Together with Letters written to some Honorable Members of Parliament.

Exodus 26.1. 21.16. And, God spoke all these words, saying, He that steals a
man and sells him, Or if he be found in his hand, He shall surely be put to
death.

LONDON, Printed in the Eleventh year of Englands Liberty. 1659.

To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses assembled in
Parliament, the Representative of the Freeborn People of England: The humble
Petition of Marcellus Rivers, and Oxenbridge Foil Gentlemen, as well on behalf
of themselves, as of threescore and ten more, Freeborn People of this Nation,
now in slavery.
Humbly shows,
THat your distressed Petitioners, and the others became prisoners at Exceter
and Ilchester in the West, upon pretense of the Salisbury Rising, in the end of
the year 1654. although many of them never saw Salisbury, or bore arms in their
lives, and your Petitioners and diverse of the others were picked up, as they
traveled upon their lawful occasions. Afterward upon an Indictment preferred
against your Petitioner Rivers, Ignoramus was found, your Petitioner Foil
never being indicted, and all the rest, were either quitted by the Jury of life
and death, or never so much as tried or examined; yet your Petitioners and the
others, were all kept prisoners by the space of one whole year, and then on a
sudden (without the least preparation) snatched out of their prisons (the
greatest number by the command and pleasure of the then high Sheriff Copleston,
and others in power in the County of Devon, and driven through the streets of
the City of Exon (which is witness to this truth) by a guard of horse and
foot, none being suffered to take leave of them, and so hurried to Plymouth,
aboard the ship, John of London, Captain John Cole Master, where after they had
lain on shipboard fourteen days, the Captain hoised sail, and at the end of
five weeks, and four days more, anchored at the Isle Barbados, in the West
Indies, being (in sailing) four thousand and five hundred miles distant from
their native country, wives, children, parents, friends, and all that is near
and dear unto them, the captive Petitioners and the others being all the way
kept locked under decks (and guards) amongst horses, that their souls through
heat and steam, (under the Tropic) fainted in them, and never till they came
to the Island, knew, whether they were going.

Being sadly arrived there, on the 7. of May 1656. the Master of the ship sold
your miserable Petitioners and the others, the generality of them to most in
humane and barbarous persons, for 1550. pound weight of Sugar apiece, (more or
less, according to their working faculties,) as the goods and chattels of
Martin Noel, and Major Thomas Alderne of London, and Captain Henry Hatsell of
Plymouth, neither sparing the aged of threescore and sixteen years old; nor
Divines, nor Officers, nor Gentlemen, nor any age or condition of men, but
rendered all alike in this most insupportable Captivity, they now generally
grinding at the Mills attending the Fornaces, or digging in this scorching
Island, having nothing to feed on (notwithstanding their hard labor,) but
Potatoe Roots, nor to drink but water, with such roots masht in it, (besides
the bread and tears of their own afflictions) being bought and sold still from
one Planter to another, or attached as horses and beasts for the debts of their
masters, being whipped at their whipping-posts, as Rogues, for their masters
pleasure, and sleep in styes worse then hogs in England, and many other ways
made miserable, beyond expression or Christian imagination.

Humbly your Petitioners do remonstrate on behalf of themselves and the others,
their most deplorable (and as to Englishmen unparalled,) condition, and
earnestly beg, since they are not under any pretended conviction of Law, that
this high and honorable Court will be pleased to examine this arbitrary power,
and to question by what warrant, so great a breach is made upon the free People
of England, they having never seen the faces of those their pretended owners
(Merchants that deal in slaves and souls of men) nor ever hearing of their
names before Master Cole made Affidavit in the office of Barbados, that he sold
them as their goods. But whence they derived their authority for the sale and
slavery of your poor Petitioners and the rest, they are wholly ignorant to this
very day.

That this high Court will be further pleased, to interest their power for the
redemption and reparation of your distressed Petitioners and the rest; or if
the names of your Petitioners, and number of the rest, be so inconsiderable as
not to be worthy Relief, or your tender compassion, yet at least, that this
Court will be pleased on behalf of themselves, and all the Freeborn people of
England, by whose suffrages they sit in Parliament, (any of whose cases it may
be next) whenever a like force shall be laid on them, to take course to curb
the unlimited power under which the Petitioners and the others suffer, that
neither you nor any of their Brethren, upon these miserable terms, may come
into this place of torment, a thing not known amongst the cruel Turks, to sell
and enslave these of their own Country and Religion, much less the Innocent.

These things being granted as they hope, their grieved souls shall pray, etc.
Marcellus Rivers. Oxenbridge Foil.

The Copy of a Letter, written, to a Noble Person, in Parliament.
My most noble Lord;
I Beseech your Lordships pardon, for this rude approach of a Slave, One of
those many mentioned in the Slaves Petition to the Parliament, thrown together,
out of this, (sometime free and noble) Nation of England, and obscurely buried
alive in the disconsolate vault, the Protestants Purgatory, Barbados, whence I
am escaped, I cannot say free, but rather, as one brought over in a Coffin, out
of which I may not peep, until the protection of this Parliament unlock it,
and say, Arise Freeman and walk; In the mean time, I account my self, equally
miserable with my fellow sufferers left behind, who do all unanimously by me
cry unto your Lordship and to all the members of your great Assembly, (the
Assertors of Englands Freedom) in the words of the Souls under the Altar,
Quousque Domine, quousque? They are now become Prisoners indeed, and Slaves of
hope, looking upon this great body, (made up of so many generous souls) to be
the Angel of their Deliverance, and humbly beg your Lordship vigorously to
prosecute the Restitution of poor Englands freedom. They look upon themselves
as least concerned in this great business (though sufficiently miserable)
being but a poor handful compared to Englands multitude: the Lot is cast upon
them to be whipped, as ('it is said) other youths are, in the presence of young
Princes; That they may be sensible, of the smart due to themselves, (and which
they may expect, if they will not learn their books better,) And if our Torment
will but make this Princely Assembly look about them, and in us, as in a
Looking-glass, to behold the face of their own Condition, they will certainly
find, that it is but hodie mihi, and cras Tibi, and can promise themselves no
longer freedom from our Condition, then they continue members of the Peoples
Representative: For the House being once dissolved, they are exposed to a
possibility, (I may not say a probability) of the like violence,
Parliament-protection only makes the difference; Else, my Lord, for ought I
know, I ought to be as free from being the goods and chattels of Martin Noel
and Henry Hatsel, (for Thomas Aldern that had the thirds of us, has already,
(I hear) given an account of his unrighteousness to a greater Tribunal) as
any man, though he might have been once a member of Parliament; For I never
made any contract with them, nor do I know whether there be such persons, or
whether the Master of the ship used their names sictitiously, as Lawyers do
formally, John Anokes and John Astiles: My Lord I do not go about to conceal
that I was sometime an unworthy Officer in the late Kings Army: But this I
affirm, I was never in any military Action, since we were disbanded upon
Articles at Truro in Cornwall in the end of the year 1644. Indeed I have had
my share in the suffering part since, upon jealous suggestions and false
surmises: After that disbanding, I have also had the benefit and protection of
an Act of Oblivion from the Parliament, and further being upon unjust pretenses
indicted as a Traitor at Exon in the West in 1655, I was there by the grand
Jury of the County of Devon, pronounced Innocent, by their Ignoramus, and so
declared in form of Law; And if neither the Artiticles of a Victorious Army,
nor the Act of Oblivion of an English Parliament, nor the formality of a Trial
by a Jury, and the Declaration of Law make us Innocent, and preserve us ftom
being sold for Slaves, whence shall we expect freedom. My Lord your spacious
soul, can certainly never undertake a more charitable Office, then to endeavor
the Redemption of the Innocent Slaves at Barbados, and the prevention of the
further slavery of England. (Our case, is but your Touchstone, by which you may
discover whether English, be Slaves or Freemen,) which I humbly beg you
Lordship to be zealous in, I can only pray for your Lordships good success, and
heartily subscribe my self, to be, (as far as without my pretended Owners
consent, I can promise)

My Lord, Your Lordshipps humble and faithful Servant.

A Copy of a second Letter written to another worthy Member of Parliament.
Sir,
HAving had former Experience of your goodness, and having been eased by your
hand, upon my Letter, when I was heretofore under some oppression (though of
nothing so high a nature as now, being with some scores more of freeborn
English men, sold into slavery,) That gives me the confidence, and you the
trouble of this second Letter, though you cannot now, (as then) singly help me,
yet in conjunction with others, of your great Assembly, (all inclined for the
freedom of the people) I hope you will further mine and all the others
liberties, who are now Slaves at Barbados, and Petitioners at your Bar; For if
this man-stealing trade hold good, that all they that were at the Salisbury
Rising shall be sold to the Indies for Slaves, because they were there; And all
those too, that were not at the Salisbury Rising, shall be also sold thither,
because they were not there; which is the case of a great number of the
Petitioners who never either saw Salisbury, or heard of that Rising, nor knew
why they were committed to Prison, yet found themselves indicted for treason,
and being thereupon quitted by the Jury of life and death, which is the case of
Augustine Greenwood and Nicholas Broadgate (two of the Petitioners) to my
knowledge, (whatever more of that petitioning number were so quitted, which I
do not remember) are notwithstanding that acquitment inslaved: If this be
allowed, an easy understanding will quickly find, what must necessarily
become, of all the (formerly free) People of England: And these Merchants of
men shelter themselves, and hope to continue hidden from the punishment of
their Iniquities, and to continue and increase Englands slavery, by an unheard
of wile, which unless this brave Assembly of Parliament do wisely look into,
and vigorously stand to their own, and the Peoples preservation; They
themselves, may chance to be cheated of lives, liberties and estates. And the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of London, by this law, (or rather lawfulness)
will in time, not be spared by these West Indian spirits; though they begin
with Country Gentlemen and others, as a more private and silent thing: These
subtle Sophisters, do not seem to be so impudent, as publicly to establish
Iniquity by a Law, for that the free People would perceive, (and at least
murmr at, though they might not be able to help) But these use the way of a
more sly violence, and pick up free People traveling upon their occasions, and
take others out of their houses upon pretenses of public Justice, and so do
piously shelter their own private and profitable malice, of the former number.
I believe the greatest part, (if not all) of the Petitioners were, (amongst
whom, is not any one condemned person) but that is no matter, they were as
proper men as those taken in Arms at South-moulton, and some of them of better
trades, and so would prove more profitable Commodities, and yield more Sugar,
then those Gentlemen, that could not work so lustily) But I Will instance but in
one taken out of his house, (though I could name more) there was one Master
Diamond, a Devonshire Gentleman, (as proper as ancient) being at his sale,
threescore and sixteen years of age, he was taken up at Tiverton, (where he
dwelt) and the greatest offense, that they accused him guilty of, (for ought I
could ever hear) was, that when Sir Joseph Waggstaffe, and the party, came
through that town, and the poor old Gentleman, wondering to see, so
unexpectedly, so many gallant men, traveling together, asked who they were, and
'twas answered, Cavaliers. Marry, said he, (as they pretend) they are very
brave Gentlemen, were I, as young as I have been, I would go along with them,
whither he said so or no, God knows, I know not, but that was all they had to
allege against him, which they never went about to prove, though he were kept
prisoner a whole year, most of the time in the inner prison, of the common
Goal, amongst the felons and murderers, from which the high Goal of Exon, is
never free, and the rest of the time, in a Room in straw, amongst three or
fourscore Prisoners more; and he was so far from being indicted, that he was
never, (I am confident) so much as examined by a Justice of Peace; and yet was
this good old Gentleman ravished away with the rest of us, from the bosom of
the wife of his youth, and from the youthful, (but now unhappy) Children of
their aged Parents, and notwithstanding his age and Innocence (for it might
have been charitably looked upon as an effect of his doteage, though he should
have said as dangerous words, (as had I wished, comes to) be; this aged
Gentlemen was driven on shipboard, the grave Matron his wife, and their
dutiful children. (Having first made application (but in vain) to the
inexorable High Sheriff) followed him with their affectionate tears, and
heartbreaking groans, a^ far as Plymouth, but could never see him, so much as
to take leave of him but sent to him on shipboard, to let him know, that they
were come thither to mourn with him at parting; but off from the shipboard, he
might not pass, to salute his wife, and bless his children, though it had been
to have saved his soul; and to him, he forbad them to come, upon his love and
blessing, for fear they should make him yet more miserable, in being snatched
away with him: thus was this ancient Gentleman thrown out of the Conversible
world at best, (if not really into his grave,) then all the voyage, bemoaning
himself, (to the great grief of all the rest,) as a miserable man, to be stolen
away from his aged wife, of whose constant affections he had scores of years
experience, and who he feared would now break her heart for grief, and never be
able to see her own home again. In this high agony of love, and grief, and
fear, and danger, above all he was troubled, that he should go out of the
world, leaving his poor Country, in this slavish condition, which he had so
many years heretofore seen noble and free. Now Sir, if this be the liberty and
privilege of the subject, so long promised us, the people of England are in
but a sad condition. And if there be no redemption of us, already so enslaved
by a tyrannical force, for whose service our masters have nothing under our
hands to show, nor have we any thing under their hands to show, whether ever or
never the term of our slavery shall end. Sir, I know it cannot but grieve your
righteous soul, to hear of these afflictions of your Brethren, if this be not
redressed, you know not how soon, the Citizens and Commons of London, whose
Representative you are, may likewise be carried into the like sad captivity; to
prevent which, methinks, since Petitions are voted the peoples privilege, they
should petition to the Parliament, (if not for our freedom, yet for
themselves, that there may an Act pass to secure them, and all the free people
of England, from this violent spiriting, least they also upon these miserable
terms, should be brought into this place of torment. Sir, I shall pray, that
God will bless you, and all the great Assembly, in the preservation of
Englands Freedom, and rest,

Sir, Your most obliged and faithful Servant.

The Copy of a third Letter, written to another member of Parliament.
Sir,
THe great Report of your public spirit, and high asserting of the enslaved
people of Englands freedom gives me this confidence, to bemoan to you in
particular, and to the great counsel of the whole nation in general, the
misery of my own, (and of the many other slaves at Barbados) sad and to be
pitied fate, for though we have never forfeited our selves to the Law, by any
guilt, yet, notwithstanding our innocence, by a strange mysterious riddle, a
blustering power, furious as a stormy Harricane, blowing from all the points of
the compass, (but fixed in none) are we hurried to the heathenish Indies, and
are sold in the public market, as beasts, and become to all intents and
purposes, like those our fellow creatures that have no understanding, being
bought and sold still, from master to master, or attacht as their goods, by the
process of their cruel creditours, so that he that has a good master too day
(for some such there are) may have a tyrant too morrow, that shall whip him at
the whipping-post, as a revenge on his baffling debtour. Oh Sir, did this
glorious nation, whose complacent and tender (mixed with a courageous)
disposition, was wont to make them appear lovely, to all the nations of the
world, ever think that this would have been the English Translation, of those
Latin words, which are as a Proclaimation throughout the earth, being so
eminently written in capital Letters of gold. Over the place of the displaced
statue of the late King Charles, upon the Royal Exchange, London, (the
intelligible center of Christendom,)

Anno primo, libertatis Angliae restitutae. 1648.

Sir, had these men-stealers committed this horrid violence, before that
publication of liberty, we might have had somewhat less cause to wonder at
their felony (though cause enough,) being a thing unknown before in any part of
the world, and which the Low Countries, Holland, and other free nations will
not yet believe, though we should swear it unto them. Sir, I beseech you
therefore to be isntrumental toward the obtaining of a Committee (or some
other Court) empowered for the hearing of the poor slaves, (whose Petition is
already in your house) that so your servant, (for that title I would fain
exchange for slave) may make all the points of their Petition appear true, by
the testimony of able persons, upon their oaths, to which purpose your
Petitioner desires the Parliaments protection of his person, which obtained, he
shall be able to make good both in substance and circumstances the saddest
relation of the most unparalled breach upon Englands freedom, that was yet
ever committed since the Creation, and from which flavish condition I do
earnestly beg, that you would use all your powers, (in a Parliamentary way) to
redeem us, and to restore us once again, to our pristine condition of being
men, and then shall I be able more properly to subscribe my self, (which now
being not my own) I do presumptuously,

Sir, Your most humble Servant.

The Copy of a fourth Letter, written to another Member of Parliament.
SIR,
I Beseech you accept of my thanks, for your charitable and cheerful
delivering of the Slaves Petition to the grand Committee of Grievances, which,
I hear was not only discussed before them; but the next day solemnly debated
in the House: Sir in this your gallant asserting of the Freedom of your Native
Country, you have shown a Mosaicall courage, that dare do so much toward the
relieving of the oppressed English, from their (more then Egyptian)
Taskmasters. Sir you cannot but know (I believe,) the truth of that part of the
Petition which concerns the Ignoramus returned upon my Indictment the
acquitment of Nicholas Broadgate by the Jury of life and death, and the
Innocence of all the rest of your Petitioners that were sent from Exeter: (for
although Eight of the there condemned persons, were sent and sold with us, yet
we have not intermixed them within our Petition; referring that to some other
way of their own, or friends, (as time and opportunity shall permit.) Sir I
believe also you have often heard from the sad and charitable Citizens of Exon,
the Tragical history of our being barbarously driven thence, into the Land of
our Captivity, with much like violence, I believe, as the Heard of swine were
driven into the sea, and they needs must go that are so driven; when two foot
soldiers and one horseman, all armed, were allotted to the guard of every two
(intended) Slaves, the horseman riding between every Couple, and on each side
of the paired Prisoners, a foot soldier guardant, beating some that came to
pity us; and the Power imprisoning one for wishing, God bless us, thus they
hurried us through the City: Being upon the Forlorn march, which continued
three days; those few of us, which were allowed beds by the way, had a Guard
of armed soldiers all night in the Room to guard us in our sleeps, least we
might make an escape in our dreams: and we were not suffered to write back this
sad kind of usage, to our friends at Exon, least it should appear too harsh a
truth: the breathless prisoners having been stifled up, for a whole year, more
then threescore, lying in a room all that while in straw together, were not
able to march so lustily, as their high fed and furious drivers expected, yet
being surbated and almost dead, through sorenosse of traveling, and fainting
down through weariness, were thence cudgelled up again, by these unchristian
Janisaries, more cruelly, then a merciful man would have beaten his rusty
jade. Thus began our misery, and so we were brought on shipboard, where it
continued, for we were all put under deck together, and locked down. On the same
deck was a bulk-head (so called) or a partition boarded, we being kept on one
side, and a main Guard of seamen on the other side of that bulk-head, through
which were port-holes made, and through them great guns, laden with case-shot,
levelled against us, that so, if there should have been any rebellion under
that tyranny (which any one or two rude fellows, against the consent of the
rest, might seem to begin, if they had pleased, then might the Guard and
Gunners more easily destroy us, which happily upon a jealousy (which was once
amongst them,) they would have done, had not our provident and covetous owners
(those merchants of Babylon, (taken care to bring us to a more profitable
market, to secure which Vice Admiral Hatsell offered the Mr. of our ship, a
states man of war for his Convoy. In this voyage, so great oppression was laid
upon us by our invisible Owners, that whereas every vicious servant which
Bridewell and Newgate had vomited into that ship, had an Hamaka to sleep in,
and keep him from the vermin, which amongst such a crew must inevitably swarm
all the voyage, until the Extremity of heat (under the Tropic) destroy them,
we were forced to ly on the bare hard boards, they refusing to let us to have
so much as mattes to ease our weary bones; though their Factour moved them, (or
one of them) to allow it, and he would have disbursed the money. Being arrived
at Barbados, we were there sold as Beasts, and made otherwise miserable,
beyond the power of my tongue or pen to express: From this brutish condition,
Sir, if you please to set too your helping hand to free us, and looking upon
us, as Beasts fallen into a ditch, will use your endeavor to help us out, it is
such a piece of charity, as will be acceptable to God, and all good men. So the
reward of the merciful attend you, for they shall receive mercy, I rest,

Sir, Your most grateful and humble Servant.

FINIS.

