THE Nonsuch PROFESSOR IN His Meridian Splendour, OR THE Singular Actions OF
Sanctified Christians.

Laid open in Seven Sermons at Allhallows Church in the Wall, London.

By WILLIAM SECKER Preacher of the Gospel.

For Isay unto you, Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven,

Math. 5. 20. Non magna loquimur sed vivimus,

Arnob. London, Printed by M. S. for Thomas Parkhurst, to be sold at his shop
at the three Crowns, over against the great Conduit in Cheapside. 1660.

TO THE HONORABLE, And truly Noble Patriots Sr Edward Barkham, Knight and
Baronet; and his Religious consort Dame Francis Barkham of Tottenham in the
County of Middlesex.
Honored Worthies.
THis Piece reflects on no Interest but what is Eternal: You have tide me in
so many silken cords of your constant favors, that I must live and dye bound
in those pleasant fetters; the only return I am able to make you, is in Ink
and Paper to acknowledge my self your Debtor: Your Noble minds are like that of
Artaxerxes King of Persia, who thought it as well becoming him to accept of
small things from others, as to give great things himself.

Let rotten posts be gilded, and decayed beauties painted; virtue like a
precious Diamond needs no varnish: Your own graces will spring you Rivers of
praises, without the tide of others tongues flowing in to brim the banks.

Real honor is not built on the glittering foundation of refined clay; the
flourishing Laurel of durable excellency, does not always grow in the smooth
field of a brave Geneallogy.

That blood which runs in virtues veins, is of a more orient color then that
which swims in other channels: The fairest flowers of humanity, are those that
spring up in the garden of sincerity; piety is a more noble thing then
parentage; it is better to be newborn, then it is to be high borne.

I believe you count that the sweetest honey which you suck out of Christ's
hive, and take more pleasure in your inward goodness, then in your outward
greatness.

I am sensible what prejudices are taken against Epistles commendatory; letters
are too often like multiplying glasses, which makes the smallest mole-hills,
appear like the greatest Mountains; But yet I dare show your unspotted faces,
without borrowing the suspicious reflection of any false glasses: You have too
clear a knowledge of God to take any thing into your hands before him, and too
dear a love to God, to set any thing in your hearts above him; you cast more
propicious aspects upon Religion, then ever to think it a friend unto
Rebellion, and looked upon Fear God, and honor the King, as a couple that God
had joined t^gether, and that no man might put asunder; and such as have shaken
these Pillars with their own hands, have pulled the house upon their own heads;
Providence having laid on them the hands of vengeance, that laid on us the
hands of violence, and brought them under the sword of the Law, that kept us
under the Law of the sword.

You rejoiced in the first dawnings of the Morning of our Redemption from
Egyptian slavery and oppression, and deem the superstruction of prosperity, is
firmliest laid upon the foundation of Monarchy. When others have sparkled like
Stars in their Orbs, you have shined like a Sun in yours; having neither been
like Crabs going backwards, nor like snails creeping forwards: When others have
sailed with every wind of Doctrine, you have steered your course according to
the Compass of Scripture; and have carried the lamp of Truth in one hand, and
the beauty of holiness in the other. It is said of the Families of some great
Personages, That there is more oaths heard in a day, then there are prayers
made in a year; But I may say of yours, there is more prayers made in a day,
then there are oaths heard in a year: The oil of grace that is poured on
your heads, runs down to the skirts of your garments. O how comely a Vision is
it, to see the Tabernacles of great men, to be the Temples of the great God!

Honored Worthies, Many jewels God has hung upon your terrestrial Crown; he
has given you the fatness of the earth, as well as the dew of Heaven, Esau's
Venison, as well as Jacob's Blessing; the nether springs of common bounty, as
well as the upper springs of special mercy: There are four showers that have
watered your Garden.

First, a fruitful Posterity. Secondly, a peaceful Tranquillity. Thirdly, a
faithful Society. Fourthly, a grateful Memory.
As there is nothing wanting to you, so let there be nothing wanting in you;
you cannot complain of God for want of mercy, let not God complain of you for
want of Duty; as he has opened his hands to bless you, so do you open your
mouths to bless him: In the highest flood and spring-tides of outward mercies,
its hard to keep our hearts within the channel.

Respected Sirs, You have a large room in the bosoms of many that are godly;
but alas! the best men's confidences on earth, are insufficient evidences for
heaven: A house well compacted is able to bear out a storm, but a dis-joynted
building every push will throw it down. The best Patrimony is that above us,
and the best Testimony is that within us; give me such hopes as will not only
go with me to my bed of rest, but will lie with me in my bed of dust; as will
not only bear me up in the Calm of Life, but will shore me up in the Tempest
of Death.

Sirs, You are like Beacons upon a hill which are visible unto all: A small
star may be darkened, and yet pass unobserved, but the eclipsing of the suns
splendour, is a part of the worlds wonder: a crack in the greatest pebble, is
not so bad as a flaw in the smallest jewel: O how amiably should you live with
men, who look to live eternally with God! The highest pre-eminence, calls for
the exactest obedience; he is unworthy to be the chiefest in a family, that is
unwilling to be the choycest of a family; yea, he puts a sword into the hand of
Vice, that snatches the scepter out of the hand of grace: None can challenge an
interest in the love of God, but such as are endued with the life of God.

Dear Sirs, I know you have affections to desire the truth, as well as
apprehensions to discern the truth; and read Books as Bees to fill your
Combs, and not as Butterflies to paint your wings; and therefore I have
presented you with a Piece that is not notionall, but practical.

A great shoe fits not a small foot, nor a large Sail a little Boat; the
subject is fitter for a Christian to live upon, then for a Critic to look
upon: They are as cruel Parents that murder the issue of their brains, as
those that murder the issue of their loins.

I hope the dreggs does not lie so thick in it, but you may draw out some clear
liquor from it; though the Author be contemptible, yet the matter is
considerable: God looks not for what he gives not: (As well as I am able) I
have from this Scripture drawn you a Believers Picture; and according to this
Glass doubt not but your selves will dress. If these bellows keep the vestall
fire always burning upon the Altar, and your graces have their advancement, I
shall have my contentment. I have here laid the Rods of correction on the backs
of offenders, and given the words of Instruction to the hearts of believers.

Worthy Sirs, Compare what is spoken in the books of men, with what is written
in the Book of God; that the Bristoll stone may not pass for the sparkling
Diamond, no^ Brass and Copper go as current as Gold and Silver. I would lay
no other burdens upon your backs, then I would carry upon my own shoulders; nor
would I have you make any brick, but with Gods straw.

Man's fault cannot prejudice Gods right; though we have lost our abillity of
obeying, yet he has not lost his Authority in commanding: By how much the
greater you are then others, by so much the better you should be then others:
where Divine Providence advances to honorable dignity, there Divine precepts
ingages to proportionable duty; on earth it is your business to serve God, in
Heaven it will be your blessedness to see God.

Many by feeding upon one dish grow to maturity, when they that sit down to a
multitude are surfited with variety: When others grumble to look upon rich men's
estates, do you tremble to think upon rich men's accounts; and as the earth
will do you no good when you dye, so let it do you no hurt whilst you live.

They that are in the right way to Paradise, should greeve at every thing that
hinders their progress: There are many are the Pictures of piety, but I wish
you may be the patterns of piety. Alas! what is the reflection in the glass to
the complexion in the face? or the form of godliness upon us, to the power of
godliness within us? such Jonah's in the lading of our Vessels, does but fill
the Seas with storms and tempests.

You Worthies have almost stretched your lives to David's standard; and who
knows how soon such may meet with the death of the body that are encompassed
with the body of death: Whilst you are descending to the bottom of the hill of
nature, I wish you may be ascending to the top of the hill of grace; that the
nearer your bodies draw to the pit of corruption, the nearer your souls may
draw to the place of perfection; that your declining Sun may not set under a
cloud, that has so long shined in a clear sky.

Usually their durations are the shortest, whose possessions are the greatest;
But you have had as larg a share of being as you have had of blessing.

My hearts desire and prayer to God for both you and yours, is, that you may be
as glorious in Heaven, as you have been prosperous on earth; that you may be
such jewels of grace, as may be locked up in the Cabinet of glory; that such
silver Cups may be found in the mouths of all your sacks, that the word which
has brought salvation to your souls, may bring your souls unto salvation; that
as your children sit like Olive plants about your Table, so you and your
children may sit like Olive plants about his Table; that your little family
below, may make up that great family above; that when others as chafe are
thrown into the fire, you as wheat may be gathered into the Garner: That you
may live long on earth profitably, and for ever in Heaven joyfully, is the
Prayer of

Your Humble Servant, William Secker.

The Author to the Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER;
WE live in age that is most censorious, and yet in age that is least
religious; where there are any faults men are more skilful to find them, then
careful to mend them: But shall we turn the Sun into darkness because of its
moats, or the Moon into blood because of her spots? Its in vain to look for
clear light where God himself will have a shadow.

Good meats displease none but distempered palats; and must wholesome dishes be
barred the Table, because they offend aguish stomachs. To serve men's necessity
is charitable, to serve men's convenience is warrantable, to serve men's iniquity
is damnable, but to serve men's purity is honorable.

Grace needs a Spur to prick it on, as well as Vice needs a Bridle to hold it
in.

The design of this Piece is not the ostentation of the Author, but the
edification of the Reader. I hope none will blow out such a Candle upon earth,
by the light of which themselves may see the way to Heaven.

The face of none is so comely in a Saints eyes as the face of Christ, and the
voice of none is so pleasant in a Saints ears as the voice of Christ.

The Manna of spiritual influences, does usually fall in the Dew of spiritual
Ordinances; To set them up was a work of mercy in God to us, and to keep them
up is a work of justice in us to God; Whilst we suck at these Breasts, they
will stream warm Milk into our mouths.

Dear Christian, In this Subject I have given thee a breviary of Religion* The
works enjoined in it are weighty and ponderous, and the wages annexed to it are
mighty and glorious; Christianity is here clothed in its white Linen of
purity. Would thou obtain that happiness which the promise confirms, thou
must espouse that holiness which the precept injoynes; The best way to greaten
your felicity, is to heighten your activity. Grace as it makes our comforts
sweeter, so it makes our Crowns greater; And as it begins in the love of God to
us, so it ends in our love to God; Those children that are found moving in the
Orbs of obedience, shall have the beautiest Sunshine of their Fathers
countenance.

Christians, Be sure to lay your superstruction upon an unmovable foundation;
and propagate such a business, as has an immediate tendency to blessedness.
It Is an unparalleled mercy to be kept free from corruption in a time of
infection: It Is better to be innocent, then it is to be penitent; To prevent
the malady, then to invent the remedy.

Christians, As you have not a Lease of your lives, so you have not a Brace of
your lives; That that which is corrupted in the former, may be corrected in the
latter: Had we not need to take heed how we shoot, that have but a single Arrow
to direct to the mark: No time is ours but what is present, and that is as soon
past as present: We had need improve that with the greatest diligence, that
glides away with the speediest nimblenesse. Shall our rests steal away one half
of our time, and our lusts the other.

O Sirs, The more you have of good in you, the more you shall have of God with
you; yea spiritual actions they will make you look fresh and orient in the eyes
of spiritual Christians, that judge of the trees of righteousness, by the
fruits of righteousness. The enjoyment of this world is neither an argument of
Divine anger, nor an evidence of Divine favor; Therefore do not judge your
selves by your wealth, but by your works, not by the Bags of Gold you have in
your hands, but by the Seeds of Grace you have in your hearts: The ambitious
man shall leave all his greatness behind him, when the religious man shall
carry all his goodness with him. Let Christianity be your shop to trade in,
and Eternity shall be your bed to rest in; Every grace that is here exercised,
shall there be glorified; The Lord Jesus Christ shall not only see the travels
of his soul, but you shall see the travels of yours.

Christians, Either let your works be according to your profession, or else let
your profession be according to your works; Never put on the fair suit of
profession, to do the fowl work of corruption. God will cut down those
degenerate Vines that bear nothing but sour Grapes. The lusts of the flesh are
pleasurable, where the works of the flesh are visible.

Sirs, The Gospel does not only require that you should be diligent Christians,
but that you should be excellent Christians. By the singularity of your
actions, you may prove the sincerity of your persons; The Race is short in
which you run, but the Prize is great for which you run. Let not us sow such
barren Lands in which we loose our time and pains.

I wish that this gail of Divinity may speed your Vessel to the Haven of
Felicity; And when God gives in more of himself to me, I shall give out more of
him to you; in the mean time it shall be my highest ambition, to be
isntrumental to others conversion. Who am and ever desire to be a Lover of him
that is a Savior to us;

Yours in the Lord Jesus, William Secker.

A Table of the chief Contents of this Treatise.
THe Text opened. The Doctrine raised, viz. That singular Christians must
perform singular actions.

First, Why it is that Christians must do more then others.

1. Because more is done for believers then is done for others. Page 14. 2.
Because they stand in a nearer relation to God then others. p. 17. 3. Because
they profess more then others, p. 21. 4. Because every believer is to be
conformed to his Redeemer. p. 25. 5. Because they are more looked upon then
others. p. 28. 6. Because if you do no more then others. it will appear that
you are no more then others. p. 31. 7. Because they are to be judges of others.
p. 33. 8. Because they expect more then others. p. 37.
Secondly, What it is that Christians must d^ more then others.

1. To do much good and make but little noise, p. 41. 2. To bring up the bottom
of our lives to the top of ou^ lights, p. 49. 3. To prefer the duty he owes,
above the danger that he fears. p. 55. 4. To seek the public good of others,
above the private good of our selves. p. 64. 5. To have the beautifullest
conversations amongst the blackest persons. p. 75. 6. To choose the worst of
sorrows before you commit the least of sins. p. 82. 7. To be a father to all in
charity, and a servant to all in humility. p. 93. 8. To mourn most before God
for those lusts that appear least before men. p. 105. 9. To keep our hearts
lowest, when God raises our estates highest. p. 117. 10. To be better inwardly
in substance, then outwardly in appearance. p. 125. 11. To be more afflicted at
the Churches heaviness, then we are affected with our own happiness. p. 132.
12. To render the greatest good for the receipt of the greatest evil. p. 139.
13. To take those reproofs best, which we need most. p. 149. 14. To take up all
duties in point of performance, and to lay them down in point of dependence. p.
159. 15. To take up our contentment, in Gods appointment. p. 167. 16. To be
more in love with the employment of holiness, then with the enjoyment of
happiness. p. 178. 17. To be more in searching our own hearts, then we are in
censuring others states. p. 187. 18. To set out for God at our beginning, and
to hold on with God until our ending. p. 193. 19. To take all the shame of our
sins to our selves, and to give all the glory of our services unto Christ. p.
207. 20. To value a Heavenly reversion, above an earthly possession. p. 215.
The Application, 1. For the erection of singular Principles; 2. For the
direction of singular Practices.

First, For the erection of singular Principles.

The first Principle, That whatsoever is acted by men on earth, is eyed by God
in Heaven. p. 225. 2. That after all your present receivings, you must be
brought to your future reckonings. p. 230. 3. That God bears a greater respect
to your hearts, then he does to your works. p. 242. 4. There Is more bitterness
following upon sins ending, then ever there was sweetness flowing from sins
acting. p. 248. 5. That there is the greatest vanity, in all created
excellency. p. 254. 6. That duties can never have too much care bestowed upon
them, nor too little considence placod in them. p. 265. 7. That there is no
obtaining what is promised, but by fulfilling what is commanded. p. 273. 8. That
its ill dressing our selves for another world, by the Looking-glass of this
world. p. 282. 9. That where man is so diligent as to do his best, there God is
so indulgent as to forgive his worst. p. 290. 10. That inward purity is the
ready road to outward plenty. p. 296. 11. That all the time God allows us is
little enough to fulfill the task that he allots us. p. 307. 12. That there can
never be too great an estrangen^ent from defilement. p. 317. 13. That
whatsoever is temporally enjoyed, should be spiritually improved. p. 344. 14.
That we are to speak well of God whatsoever ill we bear from God. p. 354. 15.
That the longer God forbears not finding amendment, the soarer he strikes when
he comes to judgment. p. 360. 16. That there is no measuring of the inward
conditions of men, by the outward dispensations of God. p. 366. 17. That we
should cleave the closest, to that good which is the choicest. p. 374. 18. That
it is our present business, to make sure of our future blessedness. p. 380.
19. That integrity is the best security. p. 385. 20. That the sweetness of the
Crown that shall be received, will make amends for the bitterness of the
Cross that may be endured. p. 390.
Secondly, For the direction of singular Practices.

1. If you would do more then others, then you must know more then others. p.
399. 2. Would you do more then others, then love morethen others. p. 407. 3.
Would you do more then others, then pray more then others. p. 413. 4. Would
you do more then others, then believe more then others. p. 421. 5. Would you do
more then others, then resolve more then others. p. 429. 6. Would you do more
then others, then learn to deny your selves. p. 432.
Courteous Reader, correct with thy Pen the faults of the Press, either such
as are Verbal, or such which are Literal, the most whereof thou shall find in
this ERRATA.
PAge 30. read magister: Margent p. 52. bona: p. 96. novos modos: p. 122.
ingens: 124. pereunt: 218. despicit: 231. observentur: 247. offerre: 256.
excaecavit inferni: 273. quam Judaeos, testamento quaeritis: 276. culpabilis:
279. in sectabere rastru: 282. respectu: 290. Anhelant is: 293. stuporis: 347.
obnubilat: 362. Accendimus: 389. dormivi: 394. calumnia: 398. auris. For
English; Page 20. for singer, r. finger: p. 22. l. 22. add on rotten
Hypocrites: p. 30. for Natian, Christian: p. 50. for relish, receive: p. 58. 2.
suus sanus: p. 192. for heart, body.

THE Non-such Professor IN His Meridian splendour. OR, The singular Actions OF
Sanctified Christians.
MATTHEW. 5. 47. -- What do ye more then others?
IN a mountain the Law was propounded to Moses; in a mountain the Law is
expounded by Jesus; the one to a man of God who was the meekest; the other by
the Son of God who was the greatest: The former to a Prophet of the Lord, the
latter by the Lord of the Prophets. As his works were miraculous, so his words
are mysterious: But what is light in the book without light in the heart:
Therefore as he opens the Scripture to our understandings, so he opens our
understandings to the Scripture. The Scribes and Pharisees though they knew the
letter of the Law, yet they were ignorant of the spirit of it: as the waves of
the sea are discoverable when the wealth of the sea is invisible. They never
cracked the shell, to taste the kernel; nor unlockt the cabinet to find out the
jewel. They made a difference of the Tables, as if one side had been of Gods
writing, and the other of the Devils scribbling. They could not charge the Law
with imperfections, but Christ charges them with misinterpretations. They were
better acquainted with the customs of nature, then with the Canons of
Scripture. How shall the blind see when the Seers are blind! yet their eyes are
out which should put others in. The Law requires holiness in our inner parts as
well as in our outward acts. Its like the Sun, from the luster of whose rays
the most secret closets are not hid: Not only he that lies with a woman, but he
that lusts after a woman, is an Adulterer: He whose heart is full of hating,
though his hand be free from striking, is a Murderer. Thus a law may be
transgressed, when it is observed; as lightning melts the sword without hurting
of the scabbard. The lusts of men may be predominate, when the lives of men are
not inordinate; as guests may be in the house when they look not out at the
door. The precepts of morality they order our conversations, but the precepts
of Divinity they order our cogitations. The only way to have crystal streams,
is to cast salt into the spring. He that begins Religion where it should end,
will end Religion where it should be begun. I have seen an end of all
perfection, but thy commandments are exceeding large, Psalm. 119. 96. You may
see an end of all perfection, but of the Laws perfection there is no end to be
seen; you may sound the bottom of any deeps but of Gods deeps.

But as the Portal conducts to the Palace, or as the Suburbs directs us to the
City, so the context will guide us to the text; Verse. 46. If ye love them that
love you, what reward have you? do not the publicans the same? they will show
kindness where kindness is shown, as an echo returns the voice it receives:
And shall publicans be as godly as the godly? shall Eos ad altius quod dam
foecunditatis genus Ch^istus excitat and attollit, dum hujusmodi illis
interrogationem proponit, Quid eximiivos facitis? fructus long
praestantissimos ab iis expectat, qui long eminentissimum and doctorem, and
doctrinam habuerunt, etc. Rous inter. reg. Dei Tract. 1. cap. 10. p. 157, 158.
the sons of men equalize the sons of God, or the Law of nature swell to so
high a tide as the law of grace? this were for the dribling river to vye with
the drowning ocean.

If you salute your brethren only, what do you more than others?

I shall not curiously carve out the words, least by painting the windows, I
shut out the light. The native comeliness of the Scripture scorns the unnatural
drugs of bewitching Jezabels. A rough Diamond is of greater value then a smooth
counterfeit. I am not about a piece of Oratory, but of Divinity; and my design
is rather to express affections than to affect expressions. Though the
sweetness of the sauce may yield us contentment, yet its the soundness of the
meat that affords us nourishment.

But that Aarons bells may ring and not jangle, the Text is like a precious
jewel, small in quantity, but great in excellency.

In the words you have two parts.

1. An action propounded. 2. A question proposed.
1. An action propounded, about what is lawful, If you salute your brethren
only.

(...) (...) salutare quidem sig. ni^i^at, sed osculo, and complexu, qui mos
islarum gentium erat. Bez. in


It signifies to salute with kisses and embraces:

There is a kiss of obedience and subjection, and that's the Subjects kiss.
There is a kiss of lusts and temptation and that is the Harlots kiss. There is
a kiss of treachery and dissimulation, and that is the Traitors kiss. There is
a kiss of love and affection, and that's the brothers kiss.

What one verse calls saluting, the other calls loving. Because salutation is
but a pledge of affection, its but our hearts running forth at our lips.

2. A question propounded about what is needful, What do you more then others?
(...), significat quid redundans, vel quid superabundans. Leigh. ^rit sacr.
(...) quid impar. (...) ultra, velquid excellens, (...) supra. ^reg. Etym. par.


(...), what singular thing do ye. (...), or (...), as if it were (...), Syms.
Lex. This is as the well from whence I shall draw the water. And that I may not
raise a superstruction without a foundation, take this as the corner stone.

Doct. That singular Christians must perform singular actions.

This celestial orb is large enough for every star to shine in. You cannot
rationally imagine that I should sluice out a bitter stream from so sweet a
spring. Whosoever shall collect any pearls out of such a heap, will leave as
good behind him as any he carries with him. The Disciples of Christ, as they
are more then others, so they should do more then others. A Heathen may move
beyond a Sodomite, but a Christian must move beyond an Hypocrite. Though the
naturally dead can do nothing, yet the spiritually dead may do something:
Though they can do nothing as to the obtaining of the grace of life, yet they
may do something as to the using of the means of life. Cicero complains of
Homer that he taught the gods to live like men; but grace teaches men to live
like gods. Great persons they are like bells, which whilst they are rising
strike apace, but when they are up, are set, and strike no more; or like
flowers, which by change of soil degenerate into weeds. Thus the highest
mountains are the barrenest grounds. Its sad that we should live so long in the
world, and do so little good; or that we should live so little in the world,
and do so much evil. All creatures have their several essences; according to
the creatures essence, is the creatures actings. Trees are in their bearing, as
they are in their being. Other creatures are not more below a sinner, then a
Saint is above a sinner. Man is the excellency of the creature, the Saint is
the excellency of the man; Grace is the excellency of the Saint, Glory is the
excellency of Grace. Believers are among others as Saul among the Israelites,
higher by the head and shoulders. They are but base-born to them that are twice
born. What is the lowest shrubs in the bottom of the valleys, to the highest
cedars on the tops of the mountain? Stars that are placed in the highest orbs,
give the clearest lights. Trees planted by the rivers of water yield the
choycest fruits. They who look for a heaven made ready, should live as though
they were in heaven already. Grace does not only make a man more a man, but it
makes him more then a man. The primitive Christians were the best of men,
though they were but men at the best: None were more lowly in their
dispositions, and none more lovely in their conversations; Noah was a just man,
and perfect in his generation, Genesis 6. 9. He was not a sinner amongst those
that were Saints, but he was a Saint amongst those that were sinners: Who would
ever have looked for so fair a bird in so foul a nest? In a field of wheat,
there may spring up tares. A Saint is not free from sin, that's his burden; a
Saint is not free to sin, that's his blessing. Sin is in his soul* that's his
lamentation; his soul is not in sin, that's his consolation; And the Lord said
unto Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job, Job 1. 8. Why, what was there
in Job that was so considerable? there is none like him in all the earth.
Though there was none so bad as Job in heaven, yet there was none so good as
Job on earth. He was a man so like unto God, that there was never another man
like unto him. Beleivers in the world, they are the Non-such's of the world. It
was the saying of a gracious soul, hearing of the far goings of Hypocrites, Let
Hypocrites go as far as they can, in that which is good I will follow them, and
where they can go no further I will go beyond them. A Christian is not only to
do more then all other men will do, but he is to do more then all other men can
do. Whatsoever is not above the top of Nature, is below the bottom of grace.
Some there are that believe and work not; others there are that work and
believe not; but a Saint must do both. He must so obey the Law as if there were
no Gospel to be believed; and so believe the Gospel as if there were no Law to
be obeyed. Its by faith that our works are justified; but its by works that our
faith is testified. A Christians work does not lie in believing or in doing,
but in beleiving and in doing.

There are Four sorts of things.

First, Some things that are neither good nor pleasant, as envy and detraction.
The eclipsing of another sun will never make our own to shine with brighter
beams. O pare off those envious nails that are ever scratching those faces that
are fairer then your own. Why do you wound your selves with those plasters
that are laid upon your brethrens sores? Or weep at every shower of rain that
falls besides your own corn? Who would grudge an Ox its fat pasture, which does
but fit it for the slaughter? Or the Malefactors progress through the meadows
which conducts him to the gallows? Thou have never the less, for others having
of the more; and others have never the more, for thy having of the less. Leahs
fruitfulness, was not the spring of Rachels barrenness.

Secondly, Some things are pleasant but not good, as sin and transgression.
This Be carries honey in its mouth, but a sting in its tail. When Jael brings
forth her milk and her butter, then beware of the nail and the hammer. Death is
in the pot whilst you are tasting of the broth. The fish by leaping at the bait
is caught upon the hook. If the cup be sinful we must not taste it; if the cup
be lawful we must not carouze it: Reason forbids either the tasting of known
poison, or the being drunk with pleasant wine. Sin, it is like a river that
begins in a quiet spring, but ends in a tumultuous sea.

Thirdly, Some things are good but not pleasant, as sorrow and affliction. Sin
that is pleasant, but unprofitable; sorrow that profitable but unpleasant. God
by affliction separates the sin that he hates so deadly, from the soul that he
loves so dearly. They are not to take our spirits out of our flesh, but to take
our flesh out of our spirits. They are not to pull down the tabernacle of
Nature without us, but to rear up the temple of Grace within us. Waters are
purest when they are in their motion, and Saints are holiest when they are in
affliction. A foul feskue may point us to a fair lesson. Some children never
learn their books but when the rod is on their backs. By the greatest
affliction God does give the sweetest instruction. Though you may resist the
Judgments that are laid before you in the word, yet you cannot resist the
Judgments that are laid upon you by the rod. The purest gold is the most
ductible: that's a good blade that bends well without retaining its crooked
figure.

Fourthly, Some things that are both good and pleasant, and they are gracious
operations. A Beleivers bed of graces is more fragrant then a bed of spices. He
that gives his Image to us, he loves his Image in us. Finally my brethren,
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if
there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things, Phil. 4. 8.
That ye may approve things that are excellent, Phil. 1. 10. But because you
cannot see so well by a candle enclosed in a lanthorn, as by a taper burning in
the candlestick; I shall crack the shell that you may taste the kernel.

There are two channels that I shall cut out for these Crystal streams to run
in.

First, I shall speak to the Explication of what is Doctrinal.

Secondly, To the Application of what is Practical.

The former is like the cutting out of the suit; the latter is like the putting
it upon the back.

First. I shall speak to the Explication of what is Doctrinal. And that I may
not sluice in a sea of water into a little river, I shall make a double banck.

First, Why it is that the Disciples of Christ must do more then others.

Secondly, What it is that the Disciples of Christ must do more then others.

I begin with the first, why it is that the Disciples of Christ must do more
then others: Now that these nails may stick the faster, I shall drive them home
with an eight fold hammer.

1. Because more is done for Believers then is done for others; therefore more
must be done by Beleivers then is done by others. God gives favors not for
their sakes that receive them, but for his sake that bestows them. Now where
there is a superaddition to our privileges, there must be a superaddition to
our practices. You do not look for so much splendour from the burnings of a
candle as from the beamings of the Sun. Nor for so much moisture from the
dropings of a bucket, as from the disolving of a cloud. The Philosophers rule
is true, Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis. The heat which
melts the wax, hardens the clay. The juice that goes into the Rose makes it
sweet, but that which goes into the Nettle makes it stink. The mercies of God
if they be not loadstones to draw us to salvation, they will be milstones to
drown us in perdition. To whom much is given, of Quo plura accepisti, gratias
eo majores, gloriamque da^ori refer obligaris. Rous inter. reg. Dei. p. 153.
them much shall be required: God does not exact much where little is bestowed;
nor except little where much is received. A drop of praises is not commensurate
to a sea of favors. Hear ye the word of the Lord, O children of Israel, you
only have I known of all the families of the earth, Amos 3. 2. They were more
known to God then others, therefore they must more acknowledge God then others.
They can never speak good enough of God who have tasted the goodness of God.
Its but reason that they should bless most, who are the most blessed. Nature
has made other Creatures, but Grace has made you Christians. In Creation God
has given us to our selves, but in Redemption he has given himself to us. Its
a greater favor to be converted, then it is to be created; yea better have no
being, then not to have a new being. Now differencing mercy calls for
differencing duty. They who hold the largest farms, they should pay the
greatest rents. Where he sows the preciousest seeds, there he looks for the
fruitfulest harvest. When we were full of blood, then he was full of bowels.
When thou were setting sail to the Devil, God blew with a contrary wind and
altered thy course. Now will I sing to my beloved, a song of my beloved
touching his vineyard; My wel-beloved had a vineyard in a very fruitful hill,
and he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the
choycest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also made a wine press
therein, Isa. 5. 1, 2. Here is an Inventory of the goodness of God to his
vineyard; now what follows? He looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it
brought forth wild grapes. He looked that they should be better to him then
others, because he had been better to them then he had been to others. The
flowers of Paradise are seated in a better soil then the weeds of the
wilderness. When others are the Devils throughfare, these are Gods enclosure.
God has kissed you that are believers over many shoulders; You are like Dyals
in the sun, on which the beams of the sun of Righteousness do shine. How is it
that thou will show thy self to us and not to the world, who might have shown
thy self to the world and not to us! Joh. 14. 22. He has exalted you above
others, who are of the same mould with others. Has God shown himself to you
and not to the world, and will not you show your selves for God, and not for
the world? It lies as a great blemish upon Hezekiah, that his returning was not
answerable to his receiving. If God do great things for beleivers, he will not
accept of small things from believers.

2. Christians they should do more then others, because they stand in a nearer
relation to God then others. The nearer the relation, the greater the
obligation. In this respect believers on earth have a greater honor then the
Angels in heaven: Christ is related to them as a Lord to his Servants; but he
is united to these as a head to the members. There is no glased eyes that is
set in our Redeemers head; there is no wooden legs that are united to his body;
there is no barren branches that grows upon the Tree of Life. The Lord Jesus is
as far from being the head of a body that's ulcerous, as he is from being the
head of a body that's monstrous. The everlasting Father, Isa. 9. 6. Others they
are made of God, but these are born of God. A son honoreth his father, and a
servant his Master; If then I be a father, where is my honor? if a master,
where is my fear? Mal. 1. 6. As a Father, so he will be reverenced for his
goodness; as a Master, he will be feared for his greatness. Give unto Caesar
the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. If honor be
not due to him, let it not be bestowed; if it be due to him, let it not be
denied. We are all born to serve God, and better we had never been born, then
that we should not serve him. As A. Fulvius said to his Son, when he found him
in the conspiracy of Cataline, Non ego te Catilinae, genui sed patriae. This is
the speech of God to every man, I gave thee not a body and a soul to serve sin
withal, but to serve me withal. Do but see the great outcry that God makes
against his own sons, Isa. 1. 2, 3. Hear O heavens, and be astonished O earth,
for I have nourished and brought up children and they have rebelled against me.
Where the relation is nearest, there the provocation is greatest. Its a more
pleasing spectacle to see Rebels becoming children, then its to see children
becoming rebels. When Caesar was wounded by the Senators, Brutus also gave him
a stab, with that he looks upon him and says, (...), What thou my son Brutus?
Sue^onius juxta fin^ vitae Iu^. Caes.
What mother can endure to see those lips that drew her breasts, suck her blood?
The unkindness of a friend has the most in it of an enemy. When others appear
before God as prisoners appear before a Judge, Believers appear before him as
children do before a Father. The Roman Censors took such a distaste at the son
of Africanus, that they plucked the ring from off his figner in which his
fathers image was engraven: They would not suffer him to wear his Fathers
picture, who was so unlike his Quin and familiaribus quaeren. tibus vellet n
Olympiae in stadio decurrere? (era^ enim pedibus velor) soquidem, respondit,
reges sunt meum d^certaturi. Plut. in ini ^vit A. lex and Q. Curt. ^. 1.
fathers person. God will not suffer any man to wear the livery of Christ upon
him, who wants the likeness of Christ within him. When his companions would
have Alexander (that was swift on foot) to run in the Olympic games; I would,
says he, so there were but Kings and Princes to run with me. Give me such a
Saint as will do nothing upon earth that is unsuitable to his birth from
heaven. What, shall he walk in darkness, whose father is light? Shall that
tongue be found lying so constantly to men, that was found praying so earnestly
to God? or those eyes be found gazing on sinful objects, that were found
reading of sacred Oracles?

The remembrance of our dignity should engage us to the performance of our
duty. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for
Princes strong drink, Prove. 31. 4. Such a sin is bad in a Subject, but worse in
a Sovereign. As a spot in scarlet is worse then a stain in russet. That's the
second.

3. Christians should do more then others, because they profess more then
others. As plants are known by their fruits, so Saints are known by their
works. Shall such as have received Christ's press-money, fight under Satan's
colors? Though there be many Professors that are no Believers, yet there are
no Believers but are Professors. They profess that they know God, but in works
they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and to every good work
reprobate, Tit. 1. 16. A man is not what he says, but he is what he does. To
say what we do, and not to do what we say, is to be like trees that are full of
leaves, but empty of fruits: Or like a barn wherein there is much chaff but
little corn. Its better never to shine, then not to be gold. What is it to put
off your old manners, and to keep on the old man? A snake may change her coat,
and yet keep her sting. The Gospel professed that lifts a man unto heaven; but
its the Gospel practiced that leads a man into heaven. To be a Professor of
piety, and a Practiser of iniquity, its so far from advancing your
commendation, that its an increasing of your condemnation. Why call ye me Lord,
Lord, and do not the word that I say! Either obey my commands more, or else
call me Lord no more. Either take me into your lives, or cast me out of your
lips. Our Lord Jesus disdains to have his name seen on, as Princes scorn to
have their Effigies stamped on base metals. Let every one that names the name
of the Lord depart from iniquity. If godliness be evil, why is it so much
professed? if goodliness be good, why is it so little practiced? Who has saved
us and called us with an holy calling, 2 Timothy 1. 10. A holy calling, should be
attended with a holy carriage. Its a greater glory to us that we serve God,
then it is to God that we serve him. It is not he that's made happy by us, but
its we that are made happy by him. He needs not such servants as we are upon
earth, but we need such a Master as he is in heaven, A man may find many that
talks of grace, but he shall find but a few that tastes of grace. Every one
does no live like a Christian that looks like a Christian. Thou that make thy
boast of the Law, through breaking the Law dishonorest thou God! Romans 2. 23.
Its monstrous to see that Christians tongues should be larger then their hands.
That they should carry a lanthorn before others, and yet tread in the dark
themselves. A vicious pattern more infects, then a virtuous doctrine instructs.
he that gives good precepts, and then sets bad paterns, is like a man that
first blows the fire to kindle it, and after casts water to quench it again.
These Physicians whilst they give cordials to others, they faint themselves. I
may say of such Professors, as he said of a vicious Preacher, That when in the
Pulpit, it was pity he should ever come out, he was so good in his
instructions; but when out of the pulpit, that it was pity he should ever come
in again, he was so bad in his conversation. We must not be offended at the
profession of Religion, because all are not religious that make a profession.
The sheep does not despise his fleece, because the Woolf has worn it. Who
blames a chrystial river because some melancholy men have drowned themselves
in its streams. The best Drugs have their adulterate? What though you have been
cheated with false colors* yet disestimate not them that are dyed in grain: He
is a bad husband, that having a spot in his coat will cut off the cloth, when
he should wash out the dirt. But when you make a good profession, be sure to
make your profession good.

4. The Disciples of Christ are to do more then others, because every Believer
is to be conformed to his Redeemer. Jesus Christ, as he is the principle of
excellency, to which all must come, so he is the pattern of excellency to which
all must conform. As he is the root on which a Saint grows, so he is the rule
by which a Saint squares. God has made one Son like unto all, that he might
make all his sons like unto one. He (...) to teach us how to live, and he died
to teach us how to die. Yea, as he lived and died for our good, so he lived and
died in our stead. Its a rule, Primum unoquoque genere est mensura reliquorum:
That which is the first in any kind, etc. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly,
Matthew. 11. 29. Never was Nature better graced, and never was Grace better
natured. Well may the Stars be obscured, when the Sun was eclipsed. For I have
given you an example, that you should do as I have done to you, Joh. 13. 5. If
the life of Christ be not your pattern, the death of Christ will not be your
pardon. The Lord Jesus though he was a man of sorrows, yet he was not a man of
sins. Though we cannot equalize his holiness, yet we should imitate his
holiness: As it is the same light which shines from the body of the sun in its
meridian, and which breaks forth in the dawnings of the morning. There Is the
same water in the streams that bubbles up at the springhead. Summa religionis
est, (...) eum quem colis. Lactant. There should be such a conformity between
the life of Christ and the life of a Christian, as there is between the
Counterpain and its Original. As face answers to face in the water, so should
life answer to life in the Scripture. What he was by nature, that we should be
by grace. He that was a way to others, never went out of the way himself. A
holy life is a crystal glass wherein Jesus Christ beholds his own face. In our
Sacramental participations, we show forth the death of Christ, but in our
evangelical conversations we show forth the life of Christ. An excellent Christ
calls for excellent Christians: And why should we ^ay his yoke is heavy, when
he says his yoke is easy? He went about doing good, Acts 10. 38. As he was
never ill employed, so he was never unimployed. Jesus Christ submits his person
to be judged by his actions. If I do not the works -- believe me not. If I act
not like a Savior, do not take me for a Savior. Thus should it be with a
Saint; Never take me for a Christian, if I act not like a Christian. If men
find no more among Saints then they find among men, they will say, Here is a
man and a man, and not a man and a Christian. Man naturally is an aspiring
piece, and loves to be nearest to those that are highest. Now a Christ that did
more then others, calls on Christians to do more then others. Methinks you
should take as much delight in those precepts that enjoin holiness, as in those
promises that assures happiness; and be as willing to be ruled by Christ, as
you are willing to be saved by Christ. To the Saints that are in the earth, and
to the excellent, in whom is all my delight, Psa. 16. 3. Was it so in his time,
and shall i^ not be so in our time? The New Testament out-shines the Old, as
much as the splendour of the sun does the brightness of the stars. If you live
under more glorious dispensations, you should have more gracious conversations.
As he is, so are we in this world, 1 John 4. 17. As he was, so should we be on
earth; and as he is, so shall we be in heaven. If there be no congruity between
Christ and you in holiness, there will be no society between Christ and you in
happiness. That's the fourth.

5. The Disciples of Christ must do more then others, because they are more
looked upon then others. If once a man be a Professor, the eyes of the whole
world are placed upon him. Because our profession in the world is a separation
from the world, Believers should condemn those by their lives, who condemn them
with their lips. Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain path because
of mine enemies, Psalm. 27. 11. Heb. Because of my observers, or propter
insidiatores meos, because of those that lie in wait for me. If you walk in the
unpaved road of licentious looseness, the world will not go backwards, like Shem
and Japhet to cover your nakedness, but they will march forward, like cursed
Cham to uncover your nakedness. They make use of your weakness, as a shield to
defend their own wickedness. Men are merciless in their censures, though God
has more equitable scales, and will give grains of allowance to his own gold. A
true Christian though he be a Dove in Gods eyes, yet he is a Rave^ in theirs.
An unholy conversation p^lls off the jewels from the beautiful Queen of
Religion. Sin allowed of in a Saint, its like a slit in a piece of cloth of
gold; or like a crack in a silver bell. The foulest spots are soonest seen in
the fairest clothes. The world will sooner allow its own enormities, then of
your infirmities. The loose walkings of Christians, are the reproaches of
Christ. Si Christus sancta d^^uisset, sancta a Christianis fierent; qualis
secta, talis sectatores. Quomodo bonus magistor, eujus tam pravos videmus
Discipulos? as Lactantius brings in the Heathens ubraiding the Nations. So much
malice is there lodged in sinners as to reproach the rectitude of the rule for
the obliquity of their lives who swerve and vary from it. Now your pure lives
should hang a padlock upon their impure lips, who throw the dirt of Professors
upon the face of Profession. One hour of the suns eclipsing attracts more eyes
to view it, then all its illustrious shinings. Dr. Whitaker reading that fifth
of Matthew, breaks forth into these words, Aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut nos
non sumus Evangelici; Either this is not Gospel that we Christians profess; or
else we are not Christians that profess the Gospel. The curelty of the
Spaniards to the Indians made them cry out, Quam malus Deus iste, qui habet tam
malos servos? What an evil God is this that has such evil servants? Gods
Jewels should cast a sparkling luster in the eyes of others. One scar may stain
the beauty of the fairest face. It was a glorious Encomium given of Zachary and
Elizabeth, They were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandm^nts
and ordinances of the Lord blam ^^ss, Luke 1. 6. As they were harmless in their
actings, so they were blameless in their walkings. Pure Religion and undefiled
before God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world, Jam. 1. 2. If you
would keep your selves unspotted from the world, you must keep your selves
unspotted in the world. Christians, such even threads should be spun by you, as
none might fasten a snarl upon you. That's the fifth.

6. Ground is, Because if you do no more then others, it will appear that you
are no more then others. Vna actio non denominat fidelem. It is not one action
that makes a Believer, no more then its one Swallow that makes a Summer. As
there is none so evil but may do some good; so there is none so good, but may
do some evil. Every being nath its proper acting; and where we do not find the
working, we may deny the being. You would be thought to be more then Publicans
and Sinners; what, and yet act no more then Publicans and Sinners? Ye shall
know them by their fruits, Mat. 7. 20. By the leaves the tree is seen, but by
the fruit the tree is known. The hand of the Dyal is without in going, as the
wheels of the clock are within in moving. Where the heart is of a good
constitution, the life will be of a fair complexion. When the Conduit is walled
in, how shall we judge of the Spring, but by the water that runs out of the
pipes? A Sinner may show the good he wants, but a Saint cannot hide the good he
has. When Saul was made a Sovereign, he had another spirit poured out upon
him, a spirit of Government for a place of Government; When a sinner is made a
Saint, he has another spirit poured out upon him: As he is what he was not, so
he does what he did not. Its reported of a Harlot, when she saw one with whom
she had formerly committed folly, she renewed her inticements, to whom he
answered, Ego non sum ego, though she was the same woman she was, yet he was
not the same man he was. For him that is more then a man, to do no more then a
man, where is the Christian? Are ye not carnal, and walk as men? 1 Cor. 3. 3.
If men act like beasts, God will call them beasts; and if Christians act like
men, he will style them men. There is no passing for current coin on earth,
without having of the stamp of heaven. That Is the sixth.

7. The Disciples of Christ are to do more then others, because they are to be
judges of others. If you consult sacred Records, you shall find that both God,
and Christ, and the Saints are said to judge the world; the ordination is Gods,
the execution is Christ's, the approbation is the Saints. When the Apostle would
stop the sinful suits among the Corinthian brethren, that did not want men of
Eminency to put a period unto controversy, Do ye not know that the Saints
shall judge the world? and if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy
to judge the smallest matters? 1 Cor. 6. 2. If you shall judge in causes
between God and man, how much more in causes between man and man? if about
matters that are eternal, then about matters that are external? fellons may be
jovial in the prison, but they tremble at the Bar. When wicked men come like
miserable captives out of their holes, how shall the Saints rise out of their
graves like morning suns? Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied saying,
Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment
upon all, Jude 14, 15. This shall no more derogate from Christ's Office then the
Session of the Justices does from the authority of the Judge; they are
Cooperators, though not Coadjutators in that peculiar act. When the Son of Man
shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, Matthew. 19. 28. Now the world judges the
Saints, but then the Saints shall judge the world; the act of the head is
imputed to the members; and the act of the members is acknowledged by the head.
Now shall there be no difference between him that sits on the Bench and him
that stands at the Bar?

How will you be able to pass a righteous sentence upon others for those evils
you are guilty of your selves? In maxima fortuna minima licentia, In the
greatest majesty there is the smallest liberty. As he said to Caesar, Caesari
cum omnia licent, propter hoc minus liceat; Seeing all things are lawful for
Caesar to do, it is therefore the less lawful for Caesar to do them. By faith
Noah built an Ark by which he condemned the world, Heb. 11. 7. The Saints judge
the world not only by their faith but by their facts. In the innocence of your
lives, you should show the world the filthiness of theirs; Thou art more
righteous then I. What is the usual prejudice that the world has against
Religion but this, that it makes no man better though it makes some men
stricter. Do not we see that they who profess against pride more then others,
are themselves as as proud as others? These people they often meet together to
be better, but they are never the better for their often meeting together; do
but take away their profession, and you take away their Religion. They have
nothing of the sheep but the skin. Do but see how the God of Israel does
upbraid the Israel of God; Has a Nation changed their gods, which are yet no
gods? but my people has changed their glory for that which does not profit,
Jer. 2. 11. Here is a professing people out-gone by a people that made no
profession. The Heathens, if they take up their gods, they will keep up their
gods. They were true to their false gods, when these were false to the true
God. Hear O heavens, and be astonished O earth, Isa. 1. 2. Why, what is the
matter? the ox knows his own, and the Ass his Masters crib; but my people
does not know, and Israel does not consider. God did not call down a Jury of
Angels to condemn them, but empannels a jury of Oxes and Asses to pass sentence
upon them. O that Oxes and Asses should be more religious, then those who do
profess Religion! In their kind they are more kind; for if the owner feeds
them, the owner rides them. That is the seventh.

8. Reason why the Disciples of Christ should do more then others, because they
expect more then others. And every man that has this hope, purifies himself as
he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. Hope its too pure a plant to grow in an impure soil.
You must not look to dance with the Devil all day, and sup with Chr^^^ at
night: or to go from Dalilahs lap, to Abraham's bosom. If falvation were easily
come by, it would be slightly set by. Its the not reigning of sin in our mortal
bodies, which makes way for the reigning of our immortal souls. Grace is such a
pilot as without its stearage you will suffer shipwreck in your voyage. Blessed
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Matthew. 5. 8. A dusty glass will
not represent the face. We do not look for a Turkish Paradise, but for a
sinless state; nor to bathe our selves in carnal pleasures, but to be consorts
of the Immaculate Lamb. Giving thanks to the Father who has made us meet
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1. 12. You season the
vessel with water, before you trust it with wine; God will season the vessel
with the water of grace before he pours into it the wine of glory. Its hard to
say whether God discovers more love in preparing of glory for Saints, or in the
preparing of Saints for glory. Believers, let you^ present deportment be
suitable to your future preferment. There is no living a life that is vicious,
and then dying a death that is righteous. As Justice crushes none before they
are corrupted, so Mercy crowns none before they are converted. Follow peace
with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.
14. Holiness, though it be that which a sinner scorns, yet its that which a
Savior crowns: The soul of man that is the cabinet, and grace that is the
jewel; and Christ will throw away the cabinet, where he does not find the
jewel. Though the wheat be for the Garner, yet the chaff is for the fire. The
Scripture presents us not only with what God will do for man, but with what man
must do for God. So run that ye may obtain. The neglecting of the race of
holiness, will be the obstructing of the prize of blessedness. He that made
thee without thy assistance, will not save thee without thy obedience. Every
tree that bears not good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire, Mat. 7.
19. If you be not plants for bearing, you will be sticks for burning. If you be
not for fruits, you are for flames. Men are sentenced not only for their
sinfulness, but for their slothfulness. Men may perish for being servants that
are unprofitable, as well as for sinners that are abominable. There is no
making out of your salvation, but by working out of your salvation. God binds
up none in the bundle of life, but such as are the heirs of life. Therefore my
beloved brethren, be ye steadfast and unmovable, ever abounding in the work of
the Lord, for as much as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1
Cor. 15. 58. How abundant should they be in the work of the Lord, that know
their labor shall not be in vain in the Lord? How cheerfully should we cast in
the net, when we are sure to make such an excellent draught? If you do no more
then others, you shall enjoy no more then others. If you love them that love
you, what reward have you? Matthew. 5. 46. All this is but nature, that love
should be returned from whence it has been received. Now natural works shall
have but natural wages. Common graces shall have but common favors. If you
would not have God to put you off with a Pharisees recompense, do not you put
off God with a Pharisees performance. God he baits the hook to catch the fish,
and spreads the net to enclose the bird. He hangs the promises of the Gospel
upon the precepts of the Law. A Merchant will run through the intemperate Zones
of heat and cold for a little treasure: And the Soldier undergo a bloody seeds
time, to enjoy a happy harvest. Shall they take pains for earthly Mammon, and
we take none for heavenly Mansions?

Thus have I dispatched the first General, Why it is that the Disciples of
Christ should do more then others.

I come now to the second General, What it is that the Disciples of Christ must
do more then others.

And here I shall make a golden chain of twenty links, for Beleivers to wear
about their necks.

1. To do much good, and make but little noise, that's a singular thing. Others
they say much but do nothing, but Christians they should do much but say
nothing. To deserve praise where none is obtained, is better then to obtain
praise where none is deserved. Qui honorem desiderat, non est dignus honor.
Abulens. Take heed that Ne propter* humanam gloriam boni essent (Christiani)
docuit enim illos Magister illorum dicens, Cavete sacere justitiam vestram,
etc. Aug. de. Civ. Dei l. 5. c 14,
you do not your alms before men, to be seen of men; otherwise you have no
reward of your Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 6. 18. A Saint may be seen
doing more works then any, and yet a Saint must not do any of his works to be
seen. Non est ingrata Deo eleemosyna quae videtur, sed quae ideo fit ut
videatur. Though good ends makes not bad actions lawful, yet bad ends makes
good actions sinful. The harp sounds sweetly though it hears not its own
melody. Moses had more glory by his vail, then he had by his face. We should
lay our selves in the dust by our humility, when we raise the poor from the
dust by our charity. Therefore when They did them in Synagogis, ut videantur a
s^pientibus: and in vicis, ut videantur a turhis, and hoc non ut den^ honum
exemplum videntibus, sed ut honorificentur ab hominibus. G^rran. in loc.
thou do thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee as the hypocrites do
in the Synagogues and in the streets that they may have glory from men, Matthew.
6. 2. What the first verse calls a doing to be seen of men, this calls a doing
to receive glory from men. Hypocrites would never care that men should see
them, but that by seeing them men should praise them. The indigent was more
beholden to their vanity then they were beholden to their charity. They gave
alms more for the rich to look upon then the poor to live upon. This is the
using of the masters coin for the servants gain. Hypocrites are more for the
market then they are for the closet; and for the corners of the streets then
for corners of the house. Its meat and drink for a formalist to fast if others
see it. The Nightingale never sings so sweetly, as when others stand by to hear
her melody. Come see my zeal for the Lord of hosts, when there was no zeal for
the Lord of hosts to be seen. Religion did but hold the stirrup to mount him
into the saddle; your sounding souls, are seldom souls that are sound. A Jehu's
vote is always linked to a Judas heart. Some persons are like hens that after
laying must be cackling. If they bestow a little money on a Churches repairs,
they will set it down in glased windows. But under the praises of Nature lurks
the enemies of Grace. Dum laudatur hypocrita, laeditur gratia. Look how much we
arrogate to our own applause, we derogate from Gods praises. Vainglory is like
Naamans Leprosy, a foul character upon a fair paper. What is the acclamations
of men to the approbation of God? To be cried up on earth by them that are
about us, and cried down in heaven by him that is above us? As one flaw robs
the diamond of the oriency of its splendour; so one fly spoils the Apothecaries
box of the fragrancy of its odor. Therefore when thou do thine alms let Vid.
Chem. Harm. Evang. cap. 5^. p. 772. 773.
not thy left hand know what thy right hand does, Matthew. 6. 3. Acts of mercy
they are right hand acts, and so singular; but the left hand must not know them
because the left hand will make them known. It is a rare thing for a Christian
to do much in secret, and to keep it secret when its done. God is nearer to us
then we are unto our selves. You need not sound a trumpet, for any thing that
is bestowed; for when the trumpet shall sound, every thing shall be revealed.
Where the river is the deepest, there the water glides the smoothest. Empty
casks sound most, when the well fraught vessel silences its own fullness. The
shadow of the Sun is largest when his beams are weakest. Honor me before Quid
aliud amant (hypocritae) quam gloriam, qua volebantetiam post mortem tanquam
vivere in ore laudantium Aug. ubi prius.
the people, 1 Samuel 15. 30. There is little worth in outward splendour, if
virtue yield it not an inward luster. When this sun is in its meridian, it may
be masked with a cloud. By climbing of too high a bough, you may hang your
selves upon the tree. Some had rather suffer the agony of the cross, then the
infamy of the cross. Its more to them to be dispraised then it is to be
destroyed. And a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelecks head,
and brake his scull; then he called hastily unto the young man his Armorbearer,
and said nnto him, Draw thy sword and slay me, that men may not say A woman
slew me, Judge. 9. 53, 54. Behold says one, Homo moritur, at superbia non
moritur; The man dies, but his pride dies not. God may reject those as copper,
whom men do adore as silve^. He is a Jew which is one inwardly, and
circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, whose praise is not of men
but of God, Romans 2. 29. The praise of an Hypocrite is not of God but of man;
the praise of an Israelite is not of man but of God. The one desires to seem
good that he may be praised, the other to be good that God may be pleased. The
Saints on earth are to imitate the Angels in heaven; and they had the hands of
a man under their wings, Ezekiel. 1. 8. They had not their wings under their
hands, but their hands under their wings: Their hands note their activity,
their wings their celerity; Their having their hands under their wings, the
obscurity of their motions: They will not have others to fall down to worship
them about the Throne, but fall down themselves to worship him upon the Throne.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, that did the most excellent works that ever were done,
He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor suffer his voice to be heard in the streets,
Isa. 42. 2. He shall not cry, that is, he shall not be contentious; He shall
not lift up his voice in the streets, he shall not be vainglorious. The
Pharisee stood and prayed with himself, God, I thank thee I am not as other men
are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican, Luke 18. 11.
Hypocrites are better in O quot babet isle in saeculo imitatores, qui festucam
in oculo fratris vident, trabe^ autem in oculo suo non considerant. Stel. in
loc. Nec quicquam jam far potest Caesar^^ priorem, Pompeiusve parem. Lucan.
showing forth their own worth, then they are in showing forth of their wants;
at the displaying the banners of their perfections, then at the discovering of
the baseness of their transgressions. I am not as other men are; as if he had
been such a fellow as had no fellow. Ambition is so great a planet that it must
have a whole orb to itself, and its impatient of a consort. Because he was not
so bad as the most, he thought himself as good as the best. A Sun-burnt-face
seems fair when compared with a Blackamoor. But can ciphers complete a sum?
This Pharisee was as far from being religious, as he was from being scandalous.
But upon what foundation Celavit hic Pharisaeus peccata, quae confiteri
debuerat and bona siquae feverat patefecit. Stella loc. jam citato
did he rear this superstruction? verse. 12. I fast twice aweek, I give tithes
of all I possess. He proclaims all without doors that is done within. They say
of the sea it loses as much in one part of the land as it gains in another:
Thus what victory formalists seemingly get over one lust, they lose it again by
being imprisoned to another: They trade not for Gods glory, but for their own
glory. If a tear be shed, or a prayer be made, whatever is performed by them,
shall be divulged by them. He that trafficks in Gods services, to fraught
himself with man's praises, suffers shipwreck in the haven, and loses his wages
when he comes to receive pay for his works. Its storied of Alexanders Footman,
that he ran so swift upon the sand, that the print of his footsteps were not
seen: Thus should it be with Christians, nothing is more pleasing unto God,
then a hand that is largely opened, and a mouth that is straightly closed. Most
persons are like Themistocles, that never found himself so much contented, as
when he heard himself praised. I will not say a gracious heart never lifts up
it self, but I will say that grace in the heart never lifts up it self. Grace
in the heart ever acts like it self, but a gracious heart does not always so. A
Saint should be like a spire steeple, minimus in summo, that is, smallest where
it is highest: or like those orient stars, the higher they are seated, the
lesser they are viewed. Usually your greatest boasters are your smallest
workers. Your deep rivers pay larger tribute to the sea then shallow brooks,
and yet empty themselves without a murmuring noise. I have read a story of a
harlot that offered to build up the walls of a City that Alexander had thrown
down, so she might set her own arms upon them. O what will not an Hypocrite do,
so he may set his own arms upon it, when it is done? That is the first.

2. To bring up the bottom of our lives to the top of our lights. Look how far
our lives are from Gods precepts to do them, so far his ears are from our
prayers to hear them. Since the tree of knowledge has been tasted, the key of
knowledge has been rusted. Man sinned away his light, when he sinned against
his light. Adams candle aspiring to be a sun, has burnt the dimmer ever since.
The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, I Cor. 2. 14. Spiritual truths, they oppose the wickedness of
reason; because they are against it; therefore a natural man cannot relish
them. They exceed the weakness of Reason, because they are above it, therefore
a natural man cannot perceive them. Its better to be a toe in the foot, and to
be sound, then to be an eye in the head, and to be blind. But grow in grace,
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18.
Without grace there may be a knowledge that is seeming, but without grace there
cannot be a knowledge that is saving. As the water engenders the ice, and the
ice the water; so by knowledge is grace produced, and by grace is knowledge
increased. If ye know these things, happy are ye if you do them. To obey the
truth, and not to know, is impossible; to know the truth and not to obey it is
unprofitable.

Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven, Mat. 7. 21.
Divine knowledge is not like the light of the moon to sleep by, but its like
the light of the sun to work by. Its not a Loyterer in the market place, but a
laborer in the vineyard. A man may be a great Scholar, and yet be a great
sinner. Judas the Traitor, was Judas the Preacher. The Toad has a pearl in its
head, and poison in its bowels. The tree of knowledge may be planted, where the
tree of life never grew. A man may be acquainted with the grace of truth, who
never knew the truth of grace. Parts and gifts without grace and holiness, are
but like Vriah's letters, that cut the throat of him that carried them. You are
never the better for your light, if you be never the better by your light. The
sun that whitens the cloth, tanns the Blackamoor. Shall that be the brand of
Christians which was the bane of Heathens; Because when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, Romans 1. 21. The flint strikes the steel in vain that
propagates no sparks. You had as good let the Devil put out your eyes that you
should not see the truth, as let him cut off your legs, that you should not
walk in the truth. Naked knowledge it may make the head giddy, but it will not
make the heart holy. Who would fraught his ship with such drossy ore? or stay
for such a gale as cannot waft him to his harbor? shall we hold a candle in one
hand, and draw a sword with the other: How many Professors are there Isti omnes
similes illis sunt qui pro bonae valitudine sacrificant, and in ipso sacro
epulis se ingurgitant, quae bone valetudini sunt contrariae. Stamp. prompt.
Mor. p. 120.
that know what is to be done, but never do what is to be known? they carry a
bright candle in a dark lanthorn. Give me the Christian that perfectly fees the
way that he goes, and readily goes the way that he sees. That's bad ground that
brings forth nothing except it be forced. To him that knows to do good and
does it not, to him it is sin, Jam. 4. 17. Though sins of ignorance are more
numerous, yet sins of knowledge are more dangerous. Your darkness will be the
blacker, because your light has been the clearer.

Pharnaces sends a Crown to Caesar at the same time that he rebelled against
him, to whom Caesar makes this return, Faceret imperata prius; Let him first
lay down his rebellion, and then I will accept of his crown.

There is many that set a crown of glory upon the head of Christ by a good
profession, that plat a crown of thorns upon the head of Christ by an evil
conversation. By the words of our lips we may adore Religion; but its by the
works of our lives that we adorn Religion.

It was the saying of one, That in the best reformed Churches, there was the
most deformed Christians. Look to it; for all will be pulled down without you,
if there be nothing raised up within you. But we all with open face beholding
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed from glory to glory by the
spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. As trees without fruits are unprofitable; so
knowledge without works is abominable. Those two sisters Leah and Rachel are
fit Emblems of knowledge and obedience: Knowledge like Rachel is beautiful, but
Obedience like Leah is fruitful. He that will not do what he knows, shall not
know what to do. Be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves; The Serpents eye
is an ornament, when its placed in the Doves head. O how unanswerable are the
lives of Professors to the lights of Professors? They have the light of the sun
for wisdom and knowledge, but want the heat of a candle for grace and holiness.

I have read a story of a Painter that being blamed by a Cardinal for putting
too much red in the faces of St. Paul and St. Peter, answered, It was to show
how much they blushed at their behaviors that styled themselves their
Successors. Were Abraham now on earth who is in heaven, how would the Father of
the Faithful blush to see their actions, that style themselves his offspring!
The Saints of old though there was less grace discovered to them, yet there was
more grace discovered by them. They knew little, but did much; we know much,
but do little. He was a burning and shining light. To shine is not enough, a
glo-worm will do so: To burn is not enough, a firebrand will do so. Light
without heat, does little good; and heat without light does much hurt. Give me
those Christians that are burning lamps as well as they are shining lights. The
Sun is as vigorous in its moving, as it is luminous in its shining. I know the
light of nature wants force to repel the lusts of nature. But will any say the
day is dawning, when the sky puts on her sable clothing? And how monsterous
is it to see that Christians tongues should be larger then their hands! That
they should speak so much of God to others, and act so little for God
themselves. That is the second.

3. Singular action that should be done by a singular Christian, is to prefer
the duty that he ows, above the danger that he fears. Christians should prize
their services above their safeties. The wicked flies when no man pursues, but
the righteous are as bold as a Lion, Prove. 28. 1. The fearful Hare squats at
every noise, when the stout lion is unmoved at the greatest clamors. Should
Believers for every cross wind that blows shrink back on earth, they would
never keep their road to heaven. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let
it go, Job 27. 6. He kept his righteousness in his heart, when he could not
keep his riches in his hands; uprightness is such a complexion as is not
subject to alteration. The laurel keeps its greenness in the winter season.
Times of trouble have ever been times of trial. Its the suffering season that
is the sifting season. Now dangers makes the world leave their duties. The
sith of persecution cuts down the tender grass of their devotion. They that
carry not the yoke of Christ upon their necks, will never carry the cross of
Christ upon their backs. Its the doing of what is good, that supports in the
suffering of what is evil. The flesh it is an enemy unto sufferings, because
sufferings is an enemy to the flesh. It may make a man an earthly Courtier, but
it will never make a man an heavenly Martyr. Wicked men they stumble at straws
in the way of salvation, that can leap over blocks in the rode of destruction.
Lay heavy weights upon rotten boughs and they will quickly break in sunder; if
they take up Religion in a fair day, they will lay it down in a foul one. God
likes no such bargains; Lord, I am willing to serve thee, but unwilling to
suffer for thee. I will go to sea, but on condition I shall meet with no
storms. I will enter the war but on condition I shall have no blows. They would
fain be wafted to the point of felicity in such vessels as might not be tossed
on the waters of calamity. Such think much to borrow a thorn though it be taken
from their Saviors Crown.

Some there are that will sacrifice a stout heart to a stubborn will; And will
rather dye as Martyrs for errors, then bow as servants to truth. How shall they
ever stand for Christ, who did never stand in Christ? But believers study more
how to adorn the cross, then how to avoid the cross? as deeming it better to be
saved in rough waters, then drowned in a calm ocean.

Temporary Professors are like Hedge-hogs that have two holes, one to the
North, the other to the South; when the South wind suns them, they open to the
North, and when the North wind chills them, they go to the South. They will
lose their activity, to find their security. It was the saying of the King of
Navar to Beza, That he would in the cause of Christ, sail no further then he
might retreat safe to the shore.

Man is a life-loving creature; he is afaid to follow truth too near at the
heels, lest it should lift up his foot and dash out his brains. Weak grace will
do for God; but it must be strong grace that will dye for God. A true
Christians will lay down his lusts at the command of Christ, and he will lay
down his life for the cause of Christ. The trees of righteousness, the more
they are shaken by the wind, the faster they are rooted in the ground. What art
thou a member of Christ, and yet afraid to be a Martyr for Christ? Si beati
sunt qui moriuntur in Domino, quam beati sunt illi qui moriuntur pro Domino? If
they be blessed that die in the Lord, how blessed are they that die for the
Lord?

What though the flesh do return to dust, so the spirit do return to rest? what
is the body of Adam for a soul to live in, to the bosom of Abraham for a Saint
to lie in? Righteous Abel, the first Soldier in the Church Militant, was the
first Saint in the Church Triumphant: He offered up a Sacrifice, when the Altar
was sprinkled with his own blood. But as his body was the first that ever took
possession of earth, so his soul was the first that ever had a translation to
heaven.

Should such a man as I fly? says Nehemiah; A man that has been so much
honored, and a man that has been so much used. It is better to dye a
Conqueror then to live a Coward. They who will be no less then combatants, they
shall be more then conquerors. None are so courageous as those who are
religious. A Christian if he lives, he knows by whose might he stands; and if
he dies, he knows for whose sake he falls. Where there is no confidence in God,
there will be no continuance with God. When the wind ceases to fill the sails,
the ship ceases to plough the seas. The taints of Ishmael, shall never make an
Isaac out of love with his inheritance.

If a righteous cause brings you into sufferings, a righteous God will bring
you out of sufferings. Christ is beholden to his enemies as well as to his
friends. Their malicious opposition wrought out his glorious exaltation. The
worst that men can do against Believers, is the best that men can do for
Beleivers. The worst that they can act against them, is to send them out of
earth; and the best they can do for them, is to send them up to heaven.

It was the expression of one of the Martyrs to his Persecutors, You take a
life from me that I cannot keep, and bestow a life upon me that I cannot lose;
which is as if you should rob a man of counters, and furnish him with gold. He
that is assured of a life that has no end, cares not how soon this life is at
an end.

All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we
dealt falsely in thy covenant. Our heart is not turned back, neither have our
steps declined from thy way. Though thou have sore broken us in the place of
Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death, Psalm. 44. 17, 18, 19.
Believers are like the moon, that wades out of her shadows by keeping her
motion, and leaves not her shining for the barking of dogs. Shall we cease to
be Professors, because others will not cease to be Persecutors? by the seed of
the serpent the heel of the woman may be bruised; but by the seed of the woman
the Serpents head shall be broken. Christians, see you good times? prepare for
bad times; there is no spring without its fall; no Summer, but has its Winter;
he never reaped comfort in the night of adversity, that did not sow it in the
day of prosperity.

Many waters cannot queneh love, neither can the floods drown it, Cant. 8. 6.
The fire of affection is not quenched by the water of affliction. But if the
trade of piety cannot be peaceably driven, Formalists will shut up their
shop-windows. They will rather tarry out of the land of Canaan, then swim to it
through the red sea. But a believer never falls asleep for Jesus, till he falls
asleep in Jesus.

If it be thou, bid me come to thee on the water, Matthew. 14. 18. Love can walk
on the water without drowning, and lie in the fire without burning. Its said of
the Serpent, that he cares not to what danger he exposes his body, so he
secures his head. Thus it is with a Christian, he cares not to what hazard he
exposes his substance, so he may but enjoy his Savior.

None of these things move me, neither count I my life dear to my self, so I
may finish my course with joy, Act. 20. 24. A Saint is inwardly pious, when he
is not outwardly prosperous. The sharper such Physic is in its taking, the
sounder the Patient is for its working. The higher the floods swell on earth,
the nearer the Ark mounts up to heaven.

God can strike strait strokes with crooked sticks, and make the Devils dross
to fetch off the rust that cleaves to his gold. Christians are crucified by the
world, that they might be crucified to the world. God makes it to be an enemy
to you, that he might make you an enmy to it. Remember Christians, that
Religion is that Phoenix that has always flourished in her own ashes.
Magistrates they defend the truth with their swords, but Martyrs they defend
the truth with their bloods: And the losing of their heads makes way for the
receiving of their crowns.

How should we land at the haven of rest, if we were not tossed upon the seas
of trouble? If Joseph had not been Egypts prisoner, he had not been Egypts
Governor. The iron chains about his feet, ushered in the golden chain about
his neck. Temporal disadvantages are but gentle blasts, but eternal are
insupportable storms. Tell me believers, is not Christ with his cross for a few
years, better then Dives with his dainties for a few days? What is a short
happiness attended with an everlasting misery, to a short misery attended with
an everlasting happiness? That's the third.

4. Singular thing is, To seek the public good of others, above the private
good of ourselves. Non nobis solum nati sumus (ut praeclare scriptum est a
Platone) ortusque nostri partem patria vendicat, partem parents, partem amici.
Tull. lib. 1. de Officiis. As we are not born by our selves, so we are not born
for our selves.

Seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not, Jer. 45. 5. For Saints
to set their hearts upon what beasts do set their feet, it is as if a King
should leave his Throne to follow the plough; Or as if one should desert a Mine
of gold, to dig in a pit of gravel. Selfsearching makes a man that is virtuous;
but self-seeking speaks a man that's covetous. I am loath to draw a line in any
man's picture with a black caol. Yet how many are there who have been in public
places, that have had private spirits? they which pretended to do every thing
for the good of others, intended not to do any thing but for the good of
themselves. Such succors at the root draw away the sap from the tree. They set
Kingdoms on fire to roast their eggs by its flames. These Drones creeping into
the Hive, have stolen away the honey, whilst the laboring Bees are starved.

O that too many were not like crows, which at first seem to bewail the dying
sheep, but at last are found picking out their eyes. Some there are that will
never want fire, so long as others yards afford fuel. They make themselves fair
cupboards with others plate.

There is a proverb, but none of Solomon's, Every man for himself, and God for
us all. But where every man is for himself, the Devil will have all. The
heathen encca was of another judgment Ego sic vivam quasi sciam me alii natum.
de vita be a^a. c. 20.
A self pleaser is a God-displeaser; though he may find himself whilst he
lives, yet he will lose himself when he dies. How justly may that complaint be
taken up, which so sadly was laid down, For all seek their own, but none the
things that are Jesus Christ's! Phil. 2. 21. A selfish spirit will not sow the
seed, except he may reap the harvest: Non quae ad ^a ^ ^m pro^^moru^ and
honor^m ^ei quaeru^^, sed qu^ ad luc^um, and gl^riam. Aqum in loc.
nor plant the vines except he may taste the grapes. There is no driving of
such chariots without oyling of their wheels. May, we not say to many, as a
great man said to his servant, Your rise has been my fall!

If Dives be tormented, quia cupide servavit sua, what shall be his portion,
qui avide rapit aliena? If those fists shall be cut off which so closely
clasped their own, what shall become of those hands that are open to graspe
other men's? It was Isreal's lamentation, that those who were clad in scarlet
embraced the dunghill; but it may be Englands lamentation, that those who
embraced the dunghill are clothed in scarlet. Every man's private advantage is
wrapped up in the good of the public. A drop of water is soon dried up when
alone, which in the Ocean retains its moisture. A single beam of light is
suddenly obscured, which in the body of the Sun secures its splendour. Yet how
many have turned the Commonweal into a Common woe, by spinning their fine
clothes Nullum vitium tetrius qua^ avaritia praesertim in principinus and Remp.
gu^ernantibus; habere Rem ab questui, non modo ^u^pecst, sedetiam s^el^ratum,
and nesarium. Sibelius conc. sept. p. 143.
ont of the Nations fleece, when it was torn to pieces? How many noble birds
have been deplumed, that their wings might be richly feathered? When any
springs have been opened, they have laid pipes to conveigh the water into their
own cisterns. Our pretended Pilots have steared the ship of plenty into their
own haven. But I hope Justice will squeeze such spunges, and leave them as dry
at the last as they were at the first. They are no better then moaths that eat
into other men's clothes, that make a mask of Religion, only to hide the face
of Rebellion.

To advance the riches of a private person, out of the public ruins of a
Nation, is as if the stomach, a public Officer, should keep all the meat to it
self, and starve the whole body. Naturally every man is his own Alpha and his
own Omega; he has his beginning from himself, and his ending in himself.

It was a dogged speech of Cain, Am I my brothers keeper? He that would not be
his brothers He thought it was not his duty to be his brothers keeper, but
never thought it was against his duty to be his brothers executioner. Assem.
Annot. in loc.
keeper, would be his brothers Butcher. How many have riveted themselves into
their possessions, by the bones of their murdered brethren; and paved causies
to preferments with the sculls of noble Patriots!

Self-seeking has been so long pulling the ropes, that it has rung the
passing bell of three Nations. O how sad is it to see the chamber a triming,
whilst the house is a burning? the cabin a filling, whilst the ship is a
sinking? or the nest a building, whilst the tree is falling? But can better
fruits grow upon the tree of Anarchy and confusion then cruelty and oppression?
They deserve to have their heads separated from their bodies, who have
separated the body from its head.

If I perish I perish; But how can I endure to see the evil that Thus Aeneas
tells ^ido how unwilling Anchises was to live after the ruins of Troy. Abnegat
excisa vitam producere Troja. Virg. Aen. l. 2. prope fin^m. Virumque hortatus
ut pi^tat^m perfectam custodirent: hac enim (...) quit) and pax conservatur,
and bella conficiuntur. Theod. Hist. Ec. l. ^. c. 25.
shall come upon my people, Esther 8. 6. She did not prefer her own life above
her peoples, but her peoples lives above her own. Theodosius, when he lay upon
his dying pillow, was more studious how to do his Kingdom good, then how to
bear his own pains, as appears by his counsel to his sons, to whom he left it.

The Eagle though she was the Queen of birds, as the Lion is the King of
beasts, was not offered up in sacrifice herself, because she lived on the spoil
of others. Grace makes a Christian homo homini Deus; not only to carry it like
a man to God, but to carry it like a God to man.

For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet
for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich, 2
Cor. 8. 9. A drop of his blood is worth a sea of ours, and yet he died our
death, that we might live his life, and suffered our hell, to bring us to his
heaven. He was conceived in the bowels of his mother, that we might be received
into the bosom of his Father. His love began in his eternal purposes of grace.
and ends in our eternal possessions of glory.

Why was the Bread of life an hungry, but to feed the hungry with the bread of
life? why was Rest it self weary, but to give the weary rest? why did he hang
upon the cross in mount Calvary, but that we might sit upon the throne in mount
Sion? His face was covered with spittle, that ours might be enamelled with
glory. Why did this Jonah cast himself into the sea of his fathers wrath, but
to save the ship of his Church from drowning? Christians, you are not vessels
in which the waters of life are lodged, but pipes through which it is to be
conveyed.

If the mountains overflow with moisture, the valleys are the richer; but if
the head be full of ill humors, the whole body is the worser. Happy are those
persons that God will use as besoms to sweep out the dust from his Temple; that
shall tug at an oar in that boat where Christ and his Church are carried.

For David after he had served his own Generation, by the will of God, fell
asleep, Act. 13. 36. David's service was not swallowed up in the narrow gulf of
self. He did not Advertite a^i^ um, popusi cap^ta, atque a ^avid distite* quid
cor vestrum a pe^ere de^eat. M^nd^ ^u^us fallaci u^ o^i^us in^ia^e ^^^ (...)
decet. Sibel. ubi supra.
draw al his lines to the ignoble center of his own ends. Such birds are bad in
the nest, but worse when winged to fly abroad. He served his own generation;
not the generation that was before him, for they were dead before he was
living; nor the generation that was behind him, for they were living after he
was dead. Every gracious spirit is public, though every public spirit is not
gracious. God may use the Midwifery of the Egyptians, to bring forth the
children of the Israelties. An Iron key may open a golden treasury, and leaden
pipes convey pleasant waters.

I saw a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon
was under her feet, Rev. 12. 1. Though carnal blessings may be communicated to
a man that is spiritual, yet spiritual blessings shall not be communicated to a
man that is carnal: When the Moon is waxing, she has her shut end toward the
earth, and her open end toward heaven; but when the moon is waining, she has
her open end toward earth, and her shut ends toward heaven: They that live
most downwards, they dye most upwards. Meteors, whilst they keep above in the
firmament yield a glorious luster, but if they decline they fall to the earth
and come to nothing.

If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I
prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy, Psalm. 137. 6. Old Ely mourned more
for the loss of his Religion, then for the loss of his relation; his heart was
broken before his neck was broken. If the Church be lost we cannot be saved, if
the Church be saved we cannot be lost.

Augustus Caesar carried such an entire love to his Country, that he called it
Filiam suam, his own daughter; therefore refused And this he had with the
consent of all. Patris patriae cognomen universi repentino maximoque consensu
detulerunt ei. Suet. p. 101.
to be called its Master, but would be called its Father, because he ruled it
non per timorem, sed per amorem; Not by fear but by love. The people at his
expiration used this bitter lamentation, Vtinam aut non nasceretur, aut non
moreretur. Macrob. O would to God that either he had never lived, or else that
he had never died. The worth of good Rulers is best seen in the want of good
Rulers. As we see more in the discomposure of a Watch then when its wheels are
set together. Such whose lives deserve no prayers, their deaths deserve no
tears.

A self-seeker he breaths unrespected, and he dies unlamented. When once a man
becomes a God to himself, he then becomes a devil to others, and cares not who
sinks in the sea so he arrive but safe at the shore. Those wretches in the
Acts, rather then a few shrine-makers should lose their gains, cared not though
a whole City lost their souls.

Its reported of Agrippina the mother of Nero, who being told that if ever her
son came to be an Emperor, she would find him to be her murderer; she answered,
Peream ego, modo ille imperet; Let me perish, so he may be Emperor. There is
many such, who though they do not utter it with their tongues, yet harbor it
in their breasts; Pereat Religio, modo ego imperem; Let Religion perish, so I
may flourish: Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against
them, and that I may consume them, and I will make of thee a great Nation,
Exodus 32. 10. But the affection of Moses as a Ruler, quenched the affections of
Moses as a Father.

And such was the noble disposition of Joshua, that he first divided Canaan
into several parts, and portions for the Tribes of Israel, before any provision
was made for his own family. Give me such carvers, as lay not all the meat upon
their own trenchers. That's the fourth.

5. Singular thing, is to have the beautifullest conversations among the
blackest persons. A wicked man as he poisons the air in which he breaths, so he
pollutes the age in which he lives. The putrid grape corrupts the Principis
mores mira vi in populu^ transsunduntur. Stapl. pro. mor. p. 57^
sound cluster. Joseph by living in the Court of Pharaoh, had learnt to swear
by the life of Pharaoh. A High Priests hall will instruct a Peter how to
disclaim his Master. The sweet streams lose their freshness by gliding into the
salt seas. They which sail amongst such rocks, may quickly split their own
ships.

When vice runs in a single stream, its then a passable shallow; but when many
of these meet together they swell a deeper channel. I will put enmity between
thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed, Genesis 3. 15. There must
be no harmony where the chief Musician will have a jar. Its better to have the
enmity of wicked men then it is to have the society of wicked men. By the
former they are most hateful, but by the latter they are most hurtful. A good
man in bad company, is like a green stick amongst dry ones; They may sooner
kindle him then he can quench them. As sheep amongst briars are injurious unto
their fleeces; so Saints among sinners do an injury to their graces.

Be not unequally yoked together with unbeleevers; for what fellowship Non
debetis jugum ducere cum infidelibus, quia alius habitus est in vobis, alius in
illis; in vobis qu^dem est habitus justitiae* in illis vero est habitus in
quitatis Aquin. in loc.
has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with
darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has beleiveth
with an Infidel? 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15. To see a Saint and a sinner associated with
one another, is to see the living and the dead to keep house together. Christ's
doves Peccatum adeo sacile alios unvadid, ut nulla pestis tantop^re acrem
in^icere possit. (...) ^ar. (...)
will be sullied amongst the pots. By the evil the good may sooner be corrupted,
then by the good the evil can be converted: The finer bread in the oven
partakes of the courser, but seldom does the course partake of the finer. If
you put an equal proportion of sour vinegar to sweet wine, the vinegar will
sooner sour the wine, then the wine will sweeten the vinegar.

That is a sound body that is healthful in a pesthouse. Its as great a wonder
to see a Saint so good amongst those that are evil, as it is to see a sinner so
evil amongst those that are good. In the salt sea the fish retains its
freshness, amongst the noysom weeds the rose preserves its sweetness; the fire
burns the hottest when the weather is the coldest.

It was the saying of a Christian as often as ever he came amongst the ungodly,
He returned less Vt ligna arida igni admota cito flammam concipiunt, sit
bomines ob naturae corruptionem aliorum improborum exemplis facillinie
impelluntur, ut secure eadem committere audeant. Idem. ib.
a man from them, then he was before he came to them. It is a singular thing
for Saints to carry it so amongst sinners, as to do much good to them, and
Theodosius tame ^si in ipsaregia natus educatusque erat, nihil tamen ex illa
educatione omn no contraxit mollitiae, tarditatisve Socr. Eccl. Hist. l. 7. I,
22.
to receive no hurt from them; to touch pitch and not to be defiled. If we
cannot help them, its their unholiness; if they hurt us, its our unhappiness.
By keeping of evil company, men are like those that walk in the sun, tanned
insensibly.

Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven, Mat. 5. 16. Light abides pure; though
the air in which it dwells be corrupted, yet it admits of no corruption. Men may
defile themselves in the light, but they cannot Non mediocris titulus virtutis
inter pravos vivere ^onum, and inter ma lignantes innoce tiae retinere
caendorem, and mo^um lenitatem. Bern. in cant. sermon. 48.
defile the light it self. The sun shines all over an unclean world, and yet is
without uncleaness. How many are there that are like dirty swine in the fairest
meadow; like Judas, that instead of being a Disciple amongst Devils, was a
Devil amongst Disciples!

Good company it brings fire to Vivitur exemplis magis quam legibus.
kindle our graces when they are freezing; but bad company it brings water to
quench them when they are flaming.

Some observe that those are the sweetest flowers that grows nearest the
stinckingest weeds. The Poets affirm, That Venus never appeared so beautiful as
when she sat by black Vulcans side. And Stevens face never shined so
gloriously in the Church where all were gracious, as before the Council where
all were vicious? How will that fire subdue dry fuel, that has prevailed
against the green? Needs must that jewel be glorious in the sun that glitters
in the shade. There are many men that can suit with any men; they can be
Professors amongst those that are Professors, and scorners amongst those that
are scorners. These are like the Planet Mercury in the horoscope of man's
Nativity, that is good in conjunction with those that are good, but evil in the
conjunction of those that are evil.

Every man loves to be a man that is beloved, and is apt to take pleasure in
them, who do take pleasure in him; but take heed of ceasing to be good
Christians, that others may think you good companions: Its hard to be conformed
to the world in the outward man, and transformed to God in the inward man: to
be an outward Heathen Noscitur ex socio, qui non dignoscitur ex se.
and an inward Christian. Its a Spanish proverb, Tell me but where thou go,
and I will tell thee what thou do. And our English Proverb will English this
Proverb, That birds of a feather will flock together: To be too intimate with
sinners, is to intimate that you are sinners.

And being let go they went to their own company, Acts 4. 23. To whom should
believers join to but believers? There is no trusting the tamest natures; let
but the lions out of their fetters, and they will soon show you their bloody
natures. How dare thou be found lodging, in that house where God himself is
not found dwelling? There is no sleeping with dogs, without swarming with fleas.

Its a royal Diadem that Christ sets on the head of his Spouse; As a Lilly All
the States, and Societies of men upon earth being compared to the Church, are
but like thorns unto Lillies and Roses, without all beauty, and delight,
unpleasant and harmful plants. Pemble in his sermon. on 2 Ca^. 1.
amongst thorns, so is my Beloved among the daughters, Cant. 2. 2. There are
many thorns that are amongst the Lillies, but few Lillies that are amongst the
thorns. How rare a spectacle is it to see a believer keep his beauty in the
midst of Blackamoors? to be like Solus ipse diversa ambularit via, virtutem
malitiae praefereus, etc. Chrysostom. hom. 22. in cap. ^. Genesis
Noah, a new man in an old world? If Lot had been polluted with Sodoms sins, he
might have been consumed in Sodoms flames.

Its ill breathing in an infectious air. Satan's progeny loves not to go to hell
without society: Its better to be with Philpot in his colehouse then with
Bonner in his Palace. A man may pass through Ethiopia and yet be unchanged, but
if he remains there he will be discolored.

Ecclesiastical history says Illius enim uxor prior irretita-laqueis Ariani
^rroris, irretivit, and ipsum adduxit ad communem secum in barathrum casum.
Theod. Eccl. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 12.
of Valens the Emperor, that by marrying an Arian Lady he was himself
ininsnared in that wicked opinion. Come out of her my people, that you be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, Rev. 18. 4. If
Rome have left us in the foundation, let us leave them in the superstruction.
Where they are fallen from God, there let us fall from them. Where such worms
breeds in the body of a Nation, they will be sure to eat out the bowels of
Religion. Not to take away such traitors, is to make a nest wherein to hatch
their treasons. That is the fifth.

6. Singular thing is this, To choose the worst of sorrows, before you commit
the least of sins. Others they choose the greatest sin before the smallest
suffering: which is like the fish that leaps out of the broyling-pan into the
burning flame; by seeking to shun an external calamity, they rush Thus Spira,
by laboring to preserve his outward estate, endangered the loss of his
immortal soul.
into eternal misery: What is this, but as if a man to save his hat, should
lose his head? Or to sink the ship that is sailing, to avoid the storm that is
rising? It is better to have the flesh defaced, then Peccatum inter omnia mala
existimare debemus maximum malum. Chem Evan. har. p. 878.
it is to have the spirit defiled.

Though man be the Butt, yet it is sin that is the mark, at which all the
arrows of divine vengeance are shot. These spiders weave their own webs, and
then are entangled in them. Our own damnation is but the product of our own
transgression.

Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins!
Lam. 3. 39. When man had no evil within him, man had no evil upon Peccatum
omnia mala habet sibi adjuncta eorumque sons, and origo existit. id. ibid.
him. He began to be sorrowful, when he began to be sinful. When the soul shall
be fully released from the guilt of its impieties, the body shall be wholly
delivered from the grief of its infirmities. Sorrow shall never be a visitant,
where sin is not an inhabitant; the former would be a foraigner, if the latter
were not a sojourner.

God is as far from beating his children for nothing, as he is from beating his
children to nothing. There is no way to calm the sea, but Si serpentem negligis
basiliscus fiet; si parvae navis foramina non abturas, ^qua paulatim acrescens
submerget navens Stapl. p. m. p. 443.
to excommunicate Jonah from the ship. Kill the root and the branches wither.
Diminish the spring and the streams will fail. Remove but the fuel of
corruption, and you extinguish the fire of affliction. The wages of sin is
death, Romans 6. 23. The works of sin are hateful, and the wages of sin are
mortal. The corruption of nature, is the cause of the dissolution of nature.
The candle of our lives, is blown out by the wind of our lusts; that is the
weed that overtops the corn, the smoke that depresses the flame, and the cloud
that over-shadows the sun.

Were it not for sin, death had never had a beginning; and Supersint in nobis
peccati reliquiae adhaerentes carni nostrae, donee s^mus in hac v^ta, at hae
reliquiae mort^ toll^atur. ^^use. ^oc. (...). de ^em. pec. p. 53.
were it not for death sin would never have an ending. Man, as a creature, is a
debtor to Gods Sovereignty commanding; but man as a sinner is a debtor to Gods
severity condemning.

What is so sweet a good as Christ, and what is so great an evil as lust? Sin
has brought many a Believer into suffering, and suffering Affl^ctiones sunt
re^edia* peccatorum, ut peccata sunt causae afflictionum. Stap. promp. Mor. p.
197.
has kept many a Believer out of sin. It is better to be preserved in brine,
then to rot in honey. The bitterest Physic is to be chosen before the sweetest
poison: Sicut aurum reprobum igne consumitur, probum vero igne declaratur. In
the same fire where the dross is consumed, the gold is refined. How many
thousands of souls had never obtained the hopes of heaven, if they had not
sailed by the gates of hell? As every mercy is a drop derived from the ocean of
Gods goodness; so every misery is a dram weighed by the wisdom of Gods
providence.

When Eudoxia threatened Chrysostom with banishment; Go tell her, says he, Nil
nisi peccatum timeo; I fear nothing but sin. And indeed nothing but sin is to
be feared. Before we lanch out into any undertaking, it behooves us to ask our
selves what is our tackling, if a storm should overtake us in our voyage. A bad
conscience imbitters the sweetest comforts, when a good conscience sweetens the
bitterest crosses. Et quantam in conscientia relinquent cicatricem vitia, vel
aetate tenerrima perpetrata! He that is not afraid to do evil, will be afraid
to suffer evil. But what need he fear a cross on the back, who does feel a
Christ in Afflictio pins non constituit infaelices aut miseros, uti humana
judicat ratio, sed contra felices, a^beatos. Lau. ^^ Ep. Iac. p 78.
the heart? Its the water without the ship that tosses it, but its the water
within the ship that drowns it. Its better to have a body consumed to ashes,
then a soul that shall dwell with everlasting burnings. Though we cannot Diligo
quidem pati, sed nescio an dignus sim. Ignat in Ep. ad Trall.
live without afflictions, yet lets live above afflictions. Our Patmos is our
way to Paradise. Non nisi per angusta, ad augusta.

Suppose the furnace be heated seven times hotter, it is but to make us seven
times better. They that are here crossed for well doing, shall be hereafter
crowned for well-dying. There is none so welcome to the spiritual Canaan, as
those that swim to it through the red sea of their own blood.

Christian, when thou come into the world, thou do but live to die again;
and when thou go out of the world, thou do but dye to live again. What is
the grain the worse for the fan by which it is winowed, or the gold for the
fire by which it is purified!

Pendleton promised rather to fry out a fat body in flames of martyrdom, then
to betray his Religion; but when the trial approacht he said, As he came not
frying into the world, so he would not go flaming out of the world. They who
will not part with their lusts for Christ, will never part with their lives for
Christ. But Paul and Silas they had their prison Thus that undaunted champion
of Christ, (...), etc. frumentum Dei, dentibus ferarum molar, ut mundus panis
Dei inveniar. Ign. in Ep. ad Rom
songs, in the midst of their prison-sufferings. These caged birds sang as
sweetly as those that have sky freedom.

I have read a story of a woman that being in travel in prison, a little before
her death she cried out of her sorrows: The Keeper asked her, how she could
endure the fire, that made such a noise at the bringing forth of a child? Well
enough, says she, for now I suffer for my sins, but then I shall suffer for my
Savior. There is more evil in a drop of corruption, then there is in a sea of
affliction. In suffering, the offense is done to us; in finning, the offense is
done to God: In suffering there is an infringement of man's liberty, in sinning
there is a violation of Gods authority. The evil of suffering is transient, but
the evil of sin is permanent. In suffering we lose the favor of men, in
sinning we hazard the favor of God. The rose is sweeter under the Still where
it drops, then on the stalk where it sprouts. The face of godliness is never so
beautiful as when its spit upon. The best corn is that which lies under the
clods in snowy weather.

It was a brave saying of Vincentius to his persecutors, Rage and do your
worst, you shall find the Spirit of God more strengthening the tormented, then
the spirit of the devil can strengthen their tormentors. Let but Professors do
their best, and then let persecutors ^e^cuss^res nihil mora^amur, praese^tim
^um moriendum esse nobis sciamu^, Justin 2. Defens. ad An^on. (...).
do their worst. Though you may feel their might, yet you should not fear their
malice. Nil desperandum Christo duce, and auspice Christo.

Its storied of Hooper, when he came to suffer; O Sir, says one, have a care
of your self; life is Thus the Proconsul persuaded and besought the noble
German (who suffered under Verus) Vt quoniam admodum ju^enis, and in flore
esset, sui ipsius misereretur. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. cap. 15.
sweet, and death is bitter: Ah, says he, this I know; but the life to come is
more full of sweetness, and the death to come is more full of bitterness. A man
may suffer without sinning, but a man cannot sin without suffering. When Philip
asked Demosthenes, If he was not afraid to lose his head; No, says he, for if
I lose my head, the Athenians will give me one immortal.

Do but listen to the language that drops out of the mouths of those three
children, or rather of those three Vos occidere quidem potestis, nocere non
potestis. ^ust. ubi prius.
champions, Dan. 3. 17, 18. We are not careful to answer thee in this matter;
if it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand O King. But if not, be it known
unto thee O King, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image
that thou have set up. Either they must sin foully, or they must suffer sadly.
Either they must bow to a golden Image, or burn in a fiery furnace. Yet they
were as far from worshipping of his gods, as he Thus Polycarpe was assaulted by
Herod, and Nicetes, who said, Quidnam mali fuerit dicere Domine Caefar,
sacrificareque and conservari? But he answered, Facturus non sum quod
consulitis; and chose rather a flaming fire then to consent unto their fawning
words. Eusebius. ubi prius.
was from worshipping of theirs. And Daniel chooses the den of the lions, before
he will forsake the cause of the Lamb. Shall not we for his sake bear the wrath
of man, who for our sakes did bear the wrath of God? Though obedience be better
then sacrifice, yet sometimes to sacrifice a man's self is the best obedience.
He that loses a baser life for Christ, shall find a better life in Christ.

Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin which are but for a season, Heb. 11. 25. What is a cup of
physic that takes away the disease, to a cup of poison that takes away the
life? They that live upon God in the use of the creature, can live upon God in
the loss of the creature. It was a brave expression of one, What I receive
thankfully as a token of Gods love to me, I part with all contentedly, as a
token of my love to him.

For a good man one will even dare to dye, Romans 5. 7. Will one dare to die for
a good man, and shall we be afraid to die for a good God? And others were
tortured, not accepting Melius est mibi emori propter Christum Iesum quam
imperare sinibus terrae. Ign. ad Romans
deliverance that they might obtain a better resurrection, Heb. 11. 35. Some
would have used any picklock to have opened a passage to their liberty; but
they knew too much of another world to bid so high a rate for this world.

It is storied of Hormisdas a noble man of Persia, who was degraded of all his
promotion, because he would not alter his professions; afterward they restored
them all again, and solicited him to deny Christ, but he rent his purple robe,
and laid all his Honors at the feet of the Emperor, saying, Siideo me sperasti
pietatem deserturam, habe tibi donum tuum una cum impietate; If you think to
make me deny Christ for The like constancy and resolution you may read of in
the noble Suenes, and the zealous Benjamin, both barbarously used by the same
Prince. Id. ibid.
the obtaining of my honors, take them all back again. He thought that Christ
without his honors, was better then his honors without Christ.

It is storied of one of the Martyrs going to the stake, a Noble man wished him
to have a care of his soul: So I will, says he; for I give my body to be
burned, to keep my soul from being defiled. How many are there that had rather
have sinful self satisfied, then to have sinful self crucified? As grace comes
in at one door, vice goes out at another: as in a well, when one bucket comes
up full, the other returns down empty. The only way to have the house of Saul
weakened, is to get the house of David strengthened. Those Philistims that could
not stand before Sampson in his health, how scornfully did they dance about him
in his sickness! O remember sin, it is that which in this life does debase us,
and it is that which in the next life does destroy us. Those whose end is
damnation, their damnation is without end. No condition is so intolerably
easeless, as that condition which is unalterably changeless.

One seeing a woman going cheerfully to prison, O, says he, you have not yet
tasted of the bitterness of death: No, says she, nor never shall; for Christ
has promised that they who keep his sayings shall never see death. A believer
may feel the stroke of death, but he shall never feel the sting of death. The
first death may bring his body to corruption, but the second death shall never
bring his soul to damnation. Though the cross may be endured by them, yet the
curse is removed from them. Though they may live a life that is dying, yet they
shall not dye a death that is living. There is no condemnation belongs to those
Christians who do belong to Christ. That is the sixth.

7. Singular thing is this, To be a father to all in charity, and yet a servant
to all in humility.

First, To be a father to all in charity. That crop that is sown in mercy,
shall be reaped in glory. In heaven there is riches enough, but no poor to
receive them; In hell Thesauros in orb illo supero struit, qui pauperibus eos
in hoc infero distribuit. Drex. ubi infra.
there is poor enough, but no rich to relieve them. Others they are deaf to the
requests of mercy, They will do no good in Those that forget benefits bestowed
are not more to blame (in a very heathens account) then those that forget to
bestow them: Qui beneficium non redit uon magis peccat, quam qui non dat. Sen.
de Bon. l. 1.
the world, with the goods of the world. They are like spunges that greedily
sucks up the waters, but yields it not forth again till they be squeezed.
Necessity is not like to be undrest of misery, whilst those that would help
cannot, for want of ability, and they which may help will not for want of
charity. There is not a drop of water for such Diveses in hell, that have not a
crum of bread for such Lazerusses upon earth. Every act of charity, is but an
act of equity. Its not the bestowing of your gifts, but the paying of your
debts. The riches superfluity was ordained to relieve the poors necessity. A
Lady giving six pence to a beggar, told him, That she had given him more then
ever God had given her. To whom he replied, No Madam, God has given you all
your abundance. No, says she, He has but lent that to such as me, that we
should give it to such as you.

Whosoever beleiveth that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God. And every one
that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him, 1 John 5.
1. Holiness as it works a likeness to him that begets it, so it works a likeing
of them that enjoys it. It is impossible that he should love the person of
Christ, who does not love the picture of Christ. He that loves himself, will
not hate his brother; for whilst he is out of charity with his brother, God is
out of charity with him, And we lose more for want of Gods love, then our
brethren lose for want of our love.

Make to your selves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when they
fail they may receive you into everlasting habitations, Luke 16. 9. He is not a
covetous man that lays up some thing providently, but he is a Audite, O
divites, novam e coelo artem; novas colligendi thesaurimodus, SPARGERE.
Errastis hactenus, nam dando ditescimus, non corradendo, and servando. Drex.
Christian. Zod. Sig 7. p. 63.
covetous man that gives out nothing willingly.

The Sun of charity, though it rises at home, yet it should set abroad. The
hopes of life should not make you covetous, but the thoughts of death should
make you It Was a Divi e saying of the heathen, Nihilmagis possidereme credam,
quam bened onata. Sen. de vi^. bea^. c 20.
bounteous. Without your mercy the poor cannot live on earth, and without Gods
mercy you shall not live in heaven. Others, their churlishness does swallow up
their charitableness: Instead of praying one for another they are making a prey
one of another.

When I consider that our hearts are not softer, I wonder that the times are no
harder: That God should give the rich so much, and the rich give the poor so
little.

Some observe that the barrenest grounds are nearest to the goldenest mines. It
is too often true in a spiritual sense, that they whom God has made the most
fruitful with Estates, are most barren of good works. The rich they spend their
goods more wantonly, but the poor they give their Alms more willingly. A penny
comes more hardly out of a bag that's full crammed, then a shilling out of a
purse that's half empty. Wherefore Parum potes? sufficit multum voluisse; multum
potes? cave velis parum dare. Drex. ubi. priu* p. 65.
does the Lord make your cups run over, but that others lips might taste of your
liquor? The showers that fall upon the highest Mountains, they glide inthe
lowest valleys; give and it shall be given you.

Its infidelity that is the spring of cruelty; Therefore where you have ^
precept for the one, you have a promise of the other. If thou deniest to those
that are virtuous, thou killest bees; if thou bestowest on those that are
vicious, thou supportest drones. But its better to favor a bastard then to
Murder a child. God looks not so much on the merits of the beggar, as upon the
mercy of the giver.

He has showed the O man what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee,
but to do Justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God! Micah 6. 8.
Here is a trinity of precepts, from a trinity of persons. If all were rich, no
Alms need be received; if all were poor, no alms could be bestowed. But he
that could have made all men wealthy, has made some men empty, that the poor
might have Christ for an example of patience, and the rich for an example of
goodness. Cruelty is one of the highest scandals of piety, which makes lambs of
Lions, and tames the feircest tempers.

Be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful. Luke 6. 36. Clemency is
one of the brightest Diamonds in the Crown of Majesty, Mat. 5. 48. Be ye
perfect as your heavenly father is perfect; what the one calls merciful, the
other styles perfect, as if ( Vna misericordia omnes perfectiones) this one
perfection of mercy included all. He that shows mercy when it may best be
spared, will receive mercy when it shall most be needed.

Its storyed of one of the Dukes of Savoy, that being asked what hounds he kept,
by certain Ambassadors that came to his Court, he showed them (a company of
poor people sitting at his Table,) these says he, are all the hounds I have on
earth, with which I hunt after the Kingdom of heaven. Its counted an honor to
live like Princes, but it is a greater honor to give like Princes.

Pure Religion and undefiled before God, and the father, is this; to visit the
fatherless and widows, in their affliction, and to keep himself unspoted from
the world, James 1. 27. The flames of piety toward God, should be perfumed
with the Incense of charity toward man; mercy is so good a servant that it
will never let its Mr. dye a beggar. Quantos avaritia ad incitas redegit?
eleemosyna nullos; its pity that those D^ek ubi prius.
who have drained their own wels dry, should perish for want of water, to
quench their thirst.

Then shall the King say unto them of Venite benedicti, fragmen panis samelico
dedistis; en mensam paratissimam; venit, aeternum ^^ulaturi peregrinos tecto
non exclusistis, angelorum civis ves esse j^b^o etc. Drex. Libro jam citato. p.
68.
his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world; for I was an hungry and you gave me
meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me drink, etc. Mercy is the Queen of beauty,
that is espoused to the King of glory. Charity though it make Vix ulla virtus
majorem intota scriptura mercedem repromissam habet, quam eleemosyna, Stap.
prom. mor. par. aest. p. 62.
your coin lighter, yet it will make your crown greater; he that would have
his name registered in the book of eternity, let him write it himself with the
pen of charity. I know no better way to preserve your dough, then by parting
with your cake. Methinks full breasts should milk themselves without drawning,
and larg springs should issue forth their waters, without pumping. Your charity
should seek the poor, before the poor seek your charity.

Put on as the elect of Gods bowels of mercy, Colos. 3. 12. he that has put
off the bowels of compassion, he has put of the badge of election; others can
love at their tongues end, but you should love at your fingers end. If a man be
naked, they can bid him be clothed; if a man be empty, they can bid him be
filled, as if poor Christians were like Camelians, that could live upon the
air; liberality does not lie in good words, but it lies in good works. The
doubtful are to be resolved by our counsels, but the needful are to be releived
with onr morsells: methinks its exceeding lovely to see the pictures of purity,
though they be hung in the frames of poverty.

If you be coveteous of any thing, let it be of this, rather to lay out on
necessity, then to lay up for posterity; Charity is seed, and Stapl. ubi prius.
Sicunt semen surgit cum multo faenore, sie eleemosyna cum multa mercede.
the Husbandman does not grow rich by the saving of his seed, but by the sowing
of his seed.

Secondly, A Servant to D^scendi^e ut ascendatis ad Deum; ^ccidistis enim
ascendendo contra eum. Aug. conf. l. 4. cap. 12.
all in humility; our first fall was by rising, but our best rise is by
falling. The acknowledgment of our own impotence, is the only stock for the
ingrafting of divine asistance. An humble Saint on earth looks likest to a
Citizen of heaven; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your
servant, Matthew. 20. 27. That is the most lovely professor who is the most lowly
professor, as incense smells the sweetest when its beaten smallest, Pride in
the soul is like the spleen in the body, that grows most when other parts
decay; God will not suffer such a weed to grow in his garden, without taking
some course to root it up. A beleiver is like a vessel cast into the Sea, the
more it fills, the more it sincks.

Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall, Prove. 16.
18. The flowing river, quickly turns to an ebbing water. Its not all the world
that can pull a humble man down, because God will exalt him; nor is it all the
world that can keep a proud man up, because God will debase him.

Do but see how one of the best of Verae humlitasis ^o^ proprium est, ut quo
quis, caeloteste, sanctior, eo, se judice, villor censeatur, Drex. Ch^istian
Zod. p. 74.
Saints, looks upon himself as one of the least of Saints: For I am the least
of the Apostles, not worthy to be called an Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 9. In the
highest heavens the beams of Majesty are displaied, but to the lowest hearts
the bowels of mercy are dispensed. Be ye clothed with humility. Pride is a
sinners excrement, but humility is a Saints ornament. The cloth of humility,
should always be worn on the back of Christianity.

God does many times stick a thorn in the flesh, to prick the bladder of pride
in the spirit. Missa fuit Interdum sub^rahitur gratia, non pro superbia quae
jam est sed quae futura est, nisi subtrahatur. Bron. in cant. Ier. 54.
miseria, ut dimissa fiat creatura. The first Adam was for self-advancement,
but the second is for self-debasement; the former was to have self deified, the
latter was to have self crucified.

Though there may be some thing left by self denial, yet there is nothing lost
by self denial: nay, a man can never enjoy himself till he deny himself. We
live by dying to our selves, and die by living in our selves. There is no proud
man but he is foolish, and almost no foolish man but he is proud. Its the owl
of ignorance that broods and hatches the Peacock of pride.

God abhors them worst, that adore themselves most. Pride its not a Bethel for
Gods dwelling, but a Babel of the devils building. It is not only a thing that
is sinful, but it is a thing that is seminal. All other Rarum aiunt esse
generosum pharmacum, cui non insit veneni aliquid; nullum certe vitium est, in
quo non aliquid superbiae. Drex. christ. Zod. p. 71.
lusts, as they are found lodging in it, so they are found flowing from it.

Wherefore he says, God resists the proud, (...), he sets himself in
battle array against them: Instructa acie, atque Fontes and flumina, non per
acclivia decurrunt nec mon^es petunt sed per declivia, and valles labuntur.
Stapl. in Dom. 10. ^ost Pent.
veluti ex adverso praelio obsistit. Lorinus; but he gives grace to the humble,
Jam. 4. 6. Specialiter propter majorem sui exinanitionem. Gor. in loc. Where
humility is the corner stone, there piety is as the top stone. Its good to have
true thoughts of our selves, but bad to have high thoughts of our selves,
Though all men forsake thee, yet will not I. Poor Peter, he was the most
impotent, when he was the most arogant. He that thought to stand whilst others
were falling, he fell whilst others were standing.

It was an excellent saying of one, Where grace sits below me, I Humilitas
virtus est ut in se praestantissima, ita deo gratissima. S^a^. in Dom. 10.
post. Pent.
will acknowledge its dignity, but where vice crawls above me I will abhor its
vanity. An humble heart may meet with opposition from man, but it shall meet
with acceptance from God. That is the seventh.

8. Singular thing is this, To mourn most for those lusts before God, that
appear least before men. Others they cannot mourn in secret for their public
sins, but we should mourn in public for our secret sins. That must be gained
by repentance, that has been lost by disobedience.

Outward acts are more scandalous, but inward lusts are more dangerous. If you
would know the heart of your sins, you must then know the sin of your hearts.
Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, false witness, blasphemies, Mat. 15. 19. Cor ut est sons vitae,
itactiam omnium pravarum cogita ionum* Diaholus and adjutor and incensoresse
potest, non autem ea^um a^ctor, Chem. Hat. Evan. p. 15. 28.
Those streams of defilement that are in your lives, do but show what a
fountain of wickedness there is in your hearts: As a little ware you lay on
your stalls, shows the great abundance you have in your shops. The thought of
foolishness is sin, Prove. 24. 9. Mercury is poison in the water distilled, as
well as in the gross body.

Repentance, though it be man's act, yet it is Gods gift: The same power goes to
the hearts melting, that goes to the hearts making; yet a heart that is broken
is better then a face that is brazen. Supernas enim beatorum mansiones attingit
^ern. in Cant. ser. 10.
poenitentiae odor. Though we are fallen from a state of Poenitentia est lorda^'s
fl^vius in quo Naa maa mundatur; and Mare ruburm in quo Aegvptii submerguntur.
Gor. in ^^ a^. 5. 4.
innocence, yet we should rise to a state of penitency. Those sins shall never
make a hell for us, which are a hell to us.

Others they do nothing more then make work for repentance, and yet do nothing
less then repent of their works. They have sin enough for all their sorrows,
but they have not sorrow enough for all their sins. Their eyes are casements to
let in lusts, that should be floodgates to pour out tears.

Those men will hardly stave off new sins, that did Quem conscientia recentis,
et crudi sceleris sollicitat, fortius, and tona^i* us amplectitur pietatem,
etc. Bapt. Fer. orat. 2. p. 4.
never grieve for old ones; but when sorrow has possession of the house, it
will shut sin out of the doors. Thou breakest the heads of Leviathan in the
waters, Psalm. 74. 14. It Is usually allegorized of great sins that are weakened,
and washed away with tears, Gorr. in 5. Mat. 4. and Playf. in his Mean. mourn,
there must be a falling out with our lusts, before there be a falling off from
our lusts; a loathing of sin in our affections, before there be Dolorem tanquam
gladium arripimus, quo peccatum interimimus Stella.
a leaving of sin in our conversations. A hearty mourning for our
transgresgressions, makes way for a happy funeral of our corruptions.

You that have filled the Book of God with your sins, should fill the bottle of
God with your tears. When Christ draws the picture of the new creature, his
first pensill is steeped in water. Except ye repent ye shall Christus nos omnes
ad poenitentiam suadet, si perire nolumus; haec enim est secunda tabula post
naufragium. Stella in l c.
all likewise perish, Luke 13. 3. Is it not better to repent without perishing,
then to perish without repenting? Your sins have been your greatest traitors,
and your sorrows will be your choycest When Alexander had read a long Epistle
written by Antipater against his mother Olympias, he said unto him Ignoras in
finitas epistolas unica? matris lachryma oblilaerari. Plut. in vita Al^x.
helpers.

Godly sorrow its such a grace, as without it, not a man shall be saved, and
with it not a man shall be damned. Is it not better swiming in the water works
of repentance, then its burning in the fireworks of vengeance? Or will the
tears that in hell are offered, put out the flames that in hell are suffered?

Him has God exhalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to
Israel, and the remission of sins, Acts 5. 31. As a Prince he gives repentance,
as a Priest he gives indulgence. Our humiliation is the fruit of his
exhaltation; as he was abased for the creatures exaltment, so he was exalted
for the creatures abasement.

Remember sinner, if thy heart be not broken in thee, thy guilt is not broken
from thee. If you lay not your sins to your hearts that you may be humbled, he
will lay your sins to your charge that you may be damned. Repentance, though it
be not a pardons obtainer, yet it is a pardons forerunner.

He that lives in sin without repentance, shall dye in sin without forgiveness.
There is no coming to the fair In catalogo beatorum scribuntur stentes, Stel.
in Luc. 6. 21.
haven of glory, without sailing through the narrow straits of repentance.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5. 4. Out of the
saltest water, God can brew the Flebile prencipium melior fortuna secuta est.
Ovid. Lib. 7. Metam.
sweetest liquor. As the Be gathers the best honey from the bitterest herbs:
when the cloud has been disolved into a shower, presently there follows a
glorious sun shine; the more a stone is wounded by the hand of the Ingraver,
the more beauty is superinduced upon it. By groans unutterable, God does usher
in joys unspeakable. Haee (poenitentia scil.) te peccatorum fluctibus mersum
perlevabit, and in portum divinae clementiae protelabit. Tert. lib. de paenit.

None do more sing in the possessing of Christ, then they who do most sigh for
the forsaking of Christ; usually their liftings up are commensurate to their
castings down; a tender heart is like melting wax; ah what choice impressions
is there stamped upon such dispositions!

A Christian should mourn more for the lusts of the flesh, then for the works
of the flesh; the sin of our natures transends the nature of our sins: carnal
sins they defile the soul, by the body, but spiritual sins they defile the soul
in the body. Others they can mourn over a body from whom a Siquem detuis charis
mortali exitu perdidisse^, ingemisteres dolenter, and flere; Animam tuam misere
perdidisti and non acriter plangis, non jugiter ingemiscis. Cypryan de lapsis.
soul is departed, but they cannot mourn over a soul whom God has deserted:
Alas, what is the biting of a Flea, to the stinging of a Scorpion, or a spot in
the face to a stab at the heart! Inward diseases though they are least
palbable, yet they are most miserable: needs must they end in that which is
mortal that begin on that which is vital: a man may dye of the plague whose
spots are never seen.

Its sin in the soul that's like Jonah in the ship, which turns the smoothest
Seas into the curledst waves. Sola penitentia superest, quae satisfaciat. Id.
Ibid.
They shall look upon me whom they pierced: and they shall mourn for him: as
one mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for Beati sunt qui
in h^c Lacry marum valle ipsis etiam lachrymis palcuntur. Stella in Luc. 6. 21.
him as one that is in bitterness for his first born, Zach. 12. 10. The nails
that pierced his hands shall now pierce their hearts: they shall wound
themselves with their sorrows, which have wounded him with their sins. That
they have grieved his spirit, it shall grieve their spirits.

A beleiver puts on his mourning garment, for putting off his wedding garment;
As the Suger-loaf is disolved, and weeps it self away when its dipped in wine; so
do our hearts disolve and melt themselves away in the sweet sense of Divine
love and our refusals of it; O that ever I should be so bad a child to him that
has been so good a Father!

Of sin, because they beliive not in me, John 16. 9. Unbelief its a sin that
least visible, and yet a sin that's most damnable. Not to fetch our lives from
Christ, is to bring the greatest death upon Christ. Insidelity is the greatest
robbery; it frustrates not only all the actions of Christ in doing, but all
the passions of Christ in dying.

Other persons are like Lapwings, that flutter most at the greatest remoteness
from the nests; if they have tears for their outward losses, but none for
their inward lusts; they can mourn for the evil that sin brings, but not for
the sin which brings the evil. As Pharaoh more lamented the hard strokes that
was upon him, then the hard heart that was within him. Esau mourned not because
he sold the Birthright, which was his sin, but because he lost the blessing,
which was his punishment: This is like weeping with an Onion; the eye sheds
tears because it smarts.

A Mariner casts over those goods in a Tempestuous season, that he courts a
return off, when the winds are silenced, many complain more of the sorrows to
which they are born, then of the sins in which they are born. The venom of sin
is not ever distastful, when the vengeance of sin is affrightful.

The sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites.
Why what is the matter? Who amongst us shall dwell with the devouring fire, who
amongsts us shall dwell with everlasting burnings. Isai. 33. 14. They fear
corruption, not as it is a cole that is blacking, but as it is a fire that is
burning. A stroke from Justice brake Judases heart into despair; but a look
from mercy melted Peter's hearts into tears.

There are two things in our sins; There Is the devillishness of them, and the
dangerousnes of them.

Now take a Saint and a sinner; Quid feci? quo me praecipitaveram, nisi mihi
Dei misericordia subveniret? Call. inst. l. 3. c. 3. sec. 15.
the one says what have I done? the other what must I suffer; the one mourns
for the active evil, that has been committed by him* the other mourns for the
passive evil that shall be inflicted on him. The former grieves because his
soul is defiled; The latter grieves because his soul is condemned.

Water may gush from a Rock when is smitten by a rod; But such heartless
humiliations are hearty dissimulations. Did sin bring sorrow into the world? O
let sorrow carry sin out of the world.

Whilst the vessel is leaking, the Pump is going; its too early to wipe Tota
vita vestra. poenitentia sit; haec enim vita locus est poenitentia. Stel. in
Luc. 3. 3.
away tears from your eyes, till God sweep away dust from your hearts. Its
better to go to heaven sadly, then to go to hell securely. Give me a melancholy
Saint, rather then a merry devil; nothing can quench Magni igitur constat
poenitentiae. Ferrar.
the fire that sin has kindled, but the water which repentance has caused.

Did the rocks rend when Christ dyed for our sins? and shall not our hearts
rend that have lived in our sins? If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John
1. 9. Do but you acknowledge the debt, and he will cansel the bond.

Is it not better to be savedby Divine mercy, then to be sued by Divine
Justice? do you open the Offensum se Deus obliviscitur, si nos offensi cum
dolor recordemur. Drex. Christi. Zod. p. 115.
ulcer that is paining, and he will apply the plaster that is healing; till we
are opressed with our own burdens, we shall never be eased by Christ's Shoulders.

Where misery passes undiscerned there mercy passes undesired: behold I stand
at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come
in to him, and sup with him, and he with me, Rev. 3. 20. Christ does many times
come unto the door, when he does not come into the house; but how willing is he
to be received, who is unwilling to be denied? as you knock at his doors for
audience, so he knocks at your doors for entrance; if you shut out his person,
he will shut out your Prayers; the only way to have our will of God, is to do
the will of God.

A Saints tears are better then a sinners triumps. Lachrymae poenitentium Bern.
sermon. 30. super Cant.
sunt vinum Angelorum. A sinners repenting is the Angels rejoicing; and give me
such a mourning on earth as creates Music in heaven; if you would not sin in
your griefs, then grieve for your sins. Why should God show him mercy that does
not acknowledge himself guilty? how many are there that are battered, as lead
by the hammer, that were never bettered as gold by the fire?

Look to it least your repentance of dead works be not it self a work that's
dead, that you shed such tears as need no tears for the sheding of them.
Usually that repentance that begins in the fears of hell, ends in the flames of
hell; that's the eighth.

9. Singular thing is, to keep our hearts lowest when God raises our estates
highest; charge them that are rich in this world that they be not high-minded,
nor trust in uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Sinful arrogance does usually
attend sinful considence.

Worldly wealthyness is a great quill to blow up the bladder of
high-mindedness; when men's estates are lifted up, then men's hearts are pussed
up. Oh how proud is thin dust of thick clay! Pride breeds Thus Romulus secundis
rebus elatus, and tumidus m nime serendam superbiam, and contumaciam sumebat.
P^^t in vita Romans
in great estates as worms do in sweet fruits; but Christians, if you be poor
in the world, you should be rich in faith; but if you be rich in the world, you
should be poor in spirit; the way to ascend is to descend; the deeper a tree is
in its rooting, the larger a tree is in its spreading: The face of prosperity
shines brightest through the Mask of humility.

As none have so little but they have matter for blessing, so none have so much
that they have matter for bosting; shall the stage player be proud of his
borrowed robes, or the mudwall rise and swell, because the beams of a beautiful
sun shine upon it?

Gold in your bags, may make you greater, but its grace in your breasts that
will make you better. Goodness without greatness shall be esteemed, when
greatness without goodness shall be confounded.

Proud sinners are fit companions for none but proud devils. The more
prosperity man enjoys, the more humility God enjoins.

Nature teaches us, that those trees bend the most freely, which bear the most
fully. A proud heart as it loves none but it self, so it is beloved by none but
by it self.

Consider, in adversity, as thou art a man, thou art no less then him that is
greatest; and in prosperity, as thou art a man, thou art no more then him that
is meanest: Who would climb those pinacles that never any went up without They
are like the inh^bitants of Asia, who (as Agesilaus affirms) si liberate
fruerentur, mali, si servirent, boni essent. Plut. Apoth. sec. 84.
fears, or got down without falls? Carnal persons, they are never good, but
when they are under the rod; and then, not because God is displeased with their
disilements, but because they are overawed by his judgments.

Its written of Timotheus the Athenian, when he had given an account to the
State of his Government, he often interlaced this speech, In this Fortune had
no hand: After which he never prospered in any thing which he attempted. When
men disown God, and cast off him, God disowns men, and casts off men.

Its storied of Philip of Macedon, that after an unexpected victory, he looked
very sadly, more like a mourner, then like a triumpher: He knew that what was
got by the sword, was subject to be lost by the sword.

God will not endure that any man should think well of himself, but himself;
and when they are glorying in all their pride, he is staining the pride of all
their glory. It is hard for any to be great in others eyes, and little in their
own. Most Christians they are like Chamelions, that when they take in the air,
they presently swell.

As that is a naughty heart which the world can soil, so that is an empty heart
that the world can fill. Prosperous winds soon fill the sails, but blowing too
strongly overturn the ship. Give me that brave person that in the midst of all
his honors, is rather pressed down with the weight of them, then puffed up
with the blasts of them.

You see your calling brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many We may say of such as Luther said of Elizabeth Q. of
Denmark a pious Princess; Christus aliquando voluit Reginam incaelum vebere.
noble are called, 1 Cor. 1. 26. You Nobles, I call you to see how few Nobles
are called: He does not say, not any such are called, but he says, Not many
such are called. A rich man is a rare dish at Gods table.

Its observed by those that are experienced in the sport of angling, that the
little fishes bite more then the great ones. Oh how few great fish do we find
so much as nibling at the Gospels book.

When King James's Tutor lay upon his expiring pillow, his Majesty sent to see
how he did: Go, says he, and tell him, that I am a going to a place where few
Kings are coming. Under the Law the Lamb and the Dove were offered, when the
Lion and the Eagle were rejected. In Heraldry they say that the plainest coats
are the richest arms. Usually the poorest on earth, are the richest in heaven.

The tree of life is seldom planted in a terrestrial Paradise. The shining
diamond of a great estate is often found upon the stinking dunghill of a wicked
heart. St. Bernard says of riches, Non tam bona, quam minora mala. They are
not so much good things as they are Sapius ventis agitatur ingenis Pinus, and
celsae graviore casu decidunt turres; feriuntque summos Fulmina montes. Hor.
Lib. 2. Ode. 10.
lesser evil things. Where there is the most prosperity, there is the least
security. The tallest Cedars are more subject unto boisterous blasts, then the
lowest shrubs: The little Pinnace rides safe by the shore, when the gallant
ship advancing with its topsails is cast away. Sheep that have the most wool
upon their backs, are soonest robbed of their suits.

The worlds fawning, is worse then the worlds frowning. Poverty is its own
defense from robery. Who will disturb those nests, in which there are hatched no
birds?

In our days, Malignants could not make estates, but yet estates could make
Malignants: If they took away their lives, it was but to get away their lands.
These Hounds though they could find nothing against them worth the barking,
yet they found something amongst them worth the taking: But I shall leave them
in their dregs, that are left in the sudds; hoping that the hands of Justice
will restore what the hands of Violence did impair.

Others, when their estates are low, their hearts are high; but Believers, when
their estates are high, their hearts are low. Then went King David in, and sat
before the Lord, and said, Who am I O Lord God, and what is my house, that thou
have brought me hitherto? 2 Samuel 7. 18. The weighty clusters humbled the
branches of this royal vine. He does not quarrel with God for mercies denied,
but adores God for mercies bestowed.

Humility it looks with one eye on grace to keep it thankeful; and with another
eye on vice, to keep it mournful: As the Peacock by viewing of its black feet,
pulls down its plumed feathers.

Theodosius thought it more honor to be a member of the Church, then to be a
Monarch of the world. Will thou set thy heart upon that which is not? Every
thing will come to nothing, but he that made every thing ont of nothing.

Many think it shall go well with them hereafter, because it is so well with
them here: As if silver and gold which came out of the bowels of the earth, had
wings to carry a soul into the bosom of heaven. The gates of the new Jerusalem,
though they stand open to gracious hearts, yet they are not got open by golden
keys. A man may lie Perunt illa congregata, sed pejus perit congregator eonum,
si non in Deo dives suerit. Id. 1 bid.
in the bosom of the creatures for a time, and yet lie in the bosom of the
Devil for ever.

The worm of pride is such a gnawing vice, that it crops the sweetest flowers
of grace. Either shut this sin out on earth, or else this sin will shut you out
of heaven. The bowing reed is preserved whole, when the stirdy oak is broke to
pieces.

A proud person thinks every thing too much that is done by him, and every
thing too little that is done for him. God is as far from pleasing him with his
mercies, as he is from pleasing of God in his duties. Behold his soul which is
lifted up in him is not upright, Hab. 2. 4. When we see a man blown up and
swelled with the dropsy, we can tell his blood is naught and waterish, without
opening a vein for the trial. I will not say a good man is never proud, but I
will say a proud man is never good. That is the nineth.

10. Singular thing is To be better inwardly in our substances, then we are
outwardly in our appearance. For he is not a Jew which is one outwardly,
neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew
which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit,
whose praise is not of men but of God, Romans 2. 28, 29. We do not use to set our
hands to blancks, though we set our seals to bonds.

Formality often takes its chambers next door to integrity, and so marches
under its Mask: the soul not suspecting that hell should aproach, so near
heaven; but of the two give me a substance that makes no show, rather then a
show that has no substance; he that gives truth to our inward parts, he loves
truth in our inward parts.

A rotten post though guilt with gold, is fitter for the burning of the fire,
then for the building of the Fabric. Where there is a pure conscience, there
will be a pure conversation; as the Index shows what is in the book, so the
actions show what is in the heart.

Its a vain thing to say its day when there is nothing but darkness in the sky;
but a man cannot tell always what is a clock in a man's breast, by the dyal of
his face; the humblest looks is sometimes linked to the proudest hearts; unclean
spirits may have the chambers, when they look not out at the windows; an
hypocrite he is both the fairest, and the foulest creature in the world; he is
the fairest outwardly, to the eyes of man, but the foulest inwardly to the eyes
Cygnus plumas habet omni nive candidiores, sed carnem nigram; sic bypocrita sub
verbis mellitissimis venenum alit. Stapl. in Dom. 5. post. Pent.
of God; who will baptize them with the name of Satan, though shrouded in the
mantle of Samuel.

Many appear righteous, who are only righteous in appearance. But such as
deceive others with the false shows of holiness deceive themselves with the
false hope of happiness.

Some would not seem evil, and yet would be so; others would seem good, and yet
would not be so. Either be what thou seem, or else seemwhat thou be;
Having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof, from such turn away.
2 Timothy 3. 5. Though they who have the power of godliness, cannot deny the form;
yet, they who have the form of godliness, can deny the power.

Hypocrites are like looking-glasses, that present the faces that are not in
them. Oh how desirous are men to draw the fairest gloves over the fowlest
hands: To put the goodliest paints upon the rottenest posts, and to Enamel a
dunghill with sun beams! to counterfeit the coin of heaven, is Treason against
the King of Heaven; who would spread such curious Carpets over a dusty Table.

If a man set forth in an unsound bottom, he may lose himself in the voyage;
either get oil into your lamps, or else part with your lamps; there is no such
Blacka-mores in the eyes of the Deity, as those which paint for spiritual
beauty. Hypocrita inverbis sanctus est, in cord va^us. Stapl. Ib.


Others they are better in their outsides, then they are in their in. But
Christians are better in their insides then they are in their out; they are not
like painted Tombs that make an enclosure of rotten bones: The Kings daughter
is all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought gold, Psalm. 45. 13. She is
all glorious within, though within is not all her glory, I know the blasphemy
of them which say they are Jews, and and are not, but are the Synagogue of
Satan, Rev. 2. 9. A false friend is worse then an open enemy. A painted Harlot
is better then a painted Hypocrite. A treatcherous Judas is more abhorred by
God then a bloody Pilat.

Christians, remember that the sheeps coat shall be taken off from the woolfs
back. The velvet plaster of profession, shall not always cover the stinking
ulcer of corruption. There is no sailing in the ship of formality, to the shore
of felicity.

The blasing lamps of foolish Virgins, will never light them to the Bridegrooms
chamber. Either get the nature of Christians within you, or else never take the
honor of Christians unto you. The Hypocrites purpose is, (not virtutem colere,
sed vitia colorare) not to embrace virtue with a good intention, but to paint
over vice with a fair complexion.

Oh what a vanity is it to lop the boughs, and to leave the roots that can send
forth more; or to empty the cistern, and leave the fountain running that can
fill it again! Such persons may swim in the pond of the visible Church, but
when the net is drawn to the shore they shall be cast away as stinking fish.
How pious and devoute did the Pharisees seem before men; the people thought
them the only Saints upon earth: they judged their insides by their out, but
God judged their outside by their in. And he said unto them, ye are they which
justify your selves before men, but God knows your hearts: for that which is
highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15.
There shows of holiness before men, was but holiness in show before God.

A man may be a God in the eyes Hypocrita vest virtutis induitur coram
hominibus, and vest impietatis coram Deo. Stapl. in Dom. 1. post. Pent.
of men, and yet be a Devil in the eyes of God. The conversation may be
civilized, when the affections are not sanctified.

There is as vaste a difference between nature restrained, and nature renewed,
as there is between the shinings of a gloworm, and the beamings of the sun.
Malus ubi bonum se simulat, tunc est pessimus. A bad man is certainly worst
when he is scemingly best.

What is it to have the scabbard trimming, if the sword be rusting? To have
hands as white as wool, and hearts as black as hell? such professors are like
curious bubles, smooth and clear without, but nothing save wind within; a man
may wear Christ's livery, and yet do the Devils drudgery. The skin of an apple
may be fare when its rotten at the Coar.

Though all gold do glister, yet all that glisters is not gould. Aurichalco
Hypocrita proprie assimilatur, auri colorem non valorem habet. Stapl. dom. 5.
post. Pent. Men views your acts, but God views your hearts. Who would not prize
a vessel in the Cellar full of generous wine, before a guilt Tun that hangs up
at the door for a sign. He that walks uprightly, walks surely, but he that
perverteth his ways shall be known, Prove. 10. 9. He that promises to cover the
sincere souls infirmities, threatens to disclose the Hypocrites impieties.

O remember Judas who purchased nothing by his deceitful dealing, but a halter,
in which his body was hanged, and a fire in which his soul was burned; that's
the tenth.

11. singular thing is, to be more afflicted with the Churches heaviness, then
we are affected with our own happiness. When we suffer not from the Enemies of
Christ by persecution, we should suffer with the friends of Christ by
compassion; wherefore the King said unto me, Why is thy countenance sad, seeing
thou art not sick? Nehemiah 2. 2.

Sadness is the fruit of sickness: What sad when the Kings cup bearer, and wine
so near? the third verse informs you the reason, why should not my
countenance be sad, when the City the place of my Fathers Sepulchers lies
wast, and the gates thereof are consumed with fire.

Let not Sions sons be rejoicing whilst their mothers mourning: are not her
breaches like the Sea, and there is none to heal them! though you cannot make up
her breaches, yet let your hearts break for her breaches. Have pity upon me,
have Non oportet nos laetari in malis proximorum, sed compati. Stel. in Luc.
1^. 3.
pity upon me O me my friends; for the hand of God has touched me. Job 19.
21. Its observed of the Bees, that if one be sick, the other will lament.
Christianity strips no man of humanity; some observe in Swine that there is a
sympathy, when one is killed the rest are troubled; and shall that be lost
amongst men, which is found amongst Swine?

Will you see the Church bleed to death and never ask balm to cure her wounds?
how can such rejoice in her standing, that do not mourn for her falling?

Others what they do not feel by sense, that they will not feel by Sympathy,
Nero could be playing when Rome was burning; we may Suet. in vit. Ner. Thus the
killing of the infants was, Spectaculum Herodi jucundum, quia luctuosum. Bap.
Ferra. Orat. 5.
draw up that charge against many persons, Amos 6. 4, 6. They lie upon beds of
Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches: and eat the Lambs out of the
flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall that drink wine in bowls,
and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, but they are not grieved for
the affliction of Joseph.

They can weep for the^ dying groans of a child, but not for the dying groans
of a Church; their love unto their relations transcends their love unto their
Religion. But he that has a stock going in the Churches ship, cannot but
lament at every storm.

I should be jealous that that's but a silver eye in the head, an Ivory tooth in
the Mouth, a Wooden Leg in the body, that is unsensible of its sorrows. I will
know that the Churches Enemies, though they may be Waves to toss her, yet they
shall never be rocks to split her. Its only such fabrics as are bottomed upon
the sands that are overturned by the wind; he that is a well of water within
her to keep her from fainting, is a wall of fire about her, to keep her from
hurting.

Though he may scour his plate, and his Jewels, yer ye will throw such wispes
on the dunghills; yet Enemies will be found pushing, as far as their short
horns are reaching: Sion like a bottle may be dipped in the water, but she shall
never be drowned in the water.

Many had rather see a Churches Expiration, then see a Churches reformation;
they had rather view her as one that's nullified, then view her as one that's
purified: they care not how many Tares spring up amongst Gods Wheat.

When the Churches adversaries make long furrows upon her back, we should cast
in the seed of tears; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me; Thus the head cries
out in heaven, whilst the Toe is trod upon on earth.

Jesus Christ though he has altered his condition, yet he has not altered his
affection: Death took away his life for us, but it did not take away his love
from us; he that loves to see the face of his Church beautiful, ear long will
wipe away those bloody tears, that run trickling down her cheeks; the prise of
her redemption is already paid, and the Lords will not require that debt again!
Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her warfare is
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned, Isa. 40. 2.

When we see the Church pledgin her beloved in the cup of affliction, we should
drink to her in the cup of consolation; a heavy burden is easile born, by the
assistance of many shoulders; others they are like Galeo, that care for none of
those things: Nay when they should be Sympat hisers with them in their misery,
Temerarium judicium est, quod ex levi conjectura levibusque signis colligitur.
Stapl. in Dom. 1. post. Pent.
they are Censurers of them for their misery; they judge the golds not good
because its tried and the grounds is naught because its plowed.

Its dangerous smitting them with our tongues whom God has smitten with his
hands. Christ himself because he suffered for transgressors, was therefore
numbered with transgressors: What Is this but to give the sharpest Vinegar where
we should give the sweetest wine: Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let
thy wrathful anger take hold of them, Psalm. 69. 24. But what is their sin? 26.
verse, for they persecute them whom thou have smitten; and they talk, to the
grief of those whom thou have wounded.

Sympathy is a debt which we owe to sufferer, and creature comforts will fit
those seasons no better then a Silver lace would do a Mourning suit; a
particular loss its but like the putting of out a candle, which brings darkness
to a room; but a general loss, is like the Eclipsing of the Sun, which
overshadows the whole Hemisphear. Pliny tells us of two Goats meeting together
on a narrow bridge; when the one could not get forward, nor the other go
backwards, the one lay down, that the other might go over him: How much of men
were there in these beasts! but how much of beasts are there in some men!

Its better to be in the humble posture of a mourner, then in the proud gesture
of a scorner. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, thou Son of David, my daughter is
grievously vexed with a devil, Mat. 15. 22. The child's malady, was the parents
misery; the tortures of the daughter, was the torment of the mother; as if the
one had been possessed till the other was dispossessed. The righteous When
Alexanders Army was ready to perish with thirst, he himself refufed water that
was proffered to him, with this Heroic Ipeech, Nec solus bibere sustineo, nec
tam ex iguum dividere omnibus possum. Quin. Curt. l. ^. Sect 5.
perish and no man lays it to heart. Isa. 57. 1. Sympathy with others makes an
estate that is joyful more happy; and an estate that is doleful, less heavy.

It should be between Christians, as it is between Lute strings that are tuned
together; when the one is touched, the others tremble. Believers should neither
be proud flesh nor dead flesh. Fellow Members have always fellow-feelings.
Remember them that are in bonds as bound with them.

Others woes are our warnings; their desolations are our informations. I am the
man that has seen afflictions by the rod of his wrath, Lam. 3. 1. He suffered
least in his own person, as being under a royal protection: But though he was
freed from the bill of mortality, yet he was filled with the bowels of
sympathy. Though they were the Jews desolations, yet they were Jeremiah's
lamentations. That is the eleventh.

12. Singular thing is the rendering of the greatest good, for the receiving of
the greatest evil. Mariners look for a storm at the seas, when the waters begin
to utter a murmuring noise.

Theodosius the Emperor being moved to execute one that had reviled him,
answered, That were it in his power if his enemies were dead, he had rather
restore them to life, then being living to put them to death.

They say by the Laws of the land that Noble men have this privilege, that
none of them can be bound to the peace, because its presumed that the peace is
bound to them. Noble dspositions will never engage themselves in quarrels and
contentions.

He makes a good market of bad commodities, that with kindness vanquishes
discourtesies. For a man to conquer another person, and be led captive by his
own passions; what is this, but to lose the Palace of a Prince to gain the
Cottage of a Peasant!

A spark of fire falling upon a solid body, expires immediately, which lighting
on combustible matter, burns furiously. God has bound every believer in
Gospelcords to his good behavior. Julian the Apostate knew this; when he
struck them on one cheek, he said, Their Master taught them to turn the other.
Yea, his Soldiers would take away their cloaks, and tell them They must part
with their coat also.

A carnal man may love his friends, but its a Christian manthat loves his
enemies. But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and
persecute you, Mat. 5. 44. Ad patientiam vocat, qui patientiae est. He calls us
to patience, who is patience it self.

Its unnatural to hate them that love us; but it is supernatural to love them
that hate us. A sinner he can do much evil, but he will suffer none; a Saint
can suffer much evil, but he will do none. He that takes up fire to throw
against his enemies, he will but burn his own fingers. A piece ill charged
Inimi^um seris? teipsum jam lethaliter laesisti; et hoc est Prunas e foco
rapere, sed omnium primo sibi manus amburere, dein alios iis perfundere, Drex.
Sig. 9. p. 84.
instead of hitting the mark, does but recoil on him that shoots it.

You should overcome others cruelty, with your kindness: If Injuries be our
enemies, forgiveness must be our weapons. How many have had their bloods seen,
because they would not have their backs seen.

Men's actions toward others, are usually excused by others actions toward
them: As we are wont to say, fallere fallentem non est sraus: There is a
frenzy of the heart which turns men out of their patience; as well as a
frenzy of the head, that turns them out of their prudence.

A sinner is so far from taking two blows without giving one, that he will give
two blows without taking one. To forget an injury is more then nature can
promise; but to forgive an injury is no less then grace can perform. Patience
affords us a shield to defend our selves, but Innocence denies us a sword to
offend others. If ever thou hopest thy charity should live after thee, let
others injuries dye before thee.

Its written in the law of Mahomet, That God made the Angels of light, and the
Devils of flame. Sure I am, they are of a hellish constitution, that delight in
the fiery flames of contention. Be ye angry and sin not, Ephesians. 4. 26. Anger, it
should not be a black coal fetched from the Devils kitchen, but a bright coal
kindled on Gods Altar. It should be like fire in straw, that is as suddenly
quenched, as it is easily kindled. He that would be angry and not sin, must not
be angry but with sin.

Let not the sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the Devil; if
you carry your passions to bed with you, the Devil will creep between the
sheets, and why should any give place, to him that will crowd in to fast of
himself?

What shall thy life be mortal, and thy wrath immortal? is it not better to
give place to an offending brother, then to a destroying Murderer? I know that
a person is as unfit to receive Counsel in his anger as a Patient is to take
Physic in a feavor; how many are there that say they can forgive an injury,
who cannot forget an injury? these are like those that pretend to sweep the
house, but leave the dust behind Nobilissimum and generosissimum vindictae
geaus est, ignoscere cum possis ulcisci; and long glorio sius est tacendo
vincere inimicum, quam respondendo. Drex. ibid.
the door: when ever you give your brethen a discharge, make your hearts set
their hands to the acquitance.

We must not only break the teeth of malice by forgiveness, but pluck the
sting out of its tail, by forgetfulness; to lade our memories with the sense of
injuries, is to fill that chest with rusty iron, which was made for refined
gold. When the pot of Malice does boil over, its time to take it off from the
fire. Yet if the Sea of sinful nature be quiet, its no for want of foam, but
for want of a storm. Can you look to fare better in the world, then he that
was better then the world? A Christian should wish well to them, who wish ill
to him.

Aristides when two came before him, he that accused the other, said, This man
accused thee at such a time; to whom Aristides answered, I sit not to hear what
he has done against me, but to hear what he has done against thee.

Others they render evil for good, but we should render good for evil;
therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink; for in
so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his head, Romans 12. 20. As the nature
of man must not make his vices to be loved, so the vices of man must not make
his nature to be hated: he that loved us when we were enemies, commands us to
love our Enemies.

Father forgive them they know not what they do, Luke 23. 34. He gave his blood
to drink, by them who gave gawl and vinegar to drink to him.

God spreads a large table every day, and the most that seed at it are his
Enemies; the wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the Leopard shall lie
down with the Kid, and the calfe and the young Lion and the fatling together,
and a little child shall lead them, Isai. 11. 6. The Lord Jesus as he can kill
the dearest lust, so he can tame the wildest beast.

Its only a patient Christ that can make us patient Christians; as our
passions were the cause of his, so his passion is the cure of ours; and he
arose and rebuked the wind, and said unto the Sea, Peace and be still, and the
wind ceased, and there was a great calm, Mark 4. 39. Whilst he lay down, the
storm rose up; whilst Christ was resting, the ship was tossing; but when he
spoke, they held their peace; shall not the troubled Ocean become a bed of rest
for him who lays the beams of his Chambers in the waters? shall not he clip
the wings of the wind, that rides upon the wings of the wind?

For if ye forgive men their Frustra Deum propitiars sibi quarit* qui cito
placari proximo negligit. Bern. ^e int. dom. c. 51.
trespasses, your heavenly father will also forgive you; but if ye forgive not
men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses, Matt.
6. 14, 15.

Without forgiving there is no forgiveness; how can you expect to have pounds
remitted to you, when pence are not remitted by you? If there be moisture in
smaller drops, there is more in larger showers; well may we show mercy to others
for Gods sake, who shows mercy to us for his own sake.

I have read a story of one who imbrued his hands in his own blood, because his
arms were not long enough to reach his Enemies; Dearly beloved avenge not your
selves, but rather give place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine,
and I will repay it, says the Lord, Romans 11. 19. And they stoned Steven
calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; and he kneeled
Stephano pro inimicis oranti coelum panditur, velut si ad nobile hoc
spectaculum coelites omnes sint intenti. Drex. Christ. zod. p. 82.
down and cried with a loud voice, Lord lay not this sin to their charge, Acts
7. 59, 60. Could living men do worse to a man that's dying, or a dying man pray
better for men that are living?

Ludovicus says, The world has been already destroyed by water, for the heat
of its luxury; and it shall be again destroyed by fire, for the coldness of its
charity.

To do evil for good is humane corruption; to do good for good is civil
retribution; but to do good for evil is Christian perfection; this though it be
not the grace of nature, yet it is the nature of grace.

Why should this dead dog curse my Lord the King? let me go over I pray thee,
and take off his head? 2 Samuel 16. 9. As if he should say, Seeing he will not
keep his tongue in his mouth, why should he keep his head on his shoulders? but
mark the answer, verse. 10. And the King said, what have I to do with you, ye
sons of Zerviah, because the Lord has said unto him Curse David! Who shall
then say Wherefore have thou done so?

David was so far from biting at the stone, that he does not bark at the hand
by which it was thrown; the back of charity is able to carry the burden of
injury, without either being moved with violence, or being removed from
patience.

Though God suffer not his people to sin in avenging their Enemies, yet he
suffers not the sin of their Enemies to go unavenged: anger rests in the bosom
of fools, Proverbs 12. 16. Where there is the most indignation, there is the
least discretion, no men do more sweetly put up disgraces from others, then
such as have learned to despise themselves.

Make not an Enemy of thy friend by returning him evil for good, but make a
friend of thine Enemy, by returning him good for evil; that's the twelfth.

13. Singular thing, its to take those reproves best which we need most; It
was the saying of a heathen though no heathenish saying, that he that would be
good, must either have a faithful friend to instruct him, or a watchful Enemy
to correct him. Who would wound those that intend their cure, or like him the
worser that would make them the better?

The flaming sword of reprehension is but to keep thee from the forbidden fruit
of Transgression; Let the righteous smite me, and it shall be a kindness; and
let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my
head: Psalm. 141. 5. Let him smite me as with a hammer, (so the word signifies)
it coming from the root, (...) which is usually rendered, he Rober. Key to the
Heb. Bible.
did beat or knock; he did not as the Papists, commend their holy water highly,
but turn away their faces when it is sprinkled upon them; a Boanerges is as
useful as a Barnabas.

Am I become your Enemy, because I tell you the truth? Gal. 4. 16. Light is
pleasant, yet offensive to sore eyes, honey is sweet though it makes wounds to
smart; but we must not neglect the actions of a friend, for fear of drawing
upon our selves the suspicion of an Enemy.

Its better to lose the smiles of men, then it is to lose the souls of men;
thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, nor suffer sin to lie upon him:
He that love a garment hates the moaths that fret the garment; Rebuke a wise
man, and he will love thee, but rebuke a scorner, and he will hate thee. Prove.
9. 8. Reproof slides from a scorners breast, as water does from an oyled post;
and who would sow those barren sands, where he shall lose both his time and
pains?

All that we can do at such houses, is to write A Lord have mercy on them at
their doors. Instead of loving a man notwithstanding injuries, these will hate
a man even for his courtesies.

Next to the, not deserving of reproof, is the well taking of reproof. Its a
holy kind of Martyrdom to bear reproofs patiently. Most persons are like gauld
horses that cannot endure the rubbing of their sores; or like Bees that as soon
as ever they are angry put forth their stings.

There Is a great deal of discretion to be used in reprehension. A word will do
more with some, then a blow will do with others. A Venice glass is not to be
rubbed so hard as a brazen kettle; the bending reed is more easily bowed, then
the sturdy Oak.

Christ's warfare needs no carnal weapons; dashing storms wash Non aspere
quantum existimo, non duriter, non modo imperiofo, ista tolluntur; magis
docendo, quam jubendo; magis monendo, quam minando. Aug. ep. 64. ad Aur.
away the seed, when gentle showers refresh the earth. Chariots too furiously
driven, may be overturned with their own speed.

How many are there that check passion with passion, and are very angry in the
dislike of anger! thus to lay one Devil they raise another. These leave more
work to undo in the end, then they found to do at the beginning; such a
reproof of a vice is a vice to be reproved.

In reprehension take heed of carrying your teeth, in your tongues; of biting
whilst you are speaking; Chyrurgeons think it not safe to stab their Patients;
because one perhaps was so delivered of an impostume.

Its hard taming the unruly surges of an enraged Ocean; Brethren, if any man be
overtaken with a fault, you that are spiritual restore such a man in the spirit
of meekness, Gal. 6. 1. (...): Set him in joint again; and to restore a
dis-joynted bone into its proper place, requires the Ladies hand; tenderness as
well as skilfulness; Leigh. Crit. Sacr. Reprehension is not an act of Butchery,
but an act of Surgery; take heed of blunting the instrument by putting too keen
an edge upon it; mark the reason that's added; Confidering thy self, least thou
also be tempted. If thy neighbors house be on fire, thy own may be the next
that's burnt; they should be willing to lend mercy at one time, that may have
occasion to borrow it at another.

We should deal with others sins, Vide Boules l. 2. cap. 15. past. evang. can.
3.
as we do with our own sores; if a prick with a pin will let out the corrupt
matter, cutting and lancing shall not be used. If the birds will be driven
away, its needless to bring a piece to shoot them. Open sinners deserve open
censures; but private admonitions will serve for private aberrations. Whilst we
seek to heal a wound in our brethrens actions, we should not leave a scar upon
our brethrens persons. The purest gold being too light for passage, we give it
grains of allowance: That is a rare temper of spirit that can cover our faults
from others eyes, and discover them to our own.

Under the Law the snuffers was made of gold, and the dishes into which the
snuff was cast; to show that there is a great deal of excellency in casting a
mantle over our brethrens infirmities.

That physic that stirs the humors, and does not carry them away, leaves the
body in a worse condition then it found it. Ah how many are there that vomit up
these bitter pills, though they be wrapped up in sweet sugar! Men love to be
adored, but hate to be reproved. But how can we make them brick when they will
not afford us straw? or praise what they do, when they do not what is to be
praised!

Theodosius the Emperor confessed of St. Ambrose, notvvithstanding his severe
dealings with him, Solum novi Ambrosium dignum Episcopi nomine; That he knew
none worthy to be a Bishop but Ambrose. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, but rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5. 11. We are as accountable
for our sins of communion, as we are for our sins of commission.

How securely would David have slept upon his adulterous pillow, if Nathan had
not been sent to awake him? How far do many travel in the Devils rode, for want
of a wholesome reproof to stop them in their journey!

It was the saying of Austin, when Benevolentiae ergo, non odii signum est
reprehendere, C^em. Asex. poe. ^ag. l. 1.
his hearers were angry at his reproofs, Emendate vitia, and ego emendabo
verba; When you mend your lives, we shall mend our language.

A serpent the more he is stirred, the more he gathers up his poison to spit at
you. Others are to reproofs, as Tigers are to Drums, that tear their own flesh
if you beat them in their presence. Man is a cross creature, and cannot endure
to be checked and controlled: He would have a Noli me tangere written upon him.
But who will blame the dogs barking at the theifs approaching.

Sin its like the nettle that stings when its gently touched, but does not hurt
when its ruggedly handled. Haec omnia tendunt ad salutem, and sanitatem
aeternam: This rough dealing is but to square you for the celestial building.
As for flatterers they may be styled the Devils Vpholsters; who when they see
men leaning toward their lusts, are laying pillows under their sleepy elbows;
but let them know that the want of the fire of zeal, will at last be punished
with the fire of hell. Those are unskilful Painters that limb deformities in
the fairest colors.

Reprehension, it should tread upon the heels of transgression. The plaster
should be applied as soon as ever the wound is received. Its easier putting out
a candle then it is quenching of a house on fire. Gentle physic will serve for
a begun distemper; but chronical diseases are cured with harshness; Next to the
keeping of our garments clean, is washing as soon as we have defiled them.

The sword of reproof must be drawn against the offense of the person, and not
against the person of the offender. Many think the cup of reprehension is not
bitter enough unless they mingle it with their gawl and wormwood! But the wrath
of man works not the righteousness of God.

The dreadfulest sentences of the Qui arguit, impassibiliter debet arguere, ut
salutem expetat ejus qui arguitur, non vindictam. Orig. (ut quidam asserunt) in
Psalm. 37.
Church are not mortal but medicinal; they are to raise the dead to life, and
not to put the living to death. Who knows how much the majesty of a Reprover
tames the insolency of an Offender! He that hates reproof is brutish, Prove. 12.
18. He is like a dog that barks and bites when the thorn is pulling out of his
foot that pricks him: or like a horse that kicks when the Ostler is rubbing off
the dirt that defiles him.

If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault, between
thee and him alone, Mat. 18. 15. If he shall hear thee thou have gained thy
brother. The dog that follows the game, by barking loses the prey. The presence
of a multitude makes a man take up an unjust defense, rather then lie down in a
just shame.

Its better to censure a man in private, then to spread his guilt by a
proclamation; yet how many do that in the market, that they should do in the
closet? Sin its a miry depth; if thou strivest to help one out and do not,
thou sinkest him in the further. Remember, tender lambs, though straying, must
be gently reduced to the fold. That's the thirteenth.

14. Singular thing is, To take up all duties in point of performance, and to
lay them down in point of dependence. When the purest duties have been
performed, the purest mercies should be implored.

Many have passed the rocks of gross sins, that have been cast away upon the
sands of self-righteousness. Others they live more on their cushions then they
do upon Christ; more upon the prayers they make to God, then upon the God to
whom they make their prayers; which is as if a redeemed captive should
reverence the sword, but not the man that has wrought his rescue.

The name of God with a sling and a stone, will do more then Goliath with all
his armor. Duties they are but dry pits in themselves, though never so
curiously cut out, till Christ fills them.

I would have you neither be idle in the means, nor to make an Idol of the
means. If a Mariner will have the help of the winds, he must weigh the anchor
and spread the sails. The pipes can make no conveyance unless the spring yields
its concurrence.

What Is hearing without Christ, but like a cabinet without a jewel? or receiving
without Christ, but like an empty glass without a cordial?

Its only that ladder whose bottom stood on earth, on the staves of which we
climb to heaven. And be found in him not having on mine own righteousness which
is of the Law; but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God through faith, Phil. 3. 9. If you be found in your own
righteousness, you will be lost by your own righteousness. That garment was worn
to pieces on Adams back, and lasted but for a days covering.

Duties they are good crutches to go upon, but they are bad Christ's to lean
upon; when Augustus Caesar desired the Senate of Rome to join some with him in
the Consulship, they replied, They held it a great dishonor to him to have any
joined with him. Its the greatest disparagement that Christians can do to
Christ, to put their services in equipage with his sufferings. You must put off
the rotten rags of the first Adam, if you would put on the royal robes of the
Second.

To mix the Virgins milk with a Redeemers blood; Though the voice may be humble
Jacobs, yet the hands are proud Esaus. Man is a creature that's apt to warm
himself by the sparks of his own fire, though he lie down in eternal flames for
the kindling of them. Noah's dove made use of her wings, but she did rest in the
Ark.

Duties can never have too much of our diligence, nor too little of our
confidence. For he that is entered into rest, has ceased from his works as God
did from his, Heb. 4. 10. A Believer does not do good works to live, but a
believer he lives to do good works.

It was a proud saying of him, Coelum gratis non accipiam; He would not accept
of heaven gratis: But he shall have hell as a debt, that Non in carnab^ bus
(...) s^d in solo Chr^sto fiduciam ^alut^^ no^^rae omnem and ^^ll^ a^ia^m re
colloca^^^. Zanc in loc.
will not take heaven as a gift. For we are the circumcision, which worship God
in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus and have no confidence in the flesh,
Phil. 3. 3. A Christian stands at as great a distance from the best of his
services, as he does from the worst of his sins: And makes not the greatest
part of his holiness, to be the smallest part of his righteousness. When you
have done all, then say we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17. 10. When you
have obeyed all the commandments from above, there is one commandment above
them all to be obeyed, that is, to rest from your obedience. A bridge is made
to give us a passage over a dangerous river, but he that stumbles on the bridge
is in danger of falling into the river. In the most of our works, we are
abominable sinners, but in the best of our works, we are unprofitable servants.

Our duties are not like the crystal streams of a living fountain, but like
the impure overflowings of an unruly torrent. I will go out in Omnis alia
fiducia quae in quavis alia re colocari potest, e cordibus nostris prorsus
amputetur, omnino necesse est. Zanc. ubi prius.
the strength of the Lord, and make mention of his righteousness, and of his
only, Psalm. 71. 16. The righteousness of Christ is to be magnified, but the
righteousness of a Christian is not to be mentioned.

Its a hard thing for us to be nothing in our selves in the midst of our
worthiness, and to be all in Christ in the midst of our weakness. To undertake
all our duties, and yet to overlook all our duties. Our services they are like
good wine that relishes of a bad cask; The Law will not take Ninety nine for an
Hundred; it will neither accept of counterfeit coin, nor of clipped money. The
duty it exacts, is as impossible to be performed, as the penalty it inflicts is
intolerable to be endured.

We sail to glory not in the salt seas of our own tears, but in the red sea of
Christ's blood. Crux Christi clavis Paradisi; The gates of heaven were closly
shut, till the cross of Christ beat them open. We owe the life of our souls to
the death of our Savior. It was his going into the furnace, that has kept us
from coming into the flame. It Is the ruddiness of his blood, that takes away the
redness of our guilt.

Man lives by death; his natural life is preserved by the death of the
creature; his spiritual life is preserved by the death of his Redeemer.

Moses must lead the children of Israel through the wilderness, but Joshua must
bring them into Canaan. Whilst we are in the wilderness of this world, we must
walk under the conduct of Moses; but when we enter into the spiritual Canaan,
it must be by the merit of Jesus; The same hand that has shut the doors of
hell to keep us out of perdition, has opened the gates of heaven to let us
into salvation.

They that carry the bucket to the puddle of their own merit, will never draw
water out of the clear fountain of Gods mercy. Luther compares the Law and the
Gospel, to Heaven and Earth; we should walk in the earth of the Law in respect
of obeying, but in the heaven of the Gospel, in respect of believing.

It was the saying of one, That he would swim through a sea of brimstone, so he
might come to heaven at the last. What would not natural men do for heaven, if
they might have heaven for their doings: But the heat of the Sun beams will melt
such weak and waxen wings.

He that has no better righteousness Omnis anima eget oleo divinae
misericordiae.
then what is of his own providing, shall meet with no higher happiness then
what is of his own deserving. For they being ignorant of the righteousness of
God, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God, Romans 11. 3.

Others if they rest not from their duties, then they rest in their duties:
They will sail in their own bottoms, though they sink in the Ocean. Duties they
are not destroyed by Christ, but they must be denied for Christ. The Master and
the Servants may dwell together in one family, provided that he have the higher
chambers, and they the lower rooms.

Who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again? Romans
11. 35. When a glass reflects the brightness of the sun, there is but an
acknowledgement of what was, not an addition of what was not; A c^rious picture
praises a beautiful face, not by communicating what it wants, but by presenting
what it enjoys

As God has never the less for the mercy he gives, so he has never the more
for the duty he takes. Man is such a Debtor to God, that he can never pay his
due to God; yea the more we pay him, the more we owe him for our payments.

Its Christ only that is the righteousness of God to man, and its Christ only
that is the righteousness of man to God. We are so far from paying of the
utmost farthing, that at the utmost we have not a farthing to pay. That man
will be a miserable spectacle of vanity, that stands upon the weak feet of his
own ability.

15. Singular thing is, To take up our contentment in Gods appointment. Others
as they do the things that God dislikes, so they dislike the things that God
does: If Israel have not meat for their lusts, they are weary of their lives.
They are delighted with their corruptions, but perplexed with their conditions;
which is as if a man should be in love with his malady, and out of love with
his medicine. They study more how to gratify their humors, then how to
satisfy their hungers: They complain of the shoe, when the disease is in the
foot.

They that think too highly of their deserts, will think too meanly of their
estates. Its even the task of God to satisfy the desires of man; not that it
argues a weakness in Gods power* that can do all things, but a wickedness in
man's nature that is not pleased with any thing.

There is no man but has received more good then he has deserved, and done
more evil then he has sustained. Therefore he should be contented though he
see but little good, and not discontended though he suffer much evil. Let your
conversation be without covetousness (let not covetousness be within your
conversation) for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb.
13. 5. Set but the seal of faith to the bond of truth, and he that has said it
will maintain thee in the want of maintenance.

A wicked man when his purse grows light, his heart grows heavy. When he has
something without to afflict him, he has nothing within to support him: But a
Christian Tu cum crescente tuo marsupio, crescit pariter animo, and cum
decrescente decrescis; tristitia contraberis, cum illud exinanitur; and lati^a
solveris (aut certe superbia inflaris, cum impletur. in Bern. Cant. ser. 21.
is more troubled that he should be discontented at any disappointment, then
that he should be disappointed of any contentment. I know both how to be
abased, and how to abound; every where, and in all things I am instructed, both
to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need.

Its hard to carry a full cup without spilling, or carry a heavy load without
breaking; To walk in the clear day of prosperity without wandering, or in the
dark night of adversity without stumbling; but which way soever the wind blows
a skilful Mariner knows how to turn his sails and meet it. They who have learnt
to abound without rioting, will learn to want without murmuring. Non est in
adversis timidus, qui non est in prosperis dissolutus.

Repenting is the work of a Christian man, but repining is the work of a carnal
man. How many men are there that look upon their greatest blessings, as upon
the greatest burdens! Though their estates are like a fruitful Paradise, yet
their hearts are like a barren wilderness: These are like spiders that suck
poison out of the sweetest flowers, and by a devilish chemistry extract dross
out of the purest gold.

They sin in the midst of mercies, as Adam did in the midst of Paradise.
Outward prosperity, cannot Nam divitiarum atqu^sitio quidem labo^^s, ^^ssessio
vero timoris, amisso plena doloris invenitur. Bern. de pers. sust. c. 12.
create inward tranquillity. Hearts-ease is a flower that never grows in the
worlds garden. The ground of their trouble is not because they find not enough
of the creature, but because they find not enough in the creature. They plough
up the level ground of their enjoyments, into the wrinckled forrows of their
disquietments. They have greatness enough in their possessions, but not
goodness enough in their dispositions. Some are satisfied under the hand of God
because they are not sensible of the hand of God; they are without any
fretting, because they are without any feeling.

A certain Stoic speaking of God, said, What God wills I will, what God wills
not I will not. A Christian though he have a will of his own, yet it becomes
not a Christian to own his will. The wisdom of the flesh is as fit for guiding,
as the will of the flesh is fit for governing. None but such as live under the
seduction of the former, will live under the dominion of the latter.

We are not to be troubled for this, that we have no more from God, but we are
to be troubled for this, that we do no more for God. They who judge their
estates are too low, we may judge their hearts are too high.

A whole World contents not Alexander, when a s^rry tub suffices Diogenes.
Christians, the Lord is well pleased with your persons, and will not you be
well pleased with your conditions? there is more reason that thou should be in
love with it, then that he should be in love with thee.

Beleivers should be like sheep that change their pastures at the will of their
Shepherds, or like Vessels in a house that stand to be filled or emptied,
according to the pleasure of their owner; he that sails upon the Sea of this
world in his own bottom, sinks at last: Never were any Saints their own
Carvers, but before they had done they cut their own fingers.

As every thing is a great mercy to a man that is afflicted, so every thing is
a good mercy to a mind that is contented. A covetous man is fretful, because he
has not so much as he desires; but a gracious man is thankeful because he has
more then he deserves.

Its true I have not the sauce, but I merit not the meat; I have not Habenies
alimeala, non delectamenta^ ind^monta, non ornamenta. Go^. in loc.
the lace, but I deserve not the coat. I want that which may support my
dignity, but I have that which may supply my indigency; having food and raiment
let us therewith be content, 1 Timothy 6. 8. you have the flesh of the creatures
to fill your emptiness, and the fleece of the creature to cover your nakedness.

It Is storied of a woman who when she was sick, was asked whither she was willing
to live or dye, she answered, which God pleased; but says one, if God should
refer it to you, which would you choose; truly says she, if God should refer it
to me, I would refer it to him again.

A Christian is to submit to the will of God disposing, as well as to the will
of God commanding; to be what he appoints, as well as to do what he approves;
that man obtaines his will of God, who subjects his will to God.

A contented heart is never out of heart; Its an even sea, in the midst of all
storms; its like a tree in Autum which secures its life, when it has lost its
leafes.

It was a rare expression of a Religious person, Put off your cares, when you
put of your clothes, so shall thy rest strengthen thy labor in the day, and
thy labor sweeten thy rest in the night.

It is not meet that patients should prescribe rules to their Physicians.
Worthy Mr. Hern lying upon his deathbed, his wife making much womanish
lamentation, what should become of her and her children, Peace (sweet heart)
says he, that God that feeds the Ravens, will not starve the Hernes.

If the child be jealous of his Fathers affection, he will quickly be dubious
of his Fathers provision, till we can find hearts without polution, we shall
never find estates without vexation: Heaven only is the place where all is
joyful, and hell only is the place where all is doleful; in the former there is
nothing but happiness to be expected, in the latter there is nothing but
heaviness to be endured. But the most golden condition here, is set in a brazen
Torch; there is no gathering a rose without its prickles, till we come into
Immannels land.

If there were nothing but showers, we should then conclude, the world would at
length be drowned; and if there were nothing but Sunshine, we should then
conclude, the world would at last be burned. Our comforts would be a Sea to
drown us; if our crosses were not a planck to save us.

By the farest gales a sinner may sail to destruction, and by the feircest
winds, a Saint may arive at Salvation. I know that when our conditions are
necessitous, then our corruptions do often prove impetuous, and rage the more
because stopped by the dam of poverty; so that if God does not help us
seasonably, we are apt to help our selves sinfully; if he be not stretching
forth his hand of goodness, we are thrusting forth our hands to wickedness.

But remember that contentment without the world, is better then the world
without contentment; there are two things that make a Christian; the first is
to speak well of what God is, the second is to think well of what God does.

What gets the dog by the biting of the stone, but the breaking of his teeth,
thou murmerest because thou art in want, and therefore thou art in want because
thou murmurest.

Thou art impatient because thou art afflicted, and therefore thou art
afflicted because thou art impatient.

The skilful Pilot knows what winds will best blow us to our harbor; an
unquiet patient makes but a slow recovery; turbulent storms, does but lengthen
the voyage.

Contentment its the best food for a sound man, to preserve him; and its the
best Physic for a sick man, to restore him, its like the gilt of the pill that
makes a man swallow it down without tasting its bitterness; or like the
Philosophers stone, that turns whatsoever it touches into gold; it will make
a cottage look as fair as a palace. He Nonqui parum habet, sed qui Plus cupit
pauper est.
is not a poor man that has little, but he is a poor man that has little, but
he is a poor man that wants much; and in this sense, the rich are often
poorest, and the poor are often richest.

Give me such Christians as will receive no more good, then God will give them,
and will suffer no less evils then God will have them; when the fire is kindled
how is it quenched, not by the pouring of oil upon it, but by the removing of
fuel from it! sivis esse dives, non est pecuniae adjiciendum, sed cupiditatibus
detrahendum.

Confinement is the way to contentment; when you cannot raise your estates as
high as your hearts, then level your hearts as low as your estates; but
godliness with contentment is great gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6. This is too precious a
seed to grow in every soil; although every godly man is not contented yet every
contentented man is godly; the Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want, Psalm. 23.
1. showers falling from a cloud may be diminished, when waters issuing from a
spring are continued.

Methinks the child should suck quietly, when although it takes not in the
whole breast at once, yet the milk is spinning out to return a further draught,
after the former is gone down; As Seneca said to his friend Polybius, Never
complain of thy hard fortunes, so long as Caesar is thy friend; so say I to a
beleiver, Never complain of thy hard fortunes, so long as the Lord Jesus is thy
friend.

Let your condition be never so great, its a hell without him; let your
condition be never so flat, its a heaven with him. Who can say he injoyes any
thing that wants Christ; or that he wants any thing, who injoyes Christ?

Should not Hagar be content though the water was spent in her bottle, when
there was a well so near? that's the Fifteenth.

16. Singular thing, is this, To be more in love with the employment of
holiness, then with the enjoyment of happiness; a Christian cares not so much
for the receiving of golden talents, as for the improveing of gracious talents.

Others they prize the wages of Religion above its works, but a Christian
prizes the works of Religion above its wages. Give me the Preacher that prefers
his labor above his lucre, the flock he keeps before the fleece he gets.

Others, their services are like dyals that are set by the sun of self
respects; they serve God, that they may serve themselves upon God; he loves not
religion sincerely, that loves not Religion Mortificationem simulant, ut
simplicibus imponant, and sub pietatis praetextu praedam ali. quam capiant.
Stapl. in Dom 5. post Pent. tex. 1.
superlatively. Israel is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit unto himself
Hos. 10. 10. Empty and yet fruitful; fruitful and yet empty; thus that
fertility which sprouts out upon the account of self, has nothing but vacuity
in the account of God.

How many are there that deal with Religion, as the Carpenters do with their
Ladders; that whilst they are building, carry them up and down on their
shoulders, but when they have done, cast them away into corners! these make not
gain to stoop to godliness, but godliness to stoop to gain, which is as if a
man should fit the foot to the shoo, when they should fit the shoo to the foot.

That Tradesman is poor and needy in what he deals, that must have ready money
for all he sels. Man in the good he does for God, seeks himself more then God.
The clock of his heart will stand still, unless its wheels be oyled.

If the Virgin should yield her consent, only for her Bridegrooms riches, she
would not espouse her self unto his person, but unto his portion. As Seneca
says of friendship begotten upon a sinister account, negotiatio est Sen. ep. ^.
non amicitia, quae ad commodum accedit; quae, quid consecutura sit, spectat:
so may I say of this, it were not properly to make a Marriage with him, but to
make a Merchandise of him.

St. Austin has an excellent saying, Non amat Christum, qui amat aliquid plus
quam Christum; he love not Christ at all, that loves not Christ above all. You
seek me not because Quam multi non quaerunt Jesum nisi ut illis benefaciat!
(...) officium non pro augendi^vi tutibus, sed pro requirendis subsidiis
inhiare solent. Aq^i. in loc.
ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled,
John 6. 26. Christ was the object of their actions but self was the end of
their actions. They came to Christ to serve their turn, and when their turns
were served, they turned away their service; they were cubbord disciples; more
then men at their meat, but less then women at there work, when the loaves were
gone, the disciples were gone; when he left feeding of them, they left
following of him.

Your weakest building needs the most under propings; that's but Kitchen fire
that burns no longer then the gross fuel of profit feeds it. Till you can
love the naked truth, you will never love to go naked for the truth; most
persons are mercenary and servile in those works wherein they should be
Son-like and free: They look more after the streams, then upon the spring, from
whence they are issued; and after the beams, then upon the Sun from whence they
are darted.

The want of mercy is the only spring of duty; they ply their prayers, as
Saylors do their pumps, only in a storm, and for fear of sinking. And now O
Father glorify thy Son, that thy son may glorify thee, John 17. 1. He prays
for glory more for the Fathers sake that bestows it, then for his own sake
that receives it; a true Christian does not desire grace only for this end,
that God may glorify him, but he desires grace for this end that he may
glorify God.

Others, could they but find the mercyes of God, they would never seek the God
of Mercyes: could they tell how to be well well without him, they would never
come at him; God has but little of many men's society, but when they can find
no other company.

Instead of looking upon godliness as their greatest gain, they look upon gain
as their greatest godliness. They love Religion not for the beauty inhering in
it, but for the dowry attending on it; like the Fox that follows the Lion for
the prey that is falling from him; if there be no honey in the pot, such Waspes
will hover no longer about it: When you fasted and mourned in the fifth and
seventh month, even those seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me? and when
ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did not ye eat for your selves, and drinck
for your selves? Zach. 7. 5, 6. In fasting and in feasting, they cast not their
eyes upon God, but upon themselves; they forget not to eat, when they were
hungry, but they forgot to praise God when they were full. Their greediness did
swallow up their thankefulness.

Remember God will shut those duties out of heaven, that shut him out on earth.
I have heard a story of a woman, that being met with fire in one hand, and
water in another, was asked what she would do with them? She answered, With this
fire I would burn up all the joys of heaven; and with this water I would
quench all the flames of hell, that I might neither serve God for fear of
punishment, nor for hopes of reward.

The less you make these things the end of your working, the more will God make
them the end of your work. God has three sorts of servants in the world; some
are slaves, and serve him for fear; other are hirelings, and serves him for
wages; others are sons and serve him for love.

Now a hireling will be a changling; he that will serve God for something, will
serve the Devil for more, he shall have his works, if he will but augment his
wages: he had an eye to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 26. This is a good
Inn for our desires baiting, but a bad home for our desires dwelling; the Poets
tell us of many who at first were Suitors to Penelope the Mistress, but at last
were married to the Maids that attended her: The ass which carried the Egyptian
goddess, had many bare heads, and bended knees, but none to the beast, but all
to the burden.

Demetrius he cries up the goddess Diana but it was not her Temple, that he
admired, but her silver shrines that he adored. He was more in love with her
wealth, then he was in love with her worship; Sirs, ye know that by this craft
we have our wealth, Acts 19. 25. If her Temple had been demolished, their trade
had been destroyed.

Does Job serve God for naught? yea, for Job served God when he had naught. He
was as good in his poverty as he was in his plenty. In this sense, that man
that serves not God for naught, that man is naught in serving God.

Love it trades not for returns here: it pays it self in serving its beloved;
Its storied of one that being asked, for whom he labored most? answered, for
his friends; And being asked, for whom he labored least? answered, for his
friends; love it does most, and yet thinks least of what it does.

Hypocrites they are more in love with the gold of the Altar, then they are
with the God of the Altar: Woe to your scribes and pharisees, Vae vobis quia
avaritiam vestram Color Religionis depingitis and Diabolo, Christi arma
praestatis, ut iniquitas ametur, dum pietas aestimatur. Gor. in loc.
for they devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayers; therefore
ye shall receivce: the greater damnation, Mat. 23. 14. They fasted all the day,
but to feed upon the widows cost at night; they hatched the birds of oppression
in the nests of devotion. These Spiders they weaved the webb of their works, to
catch the fly of their wealth; thus true is Augustines observation, Saepe
aliter se habet species facti, aliter facientis animus; there is often a vast
distance and difference between the face of the work, and heart of the worker.
But a soul acted by God in service, though he may have self at the hither end,
he will have God at the higher end.

A Christian is more in love with his present duty, then he is in love with his
future glory. St. Paul was contented to stay a while out of heaven, that he
might bring other souls into heaven. To me to live is Christ, and to dye is
gain, Phil. 1. 21. His life to them was most useful, but his death to him was
most gainful; by dying he had enjoyed his recompense sooner, but by living he
made his recompense larger.

Were it possible to divorce those things asunder, which God himself has
linked together, a Christian had rather be holy without any happiness, then be
happy without any holiness.

Luther has this expression, Mallem in inferne esse cum Christo, quam in coelo
sine Christo; I had rather be in hell with Christ, then in heaven without
Christ; And indeed hell it self would be a heaven if God were in it; and heaven
would be a hell, if God were from it.

A gracious man makes this the request of his soul, Lord, let me rather have a
good heart, then a great estate: Let me rather be pious without prosperity,
then prosperous without piety. Though you may love many things beside Religion,
yet you may not love any thing above religion.

The earth that is our workhouse, but heaven that is our storehouse. This is a
place to run in, and that is a place to rest in. Yet a Believer on his dying
pillow being asked how he did, O, says he, sorry for nothing but that I am
going to that Country where wages are received, and no works performed. That is
the sixteenth.

17. Singular thing is, To be more in searching our own hearts, then we are in
censuring others states. They are too busy Bishops, that lord it over others
Diocesses. We are to allow believers for their failings: though we are not to
allow believers in their failings. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy
flocks, and look well to thy herds, Prove. 21. 23. Its of greater concernment
to know the* state of our hearts, then to know the state of our flocks.

Its the expression of Seneca, Vtimur perspicillis magis quam speculis. Men are
more apt to use spectacles to see other men's faults, then lookingglasses to
view their own.

Plato entertaining some friends at a neatly spread table, Diogenes coming in
tramples upon it, saying, Calco fastum Platonis, I trample upon the pride of
Plato; to whom he answered, Yea, At cum majori fastu, but with a greater pride.
He that is without sin, let him throw the first stone.

They are fittest to find fault, in whom no fault is to be found; and to blame
others, who are blameless themselves. There is no removing of blots from the
paper by laying upon it a blurred finger.

Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then shall
thou see clearly to cast the moat out of Illud quasi cacoethes penitimme
inssium est, ut cum* in gravissimis nobis ipsis nimium facile, and indulgentur
ignoscimus, aliorum tamen judices inclementissimi, and censores rigidissimi
sumus. Chem. Evan. Har. cap. 51.
thy brrthers eye. Mat. 7. 5. What do thou get by throwing of stones in at
thy enemies windows, whilst thy own Children look out at the casements? He that
blows in a heap of dust, is in danger to put out his own eyes: Is not the worst
men's practices, a comment on the best men's principles?

Are there not the same lusts lodging in your hearts, that are reigning in
their lives? The reason why there is so little self-manifestation, is because
there is so little self-examination. For want of this men are like Travelers,
skilled in other Countries, but ignorant of their own.

It is a sign they are sunk in their estates, who are afraid to look into their
books: The trial of our selves, is the ready road to the knowledge of our
selves. He that buys a jewel in a case, deserves to be couzened with a Bristol
stone.

Many think themselves as surely going to heaven, as if they were already
dwelling in heaven. Christians, would you see God, then cast your eyes upwards;
would you see your selves, then cast your eyes inward. Contemplation, that is a
perspective glass to see our Savior in, but examination that is a
looking-glass to see our selves in. Bring your selves to the standard, and see
whether you be in the narrow way that leads to life, or in the broad way that
leads to death: whether your spirits be chairs for vice to sit in, or thrones
for grace to rule in; whether you be one of Christ Spouses, or one of the
Devils harlots.

Nero thought no person chaste, because Nero impurissimus neminem a libidine
purum jud^cabat.
himself was unchaste. Such as are troubled with the Jaundise, see all things
yellow. But such as are more religious, are less censorious. Why do
Temerarium ^st jud^cium cum in illo n^l* lam jurisdictionem habeas. Gor. in loc.
thou judge another man's servant, Romans 14. 4. They that are fellow creatures
with men, should not be fellow-judges with God.

What will it advantage you to search another wounds, and let your own bleed
to death! Take heed your own clothes be not full of dust, when you are brushing
others garments; or complaining of dirty streets, when heaps lie at your own
doors. Many are never well longer then they are holding their fingers upon
others sores; such are no better then crows that fasten only upon carrion: Let
every man prove his own works, so shall he have rejoicing in himself not in
another, Gal. 6. 4.

For want of this men have their accounts to cast up, when they should have
their accounts to give up, They have their evidences of grace to seek, when
they should have their evidences of grace to show: They lie down with such
hopes in their beds of rest, which they dare not lie down withal in their beds
of dust. Because he considers and turns away from all his transgressions,
Ezekiel. 18. 28. Conversion begins in consideration. The hasty shower falls
fastest, but the soft snow sinks deepest.

The Mariner that is running his ship against a rock, if he considers it, and
stears another course, prevents a desperate shipwreck. Examine your selves
Integritatis tuae curiosus explorator vitam tuam in quotidiana discussione
examina attend diligenter quantum proficias, vel quantum deficias. Bern med.
5. in lim.
whether ye be in the faith or no (or whether the faith be in you or no) prove
your own selves, know ye not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you
except you be reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. 5. See whether your hearts be the cabinets
of such a jewel. A true Subject dares not deny any coin which bears the image
of the King.

If you will needs be Judges, sit upon your own benches; I shall ever esteem
such to be but lepers, that care not for looking-glasses. He that does not mind
what he has done. Self-examination is the beaten path to perfection; its like
fire which does not only try the gold, but purifies the gold. The sight of your
selves in grace, will bring you to the sight of God in glory.

The Heathens tell us, that Nosce teipsum was an Oracle that came down from
heaven. Sure I am, it is Oracle that will lead us up to heaven. The plague of
the heart is not every man's plague, but the plague of the soul is every man's
plague: though there be no vision that's less pleasurable, yet there is no vision
that's more profitable: till you know how deep the pit is in to which you are
fallen, you will never seek to get out of it again.

The bottom of our diseases lies in not searching our diseases to the bottom:
so we have but some rags to cover our nakedness, we seek not a remedy to cure
our naughtiness. He that trusts his heart is a fool, and yet such fools are we
as to trust our hearts; the heart its that which God searches by his
Omnisciency, and its that which man should search by his industry; if a man
would know whether the sun shines, its better viewing its beams on the
pavement, then its body in the firmament. The readiest way to know whither or
no you are in Christ, is to know whither or no Christ is in you; for the fruit
is more visible then the root; that's the Seventeenth.

18. Singular thing is, to set out for God at our beginning, and to hold out
with God unto our ending: to be amongst the first that seeks God, and amongst
the last that serve him. First, to set out for God at our beginning; remember
now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not nor the
years draw nigh when thou shall say I have no pleasure in them, Eccl. 12. 1.

In the stilling of strong waters, the first that's drawn is fuller of spirits
then the rest that follows. The first of the first fruits of thy land, thou
shall bring into the house of the Lord thy God, Exo. 23. 19. The way to have
the whole harvest of your lives sanctified by God, is to have the first fruits
of your lives dedicated to God. I remember the kindness of thy youth, the love
of thine Espousal, Jer. 2. 2. God prises a Christian in the bud, and likes the
blossomings of youth above the sheddings of age.

We should pay our tribute, as soon as ever our money comes out of the Mint. Is
it not pity that plant should grow in Egypt that will thrive so well in Canaan.

Your Naturalists tells us that the most orient pearls are generated of the
morning due. They who are in Christ before us, are like to be in Christ above
us. The way to keep a field from overgrowing with weeds, is to pluck them up in
the spring. If youth be sick of the will nots, old age will dye of the cannots.

Under the law they who gathered not Manna in the morning, found none all the
day; if when you have seasons and want hearts, the time may come when you may
have hearts but want seasons. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard
his spots: then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil, Ier. 12.
23. He is a bad husband that has money to spend on company abroad, but none to
lay out for provisions (to keep his family) at home: Yet one accustomed to
Drunkenness, will rather strarve his posterity then be bound in the cords of
Sobriety.

Its hard casting off the Devils yoaks, when we Quod in morbis accidit cum
invaluere per longas moras, ut Sero medicina paretur; idem judicandum, nisi
quis a puero rectam viam meat, et eidem assuescat. Rive^. in Ps. 119. 9.
have worn them long upon our necks; can a man be born again when he is old?
grace seldom grafts upon such withered stocks. An old sinner is nearer to the
second death, then he is to the second birth; Its more likely to see him taken
out of the flesh, then to see the flesh taken out of him; his body is nearer to
corruption, then his soul is unto Salvation.

Where the Enemy is the stronger, there the victory is the harder. Usually
where the Devil pleads antiquity, he keeps propriety. As there is none so old as
that they should despair of mercy; so there is none so young, as that they
should presume on mercy; if Gods To day be too soon for thy repentance, thy To
morrow may be too late for his acceptance; Mercies clock does not always
strike at our beck. The longer poison stays in the stomach the more mortal.

Jesus Christ he had two Disciples whom he highly prized; the one who was young
for Coming so soon to him; the other who was old for staying so long with him.
O how amiable are the golden apples of grace, in the silver pictures of age?
God prizes a young friend, but punishes an old Enemy: Old sinners are like old
serpents, the fullest of poison.

Its a rare spectacle to view the Ancient of days, in those who are not
ancient in days: To see green pieces of Timber hewing and squaring that they
might be laid in the celestial building; when nature is in its minority to see
grace in its sincerity. Ps. 119. 99. I have more understanding then my
teachers; Ex disci. pulo doctorem me fecisti, etiam eorum qui doctores
meifu^runt Rivet* in loc.
his youth was wiser then others age, his dawning was brigher then their noon
tide; and this was the more admirable, because it was in his youth; for when our
lives are the most vigorous, our lusts are the most boisterous.

You teach a dog whilst he is a whelp, and break a horse whilst he is a Colt. A
plentiful harvest is the issue of an early seed time: Thou writest bitter thing
against me, thou make me to possess the sins of my youth, Job 13. 26. Needs
must that Iron gather rust that is not often filed.

Remember children your youthful sins lays a foundation for aged sorrows; You
have but one arrow to hit the mark; and if that be shot at random, God will
never put another into your bow: I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
ending, or as some, the first and the last, Rev. 1. 8. He that is the first and
the last, will be served from the first to the last; you can never come to soon
to him who is your beginning; and you can never stay too long with him, who is
your ending.

The flower of life its of Christ's setting, and shall it be of the Devils
cropping?

But what is seting out without holding out? Mutability is at best but the badg
of infirmity. Letters engraven in the bark of a tree whist it is young grow up
with it till it comes to be old; though a standing pool is soon dried up, yet a
fountain is always running. Its trees that are unsound at their roots, that
soon cease from the putting forth of their fruits; they who for the present are
inwardly corrupt, will for the future be openly profane.

That's a crazy piece of building that must be cramped with Iron bars, to keep
its standing; false grace is always declining till it be wholly lost; but true
grace goes from a mornings dawning, unto a Meridian shining; the wool on the
sheeps back if it be shorn will grow again, but the vvoll on the she skin,
clip that and there comes no more in its room.

Philosophy plays with this, Nullum violentum est perpetuum; There is nothing
permanent that is violent; as a stone that's mounted upvvards, when it loses
its impress, sinks dovvnvvards; but its dreadful to be cast off from God, for
casting off the vvays, and work of God. A finger divorced from the hand,
receives no influence, from the head: He that deserts his Colors, deserves to
be cashered the Camp.

Ah beloved! it would have bin well if we had made as much conscience in our
liberty as we have had liberty for our conscience: but we have gone from one
Religion unto all, till at last we are come from all Religions unto none: Every
varition from unity, is but a progression toward nullity: be thou faithful
unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life, Rev. 2. 10. He has a Crown
for runners, but a curse for run aways; God accounts not himself served at all,
if he be not always served.

Non tantum facite, sed perficite; it is not enough to begin our course well,
unless we Crown it with perseverance.

We live in the fall of the leaf; diverse Sibi ipsis indulgent; ex fervidis
repidi, ex repidis fergidi fiunt. Stapl. in Dom. 2. post Epip. ^ex. ^.
trees which did put forth fair blossoms; their spring is turned into an
Autumn, and their fair mornings, have been overcast with cloudings. The Corn
that promised a large harvest in the blade is blasted in the ear. The light
remains no longer then the sun shines; When God ceases to be gracious, man
ceases to be righteous.

The flowers of Paradise would quickly wither on earth, if they were not
watered with drops from heaven. How have the mighty fallen, when the Almighty
has not stood by them. The Devil would soon put out our candles, if Christ did
not carry them in his Lanthorn; be not weary in well doing, for in due season
you shall reap if you faint not, Gal. 6. 9. To see a ship sink in the harbor,
is more grievous then if it had perished in the open Sea.

There goes the same power to a Saints strengthening, that there goes to a
sinners quickening; he that does set us up, and make us holy, must keep us up,
and make us steady.

How easily is a ship sailing to the shore carried back again by a storm to
the Sea? O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee, and Judah what shall I do unto
thee? why what is the matter? your goodness is as the morning cloud; and as the
early dew it goes away, Hosea 6. 4. Their bowls began to slug, before they
came to the end of the Alley.

Some have beat Jehues March; they have driven furiously in Religion, but
within a few years they have knocked off there Chariot wheels. After they have
lifted up their hands to God, they have lift up their heels against him: that
man's beginning was in Hypocrisy, whose ending is in apostasy. You look for
happiness, as long as God has a being in heaven; and God looks for holiness,
as long as you have a being on earth: he that endures to the end shall be
saved. Vestis Aaronica expraescripto Dei deorsum ad pedes habuit, in circuitu
quasi mala punica, et tintinnabula aurea. Mala punica, inter omnes alios
sructus, sola coronae cujusdam spociem habent; illa coront est virtutum
perfectio, and consummatio, finis enim coronat opus; Hanc idcirco coronam Deus
necia principio, nec in medio, sed ad pedes posuit tunicae sacerdioalis. Id.
ibid.
He shall never be glorious in the end, that is not gracious to the end.

That man must carry his grace within him to the dust, that would have his
grace carry him with it to Christ; if any man draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him. Heb. 10. 38. He that draws back from profession, shall be kept
back from Salvation: he that departs in the Faith, shall be Saved; but he that
departs from the Faith, shall be damned.

We praise the Mariner, when he is arived at his harbor; and commend the
Soldiers valor, when he has obtained the victory; the Chrysolite which is of
a golden color in the morning, loses its splendour before the evening; such are
the glittering shows of Hypocrites. But though blazing commets fall to the
earth, yet fixed stars remain in heaven.

That fire which is lade on Gods Altar, when once its kindled, shall no more be
quenched. Grace may be shaken in the soul, but it cannot be shaken out of the
soul; it may be a bruised reed, but it shall never be a broken reed.

Christ is more tender of his body mystical, then he was of his body natural.
A beleiver though he may fall fowly, yet he shall never fall finally. The gates
of hell, shall not prevail against the Saints of Heaven.

The fiery darts of the Devil, that in themselves are intentionally mortal,
shall be to such Eventually medcinal: These bees may startle thee to keep thee
wakeful, but they shall not sting thee to make thee woeful. Thy light may be
Eclipsed for a time, but the Sun will break forth again.

Under the law God had his Evening as well as his Morning Sacrifice. There Is as
much sweetness in the Sugar at the bottom of the cup, as in the cream on the
top of the Milk. No man that puts his hand to the plough and looks back, is fit
for the Kingdom of God. Our labors are never fulfilled, till our lives are
expired: Religion if it be a thing that is troublesome, it will be a thing that
tyresome: there is no thing constant but what is pleasant; though a Saint may
some times be weary in doing the work of the Lord, yet a Saint is no time weary
of doing the Lords work. Habitus non amittitur, licet actus intermittitur,
the^e may be an omission of grace, but there cannot be an amission of grace;
this babe may lie upon a sick bed, but it shall never lie upon a Death bed.

Christ is styled the finisher of our faith, as well as he is styled the Author
of our faith. We have as much need of the spirit to bring up our graces, as we
have need of the spirit to bring forth our graces.

Indifferency in Religion, is the next step to apostasy from Religion, But
though Christians be not kept altogether from falling, yet they are kept from
falling altogether: they may part with Christ for a time, but they shall not
depart from Christ for ever; The trees of righteousness may have their autumn,
but they shall have their spring: There is never so low an ebb, but there is as
high a tide.

Christians are like crocodiles, that are growing till they are dying, or like
the Moon that increases in her beauty, till she arrives at the full of her
glory: take heed of putting off the robes of piety, whilst you are on this side
eternity. You must hold the Scepter of grace in your hands, till God set the
Crown of glory upon your heads.

If the service of God be bad, why do you set forth in it? if the service of
God be good, why do you shrinck back from it? usually they who ride fastest at
their first setting forth, are soonest tired in their journies; its the
sparkling Diamond that is set in the Apostiles Crown. 2 Timothy 4. 7. I have
fought a Absque perseverantid nec qui pugnat, victoriam; nec palmam victor
consequitur. Bern. Ep. 12*.
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: his work was done
before his life was done; henceforth their is laid up for me a crown of glory.

There Is many persons that lays a foundation, that never raises up a super
structure. But Jesus Christ is never a Father to abortive children; where he
gives strength to conceive, he gives strength to bring forth, he turns the
bruised reed into a brazen pillar; and the smoking flax, into a Triumphant
flame; that is the 18th.

19. Singular action that must be done by singular Christians, is, To take all
the shame of their sins unto their selves, and to give all the glory of their
services unto Christ. Others they take all the glory of their services to
themselves, and lay all the shame of their sins on him; as if he that dyed on
earth to redeem us from them, should live in heaven to confirm us in them.

The Devil may flatter us, but he cannot force us; he may tempt us unto sin, but
he cannot tempt us into sin. He is but the Father begeting; the evil heart is
the Mother conceiving; and in this sense, the Father can do nothing without the
Mother; the fire is his, but the tinder is ours: he could never enter into our
houses, if we did not set open our doors.

Many complain for want of liberty who thrust their feet in Satan's fetters; the
woman thou gave me, she gave me of the tree and I did eat, Genesis 3. 12. I took
that as a gift from her, whom thou gave as a gift to me; its ill putting of
sins brats to suck at Gods breast: they may receive their punishment from him,
but they shall never receive their nourishment from him. He cannot be the
unrighteous upholder, of what he is the righteous avenger.

O Blasphemy! can thou charge the Sun with darkness, by whom the heavens are
enlightened; or the Sea with dryness, by whom the earth is moistened! Our
Impiety is as truly the offspring of our souls, as our posterity is the off
spring of our bodies. Every good and perfect gift comes from above, from the
father of light, with whom is no varyableness, or shadow of turning. Jam. 18.
17. Whatsoever is truly good, has its emanation from God. Now the same spring
cannot send forth both sweet and bitter waters. It Is a known rule contraria
multuose tollunt; contraries destroy each other.

Many have more leaves to cover the naughtiness of their works then they have
cloths to cover the nakedness of their backs. How many lay the bastards of
Heresy, at the door of the Sanctuary? calling diabolical soductions,
Evangelical revelations! as if the father of light could bring forth the issues
of darkness: What Is this but to set a crown of Lead upon a head of gold?

We can defile our selves, but we cannot cleanse our selves. The sheep can go
astray alone, but can never return to the fold without the asistance of the
Shepherd; till we taste the bitterness of our own misery, we shall never relish
the sweetness of Gods mercy; till you see how foul your faces are, you will
never pay tribute to Christ for washing of them.

He that creates us in his image, he restores us his Image. If we were left to
our selves but a moment, we should destroy our selves in that moment. We are
like glasses without a bottom, that as soon as ever they are out of the hand
are broken. Others they greaten themselves to make Christ little; but we should
lessen our selves, to make Christ great. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 20. A beleiver is willing to stand for a Cipher, so
Christ may go for a figure; well may we abase our selves for his exaltment,
that abased himself for our establishment: Prorsus Satan est Lutherus, sed
vivat and regnet Christus: Let Luther be accounted a Devil, so Christ may be
exalted as a God, said that flaming Seraphim of himself.

Without me ye can do nothing, Nisi tanquam palmites in me qui vera sum vitis,
ins^ramini, nec multum nec parum, sed nih^l potestis in spiritualibus. Dav.
deter. 9. p. 48.
Joh. 15. 5. The pen may as soon write without the hand that holds it, as grace
can work without the Spirit that moves it. Not only the enjoyment of our
talents is from God, but the improvement of our talents is from God: Luke 19.
16. Lord, thy pound has gained me tenpounds Its not my pains that has done
it, but its thy pound that has done it.

Men should not glory in what they have received, but they should give glory
for what they have received. The grace of God without the God of grace, its but
like a clock that stands still, when all its weights are down. Did not our
hearts burn within us? Luke 24. 32. But how long did that flame last? all the
time he talked with us. When his bellows gave over blowing, their fuel gave
over burning.

Graces in our hearts, are like stars in the heavens, that shine not by their
own splendour, but by borrowed beams from the Sun of Righteousness. He that
takes the brick, must give the straw that makes it: There is no water, except
he smites the rock; nor fire, except he beat the flint.

If he call us to the work of Angels, he will supply us with the strength of
Angels: For when we were without strength, in due time Christ dyed for the
ungodly. A Soul that is Christless, is a Soul that is strengthless. Man is
beholden to God for what he has; but God is not beholden to man for what he
does. But of him, and through him and to him are all things, to whom be glory
for ever, Amen, Romans 11. 36. The humble heart knows no fountain but Gods grace,
and the upright man knows no end but Gods glory.

Waters will rise as high as they fall; whatsoever action has God for its
author, has God for its center; as a circular line makes its last ending,
where it had its first beginning. Take heed of turning a sacred privilege into
a privy sacrilege. If he give the grace that is not due to us, shall we deny
the praise that is due to him.

Others they make their end their God, but we must make God our end: The
firmament is made more glorious by one sun then by all the stars that are
seated in their several orbs: And Jesus Christ from one Saint has more glory
given to him then he receives from all the world besides him. The silver
shrines of divine praises, they ard passively pared off from the beings of
other creatures, but they are actively given up from the beings of the New
creature.

Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God, 1
Cor. 10. 31. From the lowest act of nature to the highest act of grace, there
is no plea for the pride of man, but for the praise of God. Not unto us, not
unto us, but unto Var^s vos Deus cum ^at bonis: quidni in lauds ejus
erumpamus? Sibel. conc. 3. in lim.
thy name be the glory: If he make our natures gracious, we should make his
name glorious.

God sets many dishes upon our table, but we must set this dish upon his table.
He that would be fingering the honor of a God, is not fitting for the honor of
a man. As he said, Aut Caesar, aut Nullus; Either I will be Caesar or nobody:
So the Lord says, Aut Deus optimus Maximus aut nullus. Either I will a great
God, or else I will be no God: That man disparages the beauty of the Sun that
lays it level with the lesser stars.

The glory of God must be the golden Butt at which all the arrows of duty are
shot, or else they fall short of their mark; Go forth O ye daughters of Sion,
and behold King Solomon with the crown, wherewith his mother crowned him, in
the day of his Espousals, Cant 3. 11. The body it has two eyes, but the soul
must have but one, and that so firmly fixed on Christ, as it must never glance
beside him. A single eye is fittest for a single object. When the people saw
what Paul had done, they lifted up their voices, saying, The Gods are come down
to us in the likeness of men, Act. 14. 11. But do they take that glory to
themselves that's given to them from others? No, v. 1. Why do you these things?
we also are men of like passions with you: We are so far from the perfections
of God, that we are clothed with the passions of men.

But do others so? The people gave a shout saying, It is the voice of God and
not of men, Act. 12. 22. What the people gave foolishly, he took fearlesly.
verse. 23. And immediately the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not
God the glory; and this same wormeaten wretch, was a wretch eaten up of worms.
Every little river pays its tribute to the great sea; The blessings of God are
to be magnified, but the being of God is (it I may so speak) to be omnified.

Magnus gratiae oceanus est Deus, ad quem per canalem gratitudinis, beneficia,
quae ex ipso manarunt, refluere, atque reverti debent; We have no way to turn
the streams unto God (the ocean of bounty) but through the channel or
conduitpipe of gratitude.

Giving thanks to the Father who Sibel. con. 9. ju^^. med.
has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light,
Col. 1. 12. Its very meet that he should be magnified by us, that Aeq^it^tem om
n^m ab^^^e runt, qui tot tantisque ^eneficiis ornati, gra^os se been factori
non praebent. Id. conc^^. in mi^.
makes us meet to be glorified with him: The whisperings of the voice are
ecchoed back in an exact concave.

The body of man if it be sound, can stoop for a pin as well as for a pound. As
the best of means should make us fruitful, so the least of mercies should make
us thankeful. The four and twenty Elders fall down before him that sat on the
Throne, and worshipped him that lives for ever and ever, and east their crowns
before the throne, Rev. 4. 10. A divine soul knows that whatsoever ointment is
poured out upon Christ's head, runs down to the skirts of his garment. What he
gives to him in copper, shall be returned to him in silver: yea the only way
of keeping our Crowns on our heads, is the casting our Crown at his feet.

Joseph of Arimathea he builds a sepulcher for Christ, and he makes use of it
for three days, and returns it again perfumed. Well may we give all our glory
unto him, who has given all his glory unto us. A Christian as he lays up
himself in God, so he lays out himself for God; and is wllling to dedicate to
God that perfume of praises, which arises from his beds of spices.

20. Singular thing is To value a heavenly reversion, above an earthly
possession. Others say that a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush; but we
say that such a bird in the bush is worth two in the hand: They that adore the
streams its an argument that they are ignorant of the spring.

Socrates being asked what Countryman he was, answered, Civis sum mundi; The
whole world is my Country; But a Christian being asked what Countryman he is,
answered, Civis cum coeli, Heaven is the region that I am free of. Believers
build their tombs, where others build their Tabernacles. The men of the world
fix upon the things of the world: that is the shrine and cabinet, wherein they
lock up all their jewels. Though God has given the earth to beasts, yet such
beasts are they as to give themselves to the earth.

It was the saying of a cursed Quis non illius vitae desiderio praesentem vitam
despiciat? Quis non illius a^undantiae de^ectamento divit^as te^poris labentis
exhor* reat* etc. Fulg. in Epist. 6. ad Theodor.
Cardinal, That he preferred his part in Paris before his part in Paradise:
That is but a cock of the worlds dunghill, that prises a barley corn before a
jewel. What is the glimering of a candle to the shining of the sun; or the
value of brass and copper, to the worth of gold and silver. Yet children are
taken more with present counters, then with future Crowns: Thus whilst the
shadow is embraced, the substance is neglected: and men court the vail when
they should kifs the face. That man that is a laboring Be for earthly
prosperity, will be but an idle drone for heavenly felicity. If you be risen
with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the
right hand of God, Col. 3. 1.

The same pen writes fair, or blots as his skill or rudeness is that handles
it. The same strings make a pleasant music, or a jarring discord, as they are
set and fingured: So our affections according to their objects about which they
are conversant, become either like fiery chariots to carry us to perfection, or
like Pharoahs chariots to hurry us to perdition.

There is no need of blotting out these Characters, but of writing of them in
fair papers; nor of drying up of these waters, but of diverting them into their
proper channels; nor of plucking up of these plants, but of setting them in a
right soil. Solum dispicit, qui coelum aspicit, He that looks upon heaven with
desire, will look upon earth with disdain. Our affections were made for the
things that are above us, and not for the things that are a out us. What is
your earthly Manors, to your heavenly Mansions? As carnal things seem small to
a man that is spiritual, so spiritual things seem small to a man that is
carnal. Ignoti nulla cupido, there are no movings after things beyond the
sphere of our knowledge. Heaven is to them as a mine of gold covered with earth
and rubbish: or as a bed of pearl enclosed in a heap of sand. If they had the
eyes of an eagl to see it, they would wish for the wings of an eagle to fly
unto it.

How little would the great world seem to us, if the great God was not little
in us. Either men have no thoughts of a future state, or else they have low
thoughts of a future state: If we had souls without any bodies, then there
would be no need of earth to keep us, if we had bodies without any souls then
there would be no need of heaven to crown us.

But such as have no present holiness, are for a present happiness. There be
many that say, Who will show us any good, Psalm. 4. 6. any good will serve the
turns of those that know not the chiefest good. But Lord lift thou up the light
of thy countenance upon us. O how sordid is it to prefer the garlic and onyons
of Egypt, before the milk and honey of Canaan. Visible things to them is better
then invisible: They mind the world that is come so much, as if it would never
have an ending, and the world to come so little as if it would never have a
beginning.

Why should you be so taken with your riches, that shall be taken from your
riches, or dote upon a flower which a day may wither? They that are traveling
beyond the world, they shoulst be trading above the world; but such are not
easily awakened that fall so fast asleep on the worlds pillow: But now they
desire a better Country, that is a Tunc (ut fama est) primum gustantes vinum ex
^talia delatum, sic illius admiratione amentes facti sunt omnes, ut collectis
armis, etc. quaesicrint eam terram, in qua hujusmodi fructus oriratur. Plut. in
vit. Camil.
heavenly, Heb. 11. 16. The Gauls when they had tasted the sweet wine of Italy,
asked where the grapes grew, and would never be quiet till they came there. O
that I had the wings of a Dove, that I might fly above and be at rest. A
beleiver is willing to lose the world for the reception of grace, and he is
willing to leave the world for the fruition of glory.

As the worst on this side hell compared with that is mercy; so the best on
this side heaven, compared with that is misery. There is no more comparison to
be made between heaven and earth, then there is between a piece of rusty iron,
and a piece of refined gold. St. Austin says, Spes vitae immortalis, est vita
vitae mortalis: The hope of life immortal, is the life of our lives mortal. Its
the expectation of their future heritage, which is the Saints Jacobs staff to
walk through this dark pilgrimage. If in this life only we have hope in Christ,
we were of all men the most miserable; but because we have hope in Christ after
this life, we may be of all men the most comfortable; for in this we groan
earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven, 2
Cor. 5. 2. A believer longs to be there most of all, where he shall be best of
all: He is not only one that grows in what is gracious, but he is one that
groans for what is glorious.

Perfection is the boundary of expectation; as it likes no other, so it looks
no further: every thing in Eternity, is wound up to its highest capciaty.
Behold I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand
of God, Act. 7. 56. A beleiver can sweetly see with an eye that is purified,
what he shall shortly see with an eye that is glorified. Here it is that mercy
is received unmixed, and majesty is viewed unvailed. What Is a Pebble that is
worthless, to a Pearl that is matchless. Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord! O
what joy enters into the believer, when he enters into the joy of his Redeemer!

The vessels of mercy shall then swim in the ocean of glory: Come ye blessed of
my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you before the foundation of the
world, Mat. 25. 34. That which makes hell so full of horror, is that its below
all hopes: That which makes heaven so full of splendour, is that its above all
fears. The one is a Ibi erit vere maximum Sabbatum non habens vesperem. Aug. de
civ. deil. 22. c. 30.
night that shall never see any day appearing, the other is a day that shall
never have any night aproaching. Who would not work for glory with the greatest
diligence, and wait for glory with the greatest patience, seeing we advance the
interest whilst we stay for the principal!

There are some deluded Professors that aspire after earthly scepters; as if
the place where Saints are to be crucified, were the place where Sts. are to be
glorified; then certainly the Church here should rather be in a state
triumphant, then in a state militant; In heaven the crown is made for them, and
in heaven the crown shall be worn by them. St. Austin presents us with two
parts of the Church, Vna in tempore perigrinationis, altera in aeternitate
mansionis. We are not speaking of that part which is established above
temptations, but of that part which is encompassed about with temptations; and
its hard finding of this ark without moving on a tumultuous deluge. In my
fathers house are many mansions; I go to prepare a place for you, Joh. 14. 2.
Our Redeemer is our Forerunner; he that takes possession of us on earth, takes
possession for us of heaven. As they are not long here without him, so he will
not be long there without them. Here all the earth is not enough for one man,
but there one heaven is enough for all men; here there is a shower of tears in
the Saints eyes, but there is a sunshine of joy in the Saints hearts. A soul
once landed at that heavenly shore, is past all tempestuous storms. Many
temptations may stand against a heavenly Christian, but no temptations can
stand before a heavenly Christian. Flying birds, are never taken in fowling
snares. What Is all that you enjoy here, but as dying sparks of that living
flame, or as languishing rays of that shining sun; or as small drops of that
overflowing spring. Whom though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. If there be so much
delight in beleiving, Tam magna sunt illius vi^ae bona, ut non possi^t
mensurari; tam mu^^a ut non possint numerari* tam ^re^iosa ut ro^ (...). Ger.
(...). 46.
oh how much delight is there in beholding! what is the woing day to the wedding
day? or the sealing of the Conveyance, to the enjoying of the inheritance? or
the fore tastes of glory, to the full draughts of glory. Solomon says, The
spirit of a man is as the candle of the Lord. When the candle of the soul shall
be taken out of the dark lanthorn of the body how gloriously shall it shine? if
the picture of holiness be so comely in its rough draught, how lovely a piece
will it be in all its perfections, when every grace that is but here in its
minority, shall be there in its maturity! Thus have I dispatched the first
General, the Doctrinal Explication.

I now put off to the practical Application, which I shall spread but into two
Branches.

First, For the erection of singular Principles.

Secondly* For the direction of singular practices.

First, For the erection of singular Principles. Natural men they obey natural
principles, and spiritual men they obey spiritual principles. No man can expect
that bitter roots should produce sweet fruits: though civil principles may be
lighted at the Torch of nature, yet Sacred principles are lighted at the Lamp
of Scripture.

Now there are twenty singular principles that are the rise and spring of
singular practices.

The first Principle for Saints to walk by is this;

That whatsoever is acted by men on earth, is eyed by God in Heaven.

A man may hide God from himself, but a man cannot hide himself from God. Their
idols are silver and gold: the work of men's hands. They have mouths, but they
speak not for our direction; eyes, but they see not our conditions; ears; but
they hear not our supplications; hands, but they work not our redemption, Psalm.
115. 5, 6. These were not the Gods that made men, but the Gods that men had
made. Ejus divinitas intima est omni rei, et vere nulla creatura est ei
invisibilis. Gor. in loc.


All things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do,
Hebrews 4. 12. We cannot see his will in his works, but he can see our works in
our wills. To him the undermost roots are as visible as the uppermost boughs.
Though the place where you sin (to men) be as dark as Egypt, yet to God it is
as light as Goshan.

It was good counsel that one gave to his friend; So live with men as if God
saw thee, and so pray to God as if men heard thee. He is a bold Thief that will
cut our Purse whilst we stare him in the face. All the ways of a man are
clean in his own eyes, but the Lord weighs the spirits, Prove: 16. 2. He sees
faults where we see none: Atoms that are invisible by the light of a Candle,
are made to dance naked in the beams of the Sun.

Cato was so grave and so good a man that none would sin in his presence;
whence it grew to a Proverbial Caveat, Cave tibi spect at Cato, Take heed what
you do for Cato sees you. Magna vobis est necessuas indicta probitatis cum
omniaagiti^ ante oculos judcicis cunctacernentis. Boet. in fine de Cons.
If the eyes of a man will keep many sins out of our hands, the eyes of a God
should cast all sins out of our hearts. To Gods omnipotence there is nothing
impossible, to Gods omniscience there is nothing invisible. Momus complained of
Vulcan that he had not set a Grate at every man's breast, but God has a glazed
Window into our dark houses of clay, and sees what is done in them: I never
look that such should strain at Gnats, as will swallow down Camels.

But what is the reason that men do the works of darkness, but that they think
they do their works in darkness; they think no eye sees them, no not his eye
that does nothing but see. And thou say how does God know? can he judge
through the dark cloud? Thick clouds are a covering to him that he sees not,
Job 22. 13, 14. How fain would the heart of man draw a veil over the face of
God.

An unsound creature would be an unseen creature. Understand, O ye brutish
among the people, O ye fools, when will you Est Deus totus oculus, totus
intellectus, imd totus sapientia, et int^lligentla; Quomodo igitur non omnia
videt? (et paucis interjectis) Qui praesto aliisut omnia vide ant, et
intelligant, ego non videbo? Zanch: de Not: Dei. Lib. 3. Cap. 2. Quest. 3.
be wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the eye,
shall he not see? Psalm. 94. 8, 9. What will you make him deaf that gives you
ears? and him blind that gives you eyes? These instead of being men amongst
beasts, they are beasts amongst men: See what follows, The Lord knows the
thoughts of men that they are vanity; and this is the vainest thought of them
all, that he knows not the vanity of all their thoughts.

You cannot write your lusts in such small Characters, but the eyes of God can
read their Letters. As he can save from the deadliest extremity, so he can see
in the deepest obscurity.

Plato says of the King of Lydaea, Cum palam ejus annuli ad palmam converterat
a nullo videbatur, ipse autem omnia videbat. Cicer: de Offic. l. 3. p. 113.
that he had a Ring, which when he turned the head to the Palm of his hand, he
could see every one and himself walk invisible. Though we cannot see God
whilst we live, in his Essence, yet God can see us how we live in our Actions:
His eyes are upon the ways of man, and he pondereth his doings. Men may gild
over the leaves of a blurred life with the profession of holmesse; but God can
unmask the painted Jezabel of hypocrisy, and lay her naked to her own infamy.

Because sin has put out our eyes we think it has put out his eyes. Because
Deus tum seipsum, tum caetera o^mia unico simul actu, atq: intuitu
perfectissime, certissime, et dist^nctissime (...). Pol^and. Dsp. Theol. p. 73.
we see not what God does in Heaven for earth, we think that God sees not what
we do on earth against Heaven.

Men care not what they do, when they believe that God sees not what is done.
They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless Psalm. 94. 6.
They say, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. The
Adulterer he waits for the twilight; his sin gets up when the Sun goes down:
The time of darkness pays most tribute to the Prince of darkness. There are
many that blush to confess their faults, that did never blush to commit their
faults; though we gain by confessing, what we loose by transgressing.

Poor Adam when he had sinned he sought not the fairest fruits to fill his
emptiness, but the broadest leaves to cover his nakedness. Its Gods eyeing of
us that makes us prosperous, but its our eyeing of God that makes us virtuous:
What servant is there that would be a sleeper under the view of his Master? Or
what Soldier will be a Coward in the presence of his General?

2. Principle that you should walk by is this; That after all your present
receivings, you must be brought to your future reckonings* Give an account of
thy Steward-ship, for thou may be no longer a Steward, Luke 16. 2. Man's
enjoyment of outward blessings is not a Lord-ship but a Steward-ship. When we
Haecbona Deus hominibus communicate, non ut ipsieorum sint Domini, sed
dispensatores ad alios. Cherm. Har. Evang. cap. 122.
take our leave of the earth the earth takes its leave of us. The rich man had
as poor a beginning as the meanest, and the poor man shall have as rich an
ending as the greatest.

Austin, Ideo latet ultimus dies ut observantur omnes dies; We should every day
be expecting our last days approaching. Persons of the greatest eminence have
anciently had their Moniters.

The Sicilian Prince Agathocles, Is Rex, et Dominus factus Siciliae, fictilia
pocula interserere solebataureis. Plut. Apoth. Sect. 26.
had his earthen Plate to tell him that he was but a Potters son. The Roman
Triumphers in the Meridian of all their splendour, had a servant behind them
crying to each of them, Memento te esse hominem.

Men that are Gods in Office, are apt to think themselves Gods in Essence. As
they say of the Pope at his installment, Mutatio nominis, is mutatio hominis;
The change of the name, makes the change of the man; I have said ye are Gods,
but ye shall dye like men, Psalm. 82. 2. This Divinity its shrouded up in
Mortality, and they that are Gods before men, are but men before God. Death
levels Palidamors aeguo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas Regumque turres. Horat.
Od. 4.
the highest Mountains, with the lowest Valleys; and mows down the Lillies of
the world, as well as the grass of the field. The Robes of Princes, and the
rags of Peasants are both laid up together in the Wardrobe of the grave.

That Star that led Israel from Egypt, went out of sight before they came to
their journeys end: For we must all appear before the Omnes nos, generaliter
sine excaptione, manifestari, evidenter sine absconsione oportet,
inexcusabiliter sine evas^one; ^nte Tribunal, praesentialiter sine procuratore.
Gor. in loc.
Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whither it be good, or whither it be
evil; 2 Cor. 5. 10. They who refused to come before his Mercy-seat, shall be
forced to come before his Judgmentseat.

At the shril voice of the last Trumpet, the greatest Jailors shall surrender
up (...) their prisoners. Now we see living men begin to dye, but then we shall
see dea^ men begin to live. The scattered dust of Adams seed shall ride upon
windy wings, till it meet together in a collected body.

Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise: awake
and sing ye that dwell in dust, Isa. 26. 19. All the creatures in the world
that have made their meals of man's flesh, shall find that they have eaten
morsels too hard for the digestion of their weak stomachs. Now he that comes to
raise the dead, he shall come to Judge the dead: In the day that God shall
judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel, 2 Romans 16. The
same Rule that God has given the creature to act by, the same Rule he has
taken himself to judge by.

If you obey not the truth of God revealed from Heaven unto you, you shall
suffer the wrath of God revealed from Heaven against you. Though you may resist
the judgments that he lays before you, yet you can never resist the judgments
that he lays upon you.

O shake the Vipers of lust off of your hands, lest they pull you into
unquenchable flames. Let nothing be acted in one world, which cannot be
answered in another. Because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the
world in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, Acts 17. 31. Its
the Son of man by whom the world was redeemed, and its the Son of man before
whom the world is arraigned. He who was guarded to the Cross with a band of
Soldiers, shall be attended to the Bench with a guard of Angels.

The Thebanes pictured their Judges without eyes, that they might not respect
persons; and without hands, that they might not receive bribes: Shall not the
Judge of all the world do right: The wills of other Judges are regulated by
righteousness, but righteousness it self is regulated by this Judges will. As
all his works are great and marvelous, so all his ways are true and righteous.

Then there will be no standing before Christ, but by standing within Christ.
What hopes shall he have at the general Assizes whose conscience condemns him
before he appears. Rejoice O young man in the days of thy youth, and walk in
the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. Eccl: 11. 9. You will
say this is brave indeed if it Fruere, ut libet, hujus mundi voluptatibus, quod
si rebus hujus seculi insolescas, et abutaris, haud dubie acerrimas aliquando
lues paenas et extremo occurres judicio, in quo vitae tuae redditurus es
rationem. Arboreus in loc.
would always last: O but after the flash of Lightning comes the clap of
Thunder: But know that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment.
As if he had said; well run down the hill as fast as you please, you will be
sure to break your necks at the last.

This is the day of Gods long-suffering, but that shall be the day of man's
long-suffering. Here the cords of patience does as it were tie the hands of
vengeance. Sinners they have forbearing mercy, though they want forgiving
mercy; but at the worlds end such will be at their wits end.

He that now shakes his sword over their heads, will then sheath it in their
bowels. There will be no tabula post naufragium, no planke to swim to the
shore, after your ship is split at the Sea. And the Kings of the earth, and
the great men, and the rich men said to the Mountains and to the Rocks fall on
us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6. 16. If you cannot endure Christ's coming as a
refining fire, how will you endure his coming as a consuming fire?

You that despise the death of the Lamb, how will ye endure the wrath of the
Lamb? If the day of mercy leave you graceless, the day of judgment will find
you speechless. There shall come in the last days s^ offers, walking after
their own lusts; saying, Where is the promise of his ^oming? 2 Pet. 3. 4. It Is
no wonder to see such persons found in the fagg end of the world; which like a
false bottom being unwound is worst at the last.

But as an expiring man has a little reviving before his departing; or as the
wasted candle gives a brighter glare at its going forth; so their deepest
security shall usher in their greatest calamity.

As mercy will let no service pass unrewarded, so justice will let no sin
pass unrevenged. You that make no account of his Coming, how will you give an
account at his Coming?

One observes, That the Resurrection of the body is placed between the
remission of sins and everlasting life, to show that then only is the
Resurrection a benefit, when remission of sins go before it, and everlasting
life follows after it.

It Is storied of one of the Hungarian Kings, who being on a time marvelously
dejected, his brother would needs know what he ailed; O says he, I have been a
great sinner against God, and know not how I shall appear before him at the
day of Judgment: his brother replied that these were nothing but a train of
Melancholy thoughts, which should be banished from the breasts of Princes. The
King lets his brother alone at present, but such was the Countries custom,
that if the Executioners of justice sounded a Trumpet at any man's door, he was
presently to be led forth to death.

The King in the dead time of the night sends his Deaths-man, and causes him to
sound his Trumpet before his brothers door; who hearing the messenger comes
with a pale and trembling countenance into his brothers presence, and beseeches
the King to let him know wherein he had offended him. Oh Brother, says the
King; thou have always pleased me and never grieved me; but if the sight of my
Executioner be so dreadful in thine eyes; then the sight of Gods executioner
must needs be more dreadful in mine eyes.

How shall they be able to lift up their heads before Christ, that have lift up
their hands against Christ: Lets hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear
God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man, Eccl. 12.
13. This is all we have to do, and all this is to be done; but why so? verse.
14. For God shall bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

If you be offenders in your words, Minsuetum judicium, non enim ex quibus
alius dicit de te, sed ex quibus ipsemet loquntus es calculationes judex feret,
Gor. in loc.
you will be made offenders for your words: By thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned, Math. 12. 37. The Arrows
of idle words though they be shot out of sight, will hereafter drop down upon
the heads of those that drew the bow.

Lingua nihil est vel bona melius, vel mala pejus; then a good tongue there is
nothing better, then a bad tongue there is nothing worser. Jesus Christ will
pass a sentence upon every sentence that has passed. Then the rich man's baggs
shall be turned to see how the poor man's box has been filled. Riches as they
bare the charges of the Pilgrims journey, so they heighten the burden of the
Stewards account. Out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing, Jam. 3.
12. There Is honey in the same Rose to the Be, and poison to the Spider: Out of
the same mouth of Christ will proceed both blessing and cursing. As the same
wind that sends one Vessel to its haven, sinks another Vessel in the Ocean;
or, as at the same gate a Citizen goes to his recreation, a thief goes to his
execution.

He that says, Come ye blessed, he Ignis infernalis qui semel accensus est,
nunquam extinguitur. Gerard.
says, Go ye cursed. O how sad is that Tragedy that shall ever be acted, but
never be ended! How can you hear the doleful knell of an everlasting
funeral! Will those transient glances of former prosperity, lighten the load
of future calamity?

There Is but a little airey breathings betwixt you and everlasting burnings.
The day of retribution, shall be a day of separation. The wheat and the chafe,
they may both grow together, but they shall not both lie together: When the one
is gathered into the Garner to be preserved, the other is cast into the fire to
be burned.

They that were here their derisions, shall not be there their companions. The
Saints enjoyments shall be incomparable, when the sinners torments shall be
intolerable. The Sea of damnation, shall not be sweetened with a drop of
compassion. If once thou drop Facilis descensus averni, sed revocaro gradum etc
Hic labor hoc opus est Virg. lib. Aeneid. 6.
into Hell, after thousands of years you will be as far from coming out, as
at your first entering in.

Christ will put the Sheep by themselves that have the ear-mark of election,
and the Goats by themselves that have the hand-mark of transgression.

In Hell there shall not be a Saint amongst those that are crucified, and in
Heaven there shall not be a sinner amongst those that are glorified.

O how will those Magistrates dare to appear before his Tribunal, that have
stained the sword of Authority with the blood of innocence, by turning its back
against the vicious, and whetting its edge against the righteous. Many an
unjust judge that now sits confidently upon the Bench, shall then stand
tremblingly at the Bar.

Or how will those Ministers appear that like the Dog and the Wolf combine
together to macerate the Flock; that instead of treading out the Corn, are
treading down the Corn; and instead of furthering the Birth, are murdering
the Child.

O you fair-faced gilded professors, that are no better then hells
freeholders; what will ye do? When the painted sepulcher is opened, the dead
men's bones will be disclosed. He will not judge you by the whiteness of your
countenances, but by the blackness of your consciences: the black hand must
then part with the white glove. That Day will be too critical, for the
Hypocritical: You that are now colored for show, shall ere long be shown in
your colors.

3. Principle that you should walk by is this, That God bears a greater
respect to your hearts, then he does to your works. God looks most where man
looks lest, My Son give me thy heart, Prove. 23. 26. We cannot trust God with
too much, nor our selves with too little. The first is our keeper, the last is
our Traitor: Here you have the dignity with which a believer is invested, and
the Duty to which a believer is invited.

The God of Heaven and Earth sues from Heaven to Earth. He that is all in all
to us, would have that which is all in all in us. We commit our estates into
the hands of men, but we must commit our hearts into the hands of God. There Is
none of our spirits so good but he deserves them, there is none of our spirits
so bad but he desires them.

On whom do parents bestow their hearts but upon their children, and on whom
should children bestow their hearts but upon their parents: but man has no
mind to give what God has a mind to have: This people draws nigh unto me
with their mouth, and honors me with their lips; but their heart is far
from me, Matthew 15. 8. Heartlesse operations, are but hearty dissimulations:
You may keep your works to your selves, if you do not give your hearts to
him. He that regards the heart without any thing, he regards not any thing
without the heart.

I beseech you therefore Brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present your
bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, Romans 12. 1. He that
makes (...) has, must have all he makes. The Formalist he is all for outward
activity; the sensualist he is all for inward sincerity: The one has nothing
within, therefore he is for what is outward, the other has nothing without,
therefore he is for what is inward; But it is not the pretense of inward
sincerity, that can justify outward impiety; nor a show of outward piety, that
will excuse inward hypocrisy.

Though the brain be the spring of sensitive motion, yet the heart is the
Original of vital motion. The heart its Primum vivens, ultimum moriens, its
the first that lives, and the last that dies: O Jerusalem wash thy heart from
wickedness, how long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4. 14. Vain
thoughts defile the heart as well as vile thoughts; as snails leave their slime
behind them as well as Serpents.

If the Leprosy takes a single thread it spreads over the whole piece: Though
you cannot keep sinful thoughts from rising, yet you should keep sinful
thoughts from reigning. Though these birds may hover over your houses, yet let
them not build their nest in its heaves.

The Devil knows if there be any good treasure it is in our hearts, and he
would feign have the key of this Cabinet to rob us of our Jewels. A heart that
is sanctified, is better then a tongue that is silvered: he that gives but the
skin of worship, receives but the shell of comfort.

It is not the bare touching of the strings that is the making of the music. A
spiritual man may pray carnally, but a carnal man cannot pray spiritually. If
our duties do not eat out the heart of our sins, our sins will eat out the
heart of our duties. A work that is heartlesse, is Quando ea, quae per se
quidem, et suo genere bona sunt fiant; si non recte nec been fiant, non
placent. Dep. Chem. Evan: Har. cap. 51.
a work that is fruitless. God cares not for the crazy Cabinet, but for the
precious Jewel. It Is said of Haniball that prime Captain, that he was Primus
ingressus, ultimus egressus, The first that went into the Field, and the last
that came out of the Field: Thus should it be in all the operations of a
Christian; The heart should be the first that comes into Duty, and the last
that goes out of Duty. In prayer the heart should first speak the words, and
then the words should speak the heart.

All the inferior Orbs they follow the motion of the superior ones. If the
heart be inditing of a good matter, the tongue will be as the pen of a ready
writer.

It Is observed of the spider, that in the morning, before she seeks her prey
she mends her broken webb, and in the doing of it, she always begins in the
middle: Christians before you pursue the profits and the pleasures of the
world, you should mend the broken webbs of your lives, and in the doing of it
you should always begin at the heart. If you would have the Cocks to run
wholesome water, you must look well to the springs that feeds them. The heart
is the presence Chamber where the King of glory takes up his lodgings. That
which is most worthy in us, should be given to him that is most worthy of it.

Good words without the heart are but flattery, and good works without the
heart are but hypocrisy. Though God pities stumbling Israelites, yet he
punishes halting hypocrites.

It Is reported of Cranmer, that after his flesh and bones were consumed in the
flames, his heart was found whole: A gracious soul is clothed with sincerity,
in the midst of it is infirmities. God is a Spirit; and they that worship him,
must worship Indicat quod Deus incorporeus est, oportet igitur, et incorpoream
ejus culturam esse, hoc est per animam, et intellectus puritatem nos es offere
Aquin. in loc.
him in spirit and in truth, John 4. 24. You can never give him the heart of
your services, unless you give him your heart in your services. It Is his heart
that speaks a mercy saving, and it is our hearts that makes a duty pleasing.

It Is said of the Lacedamonians that were a poor people, and of the Athenians
that were a rich people; the former offered up lean sacrifices to Apollo, the
latter fat ones: Yet in their wars, the Lacedamonians were always
conquerours, and the Athenians were always conquered; whereupon they went to
the Oracle to know the reason, why they should speed worst that gave most: The
Oracle gave them this return, The Lacedamonians were a people that gave their
hearts to their Gods; but the Athenians did only give their gifts to their
Gods. Thus a heart without a gift, is better then a gift without a heart.

Religion that is a sacrifice, but the heart that is the Altar upon which it must
be offered. As the body is at the command of the soul that rules it, so should
the soul be at the command of God that gives it. For a man to send his body to
the service of God, and leave his soul behind him; it is as if a man should send
his clothes stuff't with straw instead of a personal appearance.

4. Principle that you should walk by, is this; There Is more bitterness
following upon sins ending, then ever there was sweetness flowing from sins
acting. The Devils Apple, though it may have a fair skin, yet it has a bitter
core.

Me thinks this flaming sword should keep us out of the forbidden Paradise; and
make our hearts like wet Tinder to all the sparks of Satan's fire. Per delictum,
morti regnum datur, nec potest regnare in aliquo, nisi jus regni accipiata
delicto, Orig. l. 5. in Epist. ad Romans


You that see nothing but weal in its commission, will suffer nothing but woe in
its conclusion: The wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. He that likes the
works of sin to do them, will never like the wages of sin to have them. Yea who
would do those works that are but drudgery, for those wages that are but misery.

Though all sins are not equal, yet all sins are mortal. The candle of
ourlives, is blown Nonne per peccatu^ mors, et per mortem omnes ejus comites
paenae, cruciatus, et miseriae hujus vitae omnes? porro peccatum toti mundo
detrimentum adfert. Stap. in Dom. 5. Post Epiph. Tex. 4.
out by the wind of our lusts. The corruption of nature tends to the
dissolution of nature; as the Leprosy got into the walls occasioned the
demolishing of the house, Sin it stands as a But at which God may shoot every
Arrow till he has emptied his whole Quiver.

We began to be mortal, when we began to be sinful. If man had had nothing to
do with sin, Peccatum aculeus mortu dicitur; non quia peccatum per mortem, sed
per peccatum. Mors in mundum intravit. Fulgent de Incam. et Great. Christi: cap.
14.
death had had nothing to do with man: Our impiety forfeited the privilege of
our immortality.

Sin its like a Serpent in the bosom that is stinging; or like a Theif in the
Closet that is stealing; or like poison in the stomach that is paining, or like a
sword in the bowels that is killing. Its like John's Book, sweet in the mouth but
bitter in the belly; this fare faced Rachel will be found but a blear eyed
Leah: Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end. The dregs
lie in the bottom of the Cup.

That which is now like a Rose flourishing in your bosom, ere long will be
like a Dagger drawn against your breast: The Ivy though it embraces the Oak yet
it eats out its heart.

Sin its a thing that is delightful, O but its a thing that is deceitful; its
like Judas that at first salutes us, but at last betrays us; it shows the bait
but hides the hook, it represents the amiability but covers, the obliquity; its
like a River that begins in a quiet spring, but ends in a tumultuous Sea. Do
men gather Ex his spinis colligitur, non laetitia conscientiae sed labruscae
remorsus interioris non retributio gloriae, sed labruscae Gehennae. Gorran. In
locum.
Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles. Mat. 7. 16. The grapes of tranquillity,
grows not upon the Thorns of impiety. Heart peace is espoused to heart purity.
The way to keep conscience untormented, is to keep conscience undefiled.

A Saint cannot so sin as to destroy Vide Bzoviu Conc. 24. Excellentissime de
hac re disserentem.
his grace, but a Saint may so sin as to disturb his peace. The Spider cannot
kill the Bees, but if she gets into the Hive she spoils the Honey. If you will
be nibbling at the bait, the hook will enter into your bowels.

O think of that time wherein you shall be ashamed of nothing but your
wickedness, and glory in nothing but your holiness. You may be eternally
sinful, but you cannot be eternally joyful. In Hell all the Sugar will be
melted, in which this bitter pill was wrapped: that is too hot a climate for
wanton delights to live in.

The pleasures of sin are suddenly abortive, but the pains of sin are eternally
extensive. How soon did our first parents eat their forbidden fruit! Esus
vetiti illius pomi, omniu^ malorum sons, et ori^go fuit. Bzovius in Con. 24. p.
229. De malis a peccato allatis vide Bzovium. loco jam citato.
but the world to this day cannot rid it self of the miserable consequences of
that woeful banquet. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of
that mirth is heaviness, Proverbs 14. 13. The Serpent of sensual delight
always carries a sting in its tail. In such golden cups there are deadly
draughts.

Will Gaul and Wormwood ever make you pleasant wine? Such thick and muddy
vapors will never yield any sweet and pleasant showers. You that sin for your
profit, will never profit by your sins.

O that England would look with Scripture Spectacles upon all its rased
Tabernacles, and say, if sin had not been there, these had not lain here. Its
better to take up our lodging in a bed of Snakes, then to take up our lodging
in a bed of lusts: who would spread such silken Sails upon a Pirates ship?

When the pale horse of death goes before, the red horse of wrath does follow
after: When the body goes to Worms to be consumed, the soul goes to flames to
be tormented.

Its better here to forgo the pleasures of sin, then hereafter to undergo the
pains of sin. Your ill doing will be your undoing: What fruit had you of those
things whereof you are now ashamed? Romans 6. 21. What advantage does Dives
reap in hell of all the delicate banquets that he had on earth? What taste has
Cleopatra now of her draught of dissolved Pearls? The stench and torment of
everlasting burnings, will take away the sweetest perfumes that ever sin was
powdered with. How can I do this wickedness and sin against God? Genesis 39. 9.
It does not grieve a Saint so much for this, that God is displeased with him,
as it grieves a Saint for this, that God is displeased by him: He mourns not so
much for the evil which sin does bring, as he mourns for the sin which does
bring the evil. When Craesus son saw them go about to kill his father, he
cried out, O kill not King Craesus. Did Christ open his veins for our
redemption, and shall not we open our mouths for his vindication? The Crown is
fallen from our heads, woe unto us for we have sinned, Lamenta. 5. 16. Sin it
does not only unman us, but it does uncrown us: Yea, it does not only take the
Crown from off a sinners head, but it lays a curse upon a sinners back.

There Is many think the fountain of their lusts are quite dried up, when the
streams are turned into another Channel. A hand taken off from sinful
practices, without a heart taken off from sinful principles, its like a piece
of ground, which having long lain fallow, when sown again yields more increase;
or like a stream that has met with a dam, that runs with greater violence when
the sluice is opened: that is the fourth.

The 5. Principle that believers should walk by, is this; That there is the
greatest vanity in all created excellency: If this truth were more believed,
this world would be less beloved.

A Lady being told that the world in all its glory was but vanity, true says
she, Solomon said so, but he tried it before he said it, and so will I. Thus
many believe not a Toad to be poisonous, till themselves are envenomed with it.

He that knocks at the creatures door, will find but an empty house kept there.
All the rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full, Eccles. 1. 7. All the
golden streams of worldly profits, though they may run into the hearts of men,
yet they cannot fill up the hearts of men. Did you never hear a rich man
complain of the want of riches? though he has enough to support him, yet he
has not enough to content him. The eye is not satisfied with seeing. If there
be not enough in the world to satisfy the senses of men, how should there be
enough in the world to satisfy the souls of men?

The earth its not a substance that is filling, but a shadow that is flying:
The fashion of this world passes away, (...): 1 Cor. 7. 31. The most excellent
and flourishing Tamen ista divites nihil movent, quia aureus fulgor ecce cavit
eos. Bzovius Conc. 28. p. 272.
pieces of the whole creation, are continually posting to dissolution. We are
commanded to use the world as though we used it not, because whilst we use the
world it is not. The tide that so floatingly brings in the ship, suddenly
leaves her in the mud: The higher the Sun of prosperity is in its shining, the
nearer it is to its setting.

Have you not seen some who have begun their lives in a Palace, to end their
lives in a Prison? The golden Chains about their necks, have been turned into
iron fetters about their Nondescen det tecum in puteum interni aurum
splendidum, non lapides coruscantes, non servorum caterva, non agrorum
latitudo. Bzov. loco citato.
feet. The substance of this life, is but for the season of this life. All
creature felicity, will become a prize to mortality.

You who feed upon golden dust, will have all your gold turned to dust; and the
short Summer of your prosperity, will usher in the long Winter of your
adversity. You who do rejoice in the world, ere long will have no world
wherein to rejoice. Arise ye, and depart, for this is not your rest, because it
is poluted it shall destroy you, even with a sore destruction, Micah 2. 10.
Hearts ease is a flower that grows not in the worlds garden.

Where does that fish swim that will not nible at that hook on which there
hangs a golden bait? How many perish for the having of that which does perish
in the using?

Why do thou seek for wealth, seeing the greatest Rulers are laid as naked on
their dusty pillow, as the poorest beggars. The faster you grasp the world in
your hands, the sooner it slides between your fingers. What is a man prosited,
if he shall gain the whole world, and Hoc loco notantur duo* 1. Inutilitas
temporalis lucri; 2. Irrecuperabilitas spiritualis Damni. Gorr. in Loc. Quid
expedit concervar^ aurum lapides, et gemmas, et cum his in interitum pute^
inferior is demorgi? Bzovius* ubi priu^.
lose his own soul? Matthew. 16. 26. He that bought this ware knows its worth:
The World if it be gained may be lost again; but the soul if it be lost can
never be gained again. There is a way to keep a man out of hell, but no way to
get a man out of hell. Its as easy for a stone to lodge in the air, as its
for a man to rest in the earth.

The glory of this world its like a rotten post, that never shows bright but
when it is in the dark. How few are there that clime the Staves of honor, but
they leave a good conscience at the bottom of the Ladder. Believers themselves
would surfeit of the worlds sweet-meat, if God should not call them away from
the banquet.

Creature comforts they are like sweet dews, when they water the branches of
the Tree, they leave the root dry. Why should Christians be found magnifying,
what Diogenes, et Abdolonymus de quibus loquitur. Curtius, l. 4. inenis et lib.
2. juxta finem.
Heathens have been found vilifying? The world its rather a sharp Bryar to
prick us, then a sweet flower to delight us.

Poison works more furiously in wine, then it does in water; and corruption
betrays it self more in a state of plenty, then it does in a state of poverty.

Gerhard compares this Praeciosa nux apparet haec vita exterius, sed sicultro
veritatis aperias, videbis quod nil nisivermes, et putredo sintinterius.
Gerhard* Medit. 38.
life to a beautiful Nut, which how fair soever it seems, is full of nothing
but worms and rottenness. The earth it is for a Saints passage, but heaven is
for a Saints portion: the former is for a believers use, the latter is for a
believers choice.

Every thing below is too base for the soul Nobility, and too brittle for the
souls Eternity. Who would set that vessel under the droppings of a Cistern,
that is able to drink in the waters of the Ocean?

A Professor stuffed with the world is but like a Bladder filled with the wind.
They that put on at the first for the world, are put off at last with the
world. Son, remember thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things: These
Blossoms will fall off from our Trees, when death shakes the boughs.

The world its got with cares, and kept with fears, and lost with groans, We
see the outside of a great estate but not the inside of it; You behold the
field of Corn Mundi honores, divitiae, et voluptates sunt tanquam uxae acerbae,
etpoma viridia atque immatura; sed specaem anium, et viriditatem Diabolus
ostendit, acerbitatem tacet. Stapl: in Dom. 1. Quadr: Tex. 8.
but not the Tares that are mixed with it; you see not their clouds and nights,
but their day and Sun.

The world pretends to be a Nurse, but if you draw her breasts, in the one you
will find the water of vanity, in the other the wind of vexation of spirit. Its
counted miraculous to find a Diamond in a Vein of Gold; but its more miraculous
to find a Heavenly Christ in the bosom of an earthly Christian.

When we have the least of creature enjoyments, we should then bless God for
them, When we have the most of creature enjoyments we should not then bless our
selves in them.

The^ world it does us more hurt in our hearts by loving it, then it does us
good in our hands by having it. Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for
the meat that endures to everlasting life, John 6. 27. Who would loose a Crown
above, for a Crum below?

Birds the higher they are in their flights, the sweeter they are in their
notes; The higher a Christian is raised above the things of the earth, the more
he is ravished with the joys of Heaven. Surely every man walks in a vain
show: surely they are disquieted in vain: he heapeth up riches, and knows not
who shall gather them, Psalm. 39. 6. He that views an Ox grazing in a fat
Pasture, Ampla, ac locuples facultas perditionem infe^r dicitur; refugienda est
ampla possessio, ne consequatur profunda perditio. Salv. ad Eccles. Cath. l. 2.
p. 404.
concludes he is but preparing for the slaughter.

Worldly enjoyments they are but like hot water, which when cold weather comes
are the soonest frozen. The greatest happiness of the creature, is not to have
the creature for its happiness: Better not to have the world at all, then to
have our all to be the world. The Raven when it had found a C^rrion to feed
upon, cared not for returning home to the Arc.

The world its like a Looking-glass, there is a face presented by it, but
there is no face seated in it. When you have sifted out its finest flower it
turns to Bran. Labor not to be rich, Proverbs 23. 4. A strange paradox, if it
were not for labor, who would be rich? and if it were not for riches, who
would labor? But see verse. 5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not?
whilst they are, they are not. They are not that they look like, they have not
that we look for: But what are they not? They are not durables but movables;
For In hedera qua delectabatur Jonas, parabat Deus vermem ut exarescet; ita in
rebus mundanis quibus amore multi adhaerescunt, nihil est stabile, sed vermes
corruptionis in illis nascuntur. Gerhard. Medit. 38.
riches certainly make themselves wings and fly away as an Eagle toward
Heaven.

The Cup that now overflows with Wine, may be filled up to the brim with Water.
When the Sun of earthly happiness is in its Miridian Rays it may be eclipsed.
A man rejoices in health, and an Ague shakes him; In honor, and a Cloud
shadows him; In riches, and a Thief robs him; In peace, and a rumor disturbs
him; In life, and death disappoints him.

The Heavens at first had their Dropsy, and then the old world was drowned;
the Heavens at last shall have their Feavor, and then the new world shall be
burned.

The earth its big in our hopes, but little in our hands; Its like Sodoms
Apples, beautiful Nascuntur pomacirca regionem Sodomae, quae delectant
exteriori pulchritudine, sed contacta in pulverem abeunt: Pelicitas hujus vitae
exterius delectat, quid si pressiori considerations eam tangas, fumo et pulveri
similis apparebit. Gerhard. ubi prius.
to the eye at a distance, but when you touch them they crumble into ashes.
Riches avail not in the day of wrath; not in the day of man's wrath to keep him
from plundering; not in the day of Gods wrath to keep him from punishing.

They are but a shield of wax against a Sword of power: They can no more keep
an evil conscience from tormenting, then a Velvet sleeve can keep a broken arm
from akeing.

Fire say some came down from Heaven, therefore restlessely works it self
through all combustibles till it returns thither again: Every spiritual soul is
Heavens freeborn flame, raked up in the Embers of flesh and blood, therefore
restlessely works it self through all combustibles till it returns thither
again. He that comes from above, is above all, John 3. 31. Shall they who are
so Nobly descended, be ignobly minded?

Do but see how the men of the world are upon their knees for the things of the
world: There be many that say, Who will show us Carnales homines vaga, et
incerto cursu huc, illuc feruntur, ad bonum optatu^ adipiscendum -- qualibet
inani specie boni capiuntur quod in communi tantum et incerto petunt. Ames. in
loc.
any good? Psalm. 4. 6. As if they could find a Heaven on Earth, that should
seek an Earth from Heaven.

It was a wretched expression of a worldly disposition; Let but God give me
enough of earth, and I will never complain of the want of Heaven. Thus is the
curse of the Serpent intailed upon the seed of the Serpent; there is more of
earth in them, then there is of them in earth. All these things will I give
thee, if thou will fall down and worship me, Matthew. 4. 9. If a covetous man had
been there; O how would he have caught the promise out of the Devils lips, for
fear he should have gone back from his word!

Some are so in love with their golden Baggs, that they will ride post to Hell
if they be well paid for their pains.

Covetousness smothers Holiness, as the damp of the earth puts out the
Candle. This world it is a stinking Dunghill, wherein the Rich are like Cocks
crowing upon it, and the poor like Chickings scraping about it: These hungry
souls for want of better fare falls aboard upon such course cheer: Tha'ts the
Fifth.

6. Principle that you should walk by, is this; That duties can never have too
much care bestowed upon them, nor too little confidence placed in them.
Therefore Brethren we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh,
Romans 8. 12. We owe nothing to our corruption, but it is crucifixian: But when
God becomes a Donor, man becomes a debtor. The debt of sin is discharged for
us, that the debt of service might be discharged by us.

Every thing has it is bounds, but grace has none; in sollid godliness there
can be no excess. Those wells that are of Gods digging, can never be too full
of water. He loves to see the plants of righteousness laden with the fruits of
righteousness.

Though faith justifies separatim a bonis operibus, yet not seperata a bonis
operibus: Though faith justifies alone, yet that faith is Sola particula
exclusiva additur non ad seperandas alias virtutes a fide, aut ab homine
justificato a quibus seperari non possunt, magis quam lux a sole, aut calor ab
igne: sed a causando justificationem, vel ut praeparationes, vel merito, aut
dignitate sua. Scharp. de just: controvers. 7. Consule etiam Davent. de just:
act. cap. 32. prope finem.
not alone that justifies: Look what Trees are without their fruits, that faith
is without it is works. In point of Sanctification good works cannot be
sufficiently magnified; in point of Justification good works cannot be
sufficiently nullified.

The most famous Pilots of the Roman Sea, when they came within the fight of
the shore, have quitted the bottom of merit, to sail in the bark of mercy,
crying out, Tutissimum est in sola Dei misericordia acquiescere.

Most that perish, it is not their disease that kills them, but their
physician; they think to cure themselves, and that leaves themselves incurable.
Good works are so indigent as no man can be saved Bona opera sunt necessaria ad
salutem ratione praesentiae, at non efficientiae. Id. in Cont. 11. De hac re
vid: Davent. de just. act. cap. 31. conclus. 4, 5, 7. page 402. etc.
by them, and yet they are so excellent as no man can be saved without them.

It should be with Christ's members as it is with the skillful Mariners, Oculus
ad Coelum, manus ad clavum, we should have our eyes on the Stars, but our hands
on the stern. Man is a creature apt to hug himself in his Religious duties;
but he will run himself into new debts, that thinks thus to pay off old scores.
Now we know that whatsoever things the Law says, it says to them that are
under the Law; that every mouth may be stopped, Romans 3. 19. How shall any Nolo
meritum quod gratiam excludat, horreo quicquid de meo est, ut sim meus etc.
Bern. in Cant. Ser. 67.
mouth be opened, when every mouth is stopped? will thou plead innocence to
him, who sees thy black flesh under thy white feathers, and your foul hearts
under your fair acts?

Good works they are our Jacob's staff to walk Per scalam meritorum nemo
potest ascendere in cae^um, nisi ea servetur integra, et ab imo ad summum
minime intercisa, aut interrupt^. Davent. ubi prius.
with upon earth, but not our Jacobs ladder to clime with to heaven. To lay the
salve of our services, upon the sore of our sins, is as if a man that is
stung with a wasp should wipe his face with a Nettle; or as if one should go
about to support a tottering fabric with a firebrand.

When the river fails us in it is water, we then look up to the clouds for
moisture: Duties if Christ breaths not in them, a Christian grows not under
them. Pure Elements yields no pure nourishments.

It was not the clay and the spittle that cured the blind man, but Christ's
Lutum solet magis excaecare. Aquin. in loc.
anointing his eyes with them: that was more likely to make a seeing man blind,
then to make a blind man see.

It was not the troubling of the water in the Pool of Bethesda that made them
healing, but the coming down of the Angel. That stomach will remain
unsatisfied, that feeds on the dish instead of the meat.

If the Sun shine the Dial may direct us, but if the Sun be down the Dial
cannot instruct us: When the lightnings of Divine fury flashes in our eyes, and
the Cannons of the Laws curses thunders in our ears; as fast as you lay on
your own plasters, a convinced conscience will rub them off again.

Man may spread the net of duty, but it is God must make the draught of mercy.

Others they walk by this principle, That much is too little for themselves,
but a little is too much for God: But as you can never see him according to the
greatness of his Majesty, so you can never serve him according to the
goodness of his mercy.

St. Paul when he writes about the reception of a runaway servant, Phillemon
19. Thou owe to me thine own self. We do not only owe our services to God,
but we owe our selves to God. Good works though they be Adjudicat caelum
(devs) ut operu^ mercedem piis, et fide* libus, non tamen virtute meriti
humani, sed promissi divini. Dav. cap. 33.
temporal in their performing, yet they are eternal in their rewarding.

The body may as well live without any diet; as the soul can live without any
duty. But none of those things move me; neither count I my life dear to my
self, so that I may finish my course with joy, Acts 20. 24. Did Christ lay
down his life to obtain the purchase of Heaven? and shall not we lay out our
lives to obtain the possession of Heaven? Is it worth his passion? and is it
not worth our action? Alas, what is our sweat to his blood!

What could he do more then dye for us? and what can we do less then live to
him? To whom much is given of them much shall be required. You that are
Christians, can you find me out that good that is not given to you, or that
evil that is not forgiven in you? God he deserves more from every Christian,
then he demands from any Christian.

And as duties can never have too much conscience used about them, so they can
never have too little confidence placed on them. So likewise ye, when ye shall
have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable
servants, we have done that which was our duty to do, Luke 17. 10. Not only
when all is to be done, but when all has been done. God has no need of us,
for he is from everlasting without us blessed; but we have need of God, for we
are to everlasting without him cursed.

We must live in obedience, but we must not live on obedience. Duties they are
via ad regnum, Opera bona haereditatem nobis in caelis paratam tantummodo, ut
via, ac conditio in haeredibus requisita praecedunt. Synop. par. Theol: in
disp: de bon. oper. Vide etiam Rivet. in Ps. 32. verse. 1. juxta fin.
not causa regnandi. Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to
give you a Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. Heaven is not the product of man's labor, but
it is the product of Gods pleasure.

The Mariners will row hard in a storm, to get to the shore by their own
power, before they will awake him with a save us Master, or we perish. He
becomes a Malefactor, Dignitas bonorum operum non ex illorum merito, sed ex
sola dei gratia aestimanda est; nam si Deus illa secundum legis suae rigorem
examinaret; censura potius ob imperfectionem suam digna essent, quam favore, ac
beneficio ipsius.
that comes not to a Mediator. All our operations are clothed with
imperfections there is aliquid infectivum, and aliquid defectivum. Our most
sublime and spiritual duties, are not wound up to the height of a Command: They
are all tainted with a disproportion to the Golden Rule; as the Moon shines in
a lower and inferior Chamber to the Sun.

If you lay too much weight upon the pillars raised by your own hands, you will
pull the whole building upon your own heads; So then its not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy; Romans 9. 16.
Its not of him that wills, though it be never so heartily; nor of him that runs,
though it be never so hastily: Our Crown of Glory is made by mercy.

Our working is not the cause of Gods grace, but Ipsa salut hominis non debetur
alicui per aliquam ejus voluntatem, vel exteriorem operationem quae dicitur
cursus; sed procedit ex sola Dei misericordia. Aquin. in loc.
but Gods grace is the cause of our working: Man may do something against it,
but man can do nothing without it. Its ill hanging the great weight of
Eternity, upon the small Wiers of Activity. The boundless life of felicity,
flows from the bottomless love of the Deity: That Is the sixth.

7. Principle that you should walk by, is this; That there is no obtaining what
is promised, but by fulfilling what is commanded. As those which were under the
Law were not without a Gospel to save them, so those that are under the Gospel
are not without a Law to rule Lex moral is non minus ad Christianos pertinet
sub novo, quum ad Judae nos subvetere Testando. Synops. Pur. Theol. disp. 18.
them. What God has put asunder let no man join together; but what God has
joined together let no man put asunder. It Is as ill divorcing what is united, as
it is uniting what is divorced. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye
shall Quasi dixisset, id quo vobu opus est, petite; Non conceditur quod
petitis? Quaerite, Negatur quod quaerites ^ Pulsate Deus vult cogi. Arrowsin.
Tact. sacr. l. 3. cap. 1. sect. 11.
find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you, Matthew 7. 7. Continued
Importunity is the most learned Oratory; repeated knocks soonest opens
heavengates. Man cannot blame God for not giving, but God can blame man for not
asking: He that inables us to find him, he enjoins us to seek him; He that has
promised us to open that we might not be doubtful, has enjoined us to knock
that we might not be sloathful.

He that will not hear Debet se ei via morum conformare, in via justitiae,
charitatis, et patientiae, etc. et haec est via Coeli, non seculi; Dei non
Mundi. Gorram. in loc.
the voice of Christ, shall never see the face of Christ He that says He
abides in him, ought to walk even as he also walk, 1 John 2. 6. Then only does
the Watch of our lives move with uprightness, when it is set by the beams of
the Sun of Righteousness.

As he has made his glory to be the pattern of our happiness, so he has made
his grace to be the pattern of our holiness.

The Law condemns those persons as criminal that pretends to the Royal blood,
but are not of it, because there is a dependence between the blood Royal and the
Crown Royal. I know the blasphemy of them, which say they are Jews, and are
not, but are the Synagogue of Satan, Revel: 2. 9. Many would be made like
Christ in Bliss, who would not be made like Christ in Grace; They would have a
promise to corroberate their assurance, but would not have a precept to
regulate their performance.

Observe the connection; The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the
Lord is our King, he will save us, Isa. 33. 22. Where ever Christ is a Priest
for Redemption, he is a Prince for Dominion; Wherever he Non rebellibus, sed
meum credentibus, et ei obedientibus est causa sufficiens salutis aeternae,
Gor. in loc.
is a Savior, there he is a Ruler: And being made perfect, he became the
Author of eternal salvation, unto all them that obey him; Heb. 5. 9.

Jesus Christ where he is a fountain of happiness, there he is a fountain of
holiness; If he be not your Refiner, he will not be your Redeemer: And those
mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them bring hither and
slay before me; Luke 19. 27. Its here the voice of rebelious sinners, we will
not have this man to reign over us, and it will hereafter be the voice of a
righteous Savior, I will not have these men to reign with me. As many as walk
according to this rule, peace be upon them, Gala. 6. 16. To tread in any other
path on Earth, is but to mistake your way to Heaven.

If the Golden Chains of duty will not hold you, Jussasme culsa non
neglig^ntur, sine crimine non co^temnan^ur, ubique enim et neglectus
culst^bi^e., et contemptus d^mnabi^is est. Bern: de praec: and dispens.
the Iron Chains of darkness shall bind you: If you abuse your liberty in one
world, you will loose your liberty in another: Blessed are they that do his
Commandemen^s, that they may have right to the tree of life, Revel. 22. 4.

To look upon a promise without a pr^cept is the Road way to presumption; To
look upon a precept without a promise is the Road way to desparation; the one
is like the Lead to the Net to keep it from floating, the other is like the
Cork to the Net to keep it from sinking.

Believers should be like the point in the compass, that is governed not by the
various winds, but by the constant Heavens. An obedient person when hisbody is
translated from life to death, his soul is translated from death to life. O do
not make him to be a Quam miserum est ex eo flore vene^um colligere, equo alii
remedium sugunt
stone for stumbling, that God has made to be a stone for building.

The force of the fire is manifested as much in consuming the dross, as in
refining the Gold.

The strength of a Rock is seen not only in upholding the house that is built
upon it, but in breaking the ships that dashes against it. The pillar of a
Cloud was as wonderful in the darkness that it cast upon the Egyptians, as in
the brightness that it gave to the Israelites.

Thus does the Lord Jesus display the greatness of his own power, in putting
off the living to death, as well as in raising of the dead to life: Come unto
me all ye thatlabour, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Matthew
11. 28. But what follows? verse. 29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me.
Wherever he takes a burden from off the creatures back, there he lays a yoke
upon the creatures neck. The Gospel it gives a pardon to the greatest sin, but
it does not give a patronage to the smallest sin.

To be lascivious because God is gracious, what is this but to split that ship
in the Sea, which should Land us at the Shore? To live in a holy obedience to a
Heavenly Father is the liberty of Gods sons, but to give lust the swinge is the
licentious bondage of the Devils slaves.

That soul was never related to Christ, that was never devoted to Christ. Not
every Observa quomodo Christus ponit discrimen inter judicium Dei, et hominum
in culis principum bonum est dicere Domine Domine, quia ^dulatores, qui dulcia
et suavia auribus personant, sunt plurimae aestimationis apud eos. Multo aliter
erit in Regno Coeli, ibi enim cor no strum majoris erit valoris, quam phalerata
verba et bona conscientia plus aestimabitur, quam crumena nummis onusta. Stella
in Luc: cap. 6. verse. 46.
one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven;
but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven, Matthew 7. 21.
Obedience and Subjection to the will of God is not only our present duty, but
it is the paved Causy to our future glory: To think that he should perform the
Obligation, when we brake the Condition, is as if a man should expect to see
the blood in his body before his Vein be opened; or as if one should go about
to wash his hands before he had turned the Cock to let out the water.

Would you have the grain to be reaped, before ever the ground be sowed? So run
that you may obtain. There Is no obtaining the prize of happiness, without
running the race of holiness. In vain does that husbandman look for a Harvest
that throws his Plough into the hedge.

Sitting birds are Fowlers marks. The only way never Quod nisi et assiduis
terran. insectaberrnestris. Hou, magnum alterius frustra spectabis acervum.
Virg. Georg. l. 1.
to be ill employed, is never to be unimployed. When men are out of the way of
their callings, its easy to call men out of their way.

God works with means, and he works without means; With them, to show that man
should use the means, and yet ever rely upon God; without them, to show that
man should rely upon God, and yet ever use the means.

Jacob he makes his prayers to a Heavenly Father, and yet presents his gifts to
an angry Brother. David when he went out against Goliath, he makes the name of
the Lord his trust, and yet a Sling and a Stone his Weapons.

The Sword of Joshua must go along with the Prayers of Moses; and the Prayers
of Moses must go along with the Sword of Joshua: If they had fought and had not
prayed they had not obtained the victory, because God will not be neglected. If
they had prayed and not fonght, they had not obtained the victory because God
will not be tempted; This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus
Christ, 1 John 5. 6. Christ does not come by blood without any water, nor by
water without any blood; He comes not to pardon and to leave the soul unpurged,
nor to purge and to leave the soul unpardoned.

Where ever the merit of Christ does clear a soul from what is guilty, the
Spirit of Christ does cleanse a soul from what is faulty. A man may be
justified without immediate glorification, but he cannot be justified without
concomitant sanctification. The Law is as dear to God by which he rules us, as
the Gospel is dear to us by which he saves us.

Many there be that use faith as an eye to see withal, that do not use it as a
hand to work withal; they look for victory, but do not fight to obtain it;
Arise therefore and be doing, and the Lord be with thee, 1 Chronicles. 22. 16.
Without God man can do nothing, and without man God will do nothing.

That faith which sets men at work against Gods enemies within them, that faith
sets God at work against men's enemies without them. Man's prayers Sunt
promissiones quibus (Deus) tanquam placidissimus conselator solatur, eas tamen
absque petitionibus impleri minime promittit -- Orati^^^s igitur usus ad
promissa divina in nobis implenda, tutissimum et certissimum, atque infallibile
medium est. Bzo. Con. 17. p. 159.
are the Mid-wives of Gods promises; the promises they are the Wels of comfort
for our succor, but prayer is the Bucket that must draw up their water. Here
the Crop which you gather will out-go the Seed which you seatter; that is the
seventh.

8. Principle that you should walk by, is this; It Is ill dressing our selves
for another world, by the looking-glass of this world. Thou shall not follow a
multitude to do evil, Exodus 23. 2. Let them be never so mighty they are not
to be feared, let them be never so many they are not to be Pusillus dicitur
grex electorum, respecta majoris numeri reproborum. Beda a Gor. in Luc. 12. 32.
citat. Est ergo falsum, et arenosum Jesuitarum fundamentum, quo Ecclesiae suae
certitudinem super multitudine adhaerentium, et sectantium fundatam esse
contendunt. Chemn. Har. Evan. cap. 110. p. 2068.
followed.

Satan's heard of swine is larger then Christ's flock of Sheep. To infer that
way to be the truest which is the largest, is to conclude the fineness of the
cloth, by the broadnesse of the list.

The droves of men are like the droves of beasts that goes to the shambles.
Though all Israel shall be as the sands on the shore, yet but a remnant shall
be saved, Romans 9. 27. The whole piece goes to the Devil; there is but a remnant
that is cut off for God: There Is many birds of prey to one bird of Paradise.
Pibbles lie in common streets, when pearls are hardly to be found.

The Scripture does not only present us with the Christus fideles, vocat (...),
quia colletione cum Sacerdotibus, Pharisaeis, et reliquo Judaeorum caetu
instituta, et numero sunt pauciores, et aestimatione viliores. Id. Ibid.
purity of those that shall be saved, but with the paucity of those that shall
be saved: Strait is the Gaete, and narrow is the way that leads unto life,
and few there be that find it, Math. 7. 14. The Persians thought a crooked nose
a great ornament, because seated on the face of their Emperor; and the whole
Court would go awry, because such a neck was upon the shoulders of Alexander.

Great men's vices are more imitated, then poor men's graces. Ill hnmours from
the head consumes the vitalls in the body: Inferiors love to go the way which
superiors use to go; the actions of their Rulers, is the Rule of their
actions; they conceive by the eye, like Jacobs sheep which produced their Lambs
suitable to the color of the rods.

They who follow after others in sinning, are like to follow after others in
suffering; and then the number of the faggots, will but multiply the fury of
the fire. Many are called but few are chosen, Math. 20. 16. Its not many are
chosen, but few are called; but many are called, but few are chosen.

Never think to find the golden Oar but in Veins. In heaven are the best
fruitions, but in hell are the most companions. Believers, though their natures
are the sweetest, yet their numbers are the smallest.

Flavus Vopiscus said, That all the names of the good Emperors might be
engraven in a little Ring. I will not say there are not any good men that are
great, but I will say that there are not many great men that are good.

The Trees of righteousness are thinly planted in the worlds Orchard. As in
one righteous man there are many sins, so for one righteous man there are many
sinners. Our fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set
on edge. The generallity of persons, they will rather walk in the way that the
most go, then they will walk in the way that the best go: They are like dead
fish, that swims down the stream whither soever it runs; or like water that
takes the figure of the Vessel in which it is contained. But Vox populi is
sometimes Vox Diaboli: what is engraven upon the seal, is imprinted upon the wax.

If we will not have the world to be our leaders, we shall be sure to have them
to be our troublers; if they cannot seduce us into an evil way, they will
oppose us in a good one; If they cannot scorch us with their fire, they will
black us with their smoke, speaking evil of you, because you run not to the
same excess of riot; because they will not do evil with them, therefore they
will say evil of them. We must not walk in the way that has been gone, but in
the way that should be gone: Be ye followers of those, who through faith and
patience have inherited the promises. What Is the reason that there are so many
scribbling professors in the world, but that they write after such imperfect
Copies.

The best of men are but men at the best: It Is better imitating of an evil man
in what is good, then it is imitating of a good man in what is evil. Be ye
followers of me, 1. Cor. Exempla sanctorum non sunt nobis imitanda, nisi
quat^nus consentanea sunt cum lege Dei, et cum Christi exemplis; ideo neque
Apostolus simpliciter dixit imitatores mei estote, sed adjecit, sicut ago
Christi. Zanch. de not. Dei. l. 3. c. 3. ult. fere verb.
11. 1. But this Exhortation has its limitation, as I am of Christ: Where he
follows Christ, we must follow him; but if Paul forsake Christ, we may forsake
Paul.

It was a good saying of Sir Thomas More, I will not pin my faith upon any man's
sleeve, because I know not whither he will carry it. Believers have not only
infirmities that are natural, but they have infirmities that are sinful. When
they begin to be spirit, they do not cease to be flesh. Noah was no sooner
delivered from a deluge of water, but he was drowned in a deluge of wine. Their
failings flow not from a want of grace, but from a want in grace; not from a
nullity in holiness, but from an impotency in holiness: As they are not so bad
as they have been, so they are not so good as they shall be: those Roses that
are now in Gratia est adhuc in augmento, at postea erit in (...) seu
complemento. Davent. de just. act. cap. 34.
their blossom shall be fully blown; and the Stars that are yet imprisoned
under a cloud, shall be set in a clear sky.

They are but slovenly Christians, that will swallow all that believers do
without pairing their actions: The Comment must be followed no further then it
agrees with the Text.

Say not in your hearts, Multi sua peccata tegere volunt, et defendere exemplo
Davidis, et aliorum, quorum paenitentiam imita^^ opo^^ebat, non little peccata:
utere exemplis bonorum, illosque in bonis actibus imitare. Stella in Luc. c. 4.
verse. 27.
why may not I be drunk as well as Noah? and commit Adultery as well as David?
Did you ever hear of any that put out their eyes, because others were smitten
with blindness? or that cut off their legs, because others went on Crutches?

If you have sinned as they have sinned, you should mourn as they have mourned:
These acts are not for our imitation, but for our caution; they are not
Landmarks for Travelers, but Sea-marks for Mariners. If a man find a piece of
gold covered with dirt, will he possess himself with the dirt, and throw away
the gold. You have heard of the patience of Job; James 5. 11. We have not
Apostolus commondat Job cum tamen Coeco impetu abreptus, multa impatientiae
signa edidit, at etiamsi carnis infirmitate labascit, vol secum tumultuatur,
hu^ tamen semper redibat, ut se^otum Deo permitteretea. Calvin Loc.
only heard of Jobs patience but we have heard of Jobs impatience; instead of
cursing the sin in which he was born, he curses the season in which he was born.

You have heard of the meekness of Moses; and yet this even thread was not
without its snarles: whilst he is striking water out of the Rock, he is
fetching fire out of his heart, And Peter not only forsakes his Lord, but
forswears his Lord.

Who would ever have suspected that he who had his name from a Rock, should
have proved such a Reed. Holy men they may be good Witnesses at the Bar, but
they are bad Judges on the Bench.

If you will not turn your backs on Egypt, you may fall short of the Land of
Canaan.

It was the complaint of one in his time, That the greater thieves did
execution upon the lesser; But when God comes to pass Sentence he will bring
the biggest to the Bar; his Laws are not like Cob-webs which holds the little
flies prisoners, but the great ones break with small resistance; He will set
the Saddle upon the back of the right Horse.

Though you may have many under you upon Earth, yet you have one over you which
is in Heaven. The Lord called to Adam and said unto him, where art thou? Genesis
3. 9. Not where were thou? but where art thou? Oh how quickly have thou
morgaged that inheritance which I so lately settled on thee in Paradise! The
woman that thou gave me, she gave me of the Tree and I did eat, Genesis 3. 12.
Because she put it into his hands, therefore he put it into his mouth.

The brats of sin are so ugly when they are brought forth, that we are loath to
own them our selves, therefore lay them at the doors of others.

The stable Mountains are not so firm but they may be removed by Non igitur
imitandi sunt fideles, quatenus homines, sed quatenus in eis resplendet imago
Dei. Bzov: Conc: 12. Page 119.
fearful Earthquakes: Those Saints that have been as the greatest Stars, have
left behind them their twinklings and sad Eclipses.

9. Principle that you are to walk by, is this; That where man is so dilligent
as to do his best, there God is so indulgent as to forgive his worst. What an
apology does a waking Savior make for his sleeping Saints; The Spirit is
willing, but the flesh is weak. Take a carnal man, and what he can do that he
will not; take a Christian man, and what he would do that he cannot.

Now impotency shall be pityed, when obstinacy shall be punished. God has
mercy for cannots, but none for will nots: Adams want was rather will then
power, but our want is rather power then will. Psalm. 119. 5. O that my ways
were directed, Emitto vocem cupientis, et antrelantis -- Donec liberati simus
semper clamabimus utinam! Suspirabimus ex sensu imbecilitatis nostrae, Donec
gaudium plenum sit infruitione. Rivet: in loc.
that I might keep thy statutes. A Saints will begins, where his work ends.
Lord I believe, help my unbelief; Lord I see, enlighten my darkness; I hear,
but cure my deafness; I move, but quicken my dullness; I desire, but help my
unwillingness; I remember, but remove my forgetfulness.

In the playing of a Lesson a single string may jarr and slip, and yet the main
be musical; It were a folly indeed to think our fields had no corn, because
there is chaff, or that the pile had no Gold, because there is Dross. In Heaven
there is service alone without any sin, In hell there is sin alone without any
service, but on earth there is sin and service in the same heart, as there is
Wine and Water in the same Cup. To condemn thy evil is good, but to condemn thy
good is evil. Here believers are like the Israelites, that in their darkest
night had a pillar of fire, and in their clearest day had a pillar of a cloud:
Above us there is light without any darkness, below us there is darkness without
any light, but here its neither day nor night, but in the evening it shall be
light.

Though the lowest believer be above the power of sin, yet the highest believer
is not above the presence of sin. Its in a living man that lust is mortified,
but its in a dying man that lust is nullified.

When the body and the soul are separated by mortality, sin and the soul are
separated to eternity: though a forced compulsion is sufficient to testify a
Tyrant, yet its ready obedience that proves homage to a King.

Sin never ruins, but where it reigns. Its not destroying where it is
disturbing: Lust its least hurtful where it is most hateful. The more evil it
receives from us, the less evil it does to us; its only a murderer, where it
is a Governor.

But the Rose is a fragrant flower though it be surrounded with prickles. The
Passover was a feast though it was eaten with sour Herbs.

There Is much of the wild Olive in him that's ingrafted into the true Olive: Our
graces are our best Jewels, but they do not here yield their full luster. The
Moon when it shines brightest has its spots, and the fire when it burns
hottest has its smoke. I said in my have, I am cut off from before thine eyes,
nevertheless Intalem stupori, excessum adductus fui, ut mihi viderer projectus
a conspectu praesentiae tuae; tu vero, exaudita mea oratione, quanto ejus ad
fuisti per subventionem et consolationem misericordiae tuae. Titelman in Locum.
thou heardest the voice of my supplication, Psalm. 31. 22. Who would have
thought that ever those prayers should have had any prevalency, that were mixed
with so much infidelity.

Sin is an enemy at our backs, but not a friend in our bosoms. Although
believers should be mournful because they have infirmities, yet they should be
thankful because they are but infirmities. It is not the Interposition of a
cloud that makes a night, but the departing of the Sun.

Take the best believer that breaths and he is fuller of his sins then he is of
his prayers. There is too much of earth in our employments for Heaven. But as
he that drew Alexanders picture, when there was a scar on his facedrew him with
his finger upon the scar; so Jesus Christ when he draws the picture of the
Saints excellencyes, lays his finger upon the scars of the Saints infirmities.

He looks over what is his, and overlooks what is theirs; Where there is no
sins of allowance in them, there shall be grains of allowance to them: he will
not throw away his Pearls for every speck of dirt.

Christ honors grace in its maturity, yet he owns it in its minority. O thou
of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? They had faith enough to keep them
from damning, but they had not faith enough to keep them from doubting.

The least buds draw sap from the root, as well as the greatest branches.
Though one Star exceed another in magnitude, yet both are alike seated in the
Heavenly Orb: Though one member of the body be larger then another, yet each
has an equal conjunction with the head.

The Rind of good actions is tainted by infirmities, but their Core is rotted
by hypocrisy. Jacob halted and yet was blessed: as his blessing did not take
away his halting, so his halting did not keep away his blessing.

Hagar will have a room in Sarahs house, till death turn her out of doors.
Death as it leaves the body soul-lesse, so it leaves the soul sinlesse, For if
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and
not according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8. 12. He does not look that the Cock
should run water, when there is none put into the Cistern.

Jesus Christ does not put out a believers Vae nobis si secundum firmitatem
fidei Deus nobiscum agere vell^^. Chem: Har: Evan: cap. 83. p. 15. 85.
Candle, because of the dimness of its burning, nor overshadow a believers Sun
because of the watriness of its shining.

Though that Vice may be found in us, for which he might justly damn us, yet he
has not lost that grace by which he can as easily save us. He comes not with
water to put out the fire, but with wind to drive away the smoke.

The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, (Pro: 15. 8.)
because the Incense stinks of the hand that offers it. Not only the wickeds
plotting against the Godly is sinful, but also the wickeds praying unto God is
sinful: but what follows, The prayer of the upright is his delight. If the
vessel of the heart be clean, he will taste of the liquor that is drawn from it:
O my Dove! that art in the clefts of the Rock, in the secret places of the
Stare^; lee me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely, 2 Canticles 14. That Is the ninth.

10. Principle you should walk by, is this; That inward purity, is the ready
road to outward plenty; That Is but a Hell-bred Proverb, ^lain dealing is a
Jewel, but he that uses it shall dye a beggar.

Religion though it be against our ease, yet its not against our interest. O
what clusters of Grapes hang all along our way to Canaan! Its a true expression
of Tertullian, Major esset authoritas imperantis quamutili^as servientis; That
Divine authority should be of greater force, then humane utility: But Religion
is so bountiful a Master, that none need be afraid of becoming its servants:
But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you, Matthew 6. 33. Our work below is the best done,
when our work above is the first done. Do you make Heaven your Throne to serve
it; and God will make the earth your footstool to serve you. The young Lions
lack, and suffer hunger, Psalm. 34. 10. The young Lions that have old ones to
provide for them, that will have it if it be to be had; but they that seek the
Lord shall not want any good thing. As you would have no evil things, so you
shall want no good things.

He that opens the upper, will never close the lower springs: There shall be no
silver lacking in Benjamins Sack whilst Joseph has it to throw in: grace is
no such beggarly blaze, as will not pay for its own blowing. when the best of
beings is adored, the best of blessings are convayed.

Whilst the rough Esau's of the time hunt after the Venison, the smooth Jacobs
carry away the blessing. For the Lord God is a Sun and Eum, qui tam pretiosa
largitur, qualiter pigebit erga voselementiam exercere. Aquin: in 8. ad Romans v.
32.
a Shield, the Lord will give grace and glory; and no good thing will he
withhold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84. 11. What need he fear
darkness that has a Sun to guide him? Or they dread dangers, that have a
shield to guard them?

O Christian, the God whom thou servest is so excellent, that no good can be
added to him, and so infinite that no good can be diminisht in him: he makes
happy, and yet is not the less happy; he shows mercy to the full, and yet
remains full of mercy.

Did a man believe that the Lord would not fail his body, how cheerfully would
he look after his soul! Sinners they look upon times of obedience, as upon
times of hindrance; they trust to their own unutterable toylings, and not to
his unalterable undertakings; they drive such a trade on earth, as makes them
break in their merchandise for Heaven.

But what the Philospher said, Solus sapiens dives, That only the wise man is
the rich man; That may I say Solus sanctus dives, Though every rich man be not
one that is truly godly, yet every Godly man is one that is truly rich.

The Sun can as easily display its Beams over the whole world, as shed its
Rays upon a single field: What God receives from man makes him never the
richer, and what man receives from God makes him never the poorer; his
goodness is capable of imparting, but his goodness is not capable of
impairing.

If the fountain be still running, why should thou fear the want of filling?
The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want, Psalm. 23. 1. The sheep of Christ
may change their pasture, but they shall never want their pasture. Is not the
life more then meat? and the body then raiment? Matthew 6. 25. If he trust us
with the greater, shall we distrust him for the lesser? He that has given us
our beings, will give us our blessings, the great husbandman never
over-stocked his own Commons.

Jehu had an external Kingdom that served God but in hypocrisy; but they shall
have a heavenly Kingdom that serve God in sincerity: if he valued counterfeit
coin at so great a rate, how highly will he esteem of true gold! If he drops
so much into a vessel of wrath, what will he do into a vessel of mercy! If he
do so much for a slave of hell, what will he do for a son of Heaven! O
Generation, see the word of the Lord: Have I been a wilderness unto Israel? a
land of darkness? Wherefore say my people, we are Lords, we will come no more
unto thee, Jer. 2. 31. God was not a wilderness to Israel, when Israel was in
the wilderness; when they wanted bread, he gave them Manna from Heaven to
satisfy their hunger; when they wanted water, he broacht a Rock to quench
their thirst; and though they had no new clothes provided for them, yet their
old clothes did not wear out upon them; but as some think, as their backs
grew, so their clothes grew: yea, when they were put to their hardest pinch, he
made a dry lane, with watery walls, through the deep channells of the Red Sea.
They were never better liking, then when they were at his immediate finding.

O how good is a believers God! that does not only shorten his pilgrimage for
him, but sweetens his pilgrimage to him. Christians if they had too much in
temporalls, might then have too little in spiritualls. The three children (
Daniel 1. 15.) did thrive better with their pulse, then the rest with the
royal allowance.

O how safely have some men rowed in a narrow river, that have been cast away
in the large Ocean! Little is sufficiency to him, who with it enjoyes
Alsufficiency: Christian, get a holy heart, and thy estate in Heaven shall be
transcendent, yea, thy estate on earth shall be sufficient.

Naked piety is a good commodity; but Religion is a cloud that will water our
gardens. Let the people praise thee, O God; yea, let all the people praise
thee: What then? Then shall the earth yield her increase; and God, even our God
shall bless us, Psalm. 67. 5, 6. It Is our unthankfullnesse, that is the cause
Gratiarum a^^io ampliora a Deo beneficia impetrat. Stapl. in Dom. 3. post Epip.
tex. 5.
of the earths unfruitfullnesse. Whilst man is blessing of God for his mercies,
God is blessing of man with his mercies: Trumpeters repeat their sounding,
where an echo is returning.

What Is the reason that men are so afraid of godliness; but because they
think that when they seek for heavenly Manna, they shall loose their earthly
Mammon; That piety is the only enemy of prosperity. Could they but reap profit
by praying, they would take pleasure in praying: What is the Almighty that we
should serve him? and what profit should we have, if we pray unto him? Job 21.
15. Alas! Who would set those plants about him, that will yield no fruits unto
him?

The world they look upon gain as the highest godliness, and not upon
godliness as the highest gain: As if a worldly substance would make amends
for a wounded conscience. I am afraid that this worm that is gnawing, will
bring you to a flame that is everlasting. But godliness is profitable unto all
things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Who knows how many sweet productions, are in the womb of
this morning Sun. So that men shall say, verily, there is a reward for the
righteous: verily, there is a God that judges the earth, Psalm. 58. ult.
There Is no work that is done in vain, but that work that is vainly done.
Wealth and riches shall be in his house; and his righteousness* indures for
ever, Psalm. 112. 2, 3. Do but you take care of all that belongs to God, and
God will take care of all that belongs to you.

For all other gains, whilst we live we lose them, or when we dye, we leave
them; to whom we know not, but it may be to them we would not. Inkeeping of thy
Commandments there is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11. There is not only a reward
for keeping of them, but there is a reward in keeping of them.

In other services the Master has all the profit, and the servant none; but in
this the servant has all the profit, and the Master none, 2 Samuel 6. 11. And
the Ark of the Lord continued in the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite for three
months: and the Lord blessed Obed-Edom, and all his household. The Ark was not
blessed for the sake of the household, but the household was blessed for the
sake of the Arc. The Ark of God pays for its entertainment wheresoever it
comes.

We say that those have decayed limbs that must be helped on with crutches;
Such are they that will side with resigion when they may live upon it, but will
shrink from Religion when it must live upon them. But that maxim is still
ture, that Godliness with contentment is great gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6. It Is only the
Christian man, that is the contented man; and what is our enjoyments without
contentment? what is abundance of possessions, if linked to abundance of
vexations? Wicked men make this world their treasure, and God makes this Fiunt
instrumenta paenarum, quae (scilicet divitiae) fuerant oblectament^ culparum.
Innocent.
world their torment: When they want estates they are troubled for them; when
they have estates they are troubled with them; when they should drink of the
river, God disturbs the water.

Sinner remember, when thou die thou will find godliness needful, and
whilst thou live thou will find godliness gainful: The purest honey is ever
gathered out of the hive of holiness. O that my people had hearkened unto me;
and Israel had walked in my ways! Psalm. 81. 13. But what had they got by it?
verse. 16. He should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat; and with
honey out of the rock should I have satisfied thee.

The ways of iniquity are the ways of beggary. It Is but equal that God should
fall out with them in the course of his providence, that falls off from him in
the course of their obedience; that they should have nothing from him in a way
of bounty, that will do nothing for him in a way of duty.

If you make your Tabernacles leprous, God will make your Tabernacles ruinous.
Length of days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honor,
Prove. 3. 16. Look to which hand you will, and yet you shall find that both are
full.

It Is storied of Synesius a Minister, that living near Evagrius a philosopher,
This story you may read larger just after Mr. Baxter's Preface to his book
called the Crucifying of the world.
and had often persuaded him to be a Christian; O but says the Philosopher, if
I become a christian, either I must lose all for Christ, or else I may lose all
for Christ; to whom the Minister replied, what you lose for him he will pay you
again: O but says the philosopher, will you be bound for Christ, that if he
do not pay me you will? Yes says he, and so became a surety for his surety,
and the philosopher became a Christian: When this person came to lie upon his
dying pillow, he sent for this Minister, saying, here is your bond, Christ has
paid me all, he has left nothing for you to pay.

It was a vain conceit of that potentate, who refusing the name of Pius,
would be called Faelix. Inward piety is the best friend to outward felicity,
though outward felicity be many times the worst enemy to inward piety: That Is
the tenth.

The eleventh Principle that you should walk by, is this; That all the time
that God allows us, is little enough to fulfill the task that he allots us. Man
that is borne of a woman, is few of days, and full of troubles, Job 14. 1. The
creatures life and existence is of a very short and small continuance. Natures
womb sometimes proves natures tomb, and swallows up her own Vitae hujus
principium mortis exordium est, nec prius incipit augeri aetas nostra, quam
minui. Prosp. de vocat. Genesis lib. 2. c. 20,
issue.

With many it is ebb water, before the tide be at the full; the lamp of their
lives is wasted, even as soon as it is lighted; the sands of their hourglasse
are quite run out, when they think it is but newly turned.

When men feel sickness arresting, then they fear deaths approaching: But we
begin our dying, as soon as ever we begin our living; and how much the longer
our time has been, so much the shorter our time shall be.

Every man's passing bell hangs in his own steeple. Take him in his four
elements of Earth and Air, Fire and Water; In the Earth, he is like dust
that is scattering; in the Air, he is like a vapor that is vanishing; in the
water, he is like a bubble that is breaking; in the Fire, he is like smoke
that is consuming.

Seneca said truly, Maximum vivendi Sen. de brevit. vitae, cap. 9.
impedimentum est expectatio quae pendet in crastino, the greatest hinderance
of well living, is the expectation of long life. Therefore men so little
prepare for death, because they so little think on death; they think not of
living any better, till they think not of living any longer.

Did you but walk by this principle, though much of your time be past, yet
would no more of your time be lost; you would this moment make sure of God,
because the next moment you are not sure of your selves: One today is worth
two tomorrows; you know not how soon the sails of your lives may be rolled up,
or how nigh you are to your eternal haven: O ply your Oars dilligently, lest
the vessel do miscarry everlastingly.

What will you do if you begin to dye naturally, before you begin to live
spiritually? if the Tabernacle of nature be taken down, before the Temple of
grace be raised up? if your paradise be laid wast, before the Tree of life be
set in it? if you give up the Ghost, before ever you have received the Holy
Ghost? if the Sun of your lives set within you, before the Sun of righteousness
shine upon you? if the body be sit to be turned into the earth, before the soul
be fit to be taken into Heaven? If the second birth have no place in you, the
second Death shall have a power over you.

One excellently compares our life to a day; Infancy is as it were the day
break, youth is the Sun rising, full growth is as the Sun in it is Meridian,
and old age is as the Sun setting; by the light of the day, let us do the
work of the day. O that thou had known in this thy day, the things that do
belong to thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes, Luke 19. 42. The
dews of grace is falling, whilst the day of grace is dawning.

O how just is it, that they should miss of heaven at the last, that never
seek for Heaven till the last! That God should deny them his grace to repent,
that abuse his grace to sin!

It Is a Maxim, Omne principiatum sequitur naturam principiorum, every thing
has an aptitude of returning into the Principle of its beginning; as the
Rivers that have their eflux from the Sea, have their reflux to the Sea: Out of
the dust man was formed, and therefore into the dust man is turned.

Sirs, How much of your lives is gone, and yet how little of your works are
done! You tender plants, will you spend your youthful lives, in following of
your youthful lusts? will you hang the most sparkling Jewels of your years,
as pendents in the Devils ears?

The Egyptians sold their funeral balms in the Temple of Venus; to show that
where they prayed for their nativity, they might not forget their mortallity.

O you fresh pictures, will you not be hung in Heavens gallery? do you not know
that the blossom is as subject to nipping, as the flower to withering? and the
spark to extinguishing, as the flame to expiring?

Veins brimmed full with blood, may be emptied by an accident, as soon as those
that are leakish with old age. As there is none too old for eternity, so there is
none too young for mortallity; In Golgotha there are sculls of all sizes. You
are but green enough for reformation, that are gray enough for dissolution:
tell me, how will thou live when thou die, that art dead whilst thou live?
every step that your bodies take it is toward the earth; O that every step your
souls take might be toward Heaven.

We sin as well in not doing the good commanded, as in doing the evil
prohibited. The Vine that brings forth no Grapes, shall be cut down as well
as the Vine that brings forth wild Grapes. There Is no countermining against
the death of the body without us, but by undermining of the body of death
within us.

O how sad is it to be taken out of the world, before we are taken off from the
world! To day, if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, Heb. 3. 7.
We have but a day wherein we are called to repent, and therefore should repent
whilst it is called to day.

None sings so sweetly as the Turtle upon the Churches Walls, and all that he
may even constram sinners unto himself. He is the deafest Adder that stops his
ears to the voice of the sweetest Charmer. The Lord has made a promise to late
repentance, but he has not made a promise of late repentance: If the Tap be
not now thawed, it may be for ever frozen.

A pardon is sometimes given to a Thief on the Gallows, but he that Quospectas,
quo te extendu? Omnia quae ventura sunt in incertojacent. Seneca ubi prius.
trusts to that, sometimes has a Rope for his wages. Boast not of to morrow,
for thou know not what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27. Man is such a
pur-blind creature, that he cannot unerringly see a day before him: O see the
ending of one day before thou gloriest in the beginning of another.

Many a man's days deceives him; they pass away like a shadow by Moonshine,
that then appears longest when its nearest to an end. Thou may not have
half a day to live, Dum floret aetas, dum viget animus, operemur bonum; cum
enim vita ista transierit, auferetur tempus operandi. Arbor: in cap. 6. ad Gal.
ver. 10.
who thinks thou have not lived out half thy days, up and be doing least you
be for ever undone.

The night comes, wherein no man can work. The Grave is a Bed to rest in, but
not a Shop to trade in: There Is no setting up under ground, for those that have
lost their time above ground.

When the soul in death takes its flight from its loving maite, they shall meet
no more till the general Assizes. 2 Cor. 6. 2. Behold now is the acceptable
Vide Gor. and Arboreum in loc.
time; behold, now is the day of salvation. Now is the time for grace to accept
of you, and now is the time for you to accept of grace. Opportunities they are
for eternity, but opportunities they are not to eternity. Mercies Clock does
not strike at the sinners beck.

Where the means of grace is greatest, there the day of grace is shortest: Thou
may be unhappy all thy days for the neglect of this days happiness.

It was the sad cry of one, My life is done, but my work is undone. O that you
would employ the small remnant you have of opportunity, for the obtaining of
the whole piece of felicity; Make Hay whilst the Sun is shining; and hoyse up
Sails whilst the wind is serving: Let this be thy living day the next may be
thy dying day: Seek the Lord whilst he may be found, call upon him whilst he
is near, Isa. 55. 6.

Sirs, The sufferings of eternal death, are but the Issue of the slightings of
eternal life. Methinks the worth of such Pearls of price should sparkle in your
eyes. Will you let such a Sun set on earth, by the beams of which you should
walk to Heaven.

No disease is more fatal, then that which does reject Cordials. What asad
thing is it, that such rich Mines should be opened, and not a penny of this
treasure fall to your share? Some are gone so far in the way of sinning, that
there is small hopes of their returning.

How much time did God bestow upon you, before ever you returned any of that
time to him? It Is good to have an Ark prepared, before a Deluge come, in which
you may be overwhelmed. Man must do what he can, and leave God to do what he
will.

Though you cannot create the breath of the Spirit, yet hang out your Sails to
entertain it; Though you cannot make the Pool of Bethesda healing, yet lie at
its mouth and wait for its stirring. The longer a building goes to ruin, the
more cost it requires for reparation.

Remember that God can as easily turn you into the dust, as he could take you
out of the dust. Delays are numerous, O but delays are dangerous. Who will
look for water from a drained River? Or that wealthy Grapes should grow upon a
withered Vine?

For a man to make his best work to be his last work; what is this but as if an
Husbandman should be putting in of his Plough for the sowing of his seed, when
he should be thrusting in of his Sickle for the reaping of his Harvest. Know
that there is but one Heaven, miss of that, and where will thou take up
thylodging but in Hell? A vicious man expires and goes out like a Tallow
Candle, leaving a stench behind him; A gracious man expires and goes out like a
Wax Candle that leaves a sweet perfume behind him: That Is the Eleventh.

12. Principle that you should walk by, is this; That there can never be too
great an estrangement Naufragium sane pate meretur, qui valido spirante vento,
et toto aequore, acerba tempestate, jactato; Mare^ se tamen, vult committere,
e^ vel expandere, etc. Sic a Deo deteri, et vel in peccatum cadere, vel peccato
insistere, et immergi meretur, qui ventos, et tempestates tentationum et
occasionum peccati vitare, cum potest, non contendit, etc. Stapl: in Dom: 11.
Post. Pent. Text. 5.
from defilement. He who now gives way to sin, ere long may be given up to sin.
We are never far enough from lust, whilst we are on earth, nor near enough to
Christ till we be in Heaven.

A sound eye cannot endure the least Moat, nor a sound heart the least spot. O
stand off from the Devils mark, unless you would be hit by the Devils Arrows:
Abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 These. 5. 22. The closing with the
appearance of evil, is the next way to the accomplishing of apparent evil: A
spark of fire will easily catch in a box of Tinder; The Picture in the glass
may as well inflame, as the picture in the face; Little streams will find a
passage to the great Sea.

Restriction is a good chain to transgression; Why should thou venture on
slippery places, that can Quantum possumus, a lubrico, recedamus; in sicco
quoque parum firmiter stamus. Sen: Epist: 116.
hardly stand upon the firmest ground?

As faith is a grace that feeds all the rest, so fear is a grace that guards
all the rest. That man who is the most watehful, that man is the least sinful.
He may quickly be cast down by a sinful temptation, that is already prepared
for it by a sinful occasion; And who will pity him whose house is blown up with
Powder, that keeps his Barrels in the Chimney corner?

Yet so much monstrous wickedness is there lodged in the hearts of men, that
they add spurs and whips to that Horse that of himself rushes too fast into
the Battle; When the stream and current of their own lusts do carry them too
swiftly before, yet they hoyse up Sails to entertain the Devils winds, as if
they had not a Title strong enough to Hell, except they bargained for it a new,
and bound themselves by solemn Obligations never to part with it again.

The Fowler spreads his Net, but its the wings of the bird that carries her to
it: The way to keep temptations from entering into our souls, is to Instrantibus
(tentationibus) resistamus, quia facilius non recipiuntur, quam exeunt, et
(paulo post) nobis quia non est regredi facile, optimum est omnino non
progredi. Idem. Ibid.
keep our souls from venturing upon temptations. Do thou murmur for want of
liberty, and yet surrender up thy self to flavery?

They who will play with wantonness, will quickly learn to play the wantons. If
you will not step into the Harlots house, you must not go by the Harlots door;
If you would not gather the forbidden fruit, you must not look on the Tree on
which it grows.

To pray against temptations, and yet to rush into occasions, is to thrust our
fingers into the flaming fire, and then pray they might not be burned with its
heat.

The Fable says, That the Butterfiye ask the Owl, how she should do with the
Candle that had singed her Wings? who counseled her not so much as to behold
its smoke. If you hold the Stirrup no wonder if Satan get into the Saddle.

Temptation is a Tap to give vent to corruption. Whilst a man's clothes are on,
the scars of his body remain unseen; If you would keep the Fort Royal of your
souls, look well to the Outworks of your senses.

Preserve your eyes that they be not windows to let in lusts, that should be
floodgates to power out tears: a careless eye does often declare a graceless
heart.

Remember the whole world dyed by a wound in the eye: Who knows what
defilements are conveyed through these Casements; O the eyes of a Christian
should be like Sunflowers, that should not open to every blaze, but to the
beams of the Sun of righteousness.

Preserve your ears. To keep our eyes, and not to regard our ears, is as if a
man should shut the casements of his house, and leave the doors open. The ear
is an instrument that the Devilloves to play on. Your ears as they are joined
to your head on earth, so let them be fastened to him who is your Head in Heaven.

Preserve your tongues, least that which should be tuned for Gods glory, be not
turned into your own shame: By the striking of these Clappers we guess the
mettle of the Bell; Thou art a Galilean, thy speech bewrays thee: As every idle
word shall be arraigned, so every evil word shall be condemned.

A soul without its watch, is like a City without its walls, exposed to the
in-road of all its enemies. We need a Sun to dispel our darkness we are so
ignorant, and we need a Shield to repel our dangers we are so impotent. The
earth is not so apt to be overrun with Thorns, as the heart is apt to be
overgrown with sins.

If you would not fall into the bottom of the River, take heed of walking on
the Brink thereof. The Note that comes into the Margent will soon skip into the
Text it self. It Is storied of Alexander, that when Darius his wife (a beautiful
Lady) was taken by his Army, he refrained from often visiting of her, least he
should be ensnared by her. Those matches can never be completed, where all
treaties are rejected. He that crushes the Egg, need never fear the flight of
the Bird.

He that would not drink of the wine, must not taste of the grape; And he that
would not hear the Bell must not finger the Rope.

A man that carries Gunpowder about him, can never stand too far from
Sparkles. If we go with sin one Mile, it will compel us to go with it twain; It
will swell like the Cloud Eliah saw, from the bigness of a man's hand, to such
an expansion as to cover the sky.

If thou can not step over the narrow Brook, why do thou imagine it so
easy to stride over the swelling Ocean? Let him that thinks he stands, take
heed least he fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12. You will quickly loose your standing, if you
do not fear your falling. He that will abstain from nothing that is lawful,
will soon be brought to something that is sinful. Many a man has been thrown
out of the Saddle of profession, by ^iding with too slack a Rain of
circumspection.

Little sins are not like an inch of Candle, that goes off in an absolute
period, but they are like a Train of Powder, which takes fire from corn to
corn, till at last the Barrel is burst in sunder; Or as a little sickness
which is an humor disposing to a strong distemper. As those persons that are
way-layed by a Consumption, they loose first their vigor, and then their
color.

An honest Matron will blush to be found in the dress of an whorish wanton:
What will you lay that in the Chamber, which laid Christ in the Manger? Is your
house so largely built, that you can afford that a harbor, which you know to
be a Traitor?

Hating the very garment spotted with the flesh, Jude 23. If you would keep
your clothes from burning, be sure you keep your skirts from singing. A sick
man abhors the Cup out of which he took his loathsome physic: A believer he
disbands those Auxiliaries, that have yielded strength to his Adversaries.

If Achan handle the golden Wedg, his next work will be to steal it away; If
Ruth will lie at the feet of Boaz, her next remove is into the bed of Boaz; If
you take the Devils Cup into your hands, you will quickly lift it to your heads.

13. Principle that believers should walk by, is this; That whatsoever is
temporally enjoyed, should be spiritually improved. What we receive from the
hand of Divine bounty, we should employ to the height of Divine Glory.

Others they make an earthly use of things that are heavenly, but we should
make a heavenly use of things that are earthly, we should put a golden Bias
into a Leaden Bowl, that it may run true to him that made it. The more your
Wheels are oyled on earth, the swifter should your Chariots move to Heaven. I
say unto you make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness,
that when ye fail they may receive you into everlasting habitation, Luke 16.
9. There is a way to plume the wings of riches, and to lay up that treasure in
Heaven, which came out of the bowels of the Earth.

There is a Divine Chymestry that can extract the purest spirits out of the
most gross and fecculent matter; That can advance Flints and Pibbles into a
near resemblance to precious stones: The beast on the Altar differed not in
kind from the beast at the Slaughter.

There is a lawful craft of coining your money over again, and adding the Image
and Superscription of God to what is Caesar's. They say of the Philosophers
stone, that it turns what ever it touches into Gold: Whatever Mill a Saint has
going in the world, he should spread the Sails of it for Gods glory; when he
does set up us, then we should lift up him.

How unequal is it to be hot in our prayers, and cold in our praises; to cry
aloud, Give us this day our daily bread, and then to whisper out, Hallowed be
thy name; What Is this but to open our Windows to let in the light, and then to
close them again to keep out the Sun? or to lay a Pipe to convey the water into
the Cistern, and then turn the Cock against the Spring.

To remember God in our necessities, and to forget Omnes, qui aqua indigent,
praecipites in fontem vadunt, in eum oculos, et animum dirigentes, sed jam been
potati revertuntur, terga fonti animumque vertentes: sic multi in sua siti, et
tribulatione Divinae bonitatis fontem inclamant; liberati obliviscuntur. Stapl:
Prom: Mor: Dom: 3. Post. Epip: Tex. 5.
God in our superfluities, as if his kindness were not as proper a ground for
praising of him, as his goodness is for praying to him. If under miseries we
can seek out God with tears, under mercies we should set forth God with praise.

Mercies they are such gifts as advance our debts. It Is as sad a Spectacle to
see a Saint in an ungrateful posture, as it was to see Pharoahs lean Kine in a
fat Pasture. Shall man find God a Master that is bountiful, and shall not God
find man a servant that is dutiful.

If he gives us any enjoyments, it is but for his own entertainments. And well
may that hand reap the fruits that sets the Plants; Shall not he be found
feeding at a Table of his own spreading? Where former blessings have been
improved, there future blessings shall be conveyed. He shall never want mercy,
that does not play the wanton with mercy, but if the child crumbles away the
meat on his Trencher, no wonder if there come a Voyder.

When we fight against God with his own mercies, we do but beat our selves
with our own sins. In vain have I kept all that this fellow has in the
Wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that pertained unto him; and he
has requited me evil for good, 1 Samuel 25. 1. There was nothing wanting to him,
but there was something wanting in him.

Take a wicked man and Sicut nubes virtute radii solaris o terra exaltatur, et
attollitur, sublata autem, ipsu aerem obnubicat, and radios solares obscurat,
sic homo ingratus Dei favori exaltatus, Deum postea spernit, et mandata ejus
violat. Stapl: ubi prius.
he is not led to God by that which comes from God; He is like the Sea, that
turns the sweetest showers into the saltest waters. God has the least of
service, when he has the most of substance. That which should be a Bolt to
keep sin out, is but a Latch to let it in.

The Moon when its fullest of light with which it is adorned, is farthest from
the Sun from whence it was derived. They send that River laden out with
injuries, that came flowing in with commodities: The more a dunghill has the Sun
beams shining on it, the more noisome is the savor proceeding from it; Sinners
instead of having Viols full of Odors, they have Vessels full of evils. The
flames of wrath will be hottest in their burnings, where the beams of love have
been sweetest in their shinings.

How often do we see those who are above others in outward greatness, to be
below others in inward goodness. The weaker vessels by nature are many times
the stronger vessels in grace: To turn from God when he blesses us, is a
greater evil then to turn from God when he smites us. Jesus answered, many good
works have I shown you from the Father; for which of these good works do you
stone me? John 10. 32. He crowned them with his goodness, and they stoned him
for his goodness.

Many are like the highway side, that returns no Crop though you scatter on it
never so much seed; They are like Aesops Snake, that lay still in the Frost,
but stung him who warmed it in his bosom. If it be a sin to return to man evil
for evil, what is it to return to God evil for good? When we gather the fruit,
we should cast our eyes upon the root; when we are refreshed by the flowing
stream, we should reflect upon the springing fountain. A load of earth has
sunk many a man down to hell, and the richer he has been without doors, the
poorer he has been within.

Your estates if they be not wings to mount you up to Heaven, they will be
weights to sink you down to Hell. That Is a serious observation of a great
Traveller, that notwithstanding all the Religious pretenses of the Conclave of
Rome, that the Indians have brought more of the Spaniards to worship their
gold, then ever the Spaniards have brought of the Indians to worship their
gods; The former have made more infidels, then ever the latter made Christians.

The mercies that God gives to our bodies, are but baits that are laid to catch
our souls; He tries the vessel with water, that he may fill it with wine. Every
stream leads a believer Fideles singuli, beneficio aliquo accepto, oculos mox
animosque sursium ferunt, ac benefactori gratias agunt. Sibel: con. 8. in
to the fountains head; The more Gods hand is enlarged in blessing of him, the
more his heart is enlivened in the blessing of God.

Where the sun of mercy shines hottest there the fruits of grace grow fastest.
In the book of nature we may view the God of nature; The creatures are like an
Instrument ready tuned to praise God, but it is a believers hand that must make
Music upon them.

A Saint as he has a heart to seek God for what he promises, so he has a
hand to serve God with what he possesses; The greater wages he receives, the
better work he performs. The more a Merchant adventures at Sea, the greater
returns he expects at Land; They that hold the largest Farms, they should pay
the greatest Rents; the tallest Vines should ever yield the sweetest grapes;
and it is sad that ever that should prove a true prediction, Qui majores terras
possident, minores sensus solvunt, that they who have the largest crops, should
send into Gods house the fewest Tithes.

There is a retaliation of good for evil, this is admirable; of evil for
good, this is abominable; of good for good, this is laudible; of evil for
evil, this is blameable.

The April showers that makes the grass grow, and the flowers sweet, do
likewise cause many croaking frogs to come forth.

Those Rivers that receive their rise from the Sea, return their waters back
again into the lap of the Ocean: All you have is derived from God, let all you
have be returned to God. Genesis 38. 28, 29. And it came to pass, when she
traveled, that the one put out his hand, and the midwife took and bound upon
his hand a scarlet thread, saying, this came out first; and it came to pass as
he drew back his hand, that behold his brother came out. Beloved we have not
longer enjoyed our blessings, then we have abused our blessings; which gives us
cause to fear, though the child of mercy has put out his hand, yet it will go
back into the womb again, and the child of judgment will come Ingratitudo est
ventus urenssiccans fontem pietatis; rorem misericordiae, fluema gratiae. Ber.
Ser. 51 super Cont.
forth in its stead. It Is a divine saying of devout Bernard, That ingratitude
is a parching wind which dries up the spring of bounty, the dew of mercy, and
the current of clemency.

Man he was made the last of all the Creatures, that he might contemplate the
rest of all the creatures. When you lift up your eyes toward the heavens, and
see them hung with lights, O think, if there be so much beauty in the Suburbs,
what is there in the City! what is the footstool which he makes, to the Throne
on which he sits: when you see the evening stars that are in the skies, think
of that morning Star that is in your hearts.

When you sit down to your dishes, let this be the first of your messes, how
happy are all the kindred of Christ, that shall eat bread in the kingdom of
Christ! Those are the rarest feasts, where there are the Royallest guests.

When you see the fowls of the air how swiftly they glide through the yielding
elements, and the waters in the river hasting to their Original Ocean; O then
think with how much speed the little rivers of opportunity, are posting to the
great Sea of eternity.

When thou art clothing of thy body with variety, reflect how the eternal
word put on the suit of thy humanity, how mercy undrest it self to cover thee
with its garments.

When you are casting off your clothes, think of the putting off your
Tabernacles; be going to your beds as if you were going to your graves, and so
close your eyes in one world, as you would open them in another; when you are
creeping between the sheets, then think of* your winding sheet.

When you view the plants that are in your orchards, then think of the plants
that are in Christ's Orchard. It Is not more delightsome to see plants bearing of
fruits to us, then it is to see Saints bearing of fruits to him.

When thou beholdest the stately buildings, the shady groves, the Cristal
brooks, the pleasant meddows of wicked men, then think with thy self, if
sinners goes away with such large messes, what shall be the Benjamin's portion!
If the children of the concubines have so great a gift, what shall be the
inheritance of the children of promise! if the dogs fair so well under the
Table, how are the children feasted that sit at the Table! Give me that eye
that can see God in all, and that hand that can serve God with all. That Is the
thirteenth.

14. Principle that we are to walk by, is this; That we are to speak well of
God, whatsoever ill we bear from God. The mud whilst the water is quiet lies at
the bottom, but when it is stirred creeps up to the top.

Every Cock-boate can swim in a shallow River, but it must be a strong Vessel
that ploughs the curled ocean. Job nihil attendens proprium, solam domini
respicit, et commemorat voluntatem, talem suae gratiarum actioni terminum
ponens; sit nomen domin? benedictum. Titeiman. in loc.
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, and blessed be the name of the
Lord, Job 1. 21. He gives before he takes, and he takes but what he gives: The
hourglasse of outward happiness is soon run out; to day Job is the richest man
in all the east, to morrow Job is the poorest man in all the world; yet his
heart was like a fruitful Paradise, when his estate was like a barren
wilderness; though God burnt up his out-house, yet he left him his palace
standing.

Outward mercies they are like the Sea that have their flowing tides and their
ebbing waters; or like the sky that sometimes is full of clearness, and at
another time is overcast with cloudings; or like a budding flower in the
spring, which a warm day opens a little, and a cold day shuts again; if God
blesses us in taking as well as in giving, let us bless him for taking, as
well as for giving.

That is a rare Artist that can play well upon a broken instrument. Ah soul,
view the sin for which thou art lashed, and thou will never complain of the rod
with which thou art lashed; To be impatient with thy affliction, and patient
with thy corruption, what is this but to be angry with the medicine which should
heal thee, and in love with the poison which will kill thee.

There are two things very hard to flesh and blood; One is the foregoing of
sinful pleasures, And another the undergoing of sorrowful pains. Beloved Avibus
alas praesecamus, ne altius longiusve evolent; et Deus opes, and vires
imminuit, et nobis aufert ne insolenter nos propter dona ejus efferamus, Sibel:
Conc: 6. p. 118.
it is in mercy to us, that God removes mercy from us. He does not wound a
Saint to kill him, but he wounds a Saint to heal him.

'Twas the Commendation of a gracious person* that though he was sometimes full
of pains yet he was at all times full of patience, he was often found mourning
under his corruption, but never found murmuring under his affliction some can
rejoice in any thing but in Christ, and grieve for any thing but for lust.

Misprision is that which heightens affliction; O do not think that God is a
plucking up of the tree by the roots, when he is but lopping off its lu xuriant
bows; that he is demollishing of the superstruction, when he is but laying of
a right foundation; Deus in ardentem calamitatum fornacem nos mittit, ut
peccatorum nostrorum, sordes expurget. Id. in limine ejusdem, Conc.
that he is nipping of the flowers, when he is but plucking up the weeds; that
he is laying fallow of the land, when he is plowing of the field; that he is
putting out the light, when he is but snuffing of the candle.

Providence has a beautiful face when it puts on a black mask; God has the
fairest ends in the fowlest ways. The bottle may be dipped in the water, when
it is not drowned in the water; though the earth be dirty under your feet, yet
the heavens are not cloudy over your heads.

You may read the marks of a father in the stripes of his children: Every twig
of the black rod is but to draw his Image upon you. Could we but bury our
friends alive, we should not mourn so much for them when they are dead; did not
the having of riches take our hearts, the losing of riches could not break our
hearts.

Son of man, behold, I take away the desire of thine eyes with a stroke. What
though he take a wife out of your bosom, so he take her into his bosom? You may
hug a creature with so much hardness as to kill it with kindnesle, and wither
your sweetest flowers by smelling too often at them. God does but take that out
of the hands of his people, that keeps him out of the hearts of his people.

He that mingles his passions with his afflictions, is like a foolish patient
that chews the pills he should swallow down. He that carnally disturbs his soul
for the loss of his substance, casts away the kernel because God has taken
away the shell: If the tree stand and yield us fruits, let the wind blow away
it is leaves.

To bless God for mercies is the way to increase them, to bless God for
miseries is the way to remove them; No good lives so long as that which is
thankfully improved, no evil dies so soon as that which is patiently endured.

He that praises God under prosperity has paid his debt, but he that praises
him under adversity has made him a debtor. God can make a plaster of a
disease, and bring soundness to the inward man, by the sickness of the outward
man.

If he stops up all your light, it is but to make you fairer windows. When the
stars shine not the Sun appears; repairing the loss of lesser lights with
brighter beams.

In the loss of a withered nosegay you may smell at flowers fresh on the
stalk: Believers when their candles are put out, they can fetch their light
from the Sun; and when their streams are cut off, they can drink their waters
at the spring. Animus, vari is coarctatus aerumnis, subtilissime ad altissumum
Deum ala invocationis ardenti^ elevatur. Id. Ibid.


The birds of Paradise make the swiftest flights, when they have the smallest
feathers: These Nightingals warble out their pleasantest tunes, when they set
their breast against the thorns.

It Is said of Ruben that he went up to his fathers bed. How many times does the
creature intercept the respects which we do owe to our Creator; and then no
wonder if he break the Cisterne to bring us unto the fountain. Under all your
losses be you found blessing of God, and after all your losses God will be
found blessing of you.

15. Principle that you should walk by, is this; The longer God for bears not
finding amendment, the soarer he strikes when he comes to judgment. Divine
patience is a thing that is to be adored, but divine patience is not a thing
that is to be abused.

We usually take his forbearance for our acquittance; because we sin
unpunished, we think there is no punishment for sin; it is one thing to for
bear a debt, but it is another thing to forgive a debt. Because sentence against
Homines plerumque in sceleratiora proruunt vitia, et impudentius assuescunt
malis, quod non subito contra illos divina proferatur sententia, tardiusque
illorum flagitiis irascatur Deus. Arbor: in loc.
an evil work is not executed speedily; therefore the heart of the sons of
men is fully set in them to do evil, Eccl. 8. 11. Because he goes on to spare
them, they go on to provoke him; As he adds to their lives, they add to their
lusts. What Is this but for a man to break his bones, because he thinks to have
them set by a skilful Chyrurgion.

You are in debt to Justice, but mercy stops the Arrest of vengeance. Many
other have been taken from the earth by a sudden Arrow darted from Heaven, as
Zimry and Cosby unloaded their lusts and their lives together.

Because Justice winks, men think it is blind; because it is delayed, they
imagine it is denied; because he does not reprove them for their sins,
therefore they think he does approve them in theirsins. But know that the
silent Arrow does more mischief then the roaring Cannon. The patience of God,
though it be lasting, yet it is not everlasting.

The Sword of Justice its dipped in the Oil of Mercy, but its better some parts
should be dismembered, then that the whole body should be destroyed: He that
being often reproved hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy, Proverbs 29. 1.

God loves all men, so as to forbear them, but few men so as to forgive them.
He was but six days in making the whole World, and yet was seven days in
destroying of one City. If by the Warning pieces of God you be not amended, by
the Murdering pieces of God you shall be consumed. Bern.


Deus non expectabat Angelos, non expectabat Adamum, God did not wait for the
Angels, nor for Adam; but our Garrisons are fairly summoned, before they be
furiously stormed. It Is ill for Nos cae lestu irae ignem assendimuset excitamus
incendia quibus ardeainus. Salvde Gub. Deil. 8. p. 288.
the Iron to gather rust under the File. Remember if you be corrected, the
scourges that God uses, are taken out of your own houses. I gave her space to
repent of her fornication, but she repented not. Many have the space of
repentance, who have not the grace of repentance: What follows? Behold I will
cast her into a Bed, and them that commit adultery with her into great
tribulation, except they repent of their deeds, Revel. 2. 21, 22. Justice cast
her not upon a bed of feathers, but upon a bed of flames.

I have a long time holden my peace, I have been still and refrained my self,
now will I cry like a traveling woman, I will destroy and devour at once, Isa.
42. 14. The longer God is a fetching about his hand, the heavier will be the
blow; as a child the longer it stays in the body, the greater it is at the
birth.

Security its but like a flash of Lightning that ushers in a clap of Thunder,
or like a calm that is the fore runner of an earthquake.

Know it sinners that God can dip his hands into your blood, and yet fetch out
the stains. God is pleased sometimes to shake this Clayey Cottage before he
throws it down, he makes it totter before he makes it tumble. Sinners it may be
a fair Sunshine with you for a season, and yet ere long such a storm will
arise, as shall dash you all to pieces.

We pity a body that is going to the Block, shall we not pity a soal that is
going to the Pit? He dies the most comfortably, that lives the most virtuously.
Its easier for the Bird to keep out of the snare, then it is for the Bird toget
out of the snare. Even beasts will avoid the places where they see their fellows
have miscarried.

The rising of the Sun in the Morning was no sign that Sodom should not be
intombed in their own ashes before the Evening; That day that begins in mercy,
may end in judgment. These things have thou done, and I kept silence, thou
thoughtest I was altogether such a one as thy self, but I will reprove thee,
and set them in order before thee, Psalm. 50. 21. What follows? Consider this ye
that forget God, least I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.
Justice proportions the smart of man according to the fault of man, so that
Deus omnia semper habet parata, et quasi inprecinctu, ad impios impaenitentes
perdendos. Ames. in locum.
you may behold the greatness of the sin in the punishment, and the fitness of
the punishment in the sin: If he turn not, he will whet his sword, he has bent
his bow and made it ready, Psalm. 7. 12. The whetting of the sword is but a
putting on a sharper edge to give a deeper wound.

God is silent as long as our sins will let him be quiet, but when the sword is
whet, it is for cutting, and when the Bow is bent, it is for shooting.

Enraged Justice will avenge the quarrel of abused Mercy. Its a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10. 31. The stronger the arm,
the greater the blow. Never any weary Traveller complained that he was too soon
at his journeys end; but a sinner, if he dies soon its but to march to Hell the
quicker, if he lives long, its but to make Hell the hotter.

What a sad vision is that where the black Horse of death goes before, and the
red Horse of wrath follows after; needs must one fear come upon the neck of
another, when one death comes upon the neck of another.

Sinners they are preserved from a lesser, but reserved for a greater ruin.
Tolluntur in altum, ut lapsu graviore ruant, They are hoisted up the higher,
that their fall may be the soarer.

You may wonder more at Gods indulgence that you are so long reprieved, then at
Gods vengeance by which you are so soon surprised; you were fit fuel for
scorching flames, when you were wrapped up in your swaddling clothes. What a mercy
is it that we who drew our first breath in corruption, should not draw our
second breath in damnation! that he should add to our days, who have added to
our sins!

But know that God has Vials of wrath filled with indignation, for Vessels of
wrath fitted for destruction: If Gods clemency do not draw you to repenting,
Gods severity will drive you to despairing.

Sinners either seek out a Savior to deliver you from the wrath of God, or
else find out a shoulder to bear you up under the wrath of God; That Is the
Fifteenth.

16. Principle that you are to walk by, is this; That there is no measuring of
the inward conditions of men, by the outward dispensations of God. The
greatness of our estates, is no argument of the goodness of our hearts.

To prize thy self by what thou have and not by what thou do, is to vallew
the Jewel by the golden frame. Health and wealth does well together, as good no
meat, as no stomach to eat it, and as good no stomach, as no meat to feed it. A
dram of grace within the heart, is better then a chain of gold about the neck.

That old complaint may justly be renewed, Bonis male, malis been. Here it is
well with the bad, and ill with the good; They that live the best, fair the
worst, and they that live the worst, and they that live the worst, best.
Amongst the Jews the Dove and the Turtle were sacrificed, when the Swine and
the unclean creatures were exempted. Riches are called thick clay, by which the
back is sooner weakened, then the heart is lightened. Quicunque adversa
sustinent, utrum per amorem Dei sustineant, an per odium, nunc habotur
incertum. Arbor. in loc.


No man knows love or hatred by any thing that is before him, Eccl: 9. 1. You
cannot read the wrath of God in the black lines of adversity, nor the love of
God in the white lines of prosperity.

God often wrings out the waters of a full Cup to wicked men, though there be
dregs at the bottom: They may be flourishing Vines that are laden with sour
Grapes. It Is seldom that the sparkling Diamond of a great estate, is set in
the golden Ring of a gracious heart.

Riches have made many good men worser, but they never made any bad man better;
Hence it is that if we observe but a little spark of piety in great persons,
we are ready to behold it as a blazing Commet, and to cry it up in the
Superlative degree.

Though a Christian be made happy in the world, yet a Christian is not made
happy by the world. Give me those judgments that are the births of mercy,
rather then those mercies that are the births of judgment. There are many that
are temporally miserable, that are eternally happy; and there are many that are
temporally happy, that shall be eternally miserable.

If want could bring a man to Heaven, how many poor men would then be saved!
And if wealth could free a man from Hell, how few rich men would then be
damned! Believers they are the common Buts, at which the world does shoot its
poisoned Arrows.

They that go about to pull the Cross out of the Regnum Christi, estregnum
crucis; ipsius subditi insignes sunt duobus coloribus, rubr^, et candido in
scutis suis oftentant crucem rub^am, conspicuam in area candida, hoc est, laeta
puraque conscientia. Sibel. Conc: 25. in cap: 16. Matthew. p. 324.
Christians Arms spoil the whole Court, if I have any discovery of Scripture
Heraldry. He makes his sun to shine upon the evil, and upon the good, and his
rain to fall on the just, and upon the unjust, Matthew. 5. 45. The Sun of
prosperity shines upon the Dunghill, as well as upon the Bed of Spices; and the
rain of adversity falls upon the fruitful garden, as well as upon the barren
wilderness. The mercies of the one are but golden chains to bind them on
earth, and the miseries of the other are but fiery Chariots to carry them to
Heaven. Ye have called the proud happy, yea, they that work wickedness are set
up; yea, they that tempt God are delivered, Malacha 3. 15. Gods Jewels are here
trampled under feet.

If you look for a Saint you may sooner find him cast on a heap of dust, then
lapt in a bed of Down: Poor Lazarus gets to Heaven, when rich Dives goes to
Hell. For outward blessings whilst wise men beat the Bush, fools catch the
Bird; and whilst valiant minds crack the Nuts, Cowards eat the Kirnels.

Benjamin was not less regarded by Joseph because the silver Cup was found in
the mouth of his Sack. We must not infer the absence of Gods affections, from
the presence of our afflictions. When the cold wind blows the Sun beams shines.
Those stones which are designed for building are hewn and squared, whilst
others lie in neglected heaps.

A Saint is as glorious in his greatest Attend duos (de divite, et Lazaro
loquitur) unum in divitiis, et sanitate misorum, alterum in agestate, et
vulnere multum beatum. Fulgent. Epist 2. ad Galla p. 642.
misery, as a sinner is miserable in his greatest glory; The curiousest pearls
are here enclosed in the ruggedst shells. You may see a Joseph in Prison whilst
Pharaoh keeps the Court, and a Julian on the Throne swaying the Scepter, when a
Job is on a Dunghill bewayling his Ulcers: Judge not according to appearance,
but judge righteous judgment. They who judge according to appearance do not
judge according to righteousness.

How apt is the Candle of God shining upon a sinners Tabernacle to offend a
Saints eyes; as if we envied them a little light, that are to be shrouded up in
everlasting darkness; every man can find sticks to cast at laden boughs. Will
you read a piece of David's Letany, Psalm. 17. 14. From men which are thy hand, O
Lord, from men of the world, which have their portion in this life, whose belly
thou sillest with thy hid treasure. The things of the world are all the
happiness of the men of the world, all their flowers grows out of Paradise.

They live not without those creatures by which their bodies are succored, but
they dye without that Christ by whom their souls should be saved.

Sirs, A man's condition in this life may be honorable, and yet his state as to
another life may be damnable, For this purpose have I raised thee up; that I
might show my power upon thee. The Sun of outward splendour cast its Rays upon
him, only to warm his head against a storm. The stalled Ox would not set so
high a rate upon his Pasture, did he know that it was but to fit him for the
Butcher.

The same hand that now powers out his mercies on wicked men like Oil, will
pou^ down his wrath upon them like Water; Under all their wealth their hearts
are sinful, and after all their wealth their states are doleful. It Is better
through the valley of Baca to go to Zion, then to pitch our Tents in the Plains
of Sodom.

It Is an expression of Luther, That Mica quam Pater familias canibus projicit.
the great Turkish Empire was but a Crust that God throws unto the Dogs. It was
a sweet saying of a holy man, I had rather have St. Paul's Coat with his
Heavenly graces, then the Purple Robes of Princes with all their Kingdoms. God
sometimes least riches should be counted evil in themselves, Per se nec miseros
homines possunt facere, nec beatos Fulg: ubi prius.
gives them to thos^ that are good; and sometimes least they should be counted
the chiefest good gives them to (...) that are evil; They are oftener the
portion of his enemies, then they ^re of his friends.

What is it to receive, and not to be received? To have no other dews of
blessing, but such as may be followed with showers of Brimstone? They may fleet
the Cream of earthly enjoyment, that did never taste of the Milk of Heavenly
refreshment.

I have heard that there is in Scotland a floating Island, which if the Sea man
cast Anchor there, the Land will probably carry away the Ship; this is true of
this world, it is a floating Island, and never any cast Anchor here, but it
carried away their souls.

God and all that he has made, is not more then God without all that he has
made; and he can never want treasure that has such a golden Mine God is enough
to us without the creature, but the creature is not enough to us without God:
It Is better to be a Wooden Vessel filled with Wine, then a Golden Vessel filled
with Water: That Is the Sixteenth.

17. Principle that Saints should walk by, is this; That we should cleave the
closest, to that good which is the choicest. Do they believe it is worth the
while to sell all for the Pearl of price, who when they have done think
themselves miserable after the bargain? Then said Jesus to the twelve, will ye
also go away? John 6. 67. Peter as the mouth of all the rest, speaks the mind
of all the rest; Lord to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life.
A soul that is changed, is not for changing; there cannot be a better being for
us, then for us to be with thee: What we that have left all to follow thee,
should we follow all to leave thee!

You cannot tread in the steps of Christ, but you will taste of the Cups of
Christ; The nearer you are to such a spring, the clearer will be your streams;
yea, when every Gourd is withered, here is a shadow that will yield you
shelter. How precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God; how great is the sum of
them? If I should count them, they are more in number then the sand; when I
awake, I am still with thee, Psalm. 139. 18.

As soon as ever he crept out of his warm Bed, he crept into Gods warm bosom.
Believers are wont to leave their hearts with God in the evening, that they may
find them with him in the morning. David he was least alone, when he was most
alone; his heart was like the Needle in the Compass, that still points to the
Northern Totus in te (Deus optime) transit affectus cordis mei, ad eo ut nihil
prorsus sit in universa Coelorum amplitudine, quod ipsum possit oblectare, vel
^^ reficere, nis^ tu etc. Titelm^ in locum.
Pole. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth which I
desire besides thee, Psalm. 73. 25. Let a Believer search Heaven and Earth, yet
he will find nothing comparable with God: as Judah said of Jacob, His life is
bound up in the life of the Lad; so may I say of a Christian, His life is bound
up in the life of God. To be near to him is our happiness, and to draw near
to him is our holiness.

I cannot but sadly reflect on the unstableness of rotten Professors: An
applauded Christ shall have many Hosanahs, when a condemned Christ has many
Crucifiges; but a true Christian can as well go with Christ to the Cross where
he is to be crucified, as he can go with Christ to the Throne where he is to be
glorified; He will not turn like a shadow from him, in whom there is no shadow
of turning.

Tell me soul, was there nothing within thee that could draw thee to him? and
is there any thing without thee that shall draw thee from him? Who would leave
a substance to court a shadow? Or prize the Picture to the disdain of the
person? Can any thing do you so much good as his presence, or so much hurt as
his absence?

What a dreadful darkness must needs be expected, when the beams of so bright
a Sun are eclipsed! It Is better to part with a thousand worlds (were there so
many) for one Christ, then it is to part with one Christ for a thousand worlds.

Every step that you take to him, is a step to Heaven, and every step that you
take from him is a step to Hell. And he was sad at that saying, and went away
grieved, for he had great possessions, Mark 10. 22. This poor rich man, or this
rich poor man, which you will call him, for both you may call him; As he came
hastily to Christ, so he goes heavily from Christ; why what is the matter? Go
sell all that thou have, and give it to the poor, and thou shall have treasure
in Heaven.

Christ was for the selling of all, and he was for the saving of all; If he may
not have God and Mammon, he will leave God for Mammon. Thus will such as make a
God of nothing, make nothing of a God. When he cast his weights into the carnal
Scales, his corruptible silver did weigh down an incorruptible Savior.

Observe the policy of Diabolus quando decipere quenquam quaerit, in varias
sese transmutat formas, jam in leoninam, jam in vulpinam; aliquando saevit, ut
terreat; Nonnunquam blanditur, ut fallat. Sibel: in cap. 16. Matt. conc: 20. p.
256.
the Prince of darkness; that makes use of the men of the world as instruments
to drive us from God, and of the things of the world as inticements to draw us
from God: The Lord is with you whilst you are are with him; and if you seek
him, he will be found of you, but if you forsake him, he will forsake you;
Never was man forsaken of God, till God was forsaken of man, he sticks close to
us whilst we stick close to him.

Truly that good was never worth the getting, which was never worth the
keeping. Thus says the Lord, what iniquity have your fathers found in me, that
they are gone far from me, Jeremy 2. 5. Corruption is a good ground for
declension; if we saw iniquity in him, we might make an apostasy from him, for
its ill being where sin has a being, but if you can find no fault in God, why
will you commit such a fault as to depart from God.

Can any rational man deem it good to shake hands with goodness? Let me say to
such sinners, as Saul said unto his servants, Hear now ye Benjamites; will the
son of Jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards, and make you all
Captains of thousands, and Captains ^ in of hundreds? 1 Samuel 22. 7. Thus say I
to you, Can sin, Satan, or the world do that for you that God can? It Is only
the best of beings, that can bestow the best of blessings: He that has the
Keys of Heaven, can only open the doors of Heaven, its through him that we
have an admittance into our choicest inheritance.

What Is our life but a war-fare, and what is the world but a thorow-fare; can
the world do more for you without God, then God can do for you without the
world: If that be most potent then leave God for the worlds sake, but if he be
more potent then leave the world for Gods sake. Know it sinner in forsaking of
a Savior thou loosest grace which is the brightest Star on earth, and glory
which is the fairest Sun in Heaven.

No men are in more danger of loosing what they have, then those men who are
contented with what they have. A drop is easier dried up then a River, and a
spark sooner extinct then the fire: I will never leave you nor forsake you,
Heb. 13. 6. Better our goods should go and leave God behind them, then that
our God should go and leave our goods behind him.

It Is not the brightest Stars that can make it day, when the Sun is setting;
nor the thickest clouds that can make it night whilst the Sun is shining:
That Is the seventeenth.

18. Principle that you should walk by, is this; That it is our present
business to make sure of our future blessedness. It Is the Wisemans
expression, Eccle: 6. 7. That all the labor of a man is for his mouth. This is
not for Heathens to turn Christians, but for Christians to turn Heathens.

That Hawke that flies after the worlds prey, will hardly stoop to Gods lure.
Why should I lay out that for a Pibble, with the price of which I can purchase
a Jewel: That which the bountious hand of God gives for a Pension, that the
covetous heart of man takes for a Portion; These foolish Travelers are so
taken with their Inn, that they forget their home. Well you sow the seeds of
industry, to reap the Harvest of vanity.

(I confess) God has not made all the Trees in his Garden forbidden fruit;
Do you think he would spread a Table before us and bind us up with a touch
not, taste not, handle not? Godliness will allow us to taste of the world as
sauce, but not to feed on the world as meat.

Outward mercies are not so low as to be peremptorily deserted, nor so high as
to be primarily desired; If they be seducements from the Mercyseat, they will
be indictments at the Judgment Seat.

I may say of the earth, as the Philosopher said of the City of Athens, that it
was a City Ad peregrinandum jucunda, but ad in habitandum non tuta, Pleasant
for journying, but not safe for dwelling: Outward plenty it may be a
comfortable Ship for indigence to sail in, but a dangerous Rock for confidence
to trust in.

Many so they may have but something of earth in their hands, care for nothing
of Heaven in their hearts. Ah what fools are they that are so diligent about
what is temporal, and so negligent about what is spiritual, so careful about
decaying vanities, and so sloathful about enduring excellencies.

When Crates threw his Gold into the Sea, he cried out, Ego^perdam te, ne tu
perdas me; I will destroy thee, that thou may not destroy me; If men do not
put the love of the world to death, the love of the world will put men to
death; Then thou will say as Cardinal Woolsey when he was cast out of his
Princes favor, and left to his enemies fury; If I had served my God as
faithfully as I have served my King, he would not have left me thus. O how many
men are there that drops into perdition, merely for a Posy to smell on in their
Road to Execution.

It was a notable speech of Erasmus, That he desired wealth and honor, no more
then a feeble beast desired a heavy burden. How are cares bound to crowns?
anxiety disfigures the face of prosperity, and makes it like a Crystal glass
blown on by an impure breath, that retains little or nothing of its native
luster.

How far may a man go before he can see the silver picture of a comely body,
set into the Golden frame of a gracious soul! Work out your salvation with fear
and trembling, or else you will both fear and tremble for not working out of
your salvation.

Most men are like that silly woman, that when her house was on fire so minded
the saving of her goods, that she left her child rosting in the flames, at last
being put in remembrance of it, she cries out, O my child, my child.

Thus sottish sinners whilst they are scraping for a little substance their
souls are consumed in flames, and being in Hell they cry out, O my soul, my
soul. What got Sisera by his Milk and his Butter, when he tasted of the Nail
and the Hammer?

O how curious are men of their Out-wards, and how careless are they of their
In-wards; What pains do they take to cover their flesh from nakedness, when
their Spirits are not clothed with the Robes of righteousness. In a vigorous,
well complexioned, flourishing body, there is a feeble languishing and consuming
soul; The evil disposition of the latter, spoils the good composition of the
former.

For a man to be true to that part that is without him, and false to that part
that is within him; what is this but as if a Husbandman should gather in his
stubble, and leave out his corn; or as if a Goldsmiths should weigh his dross
and disregard his gold.

Will thou trim up the Scabbard, and let the Blade of admirable Metal to
gather Rust; this is Jacob like, to lay the right hand upon the younger, and
the left hand upon his elder child. If there be nothing done by your souls on
earth, there will be nothing done for your souls in Heaven.

There Is such an eagerness in contending for the wealth that is given to the
sons of men, that there is no earnestness in contending for the faith that is
delivered to the Saints of God: Ah, what pity is it to see those spirits that
came down from Heaven, to loose their way up to heaven! that ever that should
go down to misery, that came down from glory: That Is the Eighteenth.

19. Principle that believers should walk by, is this; That integrity is the
best security. Dogs that have no teeth may bark, but cannot bite; and Serpents
that have no stings may hiss, but they cannot hurt.

A naked man with innocence, is Integer vitae, scelerisque purus Non eget Mauri
jaculis nec arcu, Nec venenatis gravida sagittis fusce pharetra, etc. Hor. lib.
1. Ode 22.
better armed then Goliath in brass and Iron. And who is he that will harm
you, if ye be followers of that which is good? 1 Pet. 3. 13. As no flattery can
heal a bad conscience, so no cruelty can hurt a good conscience. As steps in
the ways of righteousness are the most gracious, so stripes for the works of
righteousness are the most glorious.

A pious Martyr is more renowned then a bloody persecutor. Righteousness is a
breast plate to a man in doing, and it is a Crown to a man in suffering.

Our integrity will not secure us Falsa crimina piis objectat, et impingit
Diabolus, eosque suspicione, et infamia aspergit. Abel. ubi prius. page, 259.
from infamy; the choicest professors have had black marks in the worlds
Calenders; but though it do not keep us from being shot, yet it will keep us
from being hurt. The Lord takes my part with them that help me; therefore
shall I see my desire upon them that hate me, Psalm. 118. 7. God will either
find a hand to hold off suffering, or an arm to uphold in suffering.

Though you be as sheep amongst wolves, he will keep you from rending; and
though you be as Ships amongst waves, he will keep you from drowning: be not
too quick to bury Christus quidem, rex ille gloriae, magnificum palatium, scil.
Ecclesiam in p^tra* firmissima aedificavit, et circuit muro divinae
protectionis. Idem page 252.
a church before she be dead, it is time enough to dress your selves in sables
when you are invited to her funerals.

Consult that saying, Isa. 43. 3. For I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of
Israel, thy Savior: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Aethiopia and Seba for
thee. God will pluck up the tares to preserve the wheat; as he ripped up the womb
of Egypt, to secure the fruit of Israel; as Constantine impoverished all his
Empire to enrich Constantinople.

Noah was sound alone, when the world was polluted, and Noah was saved alone
when the world was destroyed. Upon all the glory there shall be a defense, Isa.
4. 5. There Is nothing but the glory that is worthy to be kept, and there is
nothing of the glory but it shall be kept.

The shields of salvation they hang not in the paths of transgression: Kept by
the power of God, by faith unto salvation. All the wiles of the Devil cannot
conquer a single Soldier in Christ's Camp, much less shall he rout the whole
Army. The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous fly to it, and are
safe.

The name of the Lord is a Tower for its sublimity, and it is a strong Tower for
its security: Thy ship O Christian may put as boldly into such a harbor, as a
man may step into a house that is overtaken with a shower. A Garden enclosed is
my Sister, my Spouse, a spring shut up, and a Fountain sealed, Cant. 4. 12. God
as he has a hedge of affliction to keep his people from wandering, so he has
a hedge of protection to keep his people from wasting; he that numbers their
hairs, secures their heads.

Sincerity is the only Sanctuary. Psalm. 84. 11. The Lord God is a Sun and a
Shield. What darkness can obscure them who have a Sun above them, or what
dangers can injure them who have a Shield about them? When thou passest through
the waters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow
thee; when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall
the flame kindle upon thee, Isa. 43. 2. Here is a dangerous voyage, but a safe
convoy. God does not deal with his friends, as we do with ours: We do with
our friends as we do with Dialls, only look upon them when the Sun of
prosperity shines upon them; or as women do with flowers, whilst they are
flourishing stick them in their bosoms, but when once they wither cast them to
the Dunghill: But when our want is greatest his help is nearest; the more
grievous our oppressions, the more gracious his redemptions.

When the night is at the darkest it is Tyranni premunt, sed non opprimunt
oppugnant, sed non expugnant. Id. conc. 21. page 269.
nearest morning, and when the tide is at the lowest, it is nearest turning.

A man that has been for many years in a dark dungeon, will rejoice
exceedingly at the lest appearance of light, though it shine through a
prisongrate. When man's misery is most doleful, Gods mercy is most helpful.

When our calamity is most endured, his benignity is most admired: Behold he
that keeps Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps, though Israel so kept do both
sleep and slumber, Psalm. 121. 4.

It was the saying of Alexander, Tuto dormirinam Antipater vigilavit, I slept
securely whilst Antipater watched. Our safety sleeps when our Keeper sleeps
when our Keeper sleeps. Sometimes God does house his Corn before a storm, but
however he keeps it in the storm. If God be for us, who can be against us?
Romans 8. 31. Against us they may be to hate us, but against us they cannot be to
hurt us.

Noah rides safely in a well pitched Ark, when the old world was covered with
the waters of the Deluge; when Israel was led into captivity, then was Jeremy
set at liberty: The Prophet found more favor from the Princes of Babel, then
he found from the people of Israel.

Gideons Fleece was dry when all the earth was wet. When the shaddows of the
Evening were stretched over Asia, the day dawned to us in Europe: That Is the
Nineteenth.

20. Principle that believers are to walk by, is this; That the sweetness of
the Crown which shall be received, will make amends for the bitterness of the
Cross that may be endured. The last Wine that Christ draws, is the best Wine
that a Christian drinks.

When the waters cover the earth, whither should such a Dove-like spirit fly
but to the Ark? He that came on earth to make us righteous, will come from
Heaven to make us glorious. For ye had compassion on me in my bonds, and took
joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves Haec est omnium
vere in Christo fideliu^, vera et solida, et efficacissima consolatio contra
omnia hujus mundi adversa. Stap: in Dom: 2. Quadr: text. 2.
that ye have in Heaven a better and a more enduring substance, Heb. 10. 34.
Who would look for so fair a Jewel to lie upon so foul a Dunghill; But the gain
of these Heavenly Mansions, drowned the loss of their earthly Mammon.

Christians you are now on a storming Sea, do not say you shall never arrive at
a quiet Harbor: What has he plucked thee out of the fire of damnation, and
will he leave thee in the water of affliction? It is not long before you shall
Trumpet out that saying; For lo the Winter is past, the rain is over and gone,
the flowers appear on the earth, and the time of singing of Birds is come,
Cant. 2. 11, 12.

O how clear will the Sun of righteousness shine, when such dark clouds are
blown over! If there be so much Liquor in a single Grape, what is there in the
whole Cluster! The waters of Life glide the smoothest, when the wind blows the
highest.

Take a believer whilst he lives, and God has a servant the more on earth for
him, take a believer when he dies, and God has a Saint the more in Heaven with
him.

If there be a fiery exhalation wrapped up in a cloud, we must look for Thunder
and Lightning to follow it: Never look for an end of your sorrows, till there
be an end of your sins; As sufferings came not a day before them, so they stay
not a day behind them.

God had one Son without corruption, but he had never a Son without affliction.
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. Well may we bear the Rod, when love
makes the Rod: a believer when he lies under that hand that does afflict him,
he lies in that heart that does affect him. Dunghils when they are raked up,
send forth a filthy steame; but ointment when its powered forth, yields a sweet
perfume.

It Is reported of Tiberius that passing by a place where he saw a Cross lying
on the ground, upon a Marble stone, he caused it to be dug up, and found a
great deal of Treasure under it. Christians should you but dig up the stones
where lies your crosses, under your greatest torments, you might find your
greatest treasures.

I have read of a fountain that is cold at Midday, and Amonis nemus in medio
habet fontem; aquam solis vecant) sub lucis ortum tepidier manat; medio diei,
cum vehementissimu^ est calor, frigida eadem fluit: inclinato in vesperam,
calescit; media nocte, fervida exaestuat. Quint. Curt: Lib. 4. Sect: 7:
hot at Midnight; thus are many Christians cooled in the midday of
prosperity, that are heated in the Midnight of adversity.

Afflictions are not a fire that is consuming, but a flame that is refining; they
are like the prick at the Nightingales breast, that awaken her, and put her
upon her delightful singing. Many Saints are like Topps that goes best, when
they are lasht most. For Ireckon that the sufferings of this present time are
not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans
8. 18. These fall as far short of glory as the smallest fraction of the
greatest number, or as the least filings of Gold of the riches of the whole
Indies. If the early glimmerings of our Lord Jesus Christ shroud so much joy
and strength within their own beams as over-powers the cross, what will his
Meridian Rays of glory do when they are revealed!

Will you cast them both into the scales of the Sanctuary, 2 Cor. 4. 17. For
our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory. How light is a dram of reproach to a weight of
glory? and how short a Minute of pains to an Eternity of pleasures.

He said excellently, Been fertur Calumina, cum acquiritur Corona. He need not
be weary of the Cross, that is sure of the Crown. After the Cup of affliction,
comes the cup of salvation; The Wine Press prepares for the Wine-cellar; After
the pangs and throws comes the child birth. O clear up your interest in God; A
pardon may be past the Princes Seal, that is not put into the Prisoners hand.
Things that are exceeding sharp calls for much Sugar to make them sweet.

Death is a thing that has the most ungrateful taste to the creatures palate.
Now Grace is baptized with a double name; It Is called The firstfruits of the
spirit, Romans 8. 28. It Is called The earnest of the spirit, 2 Cor. 1. 22. It Is
a taste to show us the sweetness of eternal life, and it is a pledge to show us
the sureness of eternal life.

Our Heavenly Physician will keep us no longer in Physic, but till we are
thoroughly purged. Our merciful refiner will detain us no longer in the Furnace,
but till we are sufficiently purified.

Patience for sowing the seeds of sorrow on earth, shall reap a golden crop of
joy in Heaven. We may talk of the greatness of our future recompense, but we
shall never know the weight of our Crowns till they be set on our heads, nor
the worth of our Robes till they be worn on our backs; then the pricking Thorn
shall be turned into a precious Gem.

As darkness is the absence of light when the Sun is removed from its Horizon,
so is death the privation of life when the soul is removed from its Prison; we
have here but jus ad rem, there we shall have jus in re; Here we have an
expectation of our fruitions, there we shall have the fruition of our
expectations.

Cheer up brave spirits, your Wilderness Nunc deprimuntur, et calcantur;
(electi) ut olim assurgant, et extollantur, ad instar palmarum. Drex. Christian
Zod. Sig. 5. p. 42.
journeys will soon be periodized; The cloth must be cut in pieces before it
can be made up in garments; The hewing of the timber is for the erecting of the
structure; The new corn that lives in Summer, is produced from the old corn
that dyed in the Winter.

We should willingly embrace death, though we should not desperately rush upon
it; you will be like Civet, that is when it is taken out of the Box leaves a
sweet savor behind it.

Shall Christ willingly come down from Heaven to earth to dye for us, and shall
not we willingly go up from earth to Heaven to live with him? A Saints
loathnesse to expire does not spring from this root, because they judge that
death is not good enough for them, but it is a sprig that grows upon this root,
because they judge themselves not good enough for death.

But remember the edg of this keen sword is blunted, since the sides of Christ
was the scabbard in which it was sheathed.

When the Ship is in the Haven its Erras (mi Christian) erras sicogitas te
integrum, et non been contusum perventurum ad coelum. Drex. loc. citat.
past all storms, but by enduring storms, it at last arriveth at the Haven.
When we come to Glory there will be no temptations to endure, but its by
enduring of temptations that we come to glory. When the body and the soul shall
part asunder, the soul and God shall meet together.

The sharper your sorrows are here, the sweeter will be your joys hereafter;
let me allude to that Psalm. 68. 13. Though ye have lien among the Pots, yet
shall ye be as the wings of a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers with
yellow gold.

All the Grapes in Christ's Vineyard must pass through the Wine Press. Health
is most acceptable after the sharpest sickness; and liberty most sweet after a
rigorous bondage; and the harbor most welcome after turbulent storms: How
pleasant soever a sinners beginning is, his ending is dolorous; how troublesome
soever a Saints beginning is, his ending is joyous: The fresh Rivers of carnal
pleasure run into a salt Sea of despairing tears, when the wet seeds-time of a
pious life ushers in the Sun-shiny Harvest of a peaceful death.

When Craesus asked Solon who he Dicique beatus ant^ obitum nemo supremaque
funera debet. Horat.
thought happy, he told him one Tellus a man that was dead. Happiness does not
go before death, but death goes before happiness. It Is storied of Adrianus,
that seeing many Christians put to such cruel and bitter deaths, he asked some
of them what it was that they suffered such cruel torments for, to whom they
answered, Speramus illa bona quae oculus non videt, auras non audivit, in cor
hominis non ascenderunt; We hope for those things which eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man to conceive.

They who are born blind are unable to judge of that glory that dazles the very
eyes of the Angels; One smile in Gods face will dry up all the tears in their
eyes. When believers change earth for Heaven, they do not loose their
blessedness, but complete their blessedness; as fishes dropping out of the
narrow Brook into the wide Ocean, do not leave their Element but are more in it
then they were before. A believers dying is resembled to a burnt-offering; now
in a burnt-offering when the ashes falls to the earth, the flame ascends to
Heaven. Thus have I set twenty Diamonds in your Golden Ring. And so much for
the first thing; Namely, The erection of singular Principles. I come now to the
last stage for the direction of singular practices. Here I shall spread but six
Sails and make to the shore.

1. Would you do more then others, then you must know more then others. I may
say of Divine wisdom, as they did of that Grecian Lady, No man ever loved
her, that never saw her; and no man ever saw her, that never loved her. We do
not first come to God that we may be taught, but we are first taught that we
may come to God.

A Christian that is most intelligent, is a Christian that is most excellent.
Wisdom makes the face to shine, Eccl. 8. 1. What the Papists cry up as the
Mother of Devotion, we cry down as the Father of Superstition. Satan that cruel
Jailer secures all his Captives in the dark Dungeons of Ignorance; He deals
with them as Faulkners do with their Hawks, that put Diabolus coeca cupiditate,
et falsis consiliis ita peccatorem excaecavit, ut quietissime cum suis
compedibus ligatus stet, necse ullo prorsus in periculo constitutum putet.
Stapl: in Dom: Quinque Tex: 5.
Hoods upon their heads that they may carry them more quietly upon their hands.
Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God through
the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their hearts, Ephesians:
4. 18. The Father of light takes no pleasure in the children of darkness; he
does not use to waft souls to Heaven like passengers in a Ship, who are shut
under the Hatches and see nothing all the way they are sailing to their Port:
If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that asks, thou would have
asked of him, and he would have given thee living water, John 4. 10.

Christ does therefore go undesired in the world, because he goes undiscerned
by the world; Did they see all in this Pearl of price, they would sell all for
this Pearl of price. An ignorant man he is Satan's treasury for corruption, and
he is Gods Armory for indignation. An understanding without understanding, it is
but the soul of a beast imprisoned in the body of a man. If ye know these
things, happy are ye if you do them.

The will of God must be known on earth as it is known in Heaven, or else the
will of God will never be done on earth as it is done in Heaven.

Utter darkness is the just recompense of inner darkness. It Is storied of a
deformed person, that he set curious pictures before his wife, that seeing of
them she might have beautiful children; And Labans sheep by looking on the Rods
which were laid in the Troughes, their Lambs which they produced were party
colored: Shall fancy work so strongly in them, and shall not faith work as
strongly in us! O walk in the face of the Sun of righteousness and you will be
colored by the shinings of his beams. The patient Christian is the best for
waiting, but the prudent Christian is best for working; Where there is a vail
cast before the eyes of knowledge, there is a bar set before the hands of
practice: An ignorant person neither knows what he is doing, nor does he know
whither he is going. The dark corners of the earth are full of the inhabitants
of cruelty, Psalm. 74. 20. The Prince of darkness sits upon a Throne of
darkness; now God has no birthrights for such profane Esaues. Though the
earth may keep an ignorant man living, yet Heaven will not take an ignorant man
dying; as no man can shun the evil he fears not, so no man can embrace the good
he knows not. A man may as soon draw running streams from burning flames, as he
can taste a drop of mercy from irreconciled Majesty.

Where ever there is a trade driven for Heaven, the Spirit of Christ does first
open the Shop windows, I must work the works of him that sent me, whilst it is
day, the night comes wherein no man can work, John 9. 4. Est quidem maxima
faelicitas a Christo cognosci; sed est ma^ima necessitas, ut nos quoque
Christu^ cognoscamus. Idem in Dom: 2. postpasch^ Tex: 5.
You cannot do the work of the day unless you have the light of the day; A dim
eye may be serviceable for the prevention of falls, but a blind eye exposes to
continual hazards. Darkness as it is Satan's Element, so it is a sinners
punishment: My people perish for want of knowledge, Hosea 4. 6. Men in the mist
of ignorance, are like Ships that sail desperately against those Rocks that
splits them eternally. He shall come in flaming fire taking vengance on them
that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians.
1. 8. Your want of judgment is a sin against which Christ will come to
judgment. You that here take no knowledge of him, he will there take no
knowledge of you. When the Candle of the soul is put out, needs must it sit in
the dark. Reason though it be the noblest Tree in natures garden, yet since the
fall it has rotten fruits upon its boughs; It will not receive the Gold of the
Sanctuary, unless it be weighed in its own Scales; as if the guilt of blind
obedience, did lie upon them who have the Sun of righteousness to go before
them. Ah how do Owl-eyed sinners take that for Devotion, which is but
Superstition, and that for a Bethel, which is but a Babel! The weaker light we
have of truth, the more easily may we be cheated with error in the stead of
truth.

To keep the understanding free Quanquam multa sint peccata fragilitatis, multa
malitiae, tamen verissimu^ est, ignorantia^ omnium malorum, et flagitiorum esse
fundamentum et principium. Stella in Luc. cap. 15. verse. 12.
from ignorance is the way to keep it free from error; To preserve it as a
Goshen from the darkness of Egypt, is the way to rid it of the Frogs and
Locusts of Egypt. An arrogant man's will is not more rebellious, then an
ignorant man's wit is erroneous: He that desires to see the face of holiness in
its native luster, must not let his carnal judgment draw its picture.

To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance amongst them that are sanctified by faith in me, Acts 26. 18.

The strength of the Sunbeams can scatter the darkest Clouds, as well as
consume the thinest Vapors. In nature there is some sparkles of light, but so
raked under the ashes of disolute thoughts and practices, that though it be not
quite smothered yet it is scarce discerned; The notions of God implanted in
innocence, do not shine in their genuine and primogenial radiancy. Therefore
Nebuchadnezzar is turned a grazing to the beasts of the field, that he might
come to the acknowledging of the God of the world. It Is reported of a famous
Carver, who making a curious picture of Minerva, did secretly ingrave his own
upon it; So the Lord of Heaven has inter-woven his own Image in us, which
remains as a mark whereby we may be known to be his workmanship; and although
the glorious lineaments of his draught are much defaced, yet there are such
relics and remainders left behind, that as in fullyed Maps we may guess at
former lines. Spiritual acts, they require spiritual eyes, and the brighter we
see them, the better we do them. We cannot come to God with fiducial or
justifying faith, before we have attained a historical or dogmatical faith.

What the Papists say of Images we may justly say of the creatures, that they
are Laymens books in which there is no Errata's: The Heavens declares the glory
of God, and the Firmament shows his handy work, Psalm. 19. 1. They who could
not unclapse the book of Scripture, have laid before them the volume of nature.
The invisible things of God from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, Romans 1. 20. From the second
causes we may easily arrive at the first; as you may pursue a River as it runs
to the Fountains head from which it flows. If we should see a Ship upon the Sea
sailing directly to the Harbor, we might conclude a Pilot in her to steer her
course; They have but a narrow inspection into the works of nature, that cannot
in them discover the God of nature, which is Commentum Dei mirabile, as
Lactantius calls it; That Is the first.

2. If you would do more then others, you must love more then others. The love
of Christ constrains us, 2 Cor. 5. 14. There Is no sin so sweet, but the love of
Christ restrains them from it, there is no service so great, but the love of
Christ constrains them to it; If once this affection takes fire, the room
becomes too hot for any sin to stay in.

The heart is a chamber for Christ, but not a harbor for lust. The Mandrakes
give a smell, and at our Gates are all manner of pleasant fruits, new and old
which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved, Cant. 7. 13. Love never shakes the
Boughs, but for Christ to eat the fruits. Many pay the performance of duties,
as oppressed Subjects do heavy taxes, with sad complaints; But the Spouse of
Christ Amor onus non sentit, labores non reputat, plus affectat qua valet.
Kempis.
looks upon what she is as not great enough for his remembrance, and what she
does as not good enough for his acceptance; had she any thing a thousand times
better then her self, or were her self a thousand times better, it should be
bestowed upon him: What is that little that he desires, to that much that he
deserves. When Achilles was demanded what enterprises he found the most easy?
he answered, Those which he undertook for his friends: Seven years service
seemed nothing to Jacob, because of the love he did bear to Rachel, Omnia
facilia habenti charitatem, says Austin; Love as it acts the most excellently,
so it acts the most easily; If you love me, keep my commandments, John 14. 15.
The Crystal streams of divine actions, they bubble from the pure spring of
divine affection. I have heard of a wife that grudged obedience to her husband,
because she thought him unworthy to receive it, to whom it was answered, Though
he that married her was unworthy of her observance; yet he that made her was
worthy of her obedience, and whatsoever she had to say against her husband, she
had nothing to say against the command of God. In Christ Jesus neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumsion, but faith which works by
love, Gal. 5. 6. The Christians love advances by equal paces with the
Christians faith, as the heat of the day with the shining of the Sun; Faith
like Mary sits at the feet of Christ to hear his Sermons, and love like Martha,
compasses him about with services; Faith is the great receiver, and love is the
great disburser; We take in all by believing, and we lay out all by loving;
Faith it first works love, and then it works by love, as the workman sets an
edge upon his tools, and then carves and cuts with them; The Scripture has
exceeding high expressions of this affection. Nihil dulcius est amore, nihil
fortius, nihil jucundius, nec melius in Caelo et in terra, quia natus est ex
D^o, etc. Id: lib. 3 cap. 5. de Imit: Christi.
Christ he brings the ten Commandments into two Commandments, Matthew. 22. 37,
38. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind; this is the first and great Commandment, and the second
is like unto it, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Christ he brings
ten words into two words; but Paul he folds them all up in one word: For all
the law is fulfilled in one word (Gal. 5. 14.) What Is that? surely it is too
big for any mouth to utter, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. He that
is not wanting in this duty, is wanting in no duty. Love its called an old
Commandment, and a new Commandment, 1 John 2. 7, 8. It Is as old as the Law of
Moses, and yet as new as the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Faith is the grace that at first seals the conveyance, and love is the grace
that at last possesses the inheritance; Faith that unites Christ and sanctified
souls together on earth, but love that unites God and glorified souls together
in Heaven.

As the spleen grows, the body decays; and as hatred increases, so
holiness abateth. Die aliquid ut duo simus, was the Motto of a Heathen, and
therefore does not belong to a Christian. It Is best that dissension should
never be born among brethren, and next that it should dye presently after it is
birth: When any leak springs in the ship of Christian society, we should use
our endeavors to stop it speedily. The nearer the union is, the more dangerous
is the breach; Bodies that are glewed together may (if severed) be set together
as beautifully as ever, but members rent and torn cannot be healed without a
scar.

The love in a hypocrites bosom is just like the fire in the Israelites bush,
which was not burning all the while it was blazing; His estate and relations
has the top and strength of his affections; they admit the world not only into
the Suburbs of their senses, but into the City of their souls: But the love of
a Savior in the soul of a believer, is as Oil put into a Vial with water, in
which, though both be never so much shaken together, the oil will be uppermost;
Or if you please, as one rising Sun which drowns the light of numberless
Stars: Should God give his substance to him, and yet keep himself from him,
Absalom's expression would be his, What does all avail me, so long as I see not
the Kings face? Take a Christian and his Heaven upon earth is in Gods dwelling
with him, yea and his Heaven in Heaven is in his dwelling with God; He is like
a stone, of which some report that if it be thrown into the water whole it
swims, if broke it sinks; Or like the Mary-gold that opens with the shining,
and shuts with the setting of the Sun of righteousness.

Love it puts not off its pursuits of Certe amor Dei tam efficax est, ut
effectus, potius quam affectus dici debeat; plus enim facit, quam afficit.
Stapl: in Dom. Pen. Tex. 1.
duty, till it attains the possessions of glory; There Is no rocking this child
to sleep, till it be laid in the Cradle of the Grave: A soul that loves much,
is a soul that works much; The commands of the Gospel are not grievous to them,
but precious to them.

The highest graces are fit for the hardest duties: As God is not so much
displeased at our having of sin, as he is displeased at our loving of sin; so
he is not so well pleased at our doing of service, as at our loving of service.
Different movings express different beings: When a Christian yields obedience
to Christ out of a principle of love, he so serves Christ as none but a Saint
can serve Christ. When thou said seek ye my face, my heart answered, thy face
I will seek, Psalm. 27. 8. The heart of obedience, is the obedience of the
heart: That Is the second.

3. Would you do more then others, then pray more then others. Our daily bread,
calls for daily prayers; because new wants are created, when old wants are
supplied.

The Garden of the Church is watered by the River of Prayer. Are you called by
the name of Christ, and will you not call upon the name of Christ? Take away
spiritual breathing, and you take away spiritual living; a child that is still
born, was never a child that is newborn.

Who would not stretch forth a Beggars hand, to receive a Jewel of greater
vallew then the world. With what boldness may they appear at the Court, that
are assured of the ear of the King.

We shall soon give up the Ghost, if God do not give in the Holy Ghost: to
stop our breath is the way to loose our life.

You may pray always, and yet not always be at prayer: Thou allowest thy
body daily sustentation, O allow thy soul daily supplication. Prayer its like
Noah's Dove, though it go forth of the Arc, yet it will return again with an
Olive Branch of peace in its mouth.

In Gods injoyning our supplications there is the showing forth of his
greatness, in Gods fulfilling our supplications there is the shining forth of
his goodness: Prayer, never did man rightly make it, but God did quickly grant
it; It Is no more a duty for Saints on earth to give over praying, then it is a
duty for Saints in Heaven to give over praising.

If you would speed in the enjoying of mercy, you must speak for the obtaining
of mercy; If man lets God go without any begging, God will let man go without
any blessing. I am sadly sensible how many there are that cast off this duty;
But it is not because the lameness of their legs is cured, but because they
are ashamed to make use of crutches: Christians let not your want of
accomplishments create in you any discouragements; Dumb beggars have got alms
at Christ's gates by making of signs.

The waters of life are sweet; O what pity it is, that God should turn the
cock for want of pails to set under! Take a dry sponge and throw it into the
river, and it will suck it self full of water.

As he prayed the form of his countenance Christus cum oraret
transfigurabatur, ita in oratione magnae fiunt in anima mutationes, quia lumen
animae est oration, quae saepiu^ eum, quem invenit desperantem, relinquit
exultanter* Ger. med. 25.
was altered, and his raiment was white and glistering, Luke 9. 28, 29. Christ
had the brightest Sunshine of his fathers affection, when he was moving in the
Orb of supplication. Tell me Sirs, is not that mercy worth the breath of a
sinner, which was worth the blood of a Savior? then to pray we can do no more
to the removing of our own miseries, and we can do no less for the obtaining of
Gods mercies: methinks man should never cease asking, till God cease granting.
Lord, what will thou give me seeing I go childless? So say you, Lord what will thou give me seeing I go graceless? Prayer is the souls trading to Heaven
Oration justi clavis est caeli, ascendit precatio, et descendit Dei liberatio.
Id ibid.
for such commodities, as are only locked up in Gods Treasuries.

By fasting the body learns to obey the soul, but by praying the soul learns
to command the body. Dumbness should never seize on the lips of man, till
deafness seize on the ears of God: Shall God in Heaven want a man that is
praying, whilst man on earth wants not a God that is hearing?

Christians though your relations are excellent, yet your conditions are
indigent. No Christian has so little of Christ but he has matter for praise,
and no Christian has so much from Christ but he has matter of prayer; every
day we find it a great work to accomplish a little work; every new act of
obedience, calls for new strength and assistance: as our receipts are greater
then our deserts, so our wants are larger then our receipts. Ask, and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full. Spiritual supplication is the channel of
spiritual consolation; you must be full of prayers, if you would be full of
joys: now none are more fruitful in divine labor, then those who are most
joyful in divine favor. Death that shortens our way on earth, and makes it
nearer, but delight that sweetens our way to heaven, and makes it fairer.

The neglect of the flowers, will but administer advantage unto the growth of
the weeds; a little Ship with a strong wind, moves faster then a greater
Vessel with slacker gailes.

I never expect, that a branch which receives no sap from the Vine, should
bear any fruit in the Vine. Si ascendat oration descendet gratia; when prayer
mounts upon the wing to God, then favors come upon the spur to Non verb de
precantis deus intendit, sed orantis cor aspicit. Bern. de inter. domo. cap. 48.
man. The gift of prayer may have praise from men, but it is the grace of
prayer that has power with God: a few grapes prove the plant to be a Vine, and
not a thorn.

Prayer is Gods due as a Creator, though truly performed to him as a Father.
None can pray aright but those that are new Creatures, but all ought to pray
because they are creatures.

Christians can never want a praying time, if they do not want a praying frame;
in the morning this is a golden key to open the heart for servise, and in the
evening it is an iron lock to shut the heart from sin.

As the rain comes down from Heaven fruitfully, so let prayer go up to Heaven
fervently. Peter was kept in prison, but prayer was made without ceasing for
him, (Act. 12. 5.) And prayer fetched an Angel out of Heaven, to fetch Peter*
out of prison: If the oven be quite cold, it requires more wood to heat it
again; there is more strength exercised in the raising of a Bell, then in the
ringing of a Bell; it is not the dog that cries the loudest that catches the
hair, but he that follows the Chase.

Believers should not only pray one with another, but they should pray one for
another; next to the breach of piety in Religion, we should abominate the
breach of charity in communion; that is a sad spectacle to see men upholding an
abominable oftentation, by a more abominable separation.

It Is weak conceptions that are the Parents of strong delusions; that is true,
they who cannot know our hearts should not judge them, and they who should not
judge our hearts cannot know them; but when such Vessels gives over sailing,
we may conclude that divine gails has given over blowing. Christians, He that
is omniscient to see your wants, is omnipotent to grant your suits; there is no
mercies so little as to be gotten without prayer, there is no mercies so great
as not to be given unto prayer. Are you made spiritual Priests, and will you
not offer up spiritual sacrifices? Si fidelis, humilis, et fervens oration
fuerit, caelum sine dubio penetrabit, unde certum est quod vacu^ redire non
poterit. Ber Ser. 4. de Quadrag. ult. verb.
Our affections should fly like an Eagle when our expressions creep like a
snaile. What Is the reason there are so many empty Casks in Gods Cellar, but for
want of prayer: Pray continually, though you be not continually at prayer, 1
These. 5. 17. If the lesson be not always playing, yet the instrument must be
kept in tune.

They should never be dying Petitioners, that have an everliving Intercessor.
It matters not how often you carry an empty pitcher to so full a River: And
this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according
to his will he hears us, 1 John 5. 18. That soul shall have its will of God,
that desires nothing but what God wills.

The intercession of Christ is a golden Censor, and can we desire him to offer
up our drossy prayer for incense? It was an expression of Luthers, Fiat
voluntas mea, Domine quia tua; let my will be done, mine Lord, because it is
thine; because it fixed in the same Center; he was bold to call for the
fulfilling of it.

The Covenant of grace without us turns precepts into promises, but the spirit
of grace within us turns promises into prayers. Take with you words, and turn
unto the Lord; say unto him, take away all our iniquity, and receive us
graciously, Hosea 14. 2. O how willing is God that we should hit the mark, when
he teaches us how to direct our arrows! What desires are there in him that we
should prevail, when he shows us how we should wrestle! Spiritual breathings
are more potent then carnal roarings; none but such desires as want good aims,
do want good issues; nothing will get up to Heaven, but that which does come
down from Heaven: Deny not God faith in prayer, and God will not deny a
faithful prayer. That is the Third.

4. Would you do more than others, then believe more then others. It Is the Lamp
of fidelity, that is filled with the oil of activity: This is a grace that is
the most needful, and this is a grace Vt sol radios suos long lareque per
totum terrarum orbem diffundit, sic fides in hominecredente vires sua
efficaciter exerit. Sibel in Mat. 16. 16. conc. 13. in mi^.
that is the most fruitful; If there be life in the body the pulse will be
beating, and if there be faith in the soul the man will be working; all other
graces thrives in the soul, as this grace thrives in the soul, as the watering
of the roots makes the flourishing of the Trees.

What does it profit, my Brethren, if a man say he has faith, and has no
works, can faith save him; Jam. 2. 14. An idle faith, is an evil faith; yea, a
faith that works not, is a faith that saves not: This is a faithful saying,
and this I will that thou affirm constantly; that they which have believed in
God, might be careful to maintain good works, Titus 3. 8. It Is reported of
the Crystal, that there is such a virtue in it, that it will quicken all other
stones, and put a beauty and luster upon them: I am sure it is true here,
there is such a divine virtue and power in faith, that it quickens and casts a
luster upon all our other graces.

Perceiving of Christ speaks a Christians knowledge, but it is a receiving of
Christ that speaks a christians faith: To as many as received him, to them he
gave power to become the Sons of God, even to as many as believed on his name,
Joh. 1. 12. Faith does not only look upon Christ as a fountain of living
water, but lays pipes to convey it to its own Cisterne.

The Window irradiates the house not by any light of its own, but as a medium
to let in the beams of the Sun: without Christ faith can do nothing, and
against Christ faith will do nothing. A true and Scripturall affiance, is as
the spring in the watch, that moves all the golden wheels of obedience. The
father of the child cried out with tears, I believe, help my unbelief, Mark 9.
24. Though his tears dropped down to the earth, yet his faith reached up to Heaven.

Faith is able to swim upon those deep seas with delight, which the line of
reason could never fathom. He that is highest in his diffidence, is lowest in
his obedience: he could not do many mighty works there, because of their
unbelief: that which hinders Christ from working for Christians, that will
hinder Christians from working for Christ.

It is as natural for a believing man to be a working man, as it is for the
Sun to shine, or the fire to burn. The people of Israel stood in the outer
Court, but the High Priest entered within the Veil: Thus other graces Sic
fides inter virtutes sure suo pri matum obtinet.
stand but in the outer court, it is faith that enters within the Veil. The
Devil if he can but undermine the foundation he will soon overthrow the
building; as take away the corner stone, and yon endanger all the other stones.
Bernard has an excellent saying, Increduli timent diabolum quasi leonem; at
qui in side fortes, despiciunt eum quasi vermiculum; whilst unbeleevers fear
the Devil as a Lion, the faithful contemn him as a worm.

Christians, he that here lives by faith which does admit of doubting, shall
hereafter live by sight which does not admit of clouding: There Is no landing at
the shore of felicity, without sailing in the bark of fidelity: there is no
grace does so glorify God as faith, and there is no grace that God does so
glorify as faith.

Will you see how two gracious persons dash their feet against temptations?
Lord, if thou had been here, my Brother had not dyed, John 11. 32. As if
Christ could not have saved his life when he was absent, as well as when he was
present, and have sent him health, as well as have brought him health; But do
they stop at the first step? no, but march on further in this distrustful
Road; verse. 9. Lord by this time he stinketh; As if the physicians potion came
too late, and the Grave would not make any surrender though Christ commands the
release of its prisoner; but their unbelief stunk more in his nostrills, then
their brothers body did in theirs. And being not weak in faith, he considered
not his own body now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet
the deadness of Sarahs womb, Romans 4. 19.

Skillful swimmers are not afraid to go above their depth, whereas young
learners grope for the ground and are loath to stir from the bank-side,

Faith is not only the instrument to Fides salvifica est viva radiae
sanctitatis; ma nus, os, et oculus filiorum dei; vinculum quo summo bono, per
Christum nobis unitum, unimur. Id. conc. 15. in limine.
receive the righteousness of Christ for our justification, but it is the
instrument to receive the holiness of Christ for our sanctification: Of his
fulness we receive grace for grace, John 1. 16. But how do we receive it?
Even by Faith. Faith unites the soul to Christ, and as by a pipe laid close to
the mouth of a fountain, water is carried to our houses for the supply of the
whole family; so by faith is derived to the soul in abundance, a supply for
all its exigences: He that believes, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
living waters, Joh. 7. 38. Hence it is, that when the Saints would advance to a
high pitch in other graces, they pray for an increase of this grace: Lord,
increase our faith, Luke 17. 5. What the root sucks from the earth, it soon
disperces amongst the branches.

In faith there is such an efficacy, Fides est armaturamentis et sicut scuto
repellimus hostiles ictus sic fidem opponimus falsis diaboli suggestionibus.
Staplet. in Dom. 4. ^ost Epiph. Tex. 2.
that it is able to rout the whole body of impiety, that not one lust stands in
its unbroken strength: Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not
under the Law, but under grace, Romans 6. 14. Lusts they may stir like wounded
soldiers on their knees; they may rally like broken Troops, but shall never be
Masters of the field where faith is seen.

Faith it does not shoot paper pellets, but Cannon bullets; man's weakness can
easily build the rotten fabric of sin up, but its faiths strength which can
only throw it down.

As lusts would not let Christ live without us, so Christ will not let lusts
live within us: Holding the Mystery of faith in a pure conscience, Tim. 3. 9.
Fides est cardo super quem vertitur porta Caeli; situla per quam hauritur aqua
vitae; annulus ille nuptialis quo men's Deo desponsatur etc. Arrowsin; Tact.
sacr. l. 2. cap. 7. Sect. 13.
This heavenly Manna it is laid up in a golden Pot; if faith be a precious
pearl, a good conscience is the Cabinet in which its locked.

Faith comes out of the wars a conqueror, when fear is foiled and taken
prisoner; it is as potent to keep us from falling under temptations, as to keep
us from fainting under afflictions.

The body of Adam it is a Rack for sufferings, but the bosom of Abraham is an
Ark for resting. A Believer is like Joseph, though the Archers sorely grieved
him, and shot at him, yet his bow abode in strength, and all his Arrows were
safe in the Quiver.

Christians, never was the Tallent of faithfullness wrapped up in the Napkin of
idleness. He is a rich man that lives upon his wealth, but he is a righteous
man that lives upon his faith.

The first poisonous breath which was drawn by Eves lips, was sent in those
words; Yea, has God said ye shall not eat? This was the Traitors gate through
which all sin entered into the heart: A Tree is easily felled when its root is
loosned.

Unbeleef it does not only choke the bullets of wrath which are sent out of
the fiery mouth of the Law, but it damps all the motions of grace, which comes
from the still voice of the Gospel. All the offers of reconciliation which are
made to unbeleeving persons, they are like sparks of fire falling into a river
of water, that are extinguished by it as soon as ever they light upon it.

Fifthly, Would you do more then others, then resolve more then others. It is
the resolute Christian, that is the excellent christian: An action that is well
resolved, is an action that is half performed: God looks more at our wills
then at our works.

The very first fruits of conversion, they grow upon the Tree of holy
resolution: I will arise, and go to my father, Luke 15. 15. Arrows weakly shot
fall short of their marks.

Many stand watching on what dyall the Sun shines, and on what earth the cloud
drops; they stand as spectators on the shore; whilst the Vessel is tossed on
the Sea.

Shame is that which ambicious nature abhors, and danger is that which timorous
nature declines. Reformation is an Icy path, and cowardly spirits love to have
it well beaten by others, before they will set a foot in it themselves.

Firm resolutions are like Rocks, against which the waves may beat and strike,
but cannot move and alter. As our prayers manifest what we desire that God
should do for us, so our purposes manifest what we our selves are desirous to
do for God.

The holiness of a Saints life, may be resembled to a babes birth. In every
birth there is three things; A Conceiving, a Traveling, and a bringing forth:
So there is a conceiving of holiness in our understandings, by way of
illumination; there is a Traveling of holiness in our wills, by way of
resolution; and there is a bringing forth of holiness in our lives by way of
operation.

Till you attain to firm resolutions, you will never be free from great
temptations: Look as it is with the ill humors of the body, they flock and
resort to the crazy part; so it is with Satan's assaults, they will be ever
frequent where the heart is ready to embrace them, or not resolved to resist
them.

The Laws Curse is the press-money to force a servile spirit, but the love of
God is the by as of a Volunteer.

Your purposes and resolutions must be like water from a fountain, that flows
of it self, and not like water from a pit, that is fetched forth by artificial
Engines.

Some never take up any resolutions but when they are under sharp afflictions;
these are like those Goats, that never give any milk till they are stung:
Like children under the rod, they make fair promises; but all these blossoms
falls from the Tree without bearing of any fruits: when they are raised from
their sickbed pains, they fall from their sickbed vows; These are like Ice
that thaws in the Sun, but freezes in the shade: They hang their lusts on the
Cross for a time that they may be curbed, but take them down again that they
may not be crucified; what is this but to put a Lion in chains and then let him
loose again.

There must be a harmony between your resolutions and your conversations: What
shall we vow against our sins, and then sin against our vows? This were to
take the wages of one Master, and to do the work of another; to make our
promises unto God, and our performances to the Devil.

Sacred vows bind us to obedience, but sinful vows bind us to repentance.
Christians, say not that you have noble blood running in your veins, except you
can prove your pedigrees by heroic spirits: That Is the Fifth.

6. Would you do more then others, then deny your selves more then others.
Either we must lay self aside, or else God will lay us aside: What can any true
Israelite see in this Dagan of the Philistines, that the Ark of God should fall
before it.

Self seeking, says one, was born in heaven, but forgetting by what way she
fell from thence, she could never find the road thither again.

If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and
follow me; This is the basis or foundation on which we must build the whole
fabric of our profession. Sinful self is to be destroyed, and natural self
is to be denied.

A little will serve a man that is strong in grace, much will but serve a man
that is weak in grace, but nothing will serve a man that is void of grace.

As we must lay out all in the Cause of God, so we must lay down all at the
call of God.

But to close up all, The Elder Israelites they mourned to see how short the
glory of the second Temple, was of the glory of the first: I fear that we have
cause to mourn, to see how far short our professors come in purity of their
fore fathers.

Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man according
as his works shall be, Revel. 22. 12. This very expression may much excite to
eminency in Religion: He that does most, shall receive most; the more glory you
bring to God, the more glory you shall have from God.

The clearer the lamp of grace burns on earth, the brighter the Sun of glory
shall shine in Heaven.

Though your pilgrimage may be full of bitterness, yet your heritage will be
full of blessedness. Let such golden spurs put you upon your full careers.

Man's excellency is to be measured by the standard of his usefullnesse. The Sun
and Moon those fountains of light and guids of time, fulfill their courses in a
shorter season, when the dimmer planets are longer wheeling. O that it might be
said of you, as it was said of her, Prove. 31. 29. Many daughters have done
virtuously, but thou have excelled them all.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Thomas Parkhurst at the three Crowns over
against the great Conduit, at the lower end of Cheapside.
Folio's.
A Commentary upon the holy writings of Job, David, and Solomon, That is, these
five, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs, being part of
those which by the Ancient were called Hagiographa. Wherein the diverse
Translations, and Expositions, both litterall and mystical, of all the most
famous Commentators, both Ancient and modern, are propounded, examined and
censured: And the Texts from the Original much illustrated; By John Mayer
Doctor in Divinity.

A practical commentary, or an Exposition with Observations, Reasons, and
Uses, upou the first Epistle general of John. By that pious and worthy Divine
Master John Cotton, Pastor of Boston in New England.

A learned Commentary, or an Exposition upon the first Chapter of the second
Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians; being the substance of many Sermons
formerly preached at Grayes-Inn, London; by that Reverend and judicious Divine,
Richard Sibbs, D. D. sometimes Master of Katherine-Hall in Cambridge, and
Preacher to that honorable Society.

(...), or Divine Characters in two parts, acutely distinguishing the more
secret and undiscerned differences between; 1. The Hypocrite in his best dress
of seeming virtue and formal duties: and the true Christian in his real
graces, and sincere obedience. As also between the blackest weeds of daily
infirmities of the truly godly, eclipsing saving grace; and the reigning sins
of the unregenerate, that pretend unto that godliness they never had; By that
late burning and shining Lamp, Mr. Samuel Crook, B. D. late Pastor of Wrington
in Summerset.

Quarto's
TWo excellent Treatises, of Mr. Jeremiah Burrough's, one of the fifth of
Matthew, being many Sermons preached at Cripplegate, upon all the Beatitudes.

And Gospel-Revelation in three Treatises, viz. 1. The Nature of God, 2. The
Excellency of Christ. And 3. The excellency of man's Immortal Soul. Both
published by William Greenhill, Will. Bridge, Philip Nigh, John Yates, Matthew
Mead, William Adderly.

An Exposition on the whole Book of Solomon's Song, commonly called the
Canticles; By John Robotham.

A Theater of flying Insects, wherein especially the manner of right ordering
the Be is excellently described with discourses Historical and Physical
concerning them; with a Second part of Meditations and Observations Theological
and Moral, in three Centuries upon the same subject, by Samuel Purchase M. A.

Peoples need of a living Pastor, at the funeral of Mr. John Frost, M. A. by
Mr. Zach. Crofton.

Holy things for holy men, or the Lawyers Plea nonsuited, etc. In some
Christian reproof and pity expressed toward Mr. Prynn's book, entitled, The
Lords Supper briefly vindicated, By S. S. Minister of the Gospel.

A Vindication of the Christians Messia, that Jesus is the true Messia
prophesied and foretold by all the holy men of God, who were writers of the Old
Testament; as also proved out of their own Talmud.

The souls progress to the Celestial Canaan, By way of godly Meditations and
holy contemplations, by John Wells Preacher of the Gospel.

Comfortable Sermons on the 24 Psalm, Preached before the Lady Elizabeth her
Grace, by Daniell Dyke, B. D.

Plenary possession makes a lawful Subjection to Powers that are in Being,
proved to be lawful and necessary, in a Sermon before the Judges in Exeter, By
Rich: Saunders, Preacher of the Gospel.

The new World, or the new Reformed Church discovered out of the 2 Epist. of
Pet. By Nath. Homes, D. D.

God save the King, in a Sermon Preached the day after his Majesty came into
London; By Anthony Walker, Preacher of the Gospel.

The Judgment of Foraign Divines touching the Disciplined Liturgy and
Ceremonies of the Church of England, with a Letter from Mr. John Calvin to Mr:
Knox.

A Plea for Ministers in Sequestrations, against Mr. Mossom, by S. S.

An Antidote against Anabaptisme, wherein the Baptising infants, taking Tithes,
etc. are fully vindicated by Aylmor Haughton.

Large Octavo's
Four Profitable Treatises very useful for Christian practice, viz. The
killing power of the Law; the Spiritual Watch; the New Birth; Of the Sabbath.
By the Reverend Will. Fenner, late Minister of Rotchford in Essex.

Enchiridion Judicum, or Jehosaphat's Charge to his Judges: Together with
Catastrophe Magnatum, or King David's Lamentation at Prince Abners Incineration.
By James Livesey Minister of the Gospel at Atherton.

Mr. Robinsons Christian Armor.

The door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, by George Swinock, M.
A. Preacher of the Gospel at Rickmersworth in Hertfordshire.

Heaven and Hell Epitomized, the true Christian Characterized, by the same
Author.

The Nonsuch-Professor in his Meridian Splendour, or Singular Actions of
sanctified Christians, By Will. Secker Preacher of the Gospel.

The greatest loss, upon Math. 16. 26. By James Livesey Minister of the
Gospel.

Meditations Divine and moral, by Henry Tabb M. A.

The Conversation as Heavenly, and as Natural, in two Treatises, by Dr.
Staughton.

The Pathway to Piety, by R. Hill D. D.

The Psalms of King David translated by King James.

Small Octavo's
Catechizing Gods Ordinance, in sundry Sermons, by Mr. Zach. Crofton, Minister
at Buttolphs Aldgate, London; the second Edition corrected and augmented.

The Godly man's Ark in the day of his distress, discovered in diverse Sermons;
the first of which was preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Moore.
Whereunto is annexed Mrs. Elizabeth Moors Evidences for Heaven, composed and
collected by her in the time of her health, for her comfort in the time of
sickness. By E. Calamy. B. D. Pastor of the Church at Aldermanbury.

The Gale of opportunity, and the beloved Disciple, by Thomas Froysal.

The Wedding Ring fir for the Finger, in a Sermon at a Wedding in Edmonton, by
William Secker.

Sion in the house of Mourning, because of sin and suffering, being an
Exposition on the fifth Chapter of the Lamentations, by D. S. Pastor of
Vpingham in Rutland.

The one thing necessary; by Mr. Thomas Watson, Minister of Stephen Walbrosk.

A Plea for Alms; delivered in a Sermon at the Spittle, on Tuesday in Easter
Week, April. 13. 1658. by Mr. Thomas Watson Minister of Stephen Walbrook.

Moses unvailed, or those figures which served unto the pattern and shadow of
heavenly things, poynting out the Messiah Christ Jesus, briefly explained;
whereunto is added the harmony of the Prophets, breathing with one mouth the
Mystery of his Coming, and of that Redemption which by his death he was to
accomplish: by Will. Guild, Minist: of Gods word at King-Edward in Scotland.

Good Company; being a Collection of various, serious, pious Meditations: By J.
Melvin, Minister of the Gospel at Vdimer in Sussex.

A Religious Treatise upon Simeon's Song; or instructions how to live holily,
and dye happily: By T. Woodriff, B. D. Pastor at Kingsland in Herefordshire.

The Reformation, in which is reconciliation with God and his people: or a
Catechism unveiling the Apostles Creed, with Annotations; in which faith,
Ordinances, and Government are professed as in the Primitive times, in
opposition to all Errors and Heresies. By W. K. Minister of the Gospel.

Prospering profaneness provoking holy Conference, and Gods attention; several
Sermons from Malachy 3. 15, 16, 17. By Zach. Crofton.

The Catechism of Hugo -- grotis done into English.

Twelves.
Johnsons Essays expressed in sundry exquisite Fancies

The dangerous rule, or a Sermon preached at Clonmel in the Province of Munster
in Ireland, upon Aug. 3. 1657. before the Reverend Judges for that Circuit by
S. L. Master in Arts, and lately fellow of C. C. C. in Oxon.

The woman's glory, A Treatise asserting the due honor of that Sex, by
manifesting that women are capable of the highest improvements. By Samuel
Torshell.

Twenty four's.
Groans of the Spirit, or a Trial of the truth of prayer.

A Handkercher for parents wet eyes, upon the death of their children, or
Friends.


