LO'GOI 'OPA*IOI.

THREE SEASONABLE SERMONS The First Preached at St. MARY'S IN Cambridge, May
31. 1642.

The Others designed for public Auditories, but prevented.

By Tho. Stephens, M. A.

LONDON, Printed by J.C. for John Crook at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.

A PREFACE to the READER.
Christian Reader,
WHatsoever Title this book carries in the Front of it, thou may well censure
me, for having been instant out of Season, in obtruding more Sermons upon the
World; at this time especially, when the Pulpit has almost justled the desk
out of the Church, and all Religion seems locked up in the Preachers lips: When
every Young Stripling is ready (with Ahimaaz) to run before he be sent: yea,
and to outrun the Cushi's too, which have true tidings in their mouths; and
knows nothing, only tells you of tumults, such perhaps as he has raised by the
beating of the pulpit-drum.

-- Et quorum pars magna fult -- Such (like the fish Sepia) cast their black
infusions upon the waters in which they Swim, and by staining them, do hope not
only to secure themselves from being taken, but to poison others too, which
delight in clearer streams. Mistake me not in this: I admire, I adore this
Ordinance of God (...) this power of God unto salvation: But it is then only,
when it is Gods ordinance: when it does not resist another ordinance of God:
when the throne is not pulled down to make room for the Doctors chair; and the
word of God made a vizor to cover the deformities of Satan's Ministers. When
Corah and his confederates (notwithstanding their pretended Holiness) shall
contend with Aaron for a share in holy Administrations; true Israelites will
separate from their Congregations. Neither can I admire Saul (any mad frantic
Enthusiast) although among the Prophets. The condition of that patient is very
deplorable, to whom poison is administered by an unskilful emperick, instead of
Cordialls and Restoratives; and the state of that people is no less desperate,
when a lying Spirit in the Mouths of the pretended Prophets, shall persuade
them to go up to fight to their own destruction. It Is true that Faith comes by
hearing. But it is by hearing the word of God, not commented upon by the
Devil: for as preaching at first begat faith, in our days it has ushered in
heresies, profaneness, Libertinism, I had almost said Infidelity.

The snuffing of these new lights is the design of these following sheets:
Which were intended for the public long ago; even then when these Calves of
Bethel bleated loudest: and so they may secure the Author from the sinister end
of time serving. But alas (...) may remember the days (and oh that we could
not remember them) when the mouth of the Ox was musled: even that Ox that trod
out the corn, might neither low nor eat: Never did Nation run more in parallel
to Israel, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. which for a long time had been without a true God,
and without a teaching Priest, and without a Law. It Is true, Gods cause was
cried up, but Gods Vicegerent pulled down; teachers we had many, but teaching
priests but a few, Saul's footmen had turned against them, because their hands
had been with David. And a Law we had still, Veruntamen inclusum in tabulis,
tanquam gladium in vagina reconditum A law claps'd up in our Bibles; but pulled
down in our Churches: when the bear reading of the ten Commandments (the fifth
especially) was cause enough of a sequestration.

But blessed be God, who out of mercy to his Church (then visibly ruined) did
still preserve a remnant in Israel, many thousands that never bowed their knee
to Baal; though some of them were hid in caves and fed by stealth: blessed be
God that suffered not our lamp to be quite extinguished, although it burnt in
the Socket, but kept it light, till there was fresh Oil and better times to
trim it in. Blessed be God that although the eyes of our Elyes be waxen dim,
yet before the lamp of God be quite gone out in the Temple of the Lord, they
have time still to call some Samuels to the ministration: Ancient men [I know)
that have seen the first house (as in Ezra's days) may weep with a loud voice,
to find our Church go less, less both in power at home and reputation abroad;
yet that noise of weeping may be drowned with shouting aloud for joy, that God
has left us a remnant to escape, and given us a nail in his holy place, and
lightened our eyes, and given us a reviving in our bondage. Ezra 9.8. So that
although Jachin our establishment be shaken, yet Boaz our strength stands upon
its basis still.

It Is fabled of the old Arcadians (who fancied themselves to be born before the
moon) that,

-- Occiduum long Titana secuti Desperare diem -- -- They followed the setting
Sun to their utmost borders, and there they bad good Night to light, despairing
of a second day. But we need no Poetical illustrations to set a gloss upon
our true fears; Many a bleeding heart and weeping eye attended upon Englands
funeral when our Sun was set, and we could expect nothing but an eternal night
of horror and confusion; when the bloody and barbarous Regicides, could not
believe the King was sure enough, till they had murdered the Kingdom too, and
in the place of it had foisted in a misshapen monster called by them a
Commonwealth: but an almighty power has called light out of darkness; he
has said to dead bones, live, and whereas in other acts of providence we may
see his finger, here with his own right hand and holy arm he has gotten
himself the victory. Far be it from me, to rake in the Ashes where the coals of
division lie buried up, and for want of Air will soon be extinguished; the wound
is closed, and I hope so perfectly cured that it will never fester at the
bottom to need a second opening. Christ's coat was seamless; I dare not rend it.
Tros Tyriusve -- True Trojan or false. Carthaginian shall never more be terms
of difference: And since his Sacred Majesty in his most Gracious Declaration
has desired and ordained that hence forward all Notes of discord separation and
difference of parties be utterly abolished, I will not be so uncharitable a
Christian, or so disloyal a subject to disobey such just commands. Especially
remembering the Prophetical judgment of that blessed Saint and glorious Martyr
King CHARLES I. That none will be more loyal and faithful to his Majesty, then
those Subjects who sensible of their errors and his injuries will feel in their
own souls most vehement motives to repentance, and earnest desires to make some
reparations for their former defects. Those hands which have been deepest dyed
in blood if they prove eminent supporters of the throne will be washed from
their former guilt:

Scire piget post tale decus quid fecerat ante,
Hanc vidi, satis est hanc mihi nosse manum.
Now that God, that baptized us all into one body whether Jews or gentiles,
whether bond or free, unite all interests into the grand concernment of peace
and righteousness.

Having therefore this charity for others I cannot have a distrust of theirs to
me, by a suspicion that this Paraenesis to Loyalty will seem unseasonable to
any, although it was prepared for the most disloyal times: For the first of
these Sermons was preached in the University immediately after his Majesty of
blessed memory had retired into the North to avoid the rude and unseemly
deportment of the tumultuous rabbl^ so to escape the raging of the waters and
the madness of the People: Where the acceptance which it found arose not from
any intrinsic worth it had (I dare not flater my self with so vain a conceit)
but from the suitableness of the subject to the affections of that learned and
religious Auditory; For the good King having lately passed that way, had left
so deep an impression upon the hearts of the Loyal Students that any man was
welcome to them who was a memoria (his shall I say? Or) their Remembrancer of
him: And here it had dyed with that Generation that soon after passed away, had
it not come to the knowledge of some of our Countrey-Committee-men, four years
after (some men have long ears) for whom I have reason to bless God, who raised
them up as instruments to make me be thought worthy to suffer any thing for
that righteous cause. Doctor Holdsworth,
Yet the Reverend and pious Vice Chancellor obliged me then to another course;
to supply which, the Second Sermon was prepared, (upon a Text which had been
blasphemed in that Pulpit not long before) which happened soon after the
Signal battle of Edghill. But alas! when I came to suck the breasts of my
dear Mother I found them rubbed over with gall and wormwood; The Scene was
changed Athens was turned to a Mars's hill. The Music of Apollos harp could
not he heard for the noise of trumpets: For on the night before, that MAN OF
BLOOD came down with a troop of horse, which was then his only command (the
Cockatrice at that time was but an egg) and had blockt up the Pulpit with his
Janissaries; so that prudence bad me retire, unless I would mingle my blood
with my sacrifice.

The third Sermon was composed for a Visitation, at what Time I (the
unworthiest of those that wait upon Gods Altars) by the favor of a Reverend
Prelate, was nominated to an Ecclesiastical dignity. But those places fell in
the day of Gods Visitation, and the Sermon proved abortive. If any thing
contained in them may conduce to the settlement of Church and State, or inflame
thee to a conscionable discharge of thy duty in reference to both, I have my
end. Give God the glory; and let him have the benefit of thy prayers who is,

Thine in all Christian Offices T. Stephens.
Bury St. Edm. June 6. 1660.
Judges 21. 25. In those days there was no King in Israel; every man did that
which was right in their own eyes.
THen those days have been, and they have been in Israel too; we have
Scripture for it, says our Phanatick, and why may they not be again? This
place I confess is plain enough, and as well urged on this occasion, as his,
who maintained his heterodox opinions from St. Paul's position, Cor. 1.11. Of
necessity heresies must be amongst you -- But woe be to that man by whom these
things come to pass. When Every man must be his own Carver, and sits Judge upon
his own actions, there is no King indeed, but whole legions of Tyrants; each
domineering affection, every lusting thought, all Bastard-off-springs, the
unreasonable appetites of our reasonable souls, will Lord it over us: Take away
this (...) must needs follow: Kings we may have still, but no Subjects to obey;
every man will be his own Ruler, yet every man as unruly as he was before.

Where there is so much confusion in the text, you can expert no curious method
in the prosecution of it. An Anarchy and the effects of it do divide it. Israel
had no King, there is the Fountain: but the rivulets streaming from it, they
are diverse: there is division enough in the effects: as many parts as men,
every man has his share, they are all in action, and actions speciously good
too, they are every man doing right, if themselves may be both judge and
parties. Their eyes are the Lesbian rules which measure the works of their
hands: Physiologers tell us a crooked object is received into the eye by strait
beams: Crooked things may seem strait; that may be right in our eyes, which is
wrong in Gods eyes, that notwithstanding we walk in the ways of our own heart,
and in the sight of our own eyes, Eccl. 9. 9. Yet for all these things God will
bring us into Judgment.

My Text will bear no long Doctrinall discourse, neither know I whether I may
more properly call it a history of those times or a prophecy of these: for I
am sure ( mutato nomine) we are as deeply concerned in it, as the Jews
themselves. I shall briefly, but more plainly acquaint you with the story, then
in the Analogy make application to our selves.

When the pleasure of God had called the People of Israel, to be his own
peculiar inheritance, he did not presently and at the first, establish one
perpetual form of Government, or set the imperial Crown upon the head of his
Anointed, but ushers in the Royalty of a King (which Abraham enjoyed long
before in a Prototype by way of promise, Genesis 17.) with some inferior
subordination of power: from Captains he gave them Judges, next to them his
Prophets, then Judges back again: as if Almighty God contrived a way, how best,
and upon the best experience, he might be a safeguard to his own people. But
when these undertitles could not prevail against the daring outrages and bold
presumptions of the tribes, he then exalts his throne, creates his Viceroy; the
old Scoene disappears, and he discovers his King upon his holy hill of Sion.
And here he stops; no change from hence: St. Austin proves it for this cause
the best because it was the last, no supersedeas, no removal from it. Thus as
the Epigrammatist congratulates diseases and honors them with the title of the
first inventors of Physic, we may bless the sores of the Common wealth which
did produce so Sovereign a salve, or rather bless God which did prepare an
Antidote for, yet out of such abominable Villainies.

For in this interregnum of judiciary power, when the sins of the people had
devoured their Judges (as the Prophet speaks, Hosea 7.7.) when Owle-ey'd
iniquity durst see the Sun ( Da Phaebe veniam si quid illicitum tui videre
vultus!) and the high hand of sin disdained the coercive power of their petty
Magistrates; God raises up a new succession of Princes, a race of Kings, which
might suppress such insolences. Which were so notorious in this evening of the
Judges, when their authority was now a setting, that the holy Spirit records
three stories unparalleld by any place of Scripture. And lest the cause of all
might be mistaken, four times in these four Chapters, the same words are again
repeated, In those days, when those were acted, there was no King in Israel:

First Micah) from a converted theife turns a superstitious innovator. He made
an Idol of the Silver before, or else he would never have stolen it; but now
emptying his soul of one Devil, he gives another free entertainment. Should our
true service of God Almighty be half so dear, I fear his Temples would not be
so well customed. But what he got lightly, he spends as liberally: Out go the
eleven hundred Shekells, quantum nummorum servat in arca, tantum habet and
fidei; his religion was as high prized as his money could purchase; Gods house
was not enough for him, he must have an house of Gods, an Ephod and a Teraphim,
(...) pretty new found Dieties, which must preserve their maker, give a
well-being to him who but just now gave them their being.

The Old Woman his mother (a sex well skilled in such newfangled religions)
she likes very well of this new stamped devotion, and gives a blessing to him
who brought a curse upon her and all her family.

But what shall we do for a Priest to officiate to his golden vanity. Oh!
Micah's very good at creating: His reverence cannot only consecrate a God but
ordain his Minister too: Holy orders are very cheap, where religion it self is
at a loss; A God of gold cannot easily want servants, there will be some
Chryses, some Calchis left. Rather then fail his Son shall be consecrated; the
Hebrew word (if you look in your margins to the 5th. verse of the 17. Chap, of
this b^ok) is ( he filled the hand of his Son) engagement enough to this
following service; once fill the hand and you have heart and all: We would not
care so much for consecration, if the golden breastplate did not accompany it.

Yet least his new born piety may want some specious pretense, a poor
Journeyman Levite is heard of, such one as God curses. 1 Samuel 2.36. That he
shall come and crowch and say, put me into the Priests office that I may eat a
morsel of bread: Such a Titivillitius I say upon high way of acquaintance
shall be content for 10. Shekells of Silver, a suit of clothes and victuals
besides, to covenant to serve this Idol-God: thus is our Familist confirmed in
his new molded Frame of devotion, his independent congregation, and all this
while, there was no King in Israel.

Next come your Danites, and there is a Tribe, (...), there is danger in a
multitude, they have hands as well to practice as heads to plot their
mischiefs: A private thief may abound with spoils, but when a whole army
turns pillagers that Country must needs be desolate. Well! what fair mask did
their vice borrow to cover this insolence? Their Country forsooth was too
little for them, their climate was too cold. Five Brethren must be sent out for
spies to discover the fatness of the land, that they might come and taste of the
cup which flowed with milk and honey: These as they pass by Micah's house, hear
the Levites voice which sojourned there; sure he had good lungs, that his
tongue could so easily take acquaintance with the highway travelers: Ten
pound a year will be soon talked out, if he speak so loud: but hearing him,
they must needs hear something from him; An exhortation from him will crown the
work which they are in hand with: an act of blood if the pulpit bless it, must
needs carry the Lord with it? He bids them go in peace, encouragement enough
for them to prepare for waar.

Laish is their next stage, a quiet, careless, secure people, qui damna nec
metuunt nec parant, as free from fearing danger as intending of it. With these
glad tidings they return and enrich the Danites ears: They now most truly make
up Jacobs their Fathers prophecy Genesis 49.17. they turn Serpents by the way
and Adders in the path. Albertus tells us, the Nature of the Creature is to fly
from a clothed man, but to set upon him if they find him naked: The
Maacathites and Geshurites which live amongst them, are armed men, let them
alone it is dangerous meddling with them; but secure Laish had neither strength
nor men to aid it, the Zidonians were at a far distance, six hundred fighting
men well appointed might do good service there: The land is very good, why sit
you still, arise, make have, enter and possess it.

But Micahs house affoorded them so good entertainment in their first journal,
hat they will not balk it now in their second progress. We have found idolatry
upon Mount Ephraim, say the spies; an Ephod and a Teraphim, a graven Image and
a molten Image, fine golden Idols, all of Micah's making, let us invite them on
this journey with us: And there is a Levite too, no doubt but he will be
content, to follow his golden Gods, and then assuredly we shall go and prosper.

Well! however they loved their Idols well, (or else they would never have
built high places to them afterward) sure I am they loved the gold better:
Micah's house is rifled, his Oratory spoiled; his guardian Gods could not now
defend themselves: Sacrilege and Burglary are met together; and that false
hireling Levite whom he took for his Priest, and Father proves his betrayer. He
stands to make good the passage amongst the armed men in the gate, En filii
tunicam: his linen Ephod is turned into a coat of Male, and (...), his place
he changed, but not his office: He thought it safer offending with a multitude;
a Tribe in Israel, or two factious Towns of that one Tribe, Zorah, and Eshtaol,
may well secure an Idol Priest who goes triumphing in the midst of the
Cutthroats.

If his Mr. Micah come crying after for restitution, he may be answered in the
wolves language to the Crane, who plucked the sheepsbone out of his throat.
Away thou fool thank me thou have thy head, which I might have so easily
snapped off when I had thy long bill in my mouth: Speak softly Micah, these are
angry fellows, and if thou talk much of thy Gods, thou may loose thy Life,
and all: Our next work is to plunder Laish to put all the inhabitants to the
sword, and fire the City. And all this while, there was no King in Israel.

Lastly, that no society, neither of Families, Tribes, or Cities might be
clear, whilst the Danites are bathing themselves in innocent blood, the
Citizens of Gibeah are acting a wickedness, far more horrid, much more
barbarous: A poor Levite of Mount Ephraim, whom love and charity had reconciled
to his offending Concubine, takes a weary journey after her to Bethlem Juda,
and overtaking her he was so far from putting her to the shame which the
public Law required against adultery, that he makes honorable provision for
her more easy and speedy return; there is a couple of Asses with bread, and
wine, and provender, himself, and a servant to attender her. After some
complementall interchanges of courtesy with his Father-in-law, he begins his
journey homeward: Whilst the Sun shaming to behold the barbarous act of the
Gibeonites sets upon him: Well, Gibeah he enters, when the courtesy of the
inhabitants affoorded him the high way for his lodging place, where the Earth
might be his bed, and the Heavens his Canopie; for what should a Man of God do
in a house of one of these Sons of Belial? And this is the portion of honest
Levites. The young Fellow in the last story that mouthed it so well that his
voice might be known at distance, found better entertainment at Micah's hand.
Once sell your Conscience and you may soon buy Respect. You need not be a
Priest to Idols as he was: the People will make an Idol of you, fall down and
worship you.

It happens that a poor old laboring man, a sojourner there among them, a
stranger, it seems, to them, but more to their incivility, as he returned home
from the field, spied these new guests of their city: He hails to them
friendly, invites them to his homely cottage, and courteously embraces them:
When after provision of such simple delicates, as his not curious palate had
provided for himself, they cheer themselves in the freest expressions of loving
souls. But their mirth is soon blasted: The noise of violence is a Voyder to
the Feast. The house is beset by Incubusses, those hot Devils will not be
cooled unless the Stranger be given out to satiate their lusts. We may wonder
no longer why they were no freer to entertain him in their houses, since we
find by experience, that they exposed him in the streets, that they might the
more easily expose him to their injuries.

Well, to avoid this nefandum, this unheard of wickedness, a less mischief is
embraced: his Concubine is offered up as a Sacrifice to those Devils; whom they
ravish, nay ravish her to death; These were the acts which were so good in
their own eyes: Idolatry in Families, Burglary in Counties, Rapes in Cities,
and all these because there was no King in Israel.

And good reason for it. For first a King amongst them would, Secondly none but
a King, could curb such licentious practices; he would I say, for he is the
Minister of God which bears not the sword in vain. Romans 13. He is Gods
avenger and executes his wrath on evil doers; It is the cowardly nature of sin
that it flies away from the Magistrate though it be gathered into a Troop, like
a heard of deer from a bearded Lion: Like the Lacedaemonian Servants, who durst
not adventure themselves, after they had made a rebellious head, into their
Masters presence, although they came armed with nothing but switches in their
hands: and this, whether their inward guilt affright them, or Gods mark on his
Anointed charm them to obedience. 'Twas quivering Orestas reply in Euripides
(before his fault was published) to that (...); what feavour shakes thee? 'oh
'twas (...); 'twas a cold fit of conscience which would end in a burning fit of
hell. And I am persuaded that it was something more then our Savior Christ's
Divinity which amazed that band Soldiers with their cursed Captain Judas, when
they came to take him John 18. that they went backward and fell to the ground:
Something more I say: For should he have called his Divine Power to assist him,
he might have commanded ten thousand of Legions of Angels to have rescued him;
nor would he the second time so freely have offered himself into their hands.

Then for the other, God has bestowed upon all Magistrates an especial
Character, to secure them from any dangerous conspiracies: Touch not mine
anointed, (says David,) Chro. 1.16. my Messiah says the Original; as if the
brow of Majesty were the nearest draught, the liveliest representation of
Almighty God: from hence they were honored in the purest times by the best
Christians with such appellations as did befit their greatness; their words,
divalis jussio the audible voice of God, their presence, sacravestigia, the
clearest footsteps of the Diety.

But then secondly, no other Estate or order could, at least could so well
suppress such daring impieties; de facto we find they did not, not that they
wanted an established form of Government, for we cannot believe that God would
leave his People destitute: An interregnum of Judges here we find, from
Sampsons death to Samuel: But Highpriests still contiuned. Yet what power had
they, when Corahs infection (like Pliny's seeds kept many ages in the ground
before they sprout,) began now to grow again, and every Micah durst dispense
his holy Orders, and consecrate a Priest of his own, good enough for a Religion
of his own inventing? And for their Judges (had they at that time enjoyed them)
whether Evil Success under them, or Cruel Oppression by them, had so alienated
the peoples minds, that in the very next generation, Sam. 1.8. finding Samuel
sons turning aside after lucre, and taking bribes, and perverting judgment,
they with one mouth cry out for a King, for a King in Israel, which might
appoint every man to do that which is right, not in their own eyes, but in the
eyes of God.

Let us now make Israel our looking glass, and compare both our Estates and
Actions together, that thus laying these two crooked lines together, we may
between them draw a right one, a right one, not as we our selves, but as our
Overseers, (...), those which watch over us, shall determine.

First where have we any City, nay any Street, nay almost any Family, where
Micah and his Mother, private Spirits, have not set up their Idols, their new
stamped divinity? which Proteus-like changes shapes so often, that two days old
it is grown out of knowledge: Error I have heard ere now compared to Hydra that
monster with a hundred heads, but still the crown of truth was constancy: the
Eldest Daughter of Almighty God, and so took place from her Fathers titles, and
she was always one and the same: But sure in these days she has either
degenerated into error or borrowed so much of the nature of it, as that she is
as various as the minds of those which are the assertors of her: and as Micahs
Idols are here raised out of that stock which he first stole from his Mothers
coffers, the mint of our Religions most commonly are some old wifes traditions,
which new molten and new molded work so deep an impression in our credulous
souls, that they justle out the most solemn, devout, essential, divine parts
of our service of God: Blasphemous wretches! ( I tremble to speak what these
ears have heard) who durst accuse our Savior of indiscretion, and his Apostles
of presumption, for leaving two such Legacies, a Prayer and a Creed to the
succeeding Church: Nay the very Canon of holy Scripture must wait for
approbation in their corner Synodals, or else be no longer Canonical: Blessed
Savior! thou did once extort a Confession together with the blood of the
Apostate Julian that his wounds opened their mouths with a Vicisti Gallilaee,
now Christ thou have the upper hand: Arise O God, plead thine Own cause,
remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily: forget not the voice of
thine enemies, the presumption of them that hate thee increases ever more and
more.

For Micahs dispencing holy Orders to his Son, alas we can spare that Labor,
there is a rank smell of Popery breathed out of the very name of Orders: Orders
do suppose distinctions. We can be every man his own Priest: witness our
Anabaptists the new sprung sect of Sebaptists and our other Familists; we can
pray for our selves, instruct our selves, Baptize our selves, bless our selves,
curse our selves, and what you will: Dii talem terris avertite pestem!

And yet perhaps if some young Levite with a lusty voice will take ten shekels
and a suit of Clothes, he may be put into employment. Pudeat dicere Academici!
ex nobis nostra est perditio; the Vipers which have eaten through the bowels of
the Church are our own offsprings: These creep into the Pulpit, God knows from
whence, as some customary birds at the time of the year into hollow trees,
where out of zealous ignorance they dare declaim against all Authority as
Antichristian, all antiquity as heretical, all moral-learning as in it self
damnable, which I confess is the best plea for their own ignorance.

The old Egyptians in their Hieroglyphical Characters made the Hyaena a Symbol
of Heresy, which beast (if we believe Aristotle) had the power to blind the
Shepherds and make the Dogs dumb, then counterfeiting the Pastors voice, the
simple Sheep came at their call and so were devoured by them: whether Natures
Storehouse have furnished the World with such a traitorous brood of creatures
I will not here determine. But I am sure Religion has found too many of them.
They creep into Congregations and blind the eyes of the Lawful Pastors, and
perhaps have insinuated so far into the hearts of the Assembly that they make
him dumb too, he may not be heard to speak: his Bells are cracked, his
Pomegranates have lost their Savor: These are the only Spokesmen, and that so
loud, that the spies that travel by, may hear them, but the poor sheep, which
dance attendance to their deceitful voice, escape well if they lose nothing
but their fleeces: Our Savior Christ in 23 Math. 14. gives us intimation of
such as upon a pretense of long prayers devour Widows houses; I doubt, the woe
comes down to these times: I Am sure the Levite here with Micahs Religion had
packed away Micahs Estate too, if we look narrower to it: for that's the poor
Man's complaint in the 24. Verse of the 18. Chapter, that he had no more left;
and how many sad stories teach us when Souls and bodies, Goods and Goodness,
Estates, and Religions, have been shipwrack'd altogether. Well: Micahs story
that's made up and in all this we have done that which it right in our own eyes.

Next come the Danites; where I shall not apply the circumstances, there is too
much envy would wait upon them: But I am sure we have Zorahs and Eshtaols
enough, factious Towns and Cities, which can furnish us with a tumultuous brood
of discontented Brethren, which think their borders are too straight, they must
let out their appetites, and make more room for their active souls. And if
Micah have a solitary house upon mount Ephraim in the way, let him take heed of
pillaging: the suspicion of an Idol within his doors, will be enough co
confiscate all his goods and gold too, to this Exchequer; And truly if their
Insolency be not curbed, I believe they will discover many unknown Idolaters:
Scarce a Goldsmiths shop shall be past by, but some graven Image shall be found
in it to make it a lawful booty.

But if the severity of the Law do restrain such private Burglaries, yet Gods
house is sure to go to it. There be Idols in the Temple: that is watchword
enough for a riotous Assembly: force open the Doors, break down the Windows,
let the spies enter and the armed men keep the passage: but once in, it is not
the Altar and Rails will serve them, no the Vestry and the Library, yes the
poor man's box shall be suspected to have a golden Image in it: Nay there is no
place secure, there is an Idol in the Desk: away with the book of
Common Prayer, tear it to pieces: There is an Idol in the Pulpit too, or
rather the Priest of Idols; hale him, pull him out, tear off the sacred
Vestments from his superstitious shoulders: The Ephod and the Teraphim will not
suffice; the Surplice and the Hood: Cherubims and Seraphins must all away, nay
the very stones of the pavement shall be torn up, because men kneel upon them;
Thus, O God, do they break down the carved works of thy house with axes and
Hammars.

The Prophet David in that Psalm of Lamentations (where he drops as many tears
from his eyes as letters from his pen, for the Desolation of the Sanctuary)
Psalm. 94. complains of the havoc those unruly bands had made in the midst of
the Congregations: And the Septuagint Copies, (whether upon a Mistake in the
first transcribing, or of set purpose I know not) render that word, (...) by
(...), instead of burning his Synagogue, they say they will forbid his
Festivals: And sure between those two there is a most near relation. No readier
gap laid open for the neglect of Gods Sabbaths, then the prophanations of his
Holy Temples: If the Beauty of holiness once be lost, there will be very few
that will continue Saitors to it: Set a cheap price upon Religion, and it will
find but few Customers.

Yet who shall be the Ringleader to this furious rout, but the young Levite
who had covenanted to be Micah's servant? His voice at first called in the
Spies to search the house, and now is the joyfullest man to be in the midst of
the Assembly. How many cursed Chams has our Church found, quae tanquam sorex
suo periit indicio, such who are the readiest to discover their Parents
nakedness; such who being Hirelings and not true Shepherds, as our Savior
calls them, John 10. enter not by the door, but climb in some other way, the
same are thieves and robbers.

Nor yet will this Levite forsake his Golden Gods, he hoped I believe, ere long
to have some limb or other of his Idol stamped into lesser pieces and gingle
in his pocket. His Mr. Micah was but a private man, and ten shekells but a poor
reward for the hazarding of his Soul: but if a Tribe of Israel will entertain
him, choose their Religion he will be their Minister, he will serve them in it.
Although we for ought find, when they were settled where they would be, they
casheer'd him and Jonathan was consecrated in his stead: It Is so with us;
Religion is a good cloak though many times Covetousness and Sacriledg are hid
under it. Dionysius pluckes off Aesculapius his golden beard in Apollo's
Temple, not out of fear of Idolatry least the people should fall down and
worship it, but that he alone might adore it, when it was locked up safe in his
own Coffers: Thus all the holiness of some of our Reformers has ere now proved
but sacra fames auri: a religious itch their fingers have had to be telling the
Gold of the Sanctuary, which has constantly proved an Achans wedge, corrupted
and consumed the heap to which 'twas laid.

Thus the Danites story that is made up too, and in all this we have done that
which is right in our own eyes.

The Last is the rape in Gibeah: but in sins of that nature we scorn to have
patterns set us; we will out do all examples; that which once was said of Rome,
is now more true of England, illic impune peccare licet: we dare sin without
control; else what mean those scandalous, adulterous, incestuous copulations,
acted as if it were in despite (quam ingeniosa est haec nequitia) under the
nose of those Courts which formerly have punished them?

But closer yet, this Ephraimite was a Levite which travailed thus patiently
after his offending Concubines; but returning among the Benjamites, he finds
them so far estranged from civil hospitality, that pro disco damnum, lust
backed with violence is their most friendly salutations: None here I hope will
deny but the Ministers in the Gospel are espoused to their several
Congregations: God Almighty is the Father which gives them in this mystical
Marriage. Where after much pains and patience, long suffering and meekness they
have travailed to reclaim their errors, and call them back to their first
Loves: if they pass by the Benjamites ( those ravenous wolves which love to
devour the prey, and devide the spoil, Genesis 49.27.) it is well if they find
highway respect, and not be cudgeld out of that too. The Lions courtesy goes
a great way now, ( I assure you,) when he did no injury: More likely the young
Children of the Bethlemites will meet them in the streets and cry go up thou
bald head, go up thou bald head; but for their Concubines the benefices, every
man must be better acquainted with them: They will lie with them, that is, Know
them, one after another, make their several impropriation of them, and that
all night, so long till they have made a custom of it: So that in the morning
when this poor Concubine returns to her Lord the Levite, she shall neither
have life or heat to comfort him.

If a poor old Sojourner, one that has enough to do to secure his own head
from violence amongst them, shall take these traveilers under his roof to
protect them from the fury of the Citizens, he runs the same danger with them,
and well if the prostituting of his own Daughter can quit him from their hands:
Gods mercy to his Church is such, that he has always raised up some to
vindicate the reputation of it: yet sometimes they are so far overborne that
good Obediah, that Patron of the Prophets is every hour in danger of his own
destruction 1 Kings 18. And whotsoever shall be so religious as to undertake
their Patronage, although he plead not for Bigamy, plurality of Concubines (the
old Ephraimite here did not so) but only that they may quietly enjoy the
freedom of the place with what the Law of God and nature gives them, yet this
very plea may endanger the prostitution of his own Daughter, the publication of
his own Estate.

Thus the Gibeonites story, that is made up too, and in all this we have done
that which is right in our own eyes:

You see the effects are come home to us within our doors, but the cause you
will tell me fails: For in these days we have a King in this our Israel: And
God be blessed that in these days we have a King: may the days of this King,
in himself and his Royal race endure for ever: Yet let me tell you there is no
great difference between having no King, and a King no whit obeyed: Or if any
be, the latter is the most extreme, if malum culpae exceed that of poenae; for
so we alter it from a punishment of God to a sin of our own.

When every churlish Nabal shall refuse to let distressed David enter commons
with his own day-labourers, and partake of such provision as he had made for
his sheep-sherers, denying the least portion of his Estate, to David's use, when
the security of all his Estate consist, in David's protection: And if Ahimelech
the Priest (which has scarce bread enough to put in his own belly) shall feed
him with some few loaves of the Sanctuary, and so refresh and strengthen him
with a little Consecrated bread (although in the mean time he fast himself for
it) it shall be cause enough for some treacherous Doeg to inform against him;
and the next news will be Saul's command to his foot men, his Militia, to turn
and slay the Priests of the Lord, because their hands are with David. When
every reviling Shimei as he passes by the highway may freely and without
control curse the Lords Anointed; Nay more throw stones and dirt upon him;
bespatter his unblemisht name, and poison his reputation with malicious and
false slandours, disscourses, of most dangerous Consequences: When Achitophel
his own bosom Friend and choicest Counselor shall provoke all Israel against
him, and put down Joab the Captain of the Kings Host, and set set up Amasa in
his room: When Sheba the Benjamite [neither Priest nor Prophet] shall dare to
blow the Trumpet in the high way, renounce David and send every man of Israel
to their tents: When the King and all his Servants shall be forced from
Jerusalem that Royal City, and receive no entertainment as he passes by
Bahurim, till he come to Mahanaim far off, where old Barzillay remembers his
Duty, and performs his allegiance better. If these scattered drops do
fore-token a black storm a coming; if these thick mists which fall so fast, may
easily convince us that our Suns a setting, we need not go far to seek a cause
for those forenamed Insolences. I am amazed, Sirs, when I behold the purest
times of our Religious Forefathers, and see those blessed Martyrs, even when
they were dressed up in flames, and accompanied Eliah to heaven in a charret of
fire, when they were grinding between the teeth of Lions, when they were driven
to the tops of Mountains like so many sheep to the slaughter; when their
ingenuous Torturers were overcome at their own art, and could invent no
punishment answerable to their patience: Then, at their hour of suffering, to
hear them pray for their Persecutors, to hear them pour out their Souls in
their most pious devotions, for a blessing on the heads of those Tyrants under
whom they suffered: fighting against them indeed, but cum precibus and
lachrimis, with those melting swords of prayers and tears: And we, which enjoy
all those blessings which a peacable government can enrich a Land with, we
which fit every man under our own Vines, and our own figtrees partaking of the
fatness of the Land; we which are with as much severity kept off from
idolatry, as the Old Christians were enforced to it, we which now hear the
bells toll quietly to bring us together to the public service of God, which
(were it not for this government) we might expect would be jangling in a more
dismal tune, ringing a funeral peal to the Town or City; that we Christians,
We Protestants should conceive a mischief against the King in our private
bed-chambers; nay more, should unbridle our tongues so far as to express
those thoughts, nay more yet; should put those thoughts and words in Action,
and lift up the finger against the Lords Anointed.

I bring not in a Zisca's drum, a ratteling of the elements to terrify
Children with fantastic fears; I would to God the times were such that I might
give my self the lie. But alas ye all know it is true; it is, and has been
acted: We have a mind to Micahs Idols, to Dan's robbery, to Gibeas rape, and
therefore we are for no King to Israel.

The confusion of my Text is so great, that I have lost all Method, I will not
seek now to recover it: but shut up all with one Paraenesis. You see the evil,
it is general, it extends to every man: and there is but one Salve too, which we
can properly call, (...), a King amongst us: A precious ointment it is, and as
pretiously to be laid up, laid up by prayers for him, by hands with him, by
purses to him of all good subjects. The breath of our nostrils, the life of our
liberties, the strength of our hopes the pillar of our Religion: his Commission
is signed from Heaven, Pro. 8.15. By me Kings reign. His Authority is conferred
by Heaven, Chron. 1.16. He is the Anointed of the Lord: His power descends from
Heaven, Psalm. 21.1. The King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord: Obedience
to him is required from Heaven, 1 Pet. 2. It is the will of God that you submit
your selves to the government of your Kings. I have heard the Prophet David
suspected by some as partial in his own cause; just like the Northern
Borderers, who conceived the eighth Commandment (Thou shall not steal) to be
none of Gods making, but foisted in by Henry the Eight, to shackle their
theevish fingers: I am sorry that ever the Truth of Scripture should depend
upon the arbitrary opinion of men: but if S. Paul have gained a better credit
with them, I dare oppose the 13. Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, against
the power of Men or Devils which would trample upon the neck of Kings: Let
every soul he subject; mark the style: There Is a Statute Law enacted in the
high Parliament of Heaven, which no man that owns a soul may break without high
Treason against man, and higher impiety against God. But if our doughty valor
have got so much confidence as to fight against the Spirit of God, the
apprehension of our own advantage might be a powerful argument, me thinks, to
establish this doctrine: Since in vindicating the right of Princes we assert
our own: By setting up a King in Ifrael, we pull down Micah's Idols, we stop
the Danites forces, we quell the lust of Gibeah. It Is Our battles he fights,
it is our Laws he enacts, it is Our Liberties he defends, it is our Life he
protects: he watches for us, he is exposed to personal hazards for us, he
writes for us, he draws the Sword for us.

Ye know the old story of all the members mutenying against the lazy Belly: The
accusation was, that it consumed all, but got nothing: but they denying their
usual contribution, you will soon find who went to the worst of it. The hands
were, feeble, the mouth pale, the feet weak, and the whole Commonwealth of the
body was out of frame. If Moses do not stand in the top of the Mount, with the
Rod of God in his hand, Exodus 17. and hold up his hand too; Amalek will soon
overcome the camp of Israel.

God has blessed this Land to the Admiration of our Neighbors round about, with
a Prince in whom Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other, and carsed for
ever be the bramdles of Jotham, which would overshadow the Cedars of our
Libanon: But were he as detestable for his vices as he is now honorable for
his virtues, this were no fair plea for our disobedience: A wicked King may be
an effect of Gods wrath against a Nation; but the removal, the taking away this
wicked King, that is hotter, that is plain fury, Hos. 13. 11. Suppose him very
wicked, he has the more need of thy prayers to make him better. Suppose him to
be a Tyrant, he will give the fairer occasions to exercise thy virtue of
Patience. Suppose him to be a Persecutor, he will do thee a courtesy, he will
send thee to Heaven by violence. It is not oleum gratiae, but Dominii, that
Kings are anointed with: Saul was touched with this Oil long before the Spirit
of God came upon him, and this Oil was not wiped off, it swam uppermost still,
it had the pre-eminence long after, when that evil spirit did possess him.

If we took to the story of the 26 of the first Book of Samuel, when Saul's
guilty conscience gave him leave to sleep in the trenches of Hachilah, with his
men of war round about him, we shall find as many arguments to arm David's hand
against him, as ever met to depose a Sovereign Title: First on Saul's part, he
was an unnatural Tyrant against his own son Jonathan, he was a bloody
Persecutor of the Priests of God; he was a sacrilegious Usuper of their holy
Offices, he was a deamoniacal furious man possessed with a Devil: Next on
David's part, his life was sought for, and by sparing Saul he should undo
himself: he had all the opportunity that night and security could administer to
him: he was Saul's adopted son by Michals marriage, he was successor to the
Kingdom by the Prophets unction; and yet for all this, as if he had been a
Champion to maintain the right of Princes, he stops Abisha with a quis unqum?
Who can lift up the hand against the Lords anointed? And he that did it
afterward, though upon Saul's own entreaty (if himself may be believed found him
as stout a revenger, as he was a bold challenger: He brings News of Saul's
Death, but is sent after him the grave. I am amazed, Sirs, when I hear mention
of the Loyalty of some old Heathen, some of them exposing their bodies to the
deadly stroke of the enemies, to secure the person of their Emperors. Others
leaping alive into their Funeral piles, as if they could do them no later, no
greater service. But I will name no more, lest their dust fly in our eyes, so
blind and eclipse the glory of Christians: For let me seriously put the
question: Are we Christions? Do we know the virtue of in Oath? What think we
then of that solemn Oath of our Allegiance? An Oath which can receive no
dispensation, no absolution from what power soever: Are we Protestants? Nay one
step farther yet; are we Protestors? What think we then of that branch of the
late Protestation, that I will maintain the established doctrine of the Church,
as it stands in opposition to Popery and Popish Innovations: I conceive this
mainly material to the work in hand, therefore give me leave a while to insist
upon it.

What is the doctrine of the School of Jesuits, Bellarmines position will fully
tell us, non licere Christianis tolerare regem haereticum, etc. Princes falling
into Apostacy from the faith or heresy in the faith, lose all dominion over
their Subjects: and our own Countriman, Parsons goes a little farther, that the
People if they can gather strength sufficient ought to depose such an unworthy
Governor: and like apt Scholars they will learn their lesson quickly; for thus
a Jacobine with an Assassination shall soon make good in practice what their
School has taught them. Thus without much straining they make good the Text:
Those there work their pleasure because there was no King in Israel, these here
will have no King because they might the more freely work their pleasure.

Contrary to this is established doctrine of the Church of England in the 37th.
Article: The Kings Majesty his the chief power in this Realm of England, and
his other Dominions: and is not, nor ought to be subject to any Jurisdiction
whatsoever, but may and must restrain with the sword the Stubborn and Evil
doers: Far different (it seems) from that he is tobe restrained by Stubborn
and Evildoers, upon a pretense of his evil doing: To which purpose are those
six parts of the homily against Rebellion so full and apposite that we must
either disclaim them from being the interpreters of the Doctrine of our Church,
or sit down convinced in the manifest truth of this assertion.

To these I shall and the Testimony of some unquestioned Divines amongst us,
purposely avoiding the authority of such who are amongst some men (perhaps,
unworthily) suspected, lest their names prove a blemish to the Calendar: Bishop
Cranmer (in his Necessary Erudition for Christian Men) (A work composed by him
and other Divines of Henry the Eight, and printed long since by the same King)
upon the fifth Commandment, declares that, by it we are bound not to withdraw
our Fealty Truths Love and Obedience from our Princes, for what cause soever it
be, nor yet for any cause may we conspire against his Person, nor do any thing
toward the hindrance or hurt thereof or of his, Estate. Not long after, Bishop
Hooper, upon the same commandment determines, that if he be naught, that rules
the place he is in, it is the Order and work of God: so if thou put a
difference between the Office it self which is good, and the Officer which is
evil, it shall keep thee in a religious fear that thou reverence a good and
godly Government in a bad Governor. Bishop Latimer a Companion of them both
(in a Sermon upon Twelfday) tells us, that we may for nothing in the World
(observe the Universality) rebel against the Ordinance of God, that is the
Magistrate. All these three glorious Saints did in their Actions consirme their
Doctrine, and in the days of Queen Mary received the triumphant crown of
Martyrdom, obeying her in suffering for that, which their consciences would not
give them leave actually to perform. Next them comes that painful and Reverend
Bishop Jewel, who dispuring the Case with Harding draws issue in the story
Chilperick of France: whom the Nobles deposed; the people were contented with
it, and then Pope confirmed it, (rebellion as well strengthened as we could
wish) yet did his Succcessor Pepin scarce ever with quiet enjoy the Kingdom;
and of the nine Generations (which were all that of that race succeeeded)
hardly one was found which went down into the grave in peace. Dr. Humpheryes
Sermons upon Abisha's story 1 Samuel 26. are so full to our cause in hand, that I
should do him wrong to cite any part of him, and not spin it put to a just
Treatise: I referr ye to the book it self; as also to Bishop Bancrofts
English-Scottzing; Bishop King in his 35. Lecture on Jonas makes it the very
case of the Brownist, who in his reformation would tread Conscience, Obedience,
Religion and Duty both to God and Man under foot. Whereupon the Reverend Bishop
Davenant in his twelfth determined Question tells us, induant quam venlint
pietatis larvan^ isti Magistratuum (mark that Magistratuum not Religionum)
reformatores, Albiniani tamen Nigriani out Cassiani rectius audient, quam
Christiani; Let them mask under what cloak they will, Religion may be their
plea, but Rebellion is their practice. I shall forbear the envy of naming such
as are still alive amongst us, of whom Bishop Morton is not the least; But one
passage of the Reverend Primate of Armagh in a speech in the Castle Chamber may
not be forborne, because of the Universality of the position: There is nothing
so contrary to the nature of Sovereignty (which I hope we still allow our
Kings, if not how fell they from it?) as to have any Superior power to
overruled them: Qui Rex est, Regem (Maxim) non habeat: I forbear Seravia,
because although one of our Church, yet a stranger born; and the Learned Erwin
of Scotland: their works will testify sufficiently: Yet if you desire to know
the consentient opinion of the Protestant Divines, take Calvin in his 25. Sect.
of his 4. book of Institutions; Beza in his exposition on the 13. to to the
Romans and the Harmony of them all, in the confession of the Helvetian Divines in
the 19. Sect. Article 25. They have prepared against Sophistications in their
Anathema: there is put in both the palam and the Art too, whosoever openly by
offense, as well as cunningly pretending defense shall do it, there is a
damnamus past upon him, there is sentence given by the Church against him,
acquit him who will.

These are men whose names will tell you never were yet suspected for a
Malignant Party: Should we blot out these from the Catalogue of the Churchy, I
fear we had but a poor Charter for our Religion; if we esteem them as they are,
Protestants, I wonder how we can make so brave a flourish with this late taken
Protestation in our hats, and banish the genuine interpretation from our hearts.

If then there be any here with whom that sacred name of Majesty, like a high
Mountain at a great distance, has seemed to vanish into the Air and prove a
little nothing, suffer your selves to be undeceived; search the Scriptures, and
if ye be of David's faith put on David's conscience, who after he had cut off the
skirt of Readiness robe privily, his heart smote him, and his tears washed out his
faule: 1 Samuel 24.6, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing, unto my
Master the Lords Anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is
the anointed of the Lord: He did but cut off a lap, and shall we lay our Lords
anointed naked? Naked, not to relieve his wants; naked, to discover (if any
were) his shames. If we be Christians, it makes good our title to him he is
Christus Domini, The Lords Christ: if we be Protesants (I speak it again) such
as disclaiming the names of Papists, would not degenerate into their Religion,
we must confess that damnation is the portion of him that resists this
ordinance of God.

Shall Isaiah call Cyrus the Lords anointed? Baruch and Jeremiah bid us pray
for Nebuchodonoser? Peter and Paul command submission to Tyberius, Nero and
Caligula, all heathenish persecuting Emperors? and we neglect our Constantine,
our Theodesius, the dew of Heaven which is fallen upon, this fleece of England,
when all the World is wet with blood besides? If we shall abuse his patience
into fury, can we expect any less judgment then to be forced under that fury to
practice Patience? If any then neglecting the Urim and the Prophets, the
established ordinance of God, as fanatic Saul did 1 Samuel 28. and recurr to
Wizards, (wise women, as you call them) and inquire of them the event of such a
battle, as this would prove; they may perhaps bring you to Samuels Ghost, some
Devil in a Prophets likeness, but look for no better success, then he fourd
there, the death of your selves and your Sons, The stars in their course from
Heaven will fight against Sisera, and conjurati venient in classca venti, the
wind and the hailstones will muster up their forces against Adonizedek and his
confederates. But for you which despise Micah and his private new fangled
devotion, which resist Dan, and his riotous, tumultuous assemblies, which would
cool Benjamin, and his goatish ravenous lust, make it your care to continue a
Rex in Israel. Suffer no Baanahs and Rechabs that dare murder Kings there
beds, no Bightans and Tharezes that dare entertain the motion in their hearts,
to live amongst you: Oils by experience we know will mix, although power'd
into a vessel, much water be put betwixt them: You which have found the Oil of
the holy Spirit in your hearts, let it join your hearts and commix your souls
to the Oil upon the head of Gods anointed: That thus the religion of your
hearts may burst our of joyful lips with prayers, That God would visit him as
he did Moses in the bush, Joshua in the Battle, Gideon in the field, David in
the Temple: that the dew of his abundant mercies may fall upon his head, and
that he would give unto him the blessings of David and Solomon: That he would
he his helmet of Salvation against the face of all his enemies and a strong
Tower of defense in the time of adversity: That his reign may be prosperous,
and his days many; That peace and love, holiness, and Justice, and Truth, all
Christain Virtues may flourish in his time: That his people may serve him with
Honor and Obedience, and that he may so duly serve God here on Earth that he
may hereafter everlastingly reign with God in Heaven. Amen. Amen.

The Second SERMON.
JUDGES 4.23. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) yea, curse ye
bitterly the Inhabitants thereof: because they came not to the help of the Lord
against the mighty.
A Text no doubt in season; we have an age to Curse in, I to curse bitterly too
tanquam venena Aspidum, the poison of Aspes is under our lips. And these lips
we think are touched by the Angel of God too: A coal from the Altar at least
has fired our tongues: Nay we are grown valiant of late, we dare go out to
fight now and make the people believe, it is to the help of the Lord: And that
no title be left out, it is to the help the Lord against the mighty too: Our
pulpits by their Almighty power can create new forces, and in one nights space
proclaim them mighty whom our Saterdays night Pamphlets told us where to be
pitied for their weakness: Thus can we wrest the Scripture to our own
destruction, and gain this credit when we are once unmaskt, that we have been
plausible deceivers.

It Is no new rule, that corruption optima fit pessima, That the most Sovereign
antidote when the Spirits are decayed, or that it self by some unskilful
Emperick mis-apply'd proves oftentimes the rankest poison; And I know
indigefting stomachs may corrupt the most nourishing meats, and the sweetest
flowers may stink of his breath that smells them: Thus that pure, that sacred
fountain of Holy Scripture, whence the waters of life are drawn in their own
Crystal integrity, when it is royld with our inventions proves aqua mortis,
the poisoned waters of Sodom: The standing lake which neither, flows to other
Contryes nor nourishes in their own: tuus esse incipit. This book of God, so
abused does God as little or less service, then the Turkish Alcoran or the old
Romane-Tables. I know this place was never meant for controversy: The intent of
Sermons was (...), for conclusions to edification, not for disputation; they
should not rob the chair. But yet when Sheba shall dare to blow the Trumpet in
the highway and renounce his inheritance in David, it is time for Joab to cast
a bank about his City and besiege him: If any unprejudicate and well-affected
Christians, have drank in poison at their ears, which now (...), inflames their
souls, sets them a fire on mischief; I shall desire (which I do on my knees to
heaven) by a plain lesson on Deboras harp to disenchant them, and by a true
though homely relation of this story here, a relation in which neither language
nor method shall be concise, to undeceive them.

The people of Israel, Gods own inheritance was at this time under the
government of their Judges, which had then the supreme authority. Which
authority, whether it were the same with what their Kings did after enjoy, or
only a praeparative to it, an Usher to the royal dignity, I will not here
determine. Yet this I am sure of, it came from Heaven, and God himself was
Author of it; for when the common people, (queis semper mutare potentes
principium est,) whose brains are always turning round upon their changes, did
in the following story desire a King (which might seem an honorable and fair
exchange, whether ye regard their higher credit with other nations, or their
greater security against foreign powers, or the praedetermination of Almighty
God, who had promised this dignity long ago to the seed of Abraham Genesis 17.)
God takes the affront as put upon himself 1 Samuel 18. They have not refused
thee, but they have refused me that I should not reign over them: So constant
is Almighty God to his own principles, that although in things intended by
himself, he will not be prevented by the fantastic desires of men.

Well! Israel thus founded had many enemies: furnaces at lest to cleanse them
from their dross: Intestina pericula, pills left in the bowels of their
possessions to purge out their corruption: Five Lords of the Philistines, and
the Zidonians and the Hivites and the Jebusites and the Perizzites and the
Canaanites, who would claim title of inheritance to this land of promise.
Amongst these, Jabin a Mighty Man (that had nine hunderd Chariots of Iron, and
a powerful host, whose Captain was Sisera, that lived in Harosheth,) like a
near neighbor, he lies heavy on them; he oppresses, the Sons of Israel. Those
which would show their skill in fetching proper names from their originnall,
(and indeed your old Geneva Bibles do it) tell me that Sisera signifies a
foreseer of Horses, and Harosheth a wooden place of strength; once get a place
of strength, and then pretend some fears and jealousies of I know not what
impossible conceits, that naked Israel (which had not a spear among forty
thousand in the beginning of this Chapter) is preparing strength of Horses, or
I know not what, it is provocation enough for Sisera to go up against them.

Their judge Deborah (a Woman of most masculine Spirit) was under a Palm tree,
in the highway to Mount Ephraim: Whether excluded her City or not, I cannot
tell, but the text says there she dwelt: And truly why may we not think
excluded? 'Twas David's lot afterward, who had more Majesty and title too, in
and to the Royal City, which himself had raised; yet forced from thence,
Bahurim and the other places as he passed by, proves as ungrateful as
Jerusalem her self. She with her Co-partner Barak, at the Lords appointment do
prepare for Battle: But alas nisi Dominus -- unless the Lord had been on their
side, all the forces they could gather had not been enough for Siseras host to
breath themselves upon. Reuben they find divided, Gilead would not pass his
borders: Asher had possessed himself of the Sea Coasts and the strong holds, he
thought himself securer there: Dan was employed about the ships, he will make
the coasts sure, whatsoever becomes of the Country within: Yes, naviget
Antyceras, a little Hellebore would purge his brain better and make him wiser.
Only the two Northern Tribes Zebulon and Napthali, with ten thousand men which
offer themselves willingly will undertake this quarrel. Yet let me not
bespatter all the rest: Ephraim, and Benjamin, and Machir the son of Manasses,
and Issachar too, all Southern Counties sent out some Nobles, which were so
bold as to be honest, and associated themselves in this holy war. And I know
not how there crept in some that handle the pen of the writer too, which might
make Gods battails famous, and record to after ages those stories which the
sword here had wrote in blood. Those Judges which escaped the noise of the
Archers came down upon their white Asses: and although the Laws are mute where
the Drum speaks, they durst then tell them what the Law was, they durst sit in
Judgment, and speak the righteous acts of God. As for the rest, they chose
them new Gods, ( novum cultum says the Paraphraser) new forms of devotion, new
moulds of the old Religion, if you will; every one made an Idol of himself and
worshipped his own inventions.

Well, their Army thus confederate prepare their march: But where is their
Ammunition? No armor but that of faith: not one shield or spear amongst forty
thousand men in Israel: and as little hopes of supplies was there in other
places: Asher had stopped the coasts, Dan had seized the Ships, the high ways
were beset, and the travelers glad to walk thorough by paths. But Deborah
arose, Deborah that mother in Israel: She knew that Gods hand was not shortened
that he could not redeem, nor his power diminished that he could not deliver:
Joshua had tried it before with trumpets of rams-hornes, Ehud with his two
edged sword, Shamgar with his ox-goad: He which before had slain five Kings
with hailstones, could not he muster up an army of stars to fight in their
courses against the army of Sisera? Timere metuit: it is the Lords appointment,
she dares not fear it, but marches on courageously, whilst her general Barak
leads on the forces, to Mount Tabor the randevouz. A little distance from the
Mountain was the village Meroz, whose neighboring Situation might well have
succored them, if not with a greater strength of men for a reserve at need, yet
with a necessary shelter in the day of Battle: But this, whether affrighted
with the chariots, or trusting to the horses of the enemies troops, shut in
themselves and shut out the Israelites they will not come to hely the Lord.

And indeed what need of help has he, in whose name all help consists? The
battle joins; the Charets are discomfited, Sisera leaves his Coach and flies
away on foot: and Deborah returns back a triumphant Conqueror. Yet least She
should forget that God that taught her hands to fight, and her arms to break
those bows of steel. She sings a Paean, a song which a Quire of Angels would
Echo too, a song of triumph to the Lord of hosts: In the midst of which, as it
were a sharp, a relish to all the rest, she brands this ingratitude of Meroz in
the Text. Curse ye Meroz (says the Angel) curse ye bitterly the inhabitants
thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty.

I shall be very brief in the Theory of my Text. Discourses of this nature
require more practice: In the words behold an Anathema, a sentence of
excommunication (if you will) pronounced: And accordingly to make it legal,
here are all the parts of it: 1. There is the hand and seal, the authority
confirming it, The Angel says it, 2. There is the form of the sentence, curse
ye; yea curse ye bitterly: 3. There is the Excommunicate person, Meroz and her
inhabitants: 4. There is the crime of which she stands convict, a negative
fault, a sin of omission, for not helping the Lord, not helping the Lord
against the mighty: Oppositions seem here at the first view abundantly to meet:
The ark of God and Dagon you would think were content with the same roof: here
is the Angel of God, that messenger of glad tidings, with curses in his mouth:
here is God the Lord Almighty has need of help against the mighty: here is the
first Caos molded up together, yet with your patience, out of this darkness
God may enable us to produce some light.

First the Angel speaks it; and well there is so good authority. If this
blazing starr from Heaven, had not pointed out this judgment, holy Deborah
would have blessed her enemies, and prayed for them that used her thus
despitefully. I will not trouble you here with the Schoolmens quarrels what
this Angels name was, or of what Order in the Heavens, whether he defended
visibly, or motu Angelico, insensibly: pretty cobwebs these are to catch flies
in. Or whether this Angel were her confederate. Barak, inspired by Heaven with
a Prophetic soul, which Peter Martyr thinks a probable conjecture: be it one
or other in idem res rediit, this we know, that in times past there was a (...)
diverse ways and manners, how God spoake to our forefathers by the Prophets:
Saul (it seems) 1 Samuel 28, Made trial of them all, he sought God by dreams and
visions, by Urim and the Prophets, but finding Heaven inflexible, Acheronta
movet, a witch at Endor must do the feat, and raise up the Devil in Samuels
mantle to inform him: which Necromantick Religion I would to God it descended
not down to these our days; Too many I fear me, finding their dreams grown
ridiculous, and their visions blinded, and disdaining the Urim, the precious
stones of the high Priests breastplate, and the Prophets, have but one refuge
left, some old woman which can raise up Samuels Ghost, a Divil in a Prophets
likeness, which without the wages of Balaak, or the expectation of an Angel of
God, can make every Cupboards side or tables-end the top of Pisgah, and the top
of Peor, from whence they spit out their poison upon the host of Israel: Nos
autem Christum non sic didicimus, if any Man amongst us be thus contentious we
have no such custom nor the Church of Christ: Deborah was a Prophetess yet
durst not she strain her authority thus far: but signatim dicit, least this
curse should pretend to a morality and prove a leading case to all succeeding
ages, she shows her patent and produces her authority, The Angel of the Lord
says it. And let us give Gods Angel this honor to afford him, 1. A Credendum
2. A Tremendum, 3. A Cavendum:

Credendum 1. Gods Angel is but his messenger, and shall God speak it and the
thing not come to pass? It Is confirmation enough to me that Meroz fell under
this bitter curse, because neither sacred Scripture, nor humane writer that (I
can find) did ever since make mention of it: And indeed Sirs, lets take heed;
there are (...), Angels upon the Earth still: The Church has Angels says St.
John, and the Woman of Tekoah thought the King of Israel was at least (...) as
the Angel of the Lord: Thus when the Angel of the Church curses shall our souls
be so irreligiously incredulous as to call it brutum fulmen, a squib in the
air, or if the Angel of the state curses, to call it fulmen br^ti, Hannibals
fagots on his bulls horns to make them roar the louder? Experience will be a
sharp a Mistress, when we shall one day feel the Burden of that which we would
not believe.

But, 2. Tremendum. Manoahs Wife thought the face of the Angel very terrible,
and at that time when he comes to comfort her Judges, 13. and shall not Meroz
tremble when he comes to curse her? This is most truly (...), the Eclipsing of
the Sun, the blacking over the face of Heaven. Vaenobis (says St. Bernard) si
quando provocati sancti Angeli peccatis and negligentiis, indignos nos
judicaverint praesentia and vifitatione sua. Unhappy Sodom when her daring
sins put Lot and his Angels to flight; but infinitely more unhappy, when they
came armed with fire and brimstone to destroy it. Our good God created them
Ministering Spirits, partly for the use of Men, ore whom he gave them charge;
though all that time he never lessens their joys of Heaven, there is exterius
Ministerium, says Gregory, but still there is interior contemplatio: But when
our guardidians prove our executioners, when the Sheepheards which should
quarrel with the wolves, devour the flock: when the Cherub that defends the
garden of Eden, brandishes a flaming sword to drive out Adam, let us fear and
tremble.

Lastly, Cavendum: if we fear that curse, beware that sin which caused it: when
Jonathan shoots an arrow over David's head, it is enough to make David fly the
place, to beware his Fathers wrath: Here is one arrow shot over us, and it
lights on Meroz, but the bow is bent still, and armed with as great a curse, a
curse for cursing, if not for not going out to help the Lord, I am sure for
going to fight against the Lord: this was particular here and occasional, the
other is general and eternal. God speaks that, the Angel of God speaks this:
Curse ye Meroz (says the Angel of the Lord) yea curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof.

We are now come to the sentence: Curse ye, yea curse ye bitterly, that is,
curse ye with a cursing, in the original: in which I will not so far
interest my self, as to think to teach you, that it is a Hebraisme: yet thus
far give me leave to note, that these ingeminations are either used ass
^erando, as a note of confirmation, as that in Genesis 2. in the day thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely dye, moriendo morieris; or intendendo, as a
screw to set it higher, as this here, execrationibus execramini, curse ye
bitterly. What a curse is I shall satisfy my self, and you too I hope, in a
plain Narration from Aquihas: Idem est maledicere (says he) and malum dicere,
in his 76. Question 2.2. cursing is the same, with speaking or wishing evil:
And so a man may curse as many ways as he speaks: which is either Enuntiative,
declaring what is done: Thus Deborah in this song may be said to curse Sisera,
in that Rhetorical Catastrophe which Jael brought upon his life, At her feet he
bowed, he fell, he lay down; at her feet, he bowed, he fell, where he bowed
there he fell down dead: or 2ly Imperative by commanding what should be done,
which none, can challenge but they which have sovereignty, as God or his
Messengers, like the Angel here; or 3ly Optative, by wishing what might be
done, as (...) most execrations are. The first is in it self indifferent,
neither good nor evil, unless detraction accompany it; The two last are
always evil unless some occasion of a greater good do invite them: And this
good is double, 1. Either that of justice; thus God may curse immundum mundum,
the unclean World: Elisha may curse the reviling brats; and the Church may
curse the bastard of spring of Sectaries, which like the Mices birthday, fill
the mountain with abundant squeeking in the bringing forth, but then nascuntur
ridiculi, you may know they are empty vessels because they sound so much; or
secondly the good of profit, that affliction may reduce them: As David Psalm. 9.
wished a terror upon the Nations that they might know themselves to be but men.
From hence then we shall receive a speedy satisfaction, to those three
questions, which are only material, 1. penes quos est, in whose power this
power of cursing lies, 2. ad quos attinet, on whose shoulders it will fall; 3.
in quantum praevalet, with what burden it presses: there is infinite distance
between all these: here is abyssus abyssum invocans, one deep calling upon
another; only a powerful hand from heaven can throw down vengeance, only a
sinners neck can bear it, and if this thunderbolt be not stopped only the pit of
hell can bound it. From heaven it comes, whether immediately from God himself,
or from his Delegates: The first can make that serpent lick the dust of the
earth, which but just now aspired to the Scepter of Heaven: he can make Cain a
Runnegate in his own land, and fear the stroke of death from man, when he and
his father summed up [for ought we know] the total number of mankind. The other
have it by Commission and that Commission, they had need take care should be
well signed, or else their arrows will recoyl upon their own bosoms, and they
will provoke God to bless by their malicious curses. Some good expositors are
of opinion, that all the curses denounced in the old Law shall rather be
interpreted for propheticae praedictiones, then imprecationes maledicae: But
what ever power they had, I am sure it is now limited; there is an Evangelical
temper if we believe Christ that speaks it; when James and John would have been
a flashing in the clouds, and followed Elias in the Law, for fire from Heaven
on the Village of the Samaritans: Christ cooles their furious zeal with another
Spirit, Luke 9. he rebukes them saying, ye know not what manner of Spirits ye
are of: Fo^bear such legal threats, if you follow me your Master, I came to
save the World not to destroy it. For Ananias and Saphira's judgment, it is true
it came from heaven; but unless you enterline the Text and read it with
spectacles to make it bigger, it will no way appear to be caused by Peter's
Curse. So that if we compare St. Paul's precept, Romans 12. bless and curse not,
with his anathematizing Text, 1 Cor. 16. we shall soon find the Church has no
keys left to shut up Heaven but those which Christ left, as a Legacy in that
sacred ordination of his Apostles.

But secondly this curse is only due for sin, that being the adequate object of
the wrath of God: Hence does St. Paul think (...) doing good, will be an
undoubted shield against the power: So that Bellarmines, Uteunque ferit, will
prove but a blunt push, his excommunication undeserved is but a bull without
horns, crackers tied upon a line; flash they may, but wound they cannot.
Lastly to Hell it goes if not prevented: The Royal prophet in the 37. Psalm
says that, they that be cursed of God shall be cut off: Cut off from the Earth
first, as Pharaoh and his crew of persecutors, (after they had blunted the
arrows of God with often wounding, though they could never yet pierce their
hardened hearts:) his final destruction is threatened, Exodus 9.15. he will cut
them off from the face of the Earth: But 2. cut them down or a passage for them
down to hell too; witness Corah and his rebellious Conspirators, quibus dum non
essent digni vivere [sayes Optatus] nec mori concessum est: not deserving to
live, they were not vouchsafed to dye: sepulti sunt priusquam mortui: they
which had made a separation from their Fathers, may not be suffered to be
gathered to their Fathers, but go down quick to Hell. This is the effect of a
curse, a curse arising from a just cause, proceeding from a just Judge: If this
be the cause of Meroz, let her beware, and sure it is, for her judge is just
that speaks it, the Angel says, Curse ye Meroz and her inhabitants.

We are come to the Persons upon whom the censure falls, Meroz and her
inhabitants: Where I will not make you sport to tell you what pains Rupert
takes (although he cite St. Hierom for it) to make Meroz the praesident Angel
of the Canaanites, and the inhabitants to be the people under his protection.
Gerrae germanae, it is not worth confuting: Here is no Labyrinth that needs a
clue, or if there did, expositors with one mouth assure me, that this village
Meroz was a place adjoining to the field of battle, which must now be made
(...), a piaculum, a sacrifice to Gods curse to expiate the degenerate
backwardness of the neutrall tribes. Well may the gates of the Temple be made
of Cedar trees; Cedars so fat, so joyful, all Hieroglyphics of Gods mercy;
when as the gates of Heaven (for ought we find here) were open to an offending
multitude, and only shut against this handful of the people: Thus God is
pleased sometimes to decimate his malefactors, in paucos vindicta transit, in
plures monitio, he sets up Lots Wife as a pillar (...), says the Scholiast, a
Trophie to turn the hearts of the backsliding generations: for as he is a fire
to burn the chaff, so he is a fan to separate it from the purer wheat. When
fawning Absalom had seduced the people to a great rebellion, promising a freer
course of justice if he might reign, it is true a slaughter of the Israelites
was made in the wood of Ephraim, but still the surviving rebels were suffered
to return with David, whilst the justice of God contented it self with the head
of Absalom, hanging now as his counsels formerly had done, between Heaven and
Hell. But still as Meroz was but one place, yet a place it was, and a place
very considerable: With great disadvantage must Deborah fight, when the
villages about her were confaederate with her enemies: Put case that God had
defeated her before her enemy (as indeed (...), etc. A just cause does not
always inherit victory) what place was left to retreat to from the bloody
Mountain? what refreshment could be given to the fainting Soldiers? What
disheartning found the remoter tribes, when the place they marched to, for
fresh supplies upon occasion, proved the quarters of their enemies? As God
gives to Men, so he accepts from Men their opportunities: Rehekah was known to
be a fit wife for Isaac by her ready letting down her pitcher; and that soul
that would be espoused to Christ, must discover it self by a seasonable and
willing service. Yet mark, one step farther yet, together with the inhabitants,
Meroz herself, the very fabric bears a burden in the curse. The Eagles nest
is brought down from the Stars that the young ones may be destroyed: Oba. 4.
Thus when by Gods permission the Israelites (accursed for one man's pillaging)
found a repulse at the great City Aie, at the second assault Joshua contents
not himself with the head of the ruler, or the throats of the Citizens, but
makes the place it self a desolation. And this judgment God sends down
sometimes upon the inanimate Creature, either because it has been the
instrument to occasion man's folly, or rather that his folly may be punished by
that judgment; that man may learn to groan for sin, by the Creaturs example,
which groans under that punishment which is due to the sin of man: Well may the
young Eagles cry when the ones sacriledg has fired the nest she builds in: it is
the peoples sins begets the Cities curse: That's the last part, the cause of
this excommunication denounced, Curse ye Meroz (says the Angel) and her
inhabitants, because they went not out, to help the Lord, to help the Lord
against the mighty.

And indeed when God himself is gone up with a shout, and the Lord with the
sound of the trumpet, he may curse himself that stays behind: If it be true
that God does pursue those whom he does not accompany, it is more true that he
comes back upon those that do not accompany him. Gods cause is ours, in which
if we will not bear a share, we shall surely bear the burden. When the
Reubenites and the Gadites, (whether tired out with their tedious march, or
allured with the fatness of the plains of the Gileadites, or affrighted with
their Brethrens reports of the enemies strength fron the valley of Eschol) were
now grown lazy and neglected the portion of the other tribes, desiring, as they
thought to sleep in a whole skin, and not to endanger themselves by passing
over Jordan: See what a contestation Moses himself undertakes: Numb. 32. What a
strife beget they in meekness! He which chid his own passions before, now fell
to reviling them: They were nigri Jovis incrementum, an increase of sinful
men, the fomentors of Gods anger: And accordingly was their reward: The first
and greatest Giant Og, must be their task to tame; and the Gileadites once
cleared, unless they will go armed before the Lord to war and help their
Brethren, entrench themselves as sure as they can, they shall never shut out a
bosom enemy: there sins will find them out.

But stay; can God want help? will he, (...), sufficient of himself for Heaven
and Earth, fly to man for succor, in whom there is no help? What new Typhoeus
have we upon the Earth, which drives the Heavenly powers to the banks of Nile
for refuge! Is not God (...) Almighty? Whose Lips are the fountains of power,
at the breath of whose nostrils the infernal spirits tremble? and shall he
want assistance against the mighty? It Is true; and yet he so disposes his
affairs on Earth, That man may sometimes seem to get the upper hand: God works
not all things by a miraculous power but lets out some part of his vineyard to
the tillage and husbandry of man; in which sometimes, depopulatur aper, the
wild boars have their lurking holes, and the little foxes have their boroughs:
force or cunning have broken down their hedges. He sometimes permits a reviling
Shimei in the face of David's Army: a sacrelegious rout to deface his Sanctuary,
and not bury them in the ruins which they make: a Jewish confederacy, which
Turcisme would stand amazed at to recrucifie our Savior in imagine, and
hitherto not pays them home with Judas his portion, to go hang themselves.

And these the all seeing eye of providence dispenses, whether the more surely
to prove his friends, or the more fully to confound enemies. For the first, God
has a storehouse, from whence he could fill the hands of al his members yet
leaves he some hungry, some thirsty, some naked, to see who would refresh them:
Non quod te indiget, sed quod te ^o indigere cupit, he has no need of thee, but
he desires that thou should have need of him: What needed 32000 men of
Israel gathered under Gideons standart, when 300 did the feat? But to try who
would stand up for the Lord, and who will bow their knees to drink of the
waters: who would adore the flowing Transitory pleasures here. It Is true in
temporal as well as eternal salvation, qui te sine te fecit, te sine te non
salvabit, he which created thee alone, requires thy own concurrence to thy
preservation: nay by this means God pulls off the vizard from the face of
Hypocrytes, unguilds their garnished frontlers, and leaves them as black as the
sin they flatter with, If it had not been for Absoloms rebellion, who could
prove Achitophel David's privy Counselor had been a traitor? Who would have
thought Amasa, honored by David with the name of Cozen, one of his bone and of
his flesh, would have accepted of the generalship without David's Commission?
Who could believe that Jerusalem that Royal City, honored with David's Throne,
not subsisting (as it seems) two Months without his presence, would have gone
up after Absalom? This is the Divine Eye of Wisdom which can produce sound
fruit from such rotten stocks.

In the second there is the supreme hand of power; when wicked designs prosper
so happily that they are gathered into a head, till with one stroke God cuts
them off: as Jehu serves the Priests of Baal 2 Kings 10: Pretends a solemn
sacrifice, invites them with a full ceremony, clothes them with the richest
vestments, makes a holy day feast for Baals worshipers: The day was theirs, and
the Prophets of God were looked upon as poor inferior humble Creatures; but in
the midst of their triumph, fourscore men made it end in a bloody sacrifice,
they are all cut off, not one escapes. The Servants of the household could have
weeded out the tares, Mat. 13. But it was the Masters policy to let them grow
ripe before he burnt them: They would make the greater blaze: God Almighty, I
know, could have routed out the tares of heresy, the tares of sedition, which
in these days of sin have almost overtopped the standing wheat: but (I
persuade my self) out of mercy to his Church, he has let them grow to these
licentious times, when every Son of Belial, dares openly discover his untutored
spirit, when we find more sects, then some years since we thought our Church
had nourished Sectaries, that the sword of justice now knowing them, may make
the surer and sharper stroke against them: Babels confusion had not been so
remarkable, but that the tower was raised so high as that it stood a pillar to
after ages: The weakness of Deborahs forces and Jabins strength enlarge Gods
honor: he gets a name by pulling down the mighty from their seat; but still he
is sensible of the false hearted cowardice of the backsliding troops: He curses
Merox and her inhabitants because they came not forth to help the Lord, to help
the Lord against the mighty.

I have made have, you see with, the plain-song of my text, that I may spend
some time in the descant, in which every one of us must bear a part: And I
cannot but begin with a just indignation against those who have abused the
words and made them speak their own crazy humors, and frantic dreams. Like
Men troubled with an Hydrophobia, bitten with a mad dog, and now raging, they
think all things before them look like water, like the froth of their own
brains: Indeed Scripture shall be no longer Scripture, if it do not please
them: Being in this like the old Tyrians, who were wont to whip their Gods if
they crossed them with a misfortune, till they made them better: Thus came they
armed to the Pulpit with as brave a resolution as Hannibal to the Alps, aut
viam invenient aut facient? Where they find no tracke before them they will
adventure first; and are grown so daringly presumptuous as to slight these
texts which, (...) do in plain rerms cross their traiterous position, and tell
you it was doctrine fit for those times the Apostles lived in, (I my self have
heard it) were they upon the Earth now, when Christians knew their own
strength, they would write in another strain. Blasphemous wretches! is the
blessed Spirit of God a servant or the times; Is that eternal goodness (...),
unchangeably constant, and for ever more the same, become the Idol fortune,
and dances he upon a wheel? Never Musselman thought thus of his lawgiver
Mahomet, never Heathen of the rule of Nature. Yet that they may show some
commixture of madness and wit, sometimes they will prove ingeniously wicked,
and like a conjurer cast a mist before your eyes, till you think you see the
face of these times presented you in the glass of prophecy: which (once
persuaded) what ever language came from the top of Ebal, is a Charientismus, a
message of peace compared with theirs: Thus Deborah the Church shall fall a
cursing Meroz the friends to the crown because they came not out to help the
Lord against Siseras host the royal Army. (...): Here lets join hands: Good
sirs instruct me: whose person bore distressed Deborah? was it not the supreme?
and are there, or can there be 2. supreams? She was a Mother, a Judge, a Captain
in Israel: And can any order that is a primo primus derived from the first be
equal to it? Had Jabin been a King to Deborah I am sure she had too religious
a soul to have cursed him: For what was Sisera? Was he not a stranger? One of
another line, another claim, another religion, another God? one commanded by
God long since to be expeld the Land, and his inheritance divided amongst the
Tribes? Make you your selves an Analogy between the stories, and see what an
apt proportion they have left. But one nice distinction will stop this gap: We
can cut an hair between the King and his forces. The King is a good King, a
well meaning King (and so he is in spite of their bold faced detractions) but
his Siseras, his Generals, his Commanders, they are none of ours: No, and yet
within these three years, the reverend Fathers of our Church were quarreld at
by these very Men for leaving their names out of our divine service book. But
are we grown such experienced artificers to devide between the squirrel and the
tail that hides the back? The fable makes a pretty dialogue between the wolf
and the dog: The wolf bids him go home and sleep quietly, why should he expose
himself to the winters frosts, and the summers heat, to watch his flock? There
was no emnity between them: true (says the dog) but when thou have worried my
sheep and art grown fat and lusty with their flesh, thou may seize upon my
throat next.

But closer yet: for I would feign follow my text, however they leave it:
Neither has the Angel said it to them, nor have they power to curse, nor have
they cutsed Meroz, nor curse they for not helping of the Lord: nor (in their
sense) does the Lord need any help against the mighty.

First an Angel has not said it: whatever visions they pretend: or if he
should, though an Angel from Heaven deliver any other doctrine then what the
Scripture has preached let him be accursed: I Gal. I. the Divine revelations
and Angelical descentions which the Anabaptists glory of, are things grown too
naked to delude us any longer: They sound like the story of Mahomets dove.
Since Christ's ascension into Heaven he left the holy Spirit as a Legacy to his
Church; that Spirit which shall guide it into all truth; and so it will,
notwithstanding all these impostures: When their writings are ad thus and
scombros alligata, made as they are, wastpaper: St. Peter and St. Paul will be
true and sound divinity: And yet I know it is no new thing for Satan to transform
himself into an Angel of light, and become a lying Spirit in the mouths of such
as would be accounted Prophets: We know when he persuaded a Nation to go to
war to its own destruction: May our good God defend us from the like mischief.

But 2ly. they have no power to curse, no commission for their execrations: a
Christians office is (...) Romans 12.10. speak friendly to their persecutors:
Mark the phrase, (...), well to them, and well of them too, not pump hell for
language and arm the tongue with such Rhetoric that it cutteth like a razor.
The word (...) which the Septuagint uses here for cursing, signifies pray ye
barkward: (if ye will:) for so the Scholiast tells me that (...) the theme in
Homers time signified humble prayers; but being abused in the succeeding ages
who turned their prayers, into curses, the interpretation of the word changed
too and it signifide an execration: and indeed in this art of praying backward
we are too good proficients: If that be to pray we can learn our lessons
quickly: By the abuse of time it comes that we have changed the genuine meaning
of the word. For in the days of old, before Religion was adulterated, the
reverend Fathers in the primitive times were wont to bless the patience of
Christian Soldiers: bless them for their loyalty, bless them for their service
performed to their most cruel bloodsucking persecutors: When they behaved
themselves like the stoutest Champions in the causes of the Emperors, they were
encouraged with an Euge sic decet Christianos you show now that ye serve the
Lord of Heaven, by obeying his viceroys upon earth. But alas the ditty is
changed in our days: if any true hearted piety dare be so bold as to stand in
the just defense of that Sovereignty, which the law of God, the laws of Nations
our oaths and protestations binds us to, there is an Ito maledicta passed upon
it, it is cursed and cursed bitterly. But though they curse yet God will
bless: It is not the name malignant can exclude us out of the Church
triumphant, if in a true cause we are here militant.

Thirdly it is not Meroz, any poor little Villages they curse: tales aquilae
muscas non capiunt: but Tabor and Hermon the Mounts of God, the hills of
Learning: God knows our Meroz's our Country parishes are infatuated with a
bayard blindness, they will neither see nor yet believe they are blind:
Chyrurgions tell us no such sure sign of death as a senseless Apathy, when we
feel not the smarting of our wounds: Thus where our State is wounded, in the
head, the seat of judgment, wounded in the heart, the seat of life, wounded in
the hands, the execution of justice, wounded in the feet, the interpretation of
those laws, on whose bottom the Kingdom stands, we as if we were bitten with a
Tarantula, shall laugh our selves to death in the midst of these distractions,
and only be grieved at yesterdays ache, and take physic for that disease which
had seized and left us three years ago. And this was the very case of the
Israelites in the great defection from Rhehoboam, the complaint was oppression
by his Father Solomon, whose days indeed was golden days, the very stones of
the street which the people trampled on, were outvyed (in their number almost)
by others far more precious: But crafty Rhehaboam galling their minds first
and then finding when it pinched, he scarrifies first, Remonstrates to the
people the grievous Yoke the King had thrown upon them, and then applies an
itching plaster: he would ease them of the trouble to go up to worship at the
Mother Church at Jerusalem, he knew if the doors of the Sanctuary were open,
the law of God read there, would keep the people in subjection, 1 Kings 12.17.
Therefore he will lock them up if he can, and pretend the peoples ease: it is
too much for them to go up thither, especially since they have made Calves at
their own homes: what need a Church when the highwayes of Dan and Bethel will
serve the turn? Thus when he had cheated them into a civil war, they run
madly to their own confusion, continually weakening the powers of one another
till the foreign Assyrian enemy seized on both. Under which captivity, ten
revolting tribes lost both their names and beings: If in the mean time a
Prophet come with a message from the Lord to reduce these wandering sheep, and
bring them home to their forsaken folds, Jeroboam presently stretches out his
hand against him; and if a miraculous power from heaven do not whither it, that
hand will lay him fast. It Is reported of Julian that Enemy of Christianity,
that although he himself was an able Clerk, yet he hated and forbade all
learning in others, left they should detect his cunning fallacies: The
comparison I know is very odious, and yet I fear me we shall find in our days
more barbarism: Meroz, cursing Tabor: When the people have broken off their
golden earings for their calf, Aaron himself shall be threatened, if he will not
dance about it. Nay further yet; foolish, ignorant, lying Zedekiah shall have
leave to smite Micaiah on the face if he presume to be so honest to diswade his
Countrymen from a war, and prevail so far with those that are in power as to
clap him up in prison: God quit England from Jerusalems sins of stoning those
which are sent unto her.

But fourthly, their curses come not for not helping the Lord. Unless they
could persuade us there are two Gods in Heaven, as they would make two faiths
and more then two baptismes upon the Earth: For was ever the cause of God set
up by lying? Lying, so palpable, so notorious that Bellarmines piae frauds were
religious, if compared with it: every week being a Cretian Mart where the
Devil sends us in impressions by the whole sale, which may teach the next
Generation how voluminously wicked their Fathers were; Was ever Gods cause set
up by oppression? Cruel, inhuman, barbarous oppression, where one subject shall
be armed with power to kill another. Whilst the mouth of the Laws are stopped
and they outroad by Ordinances: Where every discontented Country boor shall
challenge an Equal share in his Neighbors goods, and fall a plundering by the
liberty of the Subject: Liberty! License let us rather call it, license qua
deteriores sumus, an abuse of license which makes us worse. Was ever Gods cause
set up by Blasphemy? Most execrable deep mouthed blasphemy, which a sober
Christian would be afraid to hear, least the Devil should be in presence: Some
daring in the Pulpits (which I my self have heard) tell Almighty God, that if
he deserted this cause he would loose his honor, none would ever call upon his
name again. Others professing in that sacred place, if this cause failed they
should turn Atheists, as I think they are already: I will not tell all, you
hear too much already. Oh Sirs, we are cheated of our Religion: The modester
Papists have robbed us of some of the choycest of our Refined Doctrine whilst we
are degenerated into the dregs of Jesuitisme: Shall they make proffers of their
service to hazerd their lives and fortunes in the just defense of a good
Prince, which notwithstanding hates their Religion although he cherishes their
subjection? and shall we unchristianly imagine that we help the Lord by
destroying the Lords Anointed? The Giants may as well say they raised those
mountains for bulwarks to defend the heavens from whence they meant to scale
them: Judas may as well say he had given his Master a kiss of courtesy when he
brought out men with swords and staves to secure him. Horror and amazement
keeps in the rest.

Lastly in their sense (I say) God has needed no help against the mighty. For
compare Deborahs Estate to Siseras, and make an equal reference in all to our
own Nation and see who might properly be called the mighty: Deborah was under a
palm tree in the high way, whilst Sisera dwelt in Harosheth. You may all
remember the time when his sacred Majesty was first driven to these parts, when
(except his goodness) there was nothing about him like a Prince, whether you
look upon his retinue, or his provision or the homage of his vicegerents as he
passed: all so much inferior to his Estate, that had those beheld it, which
could have wished it meaner, I persuade my self, they would have pitied it:
under the burden of which humility he must needs have fallen, if his heart had
not proved like Deborahs palm tree: grown higher with depressing. Sisera at
this time abounding with all provision, Deborah seeks out for succor to
encounter him: but those as you heard come in very slowly and unarmed: her
enemy had made a party in those Tribes she trusted to. When the necessity of a
war was made (which God knows was most unwelcome news to the religious heart
of our pious Sovereign) (witness those several condescentions to almost unequal
terms of peace, as would make a marble heart thaw to tears, that reads them)
think but with what difficulty he raised up any forces, remember what
opposition he found in preparing a guard for his royal person, (indeed he
needed none he had a guard of Angels,) that being quarreld at for him in an
open Country, which his Courts of Justice thought necessary for themselves in
the greatest place of security: I should distrust your judgments to remember
you of Dans ships or Ashers coast Towns, Reubens divisions or Gileads
confaederacy: What ever the wit of man could invent, to stop supplies by sea or
land, of monyes, or men, or ammunition, what ever disheartning could be thrown
upon his well affected subjects; what ever opposition could be made by an
association, entered between Geball and Ammon and Ameleck the Phylistines, and
those that dwell at Tire, all these and more then these he incountred with: But
non est consilium contra altissimum: In the day of battle Deborah wins the
field: wonder not if the power of Heaven prevail Against the arm of flesh:
Though his excellency reach unto the Heavens and his head mount up to the
clouds yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung, Job. 20.6. Mount Tabor
can tell you, and so can rebellious Meroz too, how succesfull those Northern
troops have been, which God raised up as a pledge of his providence over his
anointed, which all that look upon impartially, must needs conclude with an hic
Dei digitus: This is the hand of Heaven which has defended the Lord of the
earth Against the mihgty.

But I have cut out these so large a share in my text that I have kept for our
selves but a very small division: What ever remains two words shall dispatch,
1. Imprecemur, 2. Deprecemur: let us curse, and let us pray: Curse those that
have deserved it, pray that we may not deserve it. Imprecemur first: Curse if
not with Deborah, Meroz there for not helping the Lord yet with St. Paul Meroz
here for fighting against the Lord: In denouncing which sentence I clash not
with the doctrine I have delivered. There is an Evangelicall curse for all such
coined to my hands, and that the deepest of all other, no less then damnation.
Whosoever resists shall receive to himself damnation Romans 13. Had we the art of
opening our bibles, and reading there, as well as wearing them under our arms,
which we love so well, we had been taught this divinity from as many plain
texts as there are found to confirm any Article of the Creed: But a seeming
devotion is no new vizor. Horace tells us of the light wenches in his days,
that Libellos stoicos jacere inter sericos pulvillos amant: they would not go
to bed, but their grave treatises of chastity must be their pillows: profession
I know is very good, but it is when the hearts and lips are friends: But if we
walk not honestly toward them which are without, we teach Turks and Mahumetans
to blaspheme our God, and whereas their religion is their shame, we prove a
shame to our religon. For consider I beseech you, and consider seriously
against whom ye would take up arms? Is it not against the power, against the
ordinance of God? Contra animatam Dei Imaginem, against the walking picture of
Heaven? In Kings, says Lactantius, there is a double appearance: they are Men
before God but they are Gods before Men: Such (says Optatus) as acknowledge no
power to control them, but him alone which instated them in such power: And
who that is Tertullian will tell you elegantly: Inde Imperator, unde and homo
antequam Imperator, inde potestas illi and spiritus: St. Paul's words shall
interpret him, there is no power but what is ordained of God. Which struck good
St. Bernard to so brave are resolution, that maugre the confederacy of the
world, he would prove himself a Christian to God by a loyal subjection to his
Sovereign: his words deserve letters of Gold in his 170. Epistle. Si totus
orbis (says he) adversumme conjuraret, ut quippiam molirer adversus regiam
Majestatem ego tamen Deum timerem, and ordinatum adeo Regem offendere temere
non auderem. And he gives his reason: Nec enim ignoro ubi legerim qui potestati
resistit, Dei ordinationi resistit. See how vast a difference here is between
our Spirits: Religious soul! the whole earth combining could not make him
willingly offend his King: and shall the fear of a threatened plundering make us
oppose our King? Alas Sirs, those that we fear for the thorns to wound us,
should be the spurs to incite us: Do their worst it is the best for us: they
can but rob us of our intanglings, as Theophilact glosses upon 2 Timothy 2. (...)
Some Serpents that embrace us, and hinder us from pleasing him who has called
us to be Soldiers: shall we embrace a little nick named favor here, before
the Eternal love of God? shall the common rout persuade me to go to Hell for
company? If the name of Christian be not worn out with some newborn title for
which we have exchanged it, think what our Captain has done before us: He
curses Peter's sword, which was drawn in defense of him his Lord and Master, and
when the judge of Heaven and earth stood before the bar of Caesar, to be
adjudged, he confesses himself to the author of that power which spoke his own
condemnation. It Is truly said that Kings have long arms, they can reach to
heaven for vengeance, they can crow'd down to hell for torments: And this is
true of all Kings, Christians, or Heathen good or bad: not only of the
Vespasians the sweet governors, but of Domitian the cruel Tyrant, of Nero, of
Tyberius, that (...), (as his Master Gadareus called him) that heap of mortar
tempered with blood. The Oil upon Saul's head saved his throat (says Optatus.)
He was a wicked King, it is true, and deserved to die, but David was a good man,
and durst not be his executioner, dum timuit olenm servavit inimicum; the oil
with which he was anointed, David well knew would never sink, but in despite
of violence would swim uppermost. It Is true that God sometimes refines his
Church in the furnace of perfection, neither then does he leave it naked and
disarme it. But what are the Churches weapons? St. Anselm had his dolere
potero, potero flere, his sighs and groans against the Gottish Soldiers: St.
Bernard fought to death against Jews of France, non scutis and gladiis, sed
precibus and fletibus, prayers and tears were his sword and buckler, Nazianzen
overcame Julian but it was Christianorum lachrymis ubertim effusis, by softning
his Adamantine heart with salt drops from their eyes: Thence flows the only
sea which can overthrow Pharoahs host. But alas! this is not our case: We
prepare other arms against a Prince of another temper: One, whom if the first
Christians had known they would have made him more then the delight of Men,
they would receive him as an Angel of God. A Prince of so gracious a
disposition, that the gratest fear his good subjects have to loose him, is
because he is too good for Earth. One which lingers for peace in the greatest
success of war: One which has hoped to win by loosing, and has willingly made
himself less a King, if by that means he might make us more subjects: One which
calls out for mercy in the field of blood: ye stones hear this and melt!
forbidding the slaughter of those which they can take prisoners,
notwithstanding they came out to be his executioners. Groaning for our wants,
our infringed Liberties, our decayed religion, which now lay expiring, but that
the soul of it has found a warm seat in his royal breast. A true Cedar of
Mount Lebanon that has afforded a secure shelter to the humble valleys: and
never, O never may he be cut down, till he be removed to the building of the
Heavenly Sanctuary: As for those trees that would have the bramble reign, let
them be consumed by the brambles curse, and be burnt up with the fire which the
bramble kindles. But I have forgot my self:

2. Deprecemur, The great God of Heaven remove this curse from us, for let us
no longer flatter our selves, Brethren, with a superficial Allegiance: have we
been as zealous for God and the King as our duty binds us? have our Eliahs
cried as loud, have they rent and cut themselves as much as Baals lying
Prophets? Has not the fear of Daniels den, the place where the Kings Lions were
kept, and Jeremiahs dungeon stopped the mouths of our Men of God? Did not
Deborah here find better aid from Zebulon, of those that handle the writers
pen? whereas, after the groaning of the press with seditious Pamphlets, our
gracious Sovereign makes a just complaint that all pens are silent in his
righteous cause: If he do gladio protegere, shall not we calamo defendere? If
his sword rights our cause, shall not our quils write his? He that fights for
Heaven and us, shall not our prayers fight with Heaven and wrestle with
Almighty God for him? Shall a little of Demosthenes his gold, send the sqinzy
in our throats? Shall a politic silence stop our Mouths? For, good Sirs, what
should you fear; the loss of your Estates? Alas, if you let fall this cause,
who can challenge a propriety? 'Twill be in vain to preach a non concupisces,
thou shall not wish, when a vote turns you out of all nerutis caesis receptis?
Do you fear the loss of Liberty? Was it ever more infringed? Do you fear the
loss of Religion? I, here indeed it pinches: We have betrayed the cause
Amyclaeo filentio, whilst we durst not tell you, the enemy was a coming: They
have taken away the Lord, and we know not where they have laid him: Nay they
have not left so much as the white clothes in the place where he lay before:
They have defaced the Sanctuary, and yet we the Nehemiahs, the Eliashibs, the
Priests and Laborers, have taken neither a sword in one hand to defend it, nor
a trowell in the other to repair it. God be merciful unto our sin, for it is
great, we have not helped the Lord Against the might.

But the King shall rejoice in thy Strength, O Lord; exceeding glad shall he be
in thy Salvation. Thou shall give him his hearts desire; and wilt not deny him
the request of his lips. For thou shall prevent him with the blessings of
goodness; and shall set a crown of pure gold upon his head. His honor shall be
great in thy Salvation; glory and great worship shall thou lay upon him. For
thou shall give him everlasting felicity; and make him glad with the joy of thy
countenance. And why, because the King puts his trust in the Lord; and in
the mercy of the most Highest he shall not miscarry. All thine enemies shall
feel thy hand; thy right hand shall find out them that hate thee. Thou shall
make them like a fiery oven in the time of thy wrath; the Lord shall destroy
them in his displeasure, and the fire shall consume them. Their fruit shall
thou root out of the Earth, and their seed from among the Children of men. For
they intended mischief against thee, and imagined such a device as they shall
not be able to perform. Therefore shall thou put them to flight; and the
strings of thy bow shall thou make ready against the face of them. Be thou
exalted Lord in thine own strength, so will we sing and praise thy power.

Amen, Amen.
The Third SERMON.
NUMBERS 17.8. And it came to pass that on the morrow Moses went into the
Tabernacle of Witness, and behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi, was
budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded Almonds.
THen it appears that time was when Aaron had a rod; and that rod budded too,
yes and it budded in the Tabernacle, and was laid up in the Ark of the Covenant
to be kept for a token against the Rebels in the latter days, verse 10. And
may not we fear that those latter days are fallen upon us, when Aarons rod is
now broken, and he himself scarce suffered to enter into the Tabernacle? Whilst
an Antichristian brood, sit in the Temple of God which exalt themselves above
all that is called God. The Author to the Hebrews, chap. 9. tells us of three
sacra deposita, holy Utensils laid up in the Ark together, the pot of Manna,
the Tables of the Covenant, and this budding rod: and there they kept company
so long, that now they will not be parted. Let one be banished and all the rest
(we may fear) will follow: Once break the Crosier, this pastoral rod, and the
Tables of the Covenant, the ten Commendements are not long lived after it: They
shall be banished out of the Church by sacrilegious deformers, and out of the
heart by impious Antinomians; and the pot of Manna, the heavenly bread of holy
doctrine, shall be poisoned with the Coloquintida of errors mixed amongst it:
there will be mors in olla, till some Elisha pour in meal, better ground,
better sifted principles, there is death in the pot. Doctrine and Discipline
like Hippocrates twins will always either laugh or cry together.

The words read may be called Gods lottery; the lots are rods, the bag they are
put in is the Tabernacle, the hand that drew them out is the hand of Moses, the
house they fall on is the house of Levi. Or more plainly, it is Gods miraculous
preferring the house of Levi and Aaron most eminently of all that Tribe; before
the mutinying Congregation: They depend upon the foregoing History, and I
should handle them very partially; if I did not preface them with it.

When the Levite Cora^ thought himself undervalued, that he was only separated
from the Congregation to do the service of the Tabernacle and to Minister to
the people; esteeming it but a small thing that the Lord had thus brought him
near unto himself (indeed his ambitious heart, kept him at far distance) when
the Priesthood was intayl'd on Aaron and his Successors: he joins himself to
Dathan and Abiram, two ruling Elders of the Tribe of Reuben with two hundred
and fifty Princes of the Assembly, and there begins to preach parity, a
doctrine easily disgested by ambitious minds to this Independent Congregation.
A pretense of holiness cloaked their wickedness: For being gathered into a
riot and daring do all acts of violence which their strength could secure them
in, they exclaim against their governors, you take too much upon you, say
they, seeing all the Congregation are holy and the Lord is amongst them:
Wherefore then lift ye up your selves above the Congr^gation of the Lord? A
strange presumption which the mad World will never leave, to entitle God to the
Devils cause, to bring the Lord of Order to countenance their disorders: but
these unhappy days has left the story at our own doors; where a specious
outside guilds many rotten Hypocrites: Sampsons two foxes cannot be coupled
with a firebrand of Sedition between them, but they be reported abroad to draw
the yoke of Jes^s Christ: under a pretense of Every one is holy, a parity in
righteousness, every one strives for a primacy, a supremacy in wickedness. And
it were well if these thrusts were made against Aaron the high priests breast
plate only, Moses his rod is beaten down too. The Miter cannot fall but the
Crown shakes; they that made Religion their qnarrel just before, presently
after make political grieveances the burden of the song. Moses like a good
Prince had taken off the envy from his High Priest Aaron, and pointed their
arrows at an higher mark: you are gathered against the Lord, says he, (and
indeed Sirs God is in all his ordinances) but what is Aaron that ye murmur
against him? Yet let his next work be, to secure himself: Is it a small thing
(say they) that thou have brought us out of a Land that flows with milk and
honey to kill us in the wilderness, except thou make thy self a Prince
altogether over us? This strong complaint of Tyranny was the most forcible cord
that could unite the hands of the many-headed-monster-multitude. But the next
verse tells us it was their own particular interests which engaged the Rebels,
it was because they had not Fields and Vineyards to their hearts desire.
Absalom may flatter the people in the gate, and pity their case that justice
is delayed them, but let his heart comment upon his words, and he pitties most
his own case, that he is not in place to do it. But Moses can easily wash his
hands of Tyranny: I have not taken ass from them, neither have I hurt one of
them, says he. The complaint of Rebels most commonly is as far removed from
truth as their quarrel is from goodness: Yet unless God from Heaven will
attest his integrity, his own righteousness will scarce defend him against two
hundred and fifty assembly men. Moses and Aaron fall upon their faces, but the
Lord holds them up; and at their command the Congregation separates from the
tents of Corah and his Confederates, who would have made them Separatists from
the Congregation: Whilst those mutinying Traitors which did not deserve to
live, are not suffered to dye, but are buried before their death, and they
which would have made a division from their Fathers may not be gathered to
their Fathers in peace: But the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up,
they and all that appertained to them went down alive into the pit, and the
earth closed upon them, and they perished from amongst the Congregation. As for
the other 250 with censers in their ^^nds which would be flashing of strange
fire before the Lord, God sends down a true fire from Heaven which eats them
up: Two pararell judgments: A Schism of the Earth punishes a Schism of the
People; a fire from Heaven consumes their ignis fatuus, their false fire upon
the Earth; so surely does God overtake those which do not carry him along with
them in their designs.

By this time we would think that an awful reverence of Moses and Aaron was
wrought upon the hearts of the Congregation by the finger of heaven: but
seditious minds are restless: Like Sisyphus his stone, if it be fallen to the
bottom, it must be rold to the top of the hill again: The People fly from the
gaping of the Earth, and are afraid of the fire from Heaven, but having
digested their Panick fears, next morning (like men hardened to their
destruction) they dare challenge God to renew his judgments, by charging his
Magistrates with the blood of those which perished in their own rebellion; as
if Moses his rod which before had devoured the Egyptian mock-Serpents, had now
feasted upon the Rulers of the assembly, and Aarons blue, and purple, and
scarlet, were now altogether dyed in blood; ye have killed (say they) the
people of the Lord.

But unless those whom they accuse for their Murderers prove their deliverers
they are all but dead men for there is wrath gone out against them: Aaron at
Moses his command runs into midst of the Congregation, takes the censer, puts
fire upon the censer, puts on incense, and stands between the living and the
dead, and makes atonement for the People: The mercy of a good Governor
resembles God from whom he has his Commission: he is ready to spare and protect
them that conspire his destruction: knowing that his Savior dyed for them
which crucified him; yet least the death of fourteen thousand and seven hundred
should in the next Generation be worn out and forgoten, God will perpetuate
this story with a lasting miracle, and that the mouths of murmerers may for
ever be stopped he makes choice of Aaron symbolically: the twelve Princes of the
twelve Tribes cast in their twelve rods, as Moses appointed, with their names
wrote every man upon his rod: and on the morrow Moses went into the Sanctuary
of the Witness, and behold the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi budded and
bloomed blossoms and brought forth Almonds.

In prosecuting these words, Aquinas his rule shall be our guide: In omni
Scripturae narratione historica (says he) profundamento tenenda est veritas
historiae, and de super spirituales rations sunt fabricondae: in any histocal
narrative part of Scripture, the first principle which we must ground upon is
the truth of the history, and that foundation once laid we make our mystical,
spiritual interpretations, a super-structure. Give me leave hear then to make
Aaron another coat and to imbroyder over the fine linen, the groundwork of the
history, with the Blew, and Purple, and Scarlet, and Gold, the several colors
of the mystery. Observe we then in this miraculous Election of Almighty God,
the subject on which the miracle was wrought, which falls under our notice, 1.
In the simple, it was a rod, 2. The composit it, was Aarons rod, 3. The
decomposit, it was Aarons rod for the house of Levi, Secondly, the miracle it
self, branched out in 3, decrees: This rod at Aaron for the house of Levi, 1.
Brought forth buds, 2. Bloomed bosom, 3. Yielded almonds: Thirdly the
circumstances of time and place, like two Servants to attend upon it. It was on
the morrow, In the Sanctuary: These are the stages thorough which we shall
drive in this hours discourse, which will hardly afford us time to bait in
them, but only with a running eye to overlook them.

The subject of this miracle first was a rod, and this was chosen of God before
any other, as the most proper the most significant: Indeed if we look upon
things with a superficial eye, there was nothing belonging to the high Priest
which did not promise more, and might not better prove Aarons pre-eminence. His
very garments which God prescribed Exodus 28. to be made glorious and beautiful
like Joseph's imbroidered coat, might have taught his Brtheren that he was his
Fathers darling: Or the Urim and the Thummim, and the stones of his breastplate
which afterward delivered those divinations to the people, might have proved
their own Oracles, and witnessed their praeferment. Or the golden bells upon the
verge of his garment might have challenged that honor which is promised to the
bells of the Horses, Zach. 14.20. to be superscribed, Holiness to the Lord. But
ratio divina in medulla est non in superficie: It is not the glorious outside
which God regards: That Almighty power which chooses the weak things of the
World to confound the mighty, and says unto the dead bones, live, takes here a
sapless sere stick, without either root or branch for a Scepter at the
exaltation of his anointed; and that which before was the instrument of working
many miracles is now become the subject matter upon which a miracle is wrought.
And this was most apposite to Gods intent and purpose in four respects: 1. as
it is symbolum potestatis a rod to rule and govern them: 2. As it is symbolum
correctionis, a rod to correct and scourge them, 3. As it is symbolum
instructionis a rod to guide and instruct them, 4. As it is symbolum
sustentationis, a rod to support and comfort them: Power, Correction,
Instruction, Sustentation, are the four pinacles of Aarons Tower, which make
him lift up his head above his fellows.

1. As a Rod of power. For of old the Priesthood was not fetterd nor Aarons
hands bound behind him: If we look to his first election. Exodus 4.16. We shall
find he was made Lord Chancellor to Moses amongst the Israelites: He shall be
thy spokesman unto the people says the Lord: Afterward he and his sons were
oftentimes the Lords high Stewards, which executed judgment upon the offenders.
And when Moses was called up to Mount Sinai to talk with God, Aaron and Hur
were made the Lords high Constables to govern the people in his absence. I deny
not but that there was a Subordination of Power: the Crosier gave place to the
Scepter: Aarons rod submitted to Moses. For in the fore-quoted place. Exodus 4.
Where the Priest was made the Princes mouth, the Prince was made the Priests
God. He shall be as thy mouth and thou shall be to him as God. As for that high
Priest now a days which proves himself the Man of sin by exalting himself
above all that is called God, he had need build upon a firmer foundation then
the Sandy Clementines, or their false Glosses: otherwise their honor will fall
into the dust: Because the vision bids Peter, arise, kill and eat, therefore
the Pope may depose Princes: because Malchus, which being interpreted a King,
was servant to the High Priest, therefore Kings were the Popes servants. You
may well question whither these arguments had their rises from the Brains or
the Gutts of the Friars. And truly we need not wonder to see those Mountains
are brought low and levelled, if we do but consider that the pride of the Clergy
has been caution enough to Prince and People to look about them: that that
Crosier has not been used as a Pastoral staff to catch the Sheep but to hook
away the Crown, and Aarons Rod is turned to a Scepter of iron, to crush the
Kings of the Earth in pieces. Yet a lawful subordinate power they have
delegated from God himself: yes, and that in Temporals too, however the policy
of our State of late has thought it otherwise convenient. For to omit the
story of Judas Maccabeus, who in the time of the Captivity of their Kings
governed the people; we shall find Phineas the Grandson of Aaron in the next
generation executing this Authority, who as a Priest the son of Eleazar, and as
a Prince of the Congregation did judgment upon Zimri and Cozbi, the idolatrous
adulterers; And it is worth your observing how the Psalmist recording this
story, Psalm 106. makes choice of a word of double signification, to imply his
double capacity; the word is Palal, which signifies either to pray or to
execute judgment, verse 30. Phineas stood up and prayed, or Phineas stood up
and executed judgment: denoting not only the connaturality of these two, that
executing judgment is a kind of prayer or sacrifice to God, but likewise their
competibility to the same subject, that executing judgment is as proper an
office of the Priest as prayer it self: And thus is Aarons a rod of power.

But 2. as of power so of correction too and indeed the first patronises the
second: his power enables him for correction. By correction, I mean not a
corporal scourging or whipping of the people, as the disciplining Friars use
upon themselves and others upon their pennancedayes; Arons rod had no whipcord
at the end of it: but a more piercing lash circa potiorem partem, such arrows
which David speaks of which enter into the soul: It is a tradatur Satanae, a
shutting them out of the Congregation, and a banishing them from the camp of
Israel. To this purpose, Levit. 13. God gives the Priests marks and tokens to
discover the leprous party, and to make a difference between the clean and
unclean, and those marks once found out, it is not Nobility of blood or
greatness of power can secure the Leper or keep him within the pale: The crown
on Uzzias head cannot hide the Leprosy on his brow, but Azariah the Priest
will cast him out. 2 Chro. 26. Indeed if there be Livor in oculis Pontificis,
malice in the Priests eye, which discolours all he looks upon, and makes the
most clear object seem full of leprous spots, their casting out proves but
brutum fulmen, potguns which make a crack but cannot wound: As the blind man
newly recovered to his sight by our Savior in the Gospel, because he saw more
then the high Priest, was ejected: Indeed they threw him out of the Church that
he might be nearer God. But when it is done, clave non errante, with an
unerring judgment: pronounced on those marks which God has set: he is
polluted, he is unclean, let him dwell alone, without the camp shall his
habitation be: and were it not to prevent the application which is to come
anon, I should tell you, that in Gospel there is a retenta sunt si
retinueritis, whose sins (the Leprosy of the Soul) the Priest retains by
excommunication, they are retained, the severest correction of all other.

But 3. As a rod of power and correction so is the Priests rod a rod of
guidance and instruction too: It is the guiding statue, the Vibilia set up in
the crosspaths of sin to guide the people in the way of Gods Commandments:
Hereupon the Prophet Malachi makes the Priests lips the Cabinet of knowledge,
and sends the People to seek the Law at his mouth, 2 Mal. 7. From those
Conduit-pipes flow those streams which make glad the City of God: You know the
stopping of the pipes deprives the tankard bearers of water as much as if the
fountain head were dried up. As good no law as none divulged: And this was the
misery of the Israelites under King Asa. 2 Chronicles. 15.9. For a long season they
had been without the true God, and without a Priest to teach, and without the
law: Observe the connection, no Priest to teach the Law for a while, and
presently the law it self is quite forgotten. And this made Aaron, have golden
bells as well as Pomgranats, the soundness of the fruit of the one is nothing
without the tinkling of the other: Moses made two silver trumpets as well as
two stone tables, that the law might be registered in the one and proclaimed
with the other: God admits nothing dumb, nothing barren in his service. The
very Cattle which draw the arc must be milch kine, such as give down their
milk; and they must have calfes shut up at home, that they may low after them
as they go: And this befalls not under the law alone, but under the gospel too,
whose very name (...) implies as much; A good message it is, but no message
before it be delivered; which imprints upon every Ministers heart, S. Paul's vae
mihi 1 Cor. 9.16. Woe is me if I preach not the gospel.

Lastly as to govern, correct, and guide, so to support the people too Aaron
has his rod; and a heavy load is laid upon it, if we look to the first
institution: 28 Exo. 38. He is to bear the iniquity of the offerings of the
People: Pliny tells us of a poisoned fountain of Arabia, where the shepherds
pay the price of the sheep that drink and perish. Let Ezechiel interpret this,
Chap. 3.17, 18, 19, 20, 21 Verses, the sum of all is this, the blood of the
wicked soul which dies in his iniquity, if he be not forewarmed and admonished
God will require at the watchmans hands. Nay not only the inquity of the
Peoples offerings but the offerings themselves lie upon the Priests shoulders.
Heb. 5.1. He is ordained for Men in things appertaining to God that he may
offer both gifts and sacrifiees for sins. Have the People offended? The Priest
shall make an atonement for them before the Lord. Has Abimelech a curse upon
his family? send to Abraham he is a Prophet he shall pray for him and restore
him. Is Hezekiah discomforted by Rabshaketh? send to Esayah he is a Prophet, he
shall lift up his prayer for the remnant that is left. Is any man sick? Let him
send for the Ministers, not the Lay Elders (as some falsely interpret Saint
James) and let them pray over him, and their prayer shall work for the health
of his body and Salvation of his soul: Thus is the Priest the staff which the
people lean on: and in these respects amongst many other a rod was the most
proper subject for the miracle.

2. It was Aarons rod, Aaron, who was summus Pontifex, a Mountain (as his name
imports) which overtops the rest. God which is the God of Order would in no age
ever leave his Church to the mischiefs of disorder and confusion. Which Order,
God observed as soon as there was a Church, and a Church there was so soon as
their was a Congregation, and Men upon the Earth to make it. And first the most
honorable, the first born of the families were vertually called to this
dignity, to pray, instruct, and sacrifice for the rest: Neither can I hear omit
St. Austines observation, that at the Creation where God brought forth all
other Creatures in abundance, storing all the Earth with many individuums and
particulars of the same Species, as many beasts, many birds, and the like, he
made but one Man, and devised all the rest should flow from his loins, and so
acknowledge him their chief and principle; and so from him a lineal descent
should be derived by primogeniture, in whose hands should rest the government
of all the rest; so that Monarchick Government is (tantum non) natural.

But when God, as I may say, had imbodyed his Church and formed them into a
camp, he then immediately from himself without any suffrage of the People
elects his Governors, and dignifies them with the rods of their authority.
Moses in the temporalls, Aaron in the spiritualls. From God I say, immediately
they were chosen; not by themselves, not by the People. Not from themselves
first, for what power had a poor hireling Shepherd, Revels Son in law to
engage a whole army? what policy, what insinuations could he use which was slow
of speech, stammering of tongue? Unwilling to receive his commission when it was
given him; unwilling to execute it when he had it; fearing those very miracles
which should confirm him, flying from his rod now made a serpent which should
encourage him. Or grant that ambitious minds do politickly decline that, which
they most greedily affect, what was there here that could inflame their
desires? pugna est de paupere reg^o, a bare Sovereignty over naked Men whom
they must guide through a tedious Wilderness, and feed and furnish with all
necessaries in a forty years journey; and when they have Canaan their desires
in view, then be swept away and leave them. Unlikely that any men aspired to be
thus miserable or chose so burdensome a dominion. And more unlikely the People
chose them to it, who were more likely to rebel against them then to obey
them: And for all their pains paid them no other tribute but that of murmerings
and revilings, inconstant fickle men whose queazy stomachs sometimes affect
garlic and onions before quails and Manna. The Levites which but lately drew
their swords with them, now bandy themselves against them; and these which at
the beginning of the Chapter give praise for a late deliverance, before the end
murmr for a new affliction. But commissions signed from Heaven are armor of
proof against all the conspiraces of the Earth. Moses knew, I am that I am,
alters not; and though the Princes of the Congregation take censers in their
hands, they do but kindle a fire to their own destruction, the brass of their
censers shall make a lasting Monument of their rebellion: That so long as the
altar has a being, Men may learn from thence, that no Man may take that honor
to himself, but he that was called of God, as was Aaron: 5 Heb. 4. And sure the
love of God was such that he would choose none but the best of Governments for
his Church; Had all the Princes of the tribe of Levi had an equal share, they
by an Aristocrasy would have bred an emulation; had all the People enjoyed a
parity, their Democrasie would have brought in confusion; but exalting Aaron in
the high Priests chair, and disposing of the rest in subordinate offices under
him, God maintained so blessed a Harmony in his Church, as that it was an
imperfect shadow of that blessed Harmony in heaven.

But 3. It was Aarons rod for the house of Levi upon whom the priesthood was
entailed. The Reubenites thought they had a fair plea for it, because they were
the first born of their Father Jacob: and the other tribes wished well toward
it, witness the rods which every tribe put into the lottery, in hopes it might
be taken. But God which is constant to all his purposes had chosen Levi of all
the Tribes of Israel, to be his Priest: as the Man of God testifies 1 Samuel
2.28. To offer upon his altar and to burn incense before him. And it is well
that this honor was once esteemed so great, that all the tribes were ambitious
of it. When the Ephod and the imbroydered coat were esteemed glorious: The
dregs of Jeroboams corruptions have a greater influence upon our times, who
made Priests of the lowest of the people; and when God requires the most comely
bodies and proportionable countenances for his service; If any by nature be
made so decrepit, that he be unfit for any other employment he will come and
crouch and say, put me into the Priests office, that I may eat a morsel of
bread. Yet this Act of God which made the Priesthood Levi's impropriation, as
it debars others from affecting of it, witness the destruction of the
Reubenites, Dathan, Abiram and their Confederates, or so much as intermedling
with it, which cost poor Uzziah dear, 2 Samuel 6.7, Who going to uphold the
arc, was smitten down, so neither does it privilege the Levites themselves
to perform his service after their own fancy: If Aarons own sons Nahab and
Abihu shall presume to offer up any other fire then that which descended from
Heaven upon Gods Altar, that fire which should consume their sacrifices shall
devour themselves. The service of the Sanctuary must be entire: It will admit
of no Mechanics to officiate, nor yet must the fiery zeal of Clergymen
themselves coin any new fangled forms of services and worship which God has
not prescribed. Both are enemies to Aarons rod here; for as the one break it in
pieces or steal it away, and clap their own in the room, so the other bow it to
their humor and make it crooked after their own fancy.

Hitherto we have beheld the rod withered and dead: let us now consider it in
the miracle and see what fruit it bears, which is branched in 3. degrees, it
budded, it blossomed, it brought forth Almonds.

Every tribe in Israel, had provided his rod, and every rod was stripped alike,
and had the name of the Prince of the tribe engraven on it, Aarons rod had no
more sap in it, no more earth about it. Only it had Aarons name upon it: Where
God has made a secret choice, he will make an open difference. They go to the
wrong end of the ladder which climb up into Gods breast first, and there trace
out those unsearchable points of his election, and from thence ground
themselves upon their impossibility of barrenness and falling off, and by
consequence, their necessity of budding and blossoming and bearing fruit. Would
such a course as this have comforted Aaron, or satisfied the other tribes? What
difference between a Log and a Tree before it spring again? But then is
salvation sure when you work it out: Then faith is alive when it is manifested
by its works: Then is Aaron declared to be Gods chosen when his rod quickens.

And quicken it must or else he cannot be the chosen of God. No surer token of
the life of grace then fruitfulness. Barrenness was banished at the first
creation out of his garden of the World. Increase and multiply, says he, to all
his creatures, and if any fall short cut it down, why combreth it the ground:
And he that is not marred by the Devil, is always thus increasing: he is
always going forward either budding new or ripening his last blossomed fruit.
It was a curse laid upon avarice Esaiah 5.10. that ten acres of Vines should
yield but one bath, and the seed of an Homer should yield but an Ephah, but one
part for ten: sure that is an encumbrance not a crop; and those Vines are
fitter for winters fire then summers vintage.

Nor yet will standing still in the same condition, serve the turn, (as they
say an Oak will for an hundred years together.) It Is a true saying in Divinity,
qui Deo non progreditur, regreditur, he that goes not forward to God, goes
backward to the Devil: It was no excuse to the idle servant, that had hid his
talent, although he had buried it up for fear of losing 'ont, and put it in a
napkin for fear of rusting of it: It was taken from him, for his negligence, he
had gained nothing to it. Yet who is there here present, that cannot strike
upon his heart and say, Lord, I am in a worse condition? He was idle, I am
sinful. He hid his talent and brought it to light again, I have spent mine,
and can show no portion of it. He did not ripen his blossoms, I have made strip
and wast of mine. My beauty I have abused to voluptuousness, my wealth to
luxury, my wit to knavery, my zeal to hypocrysy, my natural ingeny to maintain
schism and heresy. Utinam nescirem literas, O that thou had given me no
talent, that having little I might had the less required: The heat of thy
spirit has sometimes quickened in me the buds of grace, but the coldness of my
devotion has nipp'd them: Or if the warmth, the sunshine of thy mercy or the
fire of thy judgments has thawed my frozen heart and made it vigorous enough to
bring forth blossoms, the Prince of this air has mildewed them: Or if the fruit
has been set, it has either been blown down by the storms of Affliction, or
wormeaten in the sunshine my prosperity, and grown rotten at the Core. Thus
have our rods which should bud and blossom, and bring forth fruit, turned like
the sorcerers to Serpents and stung us to death.

Observe yet farther, as Aarons rod had three degrees of fruitfulness, budding,
blossomming, and bearing fruit, so those three degrees met at one season,
spring, summer, ana harvest was joined together; as the one fed his hopes so
the other confirmed his assurance. A comfort it was to Aaron, no doubt, to see
the budding of his rod, that there was life in it, that God had quickened it,
and yet we know that a branch cut down, so long as the stock of sap which is in
it, will feed it, it will do so. But when it shall prove like Jeremies tree
planted by the waters. Jer. 17.8. Which spreads out her root by the river, and
shall not feel when the heat comes, but her leaf shall be green, and she
shall bring forth blossoms: This is delight as well as comfort. And yet Hosea
calls Israel vitem frondosam a vine full of leaves, Hosea. 10.1. Although
within a few verses it withered and was plucked up. But where the fruit is come
to perfection, grown hard and ripe, and lasting, then may it well be laid up in
the Sanctuary, to testify for him in the latter day. And surely, beloved,
Aarons rod in a mystical sense continues fruitful to this day. No Sermon
which you hear, which is but a branch cut off from the tree of Gods word, shall
return in vain, but if it be dead to some, and prove the savor of death, it
will quicken in others, and prove the savor of life unto life everlasting:
Thus the very budding of this rod, the watchful attention of you that hear us,
puts us in some hopes that our labor is not in vain in the Lord. Or if after
hearing, you fall a discoursing of some point delivered, praise the Preacher,
commend the fitneses semen accipitis, verba redditis, (says St, Austin) good
seed you receive, good words you give back: lauds vestrae folia sunt, fructus
quaeritur (as he goes on) good words are but leaves, or at the best but
blossoms, it is fruit we preach for: and this St. Matthew, calls Chap. 3. ver.
8. fruit worthy of repentance: restorative fruit, which may be antitidote
against the fruit of that other forbidden tree, which poysn'd us all. If this
fruit appear, it will testify for us in the latter day; Us, that we are of
Gods sending, called of God as was Aaron. You that you are of Gods planting,
and if by him planted you shall never be rooted up. Mat. 15.13. Thus whilst
some are budding, others in the blossom, others grown ripe, God may every day
receive a fruitful harvest.

One word more, behold these Almonds grow upon the rod still and are not
gathered off: and it is a good reason which a reverend Prelate has given, why
Aarons rod was treasurd up and not Moses, because this carried the miracle
still in it self, whereas the wonders of that other rod were past and gone.
Those are rotten fruits which fall off from the bough that bears them. The
parable in 13 Mat. Tells us of seed sprung up hastily amongst the stones, but
because it had not depth of Earth it withered. There is I know a sort of
Gospellers, whose hearts on a sudden are all on fire but are soon quenched
again. Jonahs gourd cannot outgrow them: but smitten by a worm they wither.
Those are Gods Champions which stand fast in the faith, those are his chosen
that fall not away, whose buds grow blossoms, whose blossoms grow fruit, and
so they grow on in grace, from one degree unto another, till they become
perfect in the Lord of all perfection Jesus Christ.

The 2. Circumstances yet remain, and I shall handle them but as Circumstances,
the Time and Place, On the morrow; in the Sanctuary.

1. For the time, this change was wrought on a sudden, one night was spring,
summer, and harvest to the rod, on the morrow it bore fruit. We must not limit
the eternal God, to time; miracles are his works, and his works are like
himself (...) in an instant. And as the high Priest under the law, so the
Apostles and Bishops in the Gospel on a sudden were advanced: There was but an
insufflavit, he breathed upon them, and with his breath they received the holy
Ghost. Which Spirit so changed their Spirits that it amazed their Adversaries
to behold such Idiots, as Saint Luke calls them, Acts 4.13. men unlearned and
simple, command so many tongues, and cure such diseases: So what the Schools
say of the Apostles, I may say of this Rod, probatur Deus per Virgam, as this
sudden change proves Aaron and the Apostles preferment came from God, so by
them it proves there is a God, since none but he could work the Miracles.

Then secondly for the place, 'twas in the Sanctuary, and no place so fit as
Gods own House for Gods own Work. That house which budded in David's thoughts,
for which God commends him, 1 Kings 3.18. But it flourished in Solomon's hands,
who raised the glorious structure of it: And however the zeal of some in these
wretched days, go about to eat it up, as the zeal of that eat up David's Heart,
Psalm. 69.9. or rather Christ in David typified, 2 John 17. Yet Gods House it
shall remain still, so long as there be Nations upon the Earth to inhabit any
other: and that in a twofold respect. First as God dwells in it, it is his
Temple: secondly as his services are performed in it, it is his House of
prayer. My house, (says the Prophet Isaiah 56.7. repeated by our Savior in
three Evangelists) shall be called the House of prayer to all Nations. And now
let the brainsick Separatists brood what conceit they list, that Temples were
but ceremonial, and Christ's Passion put them out of date: either they must
grant the fullness of the Gentiles before the descension of the holy Ghost, and
that all Nations met at prayers at Jerusalem, (which is ridiculous enough) or
that whilst nations, acknowledge a God to be worshipped, he shall have a House to
be worshipped in.

And truly Sirs we need not wonder that Harons rod in our days seems withered,
since the Sanctuary in which it is kept is so neglected. But alas! What speak I
of the crosier, when the crown it self has found the same doom. When the
traitor Jeroboam seduced the ten tribes of Israel against their King he forbids
them to go to the Temple at Jerusalem, and sets up his highway Religion to
worship his calves at Dan and Bethel. Nay he drives away the Priests of the
Lord, the Sons of Aaron and Levi (with the Sanctuary away goes the budding rod:
They are Relatives you see, pull down Church government and the Church will not
stand long after it) 2 Chronicles. 13.9. and made him Priests like the people of
other countries: Whosover comes to fill his hand with a young bullock and seven
rams, the same may be a Priest of them that are no Gods. But what speak I of
earthly Princes, when neglect of the Sanctuary ushers in Rebellion against the
King of heaven, Hence we find those precepts so frequently conjoynd of
Observing Gods Sabbaths and reverencing his Sanctuary. It Is strange that the one
should be Moral the other Ceremonial. (...) say the Heathen. Psalm. 74.8. they
will burn up all the Synagogues in the Land. (...) say the Septuagint
(changing one letter) they will forbid all his festivals. But the first part of
the verse reconciles both, Let us say they destroy them altogether: so that no
Sanctuary, no budding rod; on budding rod, no Aaron; no Aaron, no worship of
God.

Thus we have dispacht the history of the Text, with such inferences touched
upon by the way, as could not well be bauk'd: Now since whatsoever was written
of Old was written for our instruction, it will not be amiss to see how this
rod of Aaron points down to us, and is laid up to testify against these latter
days. And first I must not baulk the next high Priest, next in time, though
first in honor, our Savior Christ, who although he succeeded not of Aarons
order but of Melchizedecks, yet he is the Architype and substance which that
other Priesthood shadowed. The Author to the Hebrews his saved me the labor of
making an Analogy between them. And I hope his Offices without dispute will
furnish him with a rod: as a King, a rod of power and correction, as a Prophet
of guidance and instruction, as a Priest, of comfort and sustentation. In vain
was that scapegoat of the Jews upon whose head was laid the sins of the
Congregation, if it were not for this Lamb slain from the beginning, this
(...), this High Priest which sacrificed himself, and laid, the burden of all
our sins upon his own shoulders: He it is that took the censer in his hand as
Aaron did, when the fire of Gods wrath was gone out against us, and stood
between the living and the dead, nay he fell down amongst the dead, and was
numbered among the transgressors that by his stripes we might be healed. He, he
it is who in the last act of his life erected his cross, the rod of his
exaltation, that rod upon which his name was wrote, which bore most precious
fruit, the fruit of his own Body, which whosoever can lay up in a sanctified
heart, the Temple of the holy Ghost, may be sure to have it testifye for him in
the latter day.

But being thus gone up on high, and lead captivity captive, and received
gifts for Men, is he grown a niggard of them, and bestowed none upon his
Church which he has left behind him? Were the Jews better provided for, who
were only ad memoriam, but types and figures of him that was to come; then we
which are a memoria his remembrancers, and Priests in his stead: in persona
ejus, says the vulgar, his deputies which here personate him and act him over
again? No: his Church has Aarons still, and the Aarons have their rods too: Nay
the Aarons of the Gospel shall be refined too says Malachi 3. Chap. 3. God
shall purge the Sons of Levi, which St. Hierome interprets the Evangelical
Ministers. If the Testament be above the law; God forbid the Ministration
should be beneath it.

St. Paul 1 Cor. 12. tells us of diverse (...) free graces or gifts proceeding
from the Spirit verse 4. and that we may not think them to be heaped confusedly
all upon one, in the next verse he speaks of several (...) administrations and
offices among which they are divided, the graces are reckoned up verses 8, 9,
10. Some peculiar to the A postles some streaming down upon the skirts of the
Church. The offices are recounted, v. 28. and of them likewise some merely
Apostolical, some permanent and perpetual; namely those three, Teachers,
Helpers, Governors. Perpetual I call them, for besides that the light of
nature instructed the heathen, so far as the morality of the service of a God
carried them to the same division of the (...) their helpers, their (...) their
teachers, and the (...) their governors, they are the very same which God
prescribed his own people the Jews, in their Levites, their Helpers, and as it
were their Deacons; their Priests, their Teachers, and instructers; the sons of
Aaron their Praelates and Governors. And thus we find the oyntmentt powered
upon Aarons, head has run down o his beard, and wet the borders of his
garments. But this quick sighted generation amongst whom we live has seen
farther into the words then any of the ancient Fathers, and out of the word
Governors has extracted an Elixar their ruling Elders. A Government it is
indeed, but such as Jothams bramble was, which burnt down the Cedars of
Libanon, the pillars of the Temple: An opinion so full of novelty and void of
authority that fourscore years ago it scarce had a being. As if Gods Church all
the time before had been hid with Eliah in his cave; or fled with the woman
into the Wilderness. Some there are I know which have deeply strained their
wits to fetch this Government out of the Scriptures, and pinch hard upon that
text, 1 Timothy 5.17. (when all other fail them) The Elders that rule well are
worthy of double honor, especially they which labor in the word, and
Doctrine: Ergo by implication Elders there are (say they) which labor not and
those are lay-ruling-Elders. But St. Chrysostom which lived nearer, and knew
more of the Apostles practice than we, found out another sense. All Priests
(says he) which may administer the Sacraments are not allowed to preach: the
meaner sort may deal with Baptism, the wiser only with the Word; Which
difference St. Paul found in himself, 1 Corin. 1.17. Christ has sent me not to
baptize (says he) but to preach the Gospel. If then thou have such a Minister
over thee as is gifted for both Offices, allow him a double honor. And let no
man mistake the name of Elder or Presbyter in Scripture, which is no other then
Priest or Minister, so St. John styles himself in his two last Epistles, so St.
Peter 1 Ep. 5.1. and so all the pen men of Gods holy Word have called the
Ministers of the Gospel. Which is so notoriously true, that the very patrons of
this Government have disclamed the jus divinum of it, and make it only a State
convenience: Undenyably true it is that our Savior in his time did choose his
twelve Apostles as Superiors, his seventy as subordinate. Subordinato I say
they were; for besides that they were forbidden by the other in the time of
Christ, Luke 9.49. They were commanded by them afterward as Silas was by Paul,
Acts 17.15. and so were within their power. Afterward that the Apostles left
their successors Bishops may be evident by St. Paul's own Epistles, to Timothy
the Bishop of Ephesius, and Titus Bishop of Crete, and the undoubted testimony
of Ireneus confirms it, who lived immediately upon the Apostles age: But what
need we more Authority? St. Jude v. 11. Speaks of some in his time which
perished in the gainsaying of Corah. What that was, ye have heard; he would be
Aarons equal, how any could perish in it was impossible, unless by desiring
or affecting a parity with their Governors. In the fear of God, Brethren,
suffer then a word of Exhortation: This rod of Aaron has sap in it still and
sprouts to this day. Oh shake not of the blossoms, pluck not off the fruit: if
God have laid it up in the Tabernacle, let not Sacrilegious hands steal it
thence: It Is a rod of power, submit to it, a rod of correction, be afraid of it,
a rod of instruction, obediently receive it a rod of sustentation, rely on it.
Obey them which are set over you in the Lord. Let no Uzzah presume to touch the
Ark; nor Uzziah to offer sacrifice, let the sons Levi only wait upon the altar.
If a quis aequisivit, be terrible at the last day, who has required these
things at your hands? will not prohibita sunt, have I not fobid thee; be much
more terrible? We find in Exodus that Pharaohs sorcerers had got them rods too,
but Moses his Serpent soon devoured them: And the Sons of Sceva Act. 15.19.
would be conjuring in the name of Jesus; but the Devil soon proved himself
their Master. Beware that fearful curse which befell the nolumus hunc regnare,
those that would not let Christ reign over them: And such are they that despise
his Ordinances, and so do all such as disobey his substitutes. His substitutes
I call them, for they are his Laborers, but one degree removed from himself,
he is (...) they (...) he is, (...) they (...): if God be the chief guide,
Moses and Aaron are the hands to lead his people: if God be chief Shepherd,
Peter and his partners have the office under him to feed the flock. 1 Pet. 5.
And if in temporalls the civil Magistrate at this day thinks himself sufficient
without bringing the difficultest causes to Aaron and the Priests, as God
prescribes Deuter. the 17.8, 9. if Jehoshaphat, I say, think his Judges able to
dispatch (...) the affairs of State, yet let the Priest dispense (...), 2 Chro.
19.8. The Lords business, the judgment cause of the Lord. Make not thy self the
Devils instrument, since he has left disputing about Moses his body, for thee
to dispute Aarons authority. But rather join with that Captain of Israel in his
prayer for Levi. Deuter. 33. Let thy Urim and Thumim be with thy holy one,
bless O Lord his substance and accept the work of his hands, and smite through
the loins of them that rise up against him, and of them that hate him, that
they rise not again. To conclude: Aarans rod is Gods rod and Gods rod will
always bring forth fruit, either sweet or bitter Almonds: sermons prove either
the savor of Life or death. May that rod and this Sermon take such deep
rooting in our heart, that it may bring forth fruit abundantly in our lives,
to Gods honor his Churches glory, our own comfort, etc.

Gloria Deo in Excelsis.

