TIME
emblematic portrayal of Time with an hourglass and a sickle All the memorable
and wonder strikinge PARLAMENTARY MERCIES effected and afforded unto this our
ENGLISH NATION, within this space of less then 2 Years past A. 1641. and 1642.

Are to be sold. by Thomas. Ienner; in his shop at the old Exchange

TRVTH
portrayal of Truth as a robed figure with a sunburst halo In a little wrath I
hid my face from the for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer.

Isaiah. 54. 1. I will mention the loving kindnesses of the Lord, and the
praises of the Lord, according, to all that the Lord has bestoued on us, and
the great goodness toward the house of Israel which he has besowed on them
according to his mercies and according to the multitude of his Loving
kindnesses.

(...) 69 And the fifth Angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast,
and his kingdom was full of darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain.
and blasphemed the God of heaven.

(...) 16 ^^

The Arch-Prelate of St Andrews in Scotland reading the new Service-booke in
his pontificalibus assaulted by men and Women, with Crickets stools Sticks
and Stones.



The rising of Prentises and Seamen on Southwark side to assault the
Archbishops of Canterburys House at Lambeth.



The Soldiers in their passage to York turn unto reformers pull down Popish
pictures, beak down rayles turn altars into Tables.



the English and Scotts Armies at first ready to fight, lovingly embrace each
other, and part kind friends.



The Ministers and people solemnly take the Protestation in all Churches over
the Kingdom.



Mr Burton, Dr. Bastwick, and Mr. Prinne, triumphantly from perpetual
captivity, those 3 famous Witnesses of Truth, return home to London, attended
with thousands of horse and foot,



The Earl of Strafford for treasonable practices beheaded on the Tower Hill.



Sr. Francis Windebank, Sr. John Finch, the Lord Digbie, Iermin etc. fly for
their lives beyond sea,



The High Commission-Court and Starr-Chamber voted down, and pluralities and
non residencies damned by Parliament.



The Queen Mother sent away by Sea, and the Capuchine Friars and Priests
expelled from Somersett House beyond Sea.



The City Trained Bands, and the brave Seamen with Barges and Long-boates
adorned with streamers drums and trumpets, and furnished with Shipguns. and
other Warrlike instruments, quard the Lords and Commons safely to Parl: by Land
and Water.



The County of Buckingham Comes to London the very same day of the Lords and
Commons so quarded, with their Petition to the Parl: Carrying the Protestation
on their staves on horseback, and the Counties of Essex, Hertford, Barkshire,
Surrey, and others, followed them in like manner shortly after.



The Bishops imprisoned in the Tower of London for protesting against the
Parliament



Popish Recusants disarmed, for the great security of the kingdom



a Letter sent to Mr. Pym. Mr. Pym do not think that a guard of men can
protect you if you persist in your traitorous Courses and wiked designs I have
sent a Paper-messenger to you and if this does not touch your heart, a dagger
shall so soon as I am recovered of my plaguesore: In the mean time you may be
forborne because no better man may be endangered for you. Repent, Traitor



Colonel Lunsford assaulting the Londoners at Westminster Hall, with a great
rout of ruffinly Cavaleires




