New ERRORS Made Palpable by an old LIGHT:

OR A Cheap and easy Method to Cure the Dissentions of the Time by a
Septuagint of Conclusions, Composed and Experimented.

BY Anthony Norwood, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. and are to be sold by CHARLES ADAMS, at the Mary-Gold
in Fleet Street over against Fe^ter-Lane, 1652.

LOng preambles to short discourses are like wide Lists to narrow Clothes,
which though they set off the commodity, yet they yield no benefit to the
Buyers. Instead therefore of a Preface, take (for the better understanding of
that which follows) this brief survey of such political Axioms as have been
held forth to the people for infallible verties by some of the late Aulicicall
pretenders to Divinity.

The Episcopal party determine thus.
THat by the ordinance of God national government ought to be successively
monarchical, or solely and hereditarily in one. That as the Israelites, so all
Nations ought to be governed by Kings; and that Kings may not be resisted,
deposed or punished. That as the primitive Christians, so all believing
associations ought to have Bishops to superintend in their Ecclesiastical
polity. That the Regal and Episcopal offices may be managed by two distinct
persons in one and the same Commonwealth; and that both are of divine
institution.
The Anti-Episcoparian Doctrines, speak to this effect.
THat although there be no divine Law by which the government by Kings was
constituted, but what was peculiar to the children of Israel, yet Regal
Government ought to be continued in all Christian associations. That in some
cases Kings may be resisted, but may neither be deposed nor punished. That,
although there were Bishops and no Kings in that polity which was peculiar to
the primitive Christians, yet the government by Bishops is Antichristian and
ought to be discontinued. That in civil affairs government ought to be
Monarchical and in one, but in Ecclesiastical concernments democraticall and
by many.
This is sum of what they say, and at how wide a distance in opinion, the
Prelaticall and Presbyterian Doctors stand in opposition one to the other is
manifest by these their publicly avowed principles; wherein I conceive each
of them to be no less remote from truth; and this I shall endeavor to
demonstrate in the ensuing propositions, that so the people of the Nation may
be no longer blown in sunder, and disjoynted by such impetuous counterblasts of
blind, carnal and selfe-intending Rudiments.

Thus then we begin.

I.
If in the first ages of the world, as well before the flood as after, every
Father had by the Law of God and nature, a jurisdiction over his own family
sole and independent of any other humane authority then was it a sin in any
other to usurp upon their jurisdictions in any case whatsoever.

But in the first ages of the world, as well before the flood as after, every
Father had by the Law of God and Nature a jurisdiction over his own family sole
and independent of any other humane authority.

Therefore whosoever did then assume a power over any other Father or his
family in any case whatsoever, did therein transgress the ordinance of God.

II.
If God was displeased with Nimrod, for arrogating to himself a jurisdiction
over more families then his own, then was it not lawful for him so to do.

But God was displeased with Nimrod, for arrogating to himself a jurisdiction
over more families then his own.

Therefore his so doing was not justifiable in the sight of Almighty God.

III.
If the disposing of the children of Israel into a select fraternity under
Kings and Priests, was a typical representation of Christ and his Church, then
is it not presidentially obliging.

But the disposing of the Children of Israel into a select fraternity under
Kings and Priests was a typical representation of Christ and his Church.

Therefore although the institution were from God, yet does it not oblige all
people and in all times.

IV.
If God was displeased with the Israelites for desiring to be governed by
Kings, and if the precedent government by Judges did continue some hundreds of
years, without any express dislike from God; then, if all Nations ought to be
presidented by them, the government by Judges ought rather to be embraced then
that of Kings.

But God was displeased with the Israelites, for desiring to be governed by
Kings; and the precedent government by Judges did continue 450. years, without
any express dislike from God, Acts 13. 20.

Therefore if all Nations ought to be presidented by the Israelites, the
government by Judges ought rather to be embraced then that of Kings:

V.
If national government in a military form be not perpetuated by any
universally binding Law of God, and if the Kings of Israel were distinguistable
in their office from the Judges of that Nation by their military employment
only, then is it more reasonable to say that all Nations may be governed by
Judges, then that they ought to be everlastingly governed by Kings.

But national government in a military equipage is not perpetuated by any
universal Law of God, and the Kings of Israel were distinguishable in their
office, from the Judges of that Nation by their Military employment only. 1 Samuel 10. 1.

Therefore it is more rational to say, that all Nations may be governed by
Judges, then that they ought to be everlastingly governed by Kings.

VI.
If the government of the whole world were at any time in the power of one Man,
then if Monarchical government be instituted by God, it is as lawful to
subdivide it into as many Monarchies as there are families, as to divide it
into so many Kingdoms as are now in Christendom.

But the government of the whole world was by the donation of God solely and
Monarchically in Nebuchadnezzar. Jer. 27. 7.

Therefore, if Monarchical government be instituted by God, it is as lawful
to subdivide it into as many Monarchies as there are families, as to divide it
into so many Kingdoms as are now in Christendom.

VII.
If they who teach, that by the ordinance of God the government of a Christian
Commonwealth ought to be Monarchical, and in one, do likewise affirm that by
the like ordinance two or more ought to bear rule in the same Commonwealth,
then is their doctrine contradictory to it self.

But they who teach, that by the ordinance of God the government of a Christian
Commonwealth ought to be Monarchically in a King, do likewise affirm that the
Clergy have by divine right a gubernative power in the same Commonwealth.

Therefore the Monarchical Doctors will have something to do to reconcile
their own flat contradictions.

VIII.
If there be nothing in the ordinance to restrain Kings or Bishops to exercise
what power, and over what people they please, nor any thing to prohibit the
people to have as many, or as few, and what persons they please to be their
Kings or Bishops, then is the doctrine of divine ordination of Kings and
Bishops impertinent and inconsistent with peaceable government.

But there is nothing in the ordinance to restrain either Kings or Bishops
from exercising what power, and over what people they please, nor any thing to
prohibit the people from having as many, or as few, and what persons they
please to be their Kings or Bishops.

Therefore the doctrine of divine ordination is impertinent, and not consistent
with prudentiall and peaceable principles.

IX.
If the Ceremonial Law be abolished, and whatsoever was derived from that Law
lost its efficacy when that was abrogated, then all forms of government
constituted by that Law did determine with it.

But the Ceremonial Law is abrogated, and whatsoever was derived from that Law
lost its efficacy when that was abolished.

Therefore all forms of government constituted by that Law are now determined.

X.
If neither before the Ceremonial Law was constituted, nor after it was
abolished, God did prescribe the Laws or any set form of government, by which
and none other, he would have all associated people unalterably governed, then
is there not now remaining any municipall Laws or form of national
government of an immediate divine institution.

But neither before that Law was instituted nor after it was abrogated did God
prescribe any such Laws, or form of government.

Therefore no such Laws or form of government are now of an immediate divine
institution.

XI.
If after the abolition of the Ceremonial Law no people were confined by God
to any positive and known form of Polity, then after that Law was abrogated
the fathers of families were not restrained by God, of any part of those
rights, which were due to them before that Law was in force.

But after the abolition of the Ceremonial Law no people were confined by God
to any positive and known form of Polity.

Therefore after that Law was abrogated the primitive rights of the Fatherhood
might revert to them, notwithstanding any ordinance of God to the contrary.

XII.
If in the Gospel all those who are subordinate to the Father of a family be
commanded to obey him in every thing, then Christianity does not abridge a
Father of any part of his primitive Prerogative.

But all those who are subordinate to the Father of a family, are commanded in
the Gospel to obey him in every thing. Ephesians. 5. 24. Colo. 3. 20, 22.

Therefore a Father of a family loses nothing of his primitive Prerogative by
being converted to the faith.

XIII.
If merely by the donation of the graces of the spirit, no Father has a more
particular privilege, or prerogative then another, then no Christian Father
has more right then another to a gubernative superiority by divine
dispensation.

But no Father has merely by the donation of the graces of the spirit, a more
particular privilege or prerogative then another.

Therefore upon that account, no Father has by divine dispensation more right
then another to a gubernative superiority.

XIV.
If believing Fathers have from God an equal, sole and independent power both
by grace and nature, then no man has a power to compel them to associate in
government, or being associated to impose upon them in causes, either Civil or
Ecclesiastical.

But believing Fathers have from God an equal, sole and independent power both
by grace and nature.

Therefore no man has authority to compel them to associate in government, or
being associated to impose upon them in causes, either Civil or
Ecclesiastical.

XV.
If no man have a power to impose upon believing Fathers, or to compel them to
associate in government, then may such fathers retain their native freedom
and independency in all causes as well Civil as Ecclesiastical.

But no man has by divine right a power to impose upon heleeving Fathers, or
to compel them to associate.

Therefore such Fathers may continue free and independent in both the said
causes.

XVI.
If the preservation of peace and propriety, be the proper end of all national
government, and if believing fathers have a right to preserve their own
freedom against an obtruded power; then is it necessary, that in all Christian
associations, government be so constituted, that the subordinate Fathers may be
convinced of the lawfulness of the power and personal calling of their
Magistrates.

But the preservation of peace and propriety is the proper end of all nation
all government, and believing Fathers have a right to preserve their own
freedom against an obtruded power.

Therefore it is necessary, that in all Christian associations, government be
so constituted, that the subordinate Fathers may be convinced of the lawfulness
of the power and personal calling of their Magistrates.

XVII.
If Magistrates may sin by usurping upon those over whom they have no
warrantable jurisdiction, then some rule is necessary by which they may
infallibly know as well to what people, as to what dispensations their
authority may lawfully be extended.

But Magistrates may sin by usurping upon those over whom they have no
warrantable jurisdiction.

Therefore some rule is necessary, by which they may infallibly know as well to
what dispensations, as over what people their authority may lawfully be
extended.

XVIII.
If in a Christian Commonwealth neither parochial, provincial, or
Monarchical Magistrates can be known or distinguished in their persons or
power by the Law of God, then subordinates cannot be convinced of the
lawfulness of their personal calling and power by any divine directory.

But in a Christian Commonwealth neither Parochial, Provincial, or
Monarchical Magistrates can be known or distinguished in their persons or
power by the Law of God.

Therefore by a divine directory, subordinates cannot be convinced of the
lawfulness of the personal calling and power of any such Magigistrates.

XIX.
If God has no where intailed the Government of many families upon the eldest
Son of the precedent governor, and if the Crown of Jsrael did not descend in a
right line by priority of blood, then is there not either a divine precent or
president to justify a claim to Magistracy by hereditary succession.

But neither has God intayled the government of many families upon the eldest
Son of the precedent governor, nor did the Crown of Israel descend in a
right line by priority of blood.

Therefore he that claims a Crown by succession, will never be able to make out
a good Title by the bare plea of a divine Charter.

XX.
If the jurisdiction of Augustus Caesar did extend to the whole known world,
then, if government ought to be hereditarily monarchical no Nation of the
world can at this day be under any known lawful Monarchical authority.

But the whole known world was under the jurisdiction of Augustus Caesar. Luke
2. 1.

Therefore the several Nations of the world cannot at this day be under any
known lawful authority, if God has appointed government to be hereditarily
Monarchical.

XXI.
If the last line of English Kings did derive their title to the Crown from
Conquest, and if there were any Kings in England before them, then, if the
Crowns of Kings ought by the ordinance of God to descend to their next
legitimate heirs, the title of the last Kings was invalid.

But the last line of English Kings did derive their title to the Crown from
Conquest, and there were Kings in England before them.

Therefore, if the Crowns of Kings ought by Gods ordinance to descend in a
right line to their next legitimate heirs, the title of the last Kings was
usurped, and whatsoever any of them acted as Kings was unlawful and is
voydable.

XXII.
If the limits and precincts of no such Magistrates are laid out by any divine
boundaries, then can they not infallibly know of what people they respectively
may lawfully take cognizance by any theological dispensatory.

But the limits and precincts of no such Magistrates are laid out by divine
boundaries.

Therefore of what people they respective may lawfully take cognizance is not
determinable by Theology.

XXIII.
If no such Magistrates be distinguishable in their persons, power or precincts
by any divine directory, then neither Magistrates nor Subordinates can be
convinced of their reciprocal allegiance, but by some humane demonstration.

But no such Magistrates are distinguishable in their persons, power or
precincts by any divine directory.

Therefore neither Parochial, Provincial, or Monarchical Magistrates, nor
their Subordinates can be convinced of their reciprocal allegiance, but by
some humane demonstration.

XXIV.
If it be a humane Law only by which the persons, power and precincts of all
such Magistrates are known and distinguished, so as to create a mutual
allegiance between them and their Subordinates, then no such allegiance can be
created unless some known persons have a lawful power to make Laws.

But it is a humane Law only by which such persons are so distinguished as to
create a mutual allegiance.

Therefore, unless some known persons have a lawful power to make Laws, no
such allegiance can be created.

XXV.
If no man be bound to submit to such Laws as are constituted by an obtruded
power, then the Lawmakers ought to have a known lawful power over that whole
community, to which they pretend a power of giving Laws.

But n o man is bound to submit to Laws constituted by an obtruded power.

Therefore the Lawmakers ought to have a known lawful power over the whole
Community.

XXVI.
If the Authority of the Law makers ought to extend lawfully to the whole
Community, then it must be such as relating to all, does not thereby infringe
any known Law of God.

But their Authority by whom Laws are made, ought to extend lawfully to the
whole Community.

Therefore, it must be such as relating to all, no divine Law is thereby
infringed.

XXVII.
If the Law makers Authority ought to be such as does not infringe any known
Law of God, and if originally the paternal jurisdiction be by divine right sole
and independent, then in believing associations, none have a justifiable and
satisfactory calling to make Laws and constitute public Magistrates, either
Civil or Ecclesiastical, but the fathers of families or some deputed by them.

But the Authority of Lawmakers must be such as does not trespass upon any
known Law of God, and the paternal Prerogative is sole and independent.

Therefore none have a warrantable power to give Laws or impose Magistrates
either Civil or Ecclesiastical upon believing associates, but the fatherhood or
their deputies.

XXVIII.
If the Magistratical power neither of Kings, Priests, or Judges of Israel, did
consist in making, but in declaring Law, then as they were Kings, Priests, and
Judges, they had no Legislative Authority.

But the Magistratical power neither of Kings Priests, or Judges of Israel did
consist in making, but in declaring Law.

Therefore they had not any Legislative Authority belonging to them, as they
were either Kings, Priests, or Judges.

XXIX.
If neither the Kings, Priests, or Judges of Israel had a Legislative power
appending to their offices, and if there be no Law of God that gives such
power to such officers, then neither Kings, Priests, or Judges have by divine
right a Legislative power in respect of their offices.

But neither the Kings, Priests, or Judges of that Nation had a Legislative
power appending to their offices, nor is there any Law of God that gives such
power to such Magistrates.

Therefore by divine right, neither Kings, Priests, or Judge have a Legislative
power by virtue of any of their offices.

XXX.
If in Christian associations none have a warrantable and satisfactory calling
to make Laws or constitute public Magistrates of any sort whatsoever, but
the fathers themselves, or some deputed by them, then the Authority of the
fatherhood of associated Christians, either persoually or representatively
assembled, is sole independent and supreme in all causes, as well Civil as
Ecclesiastical.

But in Christian associations none have a warrantable and satisfactory calling
to make Laws or constitute public Magistrates of any sort whatsoever, but the
fathers themselves or some deputed by them.

Therefore the Authority of the fatherhood of associated Christians, either
personally or representatively assembled is sole independent and supreme in all
causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil.

XXXI.
If it be not discernable who amongst the individual members of a Christian
Commonwealth is more particularly inspired with the gifts of the Spirit then
another, then in such associations the gifts of the Spirit are not convincing
evidence of the lawful calling of any Magistrates.

But it is not discernable who amongst the individual members of a Christian
Commonwealth is more particularly inspired with the gifts of the spirit then
another.

Therefore the gifts of the Spirit are not competent to distinguish who in such
associations ought to be Magistrates, and who subordinates.

XXXII.
If in the associations of believers the gifts of the Spirit be not competent
whereby to determine who ought therein to be Magistrates, then is there no
other way to distinguish between Magistrates and subordinates, but by the rule
of Nature or consent.

But in the associations of believers, the gifts of the Spirit are not
competent whereby to determine who ought therein to be Magistrates.

Therefore there is no other way to distinguish between Magistrates and
subordinates in such associations, but by the rule of Nature or Consent.

XXXIII.
If the Magistrates of a Christian Comonwealth are no other way distinguishable
from subordinates but by the rule of Nature or Consent, then the Government of
Christian associations falls wholly under a natural and prudential speculation.

But the Magistrates of a Christian association are no other way
distinguishable from subordinates, but by the rule of Nature or Consent.

Therefore the Government of a Christian Commonwealth falls altogether under a
natural and prudential speculation.

XXXIV.
If the Government of a Christian Commonwealth falls wholly under a natural and
prudential speculation, then they who are of the Ministerial function have not
therein any singular privilege to a gubernative power by divine dispensation.

But the Government of a Christian Commonwealth has its form and being merely
from prudence and Nature.

Therefore they who are of the Ministerial function, have therein no singular
right to a gubernative power by divine dispensation.

XXXV.
If no Christian Father be prohibited the Graces of the Spirit, or before
association forbidden by God to exercise the Ministerial function in his own
family, then after association they have an equal liberty to officiate therein,
notwithstanding any divine prohibition.

But no Christian Father is prohibited the Graces of the Spirit, or before
association forbidden to exercise the Ministerial function in his own family.

Therefore, notwithstanding any divine prohibition, they have after association
an equal liberty of officiating therein.

XXXVI.
If after association the believing fathers of Christian families have an
equal liberty to officiate in the Ministerial function, then in a Christian
Commonwealth the personal calling to the Ministerial office proceeds not from
divine inauguration.

But after association, the associated believing fathers of Christian families
have an equal power to officiate in the Ministerial function, notwithstanding
any divine prohibition.

Therefore the persoual calling to the public Ministerial office must
necessarily proceed from politic and prudential considerations.

XXXVII.
If in a Christian Commonwealth the personal disposing of the Ministerial
office be from humane institution, and if believing fathers have originally an
equal disciplinary power, then merely the calling to the Ministerial office
cannot make a justifiable claim to a disciplinary Authority.

But in such a Commonwealth the personal calling to the Ministerial office is
from humane institution, and believing fathers have originally an equal
disciplinary power.

Therefore a claim to a disciplinary Authority cannot be made good merely by
the calling to the Ministerial office.

XXXVIII.
If the Apostles thought it not reasonable that they should be obstructed in
executing their Ministerial office by regulating the distribution of public
Alms to distressed Christian widows, and if nothing belonging to discipline
agrees better with the preaching of the Gospel then the duties of Charity, then
a reason will be hardly found, why they who are set apart for Doctrine must
therefore necessarily have to do with discipline.

But the Apostles thought it not reasonable that they should be hindered in
their Ministerial employment by regulating the distribution of public Alms to
distressed widows, and nothing belonging to discipline agrees better with the
drofession of a Minister of the Gospel, then the duties of charity. Act. 6. 2.

Therefore an Apostolical reason is not to be found, why the Ministers of the
Gospel must necessarily be Magistrates in office.

XXXIX.
If they who are Ministers in office have not thereby any privilege to be
Magistrates in office, then the Episcopal office is not inseparably annsxed to
the Ministerial function.

But ehey who are Ministers in office have not thereby any privilege to be
Magistrates in office.

Therefore I cannot conceive it to be any profanation of the office, should
some Lay Elders be appointed to supply the places of such Bishops as were in
the Churches of the primitive Christians.

XL.
If the Faith of the primitive Christians was the only cause why that polity
which they had peculiar to themselves, was accounted holy, then is there no
cause why some part of the polity of associated believing families should be
esteemed more or less holy then some other.

But the Faith of the primitive Christians was that alone for which the polity
which they had peculiar to themselves was accounted holy.

Therefore there is no cause why the polity of believing associates should be
esteemed more or less holy in one part then in another.

XLI.
If it be through Faith only that holiness be imputed to man by God, and if
wheresoever Faith is, there holiness be imputed, then sanctimony is not to be
attributed more to one believing member of a Christian association, then to
another.

But it is through Faith only that holiness is imputed to man by God, and
wheresoever Faith is, there holiness is imputed.

Therefore sanctimony is not to be attributed more to one believing member of a
Christian Commonwealth then to another.

XLII.
If holiness be an attribute belonging as well to all as to any believers, and
to every part as well as to any part of the polity of believing associates,
then the native power of a believing Fatherhood is not made less by a
pretended personal or political holiness.

But holiness is an attribute belonging as well to all as to any believers,
and to every part as well as to any part of the polity of believing associates.

Therefore a pretended personal or political holiness, cannot take away the
native power of a believing Fatherhood.

XLIII.
If the authority of a Christian Commonwealth be solely and independently in
the Fatherhood, and if lawful authority ought to be obeyed, then ought
communicated Christians to subscribe wholly to that polity which is constituted
by the Fatherhood, whether personally or electively congregated.

But the authority of a Christian Commonwealth is solely and independently in
the Fatherhood and lawful authority ought not to be disobeyed.

Therefore communicated Christians are religiously bound to subscribe wholly to
that polity which is constituted by the authority of the Fatherhood.

XLIIII.
If the Fatherhood of associated Christians have a right of power, sole
independent and extendable to the whole Community, then is it no more lawful
for any member therein associated to appeal from their determinations to his
own judgment, or to a foreign Judicatory, in matters tending to public
uniform worship, then in those which tend to the persecution of peace and
prosperity.

But the authority of the Fatherhood of associated Christians is sole,
independent, and extendably to the whole Community.

Therefore it is as unlawful for any associated member thereof to appeal from
their determinations to his own judgment, or to a foreign Judicatory in
matters tending to public uniform worship, as in those which tend to the
preservation of peace and propriety.

XLV.
If the authority of the Fatherhood be sole and independent in all causes, then
no foreign power can assume a jurisdiction over any member of a Christian
association without sin.

Bue the authority of the Fatherhood is sole and independent in all causes.

Therefore it is a sin for any foreign power to assume a jurisdiction over any
member of a Christian association.

XLVI.
If no foreign power can assume a jurisdiction over any associated members of
a Christian Commonwealth without sin, then the pretended Roman Hierarchy is a
sinful usurpation.

But no foreign power can assume a jurisdiction over any associated members of
a Christian Commonwealth without sin.

Therefore the pretended universal Roman Hierarchy is usurpatious and unlawful.

XLVII.
If the paternal authority be sole, equal, and independent, then none has by
his own right a pre-eminence above another to act in their National Councels.

But the paternal authority is originally sole, equal, and independent.

Therefore in a Christian Commonwealth no Father has by his own right more or
less power then another, to act in their National Assemblies.

XLVIII.
If in the associations of believing Fathers, no Father has a greater
privilege then another to act in their National Conventions, then if in their
representative Assemblies one cannot act unless he be elected, no more may any
other.

But in Christian associations no one Father has a greater privilege to act
in their Common-Councels then another.

Therefore, if in their representative Conventions one cannot act unless he be
elected, no more may any other.

XLIX.
If in their representative Councels none has more power to act then another,
unless he be elected, then the pretended power of Kings and Lords spiritual
and temporal, to act by virtue of their own rights is not justifyable.

But in the representative Councels of associated believing Fathers, none has
more power to act then another, unless he be elected.

Therefore the pretended power of Kings and Lords spiritual and temporal to
act in such Councels, by virtue of their own rights is not justifiable.

L.
If custom cannot destroy a right grounded upon an universal Law of God, the
the authority of the Fatherhood cannot be voided by any customary claims.

But custom cannot destroy a right grounded upon an universal Law of God.
Mat. 15. 3. 4. 9.

Therefore no customary claims can make void the sole and independent
authority of a Christian Fatherhood.

LI.
If the government of a Christian Commonwealth be solely and independently in
the Fatherhood then whosoever assumes a power in competition with the
Common Council of a believing Fatherhood, usurps upon their authority, and
sins against Gods ordinance.

But the government of a Christian Commonwealth is solely and independently in
the Fatherhood.

Therefore whosoever assumes a power in competition with them, or with their
representatives, does thereby sin against Gods ordinance.

LII.
If the Fatherhood of Christian associations have a sole and independent power,
and if it be a sin to usurp upon that authority, then may the representative
Trustees of the Fatherhood, lawfully resist any such usurpation.

But the authority of the Fatherhood of associated Christians is sole and
independent, and it is a sin to usurp upon that authority.

Therefore any such usurpation may lawfully be resisted by the representative
Trustees of the Fatherhood.

LIII.
If it be lawfully in the power of the representative Trustees of the
Fatherhood, to resist any such usurpation; then they are bound in honor and
religion, not to suffer any to be competitors with them in government, if they
have a potency wherewith to oppose.

But it is lawfully in the power of the representative Trustees of the
Fatherhood to resist any usurped power.

Therefore, if they be in a condition to prevent it, it stands not with their
honor, nor honesty to suffer any to be their competitors.

LIIII.
If the Trustees of the Fatherhood cannot in honor or honesty suffer any to be
sharers with them in government, they having a potency to oppose, then had it
been dishonest and dishonorable in the present Trustees of the Fatherhood, to
yield an inherent right in the Militia and Negative voice to a King in their
power, who had taken up Arms to maintain the incroachment.

But the Trustees of the Fatherhood cannot in honor or honesty suffer any to
be sharers with them in government, they being in an opposing condition.

Therefore had they yielded an inherent right in the Militia and Negative voice
to a King who had put the Nation to a vast expense in a war raised to maintain
the incroachment, they had neither done honestly nor honorably.

LV.
If the supreme power be solely and independently in the Fatherhood, and if
their present Trustees did by their public Remonstrances engage the people in
a chargable war against the contrary pretenses, then if after the sword had
determined the controversy, they had yielded up their sole and independent
interests they might deservedly have been noted with the brand of infidelity to
all succeeding generations.

But the supreme authority is solely and independently in the Fatherhood, and
their present Trustees had engaged the people in a chargeable war by their
public Remonstrances against the contrary pretensions.

Therefore they might deservedly have been noted with the ignominious brand of
infidelity to all succeeding generations, had they, after the sword had
determined the controversy, yielded up any part of that sole and independent
authority with which they were entrusted.

LVI.
If the Laws now in being do not agree in all points with the Laws of former
ages, then, if the present Laws be of any force, it must necessarily be
acknowledged that humane Laws are alterable and repealable.

But the Laws now in being do not agree in all points with the Laws of former
ages.

Therefore, if the present Laws be of any force, it must be acknowledged that
humane Laws are alterable and repealeable.

LVII.
If humane National Laws may lawfully be altered or repealed, then they may be
repealed or altered by that authority, or the like to that by which they were
or ought to have been made.

But it is lawful to alter or repeal any humane National Laws.

Therefore they may be altered or repealed by that authority or the like to
that by which they were or ought to have been made.

LVIII.
If humane Laws may be altered or repealed by that authority or the like to
that by which they were made, then the Fatherhood of Christian associations may
alter or repeal any municipal Laws therein constituted.

But humane Laws may be altered or repealed by that authority or the like to
that by which they were or ought to have been made.

Therefore the municipal Laws of Christian associations may be altered or
repealed by the Fatherhood or their representatives.

LIX.
If humane Laws may be altered or repealed by the Fatherhood, and if
Magistrates Parochial, Provincial, and Monarchical be of humane institution,
then any such Magistrates may be outed of their authority by an act of the
Fatherhood, either personally or representatively assembled.

But municipal Laws may be altered or repealed by the Fatherhood, and all such
Magistrates be of humane institution.

Therefore any such Magistrates may be outed of their authority by an act of
the Fatherhood whether personally or representatively assembled.

LX.
If in the English Nation there has been at one and the same time, many Kings
independent one of another, from whom the last Kings could not derive any
interest then to make out a justifiable title to the late Kings, it must be
confessed that Kings may be deposed.

But in the English Nation, there has been at one and the same time, many
Kings independent one of another, from whom the last Kings could not derive any
interest.

Therefore the title of the late Kings was invalid, unless Kings may lawfully
be deposed.

LXI.
If before association the Fathers of a Christian Commonwealth were equally
independent, then after association they are equally obliged to submit to the
Laws therein constituted.

But before association, the Fathers of a Christian Commonwealth were equally
independent.

Therefore being associated, they are equally bound to submit to the Laws
therein constituted.

LXII.
If the members of a Commonwealth be equally bound to submit to the Laws
therein constituted, then, although the collective body of the Fatherhood be
independent, yet independency cease as to any individual Member.

But the Members of a Commonwealth are equally bound to submit to the Laws
therein constituted.

Therefore as to any individual Members of a Commonwealth independency cease
after association.

LXIII.
If every individual Member of a Commonwealth be equally liable to the
penalties of the Laws therein constituted, then for the same cause that any
one may be put to death, for the same may any other.

But every individual member of a Commonwealth, is equally liable to the Laws
therein constituted

Therefore for the same cause that any one may be put to death, for the same
may any other.

LXIV.
If the Lawmaker may decree him to death, who acts any thing by which the
established government of a Commonwealth may be endangered, and if the
legislative power be solely in the Fatherhood, then much more may they order
him to death, who acts any thing destructive to that authority, by which only
such government can be established.

But Lawmakers may decree him to death, who acts any thing by which the
established government of a Commonwealth may be endangered, and the legislative
power is solely in the Fatherhood.

Therefore much more may they order him to death, by whom anything is acted
destructive to that authority, by which only such government can be
established.

LXV.
If the setting up of the Kings of Israel, is not so clearly approved by God,
as the punishing of their offending Kings by death, then it is more reasonable
to conclude from what was demonstrated by God to that Nation, that offending
Kings ought to be punished, then that the setting up of Kings is necessarily
enjoined.

But the setting up of Kings, has not so clear an approbation from God in
that Nation, as the punishing of their offending Kings. 2 Kings 9. chapter 2 Kings
10. 30.

Therefore from what was demonstrated by God to the children of Israel, it is
more reasonable to conclude, that peccant Kings ought to be punished, then that
all Nations ought to be governed by Kings.

LXVI.
If by the gifts of grace and nature, the Fatherhood of a Christian
association, have from God a sole independent and supreme authority, and if a
Christian Fatherhood, Eldership and Presbytery do signify all one and the same
thing, then in such associations Presbyterian Government instituted by God is
not to be found, but iu the personal or representative Assembly of the
Fatherhood.

But by the gifts of Grace and Nature, the Fatherhood of a Christian
association has from God a sole independent and supreme authority, and a
Christian Fatherhood, Eldership, and Presbytery do signify all one and the
same thing.

Therefore unless it be in the personal or representative Assembly of the
Fatherhood, Presbyterian Government instituted by God is not to be found in a
Christian Commonwealth; and they who pretending for Presbyterian Government do
quarrel with the representative Assembly of the Fatherhood, do contend with
that for which they seem to contend.

LXVII.
If in the established Government of a populous Commonwealth, it be
prudentially necessary that there be Governors of different qualifications, to
whom those who are subordinate ought to be in subjection; and if where such
Governors are, there necessarily must be priority and inferiority, and degrees
of both, then in such a Commonwealth the native parity and equality of the
individual subordinate members must be superceded.

But in the established government of a populous Commonwealth, it is
prudentially necessary that there be Governors of different qualifications, to
whom those who are subordinate ought to be in subjection, and wheresoever such
Governors are, there necessarily must be priority and inferiority and degrees
of both.

Therefore the parity and equality of the individual subordinate members must
necessarily be superceded in the established Government of of a populous
Commonwealth.

LXVIII.
If the Fatherhood of a Christian Association has from God by the gifts of
Grace and Nature, a sole and independent power in all causes as well spiritual
as temporal, then all Oaths and Covenants destructive to their interests are
sinful and void.

But the Fatherhood of a Christian Commonwealth has from God by the gifts of
Grace and Nature a sole and independent power in all causes as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil.

Therefore all such oaths and covenants are sinful and void, as are destructive
to their interests.

LXIX.
If it be inconsistent with the paternal Prerogative to have sharers with them
in government, then if any member of a christian association do voluntarily vow
allegiance to any other power, be it foreign or domestique, his vow is sinful,
and the covenant void.

But it is inconsistent with the paternal Prerogative to have sharers with them
in government.

Therefore if any member of a Christian association do vow allegiance to any
other power be it foreign or domestique, his vow is sinful and the covenant
void.

LXX.
If national Covenants be grounded upon a humane Law, and if the supreme
legislative power ought to be obeyed as well in their abrogating as in their
making of Laws, then, if the Law upon which a Covenant is grounded be taken
away, the Covenant loses its force.

But national Covenants are grounded upon a humane Law, and the supreme
legislative power ought to be obeyed as well in their abrogating, as in their
constituting of Laws.

Therefore all such covenants lose their force, if the Law upon which they are
grounded be taken away.

Truth is best discerned when in her playnest dress, I have therefore clothed
these my conceptions in this home-span attire, that the sense and intendment of
the conclusions may be obvious to the meanest capacity; wherein did I conceive
the least inconsistency with even and upright reason, they should sooner have
felt the flames, then seen the light: But lest I may therein seem to some, to
savor too much of an affected singularity, I will close up the propositions
with our Saviors example, then which none is more proper for a Christian Man's
imitation and direction; and from thence it seems to me, that the most
material of the precedent inferences may rationally be deducted.

Amongst the Evangelists, who, being particularly inspired, wrote the story of
his life and passion, it is recorded, that he bestowed a chiding upon Peter,
for opposing the Officers and Soldiers of the Common Council of his own
Nation, in the defense of him his Master, when they came to lay violent hands
upon him. And that he himself as Man, thought it no sin to submit his own
body even to death, the same Council judging him guilty of a Crime, meriting
so severe a punishment.

It was the authority of this Council, to which our Savior laid down the
dearest of his earthly interests, not to the power of Pilate; for he washed the
blood from off his guiltless hands and had the power been solely in him, made
his desire to save him manifest, by pleading for his life, and justifying his
spotless innocence, saying, I find no fault in the Man. It was the council
then that gave the condemning sentence against him. We have a Law, and by that
Law he ought to dye, was the instrumental vote, that sent him an innocent to
the meritorious Cross. Which council had he not been conscious, that it had
lawfully a power over him, his submission thereunto had been a sin against
himself, because it was in his power to summon Legions of Angels to his
protection. And had he sinned, his suffering had not been efficacious to Man's
salvation.

Something may be said, why this example of our Saviors is not altogether
pertinent to this purpose. As first in respect of that saying of the Jews,
wherein they disclaim any lawfulness in themselves to put any man to death;
from whence it may be alleged, that our Savior suffered not under the
authority of the Jewish Council, but Pilates jurisdiction. Which is thus
answered.

It is apparent that the sentence of death was passed upon him by the council;
and that was it which gave Pilate power over his life. And that that Nation had
liberty to try offending natives by their own Laws is not less evident.
Whereby it seems to me, that (they bring a conquered Nation) the allegiance
between the Emperor and them, was regulated and circumscribed by reciprocal
capitulations, and conditional Covenants, by which the executing power was
reserved to the Imperial Officer: otherwise the Leviticall Law by which the
Israelites were forbidden to suffer a blasphemer to live would have justified
them no less in the execution then in passing the sentence. And therefore
although the executing power was consentatively in Pilate (for which cause our
Savior may be said to suffer under him) yet was it authoritatively from that
Magistracy which did yield to those conditions; and that may still be the
Common Council of his own Nation.

Again, whereas we say that the supreme authority is solely and independently
in the Eldership of associated Christians, it may be objected, that this
example will not make good the assertion: because we find that Priests,
Pharisees and Scribes, were mixed with the Elders of the people in that
council by which he was condemned. To this we reply, that.

The people of Israel being admonished to make themselves Judges and Officers
in all their Tribes, and the Priesthood not being infeoffed by God with any
judiciary authority, nor the orders of Scribes and Pharisees constituted by
him, if we should say that these Priests, Scribes and Pharisees were made
members of that council by the election of the people, it would be a long
while before any thing could be produced to prove the contrary. Besides in
matters hard to be judged, the people were directed to enquire of the Priests
and Levites, and they might therefore be called by the Elders of the people to
assist in their National Councels, as it has been the custom in England for
the Judges at Law, and yet not have therein a condemnatory power. And this
seems to be intendment of the Text, for after the High Priest had voted his
answer to be blasphemous, he refers the sentence to the Council, and they
thereupon condemn him to be guilty of death. Deuteronomy. 16. 18. Levit. 17. 9. Mark
14. 64.

This was the case of that immaculate Lamb, who being to be offered up an
expiation, for sin, was careful to preserve himself without spot, that man
might be cleansed from the deep stain of his deadly pollutions, by that his
underservedly bleeding Oblation.

Christ the anointed and just one was sentenced to death by the unjust verdict
of the Elders of of his own Nation; and yet he, having power to resist,
submitted to the killing condemnation; because he knew it was not unjust so to
do. Here we have an example beyond examples; a president equal to a precept. He
is safe that can repose upon this Rock, seeing God has made me a member, I
will not scruple to obey such an authority as had power over my head. He did
not expostulate the unjustnesse of the sentence; nor will I so much esteem of
my own worth above his merits, as to think that any privilege or prerogative
can exempt me from being under the lash of the like authority.

So long as live in a society, I must be under some government, and it ought to
be such as I may safely submit to. Not merely for the benefit sake, for if I
go no further, my obedience exceeds not the gratitude of sensual Beasts, but
like a Christian for conscience sake. Not my fancy, but my duty must guide me
to be obedient. I cannot err by my submission to a lawful authority. And I
shall hardly be persuaded, that being incorporated into a Christian Society,
any Magistracy can have so lawful a power over me, as the Eldership or
paternall Council of my own Nation, till I know upon whose judgment I may rely
with better security then upon my allseeing and no sinning Saviors.

He was a King, a Priest and a Prophet, who, having a certain and infallible
knowledge of all things, taught us by his example, to be obedient to the
determinations of national councels. And what pretenders soever there be to
Prophecy, Priesthood or Kingship, who dare trust to their own conceptions,
rather then to the path, which he who only can be their Savior has trodden out
to them, they are not likely ever to come to the place that he has provided
for those who follow and believe in him, for he that thinks himself wiser then
God cannot put any confidence in God.

Adam sins, and in him all Mankind. To free Man from the punishment due for
sin Christ is promised: God, to shadow forth the designed Christian Church,
forms to himself a Church of the children of Israel, for whose sakes the
Idolatrous Kings of Canaan, are destroyed by Gods appointment. The Jsraelites
desire, God is displeased, yet gives them Kings reserving the choice to
himself. These Kings are types of him, who was to suffer for sin. Some of
these Kings are by Gods direction doomed to death for sinning. By Gods
predeterminate counsel the Kingship and Priesthood of Israel met both in him,
who was preordeined to be a sacrifice for sin: and Christ not without the
consent of his Father, together with his life gives up the power of both to a
council of his own Nation. By his death the Law by which those Kings and
Priests were constituted is abolished; and all those made Kings and Priests to
God the father, who by a true and lively faith, can lay hold upon his sons
incarnation, passion and resurrection. Thus were Adams posterity brought from
bondage to liberty, from death to life. And whether the substance of the
precedent propositions may not be reasonably collected from this exemplary
progress to man's salvation, I leave to be determined by any ingenuous
Christian, who will contemplate these circumstances in his sober,
selfe-denying, and peace-projecting solitudes. Rev. 1. 6.

To conclude. I am not so wise in my own conceit, as to think it impossible
for me to be mistaken. It may be that my own blindness has made me venture thus
boldly into public; but I would be loath that that should lead any other man
into the same error. If therefore through the want of judgment, I have in any
thing herein by me published swarved from the truth, I I do humbly request,
and shall think my self extremely happy to have my misapprehensions laid
open by some ingenious and more knowing pen; which being done, let me undergo
the severest of censures, if I be found in the number of those who hate to be
reformed.

FINIS.

