THREE TREATISES, Being the Substance of sundry DISCOURSES: VIZ. I. The Fixed
Eye, or the Mindful Heart, on Psalm. 25.15. II. The Principal Interest, or the
Propriety of the Saints in God, on Micah 7.7. III. Gods Interest in Man Natural
and Acquired; on Psalm. 119.4.


By that Judicious and Pious Preacher of the Gospel, Mr JOSEPH SYMONDS, M. A.
late Vice-provost of Eaton College.

LONDON, Printed by J: Macock, for LUKE FAVVN, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Parrot in Paul's Churchyard. M.DC.LIII.

portrait of Joseph Symonds The Pourtraiture of Mr. Joseph Symonds -- Late Vice
Provost of Eaton College. Aetat: Suae 50.


To all that desire to live godly in CHRIST JESUS.
IT is not unknown to very many of Gods people in this Nation, with what entire
affection, and happy success, the pious Author of these Meditations, now
asleep in Jesus, laid out himself in the service of the Gospel. Diverse of you
sat sometimes under the shadow of his Ministry with great delight. And of those
who had not the enjoyment of him, but in more removed distances, what serious
eye ever read, as it ought, that truly incomparable piece, The Deserted Souls
Case and Cure, and was not thereby enlightened, startled, humbled, lifted up
nearer to God? Or what good heart, for that end that it might be better, duly
perused his later piece Of Faith and Sight, but it was by increased faith, and
its just appendages, more fitted for sight? The Holy Spirit was his spring, and
plentiful emanations from thence filled his Cistern, and made him free to
communication. He dwelt in the presence of Christ, d so was at home in Heavenly
Negotiations* and the content that he had there made him delight to stand still
between Christ and his people, to receive and give, though he gave away his own
life withal. And when he perceived the shadow of the evening to be stretched
forth upon him, they did nothing to him, but only provoke him to make more
haste in the finishing of his work. Those holy Tapers, which receive their
light from the golden Lamp of the Sanctuary, shine and burn down to the socket,
and are burning and shining lights thereto.

In his wearinesses, and weaknesses, grown constant in his later time, when the
effects of his pains made strong solicitations to desist, it was an
expression, which he often used with pleasance to his friends, Yet praying and
preaching is too good work to be weary of. In the continuance of it, he poured
forth himself as a drink offering to Christ upon the service of his Saints, and
so passed to eternal life, through the best forms of death. And indeed that way
(as is roported of Moses) God does kiss away the souls of his Servants.

But that he might prevent death, he took much pains with his own pen, besides
constant expense of money for the assistance of another, that his love in
permanent testimonies might outlive his life, and the first neglects of his
hearers. He knew well how precious discourses are lost to the inconsiderate
part of men and women, who either do not give due heed while a Sermon is
preached, and so take it not into their understandings and hearts, or else
cannot remember it, having heard it but once. Of his good will to such, he has
left many evidences which will be produced, if God pleases, as soon as time,
health, and other work will give leave to make up the Chasin's, and mend other
errors of the writer, in those copies which were taken from the Pulpit, and
were not corrected by himself: For the present it was judged meet, to print
these three small Tracts.

The first touching Spiritual remembrance of God, as a most seasonable
praelibation; This being a time, when a careless Devil has after too eminent a
manner possessed a multitude of Professors, and many Christians have recklesly
lost Jesus Christ in the crowd of worldly affections, designs, diversions. The
aim of this is to quicken all that have the root of eternal life in them to
more frequent Addresses of Soul to God, and to rivet them in contentful abode,
and holy reposes in him.

The Second is an excellent discovery of the Saints interest in God, in which
all holy souls may see how happy they are, or may be in God, their God.

The Third holds forth Gods interest in us, by which, as by a true glass, we
may learn to reflect upon God all his goodness, and love, contained in the
former Treatise, if it be also revealed in our hearts, and so God will be to
us, as he is to all true Christians, the beginning and end of our life.

All which Discourses the Godly Reader will find enriched with many clear
descriptions of heavenly truths, many rational considerations, which in way of
Exhortation do strike fitly and weightily upon those capable principles which
God has put into the soul, as Ears for him to take hold of, both with very
lovely representations, and right dreadful terrors: and as he goes up and
down, he will meet methodicall and sure directions, like benign Guides,
telling the way of happy life to all the children of wisdom and truth. So you
have a short account of what you may find in these papers.

Be their Patronage the living influence of the all-quickning Spirit, who only
is able to make these, and all other well-ordered tendencies, effectual to
their desirable ends, and who can protect them from unprofitable reading and
forgetful neglects, which are the wrongful abuses and unjust imprisonment of
the most useful truths. I, who in this matter do only carry the staff of Elisha
which he has left behind, do and shall pray, that it may not only be laid upon
the child, which is ready to dye, but that this Spirit would join himself to
it, and make it the ministration of life, even the beauty and bands of God upon
the spirits of his own. That the misplaced eye of some Reader may be set right,
and then fixed; that some heart may be undeceived. And Oh that the time were
come, when no Child of God would write his name in the earth, which to do is to
be cursed, and to make the Devils sport. Alas! whilst we through their false
representations, and cozening impulses sell our comfort, our life, our soul for
cheap things, at easy rates, do they not laugh? do they not insult? Though it
is a poor sport, and proper only to Devils to rejoice in the follies and
sorrows of humanity. The Lord Jesus, who came to break the power of spiritual
wickednesses, drive them out of the souls of men and women, and if they must
have leave to enter any where, let it be only into swine. The Lord appear more
to the Inhabitants of this world, that they may see the glory of truth, and be
transformed into its Image, delivered into the spirit and life of truth, and
out of the power of detaining falsehoods, and seducing vanities, the chains of
evil spirits. Then the capacity of the children of men so empty, hungry, and
sore distressed, (though some are senseless, and therefore perceive it not) will
be filled with God. Then a Strand will be set to that deplorable forgetfulness
of God, which has swelled to such unreasonable heights, that it has left the
tops of very few mountains discernable above it. Then those which have pure
minds will be stirred up to run after their Lord: The Children of the Kingdom
will enjoy more of the promises, and by them partake of a Divine nature in
greater measures, inherit more of the holy Land, trade in true life, be tied in
Heavenly Galleries, having their eyes set continually upon Christ, who with
his, will take away their hearts, and keep them with himself, and be a Covering
of the eyes to them from all false ones for ever. I have no more to add, but
the continuance of these wishes, and prayers, humbly begging a remembrance also
in yours, for,

From my Study, in Eton College, June 1. 1653. Your weak Fellow Servants in the
hopes of the Gospel, Nathanael Ingelo.

THE CONTENTS Of the Ensuing TREATISES.
I. The Fixed Eye, or the Mindful Heart, on PSALM. 25.15.
Chap. 1. EYes of Saints set upon God: In what sense Ever; and how many ways.
Page 1. Chap. 2. The Way of Eying God in heavenly Meditation: Thoughts settled
upon God include much choice and pleasantness. Page 5 Chap. 3. Holy thoughts of
God are mixed with awful love, leave deep impressions, transform the spirit,
and are the Trade of good Souls. Page 13 Chap. 4. Disconformity to the
forementioned Principles a great fault in Christians: The Discovery of it.
Slumbering Eyes, and wandering Hearts. Page 18 Chap. 5. How the Soul comes to
wander from God: of divine Permission in this Case: Discouragements pretended:
The heart pleased with something else more then God. Page 28 Chap. 6. False
Meditation subdueth not the heart. A wicked heart has no joy in the thoughts
of God. What Is done, and not according to Rule, is as if it were undone. The
heart which minds not God in a constant course is not right. Page 33 Chap. 7.
Man wanders from God, having lost the government of his spirit. Thoughts of God
suit not perverted Souls, are above them and against them. Satan lord of the
imaginations and master of the affections in those which forget God. Page 43
Chap. 8. Persuasions to frequent Emanations and contentful abode of Soul with
God. Minding of God a work possible to Christians: A work of the most exellent
power. Spiritual actions easier then bodily. Contemplative life everlasting.
Natural propensity of Soul to God renewed in Saints. A blessing of love in true
mindfulness of God. Page 51 Chap. 9. Jesus Christ a Pattern of Eying the
Father. Greatest mindfulness of God due. God our best Friend. All we have is in
his hands, and af his gift. All Religion founded upon a due mindfulness of God.
Anguish awails wandering hearts. Page 62 Chap. 10. Directions cencerning Eying
of God. Truths to be received in their power. Saints are to keep in their
hearts a meetness for their work. Saints are to preserve their capacities for
God. Saints must maintain a deep sense of divine engagements. A lively sense of
necessities is useful. Pure hearts are meet for divine converse. The mind
willed without Sanctification. Page 69 Chap. 11. Advantages that come by
minding of God, are to be duly considered. The more we mind God, the more we
may. Those which eye God most, know themselves best. Those which eye God most,
have most of God. Forgetfulness of God cuts the nerves of Holiness.
Forgetfulness of God betrays to Apostasy. Page 86
II. The Principal Interest, or the Propriety of Saints in God, on MICAH 7.7.
Chap. 1. Interest in God the true Spring of Consolation. How it is Propriety
with Community. Best, because God is best by a Confluence of all Excellencies.
Page 92 Chap. 2. Interest in God of a perfect extent to all in God. Gods love
lasts, is not broke off by offenses, is not hindered by distance. Interest in
God effectual to all good ends. Divine friendship not burdensome. Page 97 Chap.
3. Saints engaged to live upon God by the Law of Nature, Love, and Judgment.
Spiritual Relation is mutual. True Resignation has Conscience with Love. A
divine Power in and over Saints. The grace and peace of Saints furthered as
they mind their Interest in God. Page 102 Chap. 4. Saints have not only the
Portion, but the Spirit of Children. Ingenious walking greatly requisite in
those who pretend Interest in God. God more easily pleased with his people then
with others. Tastes of Gods sweetness are obligatory. Carless walking weakens
hope in prayer. Page 110 Chap. 5. Saints Interest is through great
Condescension. Conjunction of God and his people very intimate. A Privilege
restored, and how, by Jesus Christ. Page 116 Chap. 6. God content to be ours,
though we had disowned him, and depraved our selves. Gods Interest in us
chargeable to him. God owns not all, but some. Peculiar frowns upon those which
walk unworthy of God. Page 124 Chap. 7. The Absolute Necessity of Interest in
God. God is either with or against his Creatures. Whosoever has not God, has
no true Interest in any thing. Page 128 Chap. 8. Interest in God most
attainable. Goodness and Fullness the Springs of Communication. Desire easily
and with most success revealed to God. Poor, strangers, impotent persons not
barred from God, as from men. Interest in God incomparable in the enjoyment.
Page 133 Chap. 9. Christians ought to clear their hopes from their
Uncertainties. Believers doubt through their own fault. They that seek God,
must pursue their end. Page 142 Chap. 10. God has fully made known whom he
loves. Christians able to know themselves. Gods Spirit strengthens the
testimony of our spirits. Christians hindered by Slothfulness and
Discouragements. Page 148 Chap. 11. Encouragements to endeavor the clearing of
our Interest in God. Love cannot hide it self. Love will not deny what may be
easily granted, and is much needed. Page 159 Chap. 12. They are not right who
are careless to clear their Evidence. Wisdom and Love make the Saints seek
after full satisfaction. Two sorts of Content in the want of God. Page 164
Chap. 13. Those which seek not to clear their Interest, offer inexpressible
violence to their own Souls. How the sense of divine Love gives strength to two
useful Principles of holy life. Page 171 Chap. 14. The Evil of Doubting as it
is a denial of the Truth of God, a diminution of his Love and Favors, and a
mis-interpretation of his Dispensations. The vexation of doubting to
enlightened persons in an evil day. Page 177 Chap. 15. Interest in God more
knowable then any other, and yet unknown to most: The Reasons of both. Page 183
Chap. 16. How the knowledge of blessed Interest in God may be attained. Desires
to have the question determined. A spirit free to yield to the determination.
Arguments proper for the deciding of the question. Those that have an Interest
in God are much in holy resignation. Of taking answers when they are given.
Page 190 Chap. 17. What it is to live upon God as our God. No other life
appointed for Saints. The fullness, beauty and satisfaction of this life. How
Christians offer violence to their relation. Page 199 Chap. 18. Heavenly life
nearest at hand. Christians are to live up to the height of it, and to maintain
it in every condition. Page 208 Chap. 19. Further Considerations to promote the
forementioned life, of its incomparable worth. Those that will not live the
life of Faith, shall not. A firm belief of the Gospel the foundation of this
Life. Page 214 Chap. 20. Our Apostasy has made us unapt for divine Life and
Converse with God through a Mediator, and willing to conform to the lowest
Patterns. Page 222 Chap. 21. Several Questions concerning the forementioned
Doctrine, answered. Saints not always equally strong. Some afflictions
sweetened more then others. Sometimes God will have his Rod smart. Page 230
Chap. 22. How it comes to pass that deformities creep into the Conversation of
Christians, since they have so high a principle of life. Whence it is that
those which enjoy not God, seem to go through afflictions with strength. Page
239 Chap. 23. A Comparison of Interest and Enjoyment, and the excellency of
Enjoyment evinced from Interest. What is requisite to make full Enjoyment. An
affectionate Close to all the foregoing Discourses. Page 251
III. Treatise, on PSALM 119. verse. 4.
Chap. 1. Gods Interest in man natural and acquired; this latter twofold. Of
holy Resignation. Of true and false Mourning. Page 1 Chap. 2. The Will of God
is the Bounds and Rule of a Resigned Spirit. Page 21 Chap. 3. Resignation
necessary in Prayer. Prayer without it has no truth in it, is nonsense, and
imposes upon God absurdly. The true Advantage of a spirit of Resignation as to
Prayer. Page 34 Chap. 4. Wicked men's prayers not to be dreaded. The sins of
those that pray, greatest. Some outlive the contests of the Spirit. Three
things to be still done by those who have resigned themselves to God. Page 41
Chap. 5. The knowledge of Interest in God does much further our approaches to
God. It begets propensions, carries the spirit in a due frame, fits it for all
divine determinations. Page 67 Chap. 6. How the knowledge of divine Interest
does promote Holiness, sets Judgment and Nature against Sin, keeps the heart
from inordinate reaching after and holding fast present things. Faith binds the
Soul, and keeps it bound, makes all a Christians ways easy. Assurance gives a
double advantage to our great meeting with God. Page 82
THE FIXED EYE, OR THE Mindful Heart.
PSALM. 25.15. Mine Eyes are Ever toward the Lord.


CHAP. I.
Eyes of Saints set upon God: In what sense Ever; and how many ways.

THis Psalm is a Psalm of special excellency, and has this mark on it, that
(as some others) its formed in Verses of it according to the Hebrew Alphabet.
David was a man of a heavenly spirit, and truly he breaths much life in every
word. This Psalm is a Prayer; David complains of Enemies; good men shall never
want them, but this is their advantage, that as the world will be sure to be
their enemy, so God will be more sure to be their friend. He had one to go to
and could tell him how it was with him, and how men dealt with him, and that is
but a bad business to the world, but its a great relief to the Spirits of the
Saints, that they can go to God and speak their hearts. And in his Prayer
observe his spirit: He does not after the manner of the world, breathe out
Affections moved merely from the smart of the stroke, without sense of the
cause; but cries out more of his sin then of his suffering, and speaks more
against himself then against his enemies, and begs more that he might walk in
the sight of Gods countenance and have his favor, then to be delivered from his
enemies. And as all Prayer, the more spiritual, the more argumentative it is,
(Prayer that is full of Affection, is full of Arguments;) so this. But while
David was drawing down mercy upon himself, he was caught up; Love fires in
Prayer. His Faith is quickened in Prayer, and then Love's inflamed: In the
midst of his Prayer he breaks out and tells God in the words of the Text, that
his eyes were ever toward him: While he was begging the eye of God toward him,
he tells God, Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord.

Ever,] You cannot understand that actually and uncessantly his thoughts and
heart were toward God, and his mind taken up with him; for by the necessity of
this life, and the Law of it, he was sometimes to be taken up with other
things: But when he says, Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord, he means these
three things.

1. That the disposition of his Soul was such, that he could be always looking
upon God; he could wish, that when he is departed out of himself, and got up,
that he might never come down more, and never have any other work in the world
but this, to behold God. Thus always is taken in the Scriptures. In Acts 10.2.
Cornelius is said to pray [always,] that is, he had a disposition, his heart
was ready to pray always. Acts 7.51. It Is said of the Jews, They were
stiff-necked and hard-hearted [always] to resist the Holy Ghost; this was their
temper: like a stone that resists the hand of the workman, takes in no
impression, but is wholly shut up to it self.

2. When he says, Mine eyes are always toward the Lord, he means this, That
upon all occasions, in every condition, in all places, his eyes were toward
God. In Luke 18.1. Christ teaches to watch and pray always, that is, upon all
occasions, when ever Prayer is called for; watch to see the season, and have
your hearts open: Making mention of you Always in my prayer, says the Apostle,
Romans 1.9. and not seldom elsewhere; that is, as I have occasion I do intercede
for you, as I pray for my self, its my daily work: So in Psalm. 88.9. Every day
will I praise thee. Psalm. 145.2. Every day will I bless thee: So here, Mine
eyes are ever toward the Lord, that is, it is my every days work.

3. Mine eyes are [ever] toward the Lord, that is, continually; it is not only
my ordinary work and daily course, but it is a work that shall last while I
live, a work for life. 2 Samuel 9.10. David says concerning Mephibosheth, He
shall [Always] eat bread at my table; that is, while he lives he shall sit at
my table: And in Psalm. 146.2. While I live (he speaks in the sense of the Text)
I will praise thee. So that now here you have the temper and practice of a
godly man, his eyes are Ever toward the Lord. The Text holds forth these three
things to us.

1. What it is upon which the eyes of Saints are set, upon what they are
terminated; upon God.

2. Their great diligence and assiduity in this work of Eying God.

3. The continuance of it, Always.

Eying of God, in Scripture expression, as it is taken in a large sense, it is
put for the mind of man, and not only for the mind, but for the heart; eying,
seeing, and looking, signifies all manner of Affections Sub oculorum nomine
omnes affectus notari non rarum est. Calv. in loc.
. I shall give you that sense only that is most comprehensive, as full and
large as either the propriety of this phrase, or any Scripture of like
expression, will reach to. There is an Eying of God in these six ways.

You shall see these all cleared in their order. 1. In way of Meditation. 2. In
way of Affection. 3. In way of Observation. 4. In way of Expectation. 5. In way
of Supplication. 6. In way of Intention.


CHAP. II.
The Way of Eying God in heavenly Meditation: Thoughts settled upon God include
much choice and pleasantness.

FIrst, Eying of God is meditating, thinking, contemplating on God: Jerem. 3.2.
Lift up thine eyes to the high places, and see where thou have not been lien
with. Lift up thine eyes; the meaning is not, that they should so much, or
only, exercise the Eyes of their Bodies, but of their Minds; that they should
consider and think well of this, how greatly they sinned against God. Prove.
24.32. Then I saw, and considered well, I looked upon it, and received
instruction; speaking of the field of the Sluggard: I saw, that is, I
diligently weighed and viewed it: and considered it well; the word in the
Original is, I set my heart to it, and made it my work to think of the matter:
So that this Eying of God is thinking and minding of him, meditating upon him.
Hebr. 12.2. Looking to Jesus, etc. The Apostle means, consider him, as he
speaks in Chap. 3.1. Consider the High Priest of our Profession; looking to
Jesus (...), The two prepositions show that the mind should be drawn off from
other things and set on Christ.
as one looks to his pattern, (which he does with all diligence,) or as one
looks to his refuge, hope, and help; all which import a solemn and serious
employment of the mind about the thing. Exodus 2.11. It is said, when Moses
grew old, he went out to see his Brethren, he looked on their Burdens: He did
not only come near, and cast an eye upon them, that is not the meaning of it,
but he weighed and considered their condition; therefore it is rendered by the
Septuagint by a word that signifies Consideration, c He considered their labor
and travel. Psalm. 25.18. (...).
Look upon mine Affliction, says David; that is, consider it. Then to eye God
is to consider him: I will express this duty in these few words; It Is a course
of voluntary and holy turning, and holding of the mind upon God. I Will a little
open this in these three things.

First, This Eying of God is not only a converting and pointing of the mind
toward God, Contemplatio est mentis in Deum suspensae elevatio, Bern. de scala
claustrali.
but the abiding and staying of the mind with God: It Is not some few and
fleeting thoughts that are the discharge of this work, but thoughts resting,
dwelling, fixing, and staying upon God. The truth is, there is a mighty rouling
in the minds and thoughts of men, their thoughts fly up and down like dust in
the wind, and some of these may light sometimes upon God, but they vanish and
abide not; these kind of Visions may consist with the greatest forgetfulness
of God. God has his way open every where, and even they that live in the
greatest unmindfulness of him, have their hearts and minds open for him to
pass in and through at pleasure. God has his way through the spirits of the
worst men, but he stays not there, that is a favor promised to some only. Joh.
14.23. If any man love me, etc. We will come and make our abode with him: He
comes to many, but stays not; he is in their eye, but passes away: so that
many have occasion to take up the Prophets complaint (in another case,) Jer.
14.8. O thou hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in time of trouble, why
should thou be as a stranger, and as a wayfaring man that turns in but for
a night? Thus God deals with most in the world, He is as a stranger to them: As
one in a strange Country is there for his business, converseth with none but
his friends, passes by all the rest as so many strangers; so God is a stranger
in the world, only he knows some few; he finds out his friends, and passes
by all others. As a wayfaring man, (...)
a traveller, comes to a place at night, and minds his rest Declinat ad
pernoctandum.
, when the night is gone he is gone; so (says the Prophet) why art thou as a
wayfaring man that tarryest for a night, and art gone in the morning? Thus God
deals with most, He has indeed his accesses to them, but he has likewise his
recesses from them; he is in their eye sometimes, but afterward hides himself,
and is in darkness again, that men cannot see him. Look to it therefore, it is
not a discharge of this work, when you have some transient thoughts of God,
when you throw a thought upon him, then which nothing is more fluent and
vanishing, being the usual Emblem of greatest and most speedy fading vanity.
How would you take it, that the Child of your own bowels should only give you
a look sometimes, and be gone, and not live in your presence! Minding of God is
another manner of business then many are aware of. It Is a thinking with thought
upon thought, a reiteration and multiplication of the thoughts of the mind
upon God, (...) Ru^sus ego cum v derem. Jun.
so the Scripture expresses it: I returned, and beheld vanity under the Sun,
Eccles. 4.7. and in Chap. 2. v. 11. I considered all my works, etc. and in the
next Verse, I returned to see; he looked upon and considered his works, and he
returned to behold them; (...) et respexi ad videndendum, v. ut viderem.
the force of that expression in the Hebrew is this, he renewed his work, and
considered again; he thought on them before, but now he returned to think; he
renewed his thoughts upon the matter, and took a new view of it. Indeed when
the understanding works seriously, it will fetch things into sight; and not
only so, but holds them there, and fastens upon them, and when they are gone,
will fetch them back again: Lam. 3.20. (...) Recordando recordabitur.
My Soul has them still in remembrance: My Soul in remembering does remember
them; that is such a calling to mind as is expressed in the next Verse, This I
recalled to mind; or as the word is in the Original, (...) Redire faciam ad
cor.
and in the Margin, This I made return to my heart: Things are apt to be gone
with most men, they are apt to lose the sight of God; but he did recall again
the thoughts that were vanished and sunk. This then is one thing that belongs to
the work, That Eying of God is not only a turning of the mind toward God,
and setting it upon God, but a fastening and holding it toward him.

2. Minding of God is a willing work, the will is in it; there be many thoughts
fly at random, they get out of the Mind, but are not sent out: The Mind of a
Man is a most profuse thing, and nothing in the world spreads it self into so
many actings as the Mind does: The Sun is not so full of beams, as the Mind is
full of thoughts, which spreads it self more then a thousand Suns. But these
acts of the Mind, which flow forth as Bees from their hive, are not this work;
but when the Mind is sent out upon this errand, the heart putting forth the
understanding upon advice, and makes it mind God; when the heart puts the mind
upon the wing, to fly upwards, within the vail, to see him that fits upon the
Throne; this is somewhat.

And it is a cheerful minding of God; a man is pleased in it, when he is
himself. It Is good for me to draw near to thee, Psalm. 73. ult. Good; how good?
better then perfume: My meditation of him shall be sweet, Psalm. 104.34. My
meditation, (...)
or my word of thee is sweet; it signifies a word secretly spoken; the heart
speaks of God, and those words are music in the Soul; the word imports a
sweetness with mixture; like compound Spices, or many flowers; such a sweetness
this thought of God yields to him whose heart is toward him; every thought is
pleasant, and the whole working of the Mind makes up a sweet delight. Again,
It Is better then wine: Cant. 1.4. We remember his love more then wine: There is
more content in contemplating on God, more refreshing to the spirit, then wine
gives to the body. Psalm. 63.5. My Soul is filled as with marrow and fatness,
when or if I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night
watches: When I do this, I am as one satisfied with marrow and fatness. Psalm.
139.17. David tells you, there is a preciousness in the thoughts of God; (...)
The word signifies to be of weight, authority, or in honor.
that word signifies, precious in every sense: Look in what kind soever you
account a thing precious, so precious are the thoughts of God to a man, whose
heart is in a right frame. Some thoughts are driven out toward God, as a
messenger sent and driven out upon an unwelcome message, in a way, and to a
person whom he loves not: Many cast an eye sometime upon God, because they
think they must not always live in forgetfulness of him; they do it as a duty,
not a refreshment to them; as a work, not wages; because they must do it, not
because they love it. Yet by some men God will be thought on, though they would
not: The Devils cannot forget God; God has made such a stamp of himself upon
their natures, that they cannot forget him; that is their unhappiness; they wish
they could be out of Gods sight, and God out of theirs; and if it could be,
their misery would be the less. So God will be in the eyes of some men, that
they cannot cast him out of their thoughts, but the impression of God fastens
and abides upon their Souls; so the sight of God followed Judas to a continual
amazement and distraction of his mind. But the more a man that is right finds a
conjunction of God and his mind, the more sweet it is to him; he reckons this
like the gate of Heaven; such a day is as one of the days of Heaven: When the
Soul is thus taken with God, it loves every glance of God; the more it sees,
the more it loves: Abraham saw my day afar off, and was glad, (...) It
signifies a rejoicing with gesticulation; as much as Luke 6.13. Rejoice and
leap.
or highly rejoiced, Joh. 8.56. This work then, of eying and minding of God, is
a willing work; not a work whereto the heart is drawn and driven, and wherein
it has no content, but such a work that is both work and wages.

CHAP. III.
Holy thoughts of God are mixed with awful love, leave deep impressions,
transform the spirit, and are the Trade of good Souls.

It Is not only a serious settling of the mind toward and upon God, but a [holy]
pointing and fastening of the mind upon him; holy in the manner, and holy in
the end of it.

1. In the manner; not like the bold practice of men that know not God, who
cast an eye upon him with as little regard as upon a post or pillar: This
minding of God must be according to the nature of God. You cannot look upon a
friend, a stranger and a Prince with one and the same eye: You cannot look upon
God as he is god, but you will love him; nor as powerfl, but you will fear him;
nor as he is excellent, but you will admire him, etc. These things will work
with you; either in a way of assimilation, or delectation, or admiration, etc.

2. Holy in the end of it; a man may do think much of God, and yet do no work
of holiness: There is a meditation of God that we may call the meditation of a
Student, who studies God as he studies other things, by which means he heaps
together many notions concerning God, but has no impression of the holiness of
God upon his heart, but is a stranger to God, and has no communion with him.
But this work is holy in the end of it: A man eyes God that he may have more of
God: He that minds God truly, hunts and seeks after something of God; he would
have more of his presence, light, favor, and Image; he is seeking the beloved
of his Soul, and the love of his beloved; therefore would fain be near him, and
looks toward him, that he may receive that from him which his Soul so much
prizeth; he minds God, and as one that desires to present as an offering to
him, those fruits of his love, which by the love of God are begotten in his
heart, so that this work is holy.

4. This minding of God is a work of course; not to be done now and then, and
laid down again, but it is the trade of that man that does it right: It is his
every days work, and his constant employment to be mindful of God. David
describes the good man thus, Psalm. 1.2. (...) Et adhuc.
His meditation is in the Law of the Lord day and night. Psalm. 139.17. When I
awake, I am still with Thee. The mind may slip from God, and sometime be taken
up with other things, but cannot be long kept from him, because God is its
Center; and it is natural for a holy mind to move toward God, as for a needle
touched with a Lodestone to point toward the North Pole. Psalm. 16.8. I have
set the Lord always before me: This was the practice of Christ our Head, Acts 2.
It Is applied to him, though spoken by David as the Type. You and I may suspect
our hearts if there be an elongation of our minds from God, if our minds be
scattered up and down the world: If our business be not with him, we have
reason to look sadly upon our selves; for where God has no place with us, we
have none with him. A good man must be with God, he has many things puts him
upon it, and inclines him to it; he wants much, and therefore cannot forbear.
Can a man forget to drink that is athirst? can a man forget to eat his meat
that is hungry? Certainly when David, Psalm. 102.4. says, He forgot to eat his
bread, sorrow had taken away his stomach that he found not the want of his
meat, but a man that feels his want cannot forget it; neither can a man forget
God that lives in the sensible want of God, his Soul is still breathing after
God. Love will send out a man's thoughts, and not suffer a man to live at home,
but to be where it is best of all to be. Can a Bridegroom forget his Bride? or
a Bride her attire? Jerem. 3.32. Men cannot forget what they love. Can a mother
forget her child? Isai. 49.14. and can a man forget God that loves God?
There Is a necessity that a man should be minding what he loves; he will send
his understanding on errands to Heaven, that it may bring him matter of delight
from the Visions of God to refresh his Soul: And not only so, but Christ
awakens the heart, and calls it forth. Indeed were it left to us, should we
have no more heavenly-mindedness, and meditations of God, then our own spirits
bring forth, it would be little or none; but Christ calls to the spirits of his
people, as he called to John, Come up hither and see; he knocks at the door
that we may open and go forth with him: The King led me into his wine celler,
Cant. 1. She was there, but how came she in? the King led me. Christ will not
be long from his; if their hearts come not up to him, he will come into them;
and if he be there, all is taken up with attending upon him; as you may see
abundantly by experience. Though the heart stands still like a Clock when the
plummets are off, and the wheels move not; yet when Christ comes in, he puts
all into motion. If a Loadstone be cast among many Needles, though they did he
still, yet now how do they all move and hang about it? So all the affections
run toward him, and the thoughts go out like motes in the Sun; the mind is at
work hard. The presence of Christ not only excites the mind, but contracts it,
and makes the working of the mind more strong. It Is reported of the Flower de
luce, That when the Sun goes down, it opens and scatters it self abroad; but
when the Sun appears, it shuts and contracts it self: There is in the presence
of Christ such a contracting of the heart toward himself. Mary, when she saw
Christ, though her mind were scattered before, and about the Sepulcher, yet now
^t concenters in Christ. A man that loves God, cannot live in a course of
forgetfulness of God; either want brings him, or love constrains him, or Christ
draws him; here cannot be a lusting alienation of mind in those that belong to
God.

CHAP. IV.
Disconformity to the forementioned Principles a great fault in Christians: The
Discovery of it: Slumbering Eyes, and wandering Hearts.

^ Exer^ise.
HAving spoken something to the opening of the thing, I shall now endevor that
you and I may lay our selves to this pattern, and compare our selves with this
Rule. Do you thus mind God? Let me ask you, where your Eyes are? The truth is,
the Eyes of the whole World are misplaced; all the World either wholly dwell
out of God, or extremely wander from God: all sorts of men are extremely guilty
of notorious forgetfulness of God; and of this God complains, and that often;
and that not only in reference to the dead and dark part of the world, who have
eyes and see not, but are like Images; but with respect to his own: My people
[my people] have forgotten me days without number; Ier. 2.32.
negligently have they suffered me to be out of their minds, and that for a
long time. My work now shall be to lay before you the Fault, and the Causes of
it. The fault, with respect to the godly and ungodly, that both may see how
guilty they stand, and may see whence it is that their understandings are so
alienated and estranged from God.

As for the godly, their frequent excursions from God, their inordinate
affections to the world, their sad dejections of spirit, their many
withdrawings, and a world of these, are too clear and deplorable demonstrations
that their eyes are not always upon God. The Fault I Will express in these four
things.

1. In not sending out the understanding toward God, not pointing of the mind
toward its Maker: The mind of man is a nimble thing, nothing is of that
agility; it is the swiftest creature God has made, next the Angels; yet toward
God it must be moved, directed, ordered, and pointed. For though the way on
high was natural, yet man not keeping his first state, it is now become a way
hardly passable, that the Soul cannot walk it of it self, neither can it dwell
on high, more then we can live in the Air, without the drawing and holding of
divine Power. I have written, says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3.1. to stir up your
pure minds, [to awaken you, (...).
] and it was but need. See how David calls upon himself, Psalm. 103. Praise the
Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits; be sure to remember God.
Psalm. 5.3. In the morning will I [direct] my prayer unto thee; or I will set it
in order, I will order my self in my addresses to Thee. And in Psalm. 57.8.
Awake my glory: Though his spirit was holy, and set toward God, yet it had
need to be called on, that it might be put forward in a right motion toward
God, and answer the voice that calls, Come up hither. Awakening is a word
imports rouzing; (...)
as birds that provoke their young ones by flight, to make use of their wings;
or as men call one upon another to their business. Judge. 5.12. Awake, awake,
Deborah; awake, awake, utter a song: Men do not thus call on themselves. It Is a
great fault, that a man loses that watch and that command over his spirit
which he should have, so that his mind either stands still, as a lake, or if it
move, it runs at waste; as indeed a man's mind does, if it be not toward God and
for God: A great fault it is when men take not pains with themselves, as the
Prophet complains, Isai. 64.7. No man stirs up himself to take hold on God.
It Is said in Exodus 35.28. They came every one whose heart stirred him up. Your
hearts had need be stirred up, else they will not do their work. Is it fit that
so noble a faculty (then which there is none under Heaven more glorious) as
that understanding which God has entrusted you withal, should be no more
improved? Was this golden Candlestick given you for any other light then that
which is from above, that may show you the way to union with God, and enjoyment
of him? Were these golden Cabinets given you, and have you the keys of them,
that you should keep them empty, when you might fill them with heavenly
treasure, which is invaluable? David calls his Soul his glory; you stain the
crown of your glory, when you make such glorious creatures to lacquey after
every creature, which should be in attendance upon God, like Angels in the
presence of their Father. When the mind runs after vanity, you become vain:
Jer. 2. What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they run far from me,
and walk after vanity, and are become vain? The vain outgoings of your minds
and spirits will make you vain, yea worse then nothing. What injury do you do
your selves, that have such nimble winged messengers, (that can mount up to the
highest Heavens, can walk with Angels, can lodge themselves in the bosom of the
glorious God, can present all your Cases to him, can bring back again reports
of mercy to you,) if you use them not? Do you not see, how God is sending out
to you continually? The thoughts of his heart are Love, eternal Love; and the
fruits of his Love are always sent out, like the beams of the Sun: He has sent
out his own Son, and will not you send out your thoughts toward him? Will not
you order your thoughts toward him, who has directed his greatest Love toward
you? What is your life, but a continual emanation and emission of divine Love?
And is God thus flowing forth to you, and will you stand still, and not have
your minds running out to him?

2. In the next place: As this is a fault, that there is not that sending out
of the thoughts toward God, and that setting of the mind to this work; so this
is another fault, that there is not a bending of the mind in this work.
Oftentimes the mind looks up, but it is so feeble, that a man's thoughts are like
an arrow shot from a Bow weakly bent, which reaches not the mark. It Is wise
counsel that the Wiseman gives; Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it
with all thy might. I am sure in nothing more it concerns us to act with all
our might, then when we act toward God, in whom all our life is. 1 Chronicles.
22.19. Now set your hearts and souls to seek the Lord your God. This is our
work, (...) give your hearts.
to act with life and vigor, when you go to take into your eyes the greatness
of that glory which you hear of God: The Apostle's phrase is, Have the loins of
your mind girt, when you are upon this work. I ask you that question, which
Christ put to some in another case, What went you out to see? When you crawl
and move, as if you had no heart, nor spirits, whom go you forth to see? What,
him that is the Lord of Glory, the only Potentate? What are such heavy and lazy
aspects, to take in such a Glory? You see in what large streams your thoughts
fly forth to other things, and are you only languishing, weak and feeble in
things of so great concernment? Mal. 1.14. Cursed be the deceiver, that has in
his flock the sound and the strong, but offers the blind and lame. Certainly
this is the way to procure a curse, to be so exceeding remiss in your addresses
to God; hence it is you get no more: Then God comes most to the heart, when the
eyes are most set upon him: The child that draws with strength is soonest
filled: The Breasts of Consolation are full, but therefore you are empty and
complain, because you bend not your selves to draw from the Wells of Salvation:
You take not pains with your selves to make your way to God lively.

3. As this is a fault, not to send our your minds toward God, and not to bend
your minds to the work; so this is another, the not binding of your minds to
it: You should not only go to God, but stay with him. The right minding of God,
is not a transient glance, and sudden cast of the eye, that is presently
wheeled off from God again. Psalm. 143.5. I remember the days of old, I meditate
on all thy works: I remember them, and not only bring them to remembrance, but
I meditate on them, my mind talks of them; (...)
that is the force of the word; I muse, and stand looking on the works of thy
hands: this is that which fires the heart, when a man's eye is fixed on God.
Psalm. 39.4, 5. My heart was hot within me; while I was musing, the fire
kindled: then spoke I with my tongue, etc. Indeed that is a season of kindling,
when the mind is musing; but when the mind is fleeting and floating, little
impression is made, little good comes of it. There are many days at Court,
wherein strangers come to see, and are soon gone; and what get they? Nothing:
But they that abide in the presence of the Prince, live by him. It Is not a
pointing and casting of your eye toward Heaven, that makes God your portion:
If you do not dwell with him, he uses you like strangers. Think well of it:
Certainly where the Eye abides not, it is because either the thing displeases,
or there is some better thing that draws away your hearts. What is there in
Heaven or in Earth should draw away your minds from these Visions? When you
look upon him who is most glorious, is he not worthy, on whom your Souls should
dwell? and your minds rest themselves with all their might? Certainly what we
love, that will hold us, that will be in our thoughts, we need not call out our
minds; and if once the eye be set upon it, it holds; as the Loadstone, having
drawn the Iron, keeps it fast to it self. Christ himself acknowledges such an
operation of love upon himself; Cant. 6.5. Turn away thine eyes, Or, taken away
mine heart. (...) excordiasti me.
for they have overcome me: And in Cant. 4.9. Thou have ravished my heart, my
Sister, my Spouse, with one of thine eyes: Christ was as one that had lost his
heart, as the word imports; He is pleased so to express his deep affection
toward his Church: He was held in the galleries, and captivated with love to
his People, so that his eye was ever upon them, he loved to behold them, it
satisfied his Soul as marrow and fatness to see them: He shall see of the
travel of his Soul, and be satisfied, (...)
Isai. 53.11. And indeed he says he cannot get his eyes off them: Can a mother
forget her child? Isai. 49.14.
No more can I forget you. And is Christ so tender in his love toward us, that
he ever minds us; and shall our minds be so loose to him? so fluttering and
fleeting? Shall there be no more care to bind our selves in cords of love to
him, that we may ever behold him, who bears us in his breast before his Father
always?

4. This is our fault, that whatsoever is done in sending, bending, and binding
of our minds toward God, yet with some at least (O that it might not be true
of all) it is not their course and trade: Now and then they are awakened, and
get up into Heaven to see their Father, but it is not daily; and here is their
failing, that it is not their course as it was David's: Psalm 145
Every day will I praise thee: And, I am ever thee, Psalm. 73. I beseech you
consider it; Is this now and then going to Heaven, within the vail, to live the
life of Friends? Is this to carry your selves as children, to be so strange at
home? What, now and then, once a month or week, seldom to be where you always
should be? You should ever dwell with God, as the lovely Center and resting
place of your Souls, and you are seldom with him; is this fair? Is Christ and
the Father of Christ objects that are not worth the looking after? such mean
things, that a visit now and then should serve the turn? What said the Queen of
Sheba concerning Solomon? Blessed are these thy servants, that Always stand
before thee, and hear thy wisdom: If she were so taken with Solomon, remember
that a greater then Solomon is here. And will you deprive your selves of that
blessedness, which you might enjoy by standing always in the presence of your
Father, to hear his Wisdom, and behold his Glory?

But if this be a fault (as indeed it is) what shall we say of that voluntary
retention of our minds, when the voice of God within bids us go and visit
Heaven, but we sit still in a voluntary reluctance to the voice that speaks?
What shall we say to that voluntary diversion of mind, when God sets himself in
our eyes, and our minds turn off from God, and pitch on other things, and have
no content in beholding him? But above all, what shall we say to that voluntary
effusion and vile expense of mind and strength of understanding upon vanities,
when we send out thoughts in whole troops toward vanities, and do not spare
one toward Heaven? Certainly this is a crime of a very high nature. You see in
part what is your fault, and to know that is a great advantage; I have
endeavored to show you it in the several degrees of it; I shall now show you the
Causes of it.

CHAP. V.
How the Soul comes to wander from God: Of divine Permission in this Case:
Discouragements pretended: The heart pleased with something else more then God.

1. THe first is, Divine Permission: God pleases to leave his people much to
themselves, for ends best known to himself; and oh, what work is made when this
wild Boar is let into the Garden? How does he trample and tread down? What
spoil does he make, when he is got into the place where he most gladly would
be? How did God let him in upon Job? so that his thoughts by visions in the
night troubled him; how was he tossed in his spirit? Solomon, how did the Devil
run away with his understanding? and carry him almost into a total
forgetfulness of God, that no good man I think ever since the Creation did run
so desperate a race as he did? God was rooted out of his heart, as it were, he
giving himself up to fulfill the lusts of his eyes and of his mind with all his
might; but in the end he cries out, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity and
vexation of spirit. Certainly it were better the Devil had power to run away
with our estates and liberties, then with our thoughts, keeping them in
captivity, and as the steersman of our minds ordering their motions at his
pleasure. Some men's understandings (by the mighty workings of these
principalities and powers) are as swiftly carried to imaginations of evil, as
Eagles when they fly to dead bodies, or as any creatures when they make haste
to their prey. You shall see a man, when he is in this case, all his thoughts
are beneath Heaven, and they roll up and down the world, and pitch sometimes
here, sometimes there, as things suit, but are separated from God, and he
cannot get off: but as Jael struck a nail into the head of Sisera, and fastened
him to the ground; so men's thoughts and minds are fastened to something in the
world, that they cannot deliver themselves.

This is a woeful day indeed, when God will not be seen; when God says of a
man, as David of Absalom, Let him not see my face. Truly if this be the
condition of any, that their understandings are ridden by the Devil, and
carried away from God; go to Christ, confess and humble your selves, seek his
face, who is the Father of spirits, and has command and power over Devils,
that as by permission he has suffered the unclean Spirit to enter, so by his
commanding word he may say to them, Come forth, that your understandings may be
free for their proper work; for he only can cast down imaginations, and every
thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bring into
captivity every thought into the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. Many may
complain as Job in another case, Chap. 17.11. My days are passed, my purposes
are broken off; even the thoughts of my heart; or as it is in the Margin, (...)
the possessions of my heart are broken off: as if a man should say, I had
thoughts of Jesus Christ, I was wont to have sweet apprehensions of my Father,
which took me much; God was wont to take up my Soul, and my mind was wont to be
contentfully possessed with the meditation of him; now these possessions are
gone, and broken off. Pray then as David, Psalm. 119.37. Turn away mine eyes
from beholding vanity; or, make mine eyes to pass, (...)
that they be not held to gaze upon vanity, but that I may run with freedom the
Race that is set before me, having God still in mine eyes.

2. A second cause of this great fault (not having our eyes bent and fixed on
God) is Discouragements: Indeed Discouragements are called, a weakening of the
hands, in Jer. 38.4. Melting of the heart, Deuteronomy. 1.28. Breaking of the heart,
Numb. 32.7. All to show, that a man under discouragements is made unfit and
unmeet for service.

1. Says one, I like this well, and you speak to my heart, when you speak of
this eying and minding of God, and my wishes keep pace with the Rule; I am
ready to say, I would it were so with me; but the work is too hard for me, I
find no strength to it.

Answ. Suppose you do not; (...).
indeed commonly the best things are hard; though this be hard, yet it is a
necessary work, and you must never plead necessity against Duty: You are bound
to it; all Law requires this. Is it hard? but is it not good? does not the work
pay you wages? My meditation of him shall be sweet, says David.

Again, You say it is hard, but not so hard as is pretended; and all the
hardship that is in it, we have brought into it; let us not then complain;
though we sweat at the work, let us be willing to do it. And remember what I
tell you, though you have lost the command you had over your spirits, yet if
you be in Christ it is in part restored to you. You see how you can send out
your understandings, and how they can shout out thoughts upon other things; and
will you not use a command over them in this, in directing them toward God, for
the beholding of him? What is the renewing of your mind, but the giving it a
powerful propensity to move toward God, and the things of God? If then you are
in part renewed, the difficulty is in part removed: You have reason therefore,
in regard of the necessity and sweetness of the work, to set your minds to it.

Besides, Your minds are swift of motion; you should not speak of difficulty,
when in an instant you can start from Earth to the highest Heavens.

Again, When you look to God and Jesus Christ, you look to one that opens to
you: If you draw near to God, he will draw near to you; If the Journey be long,
he will meet you more then half way: Isai. 64. He meets them in the way that
rejoice, and work righteousness. So that if you set to the work, you are not
like to be as one that launcheth out into the deep Sea, where he sees no
bounds; or like one in a Desert, wandering alone on foot; but you go forth to
one, that comes forth to you.

CHAP. VI.
False Meditation subdueth not the heart. A wicked heart has no joy in the
thoughts of God. What Is done, and not according to Rule, is as if it were
undone. The heart which minds not God in a constant course is not right.

THere is a generation of men, 3 Exercise.
whose course is quite cross to David's: Whereas he says, Mine eyes are Ever
toward the Lord, they may say, Mine eyes are Never toward the Lord; God is
not in all their thoughts, Psalm. 10.4. God reckons a thing as not done in
several respects.

1. When it is not done to purpose; when a work is done, but reaches not its
end: Jer. 8.6. No man repents, saying, What have I done? Yet Isai. 59.12. God
acknowledges something upon record to be done; they confessed that their
transgressions were multiplied before him, and their sins testified against
them; yet he complains, No man repents, etc. because it was not done to
purpose, the work was not home. Psalm. 119.59. I considered my ways, and turned
my feet unto thy Testimonies: I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy
Testimones. Here was a work to purpose. Then a man looks toward God to purpose,
when the thoughts of God are the possessions of his heart; when the eye is so
set on God, that the heart is changed into the likeness of God. Though a man
should give a thousand glances every day toward Heaven, if there be no
effectual impression upon the heart, God takes it as if a man ever looked from
him, and never cast an eye toward him: Psalm. 50. They are called a people that
forget God: Surely 'twas not a total forgetfulness; for the Law of God was in
their mouths, and they had made a Covenant with him by sacrifice; but their
remembrance of God was not effectual, it did not subdue their hearts to God:
therefore though they talked of him, yet God charge them with forgetfulness of
him. 1 John 3.6. the Apostle says, that they that live in sin, have not seen
God, neither known him: A true sight o^ God separates a man from himself, it is
the the destruction of the sins he lived in; as ignorance and forgetfulness of
God is the strength of sin: Forgetting and not regarding are put one for
another in Scripture; I forget (says the Apostle, Phil. 3.) those things that
are behind; i.e. they were of no weight with him, he regarded them not. So when
men forget God, it argues they regard him not at all; as God is said to forget
men, when he will do nothing for them; then a man is as forgotten, as a thing
that is not. Jer. 23.39. See how this is expressed; I even I will utterly forget
you, Obliviscendo obliviscar.
or in forgeting I will forget you, and I will utterly forsake you, and cast
you out of my presence, and bring everlasting reproach upon you, and perpetual
shame, that shall not be forgotten. A terrible place for all forgetters of God.

2. God reckons that as not done, which men would not have done. Sometimes men
think of God, but they know not how to shun it, God breaks in upon their
spirits; but their natural temper is to suffer themselves to be drunk up, and
diverted by other objects: A natural man abhors the thought of God; nothing so
sweet to a Saint, My meditation of thee shall be sweet. A good man could be
content to live out of himself, to live in God. It Is a good work, the work of
Angels; they who once have been used to this employment, know not how to wish
to change. One Eudoxius wished, that he might be admitted to come near the body
of the Sun, to have a full view of it, though it devoured him; He was something
rash in his wish: But there is something proportionable in a godly spirit; he
so loves God, that he could be content to be swallowed up in the beholding of
him. It Is said of some, Romans 1.28. That they liked not to retain God in their
knowledge, (...). Haimo.
and God gave them up to a Reprobate Mind: They liked not; that is, they not
only neglected, but despised; it seemed not good to them: so the Syriac; It was
a very unpleasing thing to them, to know and to mind God. It Is usual in
Scripture, that verbs negative are put for their contraries. Zech. 8.7. Love
not a false Oath: Love not, that is, hate it. Heb. 13.2. Forget not to
entertain strangers; that is, be sure you mind it, and have this in your hearts
to be ready to it. Revel. 12. They loved not their lives to the death; Animarum
suarum pro. digi. Beza.
they did with their lives as with things they hate, not at all regard them. So
when it is said, they liked not to retain the knowledge of God in their thoughts,
the meaning is, they hated that God should have any room in them, or that there
should be any knowledge of God in their hearts. Though the worst of men cannot
but sometimes have God in their eyes, yet because they like it not, God counts
it is not done, and takes it as if they gave him no attendance, or never looked
after him. The Apostle Romans 7.17. upon this account reckons, It Is no more I,
but sin that dwells in me; because the propention of my spirit, my better
part, is all toward God, it is no more I: In this sense, when a wicked man
thinks of God, it is not the man that does it, but his conscience, or the power
of God upon him; he does what he would not do. As in another case, Quae quia
non potuit non facit illa facit.
when a man would do a thing, though he cannot do it, it goes for done with
God; as it is said of Abraham concerning his son, and David concerning the
temple: So that whether it be good or evil, it is not reckoned if the will be
not in it. Let no man deceive himself; though he cast his eyes toward Heaven
all the day long, if he love not this work, he does nothing.

3. That which is not done according to the Rule, God reckons it as not done.
If a Master set his servant about a work, if he do it not according to the
pattern and rule which is set him, nothing is done, it may be worse then
nothing. This is not to eat the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. Yet they did eat
it; but because it was not done after its due manner, he says, this is not to
eat it. And mark it, what God faith in this case, Isai. 43.22. Thou have not
called on me, O Jacob, but have been weary of me, O Israel: Thou have not
brought me the small cattle of thy burnt-offerings, neither have thou honored
me with thy sacrifices: I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor
wearied thee with incense: Thou have bought me no sweet cane with money,
neither have thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices, etc. Yet they did
these things, and God acknowledges it; Jer. 6.20. To what purpose comes there
to me Incense from Sheba? and the sweet Cane from a far Country? Your
burnt-offerings are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet to me. He looks
on the thing as not done, because it is not done as it should be. Men think of
God, but their thoughts are not holy, awful, and subjecting the spirit: they
think of God, but their thoughts are no way proportionable to the Majesty of
God; they look loosly, carelessly and carnally upon God; they peep upon that
glory with an unholy and undaunted spirit, and so its against the Rule, and God
reckons it not done, nay it will be worse to them; God will recompense upon
their heads even their thoughts of him; this he will punish severely: People
think they do well when they have good thoughts, and think well; they are
deceived: for if their thoughts be not as they should be, though they be for
number as motes in the Sun, they do no good, but bring many sufferings and
punishments upon them.

4. That which is a man's course and trade, denominates a man, and not any
particular action. A man may come to a Carpenters house, and take up his tools,
and do something at his work, but this makes him not a Carpenter, it does not
denominate him, because that is not his trade. The best Saints sin; yet because
it is not their trade and course, they are said not to sin, and are called
blameless and holy, etc. And David is said to be a man after Gods own heart,
(notwithstanding his many failings,) because the habit of his spirit was so.
Now the course of the world is a course of habitual and voluntary forgetfulness
of God, endeavoring to shut God out of their thoughts; and if their thoughts do
run toward him, it is but as water out of its proper channel, not in its place;
their way is altogether out of God, that we may say of God in reference to
these, as Job of places not frequented, They are forgotten of the foot, Job
28.4. So the minds and spirits of these men converse not with God, but he is
forgotten of the foot of their Souls: This is a dangerous state; when they are
not with God, where are they? In the night tares are sown; and when is night,
but when God appears not? (as the nonappearance of the Sun makes darkness,)
and then the night takes place, and now all evil is to be found in that man.
Judge. 3.7. They did evil, and forgot God: Those two are joined together, as the
cause and the effect; they forgot God, and therefore did evil* Forgetfulness
and unmindfulness of Gods is the womb of all sin, where every unclean spirit
nests. A man that lives in forgetfulness of God, is free to righteousness, as
the Apostle speaks, Romans 6.20. He is in no bonds to God, he feels no obliging
power in any thing upon his spirit toward God. Non entis and non appa^entis
eadem est ratio.


As things that are not, so things that are unknown and not minded, are worth
nothing. It Is all one to me, whether things be not, or be forgotten. The
spirits of those men are in a woeful case, that live without God; they are as
Sheep without a Shepherd, and like a Ship among Rocks; nothing but a divine
hand can rescue them from everlasting Shipwreck. All affections of love, joy,
fear and hope, flow from sight of God; therefore where there is no sight and
knowledge of God, men are free to all evil: If thou forgettest God, thou clearly
pronouncest, and the express language of thy course is, that there is no God;
this very thing strips him of all loveliness and beauty, one not worthy to be
minded. What is more contemptible, then that which no man will look on?
Forgetfulness is the state of death: Psalm. 31.12. That I be not as one
forgotten among the dead. When God is not remembered by thee, he is to thee a
dead thing: And what is thy mind, but as a grave, a place of darkness and
forgetfulness, where is nothing but pollution and corruption, and whatsoever is
loathsome in it self, and destructive to thee? It Is the speech of Bildad in Job
8.11, 12, 13, 14. Can the rush grow without mire? or the flag without water?
Whilst it is yet in his greenness, and not cut down, it withers before any
other herb. So are the paths of all that forget God, and the hypocrites hope
shall perish: Whose hope shall be cut off, etc. Though the marrow be fresh in
thy bones, and thou be in the vigor of thy youth, though all be green and
flourishing about thee, yet thou art but like the flag without water, and the
rush without mire, in a withering, dying and wasting condition, though at
present thou please thy self in beholding thine own greenness; so are the paths
of all that forget God. Therefore it is good to consider of it betime. Psalm.
9.17. David says, God will turn all that forget him into [Hell;] Sheol.
The word signifies, a state of death, yea a depth of deaths: Indeed to forget
God, is a deep sin, and it brings deep death upon men that live in it, that
dare walk so boldly, viewing every creature, and minding every vanity, and do
not make it their work to mind God: All the good you do shall be forgotten, and
all the evil you do shall be remembered, and God will say to you one day, I
know you not; I was a stranger to you upon Earth, I could not have an eye from
you, but when your lazy idle spirits pleased; and now, out of my sight, I Will
never own you, nor look upon you more: and this will be the case of all that
forget God. Having presented you with the Fault, I shall now lay before you the
Causes, whence it is that men live so in a course of forgetfulness of God.

CHAP. VII.
Man wanders from God, having lost the government of his spirit. Thoughts of
God suit not perverted Souls, are above them and against them. Satan lord of
the imaginations and master of the affections in those which forget God.

1. MEn have lost the regiment of themselves, that government which God had put
into their hands over themselves. Man was created in a good state, like a well
ordered family, where there are some in command, and others under command; some
commanding, and others commanded: He made man upright, says Solomon, Eccles.
7.27. When is a thing right? When it agrees with its Rule. God and man were
alike, the Image of God was upon man: What is the Image of God? God is good and
God is wise, and so was man; and this was the rightness of man's condition: God
made man right; Aquin.
all was in order; the reason of man was subject to God, and the spirit of man
was subject to Reason; Man had the command of himself, that he could set his
thoughts in order, and send them out upon their proper work and errand, and
raise affections suitable to their objects, and command their motion. Now the
case is altered: 1 These. 5.14. The Apostle speaking of some men, among other
terms, (...).
he calls them [unruly:] This may be the name of the whole state of man; he is
unruly; like an Army routed, where neither Commander nor Soldier are in their
places: so is man, having swerved from his Rule. The truth is, the government
is not utterly extinct, but utterly perverted; like a Change in a State, where
though there be an alteration in the frame and constitution of it, yet there
will be a Government still: So here; that government which man had over himself
being perverted, now that which is good is trampled upon, and that which is
evil is exalted; Serving diverse lusts and pleasures, says the Apostle, Tit.
3.5. This is the state of man: In Prove. 17.24. The eyes of a fool are in the
ends of the Earth; wandering up and down like masterless creatures: God is
forgotten, and man has lost the command of himself, to set and hold his mind
straightly in attendance upon God. This is one Cause.

2. Another is this, God is not the object that suits them: The eye is not
pleased, therefore it withdraws. What is in God, is above man: Man was created
in a state of obedience to God, and communion with him, but now is sunk into
such a state of darkness and depravation, that what was his life, is now too
high for him; that as our bodies cannot live in the air, so the understandings
of men cannot now feed upon God who is their proper bread, and is so indeed to
those who are delivered from this polluted and defiled, perverted and impotent
state. As beasts take no pleasure in beholding heaps of gold, and rich cabinets
of precious Jewels (which are excellent and glorious in the eyes of men)
because they suit not with their condition: So the eye of a man is not taken
with beholding God, though he be good beyond all expression, even he that made
and keeps all good in Heaven and in Earth, the blessed Fountain of all; because
there is now an unsuitableness between this excellency that is in God, and the
present state of man; that as the best food in the world will not please a sick
stomach, so neither will this Angels food go down with men; as Solomon in Prove.
24. says, Wisdom is too high for a fool: [Wisdom,] whether he means the
actions that are to be governed by wisdom, or the dictates and rules of wisdom,
every thing of wisdom is too high for a fool. Creatures cannot go higher then
their appointed and natural station: A fish in the water enjoys it self, but
put it in another element it dies presently. Men are naturally of that
constitution and frame, that they cannot live but on low things, they cannot
live above: What is the life of a Saint, is death to the world: to rise toward
God, is the resurrection of their spirits, and the elevation of all their life;
but its death and destruction to natural men. And they are not only averse to
this, because there is in God that which is above them, but that which is
against them. What dreadful apprehensions has a man that looks upon the Power
and Wisdom of God, his Eternity, Omniscience? etc. These are visions that
fright him, and strike his heart through like a dart; This God is holy,
therefore he will destroy me, and there is no escaping, because he is
Omnipotent and Omniscient. There is in the nature of man a necessary motion
(that it puts it self upon flight) from every thing which it conceives to be
hurtful; it will not endure a cohabitation with what is contrary to it. Who can
dwell with everlasting burnings? God is a consuming Fire to the world, and
their thoughts and apprehensions take fire at the remembrance of him, and
scorch their Souls, and they cannot endure it. It Is a great pain for a man to
be where he would not: Woe is me, says David, that I dwell in Meshech. It Is a
perpetual dis-rest to a man, when the place of his abode displeases him.
Though a thing be never so good, yet if a man be sunk out of that state wherein
formerly he had a sweet enjoyment of it, it delights not. Bury her out of my
sight, says Abraham of his wife when she was dead: Though he loved her dearly
while she was living, yet when she was dead, bury her out of my sight. So men
love not God, therefore they bury him out of their sight; and God buries such
out of his sight: Jer. 15.1. I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast
out your brethren, the whole seed of David, etc. Man, as he is in his depraved
state, hates his being, and wishes himself rather to be nothing, then to behold
such an one as God, that is everlasting burnings, and has an unchangeable
Will, eternally and severely to punish sinners.

3. A strong cause of man's unmindfulness of God, is that distance into which
the nature of man is sunk from all good, especially from the greatest good; and
as any thing lies near that, and has most tendency to it, so the heart of man
draws back most from it. As a man that is renewed loves that best that is best,
and then that which is next to it: so an unregenerate man loves that best which
is worse; and hence they give themselves up to all vanity, setting open their
Souls, and prostituting themselves to every thing that is evil, and become a
common habitation and resting place for every thing that is not good; and the
more unlike any thing is to God, the better entertainment the heart of man
gives it: By this voluntary tradition of himself, he is so captivated to those
things that he had once a power over, and his back so bowed down, and he so
held under, that he cannot come out of this state, except God bring him out:
That in Mark 6. does something resemble the state of these men, They were in
the desert, where were many comers and goers, and they had no leisure to eat:
It Is so with worldly men, they have many thoughts coming and going, that they
have no leisure to do that which is best for them.

4. The last Cause is this, God does sometimes give men up, and leave them to
be at the will of Satan, to reign and order their motion as he pleases; so
that he is master of their affections, and lord of their imaginations; and he
calls back, and sends them out hither and thither as he pleases: He is called
the strong man; and as he is strong, so he works strongly: He is said Ephesians. 2.2.
to work effectually in the children of disobedience: Where he has possession
of the mind, he picks up the seed sown, that it may take no root, nor spring
up; he prepossesseth the mind, and holds it in perpetual employment; like
Sampson, that was made to serve in a mill: so Satan makes the Soul to run a
round which way pleases him, that it has no time nor leisure to look toward
God, which is a very sad thing: Joh. 13.2. It Is said of Judas, The Devil having
put into his heart to betray Christ, etc. When once the Devil has got the
regiment of a poor creature in that kind, he puts in and puts out at pleasure;
and the truth is, when he put this thought into Judas, Satan himself entered
into him, verse. 27. he came in with those thoughts, he entered when they
entered, and then the man was perpetually and mightily employed by him. The
mind of man is naturally fruitful in thoughts, tending from God: Out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, Mat. 15.19. It is with the nature of man, as it is
with some ground, that brings forth some things of it self; but if it be dressed
by a skilful man, it abounds much more. When Satan becomes the Gardener of the
Soul, every plant there multiplies and fructifies exceedingly, and there will
be a mighty increase. Hence it is, that man lives in a course of forgetfulness
of God, because by a voluntary diverting of himself from God, at length God is
provoked to divert from him, and then Satan takes possession of the heart and
thoughts, he enters and commands the man at his pleasure.

This may suffice to set before you the Causes of that unnatural and that
hateful forgetfulness of God, wherein most in the world live; I beseech you
mind it, it is a business of exceeding great weight. My next work is to persuade
you to practice the Duty held forth, That you would always have your eyes
toward God.

CHAP. VIII.
Persuasions to frequent Emanations and contentful abode of Soul with God.
Minding of God a work possible to Christians: A work of the most excellent
power. Spiritual actions easier then bodily. Contemplative life everlasting.
Natural propensity of Soul to God renewed in Saints. A blessing of love in true
mindfulness of God.

LIve in a more close attendance upon God: You never live rightly, till you
live in the world as in a place consecrated to God. It Is an extreme wrong to
the end of our Being, when we let our minds loose unto vanity: To be
extravagant and open to vanity, is worse then that the Temple should have been
opened to all abominations. This work is little regarded in the world, little
of it is done: The Children of the night are altogether in the dark, and shut
out from God; the Children of the light very much found in forgetfulness of
him: And truly these days in special manner abound with this fault; men stand
more remote from God now then ever: Forgetfulness of him from whom all our
Being is, and upon whom we all depend, reigns; yea much of it is there where
men think themselves to be raised most unto God, and brought into more
conformity to him, and communion with him. My counsel to you is, to look to
your eyes: My eye (says David) is ever toward the Lord: And oh that all our
eyes were so fixed. The work that I now call for is, the willing, holy and
frequent emanation and outgoing of your minds toward God, and contentful and
effectual abode with him. I shall give you a few Arguments to press this Duty;
and indeed we had need have Arguments urged with all force, and it is well if a
hundred Arguments draw one man; the most argumentative discourse in the world
is not strong enough alone to prevail with men.

1. The first Argument is from the nature of the work; it is that which you may
do, it is a work possible, it is a work that you have power to do: When God calls
for your eyes, it supposes your eyes are not so set and fastened in your
heads, not so fixed and immovable, but you may look up to him, you may eye him
and mind him; God never gave a Command impossible: But here is this threefold
fault, which I Will but touch.

That men having understandings to mind God, their minds stand still like
standing water, or like a clock whose wheels move not at all; which fault
however sometimes it may be from a mere distemper, yet oftentimes it is from a
sinful principle: There is no list in men's hearts to look to God, nay there is
a withdrawing from God, and rather then the understanding shall be employed
upon God, it shall run at waste (like water,) or stand still, and not move.

Men sometimes do look to God, but as it is not their daily course, so they do
it not with strength, but weakly and faintly: Slight visions leave but very
shallow impressions: These men live according to the sight they have of God;
Slight men are of poor spirits, because they do not enoble themselves in a
vigorous beholding God.

A third fault, which is worst of all, when men send out their thoughts and lay
out their understandings in an ill way, when the matter of their thoughts and
imaginations is evil. There are thoughts of good that are evil thoughts, and
thoughts of evil that are good: When a man's mind looks on God, but the heart
withdraws, when it looks upon God with contradictions and quarrellings at him,
these are evil thoughts of God. There are thoughts of evil that are good, as
when a man looks on evil, but his end is the separation of his heart from it,
and that he may destroy it. But when a man looks upon evil with affections and
desires after it, when his mind is employed (...) the bellows to the fire, when
he is con^^^ing and devising how he may compass (...) ^vil, this is most
notorious wickedness; (...) does mightily habituate and root the Soul in a
deplorable elongation from God: He that thinks and devises evil, makes haste
to it with all the strength he has: Prove. 24.8. He that devises evil, shall
be called a mischievous person; a Master of evil (...)
, so some read it: this is the fruit; a man by employing his understanding in a
sinful way, he becomes to be a sinner in grain, a Master sinner, a Leader of
others, a man transcendent, going beyond others; as Saul was higher then the
people by the head and shoulders. David describes such an one, Psalm. 36.3. The
words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit; he has left off to be wise, and to
do good: He devises mischief upon his bed, he sets himself in a way that is
not good; he abhors not evil, that is, he loves it, as those phrases import,
(verbs negative are put for their contrary, affirmative.) Prove. 30.32. If thou
have thought evil, lay thy hand upon thy mouth: for as the churning of milk
brings forth butter, and the wringing of the nose brings forth blood, so the
forcing of wrath brings forth strife: It Is but to show what degrees sin has.
When a man has thought an injurious thought against another, it is time for him
to lay his hand upon his mouth, and stifle it there; for if the thought be
entertained, it inflameth the tongue, and then much evil comes into act. As the
churning of milk brings forth butter, and the wringing of the nose blood; so,
says Solomon, the Forcing of wrath brings forth strife. As Vipers dye by the
young ones bred in them; so do men dye by the evil thoughts bred in their
minds. The Apostle Peter speaks of some men, 2 Pet. 2.14. so sunk in sin by the
exercise of their understanding and senses about it, that they could not cease
from sin (...).
. This I am sure of, the more you wander from God, the more you run into sin;
and every thought you have of evil this way, is a step from God. Stop betimes,
before you go so far that there can be no return, that you be not held in the
cords of your own iniquity; pray, that the thoughts of thine heart may be
forgiven thee, which was the Apostle's counsel to Simon Magus, Acts 8.22. Men
come to be in a remediless state by giving way to evil thoughts: Isa. 44.20. it
is said of Ephraim, A deceived heart has turned him aside, that he cannot
deliver his Soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? Now a man is in
a woeful state, when he is so turned aside by his deceitful heart, that he
cannot extricate himself. You have a power, and may do something; and by how
much more you are enabled to it, by so much the greater your sin is if you
neglect it: When God calls on you for this work, if you can be profuse on other
things, in a great expense of your minds and thoughts toward them, and you
will not mind him in all your ways, your sin is the greater.

2 Argu.
2. This work is a work of the noblest power and faculty you have; and as any
thing is more excellent, so it stands in the greater obligation toward God;
for as a man receives, so he owes; we owe much, that receive much. Seeing then
you have received so noble a faculty from God, you are more engaged to lay it
out when called for, according to the Will of him that gave it: You have other
faculties that are not under such a tie; you have a power of breathing, a power
of motion in all your members, you have many powers; but these lie not under
that obligation as this, because this excels all; the more careless and
unfaithful you are in improving it for God, the greater your sin and fault is.
This faculty is, as one calls it, Divinae particulam aurae.
a divine breath, a beam of the immortal Light, the very Image of God: Nothing
comes nearer unto God, then the mind of Man and Angels: When you suffer
therefore your understandings to run from God, you debase your glory; your
excellency is now deflowred and dishonored. It Is recorded as a reproach upon
Domitian the Emperor, that he would be spending his time to catch and kill
flies; too childish a work for a man in so high a place: It is much worse for
you to employ that excellent faculty your understanding about flies and
trifles, that was made to behold God, and in beholding him to be filled with
him. It Is the most excellent and highest faculty, and the workings of it are so
much the more easy: The works of the Soul are more easy then those of the
body; therefore you should be encouraged to put your selves on the exercise of
it. The eyes of the body can by one glance reach the stars, and see further in
a moment, then the body can move in all its time: The mind is quicker then the
eye, and in a moment can glance into Heaven to the beholding of God; therefore
this should be a motive to prevail with you to the practice of this Duty,
because it is a thing whereunto you are so enabled: O dulcis confabulatio Dei in
anima and cum anima quae sine linguae and labiorum formatur strepit^, and sine
aure percipitur, and subsilentio, solus qui loquitur and cui loquitur audit
illum, omnis alienus excluditur. Ber. Opusc. c. 5. Vita contemplativa incipit
in hoc seculo, perficitur in futuro. Bern.
It Is a most excellent power, conducing most to your life; the actions of the
body do more weakly and remotely conduce to your life. This faculty is
spiritual, and herein differs much from the actions of the body, which have
their seasons, their proper time and place; but the acts of the Soul may be
done in any place, at any time; you may start into Heaven when no eye sees you;
you may be on the wing toward God, though among a crowd of men; no business is
such but you may be with God, and yet your business not suffer.

Again, It Is an eternal faculty, and the work of it is everlasting: A
contemplative life is the life of Heaven, it is that which Angels do; they ever
behold the face of your Father in Heaven. If you like not this work, how will
you live in Heaven? The dislike of it is a bar against your entrance: The life
of blessedness is a life of Vision, and seeing God; which if you take no
delight in, Heaven is no place for you.

Again, It Is a faculty very active; your minds must be somewhere else, if they
be not with God; and if they be not on God, they are upon something of less
concernment. Why should you follow after drops, and neglect the Fountain? Why
should you fly after shadows, and neglect him who is the true Substance? Truly
if the mind have its current from God toward other things, these things are
not only of less concernment, but destructive, and from whence you will reap
nothing but corruption and depravation, and defilement of spirit; you will grow
worse and worse into the form of the Devil, by how much your minds stray from
God, and pitch upon other things: Jer. 2.5. They are gone far from me, and have
walked after vanity, and are become vain.

Again, It Is a faculty that has received in the Saints a tendency toward God.
You do extremely wrong your selves, when you make not use of that propensity,
and put not forth your selves to have communion with God, whereby you might
bless your selves in the enjoyment of him. See how David expresses the
propensity of his spirit toward God, Psalm. 63.1. O God, thou art my God, early
will I seek thee, my Soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee: When
shall I come and appear before thee, to behold thy Glory, as I have seen it in
the Sanctuary? This is the course of the spirits of the children of God, in
whom that propensity which was natural, is now in part restored; so that they
are bent toward God, they thirst after God; as a man thirsts for water in a
dry and thirsty Land.

Again, There is a blessing in this work: God blesses what he likes, as he
curses what he hates: He likes it well. Mal. 3.16. Then they that feared the
Lord, spoke often one to another, and a book of remembrance was written before
him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought on his Name. He will be sure to
mind those that mind him, and be a friend to those that seek after him. When
you are bid to look upon him, it is but to receive from him: Is it any thing
else, but to call and invite you to look on the most pleasing and delightful
Object, that in the beholding of it, it may convey it self unto you, and you be
delighted and filled with it? It is all one as if he should bid you sit down by
a Well of Life, and drink, and to be as Christ and the Angels are, who are
blessed in the beholding of him; as if he should bid you come and pluck Apples
off that Tree of Life that is in the midst of Paradise.

God loves this work: Cant. 2.14. Let me see thy face, my Beloved, and hear thy
voice, for thy voice is sweet, and thy countenance comely. In one act you may
do that which pleases God, and makes you blessed: Set your eye toward him,
and his eye will be more toward you, and he will refresh you as with Manna;
there is enough in him, come and take freely: Reflect upon your own experience,
have you ever found this way like a wilderness? If it be a blessed work, why
will you unbless your selves? If the work will exalt you, why will you debase
your selves in not closing with it? And if you might live above in Heaven, why
will you live below? Let all the sweetness you have ever found in this work
provoke you to enlarge your self toward it. When thoughts of God are moving in
you, God himself is not far off, he will come and enter too; and how sweet is
it for God to come and take up his habitation in the Soul?

CHAP. IX.
Jesus Christ a Pattern of Eying the Father. Greatest mindfulness of God due.
God our best Friend. All we have is in his hands, and of his gift. All Religion
founded upon a due mindfulness of God. Anguish awails wandering hearts.

ANother Argument is from the Example of our Lord Jesus, whom we are to mind
and imitate; He is your Pattern: What says Christ? Learn of Me: And, Be you
perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect. How can you follow Christ the
Captain of your Salvation, if you mind him not? When the Apostle persuades them
in Heb. 12. to run the race that is set before them, he bids them look to
Jesus, the Author and Finisher of their Faith. Mariners at Sea, that they may
run a right course, keep an eye on that ship that bears the light. Your course
cannot be right, when your eye is not upon Jesus Christ, your Pattern. Would it
be with us as it is, when the forgetfulness of God lodges in our hearts, if we
did more mind Christ? We should say in our selves, Is this the course that he
steered? David tells us of Christ, Psalm. 16.8. that he set the Lord always
before him; or as Luke expounds it, applying those words to Christ, Acts 2.25.
I foresaw the Lord always before my face: The Father was Ever in his eye;
whatsoever came into his sight, he eyed him first, and fixed upon him. Now
Christ is not only appointed to be our Pattern in this thing, but he takes
notice of us, whether we imitate or no; His eye is upon us, to see whether our
eye be upon the Father, as his was and is for ever. It was the counsel of
Seneca, that when men are about to do evil, they should think on Plato, or some
such eminent man, as present to behold them. Certainly if Christ were more
minded, as such a Pattern, God would be more the object of our most
affectionate thoughts.

Again, If we consider the Object, it is the greatest reason in the world that
our eye should be upon God: God is our friend, he loves us, he bears us in his
heart; and shall not he be in our thoughts? This is ill requiting of him, whose
eye is always on us, seldom or never to eye him: This is a great contradiction
to the Law of Friendship, which consists in reciprocation of loves, Jer. 29.11.
I know my thoughts toward you says the Lord, thoughts of peace and not of
evil, to give you an expected end: Oh that we could say so, I know my thoughts
toward God, are thoughts of love and care to please him: Job 19.14. See how
hainously Job took it, that his friends had forgotten him, My kinsfolk have
failed and my familiar friends have forgotten me, etc.

As God is your friend, so all you have is in his hand: My times, says David,
Psalm. 31. are in thy hands, O God: And can you forget him, in whose hands are
all your concernments? If you had but a piece of your estate in a man's hand,
you could not but mind him. God has all that you have for Soul and body to
Eternity in his hands, and shall we forget him? It was the aggravation of the
sin of Belshazzar, in Dan. 5.23. that he did not glorify God, in whose hands
his life was; Thy God, in whose hands thy breath is, thou have not glorified.

Again, You have all from him; all the good of every kind that you receive, is
all from God, and will you not mind him? Deuteronomy. 32.18. God complains, that the
people were unmindful of the Rock that begot them, and forgot God that formed
them. Shall we so dishonor our selves, and live so cross to all principles of
Reason and Justice, as to be taken with the things we receive from God, and
forget him? Shall we receive all that comes from him, and shut him out of
doors? It was never Gods intent, that when he had decked our ways with all
flowers of comfort, we should sink into an ungrateful unmindfulness of him:
These are so many memento's to excite us to remember him. It was the
commendation of Abraham, Heb. 11. that he sojourned in the Land of Promise, as
in a strange Country: He did not sit down as at home, and make glad his heart
in the enjoyment of mercies; but reckoned himself as in a strange Country, that
he might enjoy him that is better then all.

It is upon record, that God had said often to his own people the Jews, Beware
lest you forget me, when you come into that good Land: It is spoken to you
also, Take heed you forget not me in your habitations, in your relations and
friends, in your goods, in all your enjoyments. Isai. 44.21. Thou art my
servant, O Israel; I have formed thee, thou art my servant, thou shall not be
forgotten of me; or not forget me: the force of the word is, thou shall not
bear me away, (...) Non oblivisceris mei.
but let me be in thy heart, and in thy mind, and remembrance always; as I Will
not bear thee away, thou shall not be forgotten of me. Thus you see much in
him, whom you are to mind, to draw and hold your eyes toward him.

The last Argument: It is a very fundamental Duty; all your intentions,
purposes, dispositions and affections in your whole course comes to nothing,
except they receive life from this, for this is the foundation of all: In the
sight of God lies your Rule of direction for all your actions, and all the
Reason of your holy walking: The mind is the Leader, and it leads according to
the object where it is set. Job 31.7. My heart has not followed my eye: That
is the natural course, for the heart to follow the eye; where the eye is set,
there the heart will be also. See how the Prophet expresses, Isai. 59.2. I
have stretched out my hand to a rebellious people, that walk in a way that is
not good; they follow their own thoughts. They walked in a way that was not
good; What led them? Their own thoughts: Thoughts do mould men; a man that
thinks much of the world, grows worldly; and a man that thinks much of God,
grows godly; as he thinks, so he is, says Solomon, Prove. 23. And we beholding
the glory of Christ, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.18. are changed from glory to
glory. If there be any comfort of hope, if any flames of love, if any life of
faith, if any vigorous dispositions or motions toward God, if any meltings of a
softened heart, these flow from the knowledge of God, not habitual, but actual:
Quod appositio vel adaptatio ligni est ad ignem corporalem, hoc est
rememoratio, and recogitatio beneficiorum ad ignem spiritualem. Gul. par. de
virtut. c. 11; (...).
Habitual knowledge is as meat in the Cubboard, and as precious water in a
glass; but actual knowledge is those things in use and enjoyment: We are renewed
day by day, says the Apostle; how? by looking on things that are eternal, 2
Cor. 4.16. Heb. 11. it is reported, that Moses did many excellent things; How
came he by that excellent spirit? he saw him that was invisible. Plato says,
that it is Philosophy to love God; for that is the end of it, to bring men unto
God. Upon all these considerations, and many more that might be urged, give up
your selves unto this work: There is not a man free, but the bonds of this
counsel are upon him. The sum of it is this, Often have your eye on God, dwell
in the contemplation of him, let that day be as one of the days of Hell and of
darkness wherein you have nothing to do with God: This is certain, if God be
your God, you cannot let your minds run at waste: To turn aside from God, will
be very chargeable and expensive to you, you will pay dear for it: Children
that wander from home get the rod: The rod is not far from that man that loves
not to stay with God.

God can make the thoughts of thy heart to be like Hell it self, and to
minister more bitterness to you, then if a whole legion of Devils were about
you: I beseech you therefore mould your selves into this Doctrine, that you be
not found Despisers of the great God, who will not speak in vain: One of these
two things will be made good upon all; either the Word will subject your Souls
unto the Command of God, or unto the Vengeance of God; and if you cannot now
look up to him with delight, you may know the day in which you may look up and
curse, Isai. 8.21. Now you may look up toward God and live; but the time may
come, that you may be in that distress, that you will curse God, and the world,
and your selves, when bitterness shall be on your Souls for your neglect of
this work.

CHAP. X.
Directions concerning Eying of God. Truths to be received in their power.
Saints are to keep in their hearts a meetness for their work. Saints are to
preserve their capacities for God. Saints must maintain a deep sense of divine
engagements. A lively sense of necessities is useful. Pure hearts are meet for
divine converse. The mind willed without Sanctification.

I Shall now set before you some helpful Counsel, that may enable to this great
work, from which the heart of man does so hang off. Certainly there is nothing
which men are more hardly brought to, then to this, to keep the remembrance of
God fresh in their spirits, and to let their understandings run in this channel
constantly. As men do intend an end, so they eye the means; indeed the means
lie in the way to the end, yea they are the way it self, and the end is in
them: I will therefore offer some means to you.

First, Entertain the Rule in the power of it: When any Command of God comes
armed with his own strength, it makes man weak, he cannot make resistance, but
falls down conquered in the assault. The heart naturally stands out against and
is estranged to every voice of God; it will give him the hearing, and admit the
sound, but not the strength; it will keep the Word at a distance, either by
non-attending, or by voluntary diversions and forgetfulness. Indeed the things
of God are very strange to us, though they were our best and nearest
acquaintance in our primitive state; and therefore now we are hardly brought to
own them and receive them.

The not entertaining of the Truth in the power of it, is that which frustrates
so many thousand Sermons; so that though everyday one thing or other is called
for and pressed, yet matters are as they were: God speaks, but few regard; he
calls, but few answer; He says, Do this, and do that, but all is undone still.
Then the Word and Counsel of God is received in its power, when a man does
acknowledge it, and has the sense of the weight and efficacy of it; and this
was the commendation of them, 1 These. 1.5. that they receive the Gospel, not in
word only, but in power: and what was the effect of it? see verse. 6. And they
became followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the word in much
affliction. And observe, John 8.37. what the Reason was that the Jews were in
so desperate a course against Christ, that they sought to slay him; Christ
himself gives the Answer, (...).
My word has no place in you: Christ had preached unto them, as he does unto
us; but that word which he then spoke had little entrance or little abode at
least in the spirits of men: And so at this day, either the door is shut
against the Word, or it is soon cast out of doors again: It is not a faint
yielding of your spirits unto the call of God, when he speaks of such a thing
as this is: The thorny ground had much of this; When the Gospel came and called
on them to look to God and Jesus Christ, they were very yielding, there was a
sprouting of many affections, and great appearances of the efficacious working
of the Word on them; (...).
but all came to nothing. Many, while they are under the ministration of the
Word, are under some operation of the Spirit that attends it; and they are
ready to say as they in Exodus 19. We will do whatsoever the Lord says: But I
may take up that wish, O that there were such a heart to do even this one thing
now called for, to walk in more mindfulness of God, and that it might be said
of you, as it is of them, Romans 6.17. Thanks be to God, (...).
that you have obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine, into which you were
delivered. The receiving of the Counsels of God in their power, is not, as you
may think, only a present entertaining of them, nor is it the present taste of
the sweetness and vigor of them in your spirits; but it is the abiding of this
Word in the power of it upon your hearts. There are many that are much struck
in their spirits by the Word, but yet what says the Scripture of them? They
cast the Word of God behind their backs, and no more look after it; therefore
they are unfruitful hearers of it all their days. 1 John 2.24. see what the
Apostle John says, Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from
the beginning: if that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in
you, ye shall also continue in the Son, and in the Father. Men know not what
they do, when they let their hearts depart from the Word; many invaluable
Counsels from Heaven, in which their Souls are bound up, are lost, and made
nothing of as to them: This is Satan's gathering of the Corn that is sowed,
before it come to maturity. Those whom God carries through obedience to eternal
life, he does cause to lay up his Word, to be their companion, and unto them as
the Covenant that was laid up in the Ark of God: I have hid thy Word in my
heart, says David, Psalm. 119.11. It is such a hiding as men are wont to use
when they hide their treasure, that by no means it may be lost. God writes on
the minds of those whom he loves his Law, and he leaves impressions of himself,
that he will be minded: He that is our Pattern has said, that the Law of God
was in his heart, Psalm. 40.9. And it is the name that the Prophet gives unto
the people of God, Isa. 51.7. that they are such in whose heart is his Law.
This then you should do, lay up the Word, and have often recourse to it; and
lay your selves and your practices to this Rule, and often say, Where am I?
where is my mind? whither is my understanding wandering? what path has my Soul
been treading in? have I been walking with God? have I been minding him? have I
been serious in my spirit in the contemplation of him? Thus often have recourse
unto the Word; it is a dangerous thing to let our minds go far without a check:
It was the great fault charged upon those that were near to destruction, Jer.
6.8. No man repented, saying, What have I done? This Commandment of minding
God, is a Commandment backed not only with Authority and Reason from the equity
and excellency of it, which all Precepts have; but it is also accompanied with
special Ordinances, besides the natural Ordinance of the Creation, which is a
memorial of God, that you may be ever promped unto the fountain of it: There
are special instituted Ordinances appointed to this end, that you may remember
him. What is Baptism? and what is the Lords Supper? but the representation of
Jesus Christ to us? memorials of him, that in the celebration of them you might
remember him? Therefore labor to make your hearts sensible of the Authority
and Majesty that is in this Command, when God speaks from Heaven unto you, that
you would walk in all mindfulness of him: and that is the first thing.

The second thing that I would commend to you, is this, To get and keep your
hearts in a meetness and fitness for this work: As God has put work on his
people, so he does expect that there should be a fitness in them for it; as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 2.21. A vessel made meet for his Masters use and
service. I will express this meetness in a few particulars.

One is, to keep the mind as free as you can: Our understandings, though they
are mighty things, yet they are limited: When they are held much unto other
things, there cannot be much of them left for God: Take heed of being too
prodigal, in cutting out too large portions of your selves otherwise: When you
fill your spirits with the world, Intus existens prohibet alienum.
you are put into an incapacity of communion with God; that which is within,
keeps out that which is without: Mark what Christ says, Luke 21.34. Take heed
to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting
and drunkenness, with the cares of this life, and so that day come upon you
unawares. What ever does put you out of possession of your selves, what ever
incapacitates you to that obedience whereunto you are called, these things, as
you would not have the evil day come upon you unawares, are to be taken heed
of. O what a dread is it to the Soul of a man, when the evil day, the day of
affliction, the day of temptation, especially when the day of dissolution comes
on him before he looks for it? while he is busy in the world, in hunting after
this and that vanity, snatched away, like a fish taken in the net that it looked
not for? The cares and the pleasures of this world are unto the spirit of a man
as wine; it does intoxicate, and put a man out of himself, and under the power
of Satan; he is a man in bonds; the Devil has his foot upon his head, and his
hand upon his heart; he has the possession of him, when he is taken with any
thing in this world: You know what Christ says, that these cares and pleasures
choke the Word. Hear and read never so much, let the wisdom of Angels speak to
you, let men put themselves to the utmost improvement of Reason and
understanding, and lay out their bodies to the very last to persuade you; yet
if your hearts be taken, if the world has gotten you away, you are choked:
that as the corn that is overgrown with weeds faints away, and as a man that
is surfeited cannot breathe; so is a man in this case. The effusion of your
self upon the creature weakens you toward God; that as a drunken man, that
has not the use of his limbs, nor of his Reason, that is like a child in
strength, and a fool in understanding; so is a man whose mind is cut out and
shared among the creatures; he is separated from God, that he cannot draw near
to him. The body cannot be in two places at once; and your understandings and
spirits cannot be strongly in Heaven, and strongly in the world: The streams
will run strongly but one way; If you will therefore be in the world, you must
be content to own your selves banished from God: You have set your selves from
God, you make your selves strangers to your own life, and put your selves at a
distance from your own eternal good. Take heed therefore of filling your selves
with the world; take heed of sinful fullness: worldly fullness takes up the whole
capacity of the Soul, that there will be no room left for God. Tell me I pray
you, what use are your Crystal glasses for? do you keep them to be filled with
puddle water? Will you fill your stomachs with chaff or carrion? and will you
fill your precious and glorious minds, those high and excellent creatures, with
the vanities of the world, nay the things of Hell it self? Take heed of
prepossessing your selves; for if you be not free, we speak to dead men; it is
all one to bid you look toward God, as to bid a deaf man look Eastward when
his eyes are fixed Westward; it is all one to bid a man walk with God and in
mindfulness of him, as to bid a man that is bound in chains of Iron, rise up
and walk.

Another thing is, Maintain in your selves a deep sense of those divine
Engagements that lie upon you: Indeed we have all of us many bonds upon us, but
yet we are too free and disobliged to God; and whence is it, but because we
forget our Engagements?

Another Discouragement: Alas, say some, (...) this troubles me, Soepe in libro
experientia legimus quomodo a cord nostro relinquimur, nunc est nobiscum, nunc
alibi, nunc avolat, nunc recurrit in sola lubricitate manens in nullo unquam
sui soliditate consistit. Bern. Opusc. c. 33.
I cannot hold my self to the work; I am oftentimes assailing and putting on
toward Heaven, forcing on and driving out some thoughts, but I cannot lodge them
there, they roll down again, and I cannot fasten them; truly this is my grief.

I beseech you consider it: This rouling of the mind downwards, is either from
remisness of heart, or from weakness; if from the former, it is very sinful, and
imputed; if from weakness, it is sinful, but not imputed; the evil is not
charged upon you. What think you of your selves? if you had a child that has a
palsy hand, that cannot hold fast what is put into it, you are not angry with
your child, but pity him. He that is so Tam pius n^m^, tam pater ne^o. Bern.
a Father, that there is none like him, who says, he will accept according to
what we have, and not according to what we have not, 2 Cor. 8.12. he will not
charge his children with their weakness. All the Saints on this side Heaven,
are troubled with dimness and instability of sight; when they look upwards,
there is a turning and wheeling of their minds downwards, of which they shall
be perfectly cured when they come to Heaven: in the mean time be not
discouraged, but do as well as you can; the more weak your eyes are, the more
frequently do you look; he had need look often, that cannot look long.

Another Discouragement is this; I would look up to God; but what sweetness
will it be, when I have not an Interest in him? It Is true, he is a glorious
Father, but the more unhappy I, that he is not my Father: He is a blessed
fountain, but the more unhappy I, that I may not sit and drink of those waters.

What though thy case be so, that God be not thy Father? yet he is thy Lord; if
he be not thy Portion, yet he is thy Pattern, and thy Rule; thou must mind him:
But withal consider, It Is your minding of God that is the means to bring God
and you into one, that he may be yours, and you his: We are transformed from
glory to glory by beholding him, 2 Cor. 3.18. Sights of God are of great force;
and therefore men lie dead, because they are in the dark: Light has something
of an awakening and a quickening power; therefore if your minds were more in
conjunction with God, this would form and fashion your hearts more unto God,
and bring God more into you.

Again, says another, This disheartens me, that though I endeavor daily this
course of bending my self to eye God, yet I get no good by it; I know my pride,
and the stoutness of my spirit, and many evils that are in me, and I think by
presenting my self before God to be bettered, and to get more quickening and
enlarging, a heart more prepared to seek and to see God in all my ways; but I
find still a crooked spirit, and a heart unwrought upon; I get no good by it.

But is it so indeed? do thou get no good? at no time? then there is no life
in you; certainly thou art dead, if thou get no good from him that is all good.
But yet there are that get good, that know it not: Be not discouraged, but
endeavor to have your eyes set toward God, and toward him always.

One Cause more I shall name, why this Duty is so much neglected and omitted,
and that is this;

That the heart is set upon some other object: Observe this; For where the
heart is set, the thoughts of the heart run out, and are poured forth: You have
got something that pleases you more then God, and that has entertainment and
place in your understandings. Where a man's treasure is, it is Christ's rule, Mat.
6.21. there will the heart be also. If God be in your hearts, he will be in
your eyes; if you love him, you will mind him; what you mind most, you love
most; Love makes the mind quick in motion, and strong in resting on the thing
whereon it is set.

They that are taken with the glory of divine goodness, cannot keep themselves
from the remembrance of it; nay they will force on themselves, and spur up all
their powers unto it: Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me
bless his holy Name: Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his
benefits, Psalm. 103.1, 2. If you would mind mercies more, you would mind more
the God of mercies: If you did remember the sweetness and fullness of this
stream of grace by which you are maintained, you would eye more the fountain
from whence they flow; and if you would get your selves under the engagement of
this love, it would constrain you, that you could not live forgetters of God,
but your eye would turn readily toward him: If we were sensible of our
engagements, could we deny God that attendance that he calls for from us as his
servants? Could we deny him dwelling in his own house? Could we shut the doors
of our hearts against him, that is the place where he should rest? Could we
deny him communion, who is our Lord, who is our Husband, who is our Friend and
Father? A heart under the effectual impress and strong touch of divine grace
and mercy, will not be able to keep from minding of him. David was a man that
had a strong touch of this, and therefore says he in Psalm. 145.2. I will
praise thee, O Lord, my King, and I will bless thy Name for ever and ever:
Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever, etc.
Where bonds of love take hold, they bind to God, as well as draw.

Another thing is, Keep your hearts in a lively sense of your own necessities.
You need much: The world groans; whence is it? it is from want. You want much;
even they that have received much, want much: and you want nothing so much as
God; and here your wants are great and constant; and it were good you did
always live in the sense of this want. Can a hungry man forget his bread? Can
the heart that pants for thirst forget the river? Can a man in bonds forget
freedom? Can a child in distress forget a father in honor and wealth? And if
you lived in the sense of your necessities, could you forget God that is the
fountain, and he by whom all your wants are to be supplied, according to his
riches in glory by Jesus Christ?

Again, Keep your hearts pure, and then you will be meet for this work: Guilt
brings fear, and fear brings torment. The natural effect of guilt is flying and
hiding from God, and dying in our selves: Adam would not be seen when he had
sinned: David was afraid to come before God when under guilt: In Psalm. 32. see
how he did contend with fear; Go, says Conscience, and fall down before that
God against whom thou have sinned: I dare not, says David, I am afraid to
stand in his presence; he says it was his torment; for day and night thy hand
was heavy upon me, my moisture was turned into the drought of summer: so in
verse. 5. I said, I will confess my sins: Fear said, Do not; but says David, I
will do this. But this is sure, a man that has a spirit that is sullied by
sin, a spirit that has guilt upon it, a man that is under the power of an
accusing Conscience, that man will be afraid of God, as a Prisoner of the Judge:
And certainly sometimes if God did not by a mighty power draw in his people,
they would rather hazard their eternal life, then look up, when they have lift
up their heel against him; so dreadful is the sight of God, that it exceeds the
strength of any creature, not only the natural strength, but also the
spiritual. It is with man in this case, as with servants; when they have
committed some notorious fault against their Master, away they run, forsake
their service, and Master too: This is the disposition of man; when he has
rebelled against God, he is apt to take a run from him, and go with those that
wander from God, and live without God in the world. See what is said in 1 Samuel
12.20. The people sinned, and Samuel said unto the people, Fear not; ye have
done all this wickedness, yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve
the Lord with all your hearts: and turn not aside, for then shall you go after
vain things, that cannot profit, nor deliver, for they are vain: For the Lord
will not forsake his people, etc. He saw such a disposition in them, that
through discouragement of heart finding themselves in sin, they were ready to
sink and fall off from their attendance and service unto God; and therefore he
gives this counsel, by no means to harken to this suggestion of an evil and a
torturing spirit.

Let me add this as another means, That you must pray for sanctification of
mind: What a strange wild thing is the mind of man by nature? Sanctification
is the taming, the composing, the ordering and seasoning of the understanding;
it is the bringing of the mind into a right frame, and the setting of it in its
proper course; until that be, it lies open for all comers; all the powers of
darkness snatch, and catch, and rend it in pieces, and bear it away, and every
vanity commands it: but when grace comes, that appropriates it unto God, so
that it becomes the Lords. Therefore pray for Sanctification, which is the
induction of a new nature into the spirits of a man, and a new propensity; so
that as naturally it had its tendency toward vanity, now it will have its
tendency toward God. Sanctification is a great thing: What is the body until
Sanctification comes, but an untamed monster, as a wild beast? O with what
numberless outrageous passions does it blind and carry away the Soul? Until it
be sanctified, it puts a man into an incapacity of conversing with God; it lies
not only open to all temptations, but it snatcheth after them; it is a weight
that lies upon the spirit of a man. Pray for Sanctification, which is the
sequestration of the spirit of a man from vanity, and the consecration of it
unto God; it is the putting of it into his possession, the planting in it a new
disposition to move toward God, and to converse with God: this the Apostle
calls the renewing of the mind.

CHAP. XI.
Advantages that come by minding of God, are to be duly considered. The more we
mind God, the more we may. Those which eye God most, know themselves best.
Those which eye God most, have most of God. Forgetfulness of God cuts the
nerves of Holiness. Forgetfulness of God betrays to Apostasy.

NOw let me add another Help; Weigh well with a deep sense the high Advantages
which a due discharge of this work does bring upon you; this will facilitate
the work: The more you mind God, the better you may. Men cry out, the work is
hard: It is good and sweet; but hardest to those that do it least, easiest to
those that do it most: Living in this work does advantage and enlarge your
spiritual strength, and put you into more meetness and fitness, into more
proportion of ability for the discharge of it: That as the Apostle speaks of
the sinful use of the eye, and of the sinful effusions of the spirit in way of
evil, that it works unto a necessity of sinning, so that they have eyes full of
adultery, (...).
that cannot cease to sin, 2 Pet. 2.14. So the more you live in mindfulness of
God, the more are you wrought into a most excellent and sweet necessity of
living in this course: Gods entertainment is very gracious unto a friend that
minds him, that he cannot long have God out of his eye. De coelo descendit,
(...).
This advantage you will also have by it, the discovery of your self; and truly
that is a great matter, for a man to know himself: We are therefore so little
our selves, because we know our selves so little; all that monstrous pride and
self-love, that foolish indulgence that is usual toward our selves, is because
we know not what we are. This will make you know your selves more: for when
your eye is on God, it is upon your Rule, the Rule of all perfection, the most
absolute Pattern of all spiritual beauty; therefore you may see what proportion
and similitude there is between God and you: This will breed a self-
abhorrency, because of that infinite disagreement that is in the spirit of a
man and his ways to the holy God: Job in the sight of God abhorred himself in
dust and ashes, Job 42.4. Here you may see how your hearts and the Rule agree.

Now also you may observe what impressions the sight of God leaves upon you.
You say you mind God: Well; and I pray what comes of it? what fear? what faith?
what hope? what tenderness? What watchfulness is there wrought in your spirits
by your minding of God? What a hard heart is that which is laid under the very
beams of the Sun of Righteousness, and melts not? What an obdurate spirit is
that which in the sight of God yields no more? We should come to see better
what we are, if we were more in this work.

This advantage too you shall have, you shall be filled more with God: What is
the moaning of your Souls? O, says the Saint, that I might enjoy him! O that
God might be my God! and that his presence might be with me where ever I am!
All spiritual life has its birth and growth in this work; the first sight of
God lays the foundation, all after-sights do superstruct: The first sight of
God is the planting of holiness in the Soul, after-sights are waterings unto
more increase and fruitfulness; at the first sight of God, God enters into the
Soul, but the after-sights of God fills and fills until they fill up the Soul.
If therefore it be so great an advantage, consider it, and let it provoke you
unto this work.

One Rule more to help unto this work; Possess your selves deeply with the
apprehensions of the great sinfulness of the neglect of this: Therefore men and
their sins are so near together, because they see not their sins more sinful;
When sin appears out of measure sinful, then it sets the heart at the greatest
distance from it. Look on the sinfulness of it in the Cause of it: Whence is
it, thou wandering Soul, thou sleeping spirit, thou man possessed with the
world, that thou say thou breathest after God, and yet shuttest thy eye from
him? It is from a most woeful frame of spirit: Faith is dead, and love dead; all
principles of life are put into a state of astonishment: it is deep night; all
the spiritual powers are asleep, bound up; hence it is thou mindest God no
more. Poor Creature, thou art not thy self, thy heart is gone, other things
have born it away; thou art like the Prodigal, until God brings thee unto thy
wits and right mind again.

Now see what the state of that man is, by the true original of the sin of
neglecting to remember God; and look a little further into this matter, to see
it in the Effect of it: Forgetting of God dissolves the bond between the Soul
and God, and sets it free from God: It is the minding of God that does beget
and preserve a capacity of him, and propensity toward him; then forgeting of
God shuts up thy heart from him, and does bias thy Soul unto a contrary
motion, to a departing from him, puts thee into a state wherein thou can not
be according to the calling whereunto thou art called: Thou can not walk in
the place of a servant toward thy Lord; for how can thou do his Will whom
thou rememberest not? If all the Reason of holy walking lies in this, then the
nerves and sinews of Holiness are cut in sunder, when forgetfulness of God
raigns in men. There is this evil also, thou betrayest thy Soul as much as in
thee lies into the state of the Devils themselves: What makes Hell, but want of
God? and what makes the unhappiness of Devils, but separation from God? And
this thou do practice upon thy own self. I could give a notorious and sad
Instance of this truth to every one that does voluntarily forget God, in an
Apostate Professor whom I knew, who said, The turning point and first beginning
of his declining from God, was his neglect of communion with Jesus Christ.
Therefore when you give your selves to a voluntary forgetfulness of God, you
betray your selves into a state of Apostasy and backsliding from God; and if
once the Devil get the possession, and can back thy spirit, he will ride thee
post into the pit where there is no bottom, and from whence there is no return.
I will shut up all with that expression of God in Isai. 17.11. Because thou
have forgotten the God of thy Salvation, and have not been mindful of the Rock
of thy strength, therefore shall thou plant pleasant plants, and shall set it
with strange slips: In the day shall thou make thy plants to grow, and in the
morning shall thou make thy seed to flourish; but the Harvest shall be a heap
in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow. You may in your forgetfulness of
God enjoy your desire, trim up this world to your own contentment, and make all
your ways like pleasant walks in delightful gardens; you may make your paths to
be as fruitful fields; But what shall the end be? When the Harvest comes in the
appointed time thereof, there shall be a heap in the day of grief and of
desperate sorrow. If you would have a Harvest of Rejoicing, if you would reap
that which may be the Refreshing of your Souls, if you would not sow gall and
wormwood for you to reap hereafter, take heed of betraying your selves into a
forgetfulness of God.

THE Principal Interest OR THE Propriety of Saints in God DISPLAYED In several
Discourses upon MICAH 7.7. My GOD will hear Me.
CHAP. I.
Interest in God the true Spring of Consolation. How it is Propriety with
Community. Best, because God is best by a Confluence of all Excellencies.

THE Church was now sad, and there was cause enough, for God frowned upon her;
If she looked upward, she saw God displeased; if downward, there was nothing
but violence, one devouring another with the tongue and with the hand: And
therefore she makes her retreat unto God; [Therefore,] because men are so
injurious, so false, so treacherous, therefore I Will look to the Lord.

It Is an excellent spirit which is in the Saints, that the world knows not of;
they make such Therefores, such Conclusions as the world is not acquainted
with: The froward man says, Therefore I Will do so too; the politic man says,
Therefore I Will be wise, and look to my self; the good man says, Therefore I Will
look to the Lord. Observe how the evils of this world put the Saints upon the
improvement of their power with God, and how the sight of propriety in God
gives strength and life to the spirits of Saints; I Will look up, I Will wait for
the God of my Salvation, my God will hear me. That which I am to speak to then,
is,

That the sight of God, as our God, is that which lifts up our heads and chears
our hearts against all discouragements, and carries us through all
difficulties, and whatsoever is dismal: When a man can say, God is mine, that
man shall live when nothing else lives.

I Will give you some few Foundations of this.

The first thing I Will instance in, is, That this propriety of the Saints is a
propriety with community; there is much in that: In 1 Cor. 1.2. Unto the Church
of God which is at Corinth, sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints,
with all that call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and
ours. The force of this lies thus; That which serves for most is best: The Sun
is better then a Tapor; because that serves all, the other serves but one, or a
few: A Spring is better then a Cistern, because all my drink of that, but few
of the other. That which all want is best; Universal want argues that thing
which we need to be universally good. That may be wanting to one man, which
another wants not: A Mariner may want a rudder, or a sail, which others want
not; but all men want bread: That thing is good to him, but this is good to
all. This Propriety therefore being with Community, to wit, that God is not my
God alone, but of all the Saints in Heaven and in Earth, and of all the Angels;
this shows, that a Propriety and Interest in God is the best Propriety: Hence
it is, that the Saints having their portion in such an one are so refreshed,
and their comforts much advanced, because they know that others drink of the
same River of Life together with them.

Secondly, This Propriety is in that which is best, by a Confluence of all
excellent things: As for example, Love, Goodness, and Kindness, there is none
like that which is in God; here it is transcendent: You may reason so, not only
from what God is, an infinite Being, but from what God does. Look on those high
operations of his Wisdom and Power, you shall see they are clear demonstrations
of his Goodness; the most excellent things have flowed from thence; Pardon of
sin, Peace that passes all understanding, and everlasting life; these have
flowed from this Goodness. God in his Love has gone to the utmost to set it
out; He never intended so full a demonstration of his Power, as of his Love;
Therefore though he has not gone to the utmost of his Power, yet he has gone
to the utmost of his Love: It Is Love that passes knowledge, all knowledge, Ephesians.
3.19. It Is possible to imagine how some things in the Creation might have shown
forth more of the Power of God, as if he had made men equal power with Angels,
etc. But it is not devisable, which way there should be a greater demonstration
of his Love, then he has shown; partly in what is the enjoyment of his Saints
in this world, but principally in that which he has promised in the other. Now
where the greatest Goodness and Love is, an Interest in that Person is most
precious and excellent. There is in God a descending Love: You shall seldom
find, that love in a child carries that worth and excellency in it, as the Love
of a Father does; because descending love chiefly seeks the good of another,
ascending love seeks our own good: The love of God greater, because descending
love.

Further, There is not only Goodness and Love in God, but Wisdom also for the
managing of these; this adds to the Propriety. The best Prince may not have
wisdom enough to know all his Subjects: but God knows all his, as Christ says,
Joh. 10. I know my sheep, and am known of them. He that tells the stars, and
calls them all by their names, knows every one of his, and their cases; he
knows what fears, what wants, what pressures, what straits they are in: The
Lord knows how to deliver the righteous out of all their troubles, 2 Pet. 2.9.
Again, He is present with all his; all things in the world are confined and
limited, God only is every where: The Sun reaches to the whole Hemisphere; But
Gods Power is infinite, and himself omnipresent; He fills Heaven and Earth, He
is not confined to any place, or limited within any bounds; Therefore to have a
Propriety or Interest in this God, must needs be a very great Refreshing and
Consolation.

CHAP. II.
Interest in God of a perfect extent to all in God. Gods love lasts, is not
broke off by offenses, is not hindered by distance. Interest in God effectual
to all good ends. Divine friendship not burdensome.

THe Propriety that the Saints have in God is perfect; I mean, it extends
throughout to all that God is. Among friends and acquaintance this is the Law,
their friendship reaches to some things, not to all; but the Interest of the
wife and children reaches to the full compass of the husbands estate: Much
more our Propriety in God reaches to all that God is. As the Law of Communion
between the Father and the Son was this, John 17.10. All mine are thine, and
thine are mine: So is the Law of the Interest between Christ and his people; 1
Cor. 3. ult. All things are yours, because all is Christ's. If there be enough
in God for the spirits of just men made perfect, whose capacities are greater
then ours; if there be enough in God for Angels, whose capacities are greater
then theirs; if there be enough in God for Jesus Christ, whose capacity is yet
far wider; if there be enough in God for God himself; then there must needs be
satisfaction to a man: If he can say, that God is his God, he needs no more,
this will content and fill his spirit.

Fourthly, This Propriety is that which will hold out. All our interest in men
and things is very fleeting, experience shows it; the Anchor comes home again,
because the ground was not firm: All friends are but like flowers in the hand,
they are mine now, anon they are good for nothing, and are no bodies. You have
this given as a reason, why we should not trust in Princes, in Psalm. 146.
Because they pass away, and their thoughts perish: What ever they intended and
had contrived for your good, all dye with them. The Israelites that found favor
in Egypt for Joseph's sake, suffered when another Pharaoh arose that knew not
Joseph. But if our friends live, nothing is more common then to have an eclipse
and a damp brought upon the love of friends. But Christ loves to the end; and
if he loved his people when he was in this world, how much more does his love
continue now he is in the other world? Because here his love met with many
difficulties, but there he has nothing hard to do; his work lies plain and
easy before him. The affections of men are subject to a natural, I may call it
an unnatural, mutability, which is not only a torment to others, but to
themselves; for that man that changes his heart, suffers as well as he from
whom his heart is changed: and this is helped on by many things.

1. By offenses that ripen and quicken that fickle mutability of this poor,
frail, mortal, changeable creature, Man; You shall have him now like the Sun in
his full shining, and anon some cloud of offense darkens all his love: We were
the unhappiest creatures that could be, if God should be so to us; but he has
expressed himself in Isai. 55.7. that he will abundantly pardon, and that he
will multiply pardons.

2. Distance many times takes off the edg of love and friendship among friends,
friends oftentimes dye one to another while they live: The child sometimes is
forgotten of his Father, and the wife of her husband: But the eye of God is
ever upon us, and we cannot but be satisfied in his love, whose eye is ever
fixed upon us; as you have his promise in the last of Matthew, Lo I am with you
always to the end of the world.

3. There is a love that is fastened only by a short relation, as between the
Master and the servant, and those that are in a Brotherhood for a time; when
the term of years is out, that relation cease: But it is not so between
Christ and the Saints.

In the fifth place. This Propriety that the people of God have in him is most
effectual, because there is neither want of love nor power in God. In Isai.
48.14. All ye assemble your selves and hear; which among them has declared
these things? the Lord has loved him; he will do his pleasure on Babylon, and
his arm shall be on the Caldeans. Whether we understand it of his love to his
people, or of his love to Cyrus, it is not much material as to the setting
forth the efficacy of this Propriety. If we understand it of his love to Cyrus,
who perhaps was yet a stranger to God, that notwithstanding this, he would do
so great things, as he had spoken, for him; how much more effectual will his
love be to those to whom he is engaged by relation? He will stick at nothing,
because his love is so great; no offenses shall hinder, because he has engaged
to pardon: You are sure to speed when you come to God; they that see this their
Propriety in him, therefore must needs rejoice.

Sixthly, This Propriety in God is not onerous and burdensome. Indeed our
relations to men, and our propriety in them, is oftentimes costly; and not
without charge can we either preserve or act our friendship toward them: We
usually lose by receiving; A man accepts a benefit, and loses his liberty, as
a wise Heathen once said. A man by his engagement is put oftentimes upon hard
services; he is made to do every thing, that receives every thing; the more you
take from a friend, the more he is discharged, and he things he owes you the
less, and that you owe him the more: But indeed whatsoever God does, is an
engagement upon him to do more for you. Expressions of friendship from friends
come many times mingled with much bitterness, harshness, and rigidness; But
when God discharges the part of a Father and a Friend, he does it like
himself, it comes pure, like water out of a pure fountain, no sadness, no
bitterness mingled with it; He does it with all his heart; as in Jer. 32.41.
I Will rejoice over them to do them good, and with my whole Heart, and with my
whole Soul. Oh when kindness comes so, it comes sweetly! What refreshing is it
then to Believers in all their conditions to look upon divine Love, that is
sweet, and clear, and pure? All these joined together make but one head of
Arguments from that Excellency that is in God.

CHAP. III.
Saints engaged to live upon God by the Law of Nature, Love, and Judgment.
Spiritual Relation is mutual. True Resignation has Conscience with Love. A
divine Power in and over Saints. The grace and peace of Saints furthered as
they mind their Interest in God.

ANother Argument is this, We have nothing else to live upon; we must either
live here, or no where: If we live not upon what we have in God, we are dead
men, for God is our life. The life of every creature is maintained
proportionably by a threefold Law.

1. Some by the Law of Nature: so fishes live not but in the water, and beasts
in their pastures, and cannot live in the Sea: And indeed there is something of
the divine new nature in Christians; they must live in God, or they dye.

2. There is the Law of Love: The child loves the mother above all women,
though it may be there be many better* the Lord has placed the life of the
child in the mother: how much more the life of a Christian in himself? for
there is no love like that love.

3. Life is cut out by the Law of Reason and Judgment, by which men choose their
portion, upon which they feed, and upon which they make their lives. This way
nothing but God is eligible to a good man; He says, some other things serve
for other uses, but not to live on. Nothing but God can be made our own,
nothing out of God is properly our own, but our sins: How can a man say that is
his own, which he cannot command and hold? Nothing can be made full enough,
strong enough, answerable to our desires, but God: Hence it is that a good man
lives in God, because he can live no where else; Though he make use of his bed
to sleep on, of his meat to refresh him, and do as others do in the use of
these things, yet he would be a very dead man, worse then a man laid in the
grave, if his life were not in God.

I would exhort you then, Exhortat.
that you would thus live in God; it is a riddle to the world, but a truth to
Saints, and that which their Souls can witness to: The world knows no other
life then friends, estate, and such like enjoyments; the Saints know that there
is no life in these; they live another life which the world knows not of. Live
this life, that is, make this to be the strength, reason and rule of all your
walkings, to be the pillar and prop of your Souls, whereon you may lean and
rest; make this your ultimate rest, that after all the troublesome turnings and
tossings of this world you may take rest here, in this peace of God which
passes all underestanding, that you may say as David in Psalm. 34. He was in
trouble; but, says he, I trusted in the Lord, and said, O Lord, thou art my
God; and this was all to him against all trouble: They seek my life, and make
me a derision; but I said, O Lord, thou art my God. Two things I premise in
this Exhortation.

1. That you make your Interest in God sure, that you may be able to say
without fear and trembling, thou art my God.

This Interest is mutual; if God be yours, then you are his; He is yours by
gift of himself to you, and you are his by gift of your selves to him: Remember
the day when, how, and by what act you did give your selves to God: Have you
put by your selves, and all your sinful propensions, dispositions, and
resolutions? Have you laid an absolute denial upon them, never more to observe
them, much less to serve them? And have you resolved that you will have no
purposes or desires but such as are according to God? Be sure if you cannot say
you are his, you cannot say he is yours: You may please your selves indeed with
fancies, and vain imaginations of that which is not; but know this, that such a
kind of Contract with God as we speak of, has evidence in it; It Is not a cold
and liveless acting, but there is power and efficacy in it. These two things
will be of power in that man that has in truth given himself to God.

1. Conscience with Love; Conscience without Love has very much power in it,
but Conscience with Love is very potent: Indeed Conscience will tell thee, O
man, thou have given thy self to God, therefore thou should walk as his: And
Love will take thee aside, and sound the same alarm in thine ears too, but
more effectually.

2. A second thing is the power of God in them and over them; There is a power
of God in such: You have received, says the Apostle, the spirit of power, 2 Timothy 1.7. This is the difference between the relation that is between God and
his people, and all other relations: This relation conveys the Spirit of God
into men. The husband and wife that are never so closely knit, cannot convey
their spirits one to another; the husband may wish that his wife were wise and
meek, but he cannot give her such a spirit: But the relation between God and
his people always works a communication of spirit; the Spirit of God is given
to them.

Besides, There is a power of God over such, because he sees that there is a
great power against them: They are kept by the power of God through faith unto
Salvation. Certainly if you have not such a Conscience joined with Love, and
find not such a power of God watching over you, and the Spirit of God guiding
you, you are none of his.

Another thing to be premised is this, That a Christians life, whether we
consider the life of peace, or the life of holiness, depends much upon his
minding of his Interest in God. The Apostle in Hebr. 2. tells them, they had
lost much of the life of Christianity; how came that? because they had
forgotten the Exhortation that spoke to them as unto Children. And in Prove.
2.27. Who forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the Covenant of her God.
The latter is the cause of the former; because she forgets the Covenant of her
God, therefore she forsakes the guide of her youth.

You have need to seek much in God; your sins are many, your dangers great, you
know it well enough: You have this encouragement, Whatsoever you go for, you
knock at the right door; whatsoever you ask, you ask that which is as much your
own, as any thing you enjoy: God has made over himself to you, in becoming
yours; He has said he will be your God: All particular promises are but
streams from this Spring, and branches from this Root. Your Interest is larger
then Heaven and Earth; Heaven and Earth are nothing to God: Therefore if God be
yours, you have more cause to rejoice, then if he had made you actual and sole
Possessors of Heaven and Earth. In the world they that have little of their
own, comfort themselves that they have something in their friends; such a Lord,
such a Duke is their friend: So if you have not much in this world, comfort
your selves in this, that God is your God. The Lord thought this enough to
comfort his people with, when they were afflicted and tossed with tempests: He
that takes not comfort in this, either knows not what God is, or denies what he
professes to know. Live by Faith; or as some render these words in Psalm. 37.
Feed on Faith. When you come to God, you come not to ask a title, but to plead
a title; you come not to ask any thing that was not your own before, but you
come to ask the possession of it. You cannot ask more then he is intended to
give you: He takes more contentment in giving (I do not say then you can take
in asking, though that be much, but) then you can have in enjoying. The
Propriety you have in God is by a Mediator; so that he by whose means you come
by this Propriety, has all things put into his hand, and he is in stead of God
to you; as it is said of Joseph, that he was in stead of God to his Brethren.
He that has obliged us to be whatsoever we can to those that are ours, has
much more obliged himself to be all that he can for us. Christ was made so
great, not for his own sake, but for our sakes; if he be set on the Throne, it
is for our sakes: What shall we need to fear, when we come to ask any thing of
him? He stands more obliged to us, then we can be to ours; because it is easier
for him to do what his place calls upon him for, then it is for us; for the
engagement is strongest, where the performance is easiest; and because we are
dearer to him, then ours are to us; the dearest child is not so dear to its
mother, as we are dear to him: and the hurt that would come to those that are
beloved of God, if he should fail them, is greater then can come to children by
the neglect of their parents. Again, The honor that Christ has engaged is of
infinite more concernment: If a father be unnatural, that is a stain upon him;
but what is a spot of dishonor upon a piece of dirt? But if the Prince of Glory
should be unnatural, this would highly reflect dishonor upon him. How may we
walk with confidence and security, and account our selves richer then Princes,
and stronger then Armies? Though all this, nothing concerns those that stand
out, and are as strangers and aliens, that will call God Father whether he will
or no, that are not taught it from above, but have learned it of themselves. If
a man cannot call God his Father and his God upon good grounds, what a
miserable state is that man in? He is nothing, he has nothing, and there is
nothing between him and everlasting misery, but a moment of time: He goes up
and down pleasing himself with vain shows, pleasing himself with painted
Butterflies; but has nothing to live on, he is utterly unprovided for Eternity.

CHAP. IV.
Saints have not only the Portion, but the Spirit of Children. Ingenious
walking greatly requisite in those who pretend Interest in God. God more easily
pleased with his people then with others. Tastes of Gods sweetness are
obligatory. Careless walking weakens hope in prayer.

Col. 1.10. Walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing. Let me propound to your
Considerations a few things, to put you on to this.

First, You are deeply obliged to please God, and thereby to walk worthy of
him; for being in so near relation to him, you have not only the portion, but
the spirit of children: Because you are sons, therefore he has sent the Spirit
of Adoption into your hearts, Gal. 4. Other relations, This was touched in the
foregoing Sermon.
because they want strength, are not always beautified and sweetened with a
convenient spirit: The relation of a husband cannot communicate a meek spirit
to his wife, nor the relation of a parent to the child, because of their
impotency; their will is strong, but their hand is short: But God in that
gracious relation wherein he stands unto his own, gives them a Spirit like unto
himself, that so he may have Children answerable to himself and to his Will: In
Romans 8.9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. He that
is joined to the Lord, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.7. is one Spirit. As persons
conjoined in marriage are one flesh, so he that is married to the Lord, that is
brought into that near relation unto him, is one Spirit; they are one in their
affections, propensions, dispositions, and designs. As we say of a multitude,
they are of one heart and of one spirit when they conspire in one: so God and
his people are one Spirit, because they center in one; he in governing them,
and they in subjection and subordination to him, so one, as things ruled and
the Rule is one. This argument the Apostle urges in 2 Timothy 1.7. God has not
given us the Spirit of Fear, but of Power, Love, and of a Sound Mind. He had in
the words before exhorted to this, Therefore, says he, I put thee in
remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of God that is in thee, by the putting
on of my hands: But Timothy might say, How can I do that? Why, says the
Apostle, we have received not the spirit of fear, but of power. It is a time of
danger indeed, and a hard work to preach the Gospel in such days as these; but
he that is gifted and fitted by Christ to that work, has received a spirit of
courage and power, by which he is able to manage the things that he has
received of God.

Then I say, having received the Spirit of children, the obligation lies the
stronger upon you to walk as children. This is a Rule; The more proportionably
a man has received strength and ability to his work, the more he is bound to
it: therefore the more of the Spirit you have received, the more you are
obliged. And this Spirit of Christ in his people acts according to its
primitive original Pattern; as it wrought in Christ, so it will work in you
according to your proportion. This moving will be strong, because it moves upon
the highest grounds, that which is most taking and prevailing; it moves upon
hopes and sense of eternal life. If you walk not so as to please God, you walk
with much frowardness of heart, and your sin is the greater. It Is true, though
you have received this Spirit, yet there is much of the spirit of this world in
your hearts; but this is our duty and our work, not to suffer the better Spirit
to be quel'd and damped by the other.

But yet again, that you may see it more fully, remember, if you please not
God, you act against your own Interest and advantage, for your life is bound up
in the favor of God; when you therefore act against God, you act against your
selves. The Apostle uses such an argument in Ephesians. 5. where he exhorts
husbands to love their wives, for no man ever hated his own flesh: He means
this, that they being one, the husband cannot cease to love his wife, but he
loses so much of his own life, because they are one; therefore crossness and
untowardness between them strikes them dead.

In unequal relations the inferior is more dependant, and so should be more
subordinate: In the relation between the father and the child, the child is the
lower part, and lives more upon the father, and therefore ought to live more
according to the Father, according to his Will, or else he acts against
himself, he offends his father to his own hurt: And the goodness of Superiors
is of greater influence and force, then that of Inferiors: Take a child in the
goodness of a child, be it never so high, that cannot work so much to the good
of the father, as the goodness of the father does for the child.

The love, goodness and mercy of God, who is infinitely greater then we, is of
unspeakable influence to our good, and therefore to be tendered and preserved.
Sin in the nature of it is a violation of the Law, that is, of the Will of God;
the effect of sin is a provocation of wrath and anger: Hence it is that the
Wiseman speaks so in Prove. 8. He that sins against me, wrongs his own Soul: He
offers violence, he spoils his own Soul, he becomes a robber of himself. The
nature of sin aims at the destruction of that against which it is set, although
it do not attain this effect, because of the power of him against whom it is;
for it is a denying of all that God is, as that he is infinitely wise,
infinitely good, etc. Therefore the Apostle speaks of some in Tit. 1.16. that
profess they know God, but in works they deny him; how is that? that is, by
their works they declare that they do not acknowledge him as he is. Men
therefore that seek not to please God, do no otherwise then as if men in a Ship
should with Axes, or such like Instruments, seek to cut holes in the Ship
wherein their lives lie. To act therefore against God, is to act most
desperately against our own good; and by this we see how we are engaged to
please him.

Again, take this in, that God will more easily be pleased with his people then
with others, therefore they are the more bound: He takes that well from some
hands, that will not pass from others: It is true, we are all under one Law and
Rule, God did not destroy the Law by taking his people into a Gospel state, but
established it; nay, the Law binds more then it did before, only as the binding
power of it is increased, so the rigor of it is abated, that is, the terms of
obedience required are changed: God said before, If you do not this and this,
and every thing to the height of it, you shall dye: but he does not hold his
people to those terms now that we are reconciled to him; all is due that is
commanded: but he accepts of what we can perform; so that here is the
difference: The Law speaks to one sort, to those that are in the flesh, that
are out of Christ, as in Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in
all things written in the Law to do them. To the other sort, whom God accepts
in Christ, he speaks as in 2 Cor. 8.12. He accepts according to what a man
has, if there be a willing mind. Now if less will pass with God, and be well
taken from thine hand then from others, thy sin is greater then others, if thou
do it not.

Further, You are engaged much, because you have had tastes of the sweetness of
walking with God. This is that which made that aggravation of their sin, which
God has said he will not forgive; Heb. 6. That they had tasted of the powers
of the world to come: But it is a greater engagement to have a taste of God
himself, then to have a taste of the things of God; to have a taste of that
excellency and goodness that is in him, is far a greater bond then to taste of
all his favors.

Nay, you have had a taste of the bitterness of wandering from God, and
neglecting him; witness the blows and stripes of your own spirits, and the
frowns of God upon you: How has your unwary walking led you into a wilderness
of darkness and fears? and will you yet sin thus against God? Have you not said
in those dismal days, as in Hos. 2.7. I Will return to my first husband, for then
it was better with me then now? And have you given your selves to God again and
again, and do you now neglect him? Will you not endevor to fulfill your
promises? Mark how God carried himself to his people that neglected him, Jer.
2.20. Of old time I broke thy yoke, and burst thy bonds, and thou said, I
will not transgress; thou said thou would not, but thou did; for under
every green tree, and upon every high hill thou wanderest, playing the harlot:
Yet I planted thee a noble vine; How then art thou turned into the degenerate
plant, of a strange vine unto me? It is a dangerous thing to break promise with
God; he will plead your own words against you. That then is one main
Consideration, why such as plead an Interest in God should labor to walk in all
pleasing to him, from that Engagement that lies upon such to God.

A second Consideration is this, Otherwise you will weaken the comfort of your
hope and expectation in prayer. How can you rationally, with any satisfaction
to your own spirits, expect that God should fulful your will, that are not
willing to fulfill his? How dis-ingenious and base is it for a man to wish in
his heart, that God would act so as to please him, when in the mean time he is
not careful to please God? It does horribly impose upon God, it argues a most
vile and base spirit; it imposes upon Gods Wisdom, upon his Goodness, and
indeed upon all that God is: and God takes it very ill to be thus dealt with;
as he expresses himself, Mic. 3.11. The heads thereof judge for reward, and the
Priests teach for hire, and the Prophets divine for money; yet they lean upon
the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us. What
followed? Therefore Zion for your sakes shall be plowed like a field. God will
not be so put off. This sin borders upon that in Deuteronomy. 29.20. If any man say, I
shall have peace, though I walk after the imaginations of mine own heart; my
wrath and jealousy shall smoke against that man, and I will strike out his
name from under Heaven. You come to me, says God, and say, O Father, arise and
save us, in Jer. 5.3. but you do all the evil against me that you can; or, as
some read it, you do evil, and you can; or, and you prevail: that is, Whereas
before I told you how ready I was to do you all good, you have now so tempted
me and provoked me with your sins, as to prevail with me to resolve to give you
over. This sin was that which bred in David such discouragement to come to God,
that he had rather stay till his bones waxed old through roaring, then go to
God; this is that guile of heart, which he speaks of in Psalm. 32.2, 3. Against
this it was that Samuel reasoned with the people in 1 Samuel 12. That after all
their former evils they should not depart from God. Take heed therefore of such
a state, lest you fall into those evils that the Conscience of unholy walking
will bring you into.

CHAP. V.
Saints Interest is through great Condescension. Conjunction of God and his
people very intimate. A Privilege restored, and how, by Jesus Christ.

3. A Third Consideration is, the Nature of your Interest in God: I Will set it
before you in a few Expressions.

First, He is one that is above you, greater and higher then you are. Now the
Law in unequal relations is this, That he which is of the strongest side, be a
relief; that he that is of the weaker side, be subject; if therefore you walk
not in obedience, you do what in you lies to destroy your Interest, to make God
not to be yours: for in Mal. 1.6. says God, If I be a Father, where my fear?
If I be a Master, where is my honor? As if he should say, I cannot reckon my
self a Father to you that do not fear me, nor a Lord to you that do not honor
me; therefore if I be a Father, and if I be a Lord to you, where is my fear?
and where is my honor? And upon this reason he speaks to them in the first of
Hosea, Loammi, you are no more my people. This is the utmost misery the
Creature is capable of, to be in a state of separation from God. Woe to them,
says God, in the day when I depart from them, in Hos. 9. Indeed all woes lie
in that woe, as all evils lie in that evil of departing from God. Of other
relations some are natural; but that relation between God and us, is of will,
from grace; we are his now, we were not; but he has chosen us, called us,
renewed us, and adopted us. In relations the better side has often need of the
weaker; Kings need their Subjects, and cannot be without them: But God had no
need of us; he is so far above us, that he does not stand in need of us, or any
thing in the whole Creation. My goodness extends not to thee, O God, says
David in Psalm. 16.

It Is an happiness to have an Interest in one greater then our selves; an
Interest in a Beggar is of no worth, because he is of no power; but Interest in
a Prince all men seek: Therefore in Psalm. 33. it is said, Blessed are the people
whose God is the Lord; and blessed are the people whom he has chosen for his
own inheritance.

And as our Relation is thus to one above us, so our Interest is the best and
nearest that can be in God. God was free to let out his love to every thing as
he pleased; all Creatures have an Interest in him, except such who have been
expelled and exterminated. In a Kingdom every Subject has an Interest in the
Prince; but those of his family, especially those of his blood, his children,
have the best Interest in him. The Interest that the people of God have in him,
is the highest, and the nearest, the noblest Interest, that such Creatures are
capable of: In Psalm. 148. ult. They are a people near unto him: Near, not only
in respect of employment, but in respect of affection; they are in God. They
are called a peculiar people, Tit. 2.14. So in Exodus 19.15. Though all the
Earth be mine, yet you are my Treasure. We might have had the Interest of
servants, and truly that had been much for us; we had reason to say as the
Prodigal, We are not worthy to be called thy Sons, make us as thine Hired
Servants: But now he has set us so near to himself, as we could not be nearer;
this should much oblige us to him.

Again, It is a renewed Interest: The Propriety we had in God was lost; but as
he said in mercy concerning Jerusalem, Zech. 2.12. I have chosen Jerusalem
again, so he has said concerning us, I have chosen them again, and taken them
in the second time. We were afar off, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2.12. but
now we are made nigh. That may be said of us, which the father spoke of his
prodigal child, Luke 15.24. This my son was dead, but he is alive; he was lost,
but is found. Our state of righteousness is by regeneration, by renovation and
reception; we were cut off, but we are planted again into the Tree of Life:
Therefore now to neglect God, is the greater sin. In Judge. 4. it is said, That
after God delivered them from the yoke of the Ammonites and the Moabites, they
sinned again; and that is set down as an aggravation of their sin. And for us,
after pardon, and after reconciliation, after reception into grace and favor,
not to please God, is a sin of an higher nature then the sin of the world.

Further, Concerning the nature of our Relation to God, look upon the Cause of
it; it is by Jesus Christ: We are made near in him, says the Apostle, Ephesians.
2.13. and that by a strange way.

1. God contrives an Atonement to be made by Christ for us.

2. Then God contrives a Match between Christ and us, that we might become one
with him, and so become one with the Father. And upon this Reason Christ spoke
those words in John 20.17. Now I ascend to my Father, and to your Father; to my
God, and your God. Not to take care to please, is a token of one afar off: It Is
a mark of those wretched ones mentioned in 1 These. 2.15. that they please not
God.

Take but this in too, viz. the Effects of this Interest; All your former sins
are done away, and all good is become yours: All things are yours, says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. ult. Whatsoever you ask is yours: In Joh. 14.13. Whatsoever
you ask the Father in my Name, I Will do it.

CHAP. VI.
God content to be ours, though we had disowned him, and depraved our selves.
Gods Interest in us chargeable to him. God owns not all, but some. Peculiar
frowns upon those which walk unworthy of God.

4. A Fourth Consideration is this, The Nature of Gods Interest in us.

1. It Is an Interest that has suffered violence: There was a great violation
made, and much dishonor cast upon it; for God was rejected and cast off by us.
In the primitive Apostasy, the whole nature of Man cast him off quickly, and
upon a small temptation; and since that every one of us in our own persons have
often cast him off, and denied him when he has pleaded his own right, and have
said, he should not bear rule over us: This might have set him against us, and
the rather, because our offense was not acknowledged by us, we bore it away
stiffly: God found us in this state, We were enemies in our minds by evil works;
or, by our minds on evil works, Col. 1.21. If a woman depart from her husband,
and be married to another, will he receive her again? says God in Jer. 3. Yet
he has received us, though we have offered violence to that Interest which he
had in us upon all accounts. The Angels did thus indeed, but God never pardoned
them, when he reached forth his hand to the lost World, 2 Heb. 16. He did not
take hold of them, he took hold of man, to bring him unto repentance, and so to
bring him back again to his first Estate. If the greater force the lesser, the
lesser is pitied; if the lesser force the greater, every one wonders at him,
and condemns him. Oh what condemnation is this worthy of, that the Creature
should force the Creator! and deny God that made him to be his God! And yet
this we have all done.

Again, It Is an Interest that has suffered detriment and loss: We are not what
we were, when we were first his. At first we were a glorious structure, as we
came out of his hands: But since we gave our selves to other Lords, there is
nothing but darkness and confusion, and what ever is vile and unlovely in us.
You are degenerated, says God, into a strange vine unto me, Jer. 2.20.
[Strange,] that is, not only new, or what it was not; but [strange,] that is,
one that I know not, that I approve not: as we use to say when we are offended
with one, You are a strange man; that is, not according to mine expectation or
desire. So we were gone into a condition strange to God, yet he has taken us
in again. If a servant run from his Master, and when he is become poor, blind,
lame, deformed, and altogether diseased, shall find re-admitance; what an act
of grace is this? This is our case; we went from God when we were well, and are
become altogether depraved, deformed, and in an absolute contrariety unto God.
The Father took in the Prodigal when he had spent all; he gave him indeed a
goodly portion, but he misspent it, and misspent himself; yet he received him
again as a Son: So God has dealt with us; therefore this should be an
engagement upon us to please God.

Again, It is an Interest with charge: The Prodigal when he returned had
nothing to live on, but must live on his Fathers alms: When God took us in
again we had nothing, we must wholly live upon him.

Again, It is an Interest by free choice: God takes in not all, but some; and
what mercy is it that any of us should be of that some, if any of us should
make any of that few which God has restored to favor?

One Consideration more is this, that God will have it so: If God be your God,
he calls for this, that you be careful to please him; he will make you to do
it. It is a most absurd thing to dream of such a state of grace, that gives
licentiousness, to walk in sinful inordinate affections contrary to God: it is
against the Wisdom, Goodness and Power of God; and he having Power in his hand
will never suffer it.

Three things God will do to those that please him not.

1. He will suspend the sweetness of his presence, which you have expressed in
the words of that good Prophet, 2 Chro. 15.2. He went out to meet Asa, and said
unto him, Now hear thou me, and all Judah and Benjamin, The Lord is with you,
while you are with him; and if you seek him, he will be found of you; but if
you forsake him, he will forsake you.

A second thing is a denial of success to you: What you hope for, shall be
blasted; what you desire, shall be broken; that which you fear, shall come upon
you. Thus God dealt with this King Asa; because to shun War he swerved from
God, and took a wrong course, therefore, says God, thou have done very
foolishly; henceforth thou shall have War.

A third thing is, that he will deny such the testimony of his favor; for want
of which David in Psalm. 51. so complains, looking upon himself as a man
spiritless and forsaken.

CHAP. VII.
The Absolute Necessity of Interest in God. God is either with or against his
Creatures. Whosoever has not God, has no true Interest in any thing.

THat which I shall next speak to in a few words, is this; That every one would
look after the getting of an Interest in God: And then that you would clear up
this Interest to your own Souls, that you may be able to say, My God will hear
me.

Labor for an Interest in God: Nothing is more necessary: for it is not here as
it is in other cases; if you cannot have one man to be your friend, you may be
without him; though he will not be for you, he will not be against you: God
stands not neuter in any state of indifferency toward his Creatures, either he
is with them, or against them; and to have God against us, is the greatest evil
that can be. Two ways this will vex and torment the spirit.

1. In respect of the sight of the excellency that God is: If that be hid from
our eyes now, know that a day of Revelation is coming, when God shall show
forth himself in his Glory, and then he will appear to be what he is, when
there is no more hope left for the enjoyment of him. Do not turn that into the
greatest misery, which in its own nature is the most attractive worth, the most
refreshing comfort and true happiness, that is, God. The enjoyment of God in
Heaven makes that life, that high life, that eternal life: It must needs
therefore be death, the worst of death, all death, to have him against us.

But it is not only the Contemplation of his Nature, the sight of what he is,
that shall afflict; but his Power shall be visibly put forth against such as
have neglected him; and he will act against those that did not act toward him,
and seek to get an Interest in him: Where he says not, Come ye blessed, he
will say, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire.

Besides this, Remember that we are made for this end, to have an Interest in
God, and converse with him; we were naturally and originally designed to this;
now if we attain not our end, we are lost. We many times make things for such
ends as they do not reach; but if they cannot serve one end, they may serve for
another: but if you attain not this end, you attain nothing, you are lost. When
God made thee first, he made thee in a capacity for the enjoyment of himself;
that capacity remains, but nothing can fill it up but himself: So that the
spirits of men shall roar and weary themselves to Eternity in restless motion
after that which they cannot attain. It is true; as the Prodigal when he was
gone from his fathers house made a shift to live on husks and such trash for a
time, so do many now; but the day will come, when God will take these husks
away from you, wives, children, pleasures and estates, and what ever it is that
gives you some refreshment in this world; and then you will be left worse then
nothing, you shall neither have God nor the world.

Yea, such a necessity there is to look after this, that you have indeed no
true interest in any thing till you get a^ Interest in God, though you think
you have: That man that has not God, has nothing; it is most sure; for he is
under sentence: A condemned man loses all his estate. Men will persuade
themselves they are Lords, and that they have this, and they have that; but
indeed they have nothing: what they have, is but prisoners allowance; something
is allowed to condemned men till the stroke comes: and this is the case of all
men that have not God for their God.

Know also, that a man is not said to have any interest in any thing that does
not add something to him, if it be not something that contributes to his
well-being. A man does not reckon his sickness, diseases, pains, and such evils
and miseries to be his; interest in these things no man accounts of, it is
unhappiness: Whatsoever adds not to a man, stands for a cipher, is nothing:
Interest in nothing, is nothing. That which we claim Interest in, must have
some good in it to give out unto us. But now the real good of a man is no way
promoted by any thing, while he lives without God in the world. It is the
privilege of Saints, that all things work together for their good, Romans 8.28.
And it is as true otherwise, that nothing works for the good of those that love
not God. Children and estate may tend to the goodness of one man's condition;
there may be good working out of them to one man, and yet may prove to the hurt
of another; as the best good may be evil to this or that man: to a man that is
under the Curse, all turns to bitterness and death. The truth is, that which
kills life, does less hurt the senses then that which only destroys the peace
and rest of a man. A man feels more by a stroke sometimes, then he does by a
Consumption or an Apoplexy. That which destroys most effectually, is oftentimes
least felt; and therefore what men feel not, because of their outward
enjoyments, they consider not, they lay not to heart: But if God be your God,
then all is yours, 1 Cor. 3. Then comes an Interest in all. As he that marries
the heir becomes Lord of the estate; servants, and cattle, and lands are his,
he commands all the family: So if God be our God, the whole Creation becomes
ours. Men come to have much by coming to God: The Apostle gives some account of
this in Heb. 12. where he says, We are come to Mount Zion, to the City of the
living God, to an innumerable company of Angels, to the spirits of just men
made perfect, etc. We come to all these, to communion with these, when God
becomes ours. We begin therefore at the wrong end, when we seek any thing in
this world, and seek not God first; for says Christ, Mat. 6.33. Seek first the
Kingdom of God, and all these things shall be given to you. When therefore you
seek estates, and the accommodations of this life, and do not indeed seek to
make God yours, you act very crosly to your own good.

There is a simple necessity to look after this; for besides what has been
said, you all live and are in a state of absolute dependence upon God, who has
the power of life and death: we are all in his hands; and that Key by which he
shuts, and none can open, you shall see put forth one day, when you shall know
what a loss it is to miss an Interest in him, who has all power in Heaven and
in Earth. That Is one thing which should make us serious to get an Interest in
God, that it is simply necessary.

CHAP. VIII.
Interest in God most attainable. Goodness and Fullness the Springs of
Communication. Desire easily and with most success revealed to God. Poor,
strangers, impotent persons not barred from God, as from men. Interest in God
incomparable in the enjoyment.

A Second Argument is, That it is an Interest most attainable; for it is
Goodness and Fullness by which we come to have Interest in any thing; these are
the Springs of all Communication between one and another; and where these are
greatest, there is a wider door opened, a fuller, easier and sweeter entrance
into Communion, and the enjoyment of each other. It Is the nature of goodness to
be communicative; and the more goodness, the more ready to communicate. Look
through the whole Creation, and you shall find it so, that as any Creature is
more noble and excellent, so it is the more hospitable and bountiful, the more
ready to give out it self. The Sun, the Air, the Sea, how liberal are they?
Things of a more confined and straitened nature, are but like a small Cottage,
into which one or two, or a few may enter; but it cannot give habitation to
many: But as Creatures abound in the goodness of God and his fullness, they
become like a stately Palace, that gives open, ready, and liberal entertainment
to many. Now God is greatest in all Excellencies, and therefore his Propensions
to Mercy and Goodness toward his Creatures are unspeakably, unconceiveably
greater, then any Propensions in the Creature can be.

In these two Glories God infinitely transcends all Creatures, in the glory of
his Being, and the glory of his Working. Nothing more sets out God and exalts
him, then his readiness to do good, and communicate himself to his Creatures.
He has said, It Is a more blessed thing to give then to receive. Indeed it is
sometimes a more blessed thing to give, then to have and enjoy. Take one that
has great power to do good, and no love, what is he but like a mere Iron
Chest, a Fountain sealed? Now God is most ready to do good; it is his glory.
It Is said in Prove. 19.23. That the desire of a man is his kindness. [The desire
of a man,] that is, that which is most to be desired, the most precious thing
in a man, that thing which makes him desirable, that renders him glorious and
beautiful, is his kindness; that he is a kind man: such an one wears a Crown
and Garland upon his head. This Crown God wears above all; the desire of God is
his kindness. And to make it yet more apparent, that an Interest in God is most
attainable, Consider,

That by which we come to have an Interest in another, is usually the
manifestation of our desire, with the tender of our love and affections to him;
and this is best done, and with most efficacy, with God: for the breathings and
operations of a man's spirit lie more open to him, then to any creature. One may
wish good will to another, and may want skill to make his mind known; but you
cannot have an ingenuous and hearty wish in your Souls, O that God were my God!
but he hears it, and knows it; He hears spirits, and reads spirits, as we do
words. In Psalm. 138.9. My groanings are not hid from Thee. If thou love God,
and thine heart be toward him, he needs no Interpreter or Spokes-man to tell
him what thine heart is. The Apostle says, He knows the meaning of the spirit:
When it can but sob and sigh within it self, O that God were my God! he knows
the meaning of that language, Romans 8.22. When Christ asked Peter, Love thou
me? Lord (says he) thou know that I love thee.

Add to this, That there cannot be that assurance of speeding upon the
manifestation of our spirits to any, as there is with God. I may make my mind
known to another for the enjoyment of his friendship, yet I may fail and come
short of it: but now if I come to God with an ingenuous and sincere desire to
have God to be my God, I shall not fail in that. You seek many things in vain;
but God never frustrates his poor people in their desires after him; He
crosses them in many of their other desires, but never in that: If he be so
good that he satisfies the desire of all things, of every living creature, as
in Psalm. 146. much more will he satisfy desires after himself; for these are
from his best love, they spring from his own bosom, and he will be sure to bless
them, they shall attain their end.

Other desires may be satisfied with other things; if you cannot have one
thing, another thing may serve you in its stead; if a man cannot have this
friend, he may have another: But we must either have Gods love and his
friendship, or we dye for ever. He has engaged himself, that those that thirst
after him, shall never go without him; the word stands upon record, the Lord
Jesus Christ spoke it from his Father, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst
after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied, in Mat. 5. And let him that
thirsts come, in Revel. 22. Indeed these desires are given not only to be as
a bias or principle of motion in our Souls after God, but are planted in our
Souls as indubitable pledges of his love, and of his habitation there. Other
things are first desired, and then obtained; but God is first ours, before he
be desired. Divine love works downward, it begins in Heaven; and that Communion
that is wrought between God and us, begins in himself and from himself: He
loves first, and speaks first; and our love is but the answer of his love: If
we can say to God, Lord, I am thine, this is but the echo of what he has said
first, I am thine. So in Zech. 13. latter end, I will say (says God) Thou art
my people, and they shall say, Thou art my Father. Oh, this assurance of
obtaining mercy with God for poor thirsty Creatures, it is the honey and milk
of our Souls, our greatest joy, and the satisfaction of our spirits in this
life. They that seek God, shall glorify him: If they seek once, the next thing
is praise; their hearts shall live for ever. The manifestation of this grace,
mercy and goodness that is in God, is the life of such as seek him. In Isai.
38.15, 16. What shall I say? he has spoken to me, and himself has done it; I
shall walk softly all my years in the bitterness of my Soul. O Lord, by these
things men live, and in all these things is the life of my spirit; so will Thou
recover me, and make me to live. He speaks of Gods goodness appearing to him,
in that act which was not a single, but a compound act; and it was not a mere
natural good, but a spiritual and inward communication of himself; it took him
much; What shall I say? I shall be at rest, as one quieted and satisfied in
spirit, after my bitterness: I have had sorrow, but now I have seen the love of
God toward me, I rejoice: I was tumultuous before, and unquiet, and
unsatisfied; but now I shall be satisfied. Hitherto you have been looking upon
the feasibleness of this Interest, that no Interest is so attainable as
Interest in God. And if you will look once more, consider how many bars there
are to our Interests with men, and you shall see how these things that are such
impediments with us, are of no force with God. Many times a poor man, a beggar,
one in rags, knows it would be his happiness to have an Interest in such a
Prince; but how shall he come at it? In Prove. 14.20. Solomon tells us, The poor
man is hated of his neighbor; he is afraid, if he should ask something of him,
he should burden him: Nay he is hated of his Brother, and though he speak with
entreaties, yet he is answered roughly; What, thou a Beggar, and come so boldly
to ask of me? And yet we that are but poor beggars, and in our rags, may have
free access to God. In Prove. 19.7. it is said, All the brethren of the poor do
hate him; how much more will his friends depart far from him? But God turns not
back our prayers; though we be poor and miserable, yet our Lord Jesus Christ is
not ashamed to call us Brethren, Heb. 11.6.

Strangers have a bar in their way: Come to a great one, I know you not, says
he, I never saw you before; what have you to do to come to me? Therefore Ruth
was much taken with the kindness of Boaz, because she was a stranger to him.
What are we but strangers and aliens, afar off? and yet he rejects us not when
we come near him. God will not say to men, I know you not, though they have
been strangers, except when they come too late. In Luke 13.25. says Christ,
Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many (I say unto you) shall seek to
enter, and shall not be able; that is, they seek too late. When once the Master
of the house is risen up, and has shut the door; if then you come and say,
Lord, Lord, open to us, he will say, I know you not. But seek him while the
door is open, while he may be found, and he will be ready to receive you.

Impotent persons that are fit for nothing, how shall they get an Interest in
great ones? What can he do? say they, though it be but for a servants place.
What would become of us, if God should put that question to us? He receives us
when we are good for nothing, fit for us: Nay when we were Enemies, then he was
reconciled to us, Romans 5. Now then you see that God has received such persons;
indeed be never receives any other: So that upon all accounts an Interest in
God is more attainable, then any other Interest. That Is a second Argument: I Will
name one more.

Interest in God is better enjoyed then any other Interest whatsoever. There is
no Interest to be enjoyed with that sweetness, security, usefulness and
consolation, as our Interest in God is. For besides that unspeakable and
infinite Fullness that is in God, know that this Interest is not subject to any
dissolution. Interest in God now, is better then it was in our first estate,
when we came out of Gods hand. All other Interests may cease: If our love, or
others loveliness cease, our Interest is gone; and the loveliness of every
Creature under the Sun will have an end, but God abides. Take a man, the most
wise, the most learned, the most amiable, the richest man, all these things
will pass away: but our Interest in God is not subject to any separation, that
is, we shall be never from him. The absence of our friends is like the setting
of the Sun; they are life to us in their presence, but when they are gone from
us, they cannot help us, they are so far dead to us: but God is ever with us.

Interests with men are oft-times very exacting: A man must do this, and do
that, and much ado to please. Men do tie up their Interest so strait, that
except things be done at this time, and after this mode, we endanger a flaw.
God does not impose upon his people after this manner.

And again, Other Interests are apt to be tired, and so fall into a dull sleep
of mutual forgetfulness, because the goodness that is in us is but little; a
shallow Cistern is soon drawn dry. But with God there is no difficulty at all
to give out love; and if he spend himself never so much this way, he is not at
all diminished; He rests in his love, Zeph. 3. His joy and self-contentment is
always flourishing. So that as this Interest is more attainable, so it is better
to be enjoyed.

CHAP. IX.
Christians ought to clear their hopes from Uncertainties. Believers doubt
through their own fault. They that seek God, must pursue their end.

THat which follows next is Exhortation, That you would not only seek this
Interest and get it, but that you would seek to know it, and to be satisfied
that you have indeed an Interest in God. Live not upon hopes mingled with
uncertainties and anxieties: Let not this suffice, It may be God is my God, or
I hope he is; but put it out of doubt. Give all diligence (says the Apostle)
to make your Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Sure, as firm ground, that
you may so know it, that there may be no trembling of heart about it, that it
may be a certain conclusion made up in your own spirits, that you are the
called and chosen of God. For if you do these things (says the Apostle) you
shall never fall, but an abundant entrance shall be administered to you into his
Kingdom: You shall never fall; or as it is sometimes rendered, you shall never
offend: So the Apostle James, Chap. 2.10. He that Offends in one, is guilty of
all. Indeed the sight of Interest in God carries a man with more evenness and
strength in his way, and keeps him in more compliance with, and conformity unto
God. Sometimes the word is rendered [stumble;] Romans 11.11. Have they stumbled,
that they should fall? If a man know God to be his God, he walks with a more
even and steady foot, all his ways are more plain before him, mountains of
difficulty and danger will be laid level, there will be nothing to dash his
foot against, to hinder him in his race; and an entrance in abundance will be
administered to him into the Kingdom of Heaven: Fears and doubts straiten our
way, and hinder our passage to the Kingdom of God. Suppose a man were to go
into an house where he fears he shall not enter, this would very much hinder
his endevor: But when a man shall have a blessed prospect into Heaven, and see
his place there, that must needs further his more abundant and free entrance
into it. But more particularly, that I may persuade you (if God will) to be
very serious in this thing, to make your Interest in God more certain, let me
tell you,

In the first place, That no man that believes in Christ wants it, but through
his own fault; I say, it is a man's own fault, if he be not able to say that God
is his God. I speak now according to the ordinary course of God demeaning
himself to his people. There is nothing of greater concernment, either to his
peoples welfare, or the advancement of his own design which he has upon them,
then the manifestation of his Love, and the satisfaction of their spirits, in
that great Question, Whether God be their God. And that Spirit, upon whom lies
the Office of bringing from darkness to light, has this Office also, of
refreshing and reviving the spirit, and therefore bears that name, the
Comforter: He not only espouses us to Christ, but maintains a perpetual
entertainment; that is his work: He is not only the bond of our Union, but the
light of it, by which we see our selves one with Christ, and so one with the
Father. Many complain, they find not God to be their God; but it is not because
God is not willing to show himself what he is, but because they are wanting to
themselves. There are two great faults that oftentimes wrong us, and keep us in
the dark, and make that seem a secret, which otherwise might lie open to our
eyes.

One Error concerns seeking: Some never put their Interest in God to the
question.
Some seek not at all, and never put the question, whether God be their God,
but run the hazard, live and dye venturing their Souls to Eternity. Others
complain, they seek, but they cannot find; fain they would be satisfied in this
thing, but they cannot: Now I say, the complaint must fall upon our selves,
there is perhaps a fault in our seeking. This is the word that must stand fast
for ever, God will be found of them that seek him: In Jer. 29.13. Then you
shall find me when you seek me with all your heart. To seek with all the heart,
is not only to seek truly and sincerely, (some seek but in words only, making
verbal prayers without any inward sense,) but to seek him strongly above all
things; and not only from an ardent thirst of spirit, but to seek him without
ceasing, till we find him. In due time we shall reap, if we faint not, Gal. 6.
The Rule of Scripture you know is this, that we pray incessantly, 1 These. 5.17.
Mark that in Hos. 6.3. After two days will he revive us, and in the third he
will raise us up; Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord: His
going forth is prepared as the morning, and he shall come unto us as the rain;
as the former and latter rain unto the Earth. If you follow on, if you follow
the business, you shall obtain: God has appointed his going forth as the
morning; that is, as the Sun rises and fails not, as the Sun goes forth in its
light, and grows; so will Gods appearance to his people be: And as the rain
comes upon the thirsty Earth, and causes all things to spring afresh; so shall
the manifestation of Gods love be to those that seek him without ceasing. What
if God appear not presently, and you have not that full answer to your desires?
Though he come slowly, yet he will be sure to come; his staying is not a
denial; and his not showing himself, is not an hiding himself; He is uncovering
himself, and making way for the appearance of that which you would fain have a
sight of; He stays a while, to make his love the more visible afterward; by his
absence he raises the mind, and enlarges the heart, to desire and long after
his presence; and then his manifestation will be fullest. God is as ready, nay
more ready to open, then you are to knock; he loves that thirst in you, which
is after himself; he loves to be loved: let him be pleased as well as you. It
may be seeking Christians are not so ingenuous as they should be: We are not to
seek him only, but to please him. Psalm. 119.2. Blessed are they that keep his
Testimonies, and that seek him with their whole heart: That seek him, and his
Love, and keep his Law. Or it may be offenses have been, but not bewailed:
Impotency is the continuation of sin; You are ever doing that evil which you
have not been humbled for; nothing nulls it but repentance, and humbling your
selves in the sight of God. With what face can you say to God, Let thy love, O
Lord, be upon me, when as you cannot say to God, Lord, I love thee? That man
cannot say he loves God, that desires not to please him. Can he say his heart
is with God, who suffers his heart to go out after other things? Why should he
desire so to impose upon God, that God should love him, whom he desires not to
love and please? it is unreasonable. What father would be so dealt with, that
the child walking in stubborn courses would have his father show nothing but
clearness of countenance and love to him? David, all the while he was under
clouds of guilt and sorrow, wished that God would show forth the light of his
countenance to him; but he suffered many wrackings in his Soul till he
confessed his sins, Psalm. 32. What God has said, he will have fulfilled.
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one tittle of his Promise. If he hear
not, it is not because he is not a God hearing prayer, but because you hear not
him. Isai. 45.19. I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain: I the
Lord speak righteousness, I declare things that are right: I speak as I mean,
my words and my heart agree in one. What ever our offenses have been, if we be
ingenuous in our approaches to God, God will not look upon our offenses, but
upon our persons: In 2 Chronicles. 7.14. you have this promise, If my people that
are called by my Name shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and
turn from their wicked ways; then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive
their sin, and will heal their Land. If thy Soul be sick, and thou mournest
after God that hides himself from thee, and humblest thy self, and repentest
of thy sins with abasedness of spirit before him, he will hear.

CHAP. X.
God has fully made known whom he loves. Christians able to know themselves.
Gods Spirit strengthens the testimony of our spirits. Christians hindered by
Slothfulness and Discouragements.

A Second Fault is, That God does give the manifestation of his Love, and we
receive it not; we accept it not. I will, for the more full clearing of this,
lay down these Considerations.

First, That God has given to his people sufficient means for the knowledge of
their Interest in him; for he has told us who they are that he loves, whom he
has chosen and called out of this world, and made his peculiar people. If he
had carried on a design of love to particular persons in his own breast, no man
could have known who was loved of him, then we had been left in the dark; for
no man knows the things of a man, but the spirit of a man, as the Apostle
speaks. But as the Angel marked those in Jerusalem that were to be spared, so
there is a mark that God has set upon his own, by which they may be known to
what fold and flock they do belong. And indeed the end of the Scripture, so
discovering and setting forth the marks of the people of God, is for this
purpose, that we may know our Happiness. So in 1 John 5.13. this was the end of
writing his Epistle; These things, says he, have I written unto you that
believe on the Name of the Son of God, that you may know that you have eternal
life, and that you may believe on the Name of the Son of God. Wherefore was it
that he had told them how many ways they might know that God dwelt in them and
they in God? Wherefore did he make so many descriptions of those whom God had
set his love upon? but that you may know, says he, that you have eternal life,
because you are such.

And he has not only done thus, but has given us understanding also, by which
we are able to know not only other things, but our selves; by which we may judge
our selves, and our actions, and what is within us. Neither has he given us an
understanding merely natural, but it is raised, being illuminated with his own
light, that we may be able to find out the work of God in us; an understanding
that can reflect upon it self, not only in way of simple vision and
apprehension of what is within us, but by way of argumentation and reasoning: 1 John 2.3, 5. Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments: And
whosoever keeps his Word, in him verily is the love of God perfected; hereby we
know that we are in him. God has given us understanding to reflect upon our
selves in a way of reasoning, to make certain to our selves our Interest in
these things. Nay he has given us his Spirit, that bears witness to our
spirits that we are the sons of God, Romans 8. We must not think that was a
special favor given to the Saints then, but it is common to all the people of
God. The Spirit of Adoption has a double office, of quickening and comforting;
and whosoever is a son, has the testimony of that Spirit.

There is a double Testimony: A Testimony of the things themselves; so that
which is of God in us does bear witness; as the effect bears witness of the
cause.

There Is another Testimony, and that is of God himself by his Spirit; and that
Testimony does help our spirits; it helps the testimony of the things
themselves, and clears them; it leaves them without doubt; it strengthens and
fixes fast the Soul in the knowledge of its Interest in God.

God stands obliged for this unto his people, for their comfort lies in it, and
that makes to the fulfilling of his last end, which is his glory; for how shall
we give him praise, if we know not that God is ours?

Besides, he has given us visible Seals to ratify all the Promises to us: He
has given the earnest of his Spirit to his; He has set Christ on the Throne
for us, an indubitable Pawn of his Love; and many other, which are still with
us.

Secondly, A second Consideration is this, That the people of God in the want
of this knowledge and assurance do not what they may, they do not improve that
ability and those means which God has put into their hands; and so they spin
out their days in heaviness, mourning and anxiety. Either there is slothfulness
of spirit, or some discouragement of spirit upon them.

Slothfulness, and so they are careless, idle and vain; having lost the
sweetness of the enjoyment of God, their hearts are poured out upon vanities;
they have gone a whoring after other things, and have placed their Souls upon
things that will not profit, and are not industrious to seek after God. When
the Soul is thus gone out from God, then it commits folly under every green
tree; there is no plant that may yield any kind of refreshing, but they will
suck something from it: Whilst the Soul is busied about other Interests, and
securing them, the other great business lies by.

Another sort are under discouragement; they say, The work is hard, it is a very
hard thing to find out this matter, to do that whereby it should be found.
Says another, I have endeavored and sought and done all I can, and cannot
compass it.

Consider, you that say it is hard; what a vain thing is it for a man to plead,
that a thing is difficult which must be done? Will you plead difficulty against
necessity? You must do it, or your life will be as death; you will lose the
comfort of all Promises, of all Performances; the Promises will be as a sealed
Fountain, that you cannot drink of them.

But again, It is false to say it is hard: That false Prophet within us
communicates of his own spirit to us, and we oftentimes speak untruths against
God. Is it hard to walk in the way of life? Is it hard to enquire after God? Is
it easy to be hunting after the world, and getting something in this life? Is
it hard to reach after the fruit of the Tree of Life? When you seek after God,
you are in that very way of Life, wherein they now are, that shall enjoy God to
all Eternity.

Another Discouragement is this; I have endeavored, but it is a fruitless thing;
I see I shall never be satisfied. Poor Soul! Will thou indulge that remissness
of spirit that is in thee, to a contradiction against the God of Truth? He has
said, If thou seek him, thou shall find him; He has said he will comfort the
mourners; He has spoken as much as can be desired: What would you have God to
do more? Rather blame your seeking, then your success: Say not, It is in vain
to seek, because I have not found; nay rather say, Because I have not found,
therefore I must seek more and seek better. What says Christ in Joh. 14.23. If
any man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and make our abode with him. If any man love me, be he what
he will be; though he has been a notorious wretch, though he has been a grief
and burden to me, and offended me days without number; yet if he love me, my
Father will love him, and we will come and make our abode with him. Will you
rather blame the truth of the Promise, then your selves? The fault must be laid
on us: Let God be true, and every man a liar. It is manifest that we do not
what we might do, in these particulars.

1. We do not call our minds in, and bend them to this work of enquiring after
God, and settling this great question of our Interest in God for ever. And
indeed if we do not call in and bend our minds, and use some enforcements upon
them, they will never do their work: There is upon our minds anatural fluidness
and dullness; they go out easily to all things but unto God. The mind must be
summoned, pressed, bound and buckled to this work: Says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3.1,
2. This second Epistle, Beloved, I now write unto you, to stir up your pure
minds: [To stir up your pure minds;] The Apostle was afraid of them, lest
dullness and sluggishness should fall upon their minds: If you do not stir up
your selves to the work, and gird up the loins of your minds, the work will not
be done.

Another fault is, That as men do not bend their minds to the work, so they do
not hold them in a way of believing and cheerful expectation of what they seek
for: Says the Church in Micah 7.9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord
until he plead my cause: So long as I seek the Lord, I will wait and expect
that he will hear me, and answer my desires. In Hos. 10.12. says the Prophet,
Sow to your selves in righteousness, reap in mercy; break up your fallow
ground; for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain righteousness
upon you. You must seek the Lord till he come. In Isai. 62.7. This is the
counsel of God by his Prophet, That you give him no rest until he establish,
and till he make Jerusalem a praise.

Again, There may be this fault, We do not bring things to an effectual
judgment. Many queries are raised about this business, but there is not a full
hearing and determining of them; but either the Court breaks up before things
are concluded, and so the Soul is left to hang upon a poor thread of a feeble
hope, I hope God is my God; or else the Soul is contented to bear the burden of
many fears and sorrows, not stirring up it self as it ought to get free of
them. So that doubtless it is our fault that we have not so clear a knowledge of
our Interest in God, as to make us to triumph or glory therein. One way or
other we are defective; either in our seeking of God, or in our not receiving
what God gives unto us.

Thirdly, A third Consideration is, That we have often offended and sinned
against the Spirit; and then God weakens his Testimony toward us, and does not
so make himself known to us as we desire. David by his sin brought himself into
that sad condition, that he knew not what to make of himself; as appears by
that prayer of his in Psalm. 51. He looked on himself almost as one in bonds,
estranged from God, a man without spirit. In Isai. 59.2. says God, Your sins
have separated between me and you. Certainly God leaves us very frequently, and
sometimes when the manifestation of his love is very needful. In Micah 3.4. the
time was an evil time, and says the Prophet, Then shall they cry unto the
Lord, but he will not hear them; he will even hide his face from them at that
time.

A fourth Consideration is, That we do not seldom or not a little reject the
testimony of God, and oppose the light and the clear manifestations of his Love
to us. The Comforter comes many times; but that may be said of us, that he said
of himself in Psalm. 77. My Soul refused to be comforted; would not be
comforted. As against the conviction of the Spirit in wicked men there is a
great deal of contest, a great fight, as in Jer. 2.34. Also in thy skirts is
found the blood of the Soul of poor Innocents; I have not found it by secret
search, but upon all these: Yet thou say, Because I am innocent, surely his
anger shall turn from me: I say, as wicked men rise up in opposition to the
conviction of the Spirit; so good men likewise have their oppositions against
the consolations and comforts of the Spirit; not only against the counsel of
it, but against the comfort of it. In Isai. 49.13. you have an instance of
this, see how sweetly God speaks, Behold, these shall come from far: Sing, O
Heavens, and be joyful, O Earth, and break forth into singing, O Mountains; for
God has comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted. But what
says the Church? But Sion says, The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has
forgotten me. What ever God said, yet she said God had forsaken and forgotten
her. A like instance you have in Lament. 3.45. There are strong holds in our
spirits against the inward comforts, as there are against other operations of
the Spirit; and it requires the mighty power and operation of God to settle our
hearts in peace, as well as to convince us of our miseries and dangers. The
work of Conversion is quickly done, because it is of greatest concernment; I Will
give it you in this simile. A mother finds her child among devouring Hogs or
Dogs, or what you will; she makes haste to snatch her child out of danger, but
he is all bemoiled and dirted, and his clothes; she makes not so much haste to
get him clean, and to put other clothes upon him. So God quickly finisheth the
work of Conversion and Regeneration; he makes haste to free us from danger and
misery; but he makes not such speed to comfort us, and to establish our hearts
in the assurance of our Interest in him; that may be done at leisure.

As there is a reluctance in us against the work of grace, so there is a
reluctance against the testimony of grace; we are apt to turn all that God
speaks and does for us against our selves; the reason is, because dejection is
most natural to us, considering the state of our Apostasy, and what we are
judged to. A slave does naturally torment himself with fears, and with sad
expectations. It Is easier to us to believe the sentence of condemnation, then
of Justification: Sin is more visible then Grace. The greatness of the things
promised are such, that they make the Soul at a stand: To have pardon of sin,
to be adopted, to be raised from the depth of misery to such a state of
blessedness, this makes the Soul to be like those that dream: Besides, there is
a concurrence of foreign power to heighten all this.

CHAP. XI.
Encouragements to endevor the clearing of our Interest in God. Love cannot
hide it self. Love will not deny what may be easily granted, and is much needed.

A Second Argument is taken from the encouragement we have to put us on, to put
this out of question, that God is ours: Certainly there is more ease in this
then we are willing to believe. I speak it to the glory of God, and our shame,
That the things which God has spoken and done for our encouragement should be
so great and high, and yet we should lie so low in the satisfaction of our
spirits about this question.

First, Consider, whatsoever excellency there is in any love, that is in Gods
love transcendently. Love is very fruitful, it brings forth much for those
toward whom it is set; it will not be hid; it is compared to fire, which is
known by its heat; and you shall know the warmth of love where it is. A man may
use the words of Solomon, Prove. 27.16. which he speaks concerning the froward
woman, Whosoever hides her, hides the wind, and the ointment of his right hand
which bewrays it self: That as the wind cannot be concealed when it is up,
and as a sweet ointment cannot be concealed, but it will discover it self; so
wrath and love (for there is the like reason for both) they cannot be hid. A
friend is contented not to have his beneficence known, he would do much more
then his friend should know of; but he would have his benevolence, his love and
good will, known and manifested: Therefore the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.8, 10. says,
He obtained this grace to show forth among the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches
of Christ. Near relations live upon the manifestation of love; those which are
more remote need less, and less is due to them. The child will have but an ill
life, unless he have the light of his fathers countenance: The husband and wife
will have their life imbittered, if there be not mutual love. As life is
visible, so is love; it will discover it self, and the highest love will most
discover it self.

A second Encouragement is, That what may be easily done, may be easily
obtained of a friend. What is more easy with God, then to make us know that he
is our God? It is but one beam of light from Heaven that does it, but a word
spoken; Soul, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. Love stands not
at small matters, especially great Love: The Love of God is the highest Pattern
of Love, and the most glorious Spring of Love; all Love flows from it:
Therefore if the love of a creature can do so much, how much more will the Love
of God do? If your child should beg of you to give him a good look, could you
deny him? would not your love constrain you? And shall not the Love of God much
more? Certainly it is more for him to love you, then to tell you he loves you:
He has put forth his love already in a strange way, to give his Son for you;
and do you think he will be so unwilling to speak a word of peace to his people
where it is duly sought?

Again, where a thing is most needed, where one stands in much need of what a
friend can do for one, that will be soon granted. What do you need more then
refreshment of spirit in the sense of the Love of God? All the fears and
tremblings of the hearts of his people are for want of the light of his face.
Pharaoh's daughter looking upon a strange child, found her bowels and
compassions moved within her. Do you think Gods compassions are not richer and
fuller to his own? A child sometimes may complain (but it is not to the honor of
his father) My life is uncomfortable, because my father loves me not, shows not
his love to me; though perhaps there be cause for it: And there is cause that
God should deal so with us; but he has said he will not: If we turn from the
evil of our ways and repent, he will multiply pardons, Isai. 55.

Again, A thing that may be easily done, will not be denied when it is asked;
when it is not only what we need, but what we beg: This Christ shows in the
Parable of the unjust Judge. Importunity will move a stone; how much more will
the affectionate tears of an ingenuous child move the compassionate heart of a
tender father?

A third Encouragement is, That this is simply necessary to the right
fulfilling of the Law of our Relation, and to the enjoyment of the privileges
of it. What is thy relation to God, but of a child to his Father? What Law lies
upon a child but to obey? and that not as a slave, but with a filial spirit.
How can you be cheerful in your work, when you have this cloud upon your
spirits, this pang upon your Souls, I know not whether God be my God?

Again, The Law of a child is to live a life of cheerful dependence upon his
father: But how can a man live thus upon God, when he doubts whether God be his
or no? How can I be confident to receive great things of a stranger, much less
of an Enemy? But God appears in these forms to me, so far as he appears not to
be my God.

Again, This Law lies upon a child, to live with cheerfulness of heart upon his
fathers fullness. This the Scripture calls for; We are to rejoice, and rejoice
evermore; and with all joy, Colos. 1.11. and in the worst times: Account it all
joy when you fall into diverse temptations, Jam. 1.2.

I Will add but this, That those desires that are after God, after the knowledge
and assurance of his being our God, are from himself; God has planted them in
us, and God has invited, called and set us a longing and a thirsting after
him: And will he tell us of a Fountain of Life, and not let us drink of it?
Will he call us to himself, and when we come to him, will he hide himself?
Certainly we are very much mistaken, when we go to God to beg this grace, to
have our Souls refreshed with the sight of his Love, if we go ingenuously, with
a cheerful resignation of our selves to him, if we go not with a cheerful
expectation, that God will hear our prayer.

CHAP. XII.
They are not right who are careless to clear their Evidence. Wisdom and Love
make the Saints seek after full satisfaction. Two sorts of Content in the want
of God.

A Third Argument is this; If you seek not, and that industriously and in
earnest, to put this Question out of question, you are not right. It Is an
Evidence against a man's sincerity, and his real fellowship with that invisible
world, when he is not careful to know what Interest he has in it. The Saints
desire nothing more, with them there is nothing above the Love of God that they
seek, and nothing beneath it that they can rest in. Whom have I in Heaven but
Thee? and there is none in all the world that I desire in comparison of Thee,
Psalm. 73. David had whatsoever the heart of man could desire in this world, he
had all sorts of accommodations and contentments, and yet he was still athirst
till he could come to the Wellhead and drink of the Water of Life; He was
painfully athirst in Psalm. 63. There are two great Springs of these desires and
tendencies of Soul after God.

1. A spirit of Wisdom, that represents God as he is, in that amiableness and
glory which takes them; it represents him in goodness and greatness, as one in
whose hands all things are: so that nothing is concluded to be of that
concernment with them, as to have God to be their God: They that know thy Name,
will put their trust in Thee, Psalm. 9.10.

2. The second is a spirit of Love: The Saints have their hearts knit to God;
there is nothing which they so much prize as him, they are taken with him above
all things, therefore cannot be content without him; their desires after him
are infinite, till his infinite goodness fills up their whole capacities, and
leave no more place for hope; till he has blessed them with the full enjoyment
of himself. You know, Reason in things of importance will not be easily
satisfied. While we are in any doubt, we have no rest. Men must have things
cleared to them that are of weight; and much more should they in this, which is
the greatest of all. They say, and cannot but say, as David does in Psalm.
86.17. though his own spirit often told him that God was his God, yet he looks
up to Heaven, and says, Show me a token for good. And so in Psalm. 80.3. Cause
thy face to shine upon us, and we shall be saved. The shining of Gods face puts
a man into a state above men, and Devils, and all things.

Love is both eager in the prosecution of its end, and very curious in its
judgment. It is eager in the prosecution of its end, it will not be easily put
off; it finds out its Object, and knows it, and will not take a shadow for the
thing: if it be not satisfied, it rouls restlesly, and sinks and dies in it
self; like Noah's Dove, that fluttered up and down the world, but found no rest
for the sole of her foot. It is death to the man that loves God, not to see
that God loves him. They therefore are not right, they are not Believers in
earnest, there is not a through work upon their spirits, that can dally with
God and be at rest, when they are not clear in this, that God is their God.
There be two very great Evils in this thing.

1. That such a man lives in contempt of God: This is contempt to be content to
be without God. That which I know not to be mine, I am without: That which I
know not to be mine, is as if it were not; if I be content therefore to live
so, that I know not God to be my God, I am content to be without God.

There is a contentment that is opposed to murmuration, to froward perturbation
of mind and fretting; this must not be: no not in the midst of clouds and
darkness, and in the depth of our disputes about this great thing, Whether God
be my God, and my sins pardoned, and whether my Soul shall be saved: And in
case I be not satisfied in the thing, there must be a patient waiting for Jesus
Christ, and the glory of his appearance; though we be mournful, yet we must be
patient, quiet and humble: As in Isai. 26. In the way of thy Judgments, O Lord,
we have waited for thee; and the desire of our Souls are unto thy Name, and the
remembrance of Thee: With my Soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my
spirit within me will I seek thee early. And in Isai. 8.17. I will wait upon
the Lord that hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him
[or, I will stay for him] till he come.

There is another kind of contentment of dullness and stupidity, from darkness,
which over-clouds the Soul, and bears it down. Now I would argue thus; The
doubts thou find in thy spirit, are either weak or strong; if they be not
great, but some little anxieties, they are more easily overcome, and thy fault
is the greater that thou suffer those clouds to remain, which thou may so
easily scatter: when the question is not much disputable, when there is not
much against it, thou art the more negligent that thou do not draw it to a
full determination. It is with many Christians, as it is with a Conquering Army
in a Nation, that has beaten down all Forces round about them, only there is a
weak party now and then appearing, who cannot do much; but when the Militia in
a Commonwealth has beaten down the Enemy before them, it cannot stand with
their faithfulness to suffer the least party to remain in opposition to them:
No more can it stand with our faithfulness with God, and our own Souls, to
suffer the least party of doubts to continue, but to make all clear and sure.
We will not suffer the least flaw in a Lease, or any security for the things of
this world.

I grant, that we are like to live in disputes all our days. There Is no
vacation with a Christian, but always Term time; still suits, strifes and
contentions: But you must strive to hold your own; you must be employed to
quench all the fiery darts of Satan. As a man that is in possession of an
Estate, when one comes and lays claim to one part of it, and another comes and
challenges another part, and so a third, and a fourth, he keeps his Suit a foot
against them all, and so holds his own: So must we go on conquering, till we
have subdued all fears and doubts that rise within us. Satan is a cunning
Sophister, as full of subtilty as he is of malice; if he cannot draw men to
gross profaneness, he will tempt them to fears and doubtings. Now as holiness
works against sinfulness, so it strives against doubts. Doubting is as truly a
sin in a Believer, as any other miscarriage: A good man cannot rest till he see
all well. Psalm. 41.11. By this I know that thou love me, etc. If he cannot
lay hold on something to draw this conclusion, he thinks himself a most
miserable man.

Again, Suppose thy doubts be strong, that thou can not make out this, that
God is thy God; if thou can notwithstanding sit down, and make a life of
sweetness and contentment in other things, thou contemnest God; this shows you
care not much for him: for what a man cares for much, that he loves much; and
what he loves much, that he will have as near to him as may be: Therefore if
thou go sighing and mourning after other things, and can sit down with
contentment in the enjoyment of other things, this shows thou do prefer other
things before God, and so do contemn him. If you can live without his love,
you can live without his fear; and what is more horrid, then for a man to live
without the love and fear of God? In Jer. 5.22. God argues this matter with his
people; Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will ye not tremble at my presence, who
have placed the sand for the bound of the Sea by a perpetual decree? etc. But
this people has a revolting and a rebellious heart; they are revolted and
gone: Neither say they in their heart, Let us now fear the Lord our God, that
gives the former and latter rain in his season, etc. It is extreme darkness
that is upon you, even the darkness of Hell, when you can live quietly in the
enjoyment of other things, without the knowledge of the love of God in Christ.
All that have known God to be their God, when they are under doubts concerning
this, when they are under the frowns of God; oh! how do they mourn? Lay but
your ears to their closets, and hear their secret complaints, who can measure
their tears, or number the sighs and groans that are found with them, when they
seek after God? David in Psalm. 32. tells you how it was with him; he made his
bed swim with tears, and his moisture turned to dryness, his strength was gone
through the bitterness of his Soul, because he could not see the love of God as
formerly. Our Lord Jesus Christ, when that ineffable shadow was upon his
spirit, how did he cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? It is
therefore a contempt of God, when you can be without the knowledge that he has
pardoned you and accepted you in his Beloved.

CHAP. XIII.
Those which seek not to clear their Interest, offer inexpressible violence to
their own Souls. How the sense of divine Love gives strength to two useful
principles of holy life.

IT will further appear, that they are not right Christians that can live
without the knowledge of the love of God, if we consider that such live in
unexpressible violence offered to their own Soul, and in most horrid practices
against themselves. To instance and clear it. Are you content to live so basely
and vile in this world (when you know not that God is your God) as to rob and
spoil your Souls of their truest Life, and to consent and yield to that evil
disposition in them, to live on things that are dead, and that have but a show
of life? The spirit of a man will fasten on something; if the spring of his
life be not in God, if he have not life there, he will seek it where he can
find it. When Cain went from the presence of the Lord, he fell to building of
Cities. When Demas forsook Christ, what did he embrace? even this present
world. The Prodigal when he went from his fathers house fell on something, and
what was it but Hogs meat? When the Jews were driven from Zion, they made much
of Babylon. Will thou see thy Soul feeding thus upon vanities, and not deal
effectually with thy self to labor for self-conviction, that thou may return
unto God? Say with thy self, Where am I now? what am I doing? Is this to live
on God? is this Eternal Life? Know you not that your life lies in the sense and
taste of divine Love? Do you not find all other things to be dark and empty?
And will you suffer your Souls against Nature to live out of God, when you are
called to live on him who is the Fountain of Life? I may say unto you, as
Eliphaz spoke in Job 15. Are the Consolations of God small to you? And is it so
light a matter to have the knowledge of the love of God, and your Interest in
him? In Jer. 14.18. the Prophet speaks of spoiling and wasting; but if it does
come, says he, thy ways and thy sins have procured these things unto thee,
therefore know that it is an evil thing and bitter to forsake the Lord. You may
thank your selves, if a day come wherein there will be bitterness to your
hearts, and the pangs of death upon you, because you know not that God is your
God; know that this is your wickedness, because you will not now look after it,
and so you rob your Souls. That is one thing.

2dly. When you are not sedulous and industrious in this thing, to make sure
that God is your God, you leave your selves in the high way of Apostasy. What
is that which will make us able to stand? the Apostle Peter tells us, 2 Pet.
1.10. Give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure; for if you do
these things, you shall never fall. You expose your selves to offenses, to
stumbling and falling, when you are content to live in the dark, not knowing
what Interest you have in God. For consider, you are now out of the shine of
the Sun, you are in the cold evening shade; your life is much weakened, and
your strength abated: It is the knowledge of divine Love that is the spirit and
strength of our love; this lays bonds upon our spirits, by which we become one
with God; it is the wing of our Souls, the spring of our activity, by which we
are born up to an enjoyment of God. The joy of the Lord is your strength, says
Nehemiah: And by this Paul was more then a Conqueror; yet Paul had many
Enemies: Through this Abraham was able to do so great things; by this Moses was
able to despise the wrath and favor of Pharaoh, and all the pleasures and
riches of his Court. While a man walks in the shine and sense of divine Love,
he will feel a strength in two Principles of great use.

1. To cleave fast to the chief good: now that chief good is God to that man
that enjoys him; he has the truest taste that sees God to be his God, and no
man else has such a taste as he; this will hold him to God. Where the
Creatures have but a Judgment of Sense, they will not depart from what they
find good: A Beast will not change his pasture for gold, that is best for him.
It Is the astonishment of the world, that the Angels should fall from their
state of Glory; and it is matter of amazement, that man should fall from his
Creator, when he had a full enjoyment of him. It Is that which God calls Heaven
and Earth to tremble at, Jer. 2.13. That men should depart from him the
Fountain of living Water, etc. The sense of acceptance with God, makes a man
that he cannot go from God: Whither shall we go? says Peter, Joh. 6. Thou have
the words of eternal life. That Soul that lives under the influence of divine
Comforts, cannot but say, Lord, it is good for me to be here; he desires no
change, it cannot be better with him: Change proceeds from want; for if want
were not, the creature would not change. That Soul that enjoys God is pleased,
and he says with David, Psalm. 16. He has a good portion, and his lines are
fallen in a good place: Nothing is dear to that man to part with, that he may
enjoy God; he bids all things stand by, and says, I charge you, wife and
friends, estate and all things, do not molest me in my enjoyment of the light
of Gods face; let all the world go which way it will, let me enjoy this
blessedness, to know assuredly that God is my God. When a man lives without
this knowledge, his life is but a poor shadow of life; all without God is but a
dead thing to him.

Another Principle receiving strength from the knowledge of Gods Love, and our
Interest in him, is, That a man should be friendly to his friend, that he
should walk with an harmony of spirit to his friends desire: Love pleases not
it self. Now when a man enjoys the sweetness of friendship with God, this makes
him true to his Maker, and to cleave close to God as to his Father: Indeed the
sense of this constrains; the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.14. says, The love of Christ
constrains us. How can I do this evil, says Joseph, and sin against my God?
But now if thou be careless, and can make a shift to live I know not how, a
dull stupid dark senseless kind of life, thy heart not witnessing that thou
endeavorest to make good thy Interest in God, thou art not under the bond of
Love; and then what art thou under? Other Lovers have taken away thy heart, but
as for God thou art a stranger to him, and art contented to be without him;
this is a woeful state. And as a man that lives out of the shine of divine Love
starves and wastes away, so fears in this case are apt to turn into hatred;
when the Soul is galled and tormented with fears of the displeasure of God
against him, this is apt to turn to hatred. Naturally whom we fear we hate; and
naturally the stronger fear is, the more men hate. The Devils hate God to the
full, being past doubting of his displeasure. What the Soul fears, it flies
from; and what is the flight of the Soul but hatred? Judas would choose rather
to go out of the world, and sink into nothing, then endure his condition, when
he saw God not to be his God. I Will shut up this Argument with these few things.

All that is in a Christian makes to this, that he would get a clear knowledge
of his Interest in God. Has he Faith? why by that he believes God to be his
Happiness, and that will put him on: Has he Love? Love is restless but in
clear enjoyment: Has he desire and thirst? what are they but the Souls
sickness till it has health and life in the enjoyment of God? Has he Fear?
what is that but the Soul seeking to be secure and safe in God? Has he Reason?
what is that but the voice of God calling him unto God? Has he a sense of the
sweetness of God? what is that but the comfort of divine Love drawing the Soul
to himself? So that all that is in a Christian puts him on to this, to make
this clear, that God is his God. And therefore they that can rub out their
days, and make a shift, to busy themselves in other things, without the
knowledge of God to be their God, have great cause to pronounce this heavy
sentence upon themselves, that surely they are separated from the love of God.
So I have done with the third Argument.

CHAP. XIV.
The Evil of Doubting as it is a denial of the Truth of God, a diminution of
his Love and Favors, and a mis-interpretation of his Dispensations. The
vexation of doubting to enlightened persons in an evil day.

A Fourth is this: Doubts in this case are very sinful and grievous, especially
to a Soul in light, and to a Soul in trouble. To clear this, I will show first,
That they contain in them exceeding great evil against God, in these things.

1. They are contrary to the Truth and Faithfulness of God: They are a denial
of the Truth of God manifested in the Promises, and by the testimony and
witness of his Spirit: God has made our way open to himself, and we are apt to
say most wretchedly as the Church in Lament. 3.44. He covers himself with a
Cloud, that our prayers should not pass through. He has left upon you perhaps
some marks of his love, he has put into you some earnest of his favor; what
are these but the voice of God from Heaven, that God is your God? and yet you
say as the Church in her frowardness, The Lord has forsaken me, and my God
has forgotten me.

Again, It is not only opposite to his Truth, but to his Love. When a friend
comes to one (passionately affected in suspicion of his friendship) and says
to him, Sir, I love you, you are very dear to my heart; and he will not believe
him, he takes it ill. God may say to us in the matter of his Love, as he said
to them in the matter of obedience, What could I have done more? God may say, I
have given them the knowledge of my self, I have given them a heart to love me,
I have given them all the pledges of my dear Love; and yet they will sit down
in corners, and spend and waste themselves in mourning, because I love them
not: What can I do more? In Deuteronomy. 1.32. God took it ill when his Word could not
be taken, and when the manifestation of his Love was of no force: Yet in this
thing ye believed not the Lord your God, who went in the way before you, to
search out you a place to pitch his tent in, etc. Surely, says God, there
shall not one man of this evil generation go to see that good Land, that would
not believe me. It may be our hearts may be somewhat like Jobs, in Job 9. says
he, If I have called, and he has answered me; yet I will not believe that he
will harken to my voice. What a strange thing is this? Though he has heard me
when I came to him, and has given me entertainment of a Father, and I did
receive pledges of his Love; yet I will not believe that He loves me, and that
he will hear me.

Again, They are diminutions of divine Favors: He that doubts his Interest,
cannot so bless God in the enjoyment of wife, children, and estate, and
whatsoever carries sweetness in it; but bitterness of Soul overflows, and makes
all things bitter; and he is apt to overlook all, who is not persuaded of his
Interest in God. In Esth. 5.13. you read of the froward spirit of Haman, and
such a spirit is usually in him that fears; What is all this to me, seeing
Mordecai sits still at the gate?

Another evil against God is, That these doubts cause mis-interpretation of all
divine Actions: They make a man mis-construe God in all things, whatsoever he
says or does: God shall not be taken aright by that man that doubts his
Interest in him. O Job! how were thou mistaken, and what meanest thou to speak
those words, Job 13.20. Wherefore hidest thou thou thy face from me, and
hold me for thy enemy? Why, did God ever take thee for his enemy? So many,
because God crosses them in their desires, and frustrates them in their hopes;
O, say they, God is angry with me, he does not love me. I might tell you the
same in other dispensations of God; indeed that man cannot be pleased.

Now we may consider how painful and vexing doubting is in that man that is
alive, that is in a living state; and especially in an evil day: There are
these three things that clear it.

1. This is a matter of greatest consequence, it is a business of the greatest
weight. See you not a man sometimes, how heavily he walks when his estate is in
question? but much more when his life is in question: But what if his life and
estate too be in question? That man that knows God truly, would rather endure
the loss of ten thousand lives and estates, then the loss of Gods favor.

2. Another thing that makes it exceeding heavy, is the loss of the sweetness
of former experience. David in Psalm. 42. complains of this, When I remember
these things, I pour out my Soul in me; for I had gone with the multitude, I
went with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with the
multitude that kept holy day. And Job in Chap. 29.2. O that it were with me as
in the days of old, and in months past, as in the days when God preserved me!
when his Candle shined upon mine head, and when by his light I walked in
darkness: As I was in my youth, when the secret of God was upon my tabernacle,
and when the Almighty was yet with me. Thus that man that loses the sweetness
of his former experience, remembers the days of old, and that afflicts him.

Again, God will have it so, that where this thing is not yet driven home, and
the Soul has not duly sought, and so not found satisfaction concerning his
Love, it shall be bitterness to him: I say, God will have it so, the Soul shall
not enjoy it self. He does this, partly to give a demonstration of his own
Excellency, and to vindicate it in the Soul; that a man may surely know and
find that there is none like him: therefore says he, I will take away the
light of my face from that man; he shall have his house, and land, and estate,
and see what he will do with them, what he can make of them: And by this the
love and favor of God appears to be excellent.

Besides this, God loves his people; he will have their love, and will have his
love sweetened to them, therefore it shall be bitterness to them when it is
lost. Be persuaded then to make this your work, and rest not till you know that
you have Interest in God: plead with David in Psalm. 35. Lord, say unto my Soul,
thou art my Salvation; not only be my Salvation, but say thou art my Salvation:
And then though you may have many sad thoughts accompanying you, yet this will
refresh you in the midst of all, as it did David in Psalm. 94.14. In the
multitude of my thoughts thy comforts delight my Soul.

CHAP. XV.
Interest in God more knowable then any other, and yet unknown to most: The
Reasons of both.

BEfore I propound the Directions, how they who are sincere and ingenious
toward God, and indeed have him for their God, may know that they have a sure
Interest and Propriety in him, I will premise two things of moment.

First, That our Interest in God is more knowable then any other Interest in
the world: There is no Interest that a man has, which is so discernable:
Whatsoever it is that belongs to an Interest in any thing, or any friend, and
does discover it; is much more here. Examine it in a few particulars.

1. Where there is an Interest with men, there is a mutual closing of their
spirits, by which they know one another, and come to rest secure in each others
good intentions and hearty wishes. Here also is this mutual closing, and in a
far more high and excellent degree, then is or can be with any creature: For
that affection and love which God discovers to his people, and which he does
act upon them, is a Love that is transcendent; that is, not only beyond all
other love, but beyond all understanding: That entire closing that is between a
Believer and God in Jesus Christ, is above all that which can be found in any
other; his whole Soul runs this way. In Psalm. 119.10. I have sought thee (says
David) with my whole heart. That is the proportion which God has cut out for
himself. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with
all thy Soul, and with all thy might. Christ challenges the same proportion,
and indeed it should not be less; less would not fulfill his end, which is the
solid peace and satisfaction of his people, in the enjoyment of him; and also
the subjecting and subduing of their spirits to his government: No proportion
of love loss then the greatest, could work these things.

But besides this, there is such a through change by reason of this Interest,
as no Interest in the world does work, though the closest and the nearest: For
the habit and disposition of the spirit of a man is altered in closing with
God, and he becomes a new creature, he is not what he was. It is true, that in
all friendship that is with men, there is a kind of change on both sides,
because there must be a due and necessary application of themselves to each
others spirits; but that change is unspeakably inferior to this, in those who
have been wrought upon to believe, and have obtained this mercy to close with
God: for they are changed to the proportion of as great a distance, as death is
distant from life, and darkness from light; for they are brought off from the
love of all that, on which their hearts were set, even to a hatred of it; and
are subjected, subordinate, and conformed to the Will of God.

There is another thing in this Interest, which belongs to the nature of it,
and so discovers it, and that is, a mutual conversing with each other with
contentment. Jonathan and David had much pleasure in their mutual conversings
with each other, and in drawing forth their spirits one to another. This is
much more strong in Believers, then can be in any relation between husband and
wife, or between the father and child. This must needs be so:

For, first, The love wherewith they love God is the highest love: Therefore
many will not go for Christians, that pretend to be such, because their hearts
are not brought up to this. The highest Love acts highest, it takes the highest
delight and contentment in its Object. In Cant. 2.3. As the Apple trees among
the trees of the Forest, so is my Beloved among the sons: I sat down under his
shadow with great delight, etc. In Psalm. 73. says David, It is good for me to
draw near to God: That look as others find contentment in the things they love,
and draw near to them; so the Saints find much more contentment with God, and
therefore draw near to him.

Again, Friends cannot always enjoy these Converses: Oftentimes they are
parted, and so cannot have this felicity of expressing mutual love; but God is
ever with them. In Psalm. 73. Thou art my strong habitation, to whom I may have
a continual resort: I may always come to thee.

3. There is a third thing in Interest, and that is mutual Communication. Love
is a spring, which flows forth; it does enjoy what it has rather for its
friend, then for it self: Gods Love has this excellency more abundantly and
transcendently. Take the dearest friends that live at the highest rate of love,
they cannot maintain a constant Communication; partly because there is not
always an equal necessity and capacity, partly because there is not always the
same power to give forth. But our necessities are always very great and vast,
and Gods power is always the same; so that here is always a perfect
Communication of Love that cease not, but flows forth as beams of light from
the Sun.

Now as effects discover their causes, so then especially when they are most
full and perfect. As you may better know any tree by its fruit, then when it is
in the bud and blossoms; and you may better know it when the fruit is in its
fullness and in more abundance, then when there are but a few; if there be but
one or two upon a tree they may be hid, but when there are many, the testimony
is the more abundant: Abundant are the testimonies of the fruits of Gods Love
in what he has done for his. So that upon this account, no Interest is more
knowable then that of a Believer in his God.

Secondly, A second thing to be propounded, is this; That though no Interest be
more knowable, yet ordinarily no Interest is less known then this. This we need
not prove; I think it is a Question out of question with us all. The unevenness
of the holiness of Believers in their walkings, the inconstancy of their
rejoicing, are two strong demonstrations of this, that they do know but little
of their Interest in God. It springs from such unhappy Causes as these, That
abiding Unbelief, that bitter root that has taken such strong hold of the
nature of man, that till the whole house be pulled down, it will not be wholly
eradicated and destroyed: This is that weight the Apostle speaks of (in Heb.
12.) that hangs on us so fast, as is manifest by the Apostle's scope, who
persuading unto faith, and the workings of faith; this is that (says he) that
so suppresseth and bears us down from those heights of heavenly joy, from that
sweet contentment and rest of spirit whereto we are called.

Believing is the first stone that is laid in a Christian. He that comes to
God, must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of those that seek him,
Hebr. 12. And as there is a spirit in all Believers that tends to the settling
of them upon a sure foundation, that they may steadfastly believe: so there is a
spirit that works to unbelief, perplexity and dissettlement. While unbelief
works in us, it must needs be, that there will be a great want of that through
knowledge of Interest.

Another Cause of this great misery of man, is, That Gods communications of
himself to us, and entertainments of us, are not always in intelligible forms,
so that we cannot presently take them up, and understand the meaning and
good will of God in them. The fault is in our minds. The print is good, but
cannot be read, because the eye is dull and dark. Sometimes God comes to us
wrapped up in Clouds, and indeed he varies his dispensations, that he may attain
his End: His End is this, that he may work his people to a strength of Faith
and Love mixed with Fear; that is the proper constitution of a Christian, and the
truest temper of one that is marked out to eternal life. Therefore God
sometimes displays his greatness in the sight of his people, far above all the
manifestations of the sweetness of his mercy; that the spirit of a poor man is
overborn, shakes and trembles at the presence of God: So it was with Moses,
Heb. 12.21. The sight was so terrible (though God meant no ill to Moses) that
Moses shakes and quakes for fear, he was sore afraid. Sometimes God comes with
the manifestations of his fatherly displeasure and dislike, and then how can it
be but the Soul must dwell in bitterness? mourning, heaviness and trembling
must needs possess us.

A third Cause why so little is known of this Interest, that God is our God,
though he be so, is our unhappy diversions. We are oftentimes turned off from
that one thing necessary, and our spirits run otherways, out of light into
darkness. Alas, Solomon minded not this matter, or to little purpose, when he
poured out his Soul after vanities; and for this God pleaded with him, 1 King.
11.9. that he had departed from him; The Lord was wrath with Solomon, because
his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice.

CHAP. XVI.
How the knowledge of blessed Interest in God may be attained. Desires to have
the question determined. A spirit free to yield to the determination. Arguments
proper for the deciding of the question. Those that have an Interest in God are
much in holy resignation. Of taking answers when they are given.

THese things being premised, now I come to show you how we may attain this
blessed knowledge, that God is ours, and so quiet our hearts in this assurance,
that he is our Portion.

First, Let it be the true desire of thy Soul to have this question determined
and concluded, that God is thy God. Certainly many are careless concerning this
business, that never much debate the matter, whether God be their God, or no.
Others there are that have care enough, but it is a perplexed care, a care
sowred with unbelief; there is a desire indeed raised, but it is mixed with
perturbation; the Soul is indeed in motion after it, but it is a very
disorderly motion; working with fretting, and such disturbing fears, that they
leave themselves without judgment. Exodus 6.9. It is said concerning the
Children of Israel, that when Moses spoke to them they would not hear him, for
their anguish of spirit, and for their cruel bondage; for the shortness and
straitness of their spirits. Fears do straiten.

Secondly, A second Means is this; Come with a spirit free to yield to the
determination of truth one way or other; take your answer from God as he shall
give it. Certainly there are a generation that know that they are very partial
and foolish in this business, that fly from the decision and determination of
this question, from a secret strong suspicion that all is not well with them;
and therefore they will rather flatter themselves with the uncertainty of their
own estate, then affright themselves with the clear knowledge of their unhappy
condition. As a guilty prisoner fears to think of the time of Judgment, because
he knows there is just cause of suspicion that it shall go ill with him. Poor
man! what shall it profit thee to carry things thus? If God be not thy God,
what hurt is it for thee to know it? He that lives thus refuses the judgment
of God, and as much as in him lies hates the judgment of God. There can be no
greater evidence of a right spirit, then for a man to put the question home,
whether God be his: for that man is not willing to be the Lords, that is not
willing to have it determined, whether he be his or no.

Some again are so possessed and overcome with fears, so ready to
self-condemnation, to what ever may afflict and oppress them, that they wrap
themselves up in thick clouds, lest any light should spring forth upon them:
These are like unjust Judges, that are precipitant in their proceedings, that
hear only one party. It is a dangerous thing for a man to mistake in Judgment;
as the Wiseman speaks concerning Civil Judgment, Prove. 17.15. He that
justifies the wicked, and condemns the just, even they both are an abomination
unto God. You displease God, and sin against Truth and Righteousness, when you
bear down your selves, and pronounce a sentence of death upon your own Souls,
when God has passed the sentence of life and peace upon you: You cross the
design of Jesus Christ, which is a design of love and peace: You offer violence
to that light, reason and spirit which God has set up in you: You tempt God to
say as you do, and to make good your words. Be therefore willing to hear what
God shall say to you, as they in Acts 10. said to Peter, We are all here ready
to hear the things that are commanded thee of God.

Thirdly, A third Means is, To proceed and argue by proper Mediums, by such
Arguments as are proper to the Question. Some work themselves into a good
opinion by false discourses; concluding upon insufficient grounds that God is
their God, either from an empty appearance of good, or else from a real
presence of the life of such things as may flow from other principles then the
spirit of Adoption; as the fear of God, mourning for sin, subjection of spirit
to the Commands of God; which things indeed are good, but may flow from another
spring then the spirit of Adoption.

But if you would conclude in a right way of reasoning, that God is your God,
argue then by such things as are proper to that state and relation wherein you
suppose your selves to be toward God; and that is, in one word, a spirit of
true Love: You shall find that working thus; it will carry thy Soul in
propensions toward God, equal to thy consolations: The Soul that loves, is
carried unto God with desires equal to its refreshings, yea and more; for when
it cannot taste the comforts of the Almighty, yet it is carried after him in
desires, and says, Lord, I will love thee, though thou will not love me. This
love also will work resignation of our selves to God, equal to all our
enjoyments and expectations from God. David was much taken with Gods love to
him that tendered him in his distresses, but withal says he, Lord, I am thy
servant, Psalm. 106. He gave himself to God in the sense of the sweetness of
that mercy he had from God. Yea this will exceed also; for he will give himself
to God, when he knows not but that God has hid himself from him. This love
will work equal melting of spirit with rejoicing of spirit, and fill a man
equally with shame and joy. True love makes a man as happy in sorrowing, as in
rejoicing; and he never more abounds in godly sorrow, then when he abounds in
the manifestation of Gods love to him. In Psalm. 32. you may see how David was
taken after he found mercy with God, see how he breaks forth detesting his own
nature, and the natures of all men; he compares them to the horse and mule:
like Asaph in another case, So brutish was I and ignorant as a beast before
thee. Now if you would know whether God be your God, what do you find of such a
spirit in you?

Some conclude too well in a false way, by false Arguments. Some indeed too who
believe, conclude too ill, to their own wrong, by mistakes also; as because
they find their feet slipping, and their ways not so even, therefore they
conclude their spirits are crooked, and there is no streightness in them:
whereas it is not the action, but the disposition, whereby we should judge our
selves; nor is it this or that tripping that discovers a man, but the inward
frame of his spirit.

Again, They conclude, Surely God is not my God, because I feel my love so
faint, my faith so feeble; whereas it is not the degree, but the truth of
grace, that must discover our estates.

Fourthly, A fourth Means is this, Labor to be more full in closing with God,
and in the resignation of your selves to him, and in conversing with him, in
all delightfulness, and in whatsoever it is that shows your Interest in God:
For as there is a light in all these, by which they bear witness of themselves,
and of your happy state; so the fuller and stronger they are, the more clear,
full and vigorous is their testimony. A tender plant newly springing from the
ground does not so well discover what it is, as when it is grown up to a full
body; now it is easily known. This is certain, things are more significant as
they are more perfect. A little smoke discovers fire, but more smoke is more
full in its discovery: This the Apostle Peter intimates, 2 Pet. 1.9. If these
things be lacking, if men be but weak in these, if men be not only not sound,
but little in these; they are dark-sighted, they cannot well discern things;
their judgments will be very much clouded and darkened in the things that
concern their peace. Be frequent therefore in those works that discover your
Interest, be frequent in conversing with God, frequent in expressions of the
sincerity of your Love: for it is with God as it is with us; discoveries of our
Love make discoveries of his Love. When I say to a friend, Sir, I love you, you
are dear to me, and I am wholly yours; his heart opens to me, and there is an
echo in his spirit to my Love. When you come to God, and say, Father, I am
thine, and will be thine, wholly thine, and always thine; if your Love can make
you say so to God, much more the Love of God will make him say so to you, Thou
art mine. In Zech. 13. They shall say, Thou art our God, and I will say, Thou
art my people. Therefore be much in this.

Fifthly, Be true to your Interest, walk with a straight spirit, make straight
paths to your feet; for upon such shall peace be: Psalm. 119. Great peace have
they that keep thy Laws. God bears the clearest testimony, where there is most
excellent walking. Usually his testimony is according to the measure of grace,
as the cooperation of the Spirit also is: And as God comes with the most
terrible convictions upon highest transgressors, so he comes with sweetest
consolations to those that walk most evenly. Uneven walking carries a show of
insincerity, and puts a difficulty upon believing. David had much ado (in this
case) to conclude himself to be Gods; was a shattered man, and had lost his
confidence. The Conscience of guilt to an Unbeleever is deadly, and even to a
Believer it is a wound. You put a sword into your enemies hand, when you walk
not uprightly: You arm your unbelief against your selves; that is too strong
without your help. This is certain, that no hope conquers fear, but that which
conquers sin; for they have both one foundation. If therefore now you would
know, and would walk in this light, that God is your God; then you must walk
uprightly and faithfully in your Interest.

Lastly, Take answers of Love when they are given you, and keep them, treasure
them up as most precious things; bless Jesus Christ by whom it is that you
enjoy them, and suffer not the great question of thy Soul to be always in
agitation: Suffer not thy self to be brought to endless disputes, when the
cause is once heard and concluded. It is as well sinful to make void the
grounds of our Consolations, as to break the bonds and cords whereby God holds
us to obedience. You put gold no more to the touchstone when it has once
passed the furnace; you say it is gold. Suffer not your selves to be tossed in
whirls of amazement, when God has said he is your God. It is true indeed,
there will be objections, and they cannot be shunned, they are often injected;
yet these things must sometimes pass undisputed. Mark the season when these
things are disputed in your Souls; commonly at the worst season, when a man is
at greatest disadvantage. When Job's spirit was disturbed, you know what
amazement he fell into; and what advantage did it take of him?

Another season is the season of transgression. The Devil so works in our
unbeleeving hearts, that we oftentimes put that to the question, that God
before has put out of question. Offenses should not work in us amazement and
fear of our former bondage, but they should work in us brokenness and shame.
Lord, pardon me, says David, for my sin is very great. The greater our
transgression is, the more we should have recourse to God and his goodness; but
by no means fly from him. Certainly Gods design is to break sin by sin, and his
aim is to out-shoot the Devil in his own Bow. Oh! they love much to whom much
is forgiven. The end of this discourse is, that you would be serious, solemn
and impartial in debating of this business; for when God has cleared the
matter, it is to thy hurt to bring it about to be disputed again.

CHAP. XVII.
What it is to live upon God as our God. No other life appointed for Saints.
The fullness, beauty and satisfaction of this life. How Christians offer
violence to their relation.

IN this Chapter I would make Exhortation to all that have Interest in God, to
live upon it: Only first I will show what it is to live upon God, as our God.
And it is,

First, To cleave to God with joy of heart, to live in the affectionate
embraces of God in Christ, and delightful conversings with him; to have God for
our life; as it is said of Jacob concerning Benjamin, His Soul, his life was
bound up in the life of the child, Genesis 44.13. that is, they had one lot, if
one lived the other lived, their joys were the same, they could not be severed
or parted, they were but as one: So we should be toward God, our lives should
be so bound up in him, we should be one with him.

Secondly, To live upon God, is to contract all our desires into God, to have
none but what are for him, and according to him. This is the way of life
indeed, when God is a man's all, when the language of his Soul is, Whom have I
in Heaven but Thee? Thus to have desires to God, that he rests not in any thing
beneath God, nor seek any thing besides God; that is to live in God.

Thirdly, To live in a faithful real resignation of ones self unto God. If you
be his, you know that he has taken, chosen and set apart the good man for
himself, Psalm. 4. And so must we live as sequestered persons, as those that are
his; that as the holy things of the Temple were for no other use, so must we be
only for God. In Hos. 3.3. it is said, Thou shall abide with me many days, thou
shall not play the harlot, thou shall not be for another man, but shall be unto
me; so will I also be for thee. God will stand close to that spirit, and be the
comfort, stay and life of it, that reserves it self for him.

Fourthly, It is to contract and draw all your expectations upon God, to lay
all your weight there. If there be any thing thou promisest thine own heart,
let it be from the bosom of God; if there be any answer that thou make to the
fears, doubts and troubles of thy spirit, let it be from the voice of the Lord.
Thus David in Psalm. 62.2. He only is my Rock, and my Salvation; he is my
defense, I shall not be greatly moved. And he says at verse. 5. My Soul, wait
thou only upon God, for my expectation is from him. He tells you what God is to
him, and what indeed he looks for from God: What God is to him, He is my Rock
and my Salvation, in God is my Salvation and my Glory, he is the Rock of my
strength. He tells you also what he expects from God; My Refuge is from him: so
that if I need safety or refreshing and supply of any good, mine eye is upon
him, and from him I look for all. This is to live upon God.

Having expressed in a few words what it is to live upon God; Now take those
Considerations which persuade to live such a life as this.

First, There is no other life for you: This is appointed for you, to this you
are called, for this you are fitted. Fishes may as well live in the air, as you
live in the world. You may try and weary out your selves in vain, but God is
your life. This be sure of, if you neglect this life, either dullness and
benumedness will fall upon you, so that you will grow sensual, brutish and
earthly, strangers to the joy, activity and tenderness of holy Christians; or
you shall fall into a dis-rest, an unsufferable unquietness of spirit, while
you are as a rouling thing in the wind, having no consistence, because you are
out of your place. You shall be afflicted within; and this will be your great
evil, that you lived not in God: And now because you seek life in other things,
you shall dig for your own death. And if you have any reason, it will work to
your own affliction, vex and torment your Souls night and day, because you did
not walk in the counsels of the Most high, and the embracements of his Love:
Your sweetest enjoyments will be all sowred, like the waters of Jericho,
bitterness will be in them not to be endured.

Secondly, This is a life that should be most pleasing, and amiable unto our
spirits; and certainly we are dead and alienated from God, if there be not an
incomparable sweetness to us in it. For,

1. It is the fullest life. The life of all other things has something mixed
with it; the life of your enjoyments, your pleasures and relations, is a mixed
life; there is death in all your comforts, and you taste it, and are sick of it
many times; you know it well. It is true, there is nothing that God has made
and appointed for our use, but brings in some portion of life; our garments
give a little, and our food a little, and friends give something; but how
little do all these give? But now this life is all life; the life you have from
other things is a short poor narrow life, but this life is more complete. Take
the life of a man that has whatsoever his heart can wish, his comforts strike
but upon his sense, or at best have but some light touch upon his spirit: Alas!
the Souls of men cannot drink at these Cisterns: Life that comes from these
things, has not immortality in it; such things are as far from immortality, as
they are from sufficiency. The wisest, the richest, and most honorable, that
have the fullest life, dye, because the life they have by such things cannot
hold pace with the Soul, nor communicate a life of consistency: But the life we
have with God, extends to the whole course and capacity of the Soul; it fills
up every corner, and leaves no want.

2. It is a life that gives perfect satisfaction; he can ask no more that has
it.

3. It is a life that beautifies the Soul. Men's complexions usually are as
their diet is: Oh, he that feeds on God, what a rare complexion is his Soul of?
It makes him like to God; it reduces a Soul from a miserable separation, into
a blessed and orderly union. Our life being in one God, one Good, which is all
Good; he that lives this life, would dye ten thousand deaths rather then part
with it. Thou well knew Peter what thou said in Joh. 6. When Christ said
to his Disciples, Will ye also go away? then Simon Peter answered, To whom
shall we go, Lord? Thou have the words of eternal life. Whither do thou think
we can go? when we knew thee not, we could indeed be without thee; but now we
know thee, whither shall we go? When Nature comes to a state of Consistency, it
rests, it seeks no more: That man is in such a state, that is in God, that
enjoys him and his Love, and rests in him; he lives in an holy contentment and
a glorious rest in all things that are according to God, and in a hatred of all
things that are in opposition to God. If any thing come into the balance with
God, if it be like God, he loves it; but if it be contrary to God, he hates it:
having once drunk of the new wine, he desires not the old harsh spiritless wine.

You may remember the Catalogue of Saints in Hebr. 11. when you are come to
their pitch, then God will be dear to you, and there will be a flatness upon
all things else. The life of every thing is according to its compass, and the
thing by which it is maintained. Men have a better life then beasts, for they
have better things to live on: Princes live better lives then beggars, and
Angels then men, because they have better things to live on. Now then, if your
life be in God, you have the best and sweetest life. We judge of lives in the
world by the contentment they have that live in them; now in this life you find
innumerable Angels, the spirits of just men made perfect; Jesus Christ lives
this life, and thinks it enough, he desires no better life; God himself lives
this life, he lives in himself.

Thirdly, A third thing is, That if you do not maintain this life, you offer
unspeakable violence to that blessed station and happy relation wherein God
has set you. One of these two things you must needs acknowledge.

1. If you live not on God, God is not your portion; you have not taken him for
your God, you have not closed with him, and then you are undone.

2. Or this must be granted, If you have closed with him, you wrong God and
your selves extremely, because you live not on him. Has God taken you? and
have you taken him? Has he said to thee, My Spouse? and has thy Soul said to
him, My Lord and my Husband? And shall we live upon other things, and not upon
our Husband? Shall the child live on strangers bread, and not upon his Father?
Shall the son of a Prince hang as a beggar upon others doors, and be a stranger
to his Fathers love, to his Fathers house and fullness? This is certain, that so
far as you do this, you are not children, but Prodigals (in Luke 15. last) dead
and lost. While you are out of God, and your hearts set on other things, you
are in a state of dead men, in an absolute indisposedness and incapacity,
either to the fulfilling of that which lies upon you as the Law of your
relation unto God, or to the enjoyment of that which is the sweetness,
privilege and comfort of your relation unto God. Is she a wife think you, or
does she not offer violence to the Law of her Relation, that refuses bed and
board with her husband? You should drink water out of your own Cistern, from
your own Head and Spring; who is that but your Lord and Head whom you have
chosen? God will not endure that you should wander; He will hedge up your way,
as he speaks in Hos. 2. and those hedges will teer you. He is pleased with you
when you lean on him, and take of his Love, and then his joy is fulfilled in
you, you do what he loves, he takes contentment in it. Other comforts are
stolen; sweet they may be in the taste, but they will be bitterness in your
bowels; it must be so: for when you live any where but in God, you cross his
great design, which is to make himself your Center, wherein your Souls should
rest: He has appointed no place for thy Soul to rest in but his own bosom; You
despise him when you suffer the joys of your Souls to be clouded. If Elkanah
could say to his wife, Am not I better to thee then ten sons? Surely God may
say much more, Am not I better to thee then ten such things as these that thou
art troubled at? So that if your hearts go out any other way, it is against all
reason. Christ in John 4.10. made account, that the Soul has enough that
tastes of this; for he says, he shall never thirst more. Go no more then to
the hedges and high ways; thou that have such a God and such a Friend, be quiet
and rest in his Love: He rests in his love to you, Zech. 3.17. And will not you
rest in it, and lie down in his arms and embracements, and say, It is sweet, it
is enough? Is not he always embracing you, and cheering you, and holding forth
the breasts of his consolation to you? wooing and winning you, and using all
means to fill your Souls with himself, and to make you blessed in the enjoyment
of him? If then you have any fear of his displeasure, if you have any sweetness
and comfort of the Love of God, if you have tasted and known how good the Lord
is; then keep fast to him, and maintain your Souls in a constant living
communion with him: If you keep near him, you shall find that there is life in
him; Psalm. 69.32. They shall live that seek the Lord.

CHAP. XVIII.
Heavenly life nearest at hand. Christians are to live up to the height of it,
and to maintain it in every condition.

A Fourth Argument is, That this life we speak of is most present, it is
nearest at hand, most attainable, being wholly mental and spiritual, and those
works are quickest done. All other life comes in by parcels and pieces: If a
man would live in honor, what a deal ado is there? what a compass must he fetch
to maintain good thoughts with this man and with that man? and his honor rises
by degrees: The like may be said concerning pleasures and riches. Nay naturally
what a course does the Soul take to bring in that meat which supplies our life,
in eating, concocting and digesting it, and carrying it to every part? The
labor of Nature is great. But this life is maintained by a sweet and silent
working of Spirit; it is a life that is got, kept and cherished by the sweetest
actings of the Soul. In Psalm. 63.6. says David, I shall be filled as with
marrow and fatness, when I remember thee upon my bed. And in Psalm. 20.7. you
have this expressed by the like words, Some trust in Charets, and some in Horses:
Great preparations they make; but what is his trust? I will remember the Name
of the Lord our God. This is life, to remember the Name of the Lord our God: It
is the best exercise of the most noble part of a man toward the most excellent
Object. And what should we love more to look upon and to remember, then God? Do
not you find how a few affectionate thoughts of him come down in showers of
spiritual blessing and consolation? Both the Goodness of God and the Love of
God makes this work sweet. He that seeks to live this way, has not only
sweetness in his end, but in the way to it. Remember how successful you have
found this course: What unspeakable effusions of inward refreshing have you
found upon turning of your spirits unto God, upon the very cast of your eye
upon the Father of Mercies? Alas for those poor Souls, those wandering Beggars,
even all men that do not come in, and that have not God for their God in
Christ! It is pity and grief to see what a poor life they live, and they know
it not: How do they sweat and toil for that which they never get? They get but
the image of what they aim at: For what do they work? For life, they think; but
they work themselves out of life, not into life: they are knocking always at
that door where nothing is, where vanity and emptiness dwells; they are digging
pits that will hold no water; they are seeking grapes on thorns, and figs on
thistles. But this way is sure and sweet; you are sure to find; and your
sweetness is as well in seeking as in finding.

Let Christians then endeavor to live this life: How can we without shame
complain, that we are dead and broken in spirit, that a weight lies upon our
Souls, that we are empty, when life is so near us? when the Well is not deep,
and we might take of the water of Life, and drink freely? Men will not improve
the activity and nimbleness of their Souls to enrich themselves. We oftentimes
charge God with hiding his face from us, but wrongfully; he turns not away his
face from us, we turn from him: we go out of the Sunshine into the cold shade,
and then we shake by reason of cold. But those looks of God, which are easily
had in Jesus Christ, warm and cheer the Soul. Have not such a thought in your
hearts, that holy Consolations are hardly gotten: You wrong the Fountain of
Life, if you think that you may draw and find nothing; or that you may let down
your bucket, and bring it up empty: these are blasphemies, which our
unbeleeving hearts form against God. Certainly God is easy to be entreated,
and to be found of those that seek him. David in Psalm. 32. had hard thoughts of
him; but when he once tried him, though he came in the blackness and dread of
his Soul, covered over with shame and confusion, yet he found God to be to him
according to all his Name, and according to all his Word; his tears were wiped
away, and his broken bones were set again, and he was satisfied.

I would yet a little more clearly express this thing, and wind up the
Exhortation to its just height, in two words.

1. That we endevor to live this life in the highest degree, that is, to live
very much in God; not only to have a true life, but a life proportionable to
our relation unto him. Princes should feed as Princes, and their life should be
like their place: So should Christians have their life proportionable to what
God is. What God is in himself, he is to us, if we have accepted Salvation by
Jesus Christ. Mere peace is too low a temper for a Christian; he is never like
himself, except he live in joy: his principles reach to all joy; and for that
the Apostle Paul prayed, Col. 1.11. Saints might as well live like Princes in
faith and joy, as with feeble hopes, some weak consolations; they might as well
drink a full draught, as taste of the goodness and kindness of God. Who
straitens you? What is your life, but a continual espousing of your selves unto
God? and should not there be much joy on the Marriage day? Therefore the
Apostle prays in Romans 15. The God of peace fill you with all peace and joy
always, [All peace, and always.]

2. A second word is, That you maintain this life in every state. No variation
of our outward estate in this life, should be any diminution of the glory of
this life. The rejoicing you have by Faith, and spiritual enjoyments, should
not be dampt by any thing. Is our fellowship with the Father and with his Son
Jesus Christ? Can we say so? Then what should all the turnings of this world be
to us? How unsuitable to this Communion is it, to have our spirits turned, and
our joys changed with outward things? Suppose it be well with us in the world,
and we be pleased; yet is it fit for the Expectants of eternal life, who have
also a sense of the sweetness of enjoying God, to be much taken with these
things? Is there not a Crown prepared for us? Is not God our God? Can we be
content to be so taken with the dishes at a feast, as to forget our friend at
the table, and that our best friend? Suppose it be ill with us, as we commonly
account ill; though the truth is, it is never ill with a good man, it does but
appear ill; it seems ill, but it is all good and well; for all is from goodness
and love; therefore though it be ill with us, in this sense, yet let us be in
our own temper, that is, rejoice in God: Though nothing be the same, yet if God
be the same, let us be the same. Meditate upon that famous place, Habak. 3.17.
Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines;
the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the
flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls:
Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. This is
that which God calls for, that you live in him always. Whatsoever fails, say as
the Psalmist, Psalm. 73.26. God is my portion for ever. I have a Father in
Heaven, and so though I find things bad enough here, yet it is well, it is
well, well above and well within.

CHAP. XIX.
Further Considerations to promote the forementioned life, of its incomparable
worth. Those that will not live the life of Faith, shall not. A firm belief of
the Gospel the foundation of this Life.

LEt us now take a few things more into consideration, to promote our living in
God; for we have need of all cords to draw us and bind us to this life.

1. The first is, the unutterable difference that is between this life, and any
other attainable or imaginable. Harken to all that can judge, every thing speaks
in the Case; especially take the testimony of God, and of those whom he has
blessed with the best enjoyment of himself: You know what God says of himself,
and what glorious descriptions he has made of that absoluteness and
incomprehensible goodness which is in him: You know what he has said of all
things else, that they are broken Cisterns. Ask the Saints also, and the
spirits of just men made perfect, take the Angels too; they live in God, and
are confined in that life, they go no further; yet their confinement is no
imprisonment, but it is a confinement of love and liberty, it is from the
satisfaction of their Souls. You know that perfect rest is from a perfection of
estate. This life, and the wants of it, always breed motion; the spirit is
still moving out of one condition unto something better. The constant Rest of
those glorified spirits in God, is a plain demonstration that there is no Life
like that. They know the life that we live in this world, they know what
honors, pleasures, and such things are; but they are so beneath them, that
they do no less overlook these, then a Prince does overlook the poorest
Cottage, or the vilest things of this world. Nay the Saints on Earth too, when
they are themselves, do not only prefer a Life in God before all things, but
with contempt of all things: Paul puts a note of superexcellency upon the
knowledge of Christ, and pronounces all things else but dross and dung, Phil.
3. In Heb. 10.34. They suffered the loss of all things for this life with
joyfulness; it did not grieve them to see their goods and estates taken from
them, because they saw this loss make for the further enlargement of their life
in God. And those in Rev. 12.11. loved not their lives to the death for Christ's
sake. When Solomon had traversed all these things, (and I make no doubt but he
had many that traversed them with him,) you know what he says of them, Vanity
of vanities, all is vanity, and vexation of spirit. But why should I dwell upon
outward testimonies? Make use of your own understands, give them full scope to
search, and then think what proportion there is between that life that is upon
things finite, mixed, mutable, and of short continuance, and that life that is
in him, that is infinite, and all good, always the same, abiding for ever.
Descend lower then your understandings: Call in the sense and experience of
those several states of life which you have passed through in the world; as
that of childhood, of manhood; of a single estate, of a married estate; of a
meaner and of a fuller condition; take the best of them, what did you find in
them in comparison of that life that you have in God? Remember all the sense
you have had of the sweetness that is in the enjoyment of God, and then upon
the verdict of your sense and inward experience, you will find that there is no
comparison between the one and the other. How often have you said, when you
have been hunting after and wearied your selves in the vanity of this world, I
will return to my first Husband, for then it was better with me then now? Hos.
2.2.

2. What a deplorable loss to our spirits is it when we suffer a day to pass
without living in God? That day we dye, when as we might have been as they in
Heaven. What shadows of death have covered your Souls when you have been out of
God! What bondage and weight are cast upon men's spirits? how are they as reeds,
of no strength, shaken with every wind, with the turnings of the things in this
world, if their hearts be out of God? We are chargeable with many sorrows and
heart-breakings, and God might put them upon our account; God may visit us for
many of our tears and complaints. What, will not the Fountain give water? will
not the full breast give milk? It is a wrong to say so of God: We are the cause
of our own harms and losses. The rest and cheerful vigor of a man's Soul is of
more worth then a world, and that we lose whilst our spirits roll up and down.
Who can utter what those joys are, what that sweetness of the taste of the Soul
is, which it has in its sincere and secret addresses to the Father of Life, in
its secret conversings with him, and enjoyment of him? What a holy
forgetfulness of all things has this wrought? what a holy magnanimity? what
peace passing all understanding? what joy unspeakable and glorious? And shall
we lose all this by not maintaining our life in God? Our experience and
knowledge of these things should be as an attractive Lodestone, and the sadness
of our Souls under the heavy loss of this should be an enforcement upon us to
keep near unto God. The Apostle, Hebr. 12.5. gives this as a reason why they
were so weak; You have forgotten (says he) the exhortation or consolation that
speaks to you as children.

3. A third Consideration is, The sweet and powerful attractions and
invitations of the Spirit. How often may that be said to us, which Christ says
to them, Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if any man will open
to me, I will come in and sup with him? How often and how strongly has Wisdom
cried from Heaven, and uttered her voice, saying, I have built my house, I have
prepared my feast; come, my friends, all is prepared for you; come and eat, and
rejoice in the fullness of my Love? Christ has followed us, as the waters
followed them in the desert, mercy and goodness has followed us all our days.
Has not God by his Spirit urged us from all things, from all conditions and
relations, from every thing that strikes upon our senses, or that comes within
the compass of our knowledge? As his design is by all things to work us to
himself; so has he not by all things pleaded with us to come home, and to stay
at home, that we might be blessed in the enjoyment of the sweetness of his
presence? He has laid up something even in death it self, to bring us to him.
A Crown was once found in a thorny bush. Surely then if God be so ready to meet
us, and does so seek us; if he have so richly prepared for us, and set things
before us; we should provoke our Souls to feed on these precious things, and to
live that life of the enjoyment of God, which only is Life.

4. If we will not live this life in God, it may be we shall not. If nothing
will prevail, but we will live in the flesh, and pour out our Souls upon
vanities, and will be wandering in this world, traveling in the desert, and
forsaking the fullness and sweetness that is in God; surely it may be, that
shall be our portion all our days: God may, and he does hide himself from the
Soul, when the Soul hides it self from him: God calls, and they will not hear;
he invites, and they are careless: Well, says God, seeing they will not come,
they shall not come; but shall live like servants and strangers, and shall have
no more of the Childrens bread then will maintain them in a state of life, but
not maintain them in a state of peace. Sorrows and troubles will seize upon
men, because they would not embrace sweet mercies. Do you think we can violate
all the mercies and goodness of God, and be born with? No, no: Remember that
example in 1 Samuel 2. Eli had many and great manifestations of Gods love, but
his sin of fond love to his wicked children, would not be done away with
sacrifice or burnt-offering; God said he would bring evil upon the house of
Eli, and he did it.

As a fundamental assistance to all this, Look to the settling of your Souls in
a firm belief of the Gospel; for so far only as we believe the words of eternal
life, they are of power to us. Remember that in Heb. 4.2. The Gospel came to
the Jews, but it did not profit them, because it was not mixed with faith. The
weight of words lies in the truth of them, and not only in the worth of them:
For if you speak of mountains of Gold, of heaps of Pearls, though these are
rich words; yet if there be not as much truth in them, they are but an empty
sound, and take not the heart. Converse much with all the witnesses of the
Scriptures truth, converse with and call to mind frequently that inward Seal
which is upon your own spirits, that living and effectual force and virtue
which the Word of God has had upon your hearts, unto a thankful embracing of
it, to a holy subjection to it, to a courageous and cheerful dependence upon
it, to the melting of your hearts, and the pouring out of your spirits unto
God. Remember these things; for Gods appearances in his Word are as so many
seals and witnesses from above; Rest not till you can say with that Angel, Rev.
19.19. These are the true sayings of God: And with the Apostle in Joh. 21.2. We
know that his testimony is true: For while this is not done, our comforts and
rejoycings in God cannot be high, they cannot exceed our faith.

Then, let no dark clouds remain upon your spirits, so far as you can; if you
have received a little light, make it to increase more and more to the perfect
day. Observe the language of the people of God, I know that my Redeemer lives;
I know that thou art with me. How often have you these expressions in the first
Epistle of John, 2.3.4. and 5. Chapters; We know that we are of God; We know
that God dwells in us; We know that we have passed from death to life; We know
that we are in the truth? Endeavor to come to this.

Again, Be frequent in drawing comfortable and reviving inferences from your
Interest in God. Mark what inference the Church makes, I will wait upon God, my
God will hear me. Faith, and a lively enjoyment of God, is full of
argumentation, and that is the life of the Soul: It is not maintained by a
speculation of God, but by arguments, reasonings, and such conclusions, as are
meat and drink indeed to the Soul.

CHAP. XX.
Our Apostasy has made us unapt for divine Life and Converse with God through
a Mediator, and willing to conform to the lowest Patterns.

HAving said much to this Point, I will show now what great need there is that
so much should have been said, and much more also, for the furtherance of this
life in God; take therefore into your hearts these few things.

First, We are naturally in greater affinity and capacity as to the things of
the creature, then to the things of God. It is was not so from the beginning,
but our Apostasy cast us into this unhappy state; that whereas we were nearest
unto God, now all things are nearer unto us then God; we are grown strangers to
that life. As the child of a Prince that goes away in his childhood, and is
trained up in a beggars house, he contracts a beggars spirit, and grows a
stranger to a Princes life: So it has been with us. As Nebuchadnezzar lived
like a beast, and forgot the life of a Prince, yea of a man; so we are
strangers from the life of God. What God says in Hosea 8.10. is true of us
all, We account his things as strange things, as things that we are not
acquainted with; we have neither a pleasing sight of them, nor a pleasing taste
of them; but they are to us as meat that we cannot relish, that suits not with
us. Nothing was more natural to man then to live in God, as we came out of Gods
hand. It was not more natural for the fish to live in the water, then for us to
live in God; and that was a blessed state. The breast is not more natural to the
child, then that life was to us; that was our first life, and it was sweet,
though it was short. It was a blessed life; for God let out himself in so much
fullness, as took the heart up into intimate acquaintance. We were made upright,
that is, such as God delighted in, such as we should be; now we are altered,
our spirits are divided and scattered. In as much then as we have not
altogether cast off our depraved natures, we have need to be thus called upon,
we being more inclined to the creature then unto God.

Secondly, Naturally we have a greater propensity to observe the Law, then the
Gospel; to do what we are bid, then to take what is offered and given to us in
the Gospel: For the Law is natural to us, it is written in our hearts; the
things that are revealed in the Gospel, are above Nature. This disposition the
Apostle found in those, Ro^. 9. latter end, Israel which followed after the Law
of Righteousness, did not attain unto the Law of Righteousness: Wherefore?
because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law;
for they stumbled at that stumbling stone. It was a stumbling stone indeed to
them; they rather chose to make their way to life by the Law, then to accept of
life according to the propositions of the Gospel; because the Law was more near
to them, it was more natural to them; but the Gospel is supernatural. Children
are nearer to, and more apt to receive those things which are by Nature, then
those things which are by instruction and appointment. It is natural for a
child to eat, he need not be taught it; but for a child to learn, that is hard,
he is at more distance from it: So it is more easy for us to form our selves
to the obedience of the Law, then to the Gospel.

Thirdly, We are naturally more apt to converse with God immediately, then by a
Mediator: Because this is still according to the natural course and original
appointment of God in the first Creation of Man. Though then there was a very
great disproportion, an infinite disproportion between God and us; yet because
there was no Conscience of guilt, no matter of offense, this poor Creature,
though but dust and ashes, could come to God, and did converse with him
immediately. But now since his going away from God, God has declared that man
should come no more immediately to him, but by the Door which he has
appointed: He has made Jesus Christ that Door; and whosoever enters by him,
has life, and none else. You may knock at the door of Mercy, and spend your
days in tears and prayers, but not be heard, unless your way be through Christ:
Therefore, 1 Pet. 1.21. the Apostle speaks thus, Through Him we believe in God.
And Heb. 10. He saves those that come unto God through Him. We are very apt
rather to come to God as he is the great God, our Creator, then to come to him
through a Mediator: Therefore since there is no other way of life but this, we
had need be taught it.

Fourthly, We are apt to think it almost impossible to live such a life as
this. Oh how do we greaten the matter of our duty! We make mountains of
mole-hills: The fault is not in God, but in us. Certainly we might have more:
What says the Gospel? Does it not call us to all joy, all peace, and to
rejoice always? What Is the meaning of this? Does not God speak realities? Shall
we rather have hard thoughts of God, then of our selves? No, no; it is because
we will not, we thirst not: It is not because water is not to be had, but
because we will not take the pains to draw it: We say, the Well is deep, and
the water will not come; but he has said, he will meet those that rejoice and
work righteousness, and that he will draw near to those that draw near to him;
and he will be as good as his word. Certainly the fault lies either in our not
seeking, or not seeking as we should, or in our not taking what is offered to
us. Do you not find, that when you come to the door of grace, it stands open,
and that God is ready to give the comfort and refreshings of a Father, when you
come overwhelmed with sorrows? Is not he always the same? Will he hear one
prayer, and not another? If you did continue in prayer and seeking, might you
not have more? It is very ill to fancy such impossibilities. Why do you set
bounds where God has set none? and make that so hard to get, which God is so
willing to give? and so straiten your selves, when you have license to ask?

Lastly, We are apt to live much by patterns and examples. We see how
Christians live at the common rate; it is neither night nor day with them; they
have a trembling hope, a mingled joy, a mourning life; sometimes bright,
sometimes clouded: and this sight does form other Christians to the same life,
and makes them say, Seeing others live so, I Will live so too. Examples are
mighty. Of what force was Peter's example of to the Galatians in another case?
Beggars form one another spirits to beggary, and a poor kind of life.

Remember that counsel of the Apostle in Romans 12. Be not conformed unto this
world. Make no patterns to your selves further then they agree with the Rule
that you are to go by. How low did the Jews bring themselves by the traditions
of their Fathers? Their Fathers did so and so: That Is a poor beggarly life.
Shall I say one thing more?

We are subject to slothfulness: It Is strange that a Christian should be
slothful of all men. Should we not wonder if we saw a man slothful to gather up
Pearls and Jewels of great worth? Was ever any man so slothful, that he would
not take the pains to eat his meat when he was hungry? Can a poor man be so
slothful, that he will not dig a Mine of Gold when he may have it? What should
make a Christian slothful? What, is it the difficulty of this Life? Certainly
if we say so, we speak evil of God and his goodness, as those Spies did of the
good Land. What, is there difficulty in eating and drinking? Our way all along
is pleasure; even the pleasure of living in God, and enjoying of him. Or is the
work unsuccessful? Dare you say you have let down your bucket, and drew up
nothing? Dare you say, that you went sincerely to God, and could not procure
him to hear you? No, you cannot: for when his servants have come to him in
their worst conditions, he has received and embraced them. Could a man come to
God in a worse condition then David did? Psalm. 32. When he had run from God
desperately, and stayed out a great while, you may well think how often he
quenched the spirit in that time, and contended with God; and yet when he
returned and came home, God did not despise him; God did not say to him, Away
wretch, what have thou to do to expect mercy? but pardoned, refreshed and
cheered him; and David tells it abroad: For this, says he, shall every one
that is godly pray unto thee in a time when thou may be found. Say not then
with thy self, that thy coming shall be unsuccessful.

To that which has been said, we may add these pertinent Considerations.

1. If we live in God, and fetch all our peace, strength and satisfaction from
him, we shall have the best enjoyment of all things else: The taste of Gods
love sweetens all enjoyments.

2. This puts the Soul into a secure state against all dangers; it cannot be
ill with him that enjoys God: It puts a man into a state of conquest and
victory over all things: When a man enjoys God, and lies upon his Love, he is
above all things.

3. This fulfils the end of our Creation: For this was Gods appointment, that
we might be for the demonstration of his infinite Excellency, and to the
enhappying of our selves in the enjoyment of him.

4. This keeps the Soul in a preparedness to all holy walkings and obedience.
When a man lives in God, his heart is tuned to all duties.

CHAP. XXI.
Several Questions concerning the forementioned Doctrine, answered. Saints not
always equally strong. Some afflictions sweetened more then others. Sometimes
God will have his Rod smart.

I Proceed now to answer two or three Questions, which concern this Doctrine
and Truth.

1 Quest. Seeing the Saints have this way for Life, and that their Interest in
God does so balance their Souls; whence is it that they are so frequently
dejected, so under hatches?

2 Quest. If Interest in God be so effectual to lift up Christians spirits,
whence is it that there are so many weaknesses, deformities and contrarieties
to God in their spirits?

3 Quest. Whence is it that they who have no Interest in God, oftentimes seem
to go through very great troubles with much strength?

1 Quest. If the Saints life springs from their Interest in God, how is it then
that they are so often broken in spirit, that there dwells with them heaviness,
confusion and distraction oftentimes as with others?

Answer. In the first place let us know, that the Saints do not all live this
life equally; they have not all received such measures of grace, that they can
with equal magnanimity pass through their troubles in this world. Some pass
through trouble with a spirit of glory, being highly lifted up above their
sufferings: So Paul in Romans 5. We glory in tribulation. In Heb. 10.34. They
s^ffered joyfully the spoiling of their goods. And Acts 5. when the Apostles
were scourged, they went away rejoicing, that they were accounted worthy to
suffer for the Name of Jesus. Others go not on triumphantly, but steadfastly;
though their afflictions be not so much under them, yet they are above their
afflictions; though they cannot go on their way with so much gallantry as
others, yet they are not turned out of their way. So Job, that pattern of
patience, was sometimes up, and sometimes down; but he had the Conquest. It is
with Christians as it is with the Air, which is sometimes bright and sometimes
cloudy, sometimes stormy and sometimes calm. A Ship at anchor rouls in the Sea,
but is safe: So Christians have many tosses in this world, but are secure.
Peter is an instance of this truth. And some of our own Martyrs and others
might be produced, who have showed a very trembling spirit, a misgiving heart
in the time of their trials. Some have begun to fret at their condition; as
that good man Asaph did in Psalm. 73. because he saw God did not do for him as
for others, was angry, and disputed the matter. Jeremiah did so in the 12
Chapter of his Book: Jonah did so with a witness: David sometimes, Why have
thou forgotten me? says he. Sometimes they are brought to use ill means to
help themselves; Asa did so in 2 Chronicles. 15. Because God did not help him, he
would see if he could help himself; he struck a League with the King of
Assyria, and thereby provoked God.

The Reason of this Inequality that is between Christians compared one with
another, or that is to be found in themselves at one time compared with
themselves at another time, lies in such things as these.

1. Some sufferings are more sweetened with the divine presence then others:
God attends some afflictions with more inward Consolations and manifestations
of his Love, then others. Those sufferings that are for his Names sake, are
usually thus sweetened. The Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4.14. says, If you be
reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye: What follows? For the Spirit
of Glory and of God rests upon you. These two, sufferings and rejoycings, are
mixed and put together: In 1 These. 1.6. You have received the Gospel in much
affliction, and joy of the Holy Ghost: Much affliction, much persecution, and
therefore joy in the Holy Ghost. Sufferings for God and Christ, are no bars to
the sweetest serenity and most perfect calm of the Soul; notwithstanding these,
joy often rises to the highest, even unto ecstasy; as some have found: God
usually pours out himself very fully at such times. Light, though but a spark,
will appear against all the darkness of a whole spacious room; The little light
of a twinkling Star, prevails against the darkness of the night: How much more
will the light of Gods face, when that shines upon the Soul, prevail against
all the darkness of sufferings that are upon a man? When Peter and Daniel were
in great afflictions, God sent his Angel to comfort them. We have examples in
our own stories, that do sufficiently witness what the sight and taste of
divine Love will do in sufferings: Have not some called the flames beds of
Roses? not only things without pain, but of pleasure? Eusebius tells of one
that writ to his friend from a stinking Dungeon, and dated his Letter, from my
delicate Orchard. God so sweetens every condition, even the worst that they
undergo for his sake, that they have more contentment and satisfaction of Soul,
then a Prince on his Throne. Therefore the Apostle 2 Cor. 7.4. has these
expressions, Great is my boldness of speech toward you, great is my glorying of
you, I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulations.
Strange matter of Joy! He was very glad to hear that they were hunted and
persecuted of this world for the Name of Christ, as himself was; because now he
knew they should enjoy more of God, and of that which the world knew not.
Therefore the Apostle James says, Account it all joy when you fall into such
temptations, when you suffer thus. Other afflictions and trials usually have
less of sweetness in them.

Secondly, True Interest in God, is not always of equal strength and power with
Christians. Let a man be supposed to be of a vast estate (such things have been
found,) if he does not keep an exact account of what he has, he may think
himself worse then nothing; and then will be as a Beggar, though he be rich: So
a Christian not keeping the account of his Interest clear, may suffer in his
Spirit as one that is without God, when indeed he is in the bosom of God. Oh
how is our unhappy spirit subject to excursions and wanderings from God! and
these are the destruction of our peace, and bring our Souls into a night of
sorrow. Asah (of whom I spoke before) was out upon this account, because he had
lost the sweetness of the enjoyment of God.

Thirdly, God sometimes leaves his people, not only to their sufferings, but to
grief, yea and to faintings under their burdens. When God comes in way of
Correction, he will have his Rod known to be a Rod, it shall smart. It is true,
the ultimate end of it, is to make us more partakers of his holiness; His end
is cure, but the way is by grief, and we shall know the weight of his hand when
he comes thus: When God comes to visit us, it will be a sharp season. He will
not always deny us some comfort from the manifestation of himself to us; but he
will so manage the matter, that we shall know he is not pleased with us. But
however, there is a vast difference between the people of God, and others;
between their impatience under their burdens, and that of the world; for God
does maintain his presence in his people, and they find it; it is attended with
such a Spirit as this, usually in the worst times they can still plead with
God. You have an example in Psalm. 44.17. All this is come upon us; yet we have
not forgot Thee, nor dealt falsely in thy Covenant: Our hearts have not turned
back, neither have our steps declined from thy Way: And yet they had complained
very much in the words before, and showed a deep sense of the burdens and
troubles that lay upon their spirits; yet for all this God was their God, and
they had not departed from him. So in Isai. 26.8. In the way of thy Judgments,
O Lord, we have waited for Thee; the desire of our Soul is to thy Name, and to
the remembrance of it. This is the frame of the spirit of Gods people, that
although they complain and be full of sorrows, yet still their affections are
toward God; they are unmovable and unchangeable; our desires are still
toward Thee. You know that famous speech of Job in Chap. 13.15. Though he kill
me, yet will I trust in him; and yet Job spoke many hard things, and was full
of bitterness. And the Church here in this Micah 7. says, She will wait, and
bear the indignation of the Lord, which was heavy upon her, till God came and
showed mercy to her.

Again, Though they are born down, they rise again; all the hurt of their
spirits ends in a sweet recovery. In Jer. 31.18. it is said concerning Ephraim,
Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised; I was as a Bullock unaccustomed to
the yoke: See what a carriage here was; he was smitten and smitten, but still
stout and unquiet, restless and kicking against the Rod; but afterward he
says, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; though there was before a froward
spirit, there is now a praying spirit, that he might be brought unto himself; I
was ashamed, says he, and confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my
youth. The return of Saints is with this double excellency.

1. With a deep self-abhorrency when they find they have fainted in the day of
their trial; when they reflect upon the ill carriage of their spirits toward
God, there is a deep shame falls upon them. Job is an instance in Chap. 42.
when he saw God, and remembered his own carriage, he says, I abhor my self in
dust and ashes, [in dust and ashes,] that is, he was very much afflicted; for
that was the manner of the afflicted, as you may read in Jer. 26. Oh daughter
of my people, gird thee with sackcloth, and Wallow in Ashes: So in Isai. 61. I
will give them beauty for Ashes; that is, in stead of a mourning condition, I
will put them into a joyful. So in Psalm. 73. that good man confesses
concerning himself, I was foolish and ignorant, even as a beast before Thee; my
carriage was brutish and absurd.

2. They attain also more subjection unto God then before, they have their
hearts more bowed to him then before: Discoveries of sin, and restored mercies,
do mightily work upon their spirits. In Psalm. 39. David after his dis-rest
yielded to God, and came to more calmness of spirit; I held my peace, because
it was thy doing. The Lord will not lose his people; his end when he comes to
smite them, is not to drive them from him: They can say to God, as he said to
his Master, when he was driving him from school with a staff, It Is not thy
staff can drive me from thee. What father ever used the rod upon his child,
that he might alienate the heart of his child from him? Nay, if a father had
power to bring the spirit of his child to his own heart, he would do it: God
can, and therefore he will. It cannot stand with that infinite goodness which
is in God, by afflictions, or any thing else, to separate his people from
himself, he having set his own Image upon them: What, would he give the blood
of his own Son for them, and suffer them to be thrown away? No, neither will he
suffer them to throw themselves away.

CHAP. XXII.
How it comes to pass that deformities creep into the Conversation of
Christians, since they have so high a principle of life. Whence it is that
those which enjoy not God, seem to go through afflictions with strength.

A Second Question is,

Answer. It is a most deplorable Truth, and to be lamented of all the
generation of the righteous, That very few of those that believe, do enjoy a
clear and constant sight of their Interest in God. Many do oftentimes bring a
damp upon it by their going out from him, they dwell not in him and the hope of
glory; for the nature of that is to sanctify and bring us into a conformity to
God. 1 John 3.3. He that has this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is
pure: And, Whosoever abides in him, sins not: So far as a man's abiding is
in God, so far he is at a greater distance from sin.

2. There is something in the natural temper (I may call it rather unnatural)
that very much clouds the beauty of a Christians Conversation. Some things will
be in Christians according to that state of the body which they have here: Let
a man be strongly disposed to anger, fear, grief, or sorrow, these passions
will oftentimes appear, because they are in the constitution of the body; and
grace is not so perfect a Physician as to alter the state of it: The end of
grace is to bring the worser part into conformity and obedience, and it will do
it at last; and in the mean time, where it cannot govern, it will cry out and
complain, as the Apostle in Romans 7. O wretched man that I am, etc.

3. In great trials the spirits of men are apt to be more serious, solid and
contracted, then in smaller matters. A Soldier gathers up his courage, puts on
his armor, and will stand to it, when he is assaulted for his life; whereas he
minds not the little dog that bites him by the heels. Great spirits oftentimes
are moved at small things, that are not moved at all at greater things. Aaron
was sometime stirred at a less occasion; yet when that sore trial was upon him,
mentioned in Levit. 26. Aaron held his peace: He had a plain signification of
the Mind and Will of God in the thing, and he was quiet.

4. Assaults upon our outward man are more visible then corruptions that dwell
in us: Sin comes oftentimes stealing and creeping by degrees: so it did upon
Solomon; though he was a wise man, yet he was not aware whether he was going.

5. Afflictions and sufferings being things without us, corruptions and sins
within us, it is easier for us to bear one then the other. A Giant can bear a
burden upon his shoulders, but is not able to bear a little stone in his
bladder. The Earth that is not moved by all the storms without, is shaken with
a little wind in the body of it.

6. Outward sufferings and trials usually are more consistent and abiding; but
miscarriages, obliquities and deformities are transient things, more sudden,
and so surprise us.

The third Question is,

It is to be granted that they do so many times, but never as the Saints do.
Saul and David, and see the disproportion of their spirits in their trials. In
Saul evil wrought like it self: The natural product of affliction is
depravation. Affliction stirs up, and puts life and activity into sin: as when
you beat a Wolf, you make him more a Wolf then he was before. In 2 Chro. 28.22.
it is said of Ahaz, that in the time of his affliction he did add to sin against
God; he sinned more and more: This is that Ahaz; or as some read, This is Ahaz
the King, the same. A like phrase you have in Psalm. 102.23. Thou art the same.
Saul fretted and was angry; his Soul was at dis-rest, and in a rage within him,
because he was crossed, and suffered a frustration of his hopes and designs.
This is the natural operation of evil upon such spirits; as the Wiseman has
it in Prove. 29.3. The foolishness of man perverteth his way, and his heart
fretteth against the Lord; he is angry with his condition, and, in that, with
God. But see David's carriage in Psalm. 39. I laid mine hand upon my mouth, I
held my peace, because it was Thou, O Lord, that did it. It was a patience
not constrained, but from satisfaction of spirit; he saw love in his
affliction, and that sweetened his Soul. I know, says he, that in very
faithfulness thou have afflicted me, Psalm. 119.17. Faithfulness is a reach
beyond Justice, there is something more of sweetness in it, and that David saw.
Saul went out and did not keep his way, but David made straight steps unto his
feet. In Psalm. 18.21. he gives an account of himself; I have kept the ways of
the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God; or, I have not done
wickedly from God; or, as the Chaldee, I have not walked in my wickedness from
God; for all his Judgments were before me, and I did not put away his Statutes
from me: they were before me, in mine eye, for observation; before me, in mine
heart, for delight and contentment, and I did not turn my back upon them; or as
it is in 2 Samuel 22.23. I turned not away from them: so is the expression there;
I was also upright before him, or with him, or I was perfect to him, I was
upright to him; all the while I was under my sufferings, my wishes, mine
affections, my intentions were unmovable, they were still toward God, I did
not change in my spirit toward God, though he made me to know many changes in
my condition; I was tempted to impatience and revenge, but I kept my self from
mine evil dispositions and workings; I bridled my spirit, and so preserved my
self in his ways.

To be short, Take the most noble and generous spirit in the world, that has
not attained to an enjoyment of God, and you shall find that it is far beneath
that spirit which a sight of Interest in God works in his people. Look upon the
strength that such a man may possibly have, it is either from mere Reason,
whereby he may persuade himself to patience by the necessity and mutability of
things, etc. but this can never lead him into those depths, whereby he shall be
filled with those joys and comforts which the sight of Interest in God fills
the Soul withal: Or it may be from natural courage; and every man has
something of this, and many beasts have more then men: Job has told us of the
courage of the Horse in Job 39.20. Can thou make him afraid as the
grasshopper? And in Chap. 41.33. concerning the Leviathan, he says, that upon
the Earth there is not his like, which is made without fear; he beholds all
high things, -- he is a king over all the children of pride. But there is often
an addition to this natural courage in men from pride both against God and men,
and by an influence from this world that strengthens them in their sufferings
and hardships. But see a little further the reason why many times those men
carry it out so stoutly; they do not understand the significancy and import of
their sufferings, as the people of God do: It is true, God intends more evil
unspeakably in the sufferings of the one, then of the other; but one has a
hint of it, more then the other: The Unbeleever understands it not, receives
not the message into his judgment, he conceives not that these are tokens of
the displeasure and anger of God against him; but the sight of the displeasure
of God to a good man is more then any Rod.

Once more, No wonder that they bear so strongly, for it is their Judgment: God
pours out a spirit of stupidity and senslessness, a spirit of hardness upon
them; as you have it in Romans 11.8. He pours on them the spirit of slumber: The
word properly signifies compunction, or remorse; but so it reaches not to the
Hebrew Text, for the words in the Hebrew are in Isai. 29.10. He poured on them
the spirit of deep sleep. Some therefore because they see the Hebrew does speak
this, have made the Greek word to speak in another sense then it is translated;
they read it the night, and so make this spirit of com^unction to be the spirit
of the night: However that may be something strained, yet certainly the word
must answer to the Hebrew, and that is a spirit of deep sleep. Now as a man
that is asleep has not a sense of things, so it is with these men. The Apostle
uses another expression in the words before in verse. 7. of Romans 11. The rest
were hardened. It was with them as it is with a man that has a thick skin
drawn over him, that has a part of his flesh become brawny, he cannot receive
the sense of things; no more can these: therefore it is no wonder they bear
their sufferings so stoutly as they do; it is their Judgment.

CHAP. XXIII.
A Comparison of Interest and Enjoyment, and the excellency of Enjoyment
evinced from Interest. What is requisite to make full Enjoyment. An
affectionate Close to all the foregoing Discourses.

I Will shut up this Discourse by drawing one Inference from what has been
premised. The Inference is this, If Interest in God be so sweet, so powerful
and mighty, how precious and excellent is the enjoyment? For that take these
few Considerations.

First, To have an Interest in God, is much less then to enjoy God. A great
difference there is between the meanest Saint and a glorified Spirit; and yet
the meanest Saint has as well an Interest in God, as the highest Creature in
Glory. Interest in all things is less then possession. An heir has not so much
sweetness and content in his right and title, as when he comes to have actual
possession of that he looks for. A state of mere Interest is a state of
expectation; and where there is hope, there is always grief: it is a state of
desire, and that imports want; for when there is fullness, desire cease.
Therefore you find this to be the temper of the people of God, that having seen
their Interest, they long after enjoyment. In 2 Cor. 5. We sigh and groan,
says the Apostle (and he heaps one word upon another) till we come to the
fullness of that which we have Interest in.

Secondly, Consider this, That though Interest here be not without some
enjoyment of God, yet that enjoyment is far less then it will be. There be four
things that make up enjoyment of God.

1. A gracious presence, a sweet effusion or communication of himself to the
Soul. It must not be a bare presence, but an active presence; God pouring forth
himself. A Child that has the breast, does not enjoy it, when he cannot draw
the milk. A Garden is not enjoyed by him whose it is, that has neither flowers
nor fruits from it. That which we have of God here, though it be more then we
had reason to look for, and is that which the Angels wonder at; yet it is very
little to that which we look for in Heaven; it is called the first fruits: it is
but the infancy of that blessed state whereto we are adopted. All the enjoyment
we have of God in this world is not effectual to the removing of its contrary,
that is, to cast out all fear and heaviness, all sorrow and dejection out of
the mind. That enjoyment of God which Christ himself had here on Earth did not
keep out all fear and sorrow. Fullness is reserved for Heaven.

2. A second thing is, A mind enlightened and enabled to a just comprehension
of the excellency of God, and of the sweetness of the presence and love of God.
By comprehensive, I mean as much as the faculty can reach and extend unto. But
now the mind cannot have an observation of all the emanations of divine Love;
more then a Child can count the drops of milk which it sucks: We may as well
tell the drops of rain in a shower, as tell the particulars of the love of God
poured forth upon us: Our minds cannot extend to a just comprehension of that
sweetness and love that is in God. It is with us as it is with a child that has
a Jewel put into his hand of exceeding great value for the matter of it, and of
greater worth for the signification, being the Seal of a Crown to him, but the
child knows it not: So the mercies of God are more in their nature and in their
end then we can comprehend, they are far above our reach. Our minds are so
straitened, that we cannot have a full enjoyment of God here; but if in this
life we find so much sweetness in what we do enjoy, what will it be when our
Light shall be like the Sun at noonday?

3. There is requisite a lively sense of the presence of God. The Soul has its
sense as well as the body; nay more, for it is the fountain of sense to the
body. In Phil. 1.9. the Apostle prays, that they may abound in all knowledge and
sense of the things of God. As the body receives its life from things by the
senses, so does the Soul also receive its life in the sweetness and comfort of
the presence of God by its spiritual sense. Take away sense, and a man is as a
dead thing, and all things are dead to him; and the presence of God would be a
dead thing to the Soul, if it were not for the Souls sense of it; I mean the
spiritual sense, which the Church speaks of, Cant. 2.3. I sat under his shadow,
and his fruit was pleasant to my taste. But now the sense of the Soul has here
a dullness upon it, it is short of that quickness to which it was appointed;
therefore we cannot have that full enjoyment of God here, as hereafter. But if
what we do enjoy now be so sweet, what will the enjoyment be, when the Soul
shall be so full of sense?

4. A perfect love of God is required to a full enjoyment of God. Love must be
in its utmost height and heat, if the Soul have a complete and full enjoyment
of God. Take two persons never so qualified and furnished to make the life of
both comfortable, if there be not love, there cannot be a happy enjoyment of
these two. As a man loves a thing, so he enjoys it when he has it: So, as a
man loves God, so he will cleave to him, and pour out himself in a blessed
fruition of him: As our love is, so is our life and enjoyment. Though our
enjoyment of God here be imperfect and weak, yet it is of that strength, that it
conquers and bears up the heart against all afflictions whatsoever: Therefore
there must needs be a far greater sweetness in the fullness of this Enjoyment.

Thirdly, A third Consideration is this; Let our enjoyment here be what it
will, it is mixed with many sorrows, many wants, many straits, both within and
without: our life is such here, that our afflictions many times seem to
outweigh our enjoyments; they strike quick upon the sense, and come too near
the spirit: Hence it is that you sometimes find good men complain more of one
affliction, then they mention a thousand mercies. Our life here is mixed: 1
These. 1.6. You have received the Word with much affliction, and with joy; they
are mingled. Now I say, If the Consolations of God from that little enjoyment
of him here in the midst of many sufferings be so sweet and precious, that it
bears the Soul up above all; what then will the full enjoyment of God be in
that Land of Rest, where is light and no darkness, life and no death, all good
and no evil?

Fourthly, The enjoyment of God here is subject to many interruptions.
Sometimes by our sinful diversions from God, the Soul goes out from the bosom
of the Father, minding other things, and so our hearts are taken and brought
into an estrangedness from God, to a poor kind of delight in other things. As a
bird that wanders from her nest, so is a man that is out of his place, Prove.
27.8. Surely a man is never more out of his place, then when he goes out from
God; and then he is like a bird that is gone from her nest; she knows not where
to rest, but is troubled to find the way home again, and to recover the loss
that she has brought upon her self by her foolish wandering.

Sometimes there is an interruption by the appointment of God. God will not
always have you lie at the breasts of Consolation; nay, says God, when his
people are sitting by the Well of the Water of Life, This must not be all your
work, I Will have you about this business, and that employment: Now these
interruptions do lessen our life and our happiness; but the time will come when
we shall always live in the presence of our Father, and our minds shall be
encumbred with nothing else, but we shall be filled and blessed with the vision
of God.

Sometimes this interruption is caused by Gods going out from us; there be
recesses and retreats of God; he sometimes out of his wisdom shadows his love
and favor: but in Heaven there will be always a full, visible and clear
presence.

Fifthly, The enjoyment of God must needs be sweet, because it is such as fills
the whole capacity of the Soul; and when there is fullness, there is rest. When
a man has what he can wish, he can go no further. At thy right hand are Rivers
of pleasure, and in thy presence is fullness of joy for evermore, Psalm. 16. ult.
The Apostle in Acts 2.28. something alters the expression that is used in the
Psalms, Thou have made me glad with thy Countenance. The sense of the good
presence and favor and love of God, does fill the Soul with pleasure; and when
it can hold no more, it has enough.

Let the issue of all this Discourse be to set our hearts a longing and
wishing, O that I were blessed with a full enjoyment of God! O that I had as
much of him as ever I shall or can have! The Soul that is thus in travel,
travels without pain. The Mind reaching after other things, oftentimes
outstretcheth it self: There are usually, if not always, pains with desires,
especially in desires after the Creature, because that oftentimes there is a
frustration of our desires, or an elongation of the things, the things are far
off, hard to come by; our desires oftentimes are mute, they speak not; or the
things that we desire, know not our minds: but our desires after God always
speak, they are open unto God, he hears their voice. All my desires are
before Thee, says David, Psalm. 38.8. and my groanings are not hid from Thee.
Therefore it must needs be sweet, when the Soul lies thus open unto God. Other
desires do not assure and secure a man in the things he desires; a man may wish
this, and wish that, and go without both: but the Soul that thus longs after
God, is instated in his wish, has a present enjoyment, and certainly shall
have a full enjoyment of him. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him,
God will hear them, Psalm. 145.16. They that long most, receive most; it is the
hungry spirit that feeds best, and fares best. When the Church was sick of
love, being very much taken with what she had, and much longing after what she
wanted; then she could say, I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine, his
desire is toward me, in Cant. 7.10. That refreshed her; the Greek reads it,
his Conversion is toward me; indeed God will turn to those that go out toward
him: In Isai. 64.5. He meets those that work righteousness, and seek him in his
ways.

Again, Consider this, That longing after a full enjoyment is the natural
effect of a known Interest in God. Look through all the Orders of the Creation,
and you shall find that every thing seeks the enjoyment of its Interest; Angels
do, Men do, Beasts do, they seek their own, their own pastures, their own
young, their own mates. Can you imagine that we should be the Children of God,
and account him our Father, and not long to enjoy him? A child hears from his
father, and receives tokens from his father, but he is not contented, he would
be with his father: So it is truly with a Child of God; so far as he has
received of that Spirit, he longs to enjoy God. Interest in God works by a
power of its own, and God works in it too: God pursues his Interest in us to
the utmost; therefore he is working us to himself by all means, all ways, by
good and evil, by life, by mortality and death, by the senses, by Ordinances,
by his Spirit; He is always at work to bring us home, that we may be in his
possession, and enjoy him. And to make it the more full, he has appointed the
breaking of these bodies, that our spirits may come more full to him; nay, and
he has appointed a day of Resurrection, that our bodies may come full to him;
and this is one great end of Christ's coming again, in Joh. 14. that we may be
with him in his Fathers house. If God so drives on his Interest to make us
perfect with him, let us drive on our Interest to make God fully ours in the
enjoyment of him.

Lastly, There is nothing to hinder in this Case, that you should not drive on
to a full and perfect enjoyment of him. Are you full in this world? should your
full enjoyments of the world hinder your full enjoyments of God? Is not God
better then these things? Are you scanted in this world? The more need you have
then of the fullest enjoyments of God. Have you much of God? You know the more
what God is, and can you choose but desire him? Have you little of God? Then you
need more, and should drive on to get more. Are you sure of your Interest?
Where Interest is most sure, there is most love; and where the Soul loves most,
thither it drives most. Do you fear your Interest? You have so much the more
reason to seek after a full enjoyment of God to the satisfaction of your Souls.
What do you think should stand in the way? You must part with the world; What
is this world to your Fathers house, and to God himself? You must dye; What is
death? Cannot that everlasting life recompense you infinitely? Therefore there
is nothing to hinder you. Then seeing God invites you and provokes you to seek
more of him in this world, though you cannot have all, I conjure you by all the
sweetness that is in God, and that you have found in God, that you obey his
Word herein, and drive on more diligently and strongly to a more full enjoyment
of God.

FINIS.
PSALM. 119. verse. 4. I am thine, save me; for I have sought thy Precepts.


CHAP. I.
Gods Interest in man natural and acquired; this latter twofold. Of holy
Resignation. Of true and false Mourning.

I Have chosen this excellent Pattern (to propose to you and to my self) of an
ingenuous spirit. David, a man after Gods own heart, would be saved, but not
after the manner of the men of this world, that would be saved to be their own,
and to enjoy themselves at their own wills; but he in being saved would be
Gods, and at his disposing; I am thine, save me. There are three things here
that would be thought on.

1. What David means when he says, I am thine.

2. What the Reason should be that we should use such an acknowledgment of our
selves to be Gods when we pray to him.

3. What force there is in this argument to be pleaded with God, I am thine,
save me.

Thine] We are said to be Gods, either by way of affection, as the Church,
Cant. 2.16. I am my well-beloveds, and my well-beloved is mine: Or in respect
of that Interest that God has in us. The Interest of God in man is upon a
twofold Foundation and Account.

1. Upon account of the Law of Nature, the natural Law, which does set God as
Lord over all, and acknowledge him supreme Commander of every thing, because he
is the Original and glorious Fountain of all Being. Upon that account it is
that in Psalm. 89.11. it is said, The Heavens are thine, and the Earth also is
thine; as for the world and the fullness thereof, thou have founded them. There
is the ground of that Dominion which God has over all things; they are his
offspring, things that himself has made. And in Psalm. 50.12. God owns himself
in this Sovereignty; The Heavens are mine, and the Earth is mine, and all that
in them is. To be able no otherwise to say, I am thine, is but sad. In a
family, the meanest things that are scarce fit to be retained in the house, are
his to whom the house belongs: All things are Gods, even the meanest creatures;
and to have no other relation to God then this, is but to be in the condition
of things most contemptible. In Deuteronomy. 10.14. God speaks of a better relation to
his people; Behold, the Heavens, and the Heaven of Heavens is the Lord thy
Gods, the Earth also with all that therein is: Now the Lord had a delight in
thy fathers to love them, and chose his seed after them, even you above all
people, as appears this day. We must be his upon a better account then that
of Creation.

There is a second Interest that God has in man, and that is acquired; and
that partly by Redemption, God having redeemed both by price and power a
certain number to himself out of the lump of mankind; these in an especial
manner are his. So Isai. 43.1. Thus says the Lord that created thee, O Jacob,
and formed thee, O Israel, Fear not, I have redeemed thee, I have called thee
by name, thou art mine. [I have redeemed thee,] that is, I have delivered thee
from the great power of the mighty Ones that bare Rule over thee, and under
whom thou sufferedst hard things: Therefore thou art mine. This we know is a
Law that is amongst men, That those that are conquered, and saved from the
sword, become his by whom they are so subdued.

There is a second acquired Interest that God has in man, and that is by
Contract; wherein man engages himself to a resignation of himself to God: In
which sense David spoke also, when he said, I am thine. The Contract between
God and man, which is the foundation of this Interest, is a mutual engaging to
be each others, according to their capacities. I Will not insist upon opening
this description, but will a little hint at some of those strange things that
are in this Contract between God and man: And,

First, A word as to Gods part. It Is a Contract where there is the greatest
disparity that is imaginable between the two parties: For here is he that is
the highest, and the other party that is lower then the lowest and meanest
creature, more contemptible then the worm. Princes do not make contracts with
beggars, and yet they may have need of such, though not for their assistance,
yet as theaters to display their bounty and goodness on. God needs not the
whole Creation to set forth his glory, who is absolute in himself, God al
sufficient.

To this add that disparity that is between the things which God requires of
man, and the things which God engages himself to do for man. Was there ever
such a Contract made? Says God, Do you but your part, which is not a thousand
part of what is due, and I Will do my part; What is that? More then he did at
first indent for; I Will give you an eternal, immutable life, and that in my own
Presence and Kingdom.

You may cast your eyes from that again, and wonder more at the Mediator, by
whom and through whom this Covenant, this Contract was made: God sends his own
Son into the world, both to bespeak man to be willing to enter into this
Contract, and to seal up the Contract with his own blood.

That part which concerns man, his resigning of himself unto God, which is an
absolute parting with himself, and putting himself everlastingly under the
power, wisdom, and sovereignty of God, to be commanded, ordered and disposed in
all things by him according to his Will. I shall now set before you certain
peculiar things that are proper to this engagement of man, and resignation of
himself unto God.

1. In resigning of our selves to God, there is an act springing from the
greatest necessity, and wherein there is the greatest liberty and freedom of
spirit. It was ill done to put these two into a contrariety and opposition,
Necessity and Freedom, which do most perfectly agree: By how much the more any
creature is excellent, by so much the more he is necessarily what he is, and
yet most freely such. The Angels love God necessarily, and yet most freely: Nay
God himself is good most necessarily, and yet is so, and does good most freely.

This might be manifested in sundry Instances, where there is some degree of
necessity, and also a very excellent freedom and willingness. As for example;
Take two friends fully suited to each other, their hearts are necessarily
carried to mutual embraces, and yet most freely. It is in this case as in
flying from evil; a man flies from evil by a kind of enforcement, and yet
freely, especially from some great evil; when he sees there is a necessity to
fly, he cannot but fly, and yet does it freely.

In resigning of our selves to God, that which is the fundamental reason of it,
lays upon the Spirit of a man a strong necessity, and yet leaves that spirit in
a very sweet and excellent freedom, Psalm. 110.10. You have both these expressed,
Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the day when thou putest
forth thy power, who wilt rule in the midst of thine enemies, and raise up to
thy self a Kingdom not only among strangers, but Rebels; in this day of thy
power thy people shall be willing, yea willingnesses, very willing: they shall
come to thee, with all earnestness. The will of a man may truly and in good
fence be subject to compulsion, and yet not limited in its freedom, it may be
compelled; how? Not by mere physical power acting upon the Spirit of a man, but
by a moral power, by force of Arguments and Reasons proposed, and set on the
soul; so Saul's servants compelled him to eat bread, 1 Samuel 28. And they were
sent to command and to compel them to come to the Feast. Indeed this enforcing
and commanding reason is the great instrument of the power of God, whereby he
commands the spirits of those whom he loves into obedience to himself. This is
the key that opens the heart, as it is said, Acts 16.14. God opened the heart
of Lydia. Resignation of a man's self to God is from the efficacy of Gods
mighty appearance and manifestation of himself to the soul of a man, by which
he is over powered and cannot deny God; but notwithstanding this necessity he
does most freely fall under the power that acts upon him.

2. A second thing concerning Resignation, is, that Self is saved by being
destroyed, it lives ^y death; A man finds himself by losing himself, and does
best enjoy himself by parting with himself. There is a great mistake, and it is
the fascination and witchery of the powers of darkness upon the spirits of men,
that by Nature (corrupt nature) we are apt to think, that the giving of our
selves to God, is the giving of our selves away to our loss; whereas it is our
making; it is not the straitning, but the perfecting of our freedom* Take it in
this Similitude. A poor woman that lives in rags, has the honor and happiness
of being wife to a great Prince offered her; for her now to give up her self,
is no way to straiten her freedom, or diminish her happiness; for she will
enjoy her self better as a Queen, then as a Beggar. So by resigning our selves
unto God, we lose no liberty, nor any thing that is good; but enjoy our selves
in greater amplitude and fullness of all happiness. So that for a man to give
himself to God, is self-love in the height of it, and there is no true
self-love but this: for a man to think to love himself in ways of separation
from God, or in opposition to God, is to hate himself, in the appearance of
love; but this is true self-love, that makes me give my self to God, and be
subject to him.

3. Resigning of our selves to God is an act of the greatest joy, and the
greatest grief. Of the greatest joy and contentment; for when once the Soul is
blessed with such a life from above, as over-powers a man, and makes him
surrender himself to God, now he is in his first and proper Center. The whole
state of men out of God, is nothing but a constant course of confusion, and
restless motion; who by reason of darkness and want of judgment, by reason of
hardness and want of sense, may think they are well, may think they are at
home, when they are not; but are like men fallen asleep in a strange place; so
is every man that is out of God. But when the heart is brought home to God, it
is in its place. Do you think the Prodigal had not more rest in his Fathers
house, then among the Swine? Now a man sees what a blessed change is wrought in
his condition, that he is come now into a state of Reconciliation with God, and
of unspeakable advancement of his nature; that he is advanced to the greatest
freedom, to the greatest honor and riches, to the best life every way; and so
this Resignation is an act of the greatest Joy.

It Is likewise such a work as is with the greatest grief. These two will stand
together, neither can they be parted; every man's grief is as his joy is.
Consider these two things.

1. That when a man is brought to God, he is put into a state of Judgment and
Ingenuity; so that now he sees things as they are, and looks upon the wrongs he
has done against God with another eye: an ingenuous spirit can no more forbear
mourning, then a stone can forbear falling to the Center.

2. Think on this also, that Gods end in bringing back the creature, is such as
cannot be accomplished without this mourning. For his end is the Exaltation of
his Grace: Grace is no grace to an unbroken spirit; Sermons of mercy are but
empty sounds to a man that knows not what sorrow is. God intends to make Christ
precious; but what is a salve, a plaster, though the best in the world, to a
man that is whole? Christ came indeed to save the miserable; but that man that
is not brought to see his misery, and mourn over it, cares not for Christ.

Gods end is the engaging of the Creature to himself: but that man will never
think himself beholding to God, that knows not what he has done against God.
But when he sees what a wretch he has been, and his heart is stricken within
him, and he lies melting in sorrow, and clothed with shame before God; now he
thinks body and Soul too little for God; now if he had a thousand lives, they
should all go for God; now he says, What can I render to the Lord? etc.

Gods end is to bring his people in so, that they may be fast when they are in,
that they may not go forth again. But he that thinks himself off from sins that
he never mourned for, and thinks he has escaped evil courses that he has not
been broken for, will return again. A mourning spirit makes a Christian
steadfast in his course, and this will be a bar between him and his lust; He
that knows not to mourn, knows nor to stand fast: Certainly where there is not
a spirit of mourning, that man has not resigned himself to God to this day:
For that which is the principle of such self-resignation, does by its virtue
also work mourning, abasement, and brokenness of heart. If the sight of God in
all his goodness be that which moves and draws the Soul as with a cord unto
God, that very goodness of God which is so apprehended will also break and melt
the Soul. In Jer. 8.6. says God, I harkened and heard, but they spoke not
aright; no man repented of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? Every one
turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. This people made
many promises, that they would walk better with God; but being not touched with
an effectual sense of their injurious dealings with God, they repented not;
Therefore they returned every man to his own ways, etc.

If any one now should say, I have little of this sorrow, and therefore do
suspect my self;

I answer, 1. There is a passionate mourning, which lies in weeping, crying and
howling; and this every one has not.

2. There is a mental mourning, where a man sees the things to be mourned for,
and where he has such a spirit, that carries him against his way, and against
himself, and is full of wishes; O that I had never been so against God, and O
that I might never do so again; and makes the Soul walk humbly; it cannot be
proud now, nor lift up it self, because it remembers what it has been and done
against God. Can thou find these things in thy self?

3. Again, There is a mourning of pure necessity; not willingly and
contentfully, but so as a man cannot avoid it: God presents himself angry, and
shows sin in its color, and then not an Ahab nor a Judas can forbear mourning;
but this mourning is bitterness: But true mourning is sweet, sweeter then all
the comforts in the world: A right spirit puts the sweetness of Heaven in
mourning; God cannot please him better with any thing, then by touching his
spirit, and laying it low before him. If then thine heart be touched of God,
and thou love him, and feel some meltings, thou rejoycest, and purst not off
this sorrow, but bids it welcome; and when God as a Father rebukes thee, thou
blessest him, and love him.

4. There is a mourning that is by fits, not habitual. The veriest hypocrite in
the world you may find sometimes in his closet before God, and he will be
weeping and mourning, and taking on heavily by fits; but take him a while
after, and he is like the dry ground after a Land flood, hard as a stone. True
mourning is another frame of spirit, wherein the spirit in an usual course is
carried with abasement, and a secret lamenting within; O wretch that I am! how
have I lived? thus and thus have I done: He mingles the comforts of this world
with these sorrows, and will have place for this mourning in the midst of all
things, and cannot but oftentimes have his eye upon himself, like Paul, I was a
Persecuter, and a Blasphemer, etc.

5. Again, There is a mourning that is afflicting, but not changing. Many
trouble and vex themselves upon the remembrance of their ways, a fire burns in
their bowels that they cannot extinguish, but it does not purge them from their
dross; their tears be salt and brinish, but not healing; they hang down their
heads, and walk sadly, but carry the same spirit still against God: so Ahab; so
they in 1 Samuel 7.6. Upon Samuels counsel to them; they gathered together at
Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured out before the Lord, and fasted, and said,
We have sinned against the Lord. [They drew water,] It Is conceived, that this
drawing of water is an expression of their mourning, and their exceeding
mourning; and they fasted, which is an addition, and confessed, saying, We have
sinned against the Lord: But it came to little, as you may see in the eighth
Chapter. Thou mournest aright when thine heart is changed, and when thy
mourning tends to the killing of thy sin.

A fourth thing concerning this Resignation, is, that it is but in part, and
yet is certainly in the whole. It is in part, for no man has actually,
perfectly given himself to God; in this very gift and holy act of Resignation
there is imperfection, and something wanting, and much more in the execution of
this engagement all along: Yet notwithstanding this Resignation is whole and
entire, partly in Gods acceptance; God is pleased to take it so, to take a part
for the whole, as much as man can do, as if all were done. And it is whole and
entire in man's intention and desire: Though the desire be not perfect, and the
intent not perfect as to the degree, yet both reach to the extent of of that
which God calls for: Less then this cannot be in a good man, and a man beloved
of God; A man cannot say, I am thine, if he come not to this. For consider, God
treating with man about this work, when he comes to plead for a Resignation, he
treats not for part, but for all. Besides, when man comes to plead with God, he
pleads not for part, but for all; he would be saved, not in body alone, but in
Soul too; he would be perfectly saved. And take this also, that God gives
himself wholly unto man; if he did not give him his Wisdom, and Power, and
Love, man could not love him; for how could we love him, if his Wisdom, Power,
or any of his glorious Attributes, were against us? God gives himself to man
wholly.

Again, God cannot take less then all: for to accept of a partial resignment,
and to indulge a man a right and power over himself to live according to his
own will, is to act against those very Laws of his, which Nature cannot
dispense with: As to take that which is the first and fundamental Law, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy Soul, and with
all thy might.

If any now upon the apprehension of the truth of this should say, This makes
me fear and suspect my self, because I do not find that this giving up of my
self is so entire and complete;

I would have such consider, that Resignation lies not so much in doing and
being all that God requires, as in willingness to be and to do all. It is
necessary to be and to do all that God requires, and we are obliged to this;
but this Resignation lies chiefly in this, in being willing to be and to do so:
that is a speech methinks that falls pat with the condition of the people of
God, Neh. 1.11. O Lord, let thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy
servants, who desire to fear thy Name.

But let there be no mistake; for when I say, Resignation lies chiefly in a
willingness to be and to do all that God requires, mark what kind of
willingness it is, it must be such as is vigorous, as puts on to endevors, so
that it sets the Soul down mourning when it finds shortness of power. I add
this, lest any (as the world oftentimes does) should hurt himself by such an
excuse as this, I confess I do not, but I would do well; my ways are not good,
but I like them not; my heart is better: The world will one day see how
destructive and fallacious these pleas are.

Again, There is a great difference between sin dwelling in us, and sin
entertained by us; between sin remaining, and sin reserved: Reservation of sin
is against the nature of this absolute Resignation; but a man that truly
resigns himself, may and does want power to cast forth of doors every sin, and
every degree of it: No man that has resigned himself to God, does entertain
it; he does not like it, nor comply with it; he does not plot, conspire, or
devise how he may save and enjoy his sin; he lives not in the purposes of it;
this is against the nature of resigning our selves to God.

5. This work of Resignation is a work once done, and yet always doing. When
God has so wrought upon the heart by effectual persuasions, and his mighty
power, God says, I am thy God, and the Soul answers in truth, And I am thine:
Now is the Resignation actually made. But though this be done, yet it is still
always doing while we are in this world; nay to Eternity: for it is a thing that
consists of an iteration of multiplied acts. As Wedlock is not one single act
of giving of persons each to other; but if they live like married persons as
they should, there is a daily giving of themselves each to other; their hearts
go out every day with complaceney and delight, rejoicing in renewing the bond,
and making the league yet firmer and firmer. It Is so between God and us.

6. This Resignation is such a thing, as when it is once done, is never undone.
Herein this Contract of man with God differs from all others in the world, for
all other Contracts have a time to cease: By Contract one becomes another man's
servant for a time. The most durable Contract is that of Marriage; yet it
admits of a double breach, by death or by divorce: But here neither of these
take place; there is no divorce after marriage with God, and no death comes unto
that Soul which becomes his: for these two things hold such a man.

1. The infinite goodness of God, with which the Soul is so satisfied and
contented, that it cannot in any constant course and stay continue, and give up
it self to any other thing; no more then a man can be willing to leave the
light of the Sun, to go to live where there is no light but of a Candle; or to
forsake Paradise if he were in it, to live in a Desert.

But besides, There is not only infinite goodness as an attractive object to
hold the Soul of man when once come to God, but the almighty Power of God that
holds us to himself, and keeps in his way the spirits of such as have resigned
themselves unto him. If he that had a bird fly into his breast at Sea would not
kill it, because it came thither for refuge; how much more will God preserve
those who commit themselves to him? You are kept, says the Apostle, 1 Pet.
1.5. by the mighty power of God through faith unto Salvation.

If any should say here again, Is it so where there is a resignation of the
Soul to God? I fear I am mistaken that break my Covenant daily; I have said I
would be his, but have broken my word, in many things have walked after the
counsel of my own heart:

I answer; The Covenant between God and Man in Christ is not broken in
particular actions, but when violence is offered to the whole Law of this
Contract. There is this difference between this Covenant and the first Covenant
made with Adam; Man stood so engaged, that one breach, one failing undid him,
and discharged God; but this Contract is of a more excellent nature, so that it
is not this sin and that, nor another sin that dissolves the Covenant; though
they be sins against it, and injuries against God, yet God does not hold
himself discharged to cast off his people for them. As it is with a father and
his child, and with the husband and the wife; every angry word or neglect of
carriage in either, is a sin against that relation, but not to occasion one to
cast off the other: but when violence is offered to the whole Law of that
relation, this makes a dissolution.

And then though all the People of God have cause to be humbled f r sinning
against a Covenant so firm, and against such grace and mercy therein; yet let
them know they have no reason to be discouraged: for though through sin that
dwells in them they may be overruled in this or that, yet that very sin tends
to the destruction of sin, and God does break sin by sin, as one wave breaks
another, or as one heat destroys another: And as inward diseases are cured by
breaking out; and Rats and Mice, by coming out of their holes, being
discovered, are destroyed; and as evil roots that are in the Earth, when they
appear and show themselves, it tends to their eradication: so God out-reaches
the Devil in his design, who thinks by sin to destroy the Soul, and God by sin
destroys sin.

The Consideration of the nature of that Engagement wherein the Souls of Saints
have engaged themselves to God, should be such, that sin should be more bitter
to them, more dreadful then Hell it self; and it is hardly possible that a man
upon the knowledge of the excellency of that grace in this Covenant, should
embolden himself to sin against God.

CHAP. II.
The Will of God is the Bounds and Rule of a Resigned Spirit.

NOw we come to consider the End of this Resignation of our selves to God, to
what end or for what we do resign our selves unto him. I shall express it in
these two things.

First, To be governed and ordered by God in all our motions, both inward and
outward. When we come to God, we come in a state of subordination, as
inferiors; and the end of our coming to God is [that he might] restore us to
our primitive state, with some additional grace and favor; which state was a
state of Communion with God, but yet in subjection to God. To be under the
government of God, lies in these two things.

1. To have the Will of God to be our Bounds. 2. To have it to be our Pattern
and Rule.
The Will of God is that which must so circumscribe and confine us, as that we
are not left at liberty to any action of our own, but we must do it by order.
There is no creature which God has made, but he has set certain limits to it,
which it should not pass; as David speaks of the Sea, Psalm. 104.9. God has set
bounds to it, which it cannot pass, which it cannot go beyond. So God, though
he has given unto man a larger compass in point of activity, yet he has not
left him without bounds; he has bounded his time, and has set bounds to his
power; as Job speaks, Chap. 14.5. His days are determined, and the number of
his months are with thee: Thou have appointed him bounds, which he cannot pass.
Laws are very often expressed by the name of Bounds; and in Hos. 5.10. it is
said concerning the Princes of Israel, that they were as those that removed the
bounds: That is, as fields are set out by Boundaries, and every man thereby
knows his own, and is to keep within his compass; so God has bounded these
Princes and all the people by Laws and Constitutions which he had given them;
but they offered violence to his Laws, and removed the Bounds, to enlarge
themselves unduly.

To be bounded by God, is to do nothing but what God either does command or
warrant. In 1 King. 14.8. it is said to Jeroboam, God rent the Kingdom away from
the house of David, and gave it to thee; and yet thou have not been as my
servant David, who kept my Commandments, and followed me with all his heart, to
do that only which was right in mine eyes; that is, it was his daily
disposition, desire, intention, and endevor; not that he did so indeed; for God
himself in the very next Chap. makes an exception, at ver. 5. he says, that he
did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any
thing he commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the matter of
Uriah the Hittite. That is to be bounded, when a man does nothing but what he
is commanded or warranted.

All things are not commanded that we may do, but Commands and Warrants are the
utmost latitude of that freedom which is left to us; we have no further to go,
indeed we need not; there is scope enough to keep within these limits. Psa.
119.96. says David, I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy Commandments
are exceeding large: That is as if he should say, I have walked over the fair
fields of every creature, I have looked to the extent of all goodness in them,
and I could see beyond it; but when I look upon the Commandments of God, the
Word of God, as it is either mandatory or promisory, it is of so vast
dimensions, so exceeding great, that it exceeds all things in this world; here
is room enough for the spirit of a man that is in true subjection unto God.

Nay, as we have no need to step beyond this bound, so if we do, it is
extravagancy and dangerous, and not freedom, but bondage; it is but as a man
that steps out of his way, and falls into a pit; or as a man that steps from
his habitation, and slips into a prison; it is a dangerous thing for us to
enlarge: Hosea 4.6. For this very thing God threatened them; he says, Because
they had withdrawn from him, that he would feed them as a lamb in a large
place: Israel slides back as a backsliding heifer; now the Lord will feed them
as a lamb in a large place. Like a lamb in a large place; What Is that? Like a
lamb not kept within her fold, and appointed pastures, under the super-vision
and care of a vigilant Pastor and Shepherd, but left to ramble at its own will:
Indeed God says, Because they would not be content to live within the bounds
that he had set them, he would enlarge them by captivity, they should wander
from Country to Country.

And as to have the Mind of God our Bounds, is to do nothing but what is
agreeable to his Will, so it is to do all that he requires. This is that which
the Lord thy God requires of thee, to do all these things that he has
commanded thee, says Moses. All must be done, both that wherein we are
concerned in common with all men, and that which we receive by particular
charge from God. Every one of us, besides the general bonds that lie upon us as
men, has something that lies upon us in respect of our particular charge,
place, relation, and condition. Look to your selves in this, that you find your
selves bounded here by God, else you are at large, and free from righteousness.
You have many people that will in some measure keep pace with the Commandment
in general things; the worst of men will hear, and pray, etc. but look to them
in their places, and there you shall find them extremely deficient, refractory,
and exorbitant: So far indeed as a Command of God falls in with their interest
and advantage, they will own it; thus even the worst of men are often diligent
in their callings, because they live by them: But look upon those Commands that
do most try them, wherein they have most occasion to discover what their spirit
is, and there you shall find them like wild Asses, untamed creatures, children
of Belial, without yoke, living according to no Rule. Those relations
especially which are in subordination, are so ill managed through a spirit of
pride, that hates all superintendency, and whatsoever is above it, that to this
day they are the burden of the world. But whosoever it is that does not own God
in all things, that man is not bounded by God, and so is his own man, he is
left to the guidance of a miserable and destructive creature.

When we give our selves to God, to be commanded and governed by him, it is to
a subjection that is absolute, and not conditional. When you take a servant, it
may be he will say to you when you bid him do this and that, It was none of my
bargain, I am contented to be your Steward, but not to serve you in the Stable;
I am contented thus far to serve you, but here is my bounds. But when we come
to God there is no such treaty; we come to serve God absolutely, to be at his
command absolutely in every thing whatsoever: For the Law of God is indivisible
and indispensible; if you cannot give your selves to the obedience of all, you
have done nothing: He that offends in one, is a transgressor of the whole Law,
Jam. 2.10. that is, he transgresses the authority of the whole Law, and he
transgresses the sense and meaning of the Law; which was, not that we should
hold our selves obliged in many things, and free in some other, but that we
should subject and submit our selves to God in every thing; you do nothing, if
not all things. As in a journey of a hundred miles, if you be content to go
ninety nine and no more, you lose the end if you stop there. If God tell you,
These are my words, and I Will have them all looked to; and you look to many, but
not to all; at that one gap you enter into death, and by that one thing
neglected you shut your selves out of eternal life: If there be any one way
wherein you do not submit unto God, in that you are lost. Numb. 14.24. it is
said of Caleb (in comparison of the rest of the people) But my servant Caleb,
because he had another spirit, and followed me fully. The people did something,
yea many things that God required of them, but at some they stuck, and came not
off with subjection; But says God, My servant Caleb had another spirit, and he
followed me fully, or wholly; he did whatsoever I commanded: and that must be
the compass of our obedience. The Will of God must be our bounds, which we must
not pass; and to the utmost compass thereof we must endeavor.

2. To be under the Command and Government of God, is when the Will of God is
our Rule and Pattern; so that we act not the things only that are enjoined, but
as they are enjoined and commanded. You have an example of this in that holy
man, Ezra 10.3. When as Ezra, and others of the Rulers with him, had declared
themselves against the sin of the Congregation in mingling themselves in
marriage with strangers, and had humbled themselves before God with the people;
Shechaniah stood up, as in verse. 2. and says thus, Now therefore let us make a
Covenant with our God to put away all the wives, and such as are born of them,
according to the Counsel of the Lord, and let it be done according to the Law.
The Law in case of transgression, what does it require? That we return from our
obliquities and wanderings with mourning and with abasement; that we reform
speedily and vigorously, with a deep sense of our going from God: So would he
have their strange wives and children to be put out from among the people of
God without delay, and with a deep sense of that transgression by which they
had offended God.

This may suffice to have spoken of the first Branch of the end of our
Resignation, that is to be commanded by God, and to be under his Government.

The second is, That we be disposed by him according to his Will: Now that lies
in these two things.

1. In a contentation of mind in every condition wherein God sets us; to be at
peace and silent in our spirits toward God, to be answered in our hearts, what
ever condition God in his wisdom sees good to put us into. This is a blessed
Lesson to them that have learned it: Paul had, and every good man has in his
measure; Phil. 4.11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content. The Greek word for contentment imports self-sufficiency: That man is
well that does thus; he is as if he had all, as possessing all things, and yet
wanting all things. Our English word and the Latin imports a spirit bounded,
the spirit of a man contained and kept within his compass, and not like water
let out of a vessel, that runs hither and thither, and is lost, but kept within
its bounds.

There is a contentment from the object, the thing we enjoy, as when that does
fully answer our expectation: but that is not thankworthy; when a man has what
his heart desires, when nothing is wanting, there not to quarrel is no great
virtue. But it is a Contentment that arises from Reason and Judgment, when
though a man's condition be not so pleasing, yet in respect of him by whom he is
disposed, and in respect of the end of it, and in respect of the ingredients
wherewith God mingles his state, he is at rest. Not that this requires an
excluding of all desire to have his state otherwise, or an excluding of all
grief under the sense of any evil of a man's condition; but that the heart run
not inordinately and impetuously with desires after change, when it is not well
with us; nor are we dejected and sowred in our spirits, because it is ill with
us. When Christ was near unto death, and that Cup ready to be reached into his
hand, he had a desire to escape it, and vented his desire in prayer; If it be
possible let this Cup pass from me. But as it was the glory of Jesus Christ to
submit to his Fathers Will, so here is the excellency of Contentment in a
Christian, when though he can truly say, and may say, My case is hard, and
there is much in it to afflict nature; yet I will lay my hand upon my mouth,
that I offend not with my tongue; I will lie quietly under the Hand and Will of
God.

That Is one Branch of our Willingness to be disposed by God, to be contented in
every state wherein God sets us; and he that understands not this, has not yet
known God, nor seen him; I mean, he that does not this, nor can do it, is a
stranger to God.

2. A second Branch of being willing to be at Gods disposing, is an
indifferency of mind in respect of any possible change whereunto we are called
according to the Wisdom and Will of God; to be willing to be changed, and
poured as water from vessel to vessel according to the Will of God. You shall
find an eminent example of this in David, 2 Samuel 15.25. When Zadock was by the
Ark, the King said to him, Carry back the Ark of God into the City; if I find
favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me hither again, and show me both
it and his habitation; but if he thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold,
here I am, let him do with me as seems him good. This must be the language of
every spirit that does own God as his Sovereign, to whom he has subjected
himself: What are those that are the people of God, but as sheep before the
Shepherd, that must change their pasture at their Shepherds will and wisdom?
What are they but as Soldiers that must march hither and thither as they are
cammanded? or as vessels in the house, that stand to be filled or emptied
according to pleasure? or as servants that must go and come as they are bid,
and not to stay in any place at their wills? There are two things contrary to
this frame of spirit, which must be looked to, and taken heed of.

1. The first is, An eager and over-vehement prosecution after any good that we
want, any thing that we would have, or be in this world; as it was with Rachel,
Give me children, or else I dye. The Soul that runs out thus after any thing in
this present world, is a Soul without bounds, has cast off God, denied his
Sovereignty, Authority and Command over him.

2. A second thing that is contrary to this, is an obstinate cleaving or
holding to any state or condition in the world, be it never so amiable, sweet
or suitable to our desires: To hold this fast, and not to be willing to go out
of it when God bids us, is to deny God; it is not to own God in his power of
disposing us according to his Will. We must endeavor, and it must be in our
measure with us as it was with Abraham; Abraham was at ease; Well, says God,
Get thee out from thy fathers house, and from thy Country; do as I bid thee,
leave all, and go to a Land which thou have not seen or known: and Abraham
went. There are some that in the midst of their enjoyments are as men in
chains, they are married, and cannot endure to think of a divorce from that
state; it is death to them to think of a change. To be brought into disgrace
after honor, and after the sweetness of freedom to be brought into bondage,
they cannot brook it. The Prophet Habakkuk in Chap. 2.6. speaks of some, that
lade themselves with thick clay. What Is the reason that the treasures of this
world are compared to thick clay? Because when men get into the possession of
them, they commonly stick fast, as men in the mire. But if thou stick fast in
the Creature, thou art separated from the Creator; if thine heart be in
conjunction, and a state of confederacy and agreement with any things in this
world, thou art at odds with God, and have shaken hands with him. This is the
first thing which was propounded to be spoken of, What Resignation of our
selves to God is.

CHAP. III.
Resignation necessary in Prayer. Prayer without it has no truth in it, is
nonsense, and imposes upon God absurdly. The true Advantage of a spirit of
Resignation as to Prayer.

2. THe second thing is, Why we must do this when we come to pray?

Consider, If you come to God to ask any thing at his hands, which you would
enjoy, and of which you have great necessity, without such a disposition and
frame of spirit, as you have heard, you pray, but not in truth: there is no
truth in your recourse to God; thine action is false, treacherous and
deceitful, there is no truth in it. For consider, when you come to God, you
come with a professed sense of your indigence, and your dependence upon God; if
you did not want, you would not ask; you come with a professed sense of the
all sufficiency of God and his dominion over you, and you come and say, Lord,
and great God, and Maker of the World, etc. Now what false dealing is this with
God, to call him Lord, and not yield obedience to him? What absurd dealing is
this with the holy One, the true God, the only wise God, to come in this
fashion to him? It is true, he is near to those that call upon him, but it is
to those that call upon him in truth, Psalm. 145.18. You have an example of such
false dealing with God in Psalm. 78.36. And they remembered God their Rock, and
the high God their Redeemer; nevertheless they flattered him with their mouths,
and lied to him with their tongues; for their heart was not right with him,
neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. It was an usual thing with this
people to come in their troubles and distresses, and say, Arise, O Lord, and
save us, and we will walk with thee; but they did lie with their lips, and
flatter God with their false and dissembling words, and minded not what they
spoke, but were Deceivers.

Further, When a man comes to God upon any occasion, as a Suitor, not giving
himself to God, he speaks no sense at all; his prayer is a piece of nonsense,
there is no judgment nor reason in it, but a heap of contradictions and folly.
If any should come to God persisting in the evil of his ways, not having his
heart set toward God to become subject to him in all things, he contradicts
himself praying against evil, and yet loves evil: We pray against a particular
evil, and we love the greatest evil; that which is all evil, and the cause of
all evil. What contradiction is here? We pray for mercy, O that God would show
me mercy in this thing! and yet we show no mercy to our selves; but do that by
which we weaken, poison and destroy our selves, and with contentment; and yet
we come to God, and say, Lord have mercy on us: This is folly, extremity of
folly.

When you come to God, you come for this or that good; Lord, give me health, or
give me enlargement, or supply me in my necessities; deliver me from this
danger, etc. Men come for some particular good, and they hate that which is all
good, the chief and universal good. Thou would have life and health in this
world, but not Jesus Christ; thou carest not for eternal life. What
contradiction and folly is this, while you cry for good, and hate good? You
walk in ways of contradiction against God, and hate him in your hearts: You
say, Lord save me; when, it may be, you have some sense upon your spirits of
the sad condition of men gone out of the world, and of your own present state
to be like theirs. Thou would have God save thee, and yet thou destroyest thy
self: What say thou, O man? will thou depart from the evil of thy ways? O no,
says the Soul. Will any man hold forth his hand to a Chyrurgeon, and pray him
to cure him, and at the same time gash and wound himself? Would any man pray to
the Judge, O Sir, pray save my life, and at the same time drink down poison? And
yet this is the daily dealing of men with God; they pray to him, but they are
fools; they offer up most intolerable contradictions to him.

3. Except a man come to God with an heart submitting to him, he imposes most
strange and horrid things upon God: For either he says in his heart, that God
knows not what his intentions are (he never means nor has an heart to forsake
this or that sin) which is to make him no God; or else, if he thinks that God
knows his heart, and yet he will take the boldness to come to God, and cry for
mercy, and to be helped and relieved: Mark what he imposes upon God hereby, he
would have God act strangely against his own Wisdom; the language of that man's
prayer is, Do but save my life at this time, and I will sin more and more
against thee; Do but let me enjoy mine estate, and it shall be the fomentor of
my lusts, and the weapons of mine unrighteousness against thee; do but take off
my burden, and I will be like an untamed Ass in the desert. God has declared
and revealed his wrath from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness
of men that hold the truth in unrighteousness; men that know what they should
do, and do it not; yet they are so unrighteous to God, and to themselves, that
they will not suffer this truth to work upon their spirits: these men call to
God for mercy, when as God has declared that he will show no mercy to men that
walk thus in the stubbornness of their hearts; but that his wrath shall burn
against them, that he will be their Enemy, and oppose himself to all their
wickedness. When thou know thy heart is stark naught, and art privy to thy
secret mischievous intentions unto God and to his Truth, thou come to beg of
God to show thee mercy, which so much goes against his Will; see what thou
imposest upon the Nature of God, who is most good and holy; thou in the
baseness and rottenness of thy heart, which hold a confederacy with sin,
come to God in this infinite contradiction wherein thou stand to him, and
beggest of him that he will take thee into his bosom, and be kind unto thee.
Was there ever such a request made to a man, that he would take this Serpent
and that Toad into his bosom? I know God does so in effect, but then they cease
to be such: Never does a man put up a prayer to God with a purpose of
continuing in his sin, but he imposes a strange thing on the Will of God.
Micah 3.11. It is said, They build Zion with blood, and yet will they loan upon
the Lord. And you have a pregnant example, Jer. 3.5, 6. Will thou turn when we
cry to thee, my Father? will he reserve his anger for ever? Here is a great
sense of evil; but says he, Thou have spoken and done evil things; and at that
very time was the hearts of this people set against God, when they came beging,
praying and crying that God would help them and show them mercy. That shall
suffice for the second thing; Why, when we come to God, we must come with
resigning of our selves, with a hearty giving up of our selves to his Commands,
and in all things to be disposed of by him.

A third thing propounded was, What Argument this is, or wherein the force of
it lies, that we should plead this with God, [Save me, for I am thine?] There
is a threefold strength in this Argument.

1. The Law of Nature, which obliges a father to be good to his child, the
husband to his wife, etc. And God has subjected himself more unto the Law of
Nature, he lies more under it, then any of these; and does more perfectly,
fully and gloriously fulfill this Law of Nature, then any; there is no father
like him, no friend, no husband like him. Can a mother forget her child? can
she? Yet I will not forget thee, Isai. 49.4. A mother can hardly do it; Nature
teaches her to have bowels, and a merciful remembrance toward her child; much
more will I, says God.

2. When we can say to God, I am thine, we plead the Covenant that God has
made with us, wherein he is become our Father and Friend: And this is that
which was pleaded in Isai. 63.16. Doubtless, or surely thou art our Father,
though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not, (because they
are gone, and so have no cognizance of us now;) yet Thou, O Lord, art our
Father and our Redeemer; thy Name is upon us. See what a conclusion here is
made; Doubtless thou art our Father, and therefore we call to thee for help.

3. There is this encouragement and strength that the spirit of a man receives
in thus arguing with God, that if he can say in truth, I am thine, God much
more will say to the creature, I am thine. If we have so much love to offer our
selves to God, to become his; much more will the love of God make him to become
ours: for God loves first, and most, and surest. If mine heart rise toward God,
much more is the heart of God toward me; because there Love is in the Fountain.

CHAP. IV.
Wicked men's prayers not to be dreaded. The sins of those that pray, greatest.
Some outlive the contests of the Spirit. Three things to be still done by those
who have resigned themselves to God.

NOw I come to the Application. bruta fulmina. The reason of it is, because
they come to God without that which is the nerves and sinews of prayer: If they
come to God, and bow the knee before him, that God would bless them, and
prosper them; poor Creatures! they speak to no purpose, because they deal
hypocritically with God; for they bow the knee, and call him Lord, as if he
were their Lord; but they do what they list, and are their own Lords, Rulers
and Commanders. Hos. 7.14. God says the people of Israel dealt so with him,
They did not cry to me with their hearts, when they howled upon their beds, and
assembled themselves for corn and for wine, and rebelled against me. They pray
that God would do so such a good turn for them, but they shut their hearts
against God, and had a rebellious spirit at the same time: Though I have
strengthened their arm, yet they imagined mischief against me; They are no
friends of my Cause and Kingdom in this world, but wish their overthrow, though
I have showed them mercy. In Hos. 4.7, 8. it is said, They have set their hearts
on iniquity, and it shall be like people, like Priests; and I Will punish them
for their ways, and reward them for their doings; or as the word is, I will
cause their doings to be turned upon them. Men may think when they come to God,
that the sins of so many years past are forgotten, that God will not reckon
with them for sins so long past; and so they come to God in their filth, and
with their hearts unwashen: But says God, They are deceived, I will turn their
ways upon them; and though they be sins of so long time backward, yet I Will
remember them. In Hos. 8.3. Israel cried to me, My God, we know thee: What
says God? Israel has cast off the thing that is good, the Enemy shall pursue
him; They have set up Kings, but not by me, etc. They say, My God, we know
thee; No, says God, I Will not know you, thou have cast off the thing that is
good. Mal. 2.2, 3. You have God expressing himself to this purpose, If you will
not hear, and lay to heart, to give glory to my Name: A man dishonors God, and
puts the greatest indignity and affront upon God that can be, when he refuses
to hear and obey; Then I Will curse your blessings, and cast even the dung of
your solemn Feasts on your faces, etc. That Is a strange thing, but it was so;
their solemn Feasts were as dung to God, and God says he will cast them as
dung in their faces; and they shall be a dunghill which my Soul abhors. You
need not fear the prayers of such men as are without yoke, and fear not God;
but the prayers of Saints are to be dreaded, because they have power with God;
if they come to God and say, Save me, I am thine, God will answer, I am thine,
I will save thee.

2. If when we come to God, we must make a resignment of our selves to God, and
acknowledge we are not our own, but his; Then we learn secondly, that the sins
of a praying people are the greatest sins; there be no sins that are so out of
measure sinful, as the sins of those that pray, and pray most. Has God made
thee as a Prince with himself? has God set open a door that thou may have
access to him? has he given thee leave in the day of thy straits to pour out
thy Soul? have thou in the midst of those mercies, in the sense of the
sweetness of those visions, said to God, that thou art his? and have thou
departed from him? have thou given to him a withdrawing shoulder? (as it is said
of them:) This sin is of the highest nature, for it is a renewed Apostasy.
Those that are without God and Christ in the world are Apostates, but it is by
one Apostasy, it is a continued act wherein they are held; but now thou art
gone out from God, after thou had returned to him; thou have gone from the
unspeakable refreshings of the Father of mercies, and have offered violence to
the many engagements which thou have laid, yea which they have laid upon thy
Soul; thou have broken the bonds of them all. Sins after Resignation, and after
the matter of difference is taken up between God and the Creature, are not to
be easily passed over; they are the worst sins. Remember your selves, as many
as have known Jesus Christ; when you said to God, that you would walk with him,
did you mean it? And have thou fallen from the truth into a lie? The world many
times come to God, and say many good words, that they will be his; but, as it is
said of them in Psalm. 78.36. They flattered with their lips, and lied with
their tongues; their hearts were not steadfast in the Covenant with their God.
They minded no such thing, but thou did; and therefore boundst thy self more,
thou did intend to be bound: When thou engagedst thy self to God, thou did
it upon the greatest reason, through the enforcement of the highest Arguments:
thou feltst the power of God conquering and subduing thee, and thou yieldedst
thy self to be his for ever: And remember how often thou have said this to God.
Is not the voice of thy Soul still in his ears? Does not he remember the
language thou have uttered? And after thou have said it again and again, that
thou would do no more so; after thou have said, Thou art and shall be my God;
for thee to draw back, and start aside, it is a sin that wants a name, it is so
heinous in its kind, so horrid in its nature. What high injustice is this in
thee, to arrogate a liberty to thy self, when thou have so solemnly parted with
it into his hands whose it was? Nay was it not after thou had experience of
walking in thine own ways? Did thou not know what sin meant? It Is an argument
the Apostle uses, Colos. 3.6. [Wherein you sometimes walked.] You know what it
is to be in your sins. Did you not in the day of your sorrow say in your heart,
I will go to God again? Oh! how happy was it when I was with him? How sweet
were those days wherein I walked under the Government of Jesus Christ? and was
blessed with the constant communication of the counsel of the Spirit of life
and peace? Was not that thy speech which was the Churches? Hos. 2.7. I Will go
and return to my first husband, for then it was better with me then now. Now
after all this to sin against God, to indulge your selves to take a liberty and
freedom to transgress against him, to whom you have so engaged your selves;
what a breaking of heart, what shame of face should this be? When now thou have
put weakness upon the strongest bonds, what have thou said? Christ is nothing,
of no account; there is more in my sins then in Christ; there is more in the
satisfaction of my own desires, then in the enjoyment of Jesus Christ: for thou
have left one for the other. Thou did think it was best, when thou did give
thy self to him; and what injury have thou done to the great and holy one? Thou
have set light by him, to whom to be given thou thoughtst it thy happiness;
thou thoughtst it wonderful mercy that he would enter into a new Contract with
thee; thou thoughtst that should be an everlasting bond of Love upon thy Soul,
that God should again take thee a Runaway, that he should again admit thee a
Rebel and a Traitor; and have thou forgotten all this? Is God after all this to
be set by? that thou can walk so, and do as thou list? Therefore upon all
Considerations, the sins of those that are much with God, are greatest; because
upon their conversings, parlies and treaties that they hold with God, still
they acknowledge themselves not to be their own, but his; such therefore show
not the candor and sincerity of a right spirit. It Is a sad demonstration of a
heart not under the power of divine Love, and very much alienated from God,
that upon sight of such miscarriages is not broken and melted. I do as much
wonder at the spirit and doctrine of some men, as at any thing in the world;
that are lifting the heads of Christians above all sorrow, that would absent
them from all mourning, that would have them to be all joy. Poor men, their
language is unnatural: They must mourn, and cannot but mourn, if their hearts
be right; He that knows and loves God, cannot but feel the pain and burden of
offenses against him. It Is as impossible that Nature should cease to feel the
smart of stripes and wounds, as that a spirit filled with or acted by divine
Love, should not feel the wounds and wrongs that it offers to his Maker.
Hezekiah showed indeed his frailty, 2 Chronicles. 32.26. But [notwithstanding]
Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart: That [notwithstanding] is
a word to be observed: When a man's heart waxes proud before God, and he can
lift up himself and transgress with an high hand; when the heart glories in any
thing, and by the brightness of other things, a darkness is cast upon the
spirit toward God; when this man comes to be humbled, it is a great thing:
Hezekiah was in such a case as this, yet [notwithstanding] Hezekiah humbled
himself.

partly to those that yet have not given themselves up to God, that have not
said in truth, I am thine; and partly to those that have done it. There is a
generation of men that are under no bonds to God, they acknowledge him not, that
are free from righteousness, as the Apostle says, Romans 6.20. They have not so
much many of them as felt the breakings of God, and those contentions whereby
he strives with their unkindness and frowardness; they never so much as came to
debate the matter; or treat with God about this great business, whether they
should be his or no; but live at peradventures, and are at their own swinge,
walking after the will of the mind and of the flesh, as the Apostle speaks.

There is another sort that have felt many tuggings of God upon them; God has
been hammering the matter upon them, but they have stood it out; sometimes he
has brought them upon their knees, and to tears; nay to self-judging, to
condemn themselves in his presence, sometimes they have cried and roared in the
presence of God: such wretches there are in the world, which have outlived the
workings of the power of God upon their spirits; as those of whom it is said,
Genesis 6.3. My Spirit shall no longer strive with man. God spoke of that evil and
wretched world, that though he had striven, not only by the preaching of Noah,
and of the Ark (which was a very loud Sermon,) but also with his Spirit; for
there is no generation of men that are ever free from those contests of God,
but the light that is in them has pleaded Gods cause against their wickedness
and lusts: Well, says God, now I see they have stood out all this while, my
Spirit shall no longer strive with man; Let them alone, as he said concerning
Ephraim, Hos. 13. The Apostles language, 2 Cor. 10.5. (besides many other
Scriptures) supposes that there is often a fight in our Souls against God;
Bringing every thought of the heart into obedience. That word, bringing into
obedience, signifies a taking of the spirit of man as with a sword or spear;
God comes and arms himself against men; and when he comes thus in power, they
yield themselves to him, and they are blessed. But there are such that always
stand out, that resist the Holy Ghost; as those stiff-necked Jews in Acts 7. Or
if they yield, yet not in sincerity, not in truth; but as it is said, Jer. 3.10.
Yet for all this her treacherous Sister did not turn to me with the whole
heart, but feignedly, or in falsehood. Now concerning these persons I shall say
but very few words. Can thou come to God with such a spirit as this? What
state art thou in, O man? Thou must not, thou can not forbear praying: At one
time or other the worst in the world lift up their eyes and hearts to their
Maker: The very Heathens do not, cannot withhold from this. If not the light
that is in men, yet their straits and afflictions will cause them to come as
Petitioners to God: and will thou come to God with a petition in one hand, and
with weapons of defiance in the other hand? Will thou come to God with the face
of a Petitioner, and with the spirit of a Rebel? What infinite boldness is this
with God? I have before showed you the horridness of this kind of prayer, and
the horrid things that such prayers impose upon God. But consider further,
whilst thou retainest a resolution and bent of heart set toward thy sin; and
yet wilt pray; thou art in a necessity of sinning, do thou what thou can: If
thou do not pray, thou sinnest, by breaking of a Law of Nature, which enjoins
the creature to acknowledge his dependence upon his Maker, by prayer and
supplication: If in the day of thy distress thou come to ask mercy, thou
sinnest more. So that thou art as a Ship between two Rocks, that must needs
perish upon one, there is no escaping: so is thy Soul in the midst of sin; and
to be in the midst of sin, is to be in the midst of death. And thou every day
make thy condition more unhappy; that wherein thou blessest thy self, and
rejoycest, thy prayers are so far from being any reasonable relief unto thee,
that they are matter of amazement and astonishment to a man that rightly
understands. What have I done? [may such a man say:] I have been with God, and
mocked him to his face; I have called him Lord, but I am not his servant; but
serve my self and diverse lusts: I called my self his Subject, but I am a Rebel.
Nay this is a blaspheming of God: Men commonly are afraid of blasphemy; but
thou that come to God praying, but sinning, (that is, having thy heart upon
thy evil ways,) thou that come praying, but not yielding; thou blasphemest
God to his face, thus; to make thy self equal with God is blasphemy; it was so
judged in the heart of that people, Joh. 10. but they mistook in the Case: But
when thou make thy self the chiefest of thine own affections, thou make thy
self equal with God, whose privilege and supremacy it is to be chiefest in the
affections of his Creature, and to have the highest superintendency over the
spirits of his people, to command them. Nay thou make thy self greater then
God, because thou think it nothing to transgress, to offend, and offer
violence to his Commands; but thou take all pleasure and contentment in
gratifying thine own wicked spirit. Thou make that greatest to which thou
most yieldest; when thou then yieldest unto sin, and leavest God, have not thou
made thy self greater then God? Very high dishonors are offered to God in such
a course, past expression. Mark that in Mal. 2.2. If you will not hear and lay
to heart, to give glory to my Name, I will even send a curse upon you. If you
will not hear and yield your selves to my Commands, to give me glory: [As if he
had said,] If you will not acknowledge me to be what I am, but deny me; if you
will not submit to the Authority and Wisdom of my Commands, I Will send a Curse
upon you. And by this means thou do as thou can destroy that which does
only difference thee from Devils; for the Devils are cast into that
condemnation which shall come upon the world, but Man has a possibility to
escape: Now thou do what thou can to make thy Salvation impossible, and to
fasten and tie up thy Soul to the condemnation of those apostate Angels;
whilst thou refusest to turn unto God, from whom thou have departed; and do
not acknowledge the grace and mercy of that open door for poor creatures to
return again to the God of mercy.

And be sure of this, If you be not the Lords, the Lord will not be yours: You
have such a passage, They are not mine, break down their bulwarks; I Will take no
knowledge of Jerusalem, because she takes no knowledge of me. What a thing is
this, that God stands with both hands to give out mercy to the Creature, (as it
is said of Wisdom, Prove. 3.16. Length of days is in her right hand, and in her
left hand riches and honor,) and that the Creature shall bend both his hands
against God? Such a passage you have in Micah 7.3. Men do evil with both hands
earnestly. Now then consider how much it concerns every one of you that have
not yet given your selves to God to do it now. What an unhappy creature art
thou if God shall shut out thy prayers, when straits, fears and death come? Thy
prayers are no more then the howling of Dogs and Wolves, because thou prayest
to God, and thy spirit is not given up in obedience to him.

I shall now turn to those who have given up their spirits to God; You must do
it still when you come to God. Faith and Love, which are two fundamental
graces, of universal influence to all the rest, are to be continually used and
acted: Others are to be acted upon occasion, but these have their constant
work, every day these must be acted. When I say, that upon our coming to God,
there must be a giving up of our selves to God; I mean these three things:

1. That there must be a willing and hearty acknowledgment, that we are Gods,
and not our own: We must see the bonds of God upon upon us, and like it, and
own it; we must hate all other freedom that is offered us, we must account it
true bondage, and be glad that such a day is come, wherein God took us out of
our own hands, and has taken us into his. Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn, and
will perform; I confess, Lord, that is my hand and my bond; I will not for a
thousand worlds go back. Certainly, there should be no other spirit in you,
when you come to God, but to acknowledge your selves to be his, and under his
Commands; a Christian cannot but do it. Partly, because he sees his happiness
lies in this; he sees in his coming again to be the Lords, there is a
restitution of all that blessedness from which he fell by his Apostasy. By
becoming Gods, he sees that God also is become his. How may the Soul raise it
self in joy, when it can say this, God is my God, all he has and is, is mine;
he is mine to all Eternity. The acknowledging of this engagement wherein he
stands to God, and of Gods engaging of himself to him, is all his happiness,
from whence springs all his power and confidence in prayer; I can go boldly,
says he, to Heaven, because God is my God; I can go and ask all things,
because he is mine, and I am his. Partly also, because he loves him with a love
of complacency; the Soul has all contentment in him: Never did a spouse speak
to her husband, whom her Soul loved to the highest, more willingly, and say, I
am thine, then the spirit of an upright man says to God, Lord, I am thine. And
he loves him with a love of thankfulness: Have thou given thy self to me, says
he, and shall I then withhold my self from thee? Have thou, who art so great,
done all this for me? and shall I stand out against thee? He will willingly
acknowledge himself to be his; the Saints often do this: David above twenty
times comes with this acknowledgment in this Psalm, and in Psalm. 116.16. I am
thy servant, I am thy servant. To say it once was not enough; he says it
again, to show the sincerity of his spirit, and to witness that his heart was
fully pleased with this, that he was not his own, but the Lords.

2. There must be a perfecting and completing of our Resignment: All
beginnings are but cold; yet there are some excellencies in our primitive and
first resigning of our selves to God, which without great wariness are not
preserved till after times. In the day of love, when God first comes with terms
of peace, O how freely does the Soul go out! and how willingly does it offer it
self to him? The flower and beauty of this first love, how hardly are they
maintained? But what ever spirit there is in our first love, it is certain that
it is imperfect, and we therefore live to make it complete: Complete
extensively, as our spirits and minds come to be enlarged in the knowledge of
the Will of God, as God makes himself more known; I, says the Soul, I will do
that, and that too. And so intensively, the heart and Soul cleaves unto God in
more height and vigor of affection; as it is said of Jehosaphat, who walked
with God before and was the Lords; yet in 2 Chronicles. 13.6. Jehosaphats heart was
lifted up in the ways of God: His spirit was raised before toward God, but now
raised to an higher pitch, and greater strength; he did encourage and fortify
himself in the ways of God.

A third thing that must be done, is this; After any unfaithfulness, treachery,
or base departing from God, there must be a renovation of our Resignation: We
must again give our selves to him. Having offered this injury to God, to deny
him his right, we cannot again come to him, but we must restore it, and
acknowledge our selves to be his. It was good counsel given Job, by that friend
of his, Job 34.31. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born
chastisement, I will not offend any more: that which I see not, teach thou me;
and if I have done iniquity, I Will do no more. With such a spirit you must come
to God; I confess I have offered violence to that right thou have in me, but
I Will do so no more; and here I am a straying sheep, I have a foolish rebellious
heart; I offer my self again to thy Government, and to the Conduct and and
Command of thy spirit. There must be in those that have given themselves to
God, a resigning and giving up of themselves in prayer. Consider it, in vain
else do we pray: God has given us leave to come to him, and has engaged
himself to hear us; but upon condition; there must be a hearing on both sides:
He has said, that if any man come to him in the stoutness of his spirit, he
will not regard him; he has abundantly in the Scripture disliked such, and
their prayers he hates. In Jer. 11.13, 14. you have a full expression of this.
Concerning this resigning of our selves to God, it cannot be dispensed with;
God has sworn this shall be done: Romans 14.11. As I live, says the Lord, Every
knee shall bow before me. God will have it done: He has put conditions upon
prayer; partly, because he loves his people; he knows there is no greater
happiness to them, then to cease to be their own, and become his. As a father
pities his child that wanders abroad in the desert, and tells him, Except he
will submit himself to him, he will never take him into his house; He does
this, because he knows the happiness of his child lies in a sub^rdination to
his father. Again, God does it to put his people into a capacity of having and
enjoying the things they ask: For what art thou fit for, O man? If thou come
to God as a petitioner, and come with thy heart lifted up against him, either
the good thou desire cannot come to thee, or it will come as a rod, and a
snare; at the best it will be be bitterness to thy Soul.

Consider, Not to come in sincerity, to yield your selves to God, is not to
come after the Law of Prayer. When you come to ask of God, God then asks of
you; the requests are mutual and reciprocal: when you come to God, it is not
your business alone, but God has something to treat with you about: It is fit
if you ask, and would have God hear you, to have God grant your things; but you
should grant him his, especially considering he is free; He needs not give what
thou ask, but thou art bound to give what he asks; there is no proportion
between that which thou ask of God, and that he asks of thee: God asks of
thee to give up thy self; and what art thou fit for? A creature more
contemptible then a rotten Carcass that lies in a ditch: Well, says God, as bad
as thou art, let me have thee, give up thy self to me. And what do thou ask
of God? Pardon and eternal life. Besides, God spoke first: You come indeed and
ask, but God spoke first: Thou say, Lord, hear my prayer; but says God, My
words are gone out first, hear me. God prevents thee with requests, and has
been long waiting upon thee, that thou would come in, and give up thy self to
him.

Consider, what it is that you come for, what do you plead with God for? You
would have God to be yours, to do you good to the utmost, not to withhold any
good thing from you; then will you grant God this one request, when you ask so
many of him? You ask a thousand things of God, God asks but this one of you,
Give up your selves to him. You would have God to be yours for ever; if you ask
so great things, is it not meet that you should restore God his ancient Right?
Surely God is full of grace and mercy unto his people; they can set their seals
to this, that he is a God hearing prayer: See what an ingenuous acknowledgment
the Apostle makes of the goodness of God; 1 John 5.15. We know that he hears
us, what ever we ask of him; and we know that we have the petition that we
desire of him. It Is in effect as much as this, we can have what we will of God.
You that walk with him, what is it that you may not get of him? You never come
for any thing, and go away empty; he has not denied you even to himself;
therefore it much concerns you when you come to God, to give up your selves to
him. Certainly this Resignation is a work of a sad import; we must resign our
selves, we must be Gods; we were his before: this imports that dreadful
violence that man has exercised upon Gods patience, that should humble us, and
forward the work when we come to resign our selves, because we were before his.

Let me shut up all with this Exhortation: That when you have been with God,
and made this acknowledgment, that you are his, and have dealt in truth with
God, and when God has showed you the mercy you came for; now stand fast in
your own word, and perform it; break not your word with him to whom you have
thus engaged your selves. If you mind, you may have a true description of your
own spirits, you shall see the right face of them upon change of seasons. Have
thou been a beggar in the day of thy distress? Art thou enlarged? Is the mercy
come? Now observe thy spirit, now see what frame thy spirit is in toward God,
when thy way is made smooth, and storms are laid, and thou art at rest. Observe
it, Men are very apt to promise in a day of trouble, Oh, upon a sick bed, if
God would restore me, I would walk more exactly with him; in a day of fear,
what is more common then to say so? And as in Deuteronomy. 27. when they heard the
Word of God repeated to them, they shut up all with a professed willingness to
submit; and when the Curse was read, all the people said, Amen, so be it; but
it was not so. In 2 Chronicles. 12. you have that wicked King coming to God,
crouching before God, and offering himself before him, but it was not done
effectually; what ever thoughts he had at that time that he would be the Lords,
they went off again. Men come to God by the enforcement of distress, and say
much, but are the same afterward; they take up new words, but their hearts are
what they were before. Jer. 2.20. I have planted thee a noble vine; I have
broken the yoke, and burst the bonds; thou said, I will not transgress: But
what was the temper and frame, what was the spirit of this people indeed? When
under every high hill, and every green tree thou playest the harlot. She had a
whorish and a wicked spirit, even then when she said to God, I Will not
transgress. So in 2 Chronicles. 34.29. you see what a fair appearance there was:
Josiah being stirred in spirit to think that the Lord God should be so far out
of sight, and mind, and knowledge; and knowing what danger they were in, because
of neglecting the Commandment of God; He humbled himself, and the people joined
with him, and engaged themselves unto God, and there was great joy and alacrity
among them, and there was such an appearance, such a Passover, as never had
been: Notwithstanding, at Chap. 26.16. it is said, that they mocked the
Messengers of God, and despised his Word, and misused his Prophets: So false
are the hearts of men: It concerns you therefore to look to your intentions in
this thing.

Consider, That the word is gone out of thy mouth; thou have promised to God,
that thou will be his; if thou have not done it formally, thou have done it
virtually: There is of the nature of a promise in all prayers: No man can come
to God as a petitioner, but he comes with an acknowledgment of him as his Lord;
therefore having promised, thou oughtst to stand to it; a promise binds always,
but chiefly in such cases as these.

1. Where the thing we promised was due before it was promised: so was this; if
thou have said, thou would give thy self to God, that was due before.

2. Where the performance of the promise brings no loss or detriment; if thou
fulfill thy promise, thou losest not by it; thou partest with nothing that will
do thee good; in that thou thy self becomest the Lords, it is thy perfection,
and thy happiness, it is a coming to the very state of Angels. No creature can
possibly be happy, but in a subordination to him that is the supreme God,
blessed for ever: Having promised therefore, make good thy word.

2. Consider, That by being with God, and having obtained the things you sought
for, you have now an advantage to walk as the Lords; to make good your word.
Partly, because your way is enlarged: It Is a hard thing to walk with God in
ways full of briars and thorns; it is hard to walk through Seas of blood, and
mighty storms and tempests. But now when God smooths thy way, and removes thy
fears, and gives thy spirit more composedness, it is a mighty advantage in thy
hand, and therefore to be improved. David was of this spirit, Psalm. 119.32. I
will run the ways of thy Commandments when thou shall enlarge my heart: The
meaning is, Fears and sorrows compress and burden me, and make me walk heavily,
as a man under a weight; but if thou will scatter these clouds, and deliver me
from these straits, and comfort my Soul; if thou will cheer, refresh and
enlarge me, then I will run thy ways; I Will not only walk in them, but walk with
all alacrity and celerity: I entered upon these words, when the sword was upon
the march, and fear was upon us terribly. Has God appeared, delivered, and
saved you? yea, are the clouds of blood scattered, and fallen upon the heads of
our enemies? You have the desire of your Souls; the briars are removed, your
way is plain; now walk with God, fulfill your word to him, to whom you have
given up your selves.

This advantage also you have from the greatness of the mercy; Great mercies do
awaken the Soul, renew, refresh and enliven the Souls of men. Now, if God has
put thee upon the wing, defer not, but now up and be doing; pay thy vows before
thy heart grow cold: It is a great thing to lose impressions; when they are
lost, they are hardly regained. David lay long, before he was the same that he
was before his fall; it cost him much pains: It may be if thou grow cold again,
that God will heat thee in a fiery furnace; He has ways enough to visit upon
thee the neglects of the seasons of grace. You may see how he expresses
himself in anger against his people, Hos. 7.13. Woe to thee, for thou have fled
from me; destruction unto thee, because thou have transgressed against me;
though I have redeemed them, they have spoken lies against me; though I have
strengthened their arm, yet they have imagined evil against me. When a people
are bound by mercies, and yet obey not, it displeases. God was very angry with
Hezekiah; for what? because he did not return according to the mercies he had
received. Surely the mercy you have received is great; it must be measured by
years and ages; it is not one mercy, but a multitude, a heap of mercies: Look
how many mischiefs the wrath of malicious men would have heaped upon you, look
how many evils your own fearing hearts could devise and suggest; so many
mercies are in this one. If therefore thou have sought God, and God has heard
thee; remember when thou did come to God, thou did come upon such terms,
not to receive only, but to give: Thou have promised to be his, make good thy
word: Thou did say in thy distress, I am thine, Lord, save me; say now in the
day of thy deliverance, I am thine, Lord, for Thou have saved me.

CHAP. V.
The knowledge of Interest in God does much further our approaches to God. It
begets propensions, carries the spirit in a due frame, fits it for all divine
determinations.

THere is yet something more in the words worthy of our consideration; [I am
thine:] What Is the fruits of this apprehension of God? his drawing near to God;
I am thine, save me.

The knowledge of our Interest in God does much further our approaches to God. I
am thine; this man is a man of prayer, he is much in addresses to God, and
conversing with him. I shall give you the sense and import of this Point in
these two or three things.

First; That when God out of his unspeakable goodness has broke through the
dark Cloud that was between him and us, and has made this good to our hearts,
that he is ours; this begets an inclination and propension, an aptness to have
recourse to God, and converse with him. A child that knows his father, though
strangers pass by him, and take no notice of him; yet he loves to be with him;
and the more he has the nature of a child, the more he loves to be where his
father is. So much more is the conjunction of the Soul with God, and the
enjoyment of God, the portion of a child of God: there it loves to be; and, if
it might, there it would be, and no where else. This Interest is such, that it
begets desire upon desire, that the Soul has never enough of God; there is a
constant spring of motion toward God, that makes the Soul to hang after him, as
after that in which its life is. In Psalm. 63.1. says David, O God, thou art my
God: What then? Early will I seek thee, my Soul thirsts for thee, my flesh also
longs for thee, etc. Such a man needs not much driving, when he is himself; he
is drawn of God, he needs not much to be driven by other things. [My Soul
thirsts.] You need not force a thirsty beast to the river; do not withhold her,
and she will run her self: There needs no Law to bind a man that is hungry to
eat his meat; do but set meat before him, and he will eat willingly, he will
not withhold his hands. That man that has this sealed up in his Soul, that God
is his, cannot, nor will for ten thousand worlds be held from communion with
him; he breaks through all things; he accounts all other time (but what is
necessary) ill spent, in comparison of that time he spends with God: If he were
at his own choice, he would have no other employment, nor be put upon any other
service, then to wait upon God, and be wholly his. An ingenuous child that
carries his father in his heart, though at his fathers command he be content to
go hither and thither, as David, to keep sheep in the field; yet he had rather
be at home, where he may speak with his father, and hear his voice, and have
communion with him. God is so good to his, that where once a man finds himself
to be his, he finds such streams of mercy and goodness flowing forth, as knit
his Soul to him. When he comes to him, he comes not as to a great God, but as
to his own Father; and God entertains his not as strangers, but as children
with the entertainment of a Father: His entertainments are so sweet, that they
are new invitations; so that a man who has been with God in a right spirit, is
not glad that the time is past, but longs for that season to come again. Yea,
God shows himself kind with the best advantage; kind in great things, and those
things that are the very desires of their Souls; those things that men cannot
be without, without pain, anguish, and bitterness of spirit, those he gives.
When their Souls are in trouble, then he eases and comfort them: How often
have his people come to him in tears, heaviness, and much mourning, and he has
wiped away their tears, and scattered the clouds that were about them, and
given rest to their Souls? In Psalm. 116. I love the Lord, because he has heard
my prayer, and the voice of my supplication; because he has inclined his ear
unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. The sorrows of death
compassed me about, and the pains of Hell caught hold on me; I found trouble
and sorrow, etc. The force and spirit of it is this; I came to God in a sad
time, and God showed me kindness seasonably; seeing he has been so kind to me,
I will call on him as long as I live, I Will go often to him, I Will live in the
presence of God; I Will be much with him, because of his kindness to me.

Interest will carry a man according to the worth and sufficiency that is in
him, in whom he has Interest, and according to his own wants and indigency.
Now the Interest of the people of God in God, is in one that is most glorious,
and it is the Interest of such as have most need: None can do for them what he
can do. Now if a man have treasure of his own, will he want? will he not go to
it? If a man thirst, and have rivers that run by him; if he have springs of his
own, will he not drink of them? So it is with the people of God; when they see
God to be their God, they see all to be their own in God; and therefore will
not suffer want, but will go to him. Yea, indeed the Interest of the people of
God in God, is mingled with such ingenuity, and such a spirit of Love, that
when they have not much cause to go to God as beggars, when necessity does not
pinch and enforce them, then they go upon friendly visits. It Is great content
to a child to see his father, though he ask him nothing. It Is great content to
an ingenuous spirit to come to God as his friend, to behold him, and refresh
himself in that infinite glory wherewith he is clothed; though for the present
he be not much pinched with necessities and straits. So David, Psalm. 5.7. As
for me, I will come into thine house in the multitude of thy mercies. [In the
multitude of thy mercies:] Not only that I will make this mine Argument, which
I Will plead with thee, not that this shall be that on which my Soul shall lean;
but even when thou art very good to me, in the multitude of thy mercies toward
me will I come: not as others that come only when they need something, but when
thou art most gracious to me, then will I come. Thus the knowledge of a man's
Interest in God, works in his heart, an inward inclination and strong
propension to make his addresses to God, and converse with him.

Secondly, The knowledge of this Interest, carries the spirit of a man to God,
in a due frame and posture; that is, it maintains the Soul in its addresses to
God in joy and confidence, cheerfulness and hope; yet with intermixtures of
awful fear. A man that knows God to be his God, when he goes to him, he goes
not as he to whom Augustus said, What do thou come to me as to a Lion? He
comes not with that astonishment, dread and amazement that men do when their
Consciences are defiled, and in whose spirits the fire of Hell is. He is not
afraid, notwithstanding the infinite distance between God and him, to lift up
his face before the Almighty: He comes with boldness and confidence, when once
he is in the sight of this, that his name is written in the Book of Life, and
that God has taken him into the number of those whom he has chosen out of the
world. He comes and speaks to God, and his language is as to one with whom he
has power: Psalm. 104.6. I will say unto the Lord, Thou art my God; hear the
voice of my supplication, O Lord. He tells you what language he uses to God; I
said, Thou art my God, therefore hear me when I come unto thee: and this
argument is very strong. So in Micah 7.7. you have the Church expressing her
self thus; Therefore will I look to the Lord, and wait for the God of my
Salvation; my God will hear me: The conclusion is very strong. So in Psalm.
67.6. God, even our own God, shall bless us. When a man once comes to know that
God has taken him into the number of his, into his flock and fold; now says
he, God is mine, my own God shall bless me.

That faith which makes a man see his Interest in God, makes him see that it is
more to have an Interest in him, then to obtain all things from him; he
therefore goes with courage to God, because he has obtained that already which
is more then all comes to, that he shall have by asking. It was a greater favor
for God to give us himself to be ours, then for him to give us a portion among
the Angels in the glory of Heaven.

God being our God, stands engaged; he is not his own, but ours also: therefore
when a man sees this, he comes to God for all things as to his own, and he
comes for his own. As a child that is in want speaks to his father for
supplies; he speaks to him, as one in whom he has Interest, and pleads with
such a spirit, as knowing that he likewise has interest in his fathers estate.
Indeed this Interest is the best of all, it is founded upon all Reason: Which
ways soever a man comes to have Interest in another, so many ways has God
expressed our Interest to be in him, and more also. By Creation; He has made us,
we are not our own, Psalm. 100.3. or, He has made us, we are his. It Is founded
in Redemption; in Isai. 43.1. Thus says the Lord that formed thee, O Jacob,
and created thee, O Israel, Fear not, I have redeemed thee, I have called thee
by name, thou art mine; I have made thee, and I have bought thee. It Is likewise
founded in that Union that we have with Jesus Christ; God is become ours,
because Christ is become ours: The Sons Wife calls his Father, her Father; he
is become a Father to her in his Son. If God takes notice of Israel upon this
account, that they were the seed of Abraham his friend; how much more will he
own his people that are members of the body of his own Son? In Isai. 41.8. Thou
Israel art my servant, whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend. We
become his, and he ours, by his actual admission of us into the number of those
that are his own, and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2.19. They are said to be
a people near unto him, Psalm. 148.14. All Souls are mine, says God in Ezekiel.
18.4. But those whom he admits into his family, he takes peculiar notice of,
and they are in a more especial manner his. And also by actual Communion he
becomes ours: As the wife becomes the husband's, not only by contract and
marriage, and receiving her to his habitation, but by actual communion: so we
are the Lords, because of that actual converse that we have with God, and by
his communication of those fruits of his Love which he reserves for his own.
Thus then the knowledge of our Interest with God, clothes the spirit with fit
dispositions and affections, in addresses unto God, as to joy and confidence.
Now on the other side it works also in the Soul an awful reverential respect,
such as becomes the relation of a poor creature to his Maker, and that infinite
distance that is between the high and holy One, and a lump of dust; which also
belongs to the true temper of a man in communion with God. Serve the Lord with
fear, and rejoice with trembling, Psalm. 2. And Mal. 1.6. If I be a Master,
where is my fear? It Is a dangerous thing, for a man upon presumption of his
Interest in God, to have a boldness without a mixture of this fear and
awfulness. Such joys are not from above, nor is it the Spirit of Truth that
bears witness to them, when they do not lay the Soul much under God. Of all
men, they come with the greatest fear of God, that have the fullest knowledge of
their Interest in God, and who have their hearts most spread with joy and
gladness, because God is become their Portion. In Heb. 12.28. Wherefore
receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace whereby to serve
God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear. That seems a strange Inference,
Having received a Kingdom, therefore serve God with fear: I, says the Apostle,
[therefore,] and God looks for it; and know if it be not done, there will be
hazard in it, for our God is a consuming fire. A stranger passes by a man, and
takes no notice of him; but a child that knows him to be his father, comes
toward him with respect and honor; the very interest he has in him, and the
relation wherein he stands, strikes on his spirit an awe toward his father. So
it is with those that call God Father.

See what account Nehemiah gives of his just walking, in Nehem. 5.15. Other
Rulers did so and so, but I did not; for I feared God. The assurance of the
Love of God, and of a man's eternal life, begets fear; not that fear which has
torment, as the Apostle speaks; but it begets an awful caution and wariness, as
is meet in a business of so great concernment. He is more afraid to offend God,
that knows God to be his God, then that man is whom God threatens every day
with everlasting death. Mark that of the Prophet, Hos. 3.5. It is spoken
concerning the time when they should be restored to a better state; Afterward
shall the children of Israel return, and seek the Lord their God, and David
their King; and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days. [Shall
fear the Lord and his goodness.] No father is more feared of his child, then
the best father, that walks toward his child in the greatest wisdom, goodness,
meekness, and bounty. So that the kindness of God, and tastes of his Love, do
not lift up the Soul, and make it proud. That man is the most humble man in the
world, that has the most knowledge of the Love of God toward him in Jesus
Christ. This Fear and Faith do so stand together, that they cannot be
separated. In Act. 9.31. They walked in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the Holy Ghost. It Is the right temper of a true Christian, to have
the comforts of God in his Soul, and yet to be with fear and trembling. It Is a
fear that does inevitably arise upon a rectified nature, from a sight of the
disproportion that is between God and us. This is in Heaven it self, where the
Angels in glory beholding God so infinitely lifted up above them, cannot but
have reverence, fear and dread in their Souls toward him. And it is a fear
likewise of danger; not the danger of eternal death, for from that they are
saved, the knowledge of the Love of God assures them for that; but from the
danger of other things, which to them are as bitter as death is to the world;
and those are the frowns of God, the rebukes of God, the suspensions of Love,
and estrangedness of God toward them, the stripes of God: these things, when
God does as a Father to his that know him, they are most grievous and smarting;
and their Souls groan under these more, then worldly men under worldly danger.
Therefore he that knows God, and what it is to be in the light of his
Countenance, he that has tasted the bitterness of the loss of this, lives in
fear, lest he should provoke God as a Father to deal thus in severity with him.
And I speak all this the rather, because some do blaspheme that which is the
spring of life and peace to the Saints, saying, That for a man to have the
knowledge of God to be his God, and everlasting Portion, is a snare to bring
that man into a forgetfulness of God, and his Duty; and to blow up the spirit
with pride, and lull him into a sinful sleep. Such like things as these have
been and still are (not without much cause of grief) cast upon this blessed
Doctrine of the knowledge of our abode with God: Whereas the true knowledge of
God being ours, is that which does effectually and firmly work the heart to all
diligent watchfulness, tenderness and sedulity.

Thirdly, It disposes a man's spirit to the best entertainment of all divine
Determinations that are upon a man's addresses to God upon any occasion. Let the
answer be what it may be, what seems good to God; that man that knows God to be
his God, is best enabled to receive his answer, be it I or No: whether his
prayer succeed or not, he is put into such a frame, that he can say Amen to the
Will and Word of God; and go from God without murmuring and repining. If God
hear him, he is glad, but yet not so glad of the thing, as of his Interest; he
is not so taken with any thing he obtains, but God takes him more: If therefore
he receives any thing, he rejoices in it as the fruit of Love, and makes a
grateful return to God again. In Psalm. 119.137. Save my Soul, and it shall
praise thee. He rejoices in this, to see how welcome he is to God, and that
his prayer is accepted; others come, and are not regarded, but he has
audience: The things that God gives out, to him have another form and taste,
then to the world; they come all with tastes of love to him: In love to my
Soul, says Hezekiah, have thou delivered me, in Isai. 38.17. And whatsoever he
has, he has a better enjoyment of it then others, by reason of his Interest
in God; he has nothing from God as a mere gift, but he has God with it* God
says to that man that has Interest in him, There, take that which thou
askedst for, and me with it; that is thine, and I am thine; and the enjoyment
of God is more to him then all the world. This spirit is upon all that he has,
My Father gave me it, it is the fruit of the love of the God of my life;
therefore I must use it in order, according to order from him, and not after my
mind only. All things are best enjoyed when they are enjoyed according to Rule.
We spoil the sweetest things when we take them according to our wills, and so
use them, then they become another thing. When a man can sit in his enjoyment
of all things, and see God, this is a drop from the Fountain of Life; and it is
more then they have, that seem to enjoy a thousand times more of the things of
this life, whose corn and oil increase.

And if he be denied, if God see it not good to give him the things he desires,
yet he is satisfied; he does not contend with God, nor does his spirit rise up
against his Maker; he has a word ready in his spirit, Not my will, but thy
Will be done; he says, If my God will not give me this, it is well that he
will give me himself; I may be without this, but I could not be without him;
and seeing he has given himself to be my Portion, I will wait with patience,
and be content all the days of my life. In Eccless. 5. ult. says Solomon, If
God give a man the joy of his Soul, he shall not much remember the days of his
vanity. When God denies him any thing, he remembers that he comes not to God
for this particular thing, but for the best good: We come not to God for any
thing but that which is for our good. A good man says, If I had this thing, it
may be it would not do me good; and herein his spirit is satisfied: he says,
God knows better then I what is good for me; and if he thinks not such a thing
meet for me, I must think so too. So you see how the knowledge of a man's
Interest furthers his approaches to God, and helps him in these three respects
that we have mentioned.

CHAP. VI.
How the knowledge of divine Interest does promote Holiness, sets Judgment and
Nature against Sin, keeps the heart from inordinate reaching after and holding
fast present things. Faith binds the Soul, and keeps it bound, makes all a
Christians ways easy. Assurance gives a double advantage to our great meeting
with God.

IN this Chapter I shall in some particulars show how the knowledge of our
Interest in God, does promote and further our walking with God in all holiness.

In the first place: When a man has tasted those comforts that flow from this
Interest, Sin to that man is sin indeed; it is out of measure sinful. An
assurance of our propriety in God, represents sin in its deepest color, and
causes it with the most afflicting resemblance to reflect upon the spirit. The
knowledge of our pardon does not put an end to our sorrows, it rather begins
them. The sight of God reconciled does not work that peace that is without
sorrow, but makes those streams run deeper and purer. The more a man knows that
he shall not dye for sin, the more he is under a necessity of bewailing his
sin; and it is as natural an effect of the sight of God, to have the heart
pierced and wounded, as healed. David, when Nathan told him, that he had
sinned, and when he knew that his sin was done away, then was he most candid,
most serious, and strong in his humiliation before God. Those men that pretend
to have their joys from their pardon, and reckon God to be theirs, and yet can
pass over their sins with dry eyes, drink their refreshing waters not from him
who is the Well of Life, but from beneath, and are under a spirit of
depravation and delusion, and such a spirit as will seal them up to everlasting
condemnation. Nothing becomes the Saints more then mourning. The proper working
of love in Heaven, is joy, because there is nothing but good; but the proper
working of love here, is joy with grief, because though God be good to us, yet
we are evil against him. In Ezekiel. 36.31. you have this expression by God
himself; Then shall you remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were
not good; and shall loath your selves for your iniquities, and for your
abominations. [Then:] When? If you look in the verses before, it is when God
should come to do them the greatest good, when he would cause his face to shine
upon them, and make his footsteps to drop down blessings: Then, says God, when
I have you upon the knee, and satisfied your Souls with goodness; then shall
you remember your own evil ways, and your doings that have not been good; and
you shall loath your selves for all your abominations. The knowledge of
absolution in Heaven, breeds the severest condemnation in the hearts of the
Saints; the more they see they are accepted, the more that voice sounds in
their ears, Thou art comely and fair, my Beloved; the more do they point at
their spots, and have an eye upon their own spirits; I am black, says the
Church, the Sun has stained my beauty, though God said she was all fair and
comely. Christ says to Paul, Thou art a chosen Vessel: What says Paul of
himself all along? I was a Persecutor, and a Blasphemer, etc. He read it as if
it were wrote in a table always before his eyes. Not only sin in act, but sin
in temptation, the very solicitations to sin, are grievous to that man that
has received a testimony from Heaven, that his name is written in the Book of
Life, and that God, whose Name is, God blessed for ever, is his God and Father.
Remember Joseph what he said, Genesis 39.9. How can I do this great evil, and sin
against God? Above all, sin in their nature, as it dwells in them, and acts in
them incessantly, and renders them in such a contrariety to the Nature and Will
of God, this is that which does mightily humble and abase them; not only as it
is displeasing to God, but also as it puts them into an incapacity of serving
him, and having communion with him. The more sin is in us, the less we see of
God. Matthew 5. verse. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
[See him,] not only in Heaven, but as they are pure and are sanctified, as they
are more filled with the spirit of holiness, so they shall have clear visions
of God, and more full acquaintance with God here. Now the assurance of our
Interest in God making sin to be thus vile, and setting the Soul at such a
distance from it, is a great furtherance to holiness: It sets the judgment
against it, and not only the judgment, for so it may be in the worst of men,
but it puts the nature of the man against it. A child knows in his judgment he
ought not to wound his father; but there is something in his nature that he
cannot do it, besides the over-powering force of his judgment: As Esther in
Chap. 8.6. expresses this natural force, How can I endure to see the evil that
shall come upon my people? or, how can I endure to see the destruction of my
kindred? See how resolution wrought with her; [How can I endure,] how can I
endure to see these things? So says the Soul that has a sight of God, How can
I do thus against God? That Is one thing.

In the second place; The knowledge of this blessedness, that God is become
ours, calms, quiets, and moderates the heart toward all things: So that there
is neither that inordinacy of reaching after or holding fast these present
things, as there was before. Besides this, it works an holy contentment in our
present estate, an holy indifferency to any future possible condition according
to the Will and Wisdom of God. When once a man has tasted of this Interest,
and has seen the favor of the great God in the face of Jesus Christ, he looks
no more after other Lovers, but shakes them off according to the measure he
has attained. As in a house more noble things take place, and dust and things
of no value are cast out: so when this Pearl of infinite worth takes place in
the Soul, when once a man lives in an enjoyment of God, he dies so far to all
things else. In Gal. 6.14. says the Apostle (having said before that Christ
lived in him) I am crucified to the world, and the world is crucified to me:
The world looks on me as a dead thing, with whom it would not converse; and I
look on the world as a dead corpse, and have nothing to do with it, it is of no
value with me. When Ruth was married to Boaz, she forsook the field, and
gleaned no more; when she had got Boaz's estate, she minded no more to gather
handfulls of Corn by gleaning. If any man (says Christ) drink of these waters,
he shall never thirst; he shall not need to dig any other pits, these waters
shall content him; his desires shall be so confined, contented and contracted
to this one thing. A man's interest in one is according to the person in whom it
is: He that has interest in a Prince, will not be drawn away by beggars. When
Saul had found a Kingdom, he minded no more the Asses which he was seeking.
When the people of God had freedom to come to Jerusalem, they were willing to
leave Babylon. This is a great piece of holiness, for a man to be separated
from this world in his affections, that he can steer through the world
untouched, that he may be in the use of creatures, but not come in bonds under
the power, government, and force of them: Now when a man sees God to be his
God, this makes him to be as Christ speaks of his, They are not of this world,
as I am not of this world, Joh. 17. This comfort dissolves all bonds, and sets
free from a confederacy with other things, and now the whole world is of little
force with him. Moses is a pregnant example of (...) this in Hebr. 11.24. By
faith Moses when he was come to years (or when he became great) refused to be
called the Son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. What was
the Reason? The Text gives you these Reasons, that he had respect to the
recompense of reward, at the twenty sixth Verse, and because he had seen him
who was invisible, at the 27. Verse; So that the sight of God, and the sight of
our Interest in him, lays the world dead, casts a darkness upon the glory of
it; and the soul is taken with nothing in comparison of him.

Thirdly, The sight of our Interest holds the soul in bonds unto God, it does
not only bind it, but hold it bound. The love of Christ, says the Apostle,
constrains us, 2 Cor. 5.14. It holds us to God, that though there be something
in us that makes us apt to excursions, to go out from him, yet we are held in
by bonds of love. This Interest must needs be of a mighty force to those that
see it, because its the highest Interest in the sweetest way: God gives us such
an Interest in himself, as a child has in his Father, and as a Spouse has in
her husband; which are Interests of greatest Love. Its an Interest of constant
communion, there are constant effluxes, out-flowings of the kindness of God
upon that soul, that knows God to be his; which do bind him every day more and
more, and leave him less his own. This is the nature of the Spirit of Adoption,
that makes a man cry Abba, Father, it makes him more a child; as willing to
acknowledge himself in that state of subordination, as a child; as he is to look
up to God in a way of hope, as he is the Father of mercies.

The assurance of the love of God as it comforts, so it conquers the soul. It
does not work it into a strange kind of mad rejoicing, such as the Spirit that
is gone forth begets in the hearts of many at this day, who are strangers to
the life of God, yet boast as if they had drunk deep of the cup of consolation;
whereas they are loose and careless, and can do all evil against God, and be
free from him, and not have their hearts touched with it at all. But now true
Gospel comfort, that which he who is the God of all comfort gives, by the
manifestation of himself in conjunction with the creature, does overcome the
heart, and put it into a willing necessity, and strengthens it to walk in all
well-pleasing before him, so that the soul cannot go from him. In Psalm 63. v.
7. David expresses this, Because thou have been my help, therefore in the
shadow of thy wings will I rejoice, my soul cleaves unto thee, for thy right
hand upholdeth me. As if he should say, Thou have done me good, and thine hand
has supported me, else I should fall at every step; I live upon thee,
therefore my soul follows after thee, or is glued to thee; the expression of
thy love and constant goodness toward me is that which binds my soul unto thee.

Fourthly, When a man knows God to be his God, and there is no more remembrance
of sin against him, and that he is received into the inheritance of the Saints,
and of Christ himself; and that God is become his Father; Now all his ways are
made easy, this facilitates all. For what are those things that are wont to
burden a man's spirit in the race which is set before him? It is either because
there are such sad things in his way, or because a man fears whether his work
and service shall be accepted, or because he does not like his work, or because
he is not satisfied about his wages; Now it is manifest that the knowledge of
this, that God is our God, removes all these things; he cannot dislike his way
that sees God in it, he cannot dislike that work which God sets him about, he
cannot but think he is accepted, and that his wages is more then sufficient
recompense, that knows God to be his God. 1 John 5.3, 4. the Apostle says,
That to him that loves, the Commandment is not grievous. It is no burden in
comparison; so far as a man loves, so far his work is easy and sweet to him:
What Is the reason? Its given in the next words follwing, Because he has
overcome the world, for there is nothing except darkness upon a man's spirit,
which is a spring of fear and doubt, concerning his acceptance with God, that
clogs a man's spirit in the ways of God, that sharpens and imbitters the things
which we must grapple withal; I say, nothing can hurt him but this: Now a man
that sees God to be his God, has overcome the world. And if his case be
dangerous, such wherein he is tempted on the right hand, he says with Paul, I
pass not, I care not for all these things, as Moses cared not for all the
riches of Pharaohs Court. And as Paul when he was tempted upon the left hand, I
pass not for all these things neither shame, trouble, reproach, stripes,
imprisonments, and the like. And Esth. 4.16. In that service for the people of
God, I see (says she) it is the will of God I should do it, I Will go, and If I
perish, I perish; such an impression does the sight of God leave upon the
Spirit, that nothing can stop the soul in its course, no more then the Sun in
the firmament. Others go heavy and are soon tired, as God complains in Mal.
1.13. They say also, What a weariness is it? that is, to attend upon God in his
worship: And they snuff at it, in way of dislike, or as men that would blow
away something which lies in their way, and which they dislike. Upon all these
Considerations nothing promotes holiness more then the knowledge of this, that
God is ours. To that which has been said, I will only add a double advantage
that this assurance gives to our meeting with God.

1. That it does allay that unquietness that is ready to rise upon the thoughts
of dissolution, and the remembrance of that day of Doom, when one word
determines a man's estate to all Eternity. To know that a man is going to his
God and Father, to be able to say, as Christ said, I go to my Father; this will
banish those fears from the Soul, and make a man to go out of the body with
peace, as one that knows whether he is going, even out of an unquiet Sea to a
quiet Harbor, which he sees fair before him, and where he shall be free from
danger. This is that which John speaks of, 1 Epist. 4.17. Herein is love made
perfect, the love of God is herein perfected, has its utmost sweetness,
efficacy and operation, that we may have boldness in the day of Judgment. It
does secure and quiet our spirits, and does answer all sad thoughts of the
Soul; that we may have boldness in that day, because as he is, so are we in
this world: Because as he is faithful and real in his love to us, so we are
faithful and real in our love to him; so that there is a firm union and
conjunction between God and us.

Another Advantage is, that Assurance makes the heart to long after God, and to
be with Jesus Christ. That most assured Saint Paul was by faith put into this
temper, and having a sight of those things within the vail, and looking at them
as before him; how abundantly (as one burdened) does he groan and sigh that he
may be in the enjoyment of those things whereof he had a sight and hope? So
that it is of very great concernment, for a man to know God to be his God in
reference to his appearance before him at the last day.

My Exhortation to you all therefore shall be, That you would labor to make
your Interest certain, that you may be able to say with Job, I know that my
Redeemer lives; and as David in the Text, I am thine. A man cannot be a good
man that drives not after this; he knows not God at all, that has no desire of
this assurance. That man also, what ever he knows of God, is in a sad,
miserable and wretched condition, that doubts whether God be his God; that
lives floating between hope and fear, and yet lives without vehement desires
and endeavors to have this question cleared. Certainly you cannot be right, if
you have not such a desire of the enjoyment of this Interest, to be able to
say, God is my God. This we are to seek in truth and purity; not to the
quieting of our spirits only, or to the indulgence of the flesh, (as many seem
to long after the consolations of God, that know not what they are,) but that
God having so filled us, we may become a sacrifice to him. You must effectually
prosecute this also in the utmost improvement of your might and power, without
ceasing, till you have obtained it, till you have that word sealed up in your
Souls, Son, daughter, be of good comfort, for thy sins are forgiven thee; lift
up thy head, for thy Maker is thy Husband. It is the greatest folly in the
world for Christians to pretend a life of faith, and cut the life and sinews of
just and necessary endeavors for the attaining assurance of the love of God. A
man should take heed of presuming upon God when he cannot say, God is his God;
and he must take heed of pretending to live a life of faith in such a way that
weakens his endeavors after assurance. Certainly, the same principle that
carries a man from the world to God, will make a man restless till he knows
that God is his God, and what things are contained in that Interest: which
things, as it is a great grief not to know, so if they be clouded, it is
usually from Gods displeasure, by which the Soul is left fluctuating, tossing,
rouling and wasting it self in anxieties, clouds and perplexing doubts. I say
not, that it is always from displeasure, because God has other ends then he
has acquainted us withal; yet I say, usually it is so. But as a wise father
full of bowels, if he be strange to his child, or take any relation of love, if
it be clouded and darkened, it usually betokens all is not well, something is
amiss. So I say, thou may justly suspect, and take occasion to make a search,
what is the difference between God and thee; and what is the cause of those
clouds that are interposed between God and thy Soul. In Isai. 54.8. God tells
us the spring of this evil, In a little wrath, for a moment I hid my face. [In
a little wrath.] So that the suspending of comfort from our spirits, leaving
the Souls of men dubious and anxious about this great matter, does usually
betoken displeasure, all is not well.

FINIS.

