THE INIQVITY OF The Late Solemn League, OR COVENANT DJSCOVERED: By way of a
Letter to a Gentleman desiring information upon the Point.

Whereunto is Subjoyned the Covenant it self.

Printed, March 9. 1643.

The Iniquity of the late Solemn League or Covenant, discovered by way of
Letter to a Gentleman desiring information upon the point.
Sir,
IN answer to your desire of being informed concerning the late Covenant, I
have endeavored, as briefly and plainly, as I can, to let you understand what
I conceive of it, and do advise upon it. I cannot but conceive that this
Covenant, or Conspiracy rather, is a Combination wickedly contrived, and upon
the Consciences of others as wickedly imposed by those, who, under pretense of
reforming Religion and Government, would by force of Arms bring all into their
Power.

It is a wonder to consider, that men, who have always cried out for Liberty
of Conscience, not suffering themselves to be limited in a Ceremony or thing
indifferent, but in defense of that Liberty, endeavoring to bring all into
confusion, should thus Imperiously Tyrannize over other men's Consciences,
forcing upon them Oath after Oath, Covenant after Covenant, till they have
hardened them into a senselessness of what is just and right.

Now for your self, who would continue Resolute against it, and for those
Gentlemen, you speak of, who have taken it, or are so resolved, in hope of
procuring their Liberty thereby, if my resolution and advice may in time be
heard, it stands thus upon these two points.

I. That no man can with a safe Conscience enter this Covenant, by reason of
the gross and palpable iniquity of the Contents thereof.

II. That he who through his own ignorance, and the cunning of others, has
been seduced, or by their threats and Menaces forced, or by any other means
brought on to enter this Covenant with them, is not bound to the performance of
the Contents, but having by the taking of it, contracted their guilt of a
grievous sin, is bound to a speedy Repentance for the same.

First, That the sin and unlawfullnesse of taking it may appear, you must
consider, that he which enters Covenant after this manner, does before Almighty
God profess, that in Conscience he allows and approves the designs and
intentions of them, he enters Covenant with, and does also bind himself to do
and pursue that, for which the Covenant is made. And accordingly you may
observe, that in the close of the Covenant, it is said, And this Covenant we
make in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same. Now it is a known and received Rule, that an
Oath or Covenant, (whether lawfully or unlawfully imposed, it matters not, so a
man yields himself to take it) is taken not according to the reserved meaning
of him that takes it, but according to the known and notorious meaning and
intention of them that impose or require it. What such an one does profess and
bind himself unto, will appear in these particulars.

I. He that enters this Covenant, does by the first and second Articles
thereof, before almighty God profess, that he does in Conscience allow and
approve the change, (i. e.) not the Reformation only but abolishing) of this
Church Government, and of the extirpation of Episcopacy: and does bind himself
by the same Articles, really and constantly to endeavor the same.

Now see the iniquity of this. First; here is sedition: Subjects entered into a
Covenant for a change of established Government, without and against their
Sovereigns command and Authority. The example they pretend for this out of,
Ezra, 10. 3. makes against them; for there was no change of Law or Government
attempted, and Ezra had good Authority for what he did, being sent from the
King with full commission to carry back the People to Jerusalem, and there to
restore the Temple and Worship according to the Law of his God, Ezra 7. 13, 14.
Secondly, here is injustice to fellow Subjects: Subjects entering a Covenant,
and binding themselves to do notorious injury and wrong to others; that is, to
extirpate a company of Men, whose Function (I speak of Bishops) is of
Apostolical institution, and has continued in this Land, from the first
receiving of the Christian Faith: whose immunities also, and privileges are
undeniably most ancient and Legal in this Kingdom. Thirdly, here is a
Sacrilege, in spoiling Them, or a Church rather, of those Possessions and
Interests, which beside the right of Dedication, do by as good Law and Title
belong to them, as any Liberty or Possession does to other Subjects. Lastly,
here is Rebellion with the greatest impiety: Subjects endeavoring this by
force of Arms (as it will appear by the sixth Article, they that Covenant,
bind themselves to do) that is, to compel your Sovereign to such an
Extirpation and spoiling, against which he is bound by the Law of God, and by
express Oath, and cannot be released of that Oath, without their consent to
whom he makes it, viz. those that must here be extirpated and spoiled.

II. He that enters this Covenant, does by the fourth Article profess, that he
allows, All those which adhere to His Majesty in this Cause, should be
esteemed and proceeded against, as Malignants, Incendiaries, and as in the
first Article they set them out, Common Enemies; for it is notorious and well
known, whom the Imposers of this Covenant do mean by those names. Also by
the same fourth Article, he binds himself to discover all such, that they may
be brought to punishment.

The Iniquity of this appears, by what was said upon the former Articles; but
more especially by the duties unto which the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance
bind all Subjects, viz. the assisting of His Majesty against all attempts, and
the discovering unto him all conspiracies; duties contrary to what is
undertaken here.

III. Least this Covenant should seem contrary to those Oaths, there is in
the third Article a clause, for preserving and defending the Kings Majesty's
Person and Authority, without any thought or intention of diminishing His just
Power and Greatness; which though he that enters this Covenant may think to
be just and fair, yet is it indeed a fearful Collusion, and mocking of God,
there being nothing more against His Majesty's Authority and Power, then the
intent and pursuit of this Covenant.

IIII. He that enters this Covenant, does bind himself by the fifth Article to
endeavor the continuance of Peace between the two Kingdoms, which, according
to the intent of this Covenant, he must do, by joining with those who have now
actually broken the Pacification, and in pursuit of this Covenant invaded this
Kingdom: which is also a fearful Collusion, and mocking of God.

V. He that enters this Covenant, does profess by the sixth Article, that he
allows and approves the assisting and defending of all those, that take this
Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof, against all opposition, and
lets or impediments whatsoever; and by the same Article binds himself really
and constantly to endeavor the same to his power, without giving himself to a
detestable Neutrality in this Cause, or making a defection to the contrary part.

Now see the Iniquity of this Article, which so plainly speaks the language of
desperate Rebellion: it is notoriously known by the Arms which they and the
Scots have raised and used in pursuit of this and former Covenants or
Conspiracies, what is meant by assisting and defending their Covenantees, by
maintaining and pursuing their Covenant against all opposition whatsoever; so
that he which Covenants with them, does by this Article bind himself to
endeavor by force of Arms to compel his Sovereign, to the Reformation
pretended by this Covenant, and does, as much as in him lies, cut himself off
from returning to his duty and obedience, which is here called a defe^tion to
the contrary part. And I marvel, those Gentlemen, who by entering this
Covenant hope for liberty, do not see in what a Toil they are caught worse
then the Prison; for should they have liberty thereupon, what do they intend
to do; to live quietly at home. No, they expressly bind themselves against
Neutrality, as a detestable thing; or to assist the King; that indeed they
stand bound to do, but by this Covenant desperately undertake against it,
under the name of defection to the contrary part.

VI. Lastly to fill up the measure and to mock God Almighty to his face, he
that enters Covenant with these holy Leaguers, does profess that he approves
and binds himself to all their premises, as to that which much concerns the
glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and the honor of the King. Artic 6.
and elsewhere.

All which considered, I may conclude, that no Subject in this Kingdom, who
has not cast of the conscience of that which is just and right (much less such
an one, that abhorres the designs and proceedings of these men, and has
suffered in opposition to them) can approve and allow the Contents of this
Covenant, and bind himself to a real pursuance of them. But he will rather
say to his soul in the Psalmists words, Will thou have any thing to do with
the stool (or seat) of wickedness, which imagines mischief as a Law? Psalm.
94. 20. or as Jacob of the Brethren of Cruelty, Oh my soul come not thou into
their secret, Genesis 49. 6.

After the Resolution of Conscience, it will be needless to stand upon outward
Motives, those evils of desolation which these men threaten, as you say, to
bring upon Family, Posterity, Inheritance; yet I desire you consider that
Houses and Families do continue by the providence and blessing of God, not by
the will of Cruel and blood-thirsty men, who (as the Psalmist threatens them)
shall not themselves live out half their days.

Thus much for the resolving and keeping a good Conscience in the refusal of
this Covenant, by reason of the gross and palpable iniquity of the Contents
thereof; now for the recovery of Conscience ensnared by entering this Covenant,
we must consider the not binding of it, if taken. Which was the second point
proposed at the beginning.

This is a certain Truth. That the matter and intent of the Covenant being
unlawful, it cannot bind to performance; no more, then Herod's oath did bind
him to proceed to execution, Matthew. 14. or the great curse under which those
forty Conspiratours, Act. 23. combined themselves to make an end of Paul, could
indeed oblige them to performance.

But there are two sorts of men that abuse themselves by a misconceit of the
not binding of this Covenant. 1. Those that are suffered to take it with
express Reservations of their own framing, which do annull and frustrate the
whole Contents, and leave nothing to bind them; as thus, I take this Covenant,
so far forth, as it does not contrary the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance,
or the like. And thus the Judges there, as it is said, were permitted to take
it. But they, as wise as they are, should have considered, that, although
indeed they be not bound to perform the Contents of this Covenant being made
void by such reservations, yet will they be made to know, they must perform
and proceed as far as their Masters (who impose it) do, or shall think fit
to do upon after occasions, and for default will be dealt with, not as
Malignants only, but as perjured Persons. They should also (as knowing as they
are) learn, that while they thus play fast and loose within the compass of
their own Law, Gods Law casts an heavy bond upon them, the guilt of an heinous
sin in mocking and taking. Gods name in vain after so high a manner. For
when Reservations are allowed in the taking of Oath or Covenant, they must
limit the matter of it but in part, and not destroy it in the whole; for then
the whole business is, as was said, an open mockery, a presumptuous taking of
Gods name in vain, and requires a speedy repentance.

II. The other sort are those, who hearing this doctrine, That this Covenant
being taken does not bind to performance, by reason of the unlawful Contents
of it; do ignorantly and by ill consequence conclude themselves into it after
this manner, If it binds not, then may we take it, and there is no harm done.
They must know, that although it binds not to performance, because no man can
stand bound to do that which is unlawful and wicked, yet if they take it, it
binds them under the guilt of a grievous sin, in calling God to witness,
they will do that, which indeed with a good conscience they cannot perform.
Such I say, are not bound to perform what they have wickedly undertaken and
promised by this Covenant, but they are bound speedily to repent of the
grievous sin they have committed both against God, whose name and Majesty
they have abused in taking such a Covenant, and against the King their
Sovereign, to whom they were bound by the oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
in duties contrary to the designs and intention of this Covenant, and so had
need to make have in returning to their duty, as Shimei did after he had cursed
the King, And Shimei fell down before the King and said, Let not my Lord
impute iniquity to me, neither do thou remember that which thy servant did
perversely on the day that my Lord the King went out of Jerusalem: For thy
servant knows, that I have sinned; therefore behold I am come the first this
day to meet my Lord the King. 2. Sam. 19. 19, 20.

Sir, I hope you will not need the advice of this latter part, but will,
according to the direction of the former, endeavor to keep a good Conscience,
which you shall find in this your durance to be a continual feast* I pray God
direct and strengthen you.

A SOLEMN League and Covenant FOR Reformation, and Defense of Religion, The
Honor and Happiness of the KING; And the Peace and Safety of the three
Kingdoms OF England, Scotland, and Jreland.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and
Ireland, by the Providence of God living under one King, and being of one
reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness
of the Kings Majesty, and His Posterity, and the true public Liberty, Safety
and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included,
and calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots, Conspiracies, Attempts
and practices of the Enemies of God, against the true Religion, and Professors
thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms, ever since the
reformation of Religion, and how much their rage, power, and presumption, are
of late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable estate
of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and
Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland, are present and public Testimonies; We have now at last, (after
other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and Sufferings) for
the preservation of our selves and our Religion, from utter ruin and
Destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former
times, and the example of Gods people in other Nations, after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn
League and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself,
with our hands lifted up to the most high God, do swear:

I. THat we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, against our common Enemies, the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches; And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That
we and our posterity after us may as Brethren live in Faith and Love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

II. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government, by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall
be found to be contrary to found Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

III. We shall with the same sincerity, reality and constancy, in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our Estates and Lives, mutually to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms,
and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with our consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just power and
greatness.

IIII. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all
such as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments,
by hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or
one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or Parties amongst the
People, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
publiquetriall, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their
offenses shall require or deserve, or the supreme Iudicatories of both
Kingdoms respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall
judge convenient.

V. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms,
denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good providence of God
granted unto us, and has been lately concluded, and settled by both
Parliaments, we shall each one of us, according to our place and interest,
endeavor that they may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all
Posterity; And that Justice may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof, in
manner expressed in the precedent Articles.

VI. We shall also according to our places and callings in this common Cause of
Religion, Liberty and Peace of the Kingdom, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed union and conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or Neutralitie in this
Cause, which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms,
and the honor of the King; but shall all the days of ourlives, realously and
constantly continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same
according to our power, against all Lets and impediments whatsoever; and what
we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make
known, that it may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in
the sight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof; We profess and declare before God and the World,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially, that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
transgressions, so much abounding amongst us; And our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power
and charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and
Man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath, and heavy indignation,
and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Covenant
we made in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a
true intention to perform the same; as we shall answer at the great day, when
the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; Most humbly beseeching the Lord
to strengthen us by his holy spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success as may be deliverance and safety to his people,
and encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of
the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to join in the same, or like Association
and Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, and the peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths.

FINIS.

