A DECLARATION From his Excellence Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and the General Council
of the ARMY, Held at Putney, on Thursday September 16. 1647. Concerning the
Delays in raising Moneys for supply of the Army, and other Forces of the
Kingdom. And their humble Offers and Desires in Relation thereto. Tendered To
the Right Honorable Commissioners of Parliament residing with the Army, and by
them to be presented to the Houses. With his Exceliencies Letter to the
Commissioners concerning the same. Also a Narrative of the Soldiers behavior
toward the L. Lauderdale.

By the Appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the General
Council of the Army.

Jo. Rushworth Secretary.

Printed at London, for George Whittington, at the Blew Anchor, in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchange, 1647.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe extreme necessity of the Army, and other Forces in the Kingdom,
together with the present pressures of the Country where it Quarters, for want
of Moneys, as well as the delays of them from whom you might e're this time
have justly expected a better Account on this behalf then is as yet heard of,
is the occasion which yesterday produced a Resolution upon this enclosed Paper,
which I herewith tender to your Lordships, Desiring it may be speedily
communicated to both Houses: I remain,

Putney 17 Septembris, 1647. Your Lordships most humble servant, THO. FAIRFAX.

For the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons. Commissioners of Parliament
residing in the Army.

A Declaration from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the General
Council of the Army held at Putney on Thursday September. 16. 1647.
THe extreme wants of the Soldiery (both of the Army and other Forces and
Garrisons that have concurred with us, as also the sufferings of the Countries
in respect of free Quarter, and the necessities of the Kingdom for a speedy
supply of money in relation to the disbanding of superfluous forces, the
sending over of others for the relief of Jreland, and for the supplying of
those forces that are there already, so as to prevent the danger of those
distempers lately raised amongst them,) are such as we are and have been very
sensible of and exceedingly pressed with the consideration of them.

Yet the care the Houses have so many ways expressed for providing a present
supply of monyes, in relation to all these affairs, have made us hitherto
silent as to that point, in expectation to have found ere this time an
answerable effect thereof in actual supplies. But finding that notwithstanding
all their care, yet through the neglect or delay of those on whom the Houses
have depended in that particular, there is little or nothing hitherto effected
therein, and especially considering the delays made by the Lord Mayor Aldermen
and Common Council of the City of London, in the advancing of that sum which
the Houses have demanded of them upon the security of the Arreares (so long
since) due from the City to this Army and for that tax whereupon all or most
other places have long since paid in their proportions.) We are enforced to
make this present address to the Houses in relation thereunto.

First we cannot but consider the notorious readiness of that Court to the
advancing of far greater sums for the raising of a new War and
prosecution of the late mischievous practices and designs against the
Parliament and Army. And that as their precipitate forwardness therein, was
the occasion of the Armies coming into these parts: so their backwardness to
the raising or advancing of the money now required for the service of the
Parliament and supply of the Army, has been and is the occasion of the Armies
continuance here: And therefore we cannot but offer it as what we humbly
conceive most just and reasonable.

That for what time their default or delays have occasioned and shall further
occasion the Armies stay hereabouts (so much to the burden and oppression of
these parts) the charge thereof should some way be laid upon them and their
adherents in and about the City, together with those persons from whom the said
arreares are due, and those in whose default it lies that they have hitherto
been either not assessed or not collected. And for that purpose that at least
in case the sum required be not paid in at the time limmitted by the Houses.
There may be a proportionable penalty imposed by way of daily increase of the
sum required for so long time as the payment thereof shall be further delayed.
Next forasmuch as the Lord Mayor Aldermen and Common Council, may perhaps
conceive themselves not so much obliged (either to execute the authority given
them by the Parliament for leavying of money upon others, or to advance it
themselves by way of loan in behalf of others until it can be leavyed) as
they would be to provide what should justly be charged upon themselves: We
therefore humbly offer (at least) in case the sum required upon the arreares
be not paid in by the time limited.

II. That the Houses would be pleased speedily to consider of the delinquency
of that Court and Council, in those things that were lately done by them as a
Court, and set such Fine upon them for the same as shall be agreeable to
justice, which money being chargeable so properly upon themselves we presume
they willl not have the like excuse not to provide.

Lastly, since it is most evident that for the speedy bringing in of the money
required upon the arrears there wants not in the said Major, Alderme^ and
Common Council, either authority to levy it or ability to advance it by way of
Loan till it can be levied: nor do the persons from whom the arrears are due
want ability to pay them, but the only fault and defect lies in the want of
will to the thing, both in the one and in the other, and want of power in the
hands of willing men to enforce it, without which we see little hopes that it
will in any tolerable time be effected; We therefore offer

III. That in case the money be not brought in (by the time limited the
Parliament would be pleased to give leave and power to the General (with the
advice and directions of the Committee for the Army) for the levying of the
said arrears, together with such penalties and fine as the Houses shall find
cause to impose as aforesaid, or (at least) the penalties allowed by the
Ordinances for that tax for the Army, and then if the moneys be not speedily
brought in for the Parliament to dispose of let us be are the blame.

And all these things we desire the rather, because we have grounds both of
reason and evidence from the speeches of many in the City, to believe that in
this long witholding of money, the designs and hopes of the Parliaments and our
enemies, are to raise the Army into distempers, and the country about us into a
flame, whereby at least to hinder and interrupt all proceedings to the
execution of Parlimentary justice, or settlement of the Kingdom, and to expose
the Parliament again into tumultuous violence, of all which the danger is very
evident and imminent, if not speedily prevented by some such vigorous and
effectnall remedies as aforesaid.

Putney Sept. 16. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax
and the Council of war. Signed John Rushworth Secretary

(...)
