A Proclamation of his Highness, prohibiting the disturbing of Ministers and
other Christians in their Assemblies and Meetings.
IT having pleased the Lord, by the manifold Mercies and Deliverances which he
has wrought in and for these Nations of late years, and the blessings wherewith
he has blessed the endevors of the good people thereof, in making them
successful against his and their Enemies, to crown us with this, as not the
least Token of his favor and good will to us. That there is a free and
uninterupted passage of the Gospel running through the midst of us, and Liberty
for all to hold forth and profess with sobriety, their light and knowledge
therein, according as the Lord in his rich Grace and wisdom has dispensed to
every man, and with the same freedom to practice and exercise the Faith of the
Gospel, and to lead quiet and peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty,
without any interuption from the Powers God has set over this Commonwealth, nay
with all just and due encouragement thereto, and protection in so doing by the
same; a mercy that is the Price of much blood, and till of late years denied to
this Nation, as at this day it continues to be to most of the Nations round
about us, and which all that fear God among us ought duly to consider and be
thankful for in this Day, wherein God has so graciously visited and redeemed
his people; His Highness, as he reckons it a Duty incumbent upon him, and shall
take all possible care to preserve and continue this freedom and liberty to all
persons in this Commonwealth fearing God though of differing Judgments, by
protecting them in the sober and quiet exercise and profession of Religion, and
the sincere worship of God, against all such who shall, by imposing upon the
Consciences of their Brethren, or offering violence to their persons, or any
other way seek to hinder them therein; So likewise does he hold himself
equally obliged to take care, That on no pretense whatsoever, such freedom
given should be extended by any beyond those bounds which the Royal Law of
Love and Christian moderation have set us in our walking one toward another; or
that thereby occasion should be taken by any to abuse this liberty to the
disturbance or disquiet of any of their Brethren in the same free exercise of
their Faith and Worship, which himself enjoys of his own. And his Highness
cannot but sadly lament the woeful distemper that is fallen upon the Spirits of
many professing Religion and the fear of God in these days, who instead of a
suitable Return to the Lord our God for this liberty, and all our other
mercies, and appearing in an answerable carriage by a spirit of tenderness and
forbearance one toward another, and Provoking one another to Love and good
works, are found in a spirit of bitterness toward their Brethren, biting and
devouring, hateful and bating one another; and whilst they pretend the liberty
which Christ has purchased for his people, do openly and avowedly, by rude and
unchristian practices, disturb both the public and private meetings for
preaching the Word, and other Religious exercises, and vilify oppose, and
interrupt the public Preachers in their Ministry, whereby the liberty of the
Gospel, the Profession of Religion, and the name of God is much dishonored
and and abused, and the spirits of all good men much grieved: His Highness
therefore having had many informations from diverse parts of this Commonwealth of
such practices by diverse men lately risen up under the names of Quakers,
Ranters, and others, who do daily both reproach and disturb the assemblies and
congregations of Christians in their public and private meetings, and
interrupt the Preachers in dispensing the Word, and others in their worship,
contrary to just liberty, and to the disturbance of the public peace, Does
hold himself obliged by his Trust to declare his dislike of al such practices,
as being contrary to the just freedom and liberties of the People, which by the
Laws and Government of this Commonwealth they ought to be protected in; And
does hereby strictly require and command al persons whatsoever that they
forbear henceforth all such irregular and disorderly practices. And if in
contempt hereof any persons shall presume to offend as aforesaid, we shall
esteem them as disturbers of the civil Peace, and shall expect and do require
all Officers and Ministers of Justice to proceed against them accordingly.

Given at Whitehall February 15. 1654.

From Deal February 16.
Those ships that were riding in the Downs, are all gone, and this week are
come in from the Southward about 20 sail of Merchantmen; viz. from Legorne,
Genoa, Alicant, Malaga, Cadiz, St Lucar, and Lisbon, etc.

A list of the Ships arived this week in the Porr of London. From Bordeaux 2.
with Prunes, vinegar, rosin, etc.

Rouen 2. with Wines, vinegar, cider, canvas; etc. Roterdam 1: with hops, flax,
towe, pitch and tarr, etc St Lucar 1. with Orenges and limons Bilboa 1: with
Iron and wools Malaga 3: with Wine and fruit Cadiz 1: with Wine, fruit,
tobacco, etc. Caen 2: with canvas, paper, etc, Porptoport 1: with Oil, sumach,
argel, wine, etc. Morlaiz 1: with Dowlas, lockrams, paper, etc. Zirickzee 1.
with Pan-tiles Bruges 2. with hops, flax, Iron, etc. Nantes 1, with Spirits,
vinegar, prunes, salt, etc.

Foom Brussels February 21. stilo novo.
We are here still taken up with Plays and Bauls, which once ended, we shall
then take into consideration the state of War which is to be made against the
next Campaign, which will be no lest prosecuted then the last was by the one and
the other party. In the mean, whilst the time is spent here in divertisements,
there are commotions enough in Germany, where the Emperor, Electors and Princes
of the Empire do arm amain, and make great Levies both of horse and foot,
without declaring to what intent and purpose; leaving the world in doubt of
their design; which causes many conjectures to be made upon that subject.

Charles Stuart is still at Cullen; the passages will now begin to be open, we
may then chance to hear of his removing his quarters.


From Paris, February 20. stilo novo.
The whole Court have been a hunting at Bois de Vincennes except the Queen, who
pretends much to devotion by visiting the nests of Nunns and Friars. on
Wednesday last, she had a hunting Fit too, and went to hunt at St. German en
lay and Chantilly. here is a Report that the whole Court intends, within a few
days, to go to Fontain-bleau, and from thence to the waters of Bourbon, where
the Cardinal Mazarin intends to take these waters, by the advice of physicians,
for the conservation of his health. From thence, it is said, the Court intends
to remove to Lion.

Here has been a duel this week between 6 of the Pages of the Kings great
Stable, three against three, wherein 3. were slain, and the other 3 escaped;
which being Known to the King, he is highly incensed at it.

The Marquis of Castelnau and of Mompouillan, who command the French Cavalrie,
are now in a good posture, and intend to march abroad and brave the enemies,
and put releef into Quesnoy, with these 10. Companies of the French Guards that
were sent hence to St. Quintin. In the mean time the Marquis of Morolles,
Governer of Danvilliers, has taken Marville in the Province of Luxemburgh,
where he has lodged the Lorrainers that are in the service of France and has
enlarged his Quarter to bring in Contribution.

Here is much talk, as if the Peace were concluded betwixt France and England.
The K. intends to appear in person in his Army in Picardy. Here is news come
that Monsieur de Lyonne, Ambassador for his Majesty in Rome, did boldly declare
to the Cardinals, before they entered into the Conclave; That in case they shall
choose a Pope that is affected to Spain, and of that faction, then the King his
master did not doubt but he should use some means or other to reduce them to
reason. Count Harcourt who is at Philipsbourg in Alsatia, has sent to the King
to let him and his Council know, That unless they take order to send him the
Money which they promised, he could no longer be responsible for that place, nor
for the inconveniences that might follow. Its certi fied by letters from the
Hague in Holland, that the Spaniards make great preparations, by making their
levies in Germany; and that 900000 livres are brought out of Spain to Antwerp
for the carrying on of the War.

The embassage of the Marquis of Leyda, whom the K. of Spain intended to have
sent into England, is now at a stand, and it is not known whether it shall go on.

From Paris February 26. farther, That the great worthy of France, the Du. of
Guise, came Post into Paris on Tuesday last, laden with Italian Trophies, and
French ribbands. They relate likewise the great anxiety of the Cardinal, in
behalf of his Niece, wife to the Prince of Conti, who dancing at Montpelier, in
the time of the Carnevall, got a slip and hurt her self; but the Letters say,
he needs not be so much troubled, because he can never want Nieces to furnish
the Princes of the Blood of France, so long as Italy can afford him handsome
young Women to train up for the purpose.


From Dublin February 4.
Upon my late return from the view of the ruefull Desolations which the War and
Pestilence has made in diverse parts of Ireland, I find here is an erection of
new Judges, to determine Estates and qualifications of Irish, transplantable;
Mr Santhy the only pretender to Law, the rest are Mr John Gay, Mr Robert
Doyley, Mr Thomas Hook, Mr Isaac Dobson, and Mr William Franckland; The Courts
of Justice would be settled, were the Public Scale come over, and Judges named
in England. In the mean time, for present, the former administration is
continued.

The company of Foot that mutinyed when they were to be shipped and transported
for England (which by the way take notice of, how well the English like this
Country, when once used to, and settled in it) were cashiered in the Market
place. All things are working on here toward a settlement.


From Rome, January 25.
On the 17 instant, were celebrated the Funerals of the deceased Pope, Innocent
the Tenth; and a Funeral Oration was made by the Count Vbaldini, Secretary to
the Consistory.

Upon the 19, the Cardinals were shut up close, after the accustomed manner,
and immediately the leading Cardinals of every Faction began to labor hard about
the Election of a Pope, every one striving to make a holy Father that shall be
at their own devotion. It is publicly known already, that the Cardinal Carassa
has had 2^ voices, Cardinal Sacchetti 22, Cardinal Ghiguy 27. and Cardinal
Barbarini 36. But that statue called Pasquin, (upon which the wits of Rome use
to fasten their Libels called Pasquins or Pasquils) has declared, that
Fioranzola, or else Carpegno (two of the weakest Cardinals) to be Pope.

At another time, the learned Pasquin would have had Cardinal Cechini, or else
Rappocioli to be chosen.

Of 69 Cardinals now living, there are 66 in the Conclave at this Election; the
three who are absent, are, Cardinal Mazarin in France, the Cardinals Sandova
and Borgia in Spain.

Here arived diverse Gentlemen with store of money from Naples, to the
Ambassador of Spain, for the private bribing of diverse Cardinals, and to gain
as many of them as they can, to be Creatures to that Crown, and serve the
Spanish interest. In the mean time, to operate the more effectually upon the
sacred College of Cardinals, the Viceroy of Naples encroacheth day after day
upon the Papal Dominions, for the frighting of some, and gaining others. Diverse
subtle insinuating Papers have been spread likewise, to set forth how
convenient it is, to make choice of no man for Pope, but such a one as may be
able and active in officiating the Papal Function; which reflects a little too
much upon the eldest Cardinals.

On the other side, the French make a bustle, and that party make it their
business to keep Cardinal De Medici from the Popedom; the Sieur De Lyonne,
Ambassador of France, is said to have received one hundred thousand Pistols, to
try practices upon the Conclave; and in case there be occasion of purchasing
the voice of any one poor Cardinal, then to cooperate with the St. Esprit (as
the French phrase speaks) for the creating of such a Pope, as will consider the
interest of the Church, and of France, and the salvation of Souls, rather then
the interest of Spain. It is conceived, the Cardinals will hardly agree about
the Election of a Pope before Easter.

The late Pope, a little before his death, took a Ring off his finger, of very
great value, which he delivered to the Sieur Scotty-Major, to be by him
presented to the succeeding Pope; which the Lady Olympia desiring to view, he
refused her. The common people of this City, and others, are very much
offended, that this Lady, and the Prince Pamphillo her son, and the rest of the
Popes Kindred, showed so little of charity, and honor, at his funeral, that they
did not provide for him two Chests, one of Lead, and another of Cypress-wood,
according to the usual manner of Popes, insomuch that for want thereof, his
body was left in the lower Hall, in a nasty pickle, to the mercy of Rats and
Mice, which gnawed part of his Nose and Face, through the negligence and
drowsiness of those that watched it; which verifies the Prophecy delivered
some time since by an Astrologer concerning this last Pope, Carebit propria
Sepultura, He shall want a convenient Burial.

Notwithstanding all diligence has been used, in enquiring after the Authors
of those bitter Pasquils, which proclaim most horrid things touching the
deceased Pope, and most severe punishments are threatened against them, yet they
proceed in revilings every day; so that Father Oliva, a Jesuit his Ghostly
Father, to vindicate him, has put forth a brief Relation of all that passed at
the death of his Holiness, assuring the world, that before he died, he gave
very eminent Testimonies of his Piety, and manifested an entire resignation to
the Will of God, and a very great willingness to part with the world.

The advancement to the Popedom, lies between three Cardinals, by name
Sachetti, Caraffa, and Bragadino.


Whitehal, February 14.
Discovery being made where diverse written Papers of dangerous consequence were
kept close, and also of diverse Printed treasonous Papers, contrived on purpose,
to promote designs of Insurrection; they were all seized by some Messengers of
the Council, who at the same time, with the Papers, found a new Buff Coat, and
a rich great Saddle, which they brought away with them. The same day, his
Highness sent notice to Maj. Genesis Harrison, Mr. John Carew, Col. Rich, and one
Mr. Courtney, to come and appear before him.

Feb. 15. The aforesaid persons neglecting to appear, they were this morning
fetched in by Messengers, and about four a clock afternoon, they were admitted
into his Highnesses presence, where some pains was taken to convince them of
their discontents and disaffection to the Government; but in vain, for they
appeared stiff in opinion, justifying themselves, and refusing to give
assurance of their peaceable behavior under the Government. Whereupon, a
Council being called, and the matter taken into consideration they were
committed to the custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending the Council, in
whose hands they remain till farther order.

London, Feb. 15. Order was taken in the City, for the raising of the six
months Assessment, according to the order and declaration of his Highness and
the Council, and warrants were issued out for the speedy collecting and paying
it in to the Treasurers. The like is done for collecting it, by the Justices of
the County of Middlesex.

Feb. 16. The persons nominated by his Highness to be a Committee of Militia in
the City of London, met together; and having read their Commission, immediately
proceeded upon it, and made some progress in the business of raising forces,
for security of the City, and defense of his Highness, and the Commonwealth in
this time of danger.

Feb. 17. There was a meeting of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council,
at Guildhil, to consider of the same Affair, which was entertained with great
consent and alacrity, the City being very sensible of their own danger at this
season, and of the care of his Highness touching their welfare, and the
confidence he has been pleased to repose in them: In consideration whereof, it
was ordered by unanimous consent of Common Council, that a Committee of their
own, should present themselves at Whitehal on Monday, and give his Highness
humble and hearty thanks, in the name of the City.

Whitehal, Feb. 19. The Committee from the City had audience of his Highness,
to whom they at large delivered the sense of the Common Council, letting him
understand how ready they are to use all good ways and means, for the putting
of his Highnesses Commission, in speedy execution: Adding moreover, that they
so far resent the great pains and care of his Highness to preserve the Public
Peace, and in particular, his favorable respects toward the City, that they
shall not only with all cheerfulness observe his commands in the matter of the
Militia, propounded to them, but do somewhat also of their own accord, in order
to the service of his Highness and the Commonwealth, which may give a Testimony
of their humble and hearty thanks. The observation of this
cordial-correspondence between his Highness, and the honorable City of London;
as it is a matter of good example to other Parts of the Nation, upon the same
grounds of prudence to mind the common safety, so it must needs be a
disheartning and terror to all public Enemies and Designers.

Progress is made still in discovery of the late conspiracy; of which more by
the next.

From Dalkeith, Feb. 13. The Commissioners who came from Middleton, are now
gone back without any agreement, when it was thought all had been accorded.
There is no danger of what they can be able to do; some of those Gentlemen's
servants who were here, reported among the Soldiers in this Town, That their
Masters were returning to places so poor, and destitute of all accommodation,
that they would leave them before they should get to the Highlands.


From Leicester, February 17.
The Lord Gray of Groby is brought hither by a Party of horse to the Crane in
this Town, where he is detained in custody till further Order. But upon what
occasion this is, you will best understand at London.

UPon Saturday the 17 instant, about eight of the clock in the Evening, was
lost between Thredneedle-street, London, and Kings-street, Westminster, a
Tauny-coloured Letter-case of Plush, wherein were several Papers: If any body
has found the same, let them bring it to Mr. Timothy Cruso, in
Bishopsgate-street, London, Merchant, or to Mr. Jeremy Clarks, at the Golden
Checquer in Kings-street, Westminster, Confectioner, or to the Crier of London;
and they shall be well rewarded.


There is a Book newly Printed, Entitled,

The Great Mystery of Ungodliness, discovered from the writings and speakings
of a company of Spiritual Juglers, called QUAKERS, wherein their cheats are
manifested to the world, by Rs. Farmer; sold by Will. Ballard in Bristol, and
Joshua Kin^^ at the Kings Arms in Paul's Churchyard.

London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1655.


