THE HVMBLE AND JUST REMONSTRANCE. OF The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in
Parliament assembled in IRELAND.

Printed for Hugh Perry, in the Year 1641.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, The Lord Doputie.
Showing that in all Ages past, since the happy subjection of this Kingdom, to
the Imperial Crown of England; it was and is a principal study, and Princely
care of his Majesty, and his most Noble Progenitors, Kings and Queens of
England and Ireland, to the vast expense of Treasure and blood, that their
loyal and dutiful people of this Land of Ireland, being now for the most part
derived from the British Ancestor, should be governed according to the
municipiall and fundamental Laws of England, that the statute of Mugna
Charta, or the great Charter for the liberties of England, and other laudable
Laws and statutes, were in several Parliaments, here enacted and declared,
that by the means thereof, and of the most prudent and benign government of
his Masty, and his royal Progenitors, this kingdom was (until of late) in
its grouth to a flourishing estate, whereby the said people were heretofore
enabled to answer their humble and natural desires, to comply with his
Majesty's Royal and Princely occasions, by the free gift of 150000. l. ster.
and likewise by another gift of 120000 l. ster. more during the government of
the Lord Viscount Faulkland, and after by the gift of 40000. l. and their free
and cheerful gift of 6. entire-sibsidies, in the 10 year of his Majesty's
Reign, which to comply with his Majesty's then occasions signified to the then
house of Commons, they did allow should amount in the collections unto 250000
l. although, as they confidently believe, if the said subsidies had not bin
leavied in a moderate parliamentary way, they would not have amounted to much
more then half the said sum, besides the four entire subsidies, granted in
this present Parliament. So it is, may it please your Lordship, that by the
occasion of the ensuing and other grievances and innovations, though to his
Majesty's no considerable profit, this Kingdom is reduced to that extreme and
universal poverty, that the same is now less able to pay 2 Subsidies, then it
was heretofore to satisfy all the before recited great paiments, and his
Majesty's most faithful people of the same, do conceive great fears that the
grievances and consequences thereof may hereafter be drawn into precedents to
be perpetuated upon their posterity, which in their great hopes and strong
belief, they are persuaded is contrary to his Majesty's Royal and Princely
intention toward his said people, some of which said grievances, are as
follows.

I. First, the general and apparent decay of Trades, occasioned by the new and
illegal raising of the book of Rates and Jmpositions, as xij. d. a piece,
custom for Hides bought for 3.4. or 5. s. and many other heavy Impositions
upon native and other commodities exported and imported, by reason thereof and
of the extreme usage, and censures, Merchants are beggered, and both
disinabled, and discouraged to trade; and some of the honorable persons who
gain thereby are often Judges and parties, and that in Conclusion his
Majesty's profit thereby is not considerably advanced.

II. Secondly, the arbitrary decision of all civil causes and controversies,
by paper petitions before the Lord Lieutenant and Lord Deputity, and infinite
other judicators upon references from them derived in the nature of all
actions, determinable at the common law, not limited unto certain times,
seasons, causes, and things, whatsoever, and the consequence of such
proceedings, by receiving immoderate and unlawful fees by Secretaries, Clerks,
Pursivants, Sergeants at Arms, and otherwise by which kind of proceedings, his
Majesty loses a considerable part of his Revenue, upon original writs, and
otherwise, and the subject loses the benefit of his writ of error, Bill of
reversall, vovchers, and other legal and just advantages, and the ordinary
course and Courts of justice declined.

III. Thirdly, the proceedings in civil causes at the Counsel board, contrary
to the law and great Charter, and not limited to any certain time, or season.

IV. Fourthly, that the subject is in all the material parts thereof denied the
benefit of the princely graces, and more especially of the statute or
Limitations, of the 21. Ian. granted by his Majesty in the 4. year of his
Reign, upon great advice of the Counsel of England and Ireland, and for great
consideration; and then published in all the Courts of Dublin, and in all the
Courts of this Kingdom in open Assizes, whereby all persons do take notice,
that, contrary to his Majesty's pious intention, his Subjects of this Land have
not enjoyed the benefit of his Majesty's Princely promise thereby made.

V. Fifthly, ye extrajudiciall avoiding of Letters Patents of estates of a very
great part of his Majesty's subjects under the great Seal (the public faith
of the Kingdom) by private opinions delivered at Counsel Board, without
legal Evictions of their estates, contrary to the Law and without precedent or
example of any former age.

VI. Sixthly, the Proclamation for the sole exemption and uttering of Tobacco,
which is bought at very low Rates and uttered at high and excessive rates, by
means whereof thousands of Families within this Kingdom and of his Majesty's
subjects in several Islands and other parts of the West Indies (as your
Petitioners are informed) are destroyed, and the most part of the Coin of this
Kingdom is engrossed into particular hands, Insomuch that your Petitioners do
conceive that the profit arising and engrossed thereby, does surmount his
Majesty's revenues Certain and casual within this Kingdom, and yet his
Majesty receives but very little profit by the same.

VII. Seaventhly, the unusual and unlawful increasing of Monopolies to the
advantage of few, to the disprofit of his Majesty and the impoverishment of
his people.

VIII. Eighthly, the extreme and cruel usage of certain late Commissioners
and other, toward the British Farmers and Inhabitants of the City and Country
of Londonderry, by means whereof the worthy Plantation of that Country is
almost destroyed, and the Inhabitants are reduced to great poverty and many of
them forced to forsake the Country, the same being the first and most useful
Plantation in the large Province of Vlster, to the great weakening of the
Kingdom, in this time of danger, the said Plantation being the principal
strength of those parts.

IX. Ninthly, the late erection of the Court of high Commission for causes
Ecclesiastical in these necessitous times, the proceedings of the said Court
in many causes without legal warrant, and yet so supported as prohibitions
have not been obtained, though legally sought for, and the excessive fees
exacted by the ministers thereof, and the incroaching of the same upon the
Jurisdiction of other Ecclesiastical Courts of this Kingdom.

X. Tenthly, the exorbitant and barbarous Fees and pretended Customs exacted
by the Clergy against the Law, some of which have bin formerly represented to
your Lordship.

XI. Eleventhly, the Petitioners do most heartily bemone that his Majesty's
services and profits are much more impaired then advanced by the grievances
aforesaid. And the Subsidies granted in the last Parliament having much
increased his Majesty's Revenue by the buying in of Grants and otherwise, and
that all his Majesty's debts then due in this Kingdom were satisfied out of
the said Subsidies, and yet his Majesty is of late (as your Petitioners have
been informed) in the house of Commons become indebted in this Kingdom in
great sums, and they do therefore humbly beseech that an exact account may
be sent to his Majesty, how and in what manner his treasure issued.

XII. Twelfthly, the Petitioners do humbly conceive great and just fears at a
Proclamation published in this Kingdom in Anno Dom. 1635, prohibiting men of
Quality or estate for to depart this Kingdom into England, without the Lord
Deputies License, whereby the Subjects of this Kingdom are hindered and
interrupted from free access and address to his sacred Majesty and Privy
Counsel of England, to declare their just grievances, or to obtain remedy for
them, in such sort as their Ancestors have done in all ages, since the Reign
of King Henry the second, and great fees exacted for, every of the said
Licenses.

XIII. Thirteenthly, that of late his Majesty's late Attorney general has
exhibited informations against many ancient Buroughs of this Kingdom into his
Majesty's. Court of Exchequer, to show by what warrant the said Burroughes, who
heretofore sent Burgesses to the Parliament, should send the said Burgesses to
the Parliament. And thereupon for want of an answer, the said Privilege of
sending Burgesses was seized by the said Court, which proceedings were
altogether Coram non Judice, and contrary to the Laws and Privileges of the
house of Parliament (and if way should be given thereunto) might tend to the
subversion of Parliaments, and by consequence to the ruin and destruction of
the Commonwealth, and that the house of Commons has hitherto in this present
Parliament bin deprived of the advice and Counsel of many profitable and good
members by means thereof.

XIV. Fourteenthly, that by the powerfulness of some Ministers of State in
this Kingdom, the Parliament in its members and actions has not his natural
freedom.

XV. Fifteenthly, that the fees taken in all the Courts of Justice in this
Kingdom, both Ecclesiastical and Civil and by other inferior Officers and
Ministers, are so immoderately high, that it is an unspeakeable burden to all
his Majesty's Subjects of this, who are not able to subsist, except the same be
speedily remedied and reduced to such a moderation as may stand with the
condition of this Realm.

And lastly, That the Gentry, Merchants, and other his Majesty's subjects of
this Kingdom, are of late by the grievances and pressures aforesaid and other
the like, very near to Ruin and destruction. And Farmers of Customs,
Customers, Waiters, Searchers, Clearkes of unwarrantable proceedings,
Pursevants, and Gaolers, and sundry others very much enriched, whereby and by
the slow redress of the Petitioners grievances, his Majestes most faithful
and dutiful people of this Kingdom, do conceive great fears that their
readiness approved upon all occasions, has not been of late rightly
represented to his Majesty.

For Remedy whereof, the said Petitioners do humbly and of Right beseech your
Lordship, that the grievances and pressures may be speedily redressed. And if
your Lordship shall not think fit to afford us present relief therein, that
your Lordship may admit a select Committee of this House of persons
uninteressed in the benefit arising, the aforesaid grievances to be licensed
by your Lordship, to repair to his sacred Majesty in England for to pursue the
same, and to obtain fitting remedies for their aforesaid and other just
grievances and oppressions, and upon all just and honorable occasions, they
will without respect of particular interest or profit to be raised thereby,
most humbly and readily in Parliament, extend their utmost endeavors to serve
his Majesty, and comply with his Royal and Princely occasions,

And shall pray, etc. Copia vera.




