TWO TREATISES Concerning the matter of the ENGAGEMENT.

The first of an unknown Author, excepting against Mr. Dureus Considerations
for the taking of the ENGAGEMENT, to show the unsatisfactoriness thereof.

The second of Mr. Dureus maintaining the satisfactoriness of his
Considerations against the unknown Authors exceptions.

LONDON, Printed by J. Clowes for Richard Wodenothe at the Star under St.
Peter's Church in Cornhil, 1650.

The first Treatise, whereof the Title was, Mr. Dureus his friend unsatisfied,
or an Answer to a Paper published in print by Mr. John Dureus, entitled,
(Considerations concerning the present Engagement, whether it may be lawfully
entered into yea, or no?) affectionately presented to the serious consideration
both of Mr. Dureus and all others that desire to give, and receive satisfaction
concerning the truth.
SIR.
YOur Letter of November 27. sent to your friend for satisfaction of his
Conscience (scrupling the taking of the Engagement) is come into these parts,
and, as may be conjectured, into all parts of the Kingdom, so that it seems
your second thoughts were to make every Reader so far your friend, as to help
him in case of like irresolution. You observe in your select friend to whom you
make your special address, that he has been always affected to the Common
cause of Liberty, against the designs of tyranny, upon which your Reader will
soon observe, that such have their hesitancys in this business, and it is
observed not by a few, that almost all such have their scruples, and almost
only such. Others (on what Principles I shall forbear to speak) readily enough
for the most part enter upon it; which confession of yours, seconded with the
observation of others, does much amuse your reader, that you should pass so
heavy a censure on all that remaining unsatisfied, as yet suspend, having your
own attestation, that they cordially pursue that which in your thoughts is the
end of this, and all other public Engagements; namely, the intrinsecal good of
the Commonwealth. To which also they are ready to subscribe, not with the hand
only, but with the heart likewise, if they were once persuaded that Covenants
and public promises, bind not at all to accidental forms, (as you style them)
when yet they are made by public authority, that did impose them the very
Letter, or matter of such Covenants or Engagements. Somewhat I shall make bold
to speak to your Considerations, to let you see how far in the thoughts of
many, they fall short of carrying your Question in the affirmative, in which I
shall endeavor to keep me to the principal heads, that tediousness may not be
your trouble.

Your first work is to reconcile this Engagement, to the Oath of Allegiance,
and the National Covenant, attempting to make it good, that they are not
opposite, and in reference hereunto, you lay down as a State maxim, that the
obligation of King and Subjects are mutual, and must needs stand and fall
together, according as the condition by which they are begotten, is kept or
broken; which is nothing else but the Law, according to which he and his
Subjects agree, that he shall be their King, and they his Subjects. When this
is yielded, yet herein you fall short, that you do not produce that Law (to
which he stands obliged) that does declare this or that act of his, to be a
full forfeiture of trust, and ipso facto inflict that penalty of the loss of
all his regalities, and disobligation of his Subjects; If such a law were but
produced and a transgression proved, it would perhaps serve to quiet many
minds. Mr. Cook (if I mistake not) answering the objection, why no Law was made
in such case against Kings, instead of producing a Law; only gives in the
answer of Solon, why in his Laws he omitted the punishment of Parricides,
freely confessing that as in the one, so in the other a Law was wanting; Those
against whom the late war has frequently been avowed to be made, have also
Laws with large penalties in case of transgression made against them, (viz.)
all such as are found Counselors in evil, or as subordinate Officers are
Agents in it; which page 13. you seem to grant to be good security, and what
has been still said for the immunity of Kings in this Nation (who act nothing
as Kings in their own persons, but by subordinate Agents) You though an
Alienigena cannot be ignorant, pso facto from their Allegiance; it has been
(you say as you suppose) a perpetual custom in this Nation, for the Commons at
all times to ask and propose the making of the Laws, and for the Lords and
King to give consent thereunto; and after a few words of Explication you make
your Application; If the King then should set himself wilfully to be above this
reason of the Nation, which is the only Original of the Law, and refuse
obstinately the Laws which they shall choose to be settled: he puts himself
ipso facto out of the capacity of being a King any more unto them; and if this
can be made out to have been the way wherein the late King set himself, and
that it was the design of the House of Lords, to uphold and enable him to
follow that way, it is evident that so far as he did by that means actually
unking himself: so far also they that assisted him in that design, did unlord
themselves in the state thereof. In which sentence of yours all readers, when
they compare with it what you lay down for a rule page 10. may easily wonder at
your great forgetfulness Here you judge definitively in the highest way of the
rights which supreme powers have over us, and give in your verdict above all
(that I know) has ever been charged upon them; and there you say, for my own
part I have taken this to be a rule whereby all private men, (such as I am) as
Christians ought to walk unblameablely under the Superior powers of this
world; namely, that it does not belong to us to judge definitively of the
rights which the Supreme powers in this world pretend to have to their places,
farther you say; It is no part of our Christian profession to become Judges of
the great ones of this world, in respect of their rights and pretentions to
power, for we are to behave our selves as spiritual men in this world by the
rule of our profession, and as strangers and pilgrims therein. money only
excepted, which always with us begins with the Commons. And I suppose (however
it fares with the Lords) Kings have not often been found guilty in refusal of
their assent to Bills of Subsidies, Taxes, Pole Money, Tonnage, poundage, etc.
And that it has been a perpetual Custom for Kings and Lords to assent to all
that the Commons have proposed, is boldly affirmed; endeavoring to persuade
your reader, that not only de jure it ought to be so (which sure at some
conference or other, the Commons for prevention of so many disputes and
reasonings, would have charged upon the Lords) but that de facto it has been
so, when all that know any thing of the Custom of this Nation, very well know
the contrary, that the Lords have given their assent or dissent to Bills, (sent
from the Commons) according as they have judged it most expedient, and often
sent them back with amendments, according as in their sense they have judged
them most meet to pass as Laws; and that Kings instead of yielding assent to
Bills sent from Lords and Commons, have often times only returned a Le Roy
avisera; which sometimes (as I have heard from singular Patriots) has turned
to the great happiness of the Nation.

And as you pretend to have cleared the meaning of the Oath of Allegiance
(which was made in our own age) by the consent as you say of all ages, and this
obliges (you say) to the preservation of the Kings Person and Anthority
conditionally, and with a limitation only; namely, in the preservation and
defense of the true Religion and Libertyes of the Kingdom; In into If, to make
a condition of it, and changing the whole current of the words from our selves
to the Kings, so that they should be meant of the Kings preservation of Liberty
and Religion, and not our own (when all before and after mentioned, is our work
and not his) is such, so forced and strained, that it will abide the censure of
no indifferent and unbiassed reader, and is fully enough contradicted in those
words which immediately follow, which you prudently conceal; That the world may
bear witness with our Consciences of our loyalty, and that we have no thoughts
or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power and greatness.

It was (as is well known) frequently charged upon the Parliament, that what
ever their intendments were, for Religion and the public Liberties; yet they
had an evil eye on his Majesty, not brooking his power and greatness, which was
as frequently disavowed, as a scandal not sufferable; and in the Covenant for
this very end this solemn appeal was inserted, in which we have first an
acknowledgment that his Majesty stood vested with just power and greatness, and
so no such forfeiture made as before you mention; And secondly a serious
protestation made that we have no intention to diminish it, but as we resolve
to preserve Religion and Liberty: so we oblige our selves to loyalty to the
Kings person, and Authority, and from all thoughts or intentions to diminish
his power and greatness, which is the true and clear meaning of it. Upon
mention of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, you say The King either
refractorily casting them off, or seeming to yield unto them in such a way,
that no trust could be given him, that he would keep what he yielded unto, the
Parliament did actually lay him aside, and voted that no more addresses should
be made unto him; Where you seem unresolved whether it were guilt in his
Majesty, or jealousy in the Houses that occasioned those Votes? Whether the
King did actually deserve them, or whether there was only jealousy, that he
would render himself worthy of them? The suspected Wife Numb. 5. might not be
cast off till her guilt was proved, though some are pleased to put Kings and
Wives, both in one condition, to be cast off merely ad placitum, the one by the
husband, the other by the people: which (as to Kings) you seem not to judge
unreasonable; Then follows in your Letter from which time forward, he was no
more an object of your Oath of Allegiance, but to be looked upon as a private
man. Yes sure when the Parliament had again voted addresses to him, ejus est
tollere, cujus est ponere, If the Parliament have a legistative, they have also
legistranslative or repealing power: if Votes can set free, then Votes can
reoblige: you go on, and say to an indifferent eye, it, (namely the Engagement)
may be thought so far from being opposite to the true sense of either, that it
may be rather a confirmation of the ground for which both the Oath of
Allegiance, and third Article of the National Covenant was then binding; for
confirmation of which, you say, this or that outward form of Government is
wholly accidental, no ways essential to any Nation in the world; and therefore
is alterable in respect of forms, as is most expedient for their exigent
necessities, but to be governed by Laws, and to have the use of the true
Religion, and of the National freedom, is absolutely necessary and essential to
the being of a Commonwealth, passing by that State Paradox, that to have the
use of the true Religion and of the National freedom, is absolutely necessary
and essential to the being of a Commonwealth: so there neither is nor ever was
any Commonwealth out of Cristendome, nor many in it, (a few only having that
happiness,) This takes wholly for granted, that all our Oaths have respected
barely the esse of the Nation, or that which (you say) was called the Kingdom,
when all that read them must confess, that they had immediate respect to the
been esse, in their present constitution, and external administration; we swear
not barely to the remote end (which is the intrinsecal good as you speak, of
the Nation) but to the means which (in the judgment of those which you
sometimes call the reason of the Nation) had a direct tendency to it,

If I come to a Garrison and be there questioned, whether I come from the
enemies quarters yea, or no? May I deny upon Oath that I came from thence, when
indeed I did? satisfying my self with this, that I will not betray the Garrison
where I am, the question whence I came being only accidental, the safety of
the Garrison is the thing the Oath only intended; and to this in such an Oath
I answer, Inquire whether this be not perjury?

This evasion to eye the end and not look at accidental forms (as you call
them) will facilitate a way to any Oath, and as easily disobliege, rendering the
Oath vain as soon as it is entered; Thus it had been safe to have entered the
Canon Oath (prescribed by the Convocation in the year that this Parliament did
commence) for the establishment of the Hierarchy in Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Deans and Chapters, Chancellours, etc. Seeing we might have entered into
it (how opposite soever our judgments were against it) and then have avoided
it, explaining our selves that we swore to the end, namely Church Government,
and order for public edification, without respect to external forms, which is
accidental; which Government being in our judgment best settled, in an
Independent Congregational way (as some think) or in a Presbyterial Classical
way (as others) this Oath thus interpreted, is so far from engaging to Prelacy,
that it engages against it, so far from binding to a non consent of the change
and alteration of it (which was the letter of the Oath) that it binds us to a
vigorous endeavor of change and alteration; thus also all Covenanters are
disobliged from the second Article in the Covenant (which is to the extirpation
of Prelacy, as there explained) in case they believe (as many do) that
Church Government is best settled, and the Churches edification best provided
for in such a constitution, and so Covenanting against it in the letter of the
Covenant, they Covenant for it in the end, which you say is only to be heeded.
Neither can any State this way find any security in any Oath prescribed, all
may enter; and then evade with this shift of the intrinsecal good of the
Commonwealth of the Nation, and plead that the necessity of the public good
calls to the transgression and contradiction of it: Thus Zedekiah might have
freed himself from his Oath of fealty to Nebucadnezar; it being (as he might
have pleaded) against the intrinsecal good of that Nation, that strangers
should rule over them, and they be made a Province to Babylon, his Oath to
serve him would have strongly engaged to a revolt from him. And the Oath of the
Elders of Israel to the Gibeonites (thus understood) had been null in the very
taking of it, evidently tending to the public damage, of which the Commons of
Israel were very sensible, as appears in their exceptions taken against the
Elders, for entering into it. Saul in the act which brought a three years famine
upon Israel (if this divinity might take place) had done a work singularly
commendable, seeing it was his zeal to the house of Israel and Judah, which
alone moved him (against the letter of his Covenant) to the slaughter of those
persons, even the public good so evidently damnified, and endangered by their
abode in the midst of the people. Saul's slaughter of these Gibeonites had been
as praiseworthy as David's (his successors) slaughter of the Jebusites, the
public good being Saul's end (the Holy Ghost bearing witness) as well as
David's; and what good the present State can reap by this Engagement (your
interpretation being once admitted) I believe you know not which way to
demonstrate; the engagers may say, they will be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth, as now established without King or house of Lords, in their
endeavor to reestablish a King and house of Lords; which they may think most
tends to the honor and peace of it.

You go on to answer a further Objection of your friends, that in the third
Article of the Covenant, he is sworn to preserve, the Rights and Privileges of
Parliament, amongst which this is one, that therein should be a house of Lords
distinct from the Commons; and this another, that all the Members of the
Commons should sit and vote freely; for when he swore, he meant a Parliament so
constituted and no other.

In answer of which, you first confess, and then endeavor to avoid, and if you
did avoid as clearly, as you do confess ingenuously, you would give more
satisfaction; you confess that these are Privileges, that the intention of the
Covenant, was to preserve these, and that now such intentions cannot be
prosecuted; which confession alone, is enough to create a bigger scruple in
your friend, then the whole force of all which yet has appeared in your answer
can wipe off. Your way to avoid is, that your friend did what in him lay when
time and place was, according to his Calling to prevent these breaches, and so
cannot be accused of the infringement thereof; for when a fatal necessity of
State, (as you say) in the course of divine justice with a power irresistible,
not only to men of private, but to all that were in public vocations, did
bring about that change upon the Parliament, no particular men's engagements
were considerable. This no doubt is a clear justification of your friend, one
man's sin pollutes not another, when by opposing, and in his place withstanding,
he keeps himself from guilty participation. But in this excuse of him from
breach of Covenant, in the infringement of Parliament Privileges, you do
plainly charge that irresistible power (which you speak of) with it, He is
therefore innocent because he did what in him lay, in his place to prevent this
change; those then cannot be innocent, that being interested and obliged in the
same Covenant, did yet with such a power (as you mention) work it; Neither can
that supposed fatal necessity of State (which your answer speaks of) acquit
that power from breach of their Covenant in such confessed infringement of
Parliament-Priviledges.

The reason of the Kingdom (as elsewhere you call it) saw no such necessity as
your Paper takes for granted, but with high resolutions opposed when the power
was at their doors, and themselves in imminent danger, both Houses judged the
way that they were upon, to be the way most conducing to the States safety; and
it was their business and no other powers, in such case to give judgment. And
in case this necessity had been real, and not imaginary or pretended; yet it
were no sufficient plea for such a transgression. Joshua and the Elders of
Israel understood no such State-divinity, to break Covenant on such grounds,
much less on such pretenses. Much might have been said by them to have
necessitated a breach with those Gibeonites, with whom they had entered
Covenant; Gibeon was one of their Royal Cities, and of danger to be possessed
by such an enemy: or to have him still in their howels to lay claim to it; the
Land was Isreal's by the gift of God, and too narrow for themselves in such
multitudes to inhabit, there was no reason that the fat and the sweet should be
devoured and eaten up by strangers. The arguments of Egypt against Israel,
might well here have been taken up by Israel, when there falls out any war,
they will join unto the enemies.

These Reasons or the like of equal or greater strength Saul doubtless saw,
when he sought to slay them (not out of any private spleen but) in his zeal to
the house of Israel and of Judah; but none of these did sway with those
Covenanters, and God himself acquits them from any mistake in the Obligation of
that their Covenant, in his proceeding against the house of Saul before
observed, when private men swear to their hurt, they must not change, when
States swear they may not change: there is no security without God from any
danger; it is more safe to keep with God, though seemingly we run upon peri, I
then to quit the ways of God deserting him for prevention to speak the
fairest, these reasonings come from unbelief.

You go on, and say, You see what pinches your friend: He thinks that they that
made the change broke the Covenant, and if he engage under this change as is
desired, he thinks he breaks the Covenant also. To which you answer,

First, That they who made the change will plead for themselves, that they are
not guilty of any breach of Covenant notwithstanding the change. But this you
leave to them to justify; And seeing you will not justify them, I shall not
stand to implead them, your Reader being fully satisfied, that your own pen in
your former confession has already done it.

Secondly you answer, For the consequence your friends make from the taking of
the Engagement to a breach of the Covenant, it does not at all follow to your
understanding; for the direct and plain matter of the Engagement, binds him
only to procure the good of the Commonwealth as now it stands; and because at
all times and in all constitutions thereof, he is bound to do this no less by
the Covenant it self, then by the Engagement; therefore his taking of this, to
this effect, can be no breach of that, which you endeavor to make good by a
comment upon the words of the Engagement; for the negative words, without a
King and a house of Lords in the Engagement, may (as you say) be properly and
most obviously taken, as an explication of the words now established,
immediately going before, and not an absolute abnegation of the things looked
upon truly, and as in themselves, with more words to the same purpose, which
gloss of yours calls for some observation, and well deserves animadversion.

First, necessarily implying a high charge of such inconsiderateness, in the
heads of those that did devise, and in the power of those that do impose this
Engagement, of which none can believe that they are guilty.

1. They knew, that all the Subjects of this Nation, stood before engaged to
the intrinsecal good of this Commonwealth, (as by the dictates of nature, the
obligation of reason, self-preservation, which each one knows is wrapped up in
the public, so also) by an oath prescribed by their power since they entered
upon it, reaching doubtless thus far, and (as some conjecture) intended
further, that which was already done to their hands (as you say) by so many
Oaths and Covenants, which themselves also since their investiture in power had
done, they will not do over again, in words not at all further obliging, but
only perplexing, amusing and insnaring.

2. They know that the Engagement in this sense will nothing tend to their
establishment, as before has been evidenced; yea they know with this gloss
upon it, it has a full tendency to their further danger, not a few being
persuaded (how erroneously soever) that the public good is best provided for,
and consequently the Engagement answered in their opposition, all of which is
so clear to every eye, that it could not be hid from those that imposed this
Engagement, so that none can think that they would trouble the consciences of
so many thousands in such a needless way to their own non-benefit, yea to their
further peril. If the Covenant mentioning Monarchy in a King, do tie us to a
republic in a State, (as you before affirm) then the Engagement mentioning a
republic without King or house of Lords, may tie us to Monarchy by the same
reason.

Secondly, This gloss carrys a full contradiction in it self, these words
without King and house of Lords, may be properly and most obviously taken, as
an explication of the word [as now established] immediately going before, and
not an absolute negation of the things themselves; when as those words, as now
established, do fully imply that abnegation of Kings and Lords, which you there
mention, now being an adverb of time, the (...) in the Engagement must needs
stand in full opposition to the face of things in former administrations, it
cannot look on the Commonweal abstractively as the same, in all revolutions
and junctures of times, but as it now stands in a present different posture, as
now is a full contradiction to your sense, as ever. And I pray you consider,
whether the powers now established without King and Lords, have not voted down
both King and Lords, as useless and dangerous; and therefore now established, is
no other then an abnegation of Kings and Lords heretofore established;
therefore your friend being in this pinched, is not yet eased.

You go on as discerning that what is said will not hold. Suppose (say you)
that in your apprehens^^^ of matters, this Engagement does materially settle
some thing in the Commonwealth, which is contrary to the intention which you
had in taking the Covenant; yet I say that by giving your assent thereunto, as
matters now stand, you break not at all your Covenant, because your obligation
to those matters by virtue of the Covenant, was extinguished before you were
called upon to take this Engagement; now that which is extinct and made void,
cannot be said to oblige any more.

This supposition of yours, is wholly yielded by others, that it is in full
opposition to the Covenant and other Oaths, (and so all your labor lost in
endeavoring to reconcile them) and this which you now bring, is only held out
for a Plea to carry it in the affirmative, that the Engagement may be entered,
male res agitur, cum tot opus est remediis, is wont to be said; for your
Proposition, that that which is extinct and made void, can no more oblige, must
be acknowledged as truth; with its just limitation, provided that those
concerned in the Oath, have no hand in the extinguishing of it, for their own
disobligation. David was bound by Covenant unto Jonathan, and his seed after
him, had he consented to the death of Mephibosheth the Son of Jonathan, the
matter of the Covenant had then been extinct, and yet David had been guilty of
the breach of it; for your assumption that the matter of the Covenant as to the
third Article, is extinct, it being impossible in nature to preserve the Kings
life now it is cut off: and the house of Lords now it is put down, I shall not
stand upon that maxim, the King never dies, and so though the man be cut off,
yet the King remains and may be preserved; if you please to look into the
Preface of the Covenant, there we professed, That we had before our eyes the
glory of God, and the advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, the Honor and Happiness of the Kings Majesty, and his Posterity. As we
dare not shut out the Glory of God, the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ: no more dare we wholly shut out the Kings posterity from the Covenant;
for the Lords though they sit not as Lords in Parliament, yet still they are as
Lords, and in a capacity for actual admission. You say, they may have a title
to this right, and yet be obliged, even for preservation of that right to
suspend it for a time, and many I say are well satisfied, that they for such
end do suspend, and yet dare not engage to an opposition of it.

You yet go one step higher, that we are so far from being barred from the
Engagement by the Covenant, particularly the third Article of it, that we are
engaged to it; if the third Article of the National Covenant concerning
Privileges of Parl. be yet in force in any degree, you say, then it binds us
to preserve the Privileges of Parliament that now are, as well as those that
then were. To which I say, I know no such distinction of Privileges that are,
and were, Parliament Privileges being always the same, admitting of no such
changes, though we, have no more Parliament actually existing, then in
Wintertime we have Roses; yet as the properties of a Rose are still the same
in all seasons, so are the Privileges of Parliament: and if there be any
remainder of Privileges in actual being (as you contend) then the third
Article that binds to preserve them, binds us to perfect them. A Physician
cannot preserve unless he recover strength in his weak Patient: You conclude
this first general piece of yours with hopes that your friend will find no
cause to scruple any further at it, whereas others think that you have small
cause of hopes that you have eased him of any of his Scruples.

In your second part, as a power unlawfully usurped, as also whether by this
Engagement he shall make himself accessorie to this usurpation.

For the first, Instead of clearing their title as just and lawful, and
acquitting it from usurpation, you make it unlawful to inquire and determine
concerning it; holding out (as you say) the rule whereby you order your
conversation, supposing him ready (as it seems) in all things to make you his
precedent; in which way of yours, how dissonant you are from your self, and how
far you have been found a transgressour of your own rule, has formerly been
showed; yet (wheresoever the guilt lies) the transgression by you is aggravated
to that height, as to be one the greatest Characters of the Spirit of
Antichrist that exalts himself above all that is called God; and wherein (say
you) has he done this more remarkably toward Magistrates who are called Gods
among men, then by exalting himself over them, to become a judge of all their
rights and pretentions to power in this world? where I pray you take into your
serious consideration, whether this spirit (that great Character of the spirit
of Antichrist) does manifest it self in the man of sin, in a careful inquiry
and diligent search to find out to what power it is, that he justly owes
subjection, and is to bind himself by Oath of feoalty, for faithfulness: or
rather in his peremptory determinations of the forfeiture of right, in those
that before were possessed of an undoubted title, and disobliging Subjects from
their obedience, and to whom this Character of his does most belong, whether to
your friend or some other, I leave you sadly to consider. God appointed
subjects, with the scrupulosity of this question, you are pleased to allow your
friend in the judgment of discretion as a member of this Commonwealth, and
concerned in the public welfare thereof to look upon superiors, to see how
they pretend to stand; that is by what apparent right, and with what visible
power they possess their place; Which liberty of judgment you yet allow with
this reservation, that he suffer not his conscience to follow the dictates of
it, for so he is bound up in that which follows, which yet you call the bounds
of Christian liberty and rationality. Sure to me, blind obedience is to be
preferred before such use of light, that when I believe I see my way, I have no
allowance to walk in it: by the dictates of sense, reason and conscience;
Sense, will show him who is actually in possession of all power, and places of
Government over him, and by this he will perceive under whom he does stand;
Reason will show what he who is over him, pretends unto, whether yea, or no his
pretenses are backed with power, to maintain his right against all advarsaries
therein; and whether yea, or no, the use of that power be limited by Law, or
left wholly to his own will without Law and conscience will show, that he to
whom God has committed the plenary administration of public affairs with
unconfrontable power, is Gods Vicegerent over the society of those to whom his
administration does extend it self, either by virtue of a contract, which makes
a Law, or by virtue of a conquest, which is bound to no Law; but the will of
the Conqueror.

As these lead your friend (as you suppose) whither you would have him led: so
they would have also led Israel, in their respective junctures of time, to
Cushan-Rushathim, to Eglon, to Jabin, to the Princes and chief powers of
Midian, to Ammon, Moab and the Philistines. Israel had been thus bound to so
many successive, and opposite Engagements: and bound up in bondage from seeking
deliverance. No endeavor must ever be improved for any recovery of lost right,
if this doctrine (in favor of all that are in possession and backed with
power) shall take place. All whosoever they be, in case they can get into
Sovereignty, may keep in: and all must assist in their holding of it, none may
attempt any way, or make any plea for the most just recovery of their rights
and liberties, so that either Israel sinned as often as they were delivered, or
else these dictates of sense, reason and conscience, going this way which you
point out, may lead your friend into mistakes, and involve him in fears. Your
distinction of administrations by virtue of a contract which makes a Law, or by
virtue of a conquest which is bound to no Law, but to the will of the
conqueror, were worth observation; if you would acquaint us which way the
present power does claim, for contract we know none, when we make any, both
they and we ought to be faithful in it; Conquest (I think) you will not say, so
you leave them to their own wills without any other rule in Government; in
which you are scarce like to please any party, either those in power or such as
are in subjection.

As for the several queries, which you there put to your friend, which men of
your friends scrupulosities have never yielded, and in all that I have seen,
(in the arguments of those that stand up in defense of present proceedings) I
do not find so much as an attempt for the proof of it.

To the second branch of your friends doubt, you say, that the Engagement being
a duty just to be required by the present powers from their Subjects, without
the performance of which there is no protection due unto them, and necessary to
be performed by all that will not profess themselves desirous to overthrow the
present safety, and public welfa^re of the Nation; it cannot make those that
take it accessory to the guilt of those that tender it, if any be in them,
because, etc. But if the Engagement be not a duty, as men affected to the
common cause of liberty (by your own concessions) are persuaded, then guilt
will follow upon such supposition which you have laid down, and here you are
very high in passing sentence upon those that (being conscious to themselves of
the bonds of former Engagements) have forborne to subscribe in this; that they
deserve not to have a being in the Commonwealth.

In which how prudertial it were to proceed in so high a way, their persons,
and purses in their power, they have cause to protect them, though as yet
Subjects desire to stand free in their Consciences, protection should be as
large as subjection, Persons and Estates are already subject, and these ought
to be protected for subjections sake.

Here you tell us of the end of the Engagement, which is to give the Supreme
power an assurance that we shall not betray it; but that we are willing to
maintain all good intelligence for public concernments with it,
notwithstanding the present changes brought upon the Commonwealth. But this
gloss of yours, put upon the Engagment utterly spoils all assurance that
possibly can be given, either to this State or any other, as formerly has been
showed, and I wish that you would more seriously consider, for if no respect is
to be had to outward forms, but to the intrinsecal good of the Commonwealth
only; then all are at liberty (notwithstanding such Engagement) where they will
to hold intelligence, provided that their judgments tell them, that the
public is best provided for, that way in which they keep correspondence; if
former Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, the Protestation and Covenant bound not
at all to Monarchy there expressed; but to the public good abstracted from all
particular forms, so that our Consciences are still free to subscribe to any
platform, then entering this Engagement it does no more bind to a Republic or
Democratie, but leaves us free for Monarchy, as formerly settled and
established; and I pray you farther take into your thoughts, which way the
public (as now it stands) by such proceedings can reap advantage,
Non-subscibers (held back by conscience dictates) are most unlike to be
forward; for their danger being so cautelous before they engage with their pen,
they will be equally wary how they engage with their sword: showing themselves
so tender of their own inward private peace; they will not be hasty to infest
the public; and as they have so they will still in their place, and to their
power withstand designs of Tyranny, taking care that Monarchy (if ever again
reestablished) be kept within its bounds and limits; for those whose hands are
gained, I do not understand what security can be expected by it, hearts and
hands (we know) do not always hold pace together; and if any have minds bent
to the public, this is a good lurking-hole to hide them from suspicion, and
those interpretations of the Engagement which are held out to serve them in,
together with others, wherewith many subscribers (as I hear) satisfy
themselves, will also serve for an expedient to help them out, rendering their
Consciences innocent in engaging, and freeing them from all Obligation of
Conscience being thus engaged.

Your third part (tending to satisfy your friends scruple, the consequence of
the Engagement seems to tend to an opposition against the lawful Heir of the
Crown, and right constitutions of Parliament) presupposed him to stand
satisfied in the two former, and being built upon that bottom in case of
dis-satisfaction in those; all this necessarily falls to the ground, and
nothing needs to be spoken, that passage in it seems most observable, as for
the dissolution of your tie and obligation to the heir of the Crown, I shall
refer you to look upon God, whether he has not dispossessed him wholly by his
own doings and Counsels, and by the guilt derived from his father and mother
upon him, of all his interest in this Kingdom and Commonwealth; for because his
aim and the aim of those that are about him, is not for the Commonwealth, but
for the Kingdom, that is, not for the good of the society, but for
self-greatness; Therefore God who takes and gives the rights of Government,
has done as it seems good in his own eyes, both with him who according to
men claims the Crown, and with them that were the supporters thereof, etc. All
of which (with much more that you have to the same purpose) might be
satisfactory, if the work of God and not his word were our rule, if we must
observe his hand, to go as he acts, and not his Command, to act what he
enjoins, God may dispossess him and any Monarchy on earth at pleasure; Such is
his Prerogative royal over all: but to infer from thence, that we may therefore
engage against him (contrary to Covenant and highest obligation of oath) is
that which will at no hand follow. A good child seeks his fathers life, at that
time when God is upon removal of him by stroke of death: Arguments of this
stamp will give us warranty to act in all the evil that can be acted in the
State, or against it; all evil of this nature (penal, not oriminal) God does
and owns, if we follow his hand we shall have ours as high in guilt, as his is
in justice; these providence (which men in these times make their encour
agements) are no other then temptations, and set a door wide open to sins of
all sorts, when they may be done with immunity and impunity of this divinity,
will hold Isreal's spoilers are injuriously by the Prophets branded as robbers,
when God gave Israel to them, because they had sinned against him.

You further say, that you conceive, the Prophecy of the Prophet Isaiah,
Chapter 24. verse 21. is begun to be fulfilled amongst us, somewhat more
remarkably then in other parts of the earth as yet, which is this, And it shall
come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones
that are on high, and the Kings of the earth upon the earth, and they shall be
gathered together as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in
prison, and after many days shall be visited; Then the Moon shall be
confounded, and the Sun shall be ashamed when the Lord of Hoasts shall reign in
Mount Sion, and before his ancients gloriously.

How far God will go on in this way, (on which you suppose he is entered) it is
not safe for man to determine, only we know, that when he is doing his work, we
must hold to our duty, and seeing there is a time when these thus threatened
shall be visited, (as there is foretold) not in judgment, but mercy (as
appears in the context, and is confirmed by the consent of interpreters) it
should be our work in the way and manner of the people of God of old,
(acknowledging divine justice and their guilt) to implore the throne of grace
in their behalf, that as in present they suffer what was threatened: so they may
be fitted for the mercy promised. In the mean space Prophesies are no rule for
our actions but Precepts, not that which God says he will do, but what his will
is that we should do, must guide us; There was a Prophecy, that the Messiah
should be cut off, and the time laid down, Dan. 9.26. there sin was yet nothing
less that cut him off, he was delivered by the determinate Council of God;
there were store of Prophecies, that witnessed the suffering of Christ, and yet
with wicked hands he was Cr^cified and slain, they fulfilled the Prophets in
Condemning him. David knew well that he must succeed Saul in the Kingdom, yet
he waited Gods time and would have no hand in his removal, though providence
was more then once urged as an argument for his encouragement, that God had
delivered him into his hands; if David had followed this rule, Saul had then
dyed, and he over-timely (before Gods approved time) had intruded upon the
Throne. After some plain language spoken to those in power (which I wish may
take that Prophets may have their mouths open, and with allowance to speak, not
Placentia, but Salubria) you give us your Item or admonition that we be not
wilfully scrupulous in these matters. In which you yet acquit your friend,
when you spare not to charge diverse others, where I wish you would take into
your more serious consideration, That which in conclusion I beg is, that those
that see not with your eyes, and cannot warrant all that you approve, (having
what to say if called unto it) may obtain from you a more favorable and candid
censure, then to be judged unworthy of a being in that Commonwealth where by
right of birth they have their freedom, and that you would not think that
self-interest swayes so many to keep close to the dictates of their Conscience,
in a way in all appearance to their present and private ruin; more of
Christianity would appear, in affording them your pity and y our prayers, And
the Lord give us a right judgment in all things.

The Second Treatise. Mr. Dureus his friend further satisfied, Or, A Reply to
some Objections made against his Considerations concerning the lawfulness of
taking the Engagement; affectionately offered to the serious consideration of
those that are scrupled at it. or at his Considerations about it.
SIR,
I Shall freely confess, that the Scope of your papers, (put into my hands a
few days ago) is to me very acceptable; for which cause, as I think my self
obliged, so in all uprightness I shall endeavor your further satisfaction;
that so far as the Lord shall enable me to discern the truth, I may hold it
forth, for the manifestation of our duty in the business of the Engagement. The
Design of this Discourse.
And if a course of amicable conferences had been more freely taken up
heretofore, and regularly followed upon this subject, amongst godly Brethren,
as it ought to have been in the Law of Peace and Truth; I make no doubt but
some of these breaches might have been prevented, and perhaps some of the old
wastes and ruinous heaps, might also have been repaired: but because these
thoughts of healing and of building up, have not been laid to heart; therefore
our unsettlements have not only continued: but we have therein been led on,
unto sad courses of new divisions, and unchristian animosities; as for my self,
I can call the searcher of all hearts to witness, that I have none other aim
but to discharge a good conscience in this business, and for the Gospels sake
to seek out a Gospel-Remedy unto our public evils; for hereunto my thoughts
have been many years ago lead forth; and seeing my affections do still continue
to prosecute this design, not with humane contrivements, but by the Grace of
God in true simplicity; I may therefore hope that God may be pleased in
something happily to make me instrumental to his glory, and my unpartial
solicitations for the ways of Unity and Peace, may become effectual to the
comfort of his children: however I shall not cease to concur in true humility
with prayers, and supplications unto the Father of Lights, and the fountain of
all good gifts, that in end all who are upright in heart, may according to his
Counsel be united in the spirit of Christ, and thereby (notwithstanding some
diversities of apprehensions about humane affairs) be fitted more and more in
spiritual concernments for his service, and their mutual edification:
beseeching him withal, that none of our weaknesses and sinful distances of
spirit amongst our selves, may bring any reproach upon the holy profession of
the Gospel, and of our Ministry; or open the mouths of our adversaries, to
take advantages against us while they watch for our haltings. It is a sad
matter that the Engagement intended for a ground of mutual safety, and an
assurance of harmlessness, and indemnity amongst those that truly intend the
intrinsecal good of the Common wealth, should be so far mis-understood, as to
prove rather an object of strife and division then of an agreement; The answer
to the Preface.
and I am sorry that any of my expressions wherein I meant not to censure any
body, who is conscionable, week or well-meaning; should be taken in another
sense then I did offer them; but whether I have been in the fault by uttering
them unadvisedly, or others, who through prejudices have mistaken me, I hope
upon a further disquiry of these matters, it will in due time sufficiently
appear, nor shall I ever (God willing) be found averse from rectifying a fault
if I can discern it, when it is laid open to me.

I shall then come to the observations which you offer upon my considerations
of the Engagement, and that we may with more brevity, clearenesss, and
readiness, have recourse to the heads of matters whereof notice is to be taken;
I suppose our best course will be to mark the same with numericall Figures in
the margen of our Papers, which shall show the things which answer each other,
and direct us to the places to which we speak,

1. The first thing you take notice of, is; that yiedling an obligation to be
settled between a King and his Subjects by a Law. according to which he is to
be their King, and they his Subjects; yet you say I produce no such Law in this
case: The plea that the King cannot be counted a transgressor of the law.
and if either the Law cannot be produced upon the transgression of which he
does ipso facto forfeit his Regalities: or if his transgression of that Law
cannot be proved; that then in this case there is no ground to quiet men's
minds concerning that which is befallen him. Now that a Law in this case cannot
be produced you assert upon Mr. Cook authority, who gives the reason why no
such Law was made, to be the same for which Solon made none to punish
Parrioides, and that he cannot be counted a transgressor of the Laws, you
assert upon this ground; because Kings in this Nation act nothing as Kings in
their own persons, but only by subordinate Agents: whence you conclude, that
neither such a Law being extant, nor although it were extant, he being in a
capacity of being a transgress or against it; the thing which I allege for
dissabling the obligation of his Subjects from him, can be of no force.

To this I shall give this answer.

That in my discourse I did not suppose any particular Positive and express
Law extant between the King and his People specifying the tenure of their
mutual obligation, The answer does show what the law is to which a King is
bound.
how far it should bind or not bind the Subject to him; but I suppose only this
much: that there is a natural tacit and implicit law extant, known and
presupposed by all men who make any contracts one with another, which is this:
that no contract does otherwise bind but according to the condition upon which
it is made. If then a King is a King only upon this condition, that he shall
intend to Rule legally, and not by will and force. and if he break this
condition and actually attempt to rule, not legally, but by will and force,
then he has ipso facto forfeited his Regality: nor was it needful that any
penalty should be expressly denounced against any such transgression no more
then in Solons Commonwealth against Parrieides, not because such a fault (if
committed) was not punishable, but because all men by nature know what
punishment it may deserve. So then the want of a positive law in this matter
does not make that which I say at all invalid: for although it be granted that
there is no particular law declaring this or that act of his, to be a full
forfeiture of trust: yet this is a known law to all, that consider him to be
under an oath of Ruling legally; that in case he does set himself to Rule
lawlessy, he has broken his oath, and fully forfeited his trust.

I say then that although in my discourse I named no law, Oaths were
reciprocal, What absolves Subjects from alleagance to Kings.
standing and falling together, for this I take to be the law of nature in this
case: that if a King does break the oath of his legality toward his Subjects,
his Subjects are absolved from the oath of their allegiance toward him.

Concerning that which you say, What laws Kings are exempted from, and not
counted transgressors of in their own persons, and upon what conditions that
exemption is granted them.
but only by their subordinat agents who alone are punishable when the law is
transgressed, I know that this is the law in Cases of particular concernement,
wherein some special positive laws are transgressed, but of the general
concernement. whereby the whole ground of all legal government is taken away,
that law cannot be understood. Besides I conceive, that the positive law which
you mention, does suppose that the King is oliged to give up his subordinate
Agents (the transgessors of the laws) unto the course of Justice, and not to
take all their faults upon himself, so as to protect them with the shield of
his indemnity, or with the force of his word against the execution of
vindicative Justice: for if he does this; then he puts himself as to his own
person, out of the case of indemnity wherein the law puts it: nor can that law
be counted valid for him against his own will, and against the Equity of the
law of nature; which in this ease does make him guilty, for if a King as a
King, by the intent of the law, does act nothing in his own person but by his
agents; and yet he will not be counted to have acted by his agents but to have
done all their faults in his own person, then he declares ipso facto that he
will not have the intent of the law valid as to himself, but that he will stand
in his agents room and be looked upon as in their person and under their
guilt, and consequently not as a King but as a transgressor; non quod volenti
non fit injuria, est regula juris. Therefore I conceive thus; By 3. ways the
prerogatives of exemption from being a transgressor may be lost by Kings.
That a King may make void as to himself, and loose the prerogative of the law
made in favor to his person three ways. 1. If he set himself directly to
disanul the general ground of all laws. For this cannot be imputed to any
subordinat agents as their guilt, for they are looked upon and made punishable
only as transgressors in particular matters. 2. If he does in opposition to the
intent of the law made for punishing transgressors, and for exempting his own
person from the guilt of particular transgressions; take up on himself all the
guilt of particular faults to protect iniquity and illegality; then he does
effectually make void the prerogative which the law does give him. 3. If he
does by force take upon him to hinder the execution of the sentence of the
supreme Judicature, for the protecting of transgressors against the law; for to
do this; is the highest act of illegal government, and in effect the putting
down of all laws. In all which Cases if you can make it appear to me rationally
that by your positive law the King is to be meant no transgressor; I shall
confess a mistake, but till then give me leave to think that I am no stranger
to Reason, when I am bold to say, that no positive law of any Nation in the
world, can disanul the law of Nature, which in suchlike cases, does present a
King even as a King to be in his own person a transgressor to the law-making
power of the Nation, which is to be governed legally and not arbitrarily.

The second thing which you take notice of, is a seeming inconsistency between
two passages of my discourse. In the one (you think) I Judge definitly in the
highest way of the Rights which Supreme powers have over us, and in the other
which is page 10. I declare that it does not belong to me or to any private man
to Judge definitively of the rights which the Supre^me powers in this world
pretend to have to their places.

To reconcile this seeming inconsistency, I shall desire you to reflect upon
two things, The answer does show the grounds of reconcileing it.
viz. The direct intent and proper subject of each part of my discourse,
whereunto the things seemingly inconsistent do relate; which things in both
places being very much different, and bringing a different respect upon the
passages supposed to be opposite, when you shall perceive the same, I hope your
mistake will be rectified.

For in the first place my purpose is to declare what the fundamental
constitution of the Government of this State is, as I conceive it agreeable to
the Universal law of nature; by which all free Commonwealths are settled
within themselves. But in the second place viz. page 10. my purpose is to
declare how my friend ought to behave himself for the quieting of his
scrupulous Conscience in the doubts which he had concerning the particular
present Powers, and the lawfulnes of their coming to their places.

The proper subject of my discourse in the first place, is concerning the
Legislative power of all Nations, as they are Commonwealths, and how in this
Nation that power has been settled of old: and the proper subject whereof I
speak in the second place, is concerning the particular ways by which the
present powers are come, and have a right to their places, which are things of
a very different nature.

Concerning the first, if you look upon the Universal law of nature, I suppose
you will grant that no man ought to be ignorant of it; The application of the
grounds to show the reconcilement of the passages.
and if you look upon the constitution of this State, as that law is observed
therein, I hope you will allow me as one in matriculat into the Commonwealth,
and concerned as well as others in the common welfare thereof, the judgment of
discretion to consider and declare what I observe therein: which at this time I
think is my duty to mention, but concerneing the second, I give advice to my
friend how he may quiet his spirit about the matters which concern him not, and
whereat he seems to be troubled, and decline to make my self a definitive
Judge of the particular rights and proceedings of those that God has set over
us to Rule the Commonwealth. So then in the forme^ I observe what the law is
under which we live: and in the latter I refrain from the judicature of
particular matters whereunto I have no calling to be a Judge: A mistake
concerning the Commons right to make laws objected.
and what inconsistency is between these purposes, and between the discourses,
which to this effect I make upon these subjects; I shall refer now to your
second thoughts to collect, wherein I hope your imaginary difficulty to
reconcile these passages will easily vanish,

Concerning that which I say of the Custom of this Nation, that the Commons at
all times have used to ask and propose the making of Laws, and that the Lords
and King were wont to give their consent thereunto, you say, I do as far in
this mistake as I did forget my self in the other. To this I say, It is well if
I am not further mistaken. For I shall not stick to declare ingeniously the
truth of my present thoughts, that when I now reflect upon the expressions
which there I have used, The answer shows the objectors mistake and whence it
proceeds.
concerning the National Custom, and compare them with what you offer to be
considered here (although I see my self not guilty of the mistake wherewith you
charge me, but can discern the grounds of your mistaking the drift and sense of
my words to have been somewhat of the Printers fault; somewhat of your own
inadvertency of my meaning yet) my words seem to myself somewhat more full then
they needed to have been for the end for which I uttered them. For my end was
only to show that the received Custom and liberty, whereby the Commons are
wont to propose the making of laws, and the Lords and King are desired to give
their assent thereunto, did arise at first, and was since continued upon the
just and natural foundation of all laws in a free Nation: which is the reason
of the Body thereof in Parliament. which I say has the sole right to propose
and choose the laws by which the Nation is to be ruled. This drift of mine you
do not observe, and the fault of the Printer has helped your mistake; for in
the last Impression which I conjecture you have made use of; the particle where
is put in stead of whence which was in the first, intimating the dependence of
the custom of the Commons of this Nation upon the law of nature mentioned
immediately before. Now because I intended to point at as much of this right and
liberty of nature as I did find extant in the practice of our Parliament, and
withal had a mind briefly to intimate the most material differences of Rights,
which were in each of the members of Parliament, with reference to the whole
Body, according to the forenamed law of nature; therefore I perceive my
expressions did run out, under the general term of a National Custom, as well
upon that which by right might be practiced: or rather by the nature of this
constitution of government is proper to be practiced, as upon that which de
facto was in use amongst us.

I am not ignorant that the laws have had their rise sometimes from the one,
How the Laws do rise from the commons, and how from the King and Lords
defferently
sometimes from the other house: but when I said that it was (as I supposed) a
perpetual custom in this Nation for the Commons at all times to ask and
propose the making of laws, I had an eye to the Coronation Oath, wherein the
King is obliged to swear that he shall maintain the laws quas vulgus elegerit,
which does suppose to my understanding, no less then what I express, viz. that
the right of asking and proposing of laws to be made does originally reside in
the people; with a tacit obligation in the King to consent thereunto. As
ancient then as the Coronation Oath is, so long I suppose the Commons do lay
claim to this right of choosing laws for themselves, and although all this be
granted, yet it does not follow that the King and Lords might not also propose
any thing at all, for the making of laws unto the Commons. For to assert this
right to belong originally and primarily to these, does not wholly exclude the
other from it: nor do my expressions import much more then a direct assertion
of the right of the Commons which is in practice: which being raised and
derived from the law of nature, might be inferred to be de jure primarily
practiced by them, and truly (though you seem to deny it, yet) I have been
told very credibly and circumstantially, that the Commons since the sitting of
this Parliament, have more then once upon special immergencys declared at
Conferences to the Lords that this was their right, as they were the
representatives of the Nation, and Trustees for common safety. It is also
granted that the Lords or King have by a received custom freely given or
refused their assent to Bills offered as they have seen cause: this shows
that they sat not in Parliament as mere servants unconcerned in the maine;
but as joynt-Councellors for the main, in the things wherein their service was
to be made use of toward the State, a man may be in his Principal relation a
servant to another, and yet in such a degree of honor, as not to be obliged to
do any thing by mere command without his own free consent: and so I conceive
Kings and Lords to be in a free Nation, they may for themselves (if they think
not fit to act.) surcease, but they cannot pretend to a negative voice, so as
to make it unlawful for those that have a right to order their own affairs, to
act without them, they are then to be counted Servi Honorarii non Mancipia
legum, and because they may be considered justly as members of the State, who
have a considerable State to venture in it, therefore they cannot be in equity
deprived of a consultative vote in the making of laws (except by some faults
they make themselves incapable thereof) although the power of choosing and
making them does not primarily belong unto them but to the Commons alone: and
to these a right and prerogative to see them kept and executed, for herewith
the Representees entrust them.

That which you observe concerning the oath of allegiance (that it was made in
our age) is no ways inconsistent with my assertion, that by the consent of all
ages, In what sense the Oath of alleagance has been in all ages.
for if you observe the strain of my discourse, you will see that I speak of
the meaning of the oath as it is in the law of nature and Nations, that is, as
in all ages such Oaths have been used; for all promises of Fealty and of free
subjection unto Kings and liege Lords, in all people and Nations governed
rationally by laws, are in my apprehension of the same kind with our oath of
allegiance: and therefore this particular oath made in our age upon a special
emergency, ought to be understood no otherwise then that same oath has been
always taken at all other times.

The Comment which you say I make upon the third article of the Covenant, is
your mistake of my construction of the Covenant, Concerning the sense of the
third article of the Covenant whether the promise to preserve the King be
conditional yea, or no.
and not my mistake of the meaning thereof, for I change not the In into If, as
you say I do: for look upon my words again and you shall see that I aleadge the
expression as it is in the text of the Covenant, but yet I say that the In of
the Covenant does contain a limitation of the defense and preservation promised
to the King and his Authority, for if we promise to defend him and his
Authority only in the defense and preservation of Religion and Liberties, then
we are neither bound unto him absolutely, nor otherwise but in order to these,
so then our meaning is to be bound, first to defend these for themselves, and
then him and his Authority are included therein. But now if it should fall out
that be by his own default should not be found in these, if he should put
himself out of the sphere of that protecteion, which we oblige ourselves to
maintain toward Religion and Liberty: and if he will not be looked upon as sub
ordinate thereunto, but regarded by us, merely for himself: is not then his
share of safety due to him this way (but refused by him as thus offered) lest
to him, as from our acts of protection, because the intention of defending and
preserving him and his just Authority, is taken up and concluded only as
within the bounds of that endeavor, which is to be put forth for the
maintaining of Religion and liberty, which is so far from being a forced and
corstrained sense of the words that the more strictly you cleave to the letter
thereof, the less respect is to be had unto him alone for himself, and without
due regard to Religion and liberty. I do not say (as you misconsture me) that
the words of the Covenant are to be meant of the Kings preservation of Religion
and liberty, but I understand them of our preservation thereof, and I grant
that with it we are bound to intend his preservation also, yet always so, as to
intend him and his interest within that of religion and liberty and not without
it, or separate from it, and by itself: nor did I leave out the words
immediately following that the world may bear wituess with our Consciences of
our loyalty, and that we have no thoughts to diminish his Majesty's just power
and greatness) upon any such design as you immagine at all: for they do take
nothing from the sense of a limited protection which I urge, but rather
confirm the same, by declaring that to include all the respect which we owe to
him within our preservation of Religion and Liberty is the conscionable tenure
of our true loyalty, and that we profess before all the world, that we
acknowledge it not due to him upon any other terms, and that in so doing we
foment no purpose to diminish any thing of his just power and greatness because
it cannot be imagined that ever any power or greatness was legally intended to
be given him, or justly possessed by him, which is not consistent with the true
Religion, and the Liberties of the Nations. Whereupon my inference concerning
him, (which I perceive you misinterpret, as if I offered it, as the meaning of
the words of the Covenant) does follow, that if he would not concur with the
Representatives toward the maintaining of their Religion and Liberties, he put
himself out of the protection, which in order thereunto was intended toward
him.

Here by the way observe a fault in the printing of the Considerations; for
whereas it is said, none but his subjects are bound to defend his person, it
should be none of his Subjects are bound, etc.

I say then upon the whole matter with you, that the things charged against the
Parliament, wherein they were accused to have an evil eye against the King were
falsely and injuriously charged upon it, and justly disavowed by the
Protestations which the Parliament put forth; because it was not possible for
the Parliament to look any better way upon the King, then through the prospect
of Religion and Liberty; and if he did vanish out of their sight, whiles they
did heartily seek him within that prospect; it must not be imputed to the
Parliaments eye, but unto his own carriage and motions which made him invisible
to them there, where they were bound to seek him, and he bound to be found.

Touching the causes why the King was laid aside, you say, Concerning the Votes
of Nonaddresses whether they came from guilt in the King, or jealousy in the
Houses.
because I was resolved, not to seem a resolver of that business. For I think
it contrary to the Rule of my place and Calling, to make my self a Judge of the
matter between them.

The Reasons why a private man ought not to judge definitively of the
proceedings of his Superiors in their places, you will do well in matters of
this nature, to follow as you see I do. And if all our Brethren would do so,
they would free their spirits from great Snares, and find a readier way to do
their duty without murmuring, then now they can light upon.

But touching the parallel which you make between the King and Parliament, and
a man jealous of his Wife, out of Numb. 5. methinks the Text will not yield the
conclusion which you seem to infer from it; Deuteronomy. 24.1. Mat. 19.3.
for it is clear, that Moses permitted the Jews to give their Wives a Bill of
divorce for slight occasions of dislike taken up against them, although they
were altogether guiltless: therefore the intent of the Law of jealousy in
Numb. 5. seems not to be for ordering of the way of her dismission; for a Bill
of Divorce did order that way but only to quiet the spirit of jealousy, in the
Husband, by bringing the matter between him and his Wife to some issue by Gods
determination of the matter of doubt.

I know not why you say, that I seem to judge it not unreasonable, that the
people may cast off their Kings ad placitum. It is altogether against my
judgment; for except there be a breach of the fundamental trust, I know no
placitum to be allowable; for there ought to be no more a divorce between the
King and his People; for every slight cause, then between a Man and his Wife;
and I think you intend not to make the bond stronger between a King and his
People, then God has made it between a Wife and her Husband. If then you will
assert that there ought to be no divorce between them, without a breach of the
fundamental Relation, which may be called State-Adultery, I shall not
contradict you; but if you will go beyond the judgment of discretion
peremptorily to define, where and what the first breach of trust was, I am not
allowed to follow you, yet without any determinate judicature to look
discreetly upon these matters, and to contemplate what may be rationally said
unto them; I shall not blame you for it, viz. to consider whether the King made
not a fundamental breach from the Parliament, when he intended to dissolve it
by a Declaration, wherein he condemned them (if I am not mistaken) to be
Traitors and Rebels? and whether when he called another Parliament at Oxford,
he did not actually as it were marry himself to another Wife?

Concerning the Votes of Non-addresses, they were recalled, and the King was
made thereby an Object of the Oath of Allegiance.

I say it is true, the Votes were recalled, but yet the repeal was only in
order to a Treaty: therefore after the Treaty, In what sense the Votes of
Non-addresses were recalled.
if no full conclusion did ensue, he was to be in statu que prius. The repeal
then was not absolute, as the prohibition of addresses was: if therefore the
Votes of absolute Non-addresses did dissolve the obligation as to private
persons: and the Votes of conditional addresses for a public Treaty did not
restore it in the event, I see not how he could become an object of our
allegiance by repealing of those Votes.

That which you say against the reasons which I allege to show, that the
Engagement is so far from being opposite to the Oath of Allegiance, and the
National Covenant, that it may rather be a confirmation of the ground for which
both the one and the other was binding; runs out upon a great misconstruction
of my sense, which easily might have been otherwise understood; for it was very
obvious for any body to imagine, that in this case when we speak of a Common
wealth, a Christian Commonwealth is to be understood; and upon this
presupposal, What are the essentials of a Christian Commonwealth.
which I thought no ways obscure, I said, to be governed by Laws, to have the
true Religion and the National Freedom, are things absolutely necessary and
essential to the being of a Commonwealth, meaning a Christian Commonwealth,
and although actually there be few, or have been few such Commonwealths in the
world; yet that does not refute my assertion of the nature of the thing; but
that which you add concerning our Oaths that they had a respect not only to the
esse, but also to the been esse of the Nation does seem some what more
material: yet you mistake me wholly, How Oaths concerning means to an end are
binding.
when you say that I take for granted, that all our Oaths did barely respect
the esse not the been esse, or external administration of the Nation; for I
grant that we swore not only to the remote end, but also to the means which had
a direct tendency thereunto, which then was judged by the reason of the Nation
to be the form of Government, which at that time was established: this I freely
grant, but withal I conceive, that the intent of all such Oaths was only to
oblige unto the means so long, so far, and in quantum as they should have a
direct tendency to the main end for which they were taken; and not absolutely
whether they should have a tendency to the main end or no, whence this
consequence will follow, that if the means cease to have such a tendency,
(which upon emergencies may fall out) or become destructive to the end for
which they were chosen, then the obligation to use them for such an end (though
settled by an Oath) is no more binding; for if the Oath did bind only as to
means for an end, and the things sworn to, do cease to be what they were, viz.
means to that end: then to my understanding there is no further obligation in
that Oath toward the use of them; and I pray consult your Casuists upon this
matter, whether they can show any reason to contradict this assertion. Now this
being to me a clear truth in respect of the obligation in general, of an Oath
to the use of any means whatsoever, I shall proceed to state the case somewhat
nearer to our present condition, as I understand it, and made it the ground of
my discourse. I conceive then, The Case of taking the National Oaths, and the
Engagement stated.
that private men in public concernments touching the Government of the State;
when there is a necessary change in it, and a question, whether this or that
form is most conducible to the main end of common safety? and whether the means
formerly settled toward that end have any further fitness and tendency
thereunto, yea or no? I say, in this matter of deliberation and in all
concernments of such a public nature; private men are to be determined by the
judgment of the supreme power which is over them, for the time: if then I
(being a private man) be at one time called upon to declare my faithfulness to
the use of the means which my Superiors judge fittest for public safety, do
oblige my self under them to be faithful thereunto: and at another time, be
called upon again, to declare my faithfulness to the use of other means
(emergencies in the judgment of the supreme powers, having changed the nature
of the former) or to declare my constant resolution, to be faithful to the main
end of common peace and safety, notwithstanding the changes which they think
necessary to make in the means; if I say, I be thus called upon, as one to be
determined in such matters, by the supreme powers that are over me, do act
without scrupling that which in it self I think just and lawful in my place to
do; what blame can I bear, for yielding to different Declarations at several
times, and upon different and necessary emergencies? now if this be the case
whereof I speak, and whereinto we are cast (as clearly it is) then your whole
discourse concerning the intention of a swearer toward the end, in
contradiction to the means expressed in his Oath, is to no purpose, and I have
cause to wonder that you exspaciat so largely upon a subject whereof there is
so little occasion and appearance of ground given from that which I say; for I
say nothing but that the sense of the Engagement to my understanding does
confirm the ground and main end for which the former Oaths were taken. I speak
nothing of any man's private intentions; or of the interpretations which he may
make mentally of the Oaths which are put to him, though different from the
sense of those that offer them: I am so far from allowing of this in any body,
that I conceive all such practices to be a mocking of God and men; but I speak
clearly of the proper intent of the Engagement, and how consistent the sense
thereof is with the main end of the former Oaths. And as for that which the
former Oaths did mention touching the forms of Government then in being; I say
that I conceive none of them so essential to any Nation, as that upon exigent
necessities they may not be altered by the supreme power of that Nation: and
how you come to conceive that I think it not unreasonable for a People to cast
off their Kings, or change the form of their Government merely ad placitum,
when as I so expressly limit those alterations to a necessary exigency; I would
have some cause to wonder, if I knew not that it is very incident to men
forestalled in judgment or affection against others, to be inclined to mis
understand their words, and upon imaginary advantages against the opinions
fathered upon them, to be willing to triumph over fictitious absurdities. I
shall therefore pass by your whole discourse concerning the case of one coming
to a Garrison; Concerning the Canan-Oath to confirm the Prelacy. Concerning the
second Article of the National-Covenant, Concerning the making void of all
security in every Oath which the State may prescribe, Concerning Zedekiah and
how he might have justified his perjury against Nebucadnezer, Concerning the
Elders of Israel, that they might have broken their Oath to the Gibeonites.
Concerning Saul, that he might have justified the wrong he did unto them, and
concerning the benefit which the present State may reap by the Engagement upon
such an interpretation thereof as you are willing to put upon it, in my name
against my sense.

I say, I shall pass by all these particulars, because they are to no purpose:
the whole case and my sense against which you pretend to allege them, being
wholly mistaken, as I have already showed; nor came it ever in my heart to
think that any man's private interpretation or intention to some remote end
might justify him to take any Oath in a sense which is disagreeing from the
meaning of those that give it; nor is it possible by any consequence to infer
any such thing as justifiable, from any thing which I do say; and if you can
make it appear that any such thing does truly follow upon any assertion of
mine, I shall as willingly as you condemn it.

My Friends objection from the third Article of the Covenant, Engagement.

First, when I confess that the former intentions to preserve the privileges
of Parliament as then they were settled, cannot now be prosecuted; you tell me,
that this alone is enough to create a bigger scruple then there is force in my
answer to wipe off.

Secondly, you make use of the plea which I allege for the justification of my
Friend, to condemn those who did that which he could not allow, but rather
found himself obliged to prevent and oppose in his place.

Touching the first if you had shown what the scruple was, which that
confession might create, I could have spoken to it, but seeing you conceal it,
it is not my work to conjecture what it may be: the rather, because I cannot
suspect that you suppose it to be a sin, to lay down alterable intentions, when
God makes them impossible or sinful to be prosecuted.

Touching the second I do not allow of your inference, viz: That if my friend
is excusable from breach of Covenant in the infringement of
Parliament-Priviledges, because he did contribute nothing thereunto: that
therefore I do plainly charge with breach of Covenant those who brought this
change upon the state. I say this consequence does not follow, because the
cases of those that brought this change about, was far different from that of
my Friends; and such as by their place might make that to be right in them,
which in my Friend would have been wrong: here the saying is morally true, cum
duo faciunt idem, non est idem. For although though they are engaged into the
same Covenant, Whether they who were the Authors of the change of Government,
are to be judged guilty of the breach of Covenant yea or no?
yet the condition of public and private persons, or persons in trust or
without trust, makes a vast difference as to matters of public concernment:
nor am I a competent judge to define what is right or wrong in the management
of public places, whereof the nature and circumstances are unknown to me, nor
what the special emergencies of State were, which might justify their
proceedings: therefore I dare not beyond my line take upon me that which you
do, to condemn them for Covenant-breakers, and that unheard: surely if in such
cases every private man may make himself a Judge of the affairs entrusted unto
others in public places, all Government will be utterly dissolved, and
unextricable confusions will ensue. The fatal necessity of a State may be seen
and apprehended by some that sit at the stern otherwise then by others: Nay,
although it happen that they are a minor party.
and how far a party of Rulers in number less, and yet in point of trust more
considerable, may act by their own apprehensions of necessity, contrary to the
sense of a major party, is a thing which since the troubles of both Nations and
the sitting of this Parliament has often times been decided. If you look upon
the proceedings of the leading men of both Nations, who have ventured upon
enterprises of an extraordinary nature, in extraordinary emergencies, both
without the assent, and sometimes against the sense of the major part. Now when
men in supreme trust most considerable, differ in judgment concerning the way
of common safety, from others who are in the same trust, but less considerable:
what can we who are standers by, not acquainted with the grounds of their
deliberations, nor called to the arbitrament of differences between them, do in
such a case either as Christians or as rational men; but pray to God that they
may agree, How standers-by that look upon public debates between Rulers in
chief, should behave the (...)
and being peaceable in our own thoughts not to meddle beyond our line to judge
either way, or to foment parties, or to provoke and harden one side against
another; but to persuade all indifferently unto that concurrence and unity of
spirit, which in known duties for common concernment is out of all doubt most
edifying and blameless. If you would join with me to follow the Rules of this
Divinity, rather then give way to prejudicate imaginations, you would see just
cause to suspend your judgment concerning the plea which others have made of
necessity, from censuring it in them as imaginary and pretended: and if you had
a mind to refute the error of any point of (as you call it) State-Divinity to
break Covenants, you would certainly be enabled to do it more effectually and
impartially then hitherto you have done any thing which I have met withal in
these papers; for the reasonings which Joshua and the Elders of Israel (as you
personate them) might have alleged, and which you think Saul took up to color
his breach of Covenant with the Gibeonites: although indeed as you say, such
reasonings come from unbelief; yet if they be not of the same kind with those
which have moved the present powers to alter the former Government into this
which now is* what have you gained to your self by your reproof, but the guilt
and discredit of a rash censurer? and what good have you done to him whom you
have unadvisedly censured upon a wrong ground, but to make him averse from
hearing you any further? as for my self I shall fully grant what you say, that
the Rule whereby private men are obliged to keep their Covenant, must be
observed in States proportionally caeteris paribus, that though they swear to
their hurt, How States are bound to their Oaths.
they must not change, and that it is more safe to keep with God, although
seemingly we run upon peril, then to quit the ways of God for prevention of
peril. These maxims I do fully agree unto, and am much persuaded that none of
the godly men who have had a hand in this change of Government will contradict
the same; and because I am bound to believe this of them so long as nothing
does appear to the contrary: therefore I must represent unto my self, that
which also I offer to your ingenuity to consider, that it is more charitable to
say of them that they intended not to consult with flesh and blood, but with
their Conscience and duty, when they took their lives in their hands to see
justice executed: and if touching any of them hereafter any thing, contrary to
this judgment of charity, should break forth as a matter of conviction, fit to
be brought home unto his Conscience, I shall be so much the more fit to make
him sensible of it, by how much I have had the better opinion, and never was
inclined to wrong him by any evil surmises in my thoughts, for why should I
think evil in my heart of men unknown to me? of men who are my Superiors, in
public trust over me? and of men whose actions cannot only bear some plea; but
in the plea (if matters of fact be found true) there is nothing irrational and
contrary to the grounds of natural equity.

As for the Example of Joshua and the Elders of Israel, the chief business to
be heeded therein (in my apprehension) is this, How Joshua was bound to his
Oath made to the Gibeonites.
that we should observe the true account why Joshua and the Elders did stand to
their Covenant with the Gibeonites: notwithstanding the murmuring of the
Congregation against them; for the Congregation might justly have alleged not
those slight and trivial matters which you mention, but the invalidity and
nullity of the Oath it self, that it was ipso facto void, as being a
transgression of the Commandment of God, Deuteronomy. 20.15.16.17.
who had forbidden the Israelites to enter into league with any of the people
of the Land, or to suffer them to remain alive in it.

Moreover, that the main circumstance and express ground of their contract with
the Gibeonites was a mere nullity, and acknowledged to be a deceit; for the
contract was made with this express condition, that the Gibeonites were none of
the People of the Land, which being found otherwise, the contract was void.

To this plea of the Congregation, what you would have answered I know not; but
some Divines of good note confess upon these grounds, that the Oath which was
made to the Gibeonites was void de jure, and that Joshua and the Elders were
not bound to keep it, yet that de facto they resolved upon equitable
Considerations to keep it ex part tantum; for that it was notkept ex toto is
apparent; for it was kept only as to the main matter which was the promise of
life, but as to the matter of freedom and confederacy, which is employed in the
terms of Peace, and of a League with them. Josh. 9. verse 15. it was not kept;
and yet the promise of freedom and confederation was no less covenanted with
them then that of life. Now the equitable considerations which moved the
Princes thus to qualify the contract, and not to make it wholly void, were as
I conceive, the respect due to the Oath by the Lord God of Israel, verse 19.
and to their own safety, least wrath be upon us, verse 20. say they added the
sin of wrath breaking their Oath: they were not free from guilt for swearing
without taking Council with God: if now they should seem not at all to respect
their Oath, this might heighten that guilt to bring forth a punishment, and I
believe we shall do them no wrong, if we conjecture that they did consider also
this inconveniencie, that if they should wholly have disregarded their Oath, a
disrespect would have been brought thereby deservedly not only upon themselves
in point of fidelity, but also upon the name of God, in point of reverence in
the minds of the Nations, who should have heard of this their breach of Oath
but not have been able to know the grounds of the justifiableness thereof; for
it was not possible suddenly (as matters then stood between them and
Neighbour-Nations) to inform them of the just reasons of their not keeping
their Oath; and to think that in equity this might have swayed somewhat with
them is not unreasonable. But the main thing which did cast the balance is
clearly that which in the Text is alleged, the equity of saving their life;
for being in a strait by reason of their rash Oath, they followed that which
was most safe, not wholly to disanul their promise, but to keep that part
thereof which was most favorable, viz. to spare their lives; but the other
part by which they should have been exempted from the condition of Bondmen,
and made Confederates, was made void, although the Oath did no doubt include
this promise as well as the other. So that de facto this part of the Oath being
altered lawfully, it shows that the other de jure might also have been
altered, if the just fear of greater inconveniences which might have followed
upon the alteration, then upon the confirmation thereof, had not swayed with
them: therefore upon more mature thoughts, this part of the Oath not being
altered, but deliberately confirmed, it was made for ever afterward
unalterable, and this confirmation of the Oath, as to that part which secured
their lives, being violated by Saul for worldly ends, and for such
considerations as you wrongfully think my grounds allow, was punished by God
upon his Family; for the promise of life to the Gibeonites, being afterward
ratified, not only by the Princes, but by the Congregation also, when they had
been three hundred years, or thereabout in possession of their right, there
could be no color for Saul to persecute them to death; for although they
should have had none other plea, but so long a prescription of time for their
right to a livelihood in their service, I know not how in equity, it could have
been taken from them.

I conceive then that the first contract with the Gibeonites was not binding,
and that Joshua in dealing afterward with them, Two soveral Contracts with the
Gibeonites.
did bring them to be sensible of this, as it appears by their confession,
and the resignation of themselves to his discretion, v. 24.25. begging their
lives, and not claiming any right to it by contract: it appears also not to
have been binding de jure out of v. 14. where the Text says, they asked not
council at the mouth of God, to intimate the neglect of respect due to God, and
the transgression of his revealed will in the business, which clearly made the
matter in it self a nullity: So that the Congregation, if they had executed the
sentence of death, which God by Moses had denounced against them, could not
have been counted transgressors against God, notwithstanding the Oath of Joshua
and the Elders; but then it would have been counted cruelty in the
Congregation, and breach of Oath in the Elders, and a disrespect in the people
toward the Engagement of their Princes, and many other inconveniences besides
would have followed in reference to men and their interpretation of that
action, if no equitable temperament had been found in the business, which upon
a second Treaty (the first being declared void) was done with the consent of
the Congregation: and this second Contract God did ratify, as appears by the
punishment of Saul for the breach of it.

Thus you have my sense of the Oath of Joshua to the Gibeonites; which in many
and main things is different from the present case; only I have been thus large
upon it, to prevent your mistake lest you should think (as I know some do) the
first contract de jure binding, because confirmed by an Oath; and thereupon
infer by this president, that an Oath is indissoluble, although it be made to
establish a thing materially unlawful; and although it may fall out to oblige
to something literally, which is contrary to the main intent thereof. Now I
hold that if a thing once sworn, become either materially or formerly unlawful
or by change of circumstances impossible to be done, that then the Oath is no
more binding, but ipso facto extinct.

In that matter which is said to pinch my friend, and my answer to it; you
consider two things. First, because I say of those who have made this change in
the Government, that they will plead for themselves; and because I take not
upon me professedly to justify their proceedings, you conclude (but most
irrationally) that I condemn them for Covenant-breakers; but there is no
equitable and ingenuous Reader, who can construe any thing out of any words of
mine, which will yield such a conclusion; for I profess it is wholly against my
Conscience, to do as you do, viz. to make my self a Judge, and out of my sphere
to define matters this or that way concerning them; but you seem willing to
catch at any thing to discredit them, which I see no warrant to do.

Secondly, when I show my Friend that the consequence which he made ( thus if I
take (says he) the Engagement, then I shall be accessory-to the breach of
Covenant which I apprehend others are guilty of) was not good; you are much
displeased at me for it, and intend to make not only an observation, but an
animadversion upon my discourse concerning that matter: let me first represent
briefly the substance of my reason which you seem not at all to take notice of,
and then I shall take notice of, your animadversion.

I show that his inference was not good, Why no man by the Engagement can be
accessory to other men's sins (if they have any) for making a change in the
State.
from the direct and plain matter of the Engagement, looked upon in the letter
thereof, which binds us to nothing else, but to procure the good of the
Commonwealth as now it stands, and this I say at all times is a duty to be
done, however it stands: I say also, that to intend and do this, is agreeable
to the intent of the Covenant, from whence to my understanding, is clearly
inferred, that the taking of the Engagement to this effect, can be no breach of
the Covenant which does allow of this as a duty; for if the plain duty of the
Engagement is that which the main intent and design of the Covenant does
presuppose, then the obligation to that can be no breach of this, and
consequently his inference is not good; for it is clear that the Covenant
obliging us to some particular duties of truth and faithfulness toward the
Commonwealth, as it was then established with a King and House of Lords,
cannot bind us up, from promising and intending to be true and faithful to the
whole Commonwealth, as it is now established, without a King and House of
Lords. The having or wanting of a King and House of Lords, is but accidental to
the main duty of being true and faithful to the Commonwealth, as it is offered
to us in the Engagement.

To this matter of reason you say nothing, which yet was the main thing to be
spoken to, if you intended an animadversion: But you tell me, that my discourse
does necessarily imply a high charge of inconsiderateness in those that made
and imposed the Engagement, whereof none can believe them guilty; and this you
intend to make good, by telling me further what they who made and imposed the
Engagement knew, as inconsistent with my sense of the Engagement, wherein you
follow your ordinary vein, to make the worst construction you can of my sense,
and to presume to express their sense and intentions little to their
commendation. To dispute with you conjecturally what their thoughts, were is no
part of my duty, it is sufficient for my aim, to evince that the plain matter
of the Engagement is a clear duty not disagreeable to the intent of the
Covenant which you overthrowe not; and therefore my answer to my friends
scruple stands firm; for which cause I think it needless to spend time upon the
rectifying of your misconstruction of my sense of the Engagement, as if it
meant by the duty which I press, only the intrinsecal good of the
Commonwealth, and had no respect at all to the extrinsecal good thereof, and
to the clause as it is now established. Nor shall I insist to make an
animadversion upon your misapplication of this misconceived sense of mine, as
if I took the Engagement in so large a signification, as that any man might
foment under the words thereof what intentions he would, though never so
destructive to the present Establishment: these things I shall pass by, because
I suppose no candid Reader will so understand me, but will easily perceive that
you frame to your self fictious absurdities upon misconstrued notions.

The observation which you make upon my interpretation of the words without a
King and House of Lords, which I call an explication of the words (now
established) immediately going before, and not an absolute abnegation of the
things looked upon barely as in themselves, Whether the words without a King and
House of Lords are an abnegation of them, barely and as in themselves.
has somewhat a better color of reason, then that which you mentioned before;
and although I make no such account of that acceptio^ of these words, as to
stand confidently upon it, that they cannot rationally bear any other
interpretation; (for suppose they may by some consequence imply an abnegation
of a King and Lords House, how will that oppose my assertion? or prejudice my
reasoning with my Friend? yet your arguing against the abnegation of them so as
I have mentioned, is not valid: for first, you take not up my expressions as
they are delivered by me, and so contradict not my assertion, for you
contradict only an absolute negation of the things themselves, and I assert,
that the words do not mean, an absolute abnegation of the things looked upon,
harely as in themselves. I make a difference between the negation of a thing
and the abnegation of it. I may deny a thing to have a being, when it is not
existent in rerum natura: and yet not intend to renounce all respect which may
be had to it, looked upon barely in it self. I may confess that a thing is not
in this or that respect, and yet not declare that I cast it off, barely in it
self, and in all respects. Now I say that the [meaning of the] words of the
Engagement in their proper and obvious sense import not the last, but only the
first acception, where I would have you to take notice that the sense which you
assert is not proper and obvious, but brought in upon many consequences, which
though not irrational, yet not contradictory to what I say. Again in my
expressions, the words barely as in themselves (for the word truly is not
rightly printed, it should be barely) are reduplicatives, and you take them up
without any reduplication, and speak of the things themselves. Now there is a
great difference between a thing in a reflexive sense or reduplicative
consideration, and between the direct notion of it, you take up my words as if
I spoke of a King and House of Lords themselves, that is in a direct notion,
and I clearly speak of them in a reduplicatve notion, barely as in themselves:
therefore you contradict not what I say, although you pretend to show that my
gloss (as you call it) carries a full contradiction in it self: it is true,
that your wrong allegation of the gloss does seem to make it contradictory by
way of consequences to the Text; but how it has a full contradiction in it
self, you make it not at all appear. And this is the first point of your
mistake in the wrong allegation of my words, and the non-observing that I speak
of a proper and obvious sense of the Engagement, and not of a sense by
consequence. The second is the invalidity of your consequence, as to my
understanding; for you say, that the words as now established, do fully imply
that abnegation of King and Lords House which I there mention, because the
adverb now in the Engagement (say you) does stand in full opposition to the
face of things in former Administrations. I grant that now stands in opposition
to time past by way of consequence, but not in a direct and proper Notion; for
I may look upon things as now established, without looking back and comparing
them with that which has been; but when you say, that as now is a full
contradiction to my sense as ever, I confess I understand not that, for if as
ever, does in its proper and obvious notion, and in my sense comprehend all
times past, present and to come, then I know not by what good consequence it
can be said to be a full contradiction to that which is present; for that which
is ever must needs also be now, or else is not ever. I confess that the
Commonwealth as now established, has voted down the King and Lords house, and
declared that at present they are unfit to have any share or hand in the
Government of this Commonwealth, and in this sense by the words of the
Engagement, we deny them to have a being in this present establishment, which
is all that rationally by our Superiors (I speak it with respect) can be
desired, and in an obvious sense is offered by the words of the Engagement; but
from hence does not follow, that King and Lords are voted down, being looked
upon barely as in themselves; for it is clear, that the Declaration all along
has a respect to the safety of this Commonwealth at present, to show the
inconsistency of a King and Lords House with it; and so much I conceive may be
inferred, that the Engagement does imply by consequence a consent in the
Subscribers to this, but that either the Declaration, by which King and Lords
were voted down, or the Engagement does oblige any man to assert that
Monarchical Government in it self, or Aristocraticall Power mixed with it, and
looked upon in it self, is for ever to be rejected out of a Commonwealth, and
that neither of them can consist with the safety thereof, is much more then was
ever, (as I conceive) intended by those that made the Engagement, or then can
rationally and equitably (I say again with respect) be imposed upon any men of
judgment by their Rulers: nor is it at all needful to oblige Subjects to any
such assertion, for the end for which the Engagement is offered, which is only
to give the present powers an assurance of fidelity to the present State; but
you and some others of your strain seem willing to scrue up the sense of the
words to such irrationalities as these are by forced consequences, that an
Odium may fall upon the present Government, as if they were set against
Monarchy and Aristocraty, rather for some self ends, then for the present good
of this Commonwealth, which to intend (if there be any such leaven in the
bottom) is far from the duty both of a Christian, and of a good Subject, who
should make the best construction of the actions of their Superiors, and refer
unto them the judicature and management of public affairs, as they shall think
it most expedient, which if my Friend would lay to heart as he ought, and
practice accordingly he would soon find himself easd of any thing which in this
kind might pinch him.

I go on, not (as you say) discerning that which is said will not hold; for you
see it holds invincibly, but ex abundanti, yielding something to my Friends
weakness, more then perhaps was needful, I suppose in his apprehension of
matters, that this Engagement does materially settle something in the
Commonwealth, which is contrary to the intention which he had in taking the
Covenant; yet I say that by giving his assent thereunto as matters now stand,
he does not at all break his Covenant, because the obligation to those matters
by virtue of the Covenant was exstinct, before he was called upon to take the
Engagement, to this you say, that this opposition of mine is wholly yielded by
others, both that the Engagement is in full opposition to the Covenant and
other Oaths (and so all my labor lost in endeavoring to reconcile them) and
that this which I now bring, is only held out for a plea to carry it in the
affirmative, that the Engagement may be entered, male res agitur (say you) cum
tot opus est remediis. To which I answer, male cum ijs agitur quibus tot
applicanda sunt remedia: it shows that their Disease may be brought to be
stubborn, sed been cum ijs agitur quibus tot suppetunt remedia: it shows that
no cure is wanting, though the disease may seem desperate; for if the
supposition which I make were wholly yielded unto as I make it, there would be
no full opposition between the Covenant and other oaths found, otherwise then
in the mistaken apprehensions of some that scare themselves at the Engagement
without a just cause my labor therefore is not lost if things misunderstood
may be rectified, as surely they may, and I hope by this time in some degree
are. You admit, that that which is extinct and made void can no more oblige,
with this limitation; provided that those who are obliged have no hand in
extinguishing that which does oblige them, Corcerning the matter of an Oath how
it may be extinguished, or not extinguished.
to work out their own disobligation, this limitation I do admit, and your
instance in David's case to Jonathan for preserving his seed, I allow. Yet if
God had appointed Mephibosheth to dye, and David to have given the sentence in
the way of justice, do you think that David would have been guilty of the
breach of oath made to Jonathan for the preserving of his seed? it is true we
say the King dies not; that is, the supreme executioner of Laws dies not; but
the King in his person was Civiliter mortuus, as to his office when he was
Voted close prisoner in the Isle of Wight, and if there was just cause for it
in the Judgment of the Supreme power of the Nation, their oath for his
preservation being limited to a condition, they will be able to answer before
a higher Judge then you or I for what they have done. The case which I suppose
is concerning a private man, who is no Judge in public affairs, who had no
hand in sentencing him; and therefore although in the preface of the Covenant,
mention is made of the King and his Posterity, yet by his death the matter of
the oath relating to him is extinct, and by the cause of his death the Law has
involved his posterity.

That which you say here concerning Parliament-Priviledges, being always the
same and unalterable, is only said and not proved; in like mauner when you
tell me that we have now no Parliament actually existing, you beg the
Question, and overthrow the fundamental position of a full House to be in the
number of forty Trustees, which I believe may be six times told in the List of
those that now present themselves to that Assembly. Your comparison of a
Physician who cannot preserve, except he recover strength, does suppose many
things which are not granted; therefore I shall not think them worthy of any
larger answer then to tell you, that the Covenant never meant that private men
of whom I speak should be Judges of Parliament-priviledges, or Physicians to
the public diseases of the State. Now whether my friend has any just cause to
scruple further; neither you nor I are competent Judges, but the impartial
Reader the third man, to whom, and to your own second thoughts I shall leave
this matter.

Upon the second part of my discourse to my friend, you make some observations,
transcursu, exceptiously, then pitch upon a settled exception.

You tell me first, that in stead of clearing the title of the present Powers
as just and lawful, and acquitting it from usurpation, I make it unlawful to
inquire and determine concerning it. To this I say, what the duty of Subjects
is to their superiors.
till you make it appear that it is lawful for every private man to judge
definitively of the Titles, Rights and Actions of the Powers that are over him,
so as to oblige his Conscience to abstain from all lawful actings in his
Calling under them, till he be satisfied in all his scruples concerning them, I
must still for mine own part abstain from presuming to be their Judge in such
matters, and diswade others from that practice, and persuade them to do their
own affairs quietly, and pray to God for their superior Powers.

Then you blame me for holding forth the Rule by which I walk; as if I did
intend to make my self in all things my friends president, or supposed him to
be ready to follow me in all things. I see nothing can be so well meant and
done but it may be ill taken, when men seek to make exceptions and not to
edify; I thought the best way of edification was to hold forth the rules by
which God does teach us to walk; and because I would have no man to follow me
further then he sees a Rule, therefore I am interpreted to have an ambition to
get followers: truly I shall follow you gladly if you will show me your Rule to
be answerable to the word of God, and why show you not a fault in the Rule it
self, if it is liable to exceptions; but if you can except nothing against it,
why are you not so ingenous as to bear witness to the Truth? but when we hunt
after contradictions, this is the Genius which leads us; we look not to the
thing but to experiences, and in their wrong and worst side, afterward you say
that I have been found a transgressor of mine own Rule. I see you allude to
that which you said in your second exception but when you shall have answered
that which I have said there to rectify your mistakes, then you will give me
cause to think that you have a mind not only to tell me that I have
transressed my Rule, but also to redress either me or my Rule if either be
faulty; for which I shall thank you when you intend it as you ought to do.

Concerning the Character of AntiChrist you deny nothing of that which I say,
but you desire me to take it into my serious consideration to whom that
Character does belong; whether to those that seek out carefully to what power
it is they owe justly subjection that they may submit themselves thereunto, or
to him who does peremptorily determine of the forfeiture of Rights in those
that before were posessed of an undoubted title, Concerning the spirit that
exalts itself above Magistrates, where it appears most.
and disobliging Subjects from their Obedience.

To this I say that I have considered seriously the matter, and find that the
answer is easy, if the Case be stated as you offer it, upon a mistake in the
second part, but let the Case be truly stated, and then consider you also where
the Character of a Spirit exalting it self above Magistrates does most appear:
whether in him that submits himself to the higher Powers which God has actualy
set over him, and without disputing their title or making himself a Judge of
their actions, does all things just and lawful in his place under them as under
the Ordinance of God, because he does believe that all Supreme powers that are
actually existent in the world are ordained of God, and ought to be submitted
unto as Gods Vicegerents in their places for Conscience sake? or in him that
does nothing of all this, but making himself a Judge of the Powers that are
over him and of their proceedings, does resist them as Usurpers, denying all
obedience even in the best and lawfullest things commanded for public safety
by them: does despise their government, and speak evil of their dignity, and
does admit of none to have the right to Supreme power but whom he has
determined should have it? which of these has most of the spirit of Antichrist
judge ye? As for that which you call a peremptory determination of the
forfeiture of Right in those that were before posse essed of an undoubted
title, I can say this to it, that if you can show me that I make any peremptory
determination of any thing in particular, I shall confess a fault, but if I do
nothing more then represent the undeniable clear and general grounds of
natural equity, upon which Rights may be forfeited, without making any special
application thereof unto circumstances, or pronouncing a definitive sentence
for or against any, as a Judge in the Case, then your censure will be found
unjust and inconsiderate, and to see your error in it, look upon that which I
have said unto your second observation.

To the judgment of Discretion which I allow with a limitation, that it ought
not to be set up so high within ourselves or over others, as to oblige our
Conscience to follow it as the only Rule, and drown the thoughts of all other
rules in point of obedience to the powers who are visibly over us; you say that
blind obedience is better then such use of light, that when I believe I see my
way, I have no allowance to follow it. This is a great mistake of my meaning,
for so far as I allow to judge, I allow to follow light, I allow to judge, that
is to discern and observe rationally who are in the visible possession of
superiority, how they declare their own right, and with what power they stand;
these things must be taken notice of, that men may be able to judge their own
present station under whom they stand, whom God has set over them, Concerning
the judgment of discretion, and a definitive judgment, about what matters
they are conversant.
and unto whom they owe obedience for Conscience sake: so far as this judgment
does discover actual superiority, I oblige the conscience of every man in his
particular actions to walk in the light thereof as a dutiful Subject; but I
allow him not in the disquiry of matters concerning his superiors to go so far
as to judge peremptorily of their proceedings in their places, whether they do
right or wrong, and whether their title be good or bad; in these things,
because he cannot have that light which is requisite to settle a definitive
judgment therein, and because he is not called to be a Judge of such matters,
therefore I allow him not to oblige his Conscience to be entangled into any
such judicature, or to suspend the acts of his civil and Christian obedience
(wherein Conscience is to follow other clear Rules) upon his own or other men's
observations of such things. In a word, I allow all men to seek out their way,
and when they have found it to follow it conscionably: but they are to be
directed, that in seeking their way they presume not above their line; their
Line is to discern to whom they owe the duty of a Subject, and what the thing
is which by their superiors is required of them, whether it be answerable to
the Law of God and nature, yea or no? within this line their judgment is to
walk for themselves; but beyond this Line to make such observations of their
Superiors ways, or to give way to the apprehensions which may be suggested
unto them concerning the same from others, so far as to make those observations
and apprehensions a rule to their conscience to walk by, is in my judgment
irregular, and the very snare wherein at this time you and many others are
taken in unawares, whiles you distinguish not between your own line and the
line of others, and btween the judgment of discretion and peremptory
judgment, which are to be exercised about different objects and have a
different relation unto Conscience, the things whereof I am no competent judge,
I may diseern, with an observation of indifferency,

Concerning the Rule which I give, whereby Superiors may be discerned as
agreeable to sense, to reason, and to conscience, you object,

1. That if this Rule were right, Israel whenever they were made Servants to
their enemies, to Cushan Rushataim, to Eglon, to Jabin, to Midian, to Ammon,
and to the Philistims, should have been bound up in bondage from seeking
deliverance, nor any endeavor must have been used to recover lost rights. The
difference between a State and v private man, in opposing oppressive powers
over them.


I answer, that this does not follow at all.

1. For the case of a private man is not the same with a whole state, this has
a right to govern it self independently, but no private man in a State can
pretend unto this: therefore a State may endeavor to recover its right and
liberty whenever it can get strength to cast off the Government which is over
it; but no private man may intend to make himself independent from all superior
powers; he ought then to take notice of those that God has set over him, to do
his duty toward them.

2. In a whole State, when it is oppressed by Forraigners, as when God sent
those enemies to bring Israel into bondage there was no doubt, or need of a
Rule to know who were their superiors; but here a particular man is supposed
in a civil division, to be in doubt between two competitors, to whom he is to
perform the duty of a Subject: the Rule then is only fitted for this case, and
not for the other.

3. In the deliverance of Israel from the oppression of their enemies it is
said, that God raised them up Judges, and that he was with the Judge whom he
raised, Jud. 2.16.18. therefore it follows, that he put public Authority
upon their deliverers, and consequently, that he did not allow private men to
be otherwise then in subjection, as when he brought Nebuchadnezar against the
Jews, who brought them away Captive into Babylon, he did Command all private
men to be in subjection, and to pray for the peace of the place where they were
Captives; Jer. 29.7.
even as the Apostle does enjoin all Christians to be subject to the Roman
Emperors ( Romans 13.) who for the most part were all usurpers.

Secondly, How Subjects are to behave themselves toward these Powers, whether
claiming superiority by Contract or by Conquest.
you object against that which I say about a Contract which makes a Law between
Rulers and Subjects, and a Conquest which is bound to no Law, that it were
worth observation, if I would acquaint you, which way the present powers do
claim. I answer, my Council is, which way soever you are to look to your duty,
and not to resist the Ordinance of God which is over you: use your own
discretion to observe what you can, without making your self a peremptory Judge
of their way: and what I advise you to do, I endeavor to observe my self:
therefore it is not reasonable that you should desire me to transgress mine own
Rule, and go beyond my line to define other men's affairs which they have not
called me to determine. I can discern a mixture in their way; to some they use
the right of Conquerors, to others they walk by the Rule of a Contract: you may
put your self in either relation, for as your behavior toward them is, so you
are like to find them.

Concerning the Queries whereof you say the Question is miserably begged, the
name of others, and that it is left to your discretion to consider those
Queries as the matter of them is offered in the nature of a plea for those who
are accused of usurpation.

And although you say, Concerning the Queries mentioned in the Considerations,
how they are to be reflected upon.
you have never seen so much as an attempt for the proof of that which is taken
as granted in these Queries; yet I can tell you that I have met with those that
have in the presence of many, undertaken the proof thereof, which because it
relates to matters of fact, whereof I can bear no infallible witness pro or
contra: therefore I must leave it without a definitive sentence, as not being
obliged in Conscience this or that way to a judicature, and yet I may
rationally with an indifferent eye be inclined to assent more one way then
another, always keeping my affection entire to the rule of my duty; for what
ever the matters of fact be in other men's administrations, that is no rule to
me in my sphere, I must look to the proper rule of mine own work with a respect
to the matter and end thereof.

To the second branch of my friends doubt, But if the Engagement be not a duty
as men affected to the common cause of liberty (by mine own concessions) are
persuaded, then (say you) guilt will follow upon such supposition which I have
laid down. Concerning the Engagement that it is a Duty; and what does follow
thereupon.
To this I answer, that no man has ever yet denied the Engagement to be a duty
in the sense wherein I understand it, nor you yourself, although through
prejudice against the present Rulers you are loath they should be understood to
tender it in that sense wherein I offer it. Seeing then the Engagement in the
sense in which I take it is undoubtedly a duty just to be required by the
present Powers, you deal not rationally to suppose it to be no duty, except
you had showed that either it could not bear the sense wherein I take it, or
that that sense is not a matter of duty now to be performed as that it is
unjust to be required: nothing of which you having done, and yet taking it for
granted to be no duty (only because I confess that some men well affected to
liberty are so persuaded, though it is clear that I think them to be in an
error) you seem clearly to beg the question which is between us after that I
have proved it; for having proved the Engagement to be a duty, and such a duty
as is fundamental to all other former bonds; I may lawfully make it a ground to
build some inferences thereon, and you not having disproved it to be what I say
it is, have no ground to build any contrary inferences thereupon. Then also the
inference which you make is, to my conception (if I take your meaning)
needless; If (say you) it is no Duty, then guilt will follow upon such
supposition which you have laid down, you had done well to have showed what the
supposition is which you mean, for I cannot well guess at it. If you mean that
the guilt of being accessory to other men's faults (whereof the question is)
will follow upon the supposition that the Engagement is a duty when as indeed
it is none; this may be granted, but is needlessly mentioned, because my
presupposal that the doing of a duty can make no man accessory to another man's
personal fault, does sufficiently include; that if the thing done by him be not
a duty, it will not excuse him from being accessory unto his fault.

You take notice of the expression wherein I say of some, that they deserve not
to have a being in the Commonwealth, a high one, and a passing of sentence
upon those that have forborne to subscribe this Engagement, being conscious to
themselves of the bonds of former Engagemenns. Herein you give us an example of
that way of apprehending things which is in the spirits of all men who are led
by prejudice, for although the matter which I deliver is as clear a truth as
any that can be thought upon in the way of morality, and relates to no
particular persons at all, An instance of a prejudicate way of misinterpreting
plain truths.
but mentions only a general and undeniable maxim, which is a principle of all
human societys; yet you cannot look straightly, and with a single eye upon it
as it is delivered, but through the Prospective of your prejudice you not only
pervert my meaning, but relat my words otherwise then I do offer them; for I
say, that this is a rule of justice, that all men are bound to show fidelity
unto those of whom they desire protection, and that we ure bound to be ready to
every good work toward those with whom we live. which is all that in the
present state of this Commonwealth is required of us; which if we desire not
to perform. we deserve not to have a being in it, these truths which I deliver
as general maxims, and apply them to myself as well as to others, and
universally to all men in all Commonwealths in the world, because you cannot
deny either the premises or their coherrnce. You carp at the clause thereof;
you call it a high sentence, and to make me odious you relate it as if I spoke
it only of those that have forborne to subscribe the Engagement, which
proceeds from a narrowness of spirit, which cannot look upon the face of
universal Truths as in themselves they are offered to the understanding,
without turning them awry to some partial application. And because your
discourse which follows hereupon (concerning the inconveniency of proceeding
in so high a way, and concerning other things, whereof you make your self a
Judge and a Counselor of State, rather to reprove then to entreat, and in a
loving manner to advise that which is equitable) is all grounded upon this
distorted apprehension of my words; I shall leave it as a matter in which I am
not at all concerned, desiring you to judge equitably whether upon such a trial
of your inclination to misunderstand and misreport plain words, so full of
clear truth contrary to my sense, I have not sufficient cause to warn you, and
justly to be jealous over you, least you be no less injurious to your
Superiors, and to all that which they do toward the public by misinterpreting
the same toward others then you are to me, and how far such a strain is
different from the spirit of Christ, and from the way of doing good to others,
I shall seriously refer unto your more quiet and conscionable consideration,
desiring you to weigh it by your self at better leisure as in the presence of
God.

The descourse which you make upon my description of the end of the Engagement,
which you call a gloss; is almost of the same strain with this immediately going
before, the difference is only, that here the words are not so misreported,
but by misconstruction of matters you wrong my meaning as much as you can by
Consequences.

I say, that the end of the Engagement is, to give the Supreme Power an
assurance that we shall not betray it, but that we are willing to maintain all
good intelligence for public concernments with it, notwithstanding the
present changes brought upon the Commonwealth.

You say, Concerning the end of the Engagement and what consequences follow
thereupon.
that to intend this does utterly spoil all assurance that possibly can be
given either to this State or any other; and the reason you give (referring me
to what has been said before, where I found no reason at all, but uncharitable
surmises, viz. in Sect. 10.) is this, that if no respect is to be had to
outward forms, but to the intrinsecal good of the Commonwealth only: then (say
you) all are at liberty (notwithstanding such Engagement) where they will to
hold intelligence; provided, that their judgments tell them that the public
is best provided for, Where the observers consequence is related, and the
answer thereunto shows the grounds of his error.
that way in which they keep correspondency.

Hereunto let me for answer tell you,

First, you never heard from me, that no respect was to be had to outward
forms; for I believe that a due and conscionable respect is to be had to all
outward forms, by those that are in an orderly way engaged to them, so long as
they last; but that any men should be engaged to them after that they are
altered and taken away without their default, or should be obliged to practice
the maintaining of them to the disturbance of the public peace and welfare of
a Nation, is a thing which I cannot understand, or that any outward form should
be accounted essential to any Nation, Concerning the use of outward forms.
and more then accidental, so that by the supreme power thereof it may not be
alterable upon exigent necessities, is another thing which does pass my
capacity, and yet except you assert these paradoxes, you will never make out
the conclusions which you aim at, for the sense of former Engagements, as you
make them obligatory to the Conscience at this time in opposition to this
Engagement.

Secondly, Commonwealth only was to be intended without the outward good
thereof also: Concerning the intrinsecal and extrinsecal good of the
Commonwealth.
I believe that in a Commonwealth as in a man, there is a soul and a body,
and that in both there is a substantial and accidental good, and that this is
alterable, but that that is always in the eye of every one that is faithful to
a Commonwealth, unalterably to be sought after, and that the alterable good of
a Commonwealth, depends upon circumstances, and is determinable by the supreme
power of every Nation, I suppose you will not deny, and here I shall tell you
also, lest you mistake my notion of a Commonwealth, that I understand by it,
not an abstract form, but a concrete substance consisting of the body of the
Nation, as it is taken both collectively and representatively; for neither of
these are at any time to be understood without the other in my discourses, or
without some relation to each other.

Thirdly, you never heard from me that every private man is to be made a Judge
of that which is the public good, Concerning the judgment of private men,
touching the public good.
as if it were free for him to follow any course without control, which his
judgment tells him the public is best provided for; for I believe that all
rational men, and honest Members of a Commonwealth, take that to be best for
the public good which the supreme powers thereof declare fit to be prosecuted
concerning it, according to the trust reposed in them; so that faithful
Subjects will judge that they ought to be rationally concluded in such matters
by their superiors. Upon these assertions I suppose you will be able to see
how far you wrong my sense of the end of the Engagement; and truly if you would
but have been a little ingenuous, and considered that the preface of the Act
for taking of the Engagement, does express in effect the same ends which I
mention, you could not with any color of reason have made the inferences upon
it which you make: nay and the very letter of my words is clearly contradictory
to your inference; for I declare the end to be, not to betray the supreme
power, and to be willing to maintain with it all good intelligence, and you
infer, then all are at liberty, notwithstanding such Engagement to hold
intelligence where they will. How can a promise made to these supreme powers,
(who are the representative Commonwealth) to be true and faithful to them;
that is, not to betray them, but to maintain good intelligence for the public
welfare with them; yield this conclusion, Ergo I am free to hold intelligence
with their enemies against them; if I will understand by the public welfare
their destruction? these are such distortions of a plain matter, that I wonder
how you should come to strain your wit to beget them. There is much more of
this kind of stuff in your following glosses, upon my words, which declare the
end of the Engagement, to which I think fit to say nothing, for by what I have
said already, you will be able to resolve your self, of that which I could say
unto the remainder of those your discourses.

That which you observe concerning the dissolution of the tie of private men,
to the Heir of the Crown, is, that we must not look unto the works of God
alone, but also unto his word, to walk by a Rule, which I shall not contradict,
but heartily affirm with you, and be ready to show that by the word as a Rule,
we private men are bound to obey in things good and lawful the supreme powers
immediately and actually over us under God, and not such as are not over us whom
in opposition unto them we may be inclined to choose. As for the Engagement, it
does clearly oblige us to do our duty to the Commonwealth collectively and
representatively without a King; but to my understanding the expression is not
so against Kingly-power in it self considered; but that the supreme power of
the Nation, may, if they see cause, and the public safety in their judgments
(for they are only the competent Judges thereof) does require it; set up a King
again to morrow. I do not think it in the power of any supreme power; if they
will be faithful to their trust to bind their own hands in such a way as not to
do and undo; for this would be to oblige themselves to that which is against
the nature of their trust; nor is it imaginable that the Covenant or any other
obligation of Oath can be so high, as to bind us so to a King or his Heir,
that we should not be able lawfully to promise truth and faithfulness to the
Commonwealth without them, when they are not in place. The example of a Child
to his Father, beggs the Question; and then the Laws of men bind only to that
which the letter directly imports, in respect of outward actions mentioned in
them, and takes no notice of secret inward affections. The Argument taken from
Gods way of providence after a thing is done to acquiesce in it, by doing our
duty in all other things which the same providence does offer, can be no
occasion to sin, or any snare to do evil, nor do I press it any further in this
case, but to acquiesce at things past, which God has altered, and to do a duty
at things present, which God has settled, and if this Divinity will not hold in
reference to private men, I pray show us some better Rule, and we shall hearken
to you in it.

Concerning the place of Isaiah Chap. 24. the Kings of the Earth shall be
punished and afterward visited; I shall admit of your caveat, for I make only
a probable conjecture of that which God has done, or intends to do amongst
us, and not a peremptory definition of that which shall fall out, Concerning
the observation of Prophesies what the caveat is.
your admonition also concerning the doing of our duty I willingly receive, and
grant that Prophesies touching that which God will do; are no rules for our
actions, but the Precepts touching his will which we should do, must guide us.
That which you discourse, of the fulfilling of the Prophesies concerning Christ
to be put to death by wicked hands, is a Truth; Nay, if men be wicked, and have
no respect to God in that which they do; although they be sent forth with a
special and express command of his own upon their works, yet they do not his
prescribed will as their duty, but only a material work wherein their aim may
be undutifull. Jehu is a clear example of this.

That which you bid me take into my serious consideration concerning the
Engagement I hope God will enable me to do; Engagement can be so clear to men
preingaged in other strong bonds of duty which they cannot seedissolved, and
prepossessed against the way of the change, perhaps more then comes to their
share to judge of it, and of the persons which have brought it about; I say I
think not that this Engagement can be so clear unto them, The grounds of
Moderation toward dissenters about the Engagement.
as that they should suddenly without any debate in their Spirits, be carried
to allow of it, therefore I have always been Sollicitou fors a moderation of
proceedings; and for amiable conferences, to beget a good understanding of
doubtful matters whereinto by the necessities of the times we are fallen. I
confess that evidence does not always go along with Truth; for to make a thing
evident it must be offered ad modum recipientis; and although men be such in
whom both parts and piety are seen, yet sometimes they are so shut up with
prejudices wherein corrupons work; that they act far below themselves: and I
dare not say, that in the proposal of matters to cure them of prejudicate
thoughts, there is always that humility, love, Prudency and imprejudicants
used to them which is able to cure their disease without any further distemper
and inflammation to their sores, sometimes it may be truly said medice cura
teipsum and the Apostles memento, Gal. 6.1. to keep us in a meek temper, lest
thou also be tempted is remarkable: therefore God forbid that any should be
pressed to act against judgment, and the dictates of their Conscience only by
Club-law, who seek rationally to consider things belonging to duty in the fear
of God.

Concerning the resistance of powers, Concerning resistance of Powers.
may make such a resistance, and about things wholly good and lawful in
themselves? as for the other question, what a just power with right
unquestionable may challenge, is one thing, and what a private Subject under an
usurped power may do in opposition to the power which is actually over him, is
another thing: therefore I shall desire you also to consider, that private men's
opinions concerning forfeitures of rights and usurpations without title, are
not warrantable grounds to act toward the unsettlement of the public in
opposition to powers that are, in plenary possession of all places of
Government. As for your request in the conclusion, that those who see not with
my eyes, and cannot warrant all that I approve (having what to say if called
unto it) may obtain from me a more favorable censure then to be judged
unworthy of a being in the Commonwealth, where by right of birthright they
have their freedom; I shall profess that it never came in my thoughts so to
censure any, Concerning mutual forbearance, and the equity thereof.
although I cannot but assert this to be a fundamental truth without which no
Commonwealth can stand: That Protectio trahit allegianciam, and that whosoever
is not desirous to perform every good work to the Society wherein he does
live, does not deserve to have a being therein, although he were a hundred
times borne in it. Birthright can give no man a just title to be an enemy to
the Society wherein he has a being; now he is an enemy to every Society, who
is not desirous to perform every good work toward it; But God forbid that any
who has what to say when called to it, should not be heard in the Society
where he lives and is borne. It has been my earnest work to entreat men to
say in a Christian way that which they had to say, and I have used, all the
industry I could to bring them without partiality to it, that by the things
wherein we agree, we might come to a further light in that wherein we agree
not; but I have reaped nothing almost but jealousies, reproaches and slanders
for my pains; and have been worse rejected here, even by men otherwise Godly,
then I have been in Foreign parts amongst the stiffest Lutherans. Yet I hope
that shall never make me weary in well doing, or vary from the Rule, whereby,
as I am taught, to judge none before the time; till the secrets of hearts, and
hidden designs of self-interest be opened; So I hope the Lord will enable me
never to shut the Bowels of pity and compassion; or to restrain the affection
of prayer and supplication against any, whom I shall perceive to be in any
dangerous error and ignorance; and the like favor I shall also desire you to
afford unto me when you look upon me in my frailtys; and if we would be but
truly careful thus to bear one another burdens, rather then to complain and
murmur against each other, or to misrepresent each other to the public, we
should find more comfort in our way then now we do. I shall close with you in
your last request. The Lord give us a right understanding in all things, and
grace to follow the things which we understand, without partiality; which is
the upright endeavor,

of your Servant in Christ. Joh. Dury.
From my Study this 24. May 1650.
Reader, there is lately come out these several Books of Mr. Duries.
1. A Case of Conscience concerning Ministers meddling with State-matters, in
and out of their Sermons.

2. Considerations concerning the present Engagement.

3. Just Reproposal to humble proposals.

4. His vindication of himself.

5. Objections against the Engagement answered.

FINIS.

