A Perfect NARRATIVE Of the whole Proceedings of the High Court of Justice IN
THE Trial of the King in Westminster Hall, on Saturday the 20. and Monday the
22. of this instant January.

With the several Speeches of the King, Lord President, and Solicitor General.

Published by Authority to prevent false and impertinent Relations.

To these Proceedings of the Trial of the King, I say, Imprimatur,

Gilbert Mabbot.



London, Printed for John Playford, and are to be sold at his shop in the Inner
Temple. Jan. 23. 1648.

Reader,
THere being some impertinent and imperfect Narratives of these two days
Proceedings of the High Court of Justice, concerning the King, spread abroad, J
have for the greater satisfaction of the Nation in their Proceedings, thought
fit (by leave of Authority) to publish this subsequent Relation and Account.

C. W.

A perfect NARRATIVE of the whole PROCEEDINGS OF THE High Court of Justice in
the Trial of the King in West-minister Hall. Saturday, Jan. 20. 1648.
AT the high Court of Justice sitting in the great Hall at Westminster,
Sergeant Bradshaw Lord Predsient, about 70. Members present, [O yes] made,
Silence commanded.

The Act of the Commons in Parliment (for the Trial of the King) was read,
after the Court was called, and each Member rising up as he was called.

The King came into the Court (with his Hat on) the Sergeant ushered him in
with the Mace, Col. Hacker, and about thirty Officers and Gentlemen more, came
as his Guard.

Lord President. Charles Stuart King of England, the Commons of England,
assembled in Parliament, being sensible of the great Calamities that have been
brought upon this Nation, and of the innocent Blood that has been shed in this
Nation, which are referred to you as the Author of it, and according to that
duty which they owe to God, to the Nation, and to themselves; and according to
that Power and Fundamental. Trust that is reposed in them by the People, have
constituted this high Court of Justice, before which you are now brought, and
you are to hear your Charge, upon which the Court will proceed.


Mr Cook Solicitor General. My Lord, in behalf of the Commons of England, and
of all the people thereof, I do accuse Charles Stuart, here present, of high
Treason, and high Misdemeanors; and I do, in the name of the Commons of
England, desire the Charge may be read unto him.


The King. Hold a little.


Lord President. Sir, the Court commands the Charge to be read, if you have any
thing to say afterward, you may be heard.

The Charge read.

The King smiled often during the time, especially at these words, Tyrant,
Traitor, Murderer and Public Enemy of the Common wealth.


Lord President. Sir, you have now heard your Charge read, containing such
matter as appears in it; you find, That in the close of it, it is prayed to
the Court, in the behalf of the Commons of England, that you answer to your
Charge. The Court expects your Answer.


The King. I would know by what power I am called hither; I was not long ago in
the Isle of Wight, how I came there, is a longer story then I think is fit at
this time for me to speak of; but there I entered into a Treaty with both
Houses of Parliament with as much public faith as its possible to be had of
any people in the world. I treated there with a number of Honorable Lords and
Gentlemen, and treated honestly and uprightly, I cannot say but they did very
nobly with me, we were upon a conclusion of the Treaty. Now I would know by
what Authority, I mean, lawful; there are many unlawful Authorities in the
world, Thieves and Robbers by the high ways; but I would know by what Authority
I was brought from thence, and carried from place to place, (and I know not
what) and when I know what lawful Authority, I shall answer, Remember I am your
King, your lawful King, and what sins you bring upon your heads, and the
Judgment of God upon this Land, think well upon it, I say, think well upon it,
before you go further from one sin to a greater, therefore let me know by what
lawful Authority I am seated here, and I shall not be unwilling to answer; in
the mean time I shall not betray my Trust; I have a Trust committed to me by
God, by old and lawful descent, I will not betray it to answer to a new
unlawful Authority, therefore resolve me that, and you shall hear more of me.


Lord President. If you had been pleased to have observed what was hinted to
you, by the Court, at your first coming hither, you would have known by what
Authority; which Authority requires you in the name of the People of England,
of which you are Elected King, to answer them.


The King. No Sir, I deny that.


Lord President. If you acknowledge not the Authority of the Court, they must
proceed.


The King. I do tell them so, England was never an Elective Kingdom, but an
Hereditary Kingdom for near these thousand years; therefore let me know by what
Authority I am called hither; I do stand more for the Liberty of my people then
any here that come to be my pretended Judges; and therefore let the know by
what Lawful Authority I am seated here, and I will answer it, otherwise I will
not answer it.


Lord President. Sir, how really you have managed your Trust, is known; your
way of answer is to interrogate the Court which beseems not you in this
condition. You have been told of it twice or thrice.


The King. Here is a Gentleman, Lieut. Col. Cobbet (ask him) if he did not
bring me from the Isle of wight by force? I do not come here as submitting to
the Court; I will stand as much for the Privilege of the House of Commons,
rightly understood, as any man here whatsoever. I see no House of Lords here
that may constitute a Parliament, and (the King too) should have been. Is this
the bringing of the King to his Parliament? Is this the bringing an end to the
Treaty in the public faith of the world? Let me see a legal Authority
warranted by the Would of God the Scriptures, or warranted by the Constitutions
of the Kingdom and I will answer.


Lord President. Sir, You have propounded a Question, and have been answered;
seeing you will not answer, the Court will consider how to proceed, inthe mean
time, those that brought you hither are to take charge of you back again.

The Court desires to know, whether this be all the Answer you will give, or no.


The KING. Sir, I desire that you would give me, and all the world,
satisfaction in this; let me tell you, it is not a slight thing you are about.
I am sworn to keep the Peace by that duty I owe to GOD and my Country, and I
will do it to the last breath of my body, and therefore you shall do well to
satisfy first GOD, and then the Country, by what Authority you do it, if you
do it by a usurped Authority, you cannot answer it. There is a GOD in Heaven
that will call you, and all that give you power, to account; Satisfy me in
that, and I will answer, otherwise I betray my Trust, and the Liberties of the
People, and therefore think of that, and then I shall be willing. For I do
avow, That it is a great sin to withstand lawful Authority, as it is to submit
to a Tyrannical, or any other ways unsawful Authority, and therefore satisfy
me that, and you shall receive my answer.


Lord President. The Court expects you should give them a final Answer, their
purpose is to adjourn till Monday next, if you do not satisfy your self,
though we do tell you our Authority, we are satisfied with our Authority, and
it is upon Gods Authority and the Kingdoms, and that Peace you speak of will be
kept in the doing of Justice, and that's our present Work.


The King. For answer let me tell you, You have shown no lawful Authority to
satisfy any reasonable man.


Lord President. That is in your apprehension, we are satisfied that are your
Judges.


The King. It Is not my apprehension, nor yours neither, (that ought to decide
it.)


Lord President. The Court has heard you, and you are to be desposed of as
they have commanded.

The Court adjourns to the painted Chamber on Monday at 10. of the clock in the
forenoon, and thence hither.

It is to be observed,

That as the Charge was reading against the King, the head of his staff fell
off, which he wondered at, and seeing none to take it up, he stoops for it
himself.

As the King went away facing the Court, said, I do not fear that, (meaning the
sword.) The people in the Hall as he went down the stairs cried out, some, God
save the King, and most for Justice.


At the high Court of Justice sitting in Westminster Hall, Monday January 22.
1648.
O Yes made. Silence commanded. The Court called and answered to their names.

Silence commanded upon pain of imprisonment, and the Captain of the Guard to
apprehend all such as make disturbance.

Upon the Kings coming in a shout was made.

Command given by the Court to the Captain of the Guard to fetch and take into
his custody those who make any disturbance.

Mr. Solicitor. May it please your Lordship, my Lord President,

I did at the last Court in the behalf of the Commons of England, exhibit and
give into this Court a Charge of high Treason, and other high Crimes against
the Prisoner at the Bar, whereof I do accuse him in the name of the People of
England, and the Charge was read unto him, and his Answer required. My Lord, He
was not then dleased to give an Answer, but instead of answering, did there
dispute the authority of this high Court. My humble Motion to this high Court
in behalf of the Kingdom of England is, That the Prisoner may be directed to
make a postive Answer, either by way of Confession, or Negation; which if he
shall refuse to do, That the matter of Charge may be taken pro confesso, and
the Court may proceed according to justice.


Lord President. Sir, You may remember at the last Court you were told the
occasion of your being brought hither, and you heard a Charge read against you
containing a charge of high Treason and other high crimes against this Realm
of England; you heard likewise, that it was prayed in the behalf of the People,
that you should give an Answer to that Charge, that thereupon such proceedings
might be had as should be agreeable to justice; you were then pleased to make
some scruples concerning the Authority of this Court, and knew not not by what
authority you were brought hither; you did diverse times propound your
Questions, and were as often answered, That it was by authority of the Commons
of England assembled in Parliament, that did think fit to call you to Account
for those high and capital Misdemeanors wherewith you were then charged.
Since that the Court has taken into Consideration what you then said, they are
fully satisfied with their own authority, and they hold it fit you should
stand satisfied with it too; and they do require it, that you do give a
positive and particular answer to this charge that is exhibited against you;
they do expect you should either confess or deny it; if you deny, it is
offered in the behalf of the Kingdom to be made good against you; their
authority they do avow to the whole world, that the whole Kingdom are to rest
satisfied in, and you are to rest satisfied with it, and therefore you are to
lose no more time, but to give a positive answer thereunto.


The King. When I was here last, it is very true, I made that Question, and
truly if it were only my own particular case, I would have satisfied my self
with the Protestation I made the last time I was here against the legality of
this Court, and that a King cannot be tried by any Superior Jurisdiction on
Earth; but it is not my case alone, it is the freedom and the liberty of the
People of England, and do you pretend what you will, I stand more for their
Liberties. For if Power without Law may make Laws, may alter the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom, I do not know what subject he is in England, that can be
sure of his life or any thing that he calls his own; therefore when that I
came here, I did expect particular reasons to know by what Law, what Authority
you did proceed against me here, and therefore I am a little to seek what to
say to you in this particular, because the Affirmative is to be proved, the
Negative often is very hard to do: but since I cannot persuade you to do it, I
shall tell you my Reasons as short as I can.

My Reasons why in Conscience and the duty I owe to God first, and my People
next, for the preservation of their lives, Liberties and Estates; I conceive I
cannot answer this, till I be satisfied of the legality of it.

All proceedings against any man whatsoever.


Lord President. Sir, I must interrupt you, which I would not do, but that what
you do is not agreeable to the proceedings of any Court of Justice, you are
about to enter into Argument, and dispute concerning the Authority of this
Court, before whom you appear as a prisoner, and are charged as an high
Delinquent; if you take upon you to dispute the Authority of the Court we may
not do it, nor will any Court give way unto it, you are to submit unto it, you
are to give a punctual and direct answer, whether you will answer your Charge
or no, and what your answer is.


The King. Sir, by your favor, I do not know the forms of Law, I do know Law
and Reason, though I am no Lawyer professed, but I know as much Law as any
Gentleman in England; and therefore (under favor) I do plead for the Liberties
of the people of England more then you do, and therefore if I should impose a
belief upon any man without reasons given for it, it were unreasonable, but I
must tell you, that that reason that I have as thus informed I cannot yield
unto it.


Lord President. Sir, I must interrupt you, you may not be permitted, you speak
of Law and reason, it is fit there should be Law and reason, and there is both
against you. Sir, the Vote of the Commons of England assembled in Parliament,
it is the reason of the Kingdom, and they are these that have given to that
Law, according to which you should have rulid and reigned: Sir, you are not to
dispute our Authority, you are told it again by the Court. Sir, it will be
taken notice of, that you stand in contempt of the Court, and your contempt
will be recorded accordingly.


The King. I do not know how a King can be a Delinquent, but by any Law that
ever I heard of, all men (Delinquents or what you will) let me tell you they
may put in Demurrers against any proceeding as legal, and I do demand that,
and demand to be heard with my Reasons, if you deny that, you deny Reason.


Lord President. Sir, you have offered something to the Court, I shall speak
something unto you the sense of the Court. Sir, neither you nor any man are
permitted to dispute that point, you are concluded, you may not demurre the
Jurisdiction of the Court, if you do, I must let you know, that they overruled
your Demurrer, they sit here by the Authority of the Commons of England, and
all your Predecessors, and you are responsible to them.


The King. I deny that, show me one president.


Lord President. Sir, you ought not to interrupt while the Court is speaking to
you, this point is not to be debated by you, neither will the Court permit you
to do it, if you offer it by way of Demurrer to the Jurisdiction of the Court,
they have considered of their Jurisdiction, they do affir me their own
Jurisdiction.


The King. I say Sir, by your favor, that the Commons of England was never a
Court of Judicature, I would know how they came to be so.


Lord President. Sir, You are not to be permitted to go on in that speech and
these discourses.

Then the Clerk of the Court read as follows.


Charles Stuart King of England, You have been accused on the behalf of the
People of England of high Treason and other high Crimes; the Court have
determined that you ought to answer the same.


The King. I will answer the same so soon as I know by what authority you do
this.


Lord President. If this be all that you will say, then Gentlemen you that
brought the Prisoner hither, take charge of him back again.


The King. I do require that I may give in my Reasons why I do not answer, and
give me time for that.


Lord President. Sir, It Is not for Prisoners to require.


The King. Prisoners? Sir, I am not an ordinary Prisoner.


Lord President. The Court has considered of their jurisdiction, and they have
already affirmed their jurisdiction; if you will not answer, we shall give
order to record your default.


The King. You never heard my Reason yet.


Lord President. Sir, Your Reasons are not to be heard against the highest
Jurisdiction.


The King. Show me that Jurisdiction where Reason is not to be heard.


Lord President. Sir, We show it you here, the Commons of England; and the next
time you are brought you will know more of the pleasure of the Court; and, it
may be, their final determination.


The King. Show me where ever the House of Commons was a Court of Judicature of
that kind.


Lord President. Sergeant, Take away the Prisoner.


The King. Well Sir, Remember that the King is not suffered to give in his
Reasons for the Liberty and Freedom of all his Subjects.


Lord President. Sir, You are not to have liberty to use his language; How
great a friend you have been to the Laws and Liberties of the People, let all
England and the world judge.


The King. Sir, under favor it was the Liberty, Freedom, and Laws of the
subject that ever I took defended my self with Arms, I never took up. Arms
against the People, but for the Laws.


Lord President. The Command of the Court must be obeyed; no answer will be
given to the Charge.


The King. Well Sir.

And so was guarded forth to Sir Robert Cottons house.

Then the Court adjourned to the Painted Chamber on Tuesday at twelve a clock,
and from thence they intend to adjourne to Westminster Hall, at which time all
persons concerned are to give their attendance.


FINIS.

