Seasonable Observations ON A LATE BOOK INTITVLED A System of the Law: As it
was contrived and published by the Committee appointed for Regulation: So far
as it relates to the high Court of Chancery, and the Fees and proceedings
thereof: Wherein several Proposals made by the said Committee, are held unsafe
and inconvenient; some are approved of, and illustrated; and others supplied
wherein the same are conceived defective: With further Proposals, for the
better regulation of the said Court, and more speedy and cheap hearing of
Causes.

And an exact TABLE. 1. Containing the Fees now paid to the grand Officers and
Patentees. 2. How much will satisfy the true Laborers. 3. What will be saved
thereby to all Suitors in the said Court.


Unto which is likewise annexed, that memorable Case put by the late King
James, to the then learned Judges of the Land, touching the power and
Jurisdiction of the said Court; for relieving Complainants after Judgments
given in the Courts of Common Law; And how far the Statutes of Praemunire do
extend to restrain the said Court therein: With the Reasons and Resolutions of
the said Judges thereupon: Tendered to the consideration of the Supreme
Authority: And published for the general good and information of all
Practitioners and Suitors in the said Court.

By PHILOSTRATUS PHILODEMIUS.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. and are to sold by Edw. Dod, and Nath. Ekins, at the
Gun in Ivie-Lane. 1653.

TO THE Supreme Authority OF THE NATION.
Right Honorable,
THat which the Air is in the Elementary world, the Sun in the Celestial, the
Soul in the intelligible; Law and Justice are the same in the Civil; its the
Air which the oppressed wish to breath in, the Sun which dispelleth the Clouds,
the Soul which breaths life to all; so the Execution of Laws and
Administration of Justice, is the peoples peace, the distressed man's Patron,
the high Protector of Lives, Liberties, and Estates, and all that is dear and
near unto man. The regulating the exorbitant Fees, impertinent Offices, and
tedious proceedings in Courts of Law and equity, has been the earnest and
frequent desires of this Nation, as a means to satisfy the longing
expectations of the people, and procure a great measure of peace and quiet
thereby: To which end, the late Parliament have appointed select persons who
have prepared several printed Proposals, Entitled, The System of the Law,
which coming to the hands of several persons of approved knowledge and
experience in the proceedings of the high Court of Chancery, after serious
consideration had of so much of the said System as concern the said Court; It
is humbly conceived, that as there be several good and wholesome Proposals
therein offered, which are hereby approved of, and illustrated; so there are
others not so safe and convenient to be established by Public Authority, and
other things omitted, which are conceived material to be added, amongst which
is the small provision made for the Laborers therein, that it will not afford
persons of value fit for Trust a reasonable subsistence, whereby the dignity of
the Court will be ecclipsed, and the people of the Nation injured by the
undertakings of mean and ignorant Officers and Clerks. Wherefore, the Author
could do no less out of his affection to the public welfare of the Nation, and
the debt he owes to his native Country as a member of this Commonwealth,
(laying hold on the just Liberty held forth to others the free people of this
Nation in Cases of like nature,) then communicate the same to public view, and
especially to the consideration of the Supreme Authority, for further to be
done therein, as they in their grave wisdoms shall think meet, hoping that
something may therein appear worthy of acceptance for their better information
of the Authority of the said Court and proceedings thereof, and the means to
regulate the same; which is so ancient, honorable, and so essentially good in
it self, and so necessary for the well government of this Nation, that all the
Changes of Goverments since William the Conqueror's time, and long before, have
never produced an alteration of the just Power and Jurisdiction of the said
Court, but rather an enlargement thereof; the same being of such Antiquity,
that its prescription is as Ancient as the very Nation, which custom is of such
high Authority, that it cannot justly be altered or changed, but by an Act of a
Free and Legal Parliament, being next unto it in power and preheminency, and is
called Officina justitiae and vericatis: Certain it is, that both the British
and Saxon Kings had their Courts of Chancery, being the only Courts out of
which all Original Writs, and Commissions (whereupon other Courts do ground
their proceedings) are issued forth: Edward the Confessor, and Etheldred, who
began his reign Anno 978. had their Chancellors; King Edgar, and Athelstain
theirs: And for further authority, that there was a Court of Chancery beyond
the antiquity of those times, The Mirror, cap. 1. sect. 3. and cap. 5. sect.
says, Le primier Constitutions ordenus per les viels voys, etc. ordein fuit
qui cheseun eyt del Chancery le Roy brief remedial a son plaint sans
difficulty: Hereby it appears, that in the time of King Alfred, Grandfather to
Athelstain, who reigned Anno 872. there was a Court of Chancery, out of which
remediel Writs issued, which Court was not then newly created, but in esse long
before. And though Polydor Virgil affirms this Court to come in with the
Conquest, perperam erravit; vide Cook 4 par. Inst. de Jurisd. Cur. And this
Court is of such use to the Commonwealth, for Discovery of Fraud,
Circumvention, breach of Trust, for secreting and concealing of Estates,
forging of Deeds, Evidences, and Writings, preservation of the Testimony of
aged Witnesses, regulating and restraining the strict rigor of the Common Law
(called summum jus, or jus subtle as some interpret it) and for supply of
Relief in a just and equitable way, wherein the Common Law is deficient; And
for diverse other good ends and public advantages, etc. that the Commonwealth
cannot well subsist without it; insomuch that not any of our neighboring
Nations are without this Court, being a continual curb and awe to the corrupt
Consciences of men who otherwise cannot be restrained by any general Rules or
Maxims of Law, which may prove short and defective to cure every disease; So
that the care and wisdom of all former Ages have been such, that as much as in
them lay, they left no means unattempted to provide redress and remedies for
the People, suitable to the nature of their complaints. And as hard it was for
Galen to prescribe Medicines to cure all sorts of diseases, as it is for any
Governors or Magistrates to establish rules of Law for relief of all sorts of
Cases. And therefore as God does dispose his Government by Justice and Mercy,
whereof notwithstanding Mercy has the supreme place in the Lords Tabernacle,
as that which was put above upon the Ark, wherein were the two Tables of stone,
in which the Law was written: To which S. James alluding (James 2.13.) says,
That Mercy triumphs over Judgment: So the Princes and Governors of Nations,
in imitation to that heavenly representation, have appointed two supreme
States, The one of Justice, wherein nothing but the strict Letter of the Law is
observed; The other of Equity, wherein the rigor of the Law is tempered with
lenity, which is nothing else but Mercy qualifying the sharpness of Justice:
Ipsae enim leges cupiunt ut jure regantur, id est, ut illi facili ac benigna
interpretatione temperentur: Equity does diminish or add to the letter of the
strictest Law, as times and necessities require, and is defined by Aristotle to
be Correctio legis generatim latae qua part deficit. Perionius terms it
Correctio quaedam legi adhibita quia ab ea abest aliquid propter generalem sine
exceptione comprehensionem. The sense of both interpretations being one and the
same, that Equity is a Restriction of the rigor of the Law, and so useful in
the well government of the Nation, that without our Courts of Equity, the Common
Law may be termed Severity, and the strict rigor thereof totally destructive
to the People. But since corruption has crept into this Court, and the usual
delay, together with the excessive Fees, blemished the primitive luster thereof;
the grave Counselors and Patriots of these times, like wise Chirurgions,
intend the preservation of the body by amputation of some putrid members, Ne
pars sincera trahatur; for which purpose these ensuing Observations, etc. are
humbly represented to those in Supreme Authority, not in opposition to their
judicial proceedings therein, nor as a rule to frame and square their actions
by, in managing thereof, but as a matter useful (as is humbly conceived) for
avoiding the tediousness of proceedings, the impertinency of some Officers, and
the exorbitancy of excessive Fees of that Court, which being regulated, You the
Heroes of our times may be truly said to have erected a Trophie to Justice, and
to have established Righteousness in the Nation.

Acts of Justice and Piety will make you glorious in the memory of men, whiles
others who prepare Altars and Tables to Fortune, (as says the Prophet Isaiah)
have built on the quicksands of imaginary greatness, which serve them for no
other purpose but to measure their own fall. God has made you (the great
Governors of this Nation) to read the Decrees of your good success written as
it were with the rays of your own Justice and Piety: By how much the more you
are affected to this, by so much the more the happy issue of your affairs shall
crown your desires. You have seen your Battails end in Bays, and the thorns of
your travails spring up to a peaceable and well framed Gevernment, wherein God
has made you amongst men as Mountains over Valleys. Be then Mountains of
perfumes, of which Solomon speaks in Cant. and not the Hills of Osee, full of
snares and gins, rigorous, harsh, and strict in Government: Since God has
elevated you as Cliffs above the Sea, let your Laws be as Watch-Towers, not
Rocks to shipwreck the People. If Suns, let your Laws be as the Light to the
blind, not Gomets to pour down Malignity. Whilst thus you temper Mercy and
Justice, Equity and Law together, with thoughts fixed on Judgment and
Righteousness, may propitious Heaven so prosper your Designs, That the greatest
may have matter to imitate, and the whole Nation to admire your Justice and
Mercy, which is the Authors fervent Prayer,

Philostratus Philodemius.

SECT. I.
BE it Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That the Court of
Chancery shall hear and determine all Causes of Equity in one certain Public
place and not elsewhere; And that there shall be in the said Court a Chief Clerk
to be chosen from time to time by (...) who shall from and after (...) make
forth all Process, and all Commissions and other things issuing out of the said
Court, and shall take the Returns, and File them, and also all Bills, Answers,
Pleadings and Depositions in the said Court; and Enter and keep all the Records
thereof, and matters Filed as aforesaid there, and shall have such and so many
under-Clerks for writing and dispatching Business under him as shall be allowed
and appointed by the Judges of the said Court from time to time, who shall
administer an Oath both to the Chief Clerk and under Clerks to deal faithfully
and uncorruptly in their Places, and out of the Fee payable to the Chief Clerk,
shall appoint how much the under Clerks shall have for their pains; which Chief
Clerk and under Clerks shall constantly attend and execute their Places in
person and not by Deputy, and upon the a^oidance of the Chier Clerks place, the
under-Clerks shall from time to time succeed according to their Antiquity, if
they be not found incapable of executing the said Office; And all the Records
and Matters Filed on Record in the said Court shall from and after (...) be in
the custody of the Chief Clerk, who is thereby appointed to take the same into
his Charge.

Observation 1.
THat to confine the Court of Chancery to hear and Determine all Causes of
Equity in one certain public Place, and not elsewhere, may prove a great
prejudice and inconveniency both to the Court and the People, for that it may
so fall out by sickness, fire, war or other casualties, that it is impossible
for the Lords Commissioners or others, appointed Judges there, to continue
their sitting in the same place allotted for that purpose. And in such cases
before they can sit in a more safe and convenient place, there must be an Act
to authorize them by appointing that place which by the casualty aforesaid may
be the occasion of several removals from place to place, and of several Acts
for that purpose. In the Interval whereof there must certainly be a delay and
fayler of Justice as to the benefit of the Court held forth to the People of
this Nation: And therefore it has been the wisdom of former Ages (in reference
to their place of sitting) to leave it to the discretion of the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Keeper and Lords Commissioners for the time being, to appoint
the most convenient places as occasion required for the better access of the
People to make their Complaints and Addresses; It being humbly conceived that
not the formality of the place, but its convenience, nor the manner but the
matter of Equity and Right there Administered ought to be first preferred, and
chiefly endeavored by all that are concerned therein, To appoint one chief
Clerk for the performing of all the things contained in this Section relating
to his place, being a Work formerly done by the six Clerks, and their under
Clerks in Chancery, the Masters, Deputy and Clerks of the Sub-poena Office and
the Mr. Deputy, and Clerks of the Affidavit Office, being in all above 150.
persons, may prove a great inconveniency to the People of this Nation for these
Reasons.

1. It being conceived impossible for one Clerk to discharge the same with that
Care and Expedition as the nature of the place requires; for that all the
number of Bills, Answers, Replications, and other pleadings and proceedings,
and other things formerly transacted by 6. coming to the hands of one, and the
entry thereof being material in point of time, Those delays and mistakes
incident thereto may prove a great prejudice to the People.

2. That by mistakes, neglects, and other errors in the Filing and Entering of
Pleadings, and other proceedings in the said Court, relating to the Practical
part thereof, there must consequently arise many Differences betwixt the
Parties, Plantiffs and Defendants, and the Clerks on both sides; and these
Differences must necessarily be determined by that one chief Clerk mentioned in
this Section.

And in such a Case, whether or no it is likely there will be so just, regular,
and indifferent Report made of the matters to him referred (especially if the
Error relates to himself or his under Clerks by mis-entring or not entering,
which frequently must fall out) as when there are 3. or more superintendent
Clerks entrusted therein. And how is it possible for one Clerk personally to
attend his Office and the Court, and File all Pleadings, take all Affidavits,
and make all Sub-poena's; and yet sit to hear and certify all matters to him
referred, and to do all those things by himself personally without Deputy, with
that care, expedition, uprightness and indifferency as the nature and duty of
his place requires, is left to the consideration of all rational men.

3. Whether such a trust vested in one person (be he never so able and honest)
be not too great and large a power to the indangering of the Peoples Causes,
and a snare laid for an honest man in consequence of time to act contrary to
safe and wholesome principles; For the wisdom of all former Ages was such, that
they thought not fit to make one person sole Judge of any one of the Courts of
Westminster, to prevent corruption, partiality, or other indirect proceedings;
for two is better then one, and three may do more then both: And as there are
three Lords Commissioners appointed Judges of the Court, why it may not prove
more safe, expeditions and convenient to the People to have three persons to
enter all pleadings and keep all Records, and to certify all proceedings of
the Office, and make all reports and references, etc. is likewise left to
consideration; it being far more easy and probable that one may be mistaken or
corrupted then three. And the reducing of six to three will (as is conceived)
much ease the People in point of Fees, and give them more satisfaction and
assurance of a regular and ust proceeding, then if reduced from six to one, as
is proposed by this Section.

4. Whereas it is proposed by this Section, that the chief Clerk shall have
such and so many under Clerks for writing and dispatching of Business under him
as shall be allowed by the Judges of the Court, who are also to ascertain what
they shall receive for their pains out of the Fees of the chief Clerk.

It is desired to be considered, whether this course does not tend to the
Engrossing and Monopolizing the Profit and Fees received in the said Office
into the hands of one, and to make him rich by impoverishing many; for
certainly when the Proposers of this Act did direct, that the Fees of the under
Clerks should be allowed by the Judges of the Court out of the Fees of the
chief Clerk, they did forget that in their Table of Fees they took upon them to
ascertain what the under Clerk shall have for his pains, and what the chief
Clerk for his, which are so unproportionable and unsuitable to their respective
places and employments, That the Labourer ( viz. the under Clerk) who is worthy
of his hire, shall not be able to live by his labor; and the chief Clerk (who
takes the least pains and care) shall suck the fruits of other men's labors.
And whereas formerly, above 100. Clerks daily labored to maintain six (yet
upon some more honorable considerable conditions then is proposed by the Table
of Fees made by the Proposers) Now they must labor to maintain one upon such
poor inferior terms, that no Clerk of any parts or abilities to undertake
Business will own such an unworthy beggarly employment; so that the chief Clerk
must be contented with Brewers-Clerks, Kitchen Boys, or some such persons to
undertake the difpatch of the Peoples Business. And this one chief Clerk
according to the Table of Fees made by the Proposers will gain twice as much by
his place as any one of the present six Clerks do; which can easily be made
apparent by those that sufficiently know the nature and benefit of their
employments.

SECT. II.
THat there shall be such, and so many Attorneys of the said Court as the
Judges thereof shall from time to time appoint, who shall take the like oath as
Attorneys at the Common Law, and until such appointment be made, the six
Clerks and Clerks of the Pettibag, and the under Clerks to the Clerks in their
Office, and to the Clerks in the Pettibag in their Office shall be Attorneys of
the said Court.

Observation 2.
What the Proposers mean by Attorneys of the Court is not discovered by this
Section: But I find in the Table of Fees something allowed to them, being 10.
s. and no more for what they are to do in a whole Cause; viz. 3. s. 4. d. for
Filing a Bill, or entering an appearance 3. s. 4. d. at joining Issue and 3. s.
4. d. at hearing. It is humbly conceived, the Proposers did deal discreetly in
not prescribing what they are to do for this 10. s. and also in leaving it to
the Judges to appoint how many of them shall be allotted for this purpose; for
it may so fall out that as the Proposers would have but one chief Clerk; so
they will have but two Attorneys; and then an Attorneys place will be of more
benefit then any one of the best Colonels pay in all the Army; But if they
intend there shall be so many Attorneys in the Court as will discharge the
Office and Duty of Attorneys, viz. To draw their Pleadings, Breviats, and other
things needful and fit to be perused by Council, and to direct and advise them
in all their proceedings. It is not likely that they will find any Attorney
qualified for that place, that will undertake that employment for ten shillings
in a whole Cause.

And whereas it is proposed. That Clerks and Attorneys should take Oaths for
the discharge of their respective places; It is much admired that in those
times wherein so many of the Honest Conscientious People of this Nation have
written and declared against Oaths ex Officio, as illegal, arbitrary and
unwarrantable, should go about now to impose the same anew. And it were well
that no Sheriffs or other Officers were forced to take such Oaths, since few or
none of them do or can perform the same according to the Letter and purport
thereof, which may occasion a general inundation of perjury, with which the
Land already mourns: The many contradictory Oaths, and other unperformed Vows
and Oaths which have been taken in this Nation since the beginning of these
unhappy Wars (yet so little observed) being one of the grand sins of the
Nation; insomuch that we have great cause to fear that it will produce a more
fearful National Judgment and Punishment on this Land then has hitherto
befallen the Inhabitants thereof.

SECT. III.
THat the process of Appearance in the said Court of Chancery shall be by
Summons in this form and no otherwise.

The Keepers of the Liberties of England by Authority of Parliament to A. B. of
C. in the County of D. We command you to satisfy A. D. of (...) the Complaint
in his Bill, a Copy whereof we send you, or within 15. days after notice
thereof, to appear and answer the same: Given under the Great Seal of England
the (...) day of (...) And the name of the party that made the same, and the
true party that sued it forth, or the Attorneys name shall be written under.

Observation 3.
Against this there is no Exception made by the Author, only he desires it may
be considered whether the style of the Writ be so proper to be now used as is
proposed by this Section.

SECT. IV.
THat a Plaintiff may put the names of all Defendants into one Writ of Summons,
and that all other Process of the said Court shall be sealed open, and the
showing the Summons where the Defendant is present, and leaving a fair Copy
thereof with him or her, and a Copy of the Summens and Bill at his or her
habitation with some person there (if any be to be found) or else at the door
of the House, if no person be there to be found, shall be a good service on
that Defendant: And the party serving the same shall endorse the Summons, with
the time and manner of service, and make oath thereof before some Justice of
Peace, or Master of Chancery, and return it whence it issued; and the Bill
shall be duly filed at, or before the Return of the Summons.

Observation 4.
To give way for Plaintiffs to put the names of all Defendants into one Writ,
has been formerly found inconvenient, because thereby litigious persons, and
especially Paupers would take opportunity to make a multitude of Defendants out
of mere malice and vexation, and rather to wrest unjust Compositions from them,
then out of any just cause of suit, the same being too much practiced in remote
parts of this Nation, whereby many of the People to purchase their ease and
quietness, and to avoid needless trouble and charges in answering vexatious
troublesome persons, will rather give them something, then to be exposed to a
needless Suit; For prevention whereof, the Court formerly would not suffer
above three to be inserted in one Sub-poena, so that very few unless they had
some colorable cause of Suit would be at the charge of taking out of more
Sub-poena's then they had just cause so to do; And when it falls out that
Defendants cannot be personally served with Billets, or live very remote, in
such a case, the Parties Plaintiff must be unavoidably exposed to take out
several Sub-poena's, to be left at their dwelling Houses, which is accounted
good service by this System of the Proposers. The sealing of all the Process of
the Court open, was formerly certified by the Clerks in Chancery (in obedience
to the orders of the former Committee for regulating the Law) as a very
commendable course to avoid mistakes, and other inconveniences: But as to the
leaving of the Copy of the Bill with the Defendant, or at his house in his
absence at the time of service of the Sub-poena, it may prove of little use,
but rather an inconveniency and double charge; for it may so fall out that the
Plaintiff may on better advice, alter his Bill before he Files it; and who can
swear that he left a true Copy of the Plaintiffs Bill with the Defendant or at
his house before such Bill be Filed on Record, and examined with the Record by
the party that is to leave a Copy for the Defendant (without which no contempt
can issue forth against him.) And as for those that serve Subpoena's and are
employed in business of that nature, they are for the most part illiterate
persons, and Affidavits of such service may occasion many perjuries, and great
troubles, expenses and debates thereabouts; whereas if all Bills were first
Filed in the office before a Sub-poena granted (as has been ingeniously
proposed by the said Clerks, the same being agreeable to the ancient wholesome
course of the Court) and the Defendant to make his address to the Office for a
copy under Test, it is conceived to be a far more safe and regular course: And
moreover in case a Copy of a Bill be left with the Defendant or at his house at
service of a Sub-poena before the Defendant will repair to Counsel to draw his
Answer, he will in all likelihood examine it with the Record it self, and have
it under Test, all which does but increase labor and expense, and loss of
time; for otherwise he does but answer an uncertain matter, or an individuum
vagum; for it may so fall out that the Record and Copy left at Service may much
differ, and one word or syllable does cause a great alteration; And if this
course of delivering Copies of Bills, Answers and Pleadings be intended to save
charges to both parties, a reasonable abatement of the present Fees would in
all likelihood give the Client far more satisfaction then this new invented
course, the consequence whereof may probably prove very fatal and prejudicial
both to the Plaintiff and Defendant.

SECT. V.
THat from and after the establishing of Country Registers, any person that
exhibits a Suit in equity for any Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
shall not have the benefit of any Decree to be made touching the same, as
against any purchaser, or other claiming interest in, or profit out of the same
for valuable consideration: But from the time of the entering of such his Claim,
Suit, or Decree in the Registry where the same do lie.

Observation 5.
To this the Author makes no exception, so the People be not debarred of the
benefit of Suit already commenced, or to be commenced in this Court before the
establishment of Country Registers, and touching precedent encumbrances.

SECT. VI.
THat the Defendant being duly served, and not appearing shall forfeit 40. s.
to the Plaintiff, and 20. s. to the Commonwealth; and Process shall be made
forth, directed to the Sheriff, Coroner, or such other person as the Plaintiff
shall name to attach the Defendant by Body, Lands, and Goods, to enforce him to
appear, and answer returnable at such time as the Plaintiff shall desire, which
Process shall not be executed, or being executed shall be discharged if the
Defendant pay the aforesaid forfeitures, and charge of the Process; and under
his hand on the backside of the said Process, Declare that he will appear
within the Return thereof, and within eight days after make his Defense, or
otherwise make Oath before the Sheriff or Coroner, that he had no notice of the
said Summons, with such Declaration to appear and Answer, as aforesaid; and
such Process either executed, or thus endorsed or where it cannot be executed,
shall at the return day be returned whence it issued, and be there filed: And
in case the body cannot be attached, and Issues be returned upon Lands or
Goods, the same shall be to the value of four pounds, which shall be forseited
for not appearing, one half to the Commonwealth, the other half to the
Plaintiff.

Observation 6.
That the Course prescribed in this Section for an Attachment, Proclamation,
Commission of Rebellion, and Sequestration to be contained in one Process upon
a Contempt, is humbly conceived to be of dangerous consequence, and more
mischievous to the Defendant then any prejudice could formerly accrue to the
Plaintiff by the ordinary course of taking out of the usual Process of Court on
Non est inventus returned: For that on a false Affidavit that the Defendants
house was served, according to the Direction of this Section (which may by
craft be done, and yet the Defendant never hear of it until in contempt) The
Defendant being a Merchant, or other person living much on his Trade or Credit,
having occasion to travel beyond Sea, or unto some remote parts of the Nation,
may have a Sequestration come upon his estate, and his credit and trade
destroyed, and his goods wasted and mis-used before ever he shall hear it.
Those that are conversant with the practice of the Court of Chancery, cannot
but well remember, that it is frequent upon false Affidavits, or other indirect
grounds, to issue contempts against many men, who upon due examination of the
Business are often cleared: And it were a sad Case, that on a bare Affidavit or
mistake, any of the People of this Nation, being in credit and repute, should
have their Lands, Goods or Chattels attached or sequestered. And if the Course
proposed by the said Clerks for an Attachment and Proclamation to be the first
Process, contained in one Writ and Commission of Rebellion next, and then
Sequestration, it were more safe for all parties Plaintiff and Defendant; and
less danger, mischief, and inconveniency would probably accrue to both by this
course, then the way directed in this Section.

SECT. VII.
THat where the person of the Defendant shall not be attached on this process,
and in custody, and the said process endorsed, as aforesaid; and the Defendant
shall not appear on the return thereof, the like process shall be sent to all
the Shetiffs and Coroners of England, and such others as the Plaintiff shall
name; and the Defendant shall also stand disabled to prosecute any Suit in any
Court (except in Causes where issue is joined, and there only to Trial) And the
Court may also sequester the thing in demand by the Bill for the party not
appearing until appearance and answer, except it appear to the Court by oath;
that at the service of the Summons the Defendant was not within the
Commonwealth; in which case the Court may give such time for appearance and
Answer as shall be meet.

Observation 7.
This has dependence on the last Section, which being held inconvenient, this
consequently must follow as impertinent and useless, as to what is herein
before excepted against, as is humbly conceived.

SECT. VIII.
THat where any Defendant has declared under his hand, that he will appear as
aforesaid, and appears not, and is in custody for not appearing, or having
appeared, for not answering, or not answering sufficiently, the Court shall
order him to answer, and the Bill to be taken as confessed: And if within eight
days after notice of that Order, the Defendant shall not answer accordingly,
the said Cause shall be put in the Book of Hearings; and such Decree made
thereupon, as if the Defendant had confessed the Equity in the Bill; and if at
the said hearing it shall appear that the said Defendant ought to discover any
thing for the Plaintiffs relief, the Court may enforce the same by strict
restraint of the said Defendant, and Fine to be imposed by the Court, one half
thereof to the Commonwealth, the other to the Plaintiff.

Observation 8.
The Court has already sufficiently provided in matters of this Nature, who in
case the Defendant refuses to answer, will decree the Bill pro Confesso, so
that this Proposal might have been spared.

SECT. IX.
THat where a Defendant does appear, and does not answer, plead, or demur
within eight days, he shall forfeit 5. l. for the first eight days default, to
be paid to the plaintiff, and 10. l. for every eight days default after; one
half to the plaintiff, the other to the Commonwealth; And the plaintiff may
nevertheless in such case take forth such process, as before, to attach the
Defendant by Body, Land, and Goods; and in case, that his Body be attached, and
it does not appear that he has Lands and Goods sufficient to answer the
plaintiffs demands, his Body shall be kept in safe custody, until he has paid
the costs and forfeitures, and given good security to be taken in the name of
the plaintiff, and approved by the Sheriff, or such party as does Attach him to
appear at the Return of the process and answer, and not depart without leave of
the Court.

Observation 9.
By the former course of the Court, every defendant was to plead, answer, or
demur within eight days after appearance, unless the Court upon special cause
appearing by Affidavit that the defendant without sight of Writing or
Conference with the rest of the defendants, or by reason of sickness, or
remoteness of his dwelling, or some other extraordinary reason given to the
Court, who in such Cases will grant the defendant a Dedimus, or give a further
convenient time, for him to answer according to their discretions, in which
cases there is no provision made in this Section, but extraordinary rigidness
in point of time: so that this general Rule cannot be admitted in all Cases
without much prejudice to many defendants.

SECT. X.
THat any Justice of the Peace, as well as Master of the Chancery, in ordinary,
may take an Answer, upon oath, sigued with the Desendants hand or mark, and
shall deliver the same himself, or transmit the same close sealed up to the
chief Clerk, and upon such delivery made or transmitting with an oath, that it
was not altered since it was so sealed, the same shall be received and filed by
the same chief Clerk, as if it had been sworn in Court or returned by
Commission; and a Justice of Peace may also take an Affidavit, so as he put his
hand and seal thereto, and name the place of his habitation; and the same may
be made use of in any Court, as if the same had been sworn in any Court before
a Judge of the same Court, but no razure nor interlineation is to be in any
Affidavit whatsoever.

Observation 10.
To this the Author makes no exception, only desires that there may be special
care taken in Commissionating faithful and honest able Justices of the Peace,
in whom the Propositors by this System do repose in many things as much power
as is now entrusted in the Reverend Judges of the Law.

SECT. XI.
THat where the Plantiff or Defendant do cause any Pleas, Answers, Demurrers,
Replications or Rejoynders to be filed by the chief Clerk, they shall give to
the adverse party or leave with his Attorney for him a true Copy of the same,
which he shall have without Fee.

Observation 11.
The same Objection that was made Section fourth, touching Copies of Bills may
serve for this.

SECT. XII.
THat where any defendant appears upon the return of Summons or process, if the
Bill be not filed, he shall have his full costs to be taxed by the chief Clerk,
without further attendance then the next day after the return day; And not to
appear again upon Suit of the same party before the costs paid, and upon new
Summons.

Observation 12.
The Proposals of the Clerks, mentioned in Section fourth, That all Bills be
first filed (wherein the plaintiff prays process) before the same be granted,
will (as is conceived) prevent all preferring of costs, and all those delays,
unnecessary expenses, costs and trouble that formerly happened thereby, both to
the plaintiff and defendant.

SECT. XIII.
THat where any Defendant pleads or demurs, if it be in Term time, the same
shall be determined within fourteen days after it be put in; if in Vacation,
either before or in the first week of the Term; To which end the Judges of the
Court shall appoint certain times for the determining the same, not
interrupting the course of hearing other causes, and shall upon the first
hearing of a plea or demur give their positive Order herein, without a second
hearing: And where any plea or demurrer is overruled, the Defendant shall pay
40.s. to the Commonwealth for a fine, besides the plaintiffs costs.

Observation 13.
To limit a time for arguing of all pleas and demurrers (as is conceived) tends
to the forestalling the Judgment, Justice and Discretion of the Court whose
practice has been hitherto to dispatch them all in order with as much
expedition as they could; but in case there be so many entered in the Books and
Papers of pleas and demurrers that in ordinary courses, according to their
dates and entries, they cannot be heard within the 14. days; to bind the Lords
Commissioners or Judges of the Court to hear and dispatch them within that time
is conceived to be too unreasonable an obligation which (in all probability) no
Judges or Lords Commissioners will undertake to perform; And in case it fall
out that a plea or demurrer come to be argued in the absence of the plaintiff
or defendant, and by reason thereof be ordered to stand or be overruled, if
the party absent show good cause why he could not attend the arguing of such
plea or demurrer, upon payment of double costs of the Court, if it go against
him, the Court would not deny the re-arguing thereof, which was never yet held
unreasonable by any practitioner of the Court, or other unbiassed person; it
seeming unjust and unreasonable, that in case either party be surprised or
prejudiced by non-attendance, in such cases that on payment of double costs he
should not be heard therein.

SECT. XIV.
THat when a sufficient Answer is put in, the plaintiff shall reply within
eight days, and if it be insufficient, shall within eight days put in
exceptions thereto, or enter it in the Registers Books for hearing upon the
Answer; otherwise the cause to be dismissed without any motion, and the chief
Clerk to Tax full costs within the time aforesaid, and no dismission Fee to be
paid by the defendant in this cause or any other: But if the plaintiff will in
such case pay full costs and charges, he may exhibit a new Bill.

Observation 14.
This is sufficiently provided for by the general and special Rules of Court
made by the present Lords Commissioners for the great Seal of England, to the
satisfaction of all Suitors.

SECT. XV.
THat References to particular Masters of Chancery be forborne, and there shall
be from henceforth but six Masters of Chancery in ordinary, to be named by the
Parliament, and eligible at the end of every three years, and to have by the
year (...) two or three whereof shall sit day by day at some certain public
place, so long as any thing depends in reference before them, and shall have a
Register to attend them; which two Masters, or three of them at the least shall
hear and report things under their hands which come before them, always ending
one cause before they begin another.

Observation 15.
This course, if settled, would in all likelihood prove of very great use and
benefit to the People, and prevent delays and corruptions by references to
particular Masters; only this is desired to be added, that there be some
extraordinary punishment imposed as well on Masters of Chancery as on all other
persons that are Judges, who shall directly or undirectly take any bribe,
gratuity or reward in any Cause, but barely their Stipends allowed by the
State.

SECT. XVI.
THat for the orderly hearing of causes and motions in Court, and references
before Masters of Chancery, the Register shall keep two distinct Books; in one
of which, any party who has a cause ready for hearing, shall enter the same in
either of them any person who has a reference to the Masters of the Chancery
shall enter the same in the Register always in the Margin, figuring the Books
by numbers, according to the time of the entry, and the party entering every
such cause or reference subscribing his name. And there shall not hereafter be
any Motions in Court for reference of insufficient answers to Bills or
Interregatories, or touching contempts, or for scandal, or impertinency in
Bills or Answers; But any party desiring a reference in any such cause may
enter the same in the said Books of reference to be heard before the Masters.

Observation 16.
This Court of entering causes and references, is conceived of good use and
benefit to the People: The present Lords Commissioners having in a good measure
made provision therein: But it is likewise humbly proposed that all motions in
Court be likewise entered with the Registers, and the cause and end of the
motion briefly inserted; And that the same may be heard in course; which will
be a means to hear and determine Causes and Motions with equal dispatch;
whereas now eminent Lawyers and Favorites are called by their names to move,
who make sometimes three or four motions in a day, and sometimes more; whereas
other Counselors of good parts and abilities are forced to attend a week or
more before they can be heard, the Clyent in the mean time suffering in his
Cause, and the Councellor (though in no fault) suffering in his reputation. And
that for prevention of mistakes in the drawing of Orders, contrary to the
meaning and Declaration of the Court, it is humbly proposed, that the Register
do take the Order of the Court Verbatim, and read it openly, that Council on
both sides may except against and settle the same in Court, according to the
Direction and Declaration of the Court; and that the Register, on a good
penalty, presume not to draw any Order otherwise, or add to, or diminish from
his Notes without consent of parties on both sides: The Register (as the case
now stands) being in a capacity to do great hurt and prejudice to the people of
this Nation if inclined to the Cause of either party, Plaintiff or Defendant.

SECT. XVII.
THat if the Judges or Master of Chancery shall hear any cause, motion or
reference in any other order then as they are set down in the said Registers
Books, they shall forfeit 20. l. one half to the Commonwealth, the other half
to the party whose cause should be next heard in due course, and the Register
to forseit 5. l. to be paid in the moyeties as aforesaid, that shall alter the
number on the said Books, except it shall be by consent of parties, or where
neither party does attend; And then such cause to be put at the end of all the
causes then entered in the said Books respectively.

Observation 17.
Against this there is nothing excepted.

SECT. XVIII.
THat upon a second insufficient Answer, the party shall be committed and kept
within the prison until he make a sufficient Answer.

Observation 18.
Against this Proposal, there is no exception made.

SECT. XIX.
THat in case erceptions be taken to a Report, defiring the opinion of the
Court, the same shall be entered in the Book of Motion, and the party excepting,
shall deposite 3. l. with the Register; and if the Court shall judge the
exceptions void, it shall be restored to him, and the adverse party shall pay
him 40. s. costs. But if his exceptions be adjudged fri^ilous, the Commonwealth
shall have 20. s. of the 3. l. and the adverse party the residue.

Observation 19.
This course is already established by the orders of the Lords Commissioners,
saving the 20.s. forfeiture to the Commonwealth, which seems more reasonable
(as well in this case as in other places (where such forfeitures are mentioned)
to be paid to the parties concerned and aggrieved: And besides the extreating
and levying of these petty forfeitures will stand the Commonwealth in more
charge then the same will amount unto, and none will prosecute such
forfeitures, since no particular benefit accrews to the prosecutors thereby.

SECT. XX.
THat after a Defendant has once appeared, he shall perfect his Answer,
re-ioyn, and ioyn in Commission, and attend the hearing, upon notice to his
Attorney, or known Solicitor without any more process, and the Plaintiff to do
the like after he has Replied.

Observation 20.
To rejoyn, and join in Commission on notice to the Clerk and Solicitor is
approved of, but not to proceed to hearing on such notice, which may prove very
prejudicial to the party, in whose absence the cause may be heard for want of
due notice given him thereof; especially if the party be barred of a
re-hearing, as is unsafely proposed, Sect. 27.

SECT. XXI.
THat in every cause where Commissioners are prayed to examine witnesses,
duplicate Commissions shall issue at the request of the Defendant, to be
executed in such Counties as either parties shall think fit, which may be
executed in any place returnable within 60. days from the date, and return
publication to pass of course; and either party or his Attorney to be at
Liberty to enter the same into the Registers Books of hearing: And if no
Commission issue, and Witnesses be exacted in Court, the cause shall be
published within sixty days from the time of Replication; and then to be entered
with the Register as formerly; but where Commissions are to be executed beyond
the Seas, the chief Clerk shall set down a time for the return and publication,
and either party may certify at the hearing, that he could not produce his
witnesses within sixty days to be examined; so as notice was given in writing
to the other party, before publication of such witnesses names, and place of
abode, and to what points they are to be examined at the hearing. And where the
Court gives order to examine any parties witness, the same is to be done by
virtue of that order, without any Commission, and the charges of Commisson in
such causes are to be spared.

Observation 21.
This is very well approved.

SECT. XXII.
THat where Witnesses shall be examined for to prove a contempt, the party
accused may likewise examine Witnesses to clear the same.

Observation 22.
This is already provided for in the Rules and Orders, established and
published by the present Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of England.

SECT. XXIII.
THat Commissioners for Examination of Witnesses shall take an oath before
execution of any Commission to execute the same faithfully and impartially,
which each Commissioner is empowered to administer to the other; and the Clerks
attending such Commissioners, shall take an oath (which is to be administered by
the Commissioners) to write down the Depositions of the Witnesses truly and
indifferently without partiality, and every of the Witnesses shall be sworn and
examined, and the depositions put in writing, and in presence of the
Commissioners, and not elfewhere.

Observation 23.
This is an excellent course for the due and regular carrying of Commissions,
there having been hitherto in many causes too much foul practice used in the
taking of Depositions, wherein many Commissioners and Clerks on both sides, for
the most part Act rather as Parties or Agents for the persons concerned, then
as becomes honest indifferent persons, according to the trust reposed in them
by the Court; so that through the indirect practice of cunning Clerks and
Commissioners, meeting with persons of the other side not so skillful, nor so
ill disposed, many a good and honest cause is overthrown.

SECT. XXIV.
THat after publication, either party may see the depositions of either side,
and not be obliged to take Copies of any more then he shall conceive material,
so as he take not the part of a Deposition to one Interrogatorie: And
Plaintiffs and Defendants may (if they agree) take but one Copy of all, or any
part of the Depositions, and make use of the same.

Observation 24.
This seeming benefit may prove more prejudicial to the parties concerned, then
the charge of full Copies may amount unto; for how can Council be instructed in
the merits of the Cause without sight and perusal of Copies of all the
Depositions of both fides; and how can an ignorant Country man judge what part
of the Depositions are useful for him, and what not, wherein some persons
(taking upon them more knowledge then probaly they may have) out of a desire to
save an inconsiderable charge) may destroy a good Cause; but if they will
wilfully hazard their Causes, it is fit they should abide the ill consequence
thereof.

SECT. XXV.
THat no stay shall be of any proceedings at the Common Law upon a Bill of
Erchange between Merchants, nor of Execution upon a Judgment at Law upon Bill
extant after the said Judgment without defeazance in writing of such
Judgment, till the final hearing of the cause.

Observation 25.
This seems very just and equitable.

SECT. XXVI.
THat no stay of any proceeding at Law shall be, but upon equity confessed in
the parties Answers who is stayed, or where the party stayed is in contempt for
not answering, or not sufficiently answering to some material charge; in such
cases the stay to be void upon clearing the contempt, or sufficiently
answering, without any further order.

Observation 26.
This is already provided for, according as is proposed by the present Rules of
the Court, so that this Section was needless.

SECT. XXVII.
THat where any cause comes to hearing, the Judges shall determine the same
without delay, or second hearing; but if both parties consent, the cause may be
put the last in the Registers Book of hearing; where the parties consent to a
reference, the Court may refer it.

Provided, that no Judge before full hearing, does move either party to consent
in either of the Cases; And where any reference shall be made by consent of
parties, they shall not have power for to countermand it; and an Adward or
Arbitrament made thereupon shall be full as if the reference was by order of
Court, and shall be a sufficient ground for a Decree: And the Judges shall sit
constantly, as well Vacation as Term, until the causes and motions in the
Registers Book be heard and determined; And they shall in all causes pronounce
either decree presently in Court at the hearing, saving in case of very great
difficulty; and then not to exceed above ten days, and not to hear Council a
second time in the said cause.

Observation 27.
To deny the parties to be reheard on payment of double costs, if it go against
them, seems unreasonable on the grounds and reasons set forth, Section the 13.
touching re-arguing of Pleas and Demurrers.

As for References and Adwards, the Court were never against them; and if the
parties on both sides agree, there is an end of that difference; In which cause
it is well known the Court neither will, nor can meddle with it; for if both
parties agree, what need they trouble the Court, which is for no other use or
end then to determine those controversies which cannot be composed in an
amicable way by the parties themselves. But in case an Adward be indirectly
made by practice or collusion, in such cases the Court will relieve the party
aggrieved, according to the truth and merits of his Cause, which has been held
a commendable and just course. And as to that part of this Section, which
relates to restraining the Judges of the Court from hearing of Council the
second time, this seems unreasonable if parties do desire it, and the Court see
cause; and surely it cannot choose but give more satisfaction to the parties,
and carry with it a greater countenance and power of Justice to hear Council,
if the parties on both sides desire it, then to deny it to either; for it has
been hitherto conceived a just complaint of the People for unjustice, in cases
wherein they have been concluded, without permitting their Council to be heard,
when they had something material to offer to the Court, especially in case of
new matter not offered before: Whereas otherwise to hear both sides seems but
just, whilst the Judgment is still reserved in the breast of the Court, who
may order increase of Costs on re-hearings as they shall see cause.

SECT. XXVIII.
THat the Register shall not execute his Office by Deputy, except in case of
sickness, and then the Court to appoint one, and shall in his draught of orders
shortly express the sense of the Court as Rules in the Court of Common Law,
without any unnecessary preamble: And if the Register draw up an order contrary
to, or not agreeing with the order pronounced in Court, he shall answer the
party grieved thereby his full costs and damages to be given him by the Court,
or to be recovered by Action on the Case at his Election.

Observation 28.
This method of drawing up Orders pithily, has been formerly proposed by the
Clerks, and if a Register draws an order contrary to the Declaration of the
Court, it is but just that he should be liable to an Action of the Case; but in
case the course herein before proposed, Sect. 16. for public reading of the
Orders in Court be established, it will in all likelihood prevent many
miscarriages in drawing up of Orders, and will be a means to shorten causes,
and avoid multiplicity of Orders, and spare the Clyent much expense.

SECT. XXIX.
THat the Register shall upon every Decree pronounced in Court, enter the very
words of the Decree in his Book, without interlineation, and publicly read the
same in Court at that sitting of the Court to be there allowed: And that the
Judges shall sign all Decrees publicly in Court at certain times to be for
that purpose appointed, which Decrees are to be drawn up forthwith, after the
Decree pronounced; And that from and after (...) no Suit shall be admitted in
any Court of Equity for the obtaining of any Decree for any Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments upon any prefence of trust or Agreement
whatsoever, which shall not appear in Writing under the hand of the party, who
ought to perform the same, or by some Deed or Will in writing.

Observation 29.
As to the first part hereof, which concerns the Register in relation to the
Decretal Orders of the Court it is very well approved of: And it were well the
same course were observed on all other Orders granted in Court, as has been
before proposed, Sect. 16. And for the time and manner of signing of Decrees
and Dismisses, the Author makes no objection but in the latter part, which
relates to the barring of the Court from relieving any person for any Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, upon any pretense of trust or agreement, which
shall not appear in writing, etc. the Author makes no Objection against it;
provided, that this extends not to precedent trusts before the establishing
hereof by any Act, and before Country Registers be appointed where such trusts
and agreements ought to be enrolled and entered; for the right truth is, if
matters of trust and agreement, and other matters of Fact betwixt parties were
reduced into writing, and enrolled, it would avoid many litigious causeless
suits, and prove a speedy way of redress, and little occasion would be for the
parties to make address to the Chancery in such cases, and a Law to bind the
People to reduce their Acts, Deeds, Contracts and Agreements into writing
enrolled, will work a great peace in the Land in reference to Lawsuits, and
would spare many thousand pounds a year to the people by prevention thereof, as
is humbly conceived.

SECT. XXX.
THat in all Cases where a Plaintiff is dismissed the Desendant shall have full
costs, and where the Plaintiff has just cause of relief the Plaintiff shall
have full Costs, saving in a case where he might have had the like benefit
without Suit: and there he shall have no costs, but pay the adverse party full
costs, and a Fine of 40.s. to the Commonwealth, save also where the Defendant
by Answer submits to the Judgment of the Court, and claims nothing to his own
use; in which case he shall neither pay Costs nor Fine, but the Plaintiff to
pay him costs if the Court find cause. And where the Plaintiff is relieved for
part, and dismissed for part, either party to pay costs to the other: and if a
Plaintiff be relieved against any one or more Defendants, and not against
others, such others shall have their full costs: And whereas any is to pay
costs, and is not able, such party shall be sent to the Workhouse to work,
during the pleasure of the Court; one half of the benefit of his work to go
toward the payment of his Costs; or be whipped, or both, at the discretion of
the Court; And no person is admitted to sue as a poor man, unless he bring a
Certificate from some Justice of the Peace, Councellor, or Sergeant at Law, or
Judge of the County Judicature of his poverty, and the Iustness of his Cause.

Observation 30.
All this Section seems very just and reasonable, and may prove of good use and
benefit to the people of this Nation, if established by Authority.

SECT. XXXI.
THat in all cases where a Plaintiff is dismissed, he shall pay a Fine to the
Commonwealth of 20. s. and if the Plaintiff has a decree against any
Defendant, such Defendant shall pay alive Fine to the Commonwealth, where he
paid costs to the adverse party: And a Defendant for every insufficient Answer
(after the first) shall pay a like Fine to the Commonwealth; and a Plaintiff a
like Fine for frivilous exceptions, and every person judged in contempt for
that unnecessary trouble of the Masters of the Court by entering a reference
before them in their Book, shall pay a like Fine to the Commonwealth.

Observation 31.
As to the payment of 20.s. Fine in this Section proposed to the Commonwealth,
it should seem more reasonable that the same should be paid to the party
aggrieved and concerned, which may be considerable in his purse, whereas if the
same be cast into a public Treasury, it will little add thereto.

SECT. XXXII.
THat the showing a Decretal or other Order of the Court under the Registers
hand to the party, who is to observe the same, and leaving a Copy thereof with
him, or leaving the same at his dwelling with some person there (if any be
there to be found) or otherwise at the door of the house, shall be a sufficient
service, and the party shall be in contempt, if he yield not obedience thereto
within eight days, and thereupon process may and shall issue forth to attach
his body; and if the order be to pay money, then also to levy the same of his
goods and chattels, lands and tenements, as upon a Judgment at the Common Law.

And the Sheriff and Coronor in execution of their Offices upon process forth
of Chancery shall have the same power as in execution of process at Common Law,
and leavy their own Fee befide the money for the party or Commonwealth, and
behave themsel^es, as in cases of other Execution; And all process of Summons
under a penalty, and the course of Arresting by any other Writ of Attachment
then is by this Act appointed, Attachment with Preclamation, Commission of
Rebellion, Mossenger, or Sergeant at Arms (as to the Execution of any process
of the said Court) to be henceforth forborne, and Writs of Executions of Orders
and Decrees under Seal to be no more used.

Observation 32.
The course prescribed, for service of Decretal Orders in this Section, seems
to be inconvenient; for since the Proposers have directed that all the Process
of Summons shall be under the Seal of the Court, which is the first, and least
considerable of all the Process issuable out of the Court: why a Decree which
is the last and most considerable of all Writs should not be under Seal, is
left to consideration, it being easy to counterfeit a Registers hand, and if
discovered, not so penal as the counterfeiting of the Great Seal of England,
wherein pains of death are provided for the party offending; and therefore in
respect of the difficulty of counterfeiting the great Seal, and the hazard and
punishment attending the same, it is held and taken to be the most safe,
convenient course which strikes a terror in the persons concerned, and works
a more honorable respect to the Decree and Authority of the Court that made
it, then to a bare Registers hand, which may be had for twelve pence at any
time.

And as to the Proposal which would make a decree in Chancery equivalent to a
Judgment at Law, it was formerly proposed by the Clerk, and cannot but be well
approved of by all un-byassed persons, since Execution of the Law is the life
of the Law; And the precedent reasons that are offered for the issuing forth of
Decrees under Seal of this Court will satisfy all ingenious men for the
issuing forth of all Writs of Executions of Orders under Seal of this Court.

SECT. XXXIII.
THat whereas any man is attached for breach of a Decree, he shall not buy or
sell at liberty, but by order of Court; And in all such process of Attachment,
it shall be mentioned that it is for breach of a Decree.

Observation 33.
This is a very strict course (as is humbly conceived) and tends to the
disinabling the party against whom the decree is past to pay h^s Debts, or to
make satisfaction to the party demandant: But to restrain him from disposing or
selling of the matter decreed seems reasonable.

SECT. XXXIV.
THat there shall be no more money ordered to be paid into Court, unless by
consent of both parties, and no Fees shall be paid for paying out the money
already in Court: And the party who thought to have damages for detaining any
money which is brought into Court, shall have it during the time the money
remains in Court to be paid, by such as were the cause for the bringing it into
Court.

Observation 34.
To restrain the Court from ordering moneys to be paid into Court without
relation to the nature of the Case, may prove a great prejudice to many
persons; for in case there be one or more Suits depending for profits of Lands,
or other things whereunto the Plaintiffs and Defendants make several claims,
and the Tenants or others concerned, who derive an interest under the parties;
Plaintiffs or Defendants have rents or moneys in their hands, but cannot with
safety pay the same, until the right be determined; it might prove a great
inconveniency to the Tenants to pay their Rents to either parties before the
Court on hearing of the Cause declare to whom the right appertains; the
payment thereof in the interim, in dubious and intricate causes may occasion
the parties to pay the same again, and so consequently multiply unnecessary
suits, which the wisdom of former Ages has prevented by staying the rents in
the Tenants hands on good security given, to pay the same to whom the Court
shall order, or else by ordering them to bring the rents, etc. into Court to be
disposed of as the Court shall direct on mature and deliberate consideration
had of the merits of the Cause, whereby it may appear to whom the same beiongs:
And it seems unreasonable that no Fees should be paid for the paying out of the
money already in Court, since the Officer that has charge thereof has been
put to the trouble in receiving, and keeping the same, who is liable to make
satisfaction therein, if the same be imbezelled, and must be at the trouble and
loss of times to pay the same out, and receive discharges for the same; for all
which pains trouble and hazard, it seems reasonable that the Officer should
receive satisfaction accordingly.

SECT. XXXV.
THat where any party may take forth Sub-poena's of course to bring in a Deed,
the Register shall grant an order of course under his hand, and like order
where the Court does direct it: And the Sub-poena's Ducens tecum to be forborne.
And the Register shall take for such order and entering it 12.d. and no more.

Observation 35.
This is already provided for by the late Rules made by the present Lords
Commissioners more expeditious and at less charge then is proposed in this
Section, viz. that the party may of course without order or motion take out a
Writ of Ducens tecum to bring in any writings confessed in the Defendants
Answer; but in case the party on his examination and consideration had to the
title set forth in his Answer do make good claim to the Writings, the Plaintiff
in such case is to pay costs; which order is conceived to be a more wholesome and
safe course then what is prescribed in this Section.

SECT. XXXVI.
THat the time of redemption of Lands morgaged before or at the passing of this
Law, where no suit is depending for the same, shall not exceed two years from
the passing this Act, and the time of redemption upon any morgage after to be
made, shall not exceed one year from the entry of the Morgage after the
condition broken, and from the time of Entry within the year, and until
redemption the Morgagee shall receive double damages if it be redeemed, unless
where an Infant is the Heir of a Morgager, and to redeem shall have two years,
and not above from the time of the entry of the Morgagee after the condition
broken, paying single damages: And that in all cases where the Morgager dies,
having an heir within Age, and the Morgagee redeemable, such Heir upon
satisfaction of costs and damages may join with his Guardian to make
reconveyance of the Land Morgaged: And the same shall be good against such
infant, and all claiming under him.

Observation 36.
The time limited for redemption of Lands morgaged seems very short, and too
strict, and tends to the forreiting of many men's estates when Morgagers cannot
raise moneys within the time prescribed by this Section for Redemption; and in
case moneymongers combine together, in such cases Morgagers must either forfeit
their lands at half the value, or else sell it at an extraordinary undervalue:
And by this means no moneys can be raised by persons indebted, but on
unconscionable, disadvantagious terms, which cannot but occasion a decay of
Trade and Commerce in the Nation, and either disable Creditors to pay their
Debts, or else expose them to ruin by forfeitures of their Estates at great
undervalues: But on the other side it seems unreasonable that a Morgagee shall
be subject to a Bill in equity for redemption after 20. or 30. years
forfeiture, and sometimes longer; and after alienation of the estate, which
occasioneth many unnecessary troublesome and chargeable suits, so that a
reasonable certain time being limited beyond which there shall be no redemption
seems just and convenient, which is left to the grave consideration of those
who are to Enact the same.

SECT. XXXVII.
THat from the time of hearing of Suits now depending in Court of Equity upon
Morgages, there shall not be in any case above six months allowed for time of
Redemption from the hearing of the Cause, and there shall be no stay of any
legal proceedings upon any Morgage unless equity be in the Defendants Answer,
confessed or adjudged of the Court upon hearing of the Cause.

Observation 37.
This seems reasonable.

SECT. XXXVIII.
THat a Morgagee entering, and a Morgager redeeming Lands Morgaged, the Morgagee
shall not be responsable for more then the profits he has clearly made of the
Lands while he had the same in Morgage, deducting his necessary charges, which
shall be determined by the Oath of the Morgager his Heirs and Assigns, and no
other profits shall be required or admitted.

SECT. XXXIX.
THat the form of the Oath shall be that neither the Morgagee nor any other
deriving title under him to his use has made other, or more profits of the
Lands then are given in upon such oath, as far as he knows, believes or can
possibly discover; and that there has not been any fraud, nor wilful neglect,
so far as he knows or believes in the management thereof, whereby the profits
were not made to his use of the Lands or Tenements Morgaged.

Observation 38. and 39.
Against which the Author offers this to consideration, that in case the
Morgagee will let the Lands to a friend of his at an extreme undervalue; this
cannot be termed properly a fraud; for any man may let out his own Lands, or
what he is justly possessed of, and has power to let and set at what Rates he
pleases; but in case the Morgager or any other for him, or any other person
offer the Morgagee, a far more considerable rent, and as good terms and
securities as he was to have from another Tenant, who was to have it at an
undervalue, this will render it a fraud; otherwise not; And as to the Provision
made in this Section touching the oath to be taken by the Morgagee, the
Morgagee may greatly damnifie the Morgager in point of Redemption, and yet take
the Oath herein before directed: And it were well if course were taken to avoid
the taking of oaths (which are sacred) unless in cases of necessity. And
therefore it is humbly proposed, whether it were not more convenient that the
value of the Lands should be inserted in the deed of morgage, according to
which the Morgagee shall be liable to an account at the time of redemption, who
will be careful in such a case in ascertaining such value, which may be
moderated by agreement before the executing of such Deed at such Rates as the
Morgagee will be contented to take the same, and give account accordingly,
which course will avoid future differences, and the hazard of unsafe oaths
concerning the same.

SECT. XL.
THat in any case where a Court of Equity relieveth against a penalty or
forfeiture at common Law, the party relieved shall pay the adverse party double
damages, unless in case of infancy, or where it shall appear by proof, that
the fault was not by or through his carelessness and neglect: And the
Surplussage of the Morgage-money upon an estate Morgaged in Fee-simple,
forfeited and redeemed, shall go to the heir, after the Morgagees debts paid,
and his will performed if he made one; if not, then the surplussage of the
money after payment of debts shall go to the younger child or children of the
Morgager unprovided for.

And be it Enacted, that a Table of Fees shall be hung up in the Chancery for
Causes in Equity, and no Sergeant or Councellor at Law, Officer, Minister, or
Clerk of the said Court, shall take any other Fee or Sum of money, for, or in
respect of any cause there depending or copy of any Record or other thing there
filed or Registered or put to the seal, upon pain to be punished as an
Extortioner, and disabled to bear any office of trust or profit in the
Commonwealth, unless the same shall be allowed by Parliament, which table of
fees shall be as follows.

Observation 40.
Unto this the Author makes no exception. Neither does he except against the
hanging up of A Table of Fees, nor the punishments provided herein against
Extortioners, etc. the same being already provided for by the present rules of
the Court and the Law of the Land in such cases.

But he desires those worthy persons before they establish a Table of Fees, to
consider well of the consequence thereof.

I. To a Sergeant and Barrester at Law upon a Motion, Reference, giving advice,
signing Bills or Pleadings l. 1 s. 0 d. 0

Observation 1. Against this the Author makes no exception, but in case any
Sergeant or Barrester, draw any Bills or Pleadings, that he may be paid Quantum
meruit, or as much as the Clyent will be contented to give him; for that in
such cases his pains may be great though his writing but small; and it seems
reasonable, that whilst such an honorable degree of a Sergeant at Law is
thought worthy to be continued, there should be some respect had toward them
in point of Fees, more then is allowed to ordinary Baresters.

II. For a hearing or arguing a plea or demur -- l. 1 s. 0 d. 0

Observation 2. Against this Fee the Author makes no Exception.

III. To the Masters of the Chancery for examining every skin of an
exemplification of a Record l. 0 s. 2 d. 3

Observation 3. This was the former Fee, and seems reasonable.

IV. For taking the Acknowledgement of a deed or recognizance to be Enrolled.
l. 0 s. 0 d. 6

Observation 4. This seems reasonable:

V. To the chief Clerk for writing the Summons and filing upon the return,
besides the Seal l. 0 s. 1 d. 0

VI. The like for Summons to testify.

For the Seal of that and every other Process to the use of the Commonwealth l.
0 s. 0 d. 6

This was formerly paid.

VII. For administering an Oath -- l. 0 s. 0 d. 4

Observation 5 6, 7. All this is sufficient, being more in a year then the
profits of two of the best six Clerks places will now amount unto.

VIII. To the Attorney for the Plaintiff for filing the Bill the first Term l.
0 s. 3 d. 4

IX. The like to the Defendants Attorney for putting in the Answer l. 0 s. 3 d.
4

X. To the Attorney of either party for the Term, when issue is joined l. 0 s.
3 d. 4

XI. To the Attorney of either party at the hearing l. 0 s. 3 d. 4

Observation 8, 9, 10, 11. This is a competent Fee, if the Attorney does only
file the Bill, and enter the appearance, etc. But it is desired to be
considered, who shall do the rest of the work appertaining to the Cause, and
what he shall have for his pains that is to do the same.

XII. To the Examiner for Examination of every witness or upon contempt l. 0 s.
2 d. 6

Observation 12. This is also a competent Fee, and no more now paid.

XIII. To the Clerk for writing and engrossing Depositions upon a Commission
for every 12. lines, containing 10. words in a line, three pence.

Observation 13. This Clerk is no Officer of Court, and therefore, not so
proper to be placed in a Table of Fees, the parties always paying him Quantum
meruit, or as cheap as they can agree, who otherwise will not take that pains.

XIV. To all the Officers of the Court respectively, where they are required to
subscribe their names to any thing in Eourt ready written by way of Certificate
4. d. if it exceed not twelve lines with ten words in a line; if it exceed
twelve lines, and under 24. eight pence, if above 24. twelve pence.

Observation 14. This will occasion unnecessary time in reckoning lines, and it
were better to ascertain a Fee for subscribing Certificates of what length
soever they be, long and short all of a price.

XV. For filing an Affidavit one penny, and for Copies for every twelve lines
with ten words in a line two pence.

Observation 15. This is a poor Fee, and not satisfactory for the work, if done
and entered as the nature of it requires, or as it is now exactly done by the
present Register: And at this rate none will discharge the place that is a
person of worth, credit or fidelity as it ought to be done; the present
Register of Affidavits, being a person of known honesty and carefulness in his
place, and gains but a reasonable livelihood thereby.

XVI. To the Register for drawing and entering every Order, not exceeding twelve
lines, with ten words in a line, twelve pence; and forevery twelve lines above
the first, seven pence; and for Copies of Orders for every twelve lines two
pence.

Observation 16. At this rate, none but Chandlers-boys, Kitchin-boys, and the
like, will undertake the employment.

XVII. For drawing Decrees and Dismissions to the Attorney, for twelve lines
with ten words in a line 3. d. for Intolment 2. d. and for exemplication 3. d.
for every 12. lines with ten words in a line l. 0 s. 0 d. 3

Observation 17. This allowance will not recompense any one that will take the
pains do to it; and therefore Clerks will rather turn Cobblers Apprentices then
work at this mean rate, which cannot find them bread and salt.

XVIII. For a search, or reading any Order or Record in Chancery l. 0 s. 1 d. 0

Observation 18. This cannot be ascertained, unless by the terms as is already
paid in all Courts, or else according to the nature of the search, which may
sometimes take up four or five hours, or more: whereas every Coachmans-wages is
more considerable then what is proposed, in case of long searches which often
fall out.

XIX. To the Crier and Doorkeeper, to each of them at the final hearing of
every cause from the party that has a Decree, for whom Dismission is
pronounced l. 0 s. 1 d. 0

Observation 19. The Proposers have forgot those other persons that attend the
Court, and ought to have allowances accordingly, either by way of sallary, or
from the Clyents.

XX. For the Copy of any Record in Chancery, or other thing there filed, not
before particularly expressed 2.d. for every 12. lines with ten words in a line,
the party taking what party he pleases l. 0 s. 0 d. 2

Observation 20. No Officer or Clerk will attend this place at this rate, when
as sometimes they make not any Copy of Record in three or four days, and the
Copy may prove but short, and especially if the party may choose what part
thereof he please (as indeed he might have formerly done before this Proposal)
How this can recompense the pains and attendance of any honest, able, trusty
man, and afford maintenance for himself and his family, is left to
consideration; especially if they intend that the Plaintiff and Defendant are
to deliver to each other Copies of all Bills, and other pleadings in the Cause,
so that it is likely the Clerk will not have an occasion to make Copies of any
pleadings in a whole Cause, unless the depositions, whereby he is tied to
continual attendance, but no work or wages provided for him by this System.

XXI. For writing any thing to the Seal, not before mentioned, for every 12.
lines with ten words in a line l. 0 s. 0 d. 3

Observation 21. There is no Clerk of any parts or abilities will undertake
this employment at this mean rate.

XXII. And to the Commonwealth for the whole great Seal, the same Fees that
have been accustomed

Observation 22. This was formerly paid.

XXIII. For every Answer in writing on Petition -- l. 0 s. 2 d. 6

Observation 23. This is a sufficient Fee, and but reasonable.

Forasmuch as some persons seem to be unsatisfied of the power and authority of
the high Court of Chancery, to give relief to Complainants after Judgment
given against them in the Courts of Common Law; which some have lately openly
declared.

For public satisfaction therein, I have thought it very useful to recite
the Case put by the late King James, concerning the power and jurisdiction of
the said Court in matters of that nature, together with the Cettificate,
Reasons and Resolutions of the several Learned Judges thereupon.

James by the grace of God, etc.

Whereas our right trusty and wel-beloved Sir Francis Bacon Knight, our
Councellor and Attorney General, received a Letter from our Chancellor of
England, dated 19. Martii 1615. written by our express Commandment, directing
and requiring him, and the rest of our Learned Council to peruse such
Presidents as should be produced unto them of the time of King H. the 7. and
since of Complaints made in the Chancery there to be relieved, according to
equity and conscience after Judgments in the Courts of Common Law in Cases
where the Judges of the Common Law could not relieve them: And thereupon to
certify us of the truth of that they should find, and of their opinions
concerning the same; which Letter follows in these words.

Mr. Attorney, his Majesty being informed, that there be many Presidents in
the Court of Chancery in the time of King H. the 7. and continually since, of
such as complained there to be relieved according to equity and conscience
after Judgments in the Courts of Common Law, in Cases where Judges of the
Common Law could not relieve them (being bound by their Oath to observe the
strict rules of the Law) is willing to understand whether there be such
President as he is informed of; And therefore has commanded me to let you know
that his will and pleasure is, that you call to assist you his Majesty's
Sergeants and Solicitors; and to peruse such Presidents of this kind as shall
be produced unto you, and thereupon to certify his Majesty of the truth of
that you shall find, and of your opinions concerning the same; And for your
better direction therein I have sent you here enclosed a note in writing
delivered to me, mentioning some such Presidents in King H. 7. time, and since;
and I am told that there be the like in former times: his Majesty expects
your proceedings in this with as much speed as conveniently you may: And so I
rest

York-house 19. Martii, 1615. Your very assured loving friend, T. Elsmore,
Chancellor.


And whereas our Attorney General, and the rest of our learned Council did
thereupon return unto us their Certificate subscribed withal their hands,
according to our commandment and direction given them by the said Letter, which
Certificate follows in these words.

Certificate. According to your Majesty's Commandment we have advised and
considered of the Note delivered unto us of Presidents of complaining and
proceeding in Chancery after Judgments had at Common Law, and have also seen
and perused the Originals, out of which the same Note was abstracted, upon all
which we do find and observe the points following.

1. We find that the same Note is fully verified and maintained by the
Originals.

2. We find that there has been astrong current and practice of proceedings
in Chancery after Judgment, and many times after Execution, continued from the
beginning of King H. 7. reign until the time of the Lord Chancellor that now
is, both in the Raigns separatim of the several Kings, and in the times of the
several Chancellors, whereof diverse were great learned men in the Law, it being
in cases where there is no remedy for the Subject by the strict course of the
Common Law, unto which the Judges are sworn.

3. We find that this proceeding in Chancery has been after Judgments in
Actions of several natures, as well real as personal.

4. We find it has been after Judgments in your Majesty's several Courts of
Kings Bench, Common Pleas, Justice in Oyer, etc.

5. We find it has been after Judgments obtained on Verdicts and Demurrers,
and where Writs of Error have been brought.

6. We find in many of the Cases, that the said Judgments are expressly
mentioned in the Bills in Chancery themselves to have been given, and relief
craved thereupon sometimes for stay of Execution, and sometimes after
Execution, of which kind we find a great number of King H. 7. time.

7. We find the matter in Equity laid in such Bills in most of the Cases to
have matter precedent before the Judgments, and no matter of agreement
afterward.

8. We find in the said Cases, not only the Bill preferred, but motions,
orders, injunctions and decrees thereupon for the releasing and discharging of
the Judgments, or avoiding the possession thereupon obtained, and sometimes
for the mean profits and release of Costs.

9. We find in some of the Cases that in this very point (that Judgment has
been given) has been stood upon by the Defendant, and alleged by them by way
of Demurrer, and overruled.

10. We find that the Judges themselves in their own Courts, when there
appeared to them matter of Equity, because they by their Oath and Office cannot
stay the Judgment, except it be for some small time, have directed the party
to seek relief in Chancery.

11. We find that this has been done not only in times of the several
Chancellors, but by the Judges themselves, and that without difficulty while
they sat in the Chancery, in the vacancy or absence of the Chancellor.

12. We find the hands of sundry principal Counselors at Law, whereof diverse
of them are now Judges, and some of them in chief places, to Bills of that
kind.

13. Lastly, there were offered to have been showed unto us many other
Presidents; whereof we heard some read, and found them to be of like nature
with those contained in the Note.

Fran. Bacon, Hen. Mountague, Ran. Crew, Hen. Yelverton,


AND whereas also our said Attorney received another Letter from our said
Chancellor, with a Case therein enclosed, written likewise by our erpress
Command, dated 27. Martii 1616. directing and requiring him, and the rest of
our learned Council, together with the Attorney of our dear Son the Prince, to
consult together upon the said Case, and to consider advisedly of all the
points thereof; and thereupon to peruse all the Statutes of Praemunire, or the
Provisoes of all other Statutes as they should conceive to be necessary to be
considered of for resolving the Question propounded in that Case: and thereupon
to report to us their opinions in writing concerning the same, which Letter and
Case therein enclosed, follow in these words.

Mr. Attorney, his Majesty has perused this Case enclosed, and commanded me to
send it to you: And his. Majesty's will and pleasure is, that you Mr. Sergeant
Mountague, Mr. Sergeant Crew, Mr. Solicitor, and Mr. Walter the Princes
Attorney, that you confer together thereupon, and consider advisedly and
deliberately of all the parts thereof, and thereupon to peruse all the Statutes
of Praemunire, or Provisoes of all other such Statutes as you shall conceive to
be necessary to be considered of, resolving the question propounded in this
Case; this his Majesty would have to be done with mature deliberation; and yet
with as much speed as conveniently you can; and when you have sufficiently
informed your selves therein, then to report unto him your opinions in writing;
and so I commit you to God, and rest

Your loving Friend, T. Elsmore, Chancellor.
York-house 27. Martii 1616.

The Case.

A. has Judgment and Execution in the Kings Bench, or Common Pleas against B.
in an Action of debt of 1000. l. and in an Ejectione firm of the Manor of D.
B. complains in the Chancery to be relieved against these Judgments and
Executions, according to conscience and equity, allowing the Judgments te be
good and lawful by the rigor and strict Rules of the Common Law; and the
matter in conscience is such, as the Judges of the Common Law (being no Judges
of equity) being bound by their oaths to do the Law, cannot give any remedy or
relief for the same, either by error or attaint, or by any other means.

Quest. Whether the Chancery may relieve B. in these or such like Cases, or
else leave him utterly remediless and undone: And if the Chancery be restrained
herein by any Statute of Praemunire, etc. then by what Statute or by what words
in any Statute is the Chancery so restrained, and conscience and equity
banished concluded and damned?

Certificate. According to your Majesty's commandment, we have deliberatly
advised of the Case sent to us by the Lord Chancellor, and of the Statutes, as
well those of Praemunire as others, as far as we take it may concern the Case.

And for our better information herein, we have thought fit to send for, and
peruse the Original Records themselves, remaining in the Tower of London of
those Statutes, not only appearing upon the Rolls of Parliament, with the Kings
answers, which is the Warrant of the Roll of Parliament.

We have also taken into consideration as well Book-Law as diverse other Acts
of Parliament which may give light unto the Statutes, whereupon the question
properly does grow, together with such ancient Records and Presidents as we
could find, as well which maintain the Authority of the Chancery, as those
which seem to impeach the same.

Opinion. And upon the whole matter we are all of one opinion, that the
Chancery may give relief in the Case in question. And that no Statute of
Praemunire, etc. or other Statute restrains the same; And because we know not
what use your Majesty may be pleased to make of our opinion, either for the
time present, or for the future, we are willing to give some reasons for the
same, not thinking fit to trouble your Majesty with all those things whereupon
we have grounded our selves, but selected out some principal things, which
moved us to be of this opinion to the end; the same may be a fuller object of
your Majesty's Princely Judgment, whereunto we always submit our selves.

Prescription.

And first of all, we must lay for a sure foundation that which was contained
in our former Certificate, concerning the continual practice by the space now
of 120. years in the time of King H. 7. H. 8. E 6 Q.M. Q.E. of this Authority,
and that in those times when the same Authority was managed, not only by the
Bishops which might be thought less affectionate toward the Laws of the Land,
but also by diverse great Lawyers which could not but both know and honor the
Law, as the means of their advancement, Sir Tho. Moore, the Lord Audly, the
Lord Rich, Sir Richard Bacon, Sir Tho. Bromley, and Sir John Pickring. And
further, the most of the late Judges of the Kingdom, either as Judges when they
sat in Chancery by Commission, or as Counselors at Law, when they set their
hands to Bills, have by their Judgments and Council upheld the same Authority:
And therefore, forasmuch as it is a true ground, that optimus legum interpres
consuetudo, especially where the practice or custom passes not amongst vulgar
persons, but amongst the most high and most scient Magistrates of the Kingdom:
and when also the practice of the same shall lie under so heavy a pain as the
Praemunire; this is unto us a principal and implicit satisfaction, that those
Statutes ought not to be construed to extend to this Case: And this of it self
(well known) as of far more force to move your Majesty then any opinion of
ours, because Kings are fittest to inform Kings, and Judges to teach Judges.

Jurisdiction.

But further out of our Science and Profession, we have thought fit these
further reasons and proofs, very briefly to offer, because in case of so
ancient a possession of Jurisdiction, we hold it not fit to amplify.

Praemunire.

The said Statutes upon which this question grows, are principally one whereof
is a Statute of Praemunire, and the other is a Statute of simple prohibition.

That of the Praemunire is the Statute of 27. E. 3. Car. 1.

And the Statute of simple prohibitions 4. H. 4. Car. 23. there be diverse other
Statutes of both kinds, but the Question will rest on these two, as we conceive
it, for that the Statute of 27. E. 3. it cannot in our opinion extend unto the
Chancery for these Reasons.

1. Out of the mischief which the Statute provides for and recites, viz. that
such Suits and Pleas, against which the Statute is provided, were in prejudice
and disherison of the King, and his Crown, which cannot be applied to the
Chancery; for the King cannot be dis-inherited of Jurisdiction, but either by
the Forreigner, or by the Subject, but never by his own Court.

2. Out of the remedy which the Statute appoints, viz. that the offenders shall
be warned within two months to be before the King and his Council, or in his
Chancery, or before the Kings Justices of the one Bench or the other, etc. By
which words it is opposed in it self, that the Chancery should give both the
offense and the remedy.

3. Out of the penalty, which is not only severe but hostile, namely that the
offenders shall be put out of the Kings protection, which penalty altogether
savours of adhering to Foreign Jurisdictions, and would never have been
inflicted upon excess only of Jurisdiction in any of the Kings Courts, as the
Court of Chancery is.

4. Out of the Statutes precedent and subsequent of 25. E. 3. Car. 1. and 16.
R. 2. Car. 5. which are of the same nature, and cannot be applied but to
foreign Courts; for the word alibi or elsewhere, is never used but where Rome
is named, especially before.

5. The dis-junctive in this Statute, which only gives the color, viz. that
they which draw out of the Realm in Plea whereof the cognizance pertains to
the Kings Court, or of things whereof Judgments be given in the Kings Court,
or which do sue in any other Court to defeat or impeach the Judgments given in
the Kings Court. This last disjunctive (we say) which must go further then
Courts out of the Realm which are fully provided for by the former branch, has
sufficient matter and effect to work upon in respect of such Courts, which
though they were locally within the Realm, yet in Jurisdiction were subordinate
to the Forreigner, such as were the Legates Courts and Deligates Court, and in
general all the Ecclesiastical Courts within the Realm at that time, as it is
expressly construed by the Judges in 5. E. 4. fo. 6.

6. In this the sight of the Record of the Petition does clear the doubts where
the Subject supplicates to the King to ordain remedy against those which pursue
in other Courts then his own against Judgments given in his Court, which
explains the word (other) to be other then the Kings Court.

7. With this agrees notably the Book of Entry, which translates the word in
other Courts, not in alia Curia, but aliena Curia.

This Statute of 27. of Ed. 3. being in corroboration of the Common Law (as it
self recites) we do not find in the Register any president of the Writs of (ad
jura Regia) which are framed upon these Cases that were afterward made penal
by Praemunire, but only against the Ecclesiastical Courts.

Lastly, we have not found any president at all of any condition of the Statute
of Praemunire of this nature of Suits in Chancery, but only two or three Bills
of Indictments preferred (sed nihil inde venit) for ought appears to us. For
the Statute of Hen. 4. that no doubt was made against proceedings within the
Realm, and not against Foreign, and therefore has no penalty annexed;
nevertheless we conceive that it extends not to the Chancery in the Case
delivered for these Reasons.

1. The Statute recites where the parties are made to come upon grievous pain,
sometimes before the King himself, sometimes before the Kings Council, and
sometimes in Parliament to answer thereof anew, etc. where it appears that the
Chancery is not named, which could not have been forgotten, but was left out
upon great reason, because the Chancery is a Court of Ordinary Justice for
matter of Equity, and the Statute meant only to restrain extraordinary
Commission, and such like proceedings.

2. This appears fully in viewing and comparing the two Petitions which were
made the same Parliament of 4. H. 4. placed immediately by the one before the
other, the first of which was recited by the King, and the second whereupon the
Statute was made, whereof the first was to restrain three ordinary proceedings
of Justice, that is to say in Chancery by name, in the Exchequer, and before
the Kings Council by process of Privy Seal; unto which the King makes a Royal
prudent answer in these words: The King will charge his Officers to be more
sparing to send for his Subjects by such process then they have heretofore
been: but notwithstanding, it is not his mind that the Officers shall so far
abstain, but they may call his Subjects before them in matters and causes
necessary, as it has been done in the time of his good Progenitors; and then
immediately follows the Petition, whereupon this Act now in Question was made,
unto which the King gave his assent, and wherein no mention is made at all of
the Chancery or Exchequer.

3. If the Chancery should be understood to be within the Statute, yet the
Statute extends not to this Case; for the words are that the Kings Subjects
after Judgments are drawn thereof anew, which must be understood when the same
matter formerly judged is put in issue or question again; but when the case is
called into Chancery, only upon point of equity there, as the point of equity
was never in question in the Common Law, so the point of Law is of Fact (as it
concerns the Law) is never in question in the Chancery, so the same thing is
not twice in question, or answered anew; for the Chancery does supply the Law,
and not cross it.

4. It appears to our understanding by the clause of Error and Attaint in the
same Statute, what Jurisdiction it was that the Statute meant to restrain, viz.
such Jurisdiction as did assume to reverse and undo the Judgment, as Error or
Attaint does, which the Chancery never does, but leaves the Judgment in peace,
and only meddles with the corrupt conscience of the party; for if the Chancery
does assume to reverse the Judgment in the point adjudged, it is void as
appears 39. E. 3. fo. 14.

We find no presidents of any proceedings to conviction or Judgment of any
Indictment framed or grounded upon this Statute, no more then the Statute of
Praemunire; and the late Judgments are contra diversa Satuta, not mentioning
the particular Statutes.

6. Lastly, it were a great mischief to force the Subject in all cases to seek
remidy in equity, before he knows whether the Law will help him or no, which
oftentimes he cannot do till after Judgment; therefore he is to seek his
remedy when he has his hurt.

There be diverse other things of weight, which we have seen and considered of,
whereupon we have grounded our opinions; but we go no further then upon that we
have seen; but because matter of President is greatly considerable in this
Case, and that we have been attended by the Clerks of the Chancery with the
presidents of that Court, and have not yet been attended by any Officer of the
Kings Bench with any Presidents or Indictments, although we required them, and
gave them convenient time to have attended us with their Presidents, we shall
give your Majesty faithful Account of them as we have done of the other; all
which, etc.

Francis Bacon, Hen. Mountague. Rand. Crewe. Hen. Yelverton. John Walter.


NOw forasmuch as Mercy and Justice be the true Supporters of our Royal Throne,
and that it properly belongs to Us in our Princely Office to take care, and
provide that our Subjects have equal and indifferent Justice ministered to
them, and that where their case deserves to be relieved in course of Equity by
Suit in our Court of Chancery, they should not be abandoned, and exposed to
perish under the rigor and extremity of our Laws; We in our Princely Judgment
having well weighed, and with mature deliberation considered of our said
several Reports of our Learned Council, and all the parts of them, do prove,
ratify and confirm, as well the practice of our Court of Chancery, expressed
in their first Certificate as their Opinions, for the Law upon the Statute
mentioned in their latter Certificate, the same having relation to the Case
sent them by our said Chancellor; And do will and command, that our Chancellor,
or Keeper of our Great Seal for the time being, shall not hereafrer desist to
give unto our Subjects upon their several complaints, now or hereafter to be
made, such relief in equity, notwithstanding any former proceedings at the
Common Law against them, which shall stand with the true merits and justice of
their Cases, and with the former ancient and continued practices and presidency
of the Chancery; And for that it appertains to our Princely Care and Office
only to be Judges over all Judges, and discern and determine such differences
as shall, or may at any time arise between our several Courts touching their
Jurisdictions, and the same to settle and decide, as we in our Princely wisdom
shall find to stand most with our honor, and the example of our Royal
Progenitors in the best times, and the general Weal and Good of our People, for
which we are to answer unto God, who has placed us over them, our Will and
Pleasure is, that our whole proceedings herein, by the Decrees formerly set
down, be enrolled in our Court of Chancery, there to remain on Record, for the
better extinguishing of the like Questions or differences that may arise in
future times.

18. Julii 14. Jacobi Regis per ipsum Regem.
Additional Proposals, with a Table of Fees annexed for the better regulation
of the Fees and proceedings of the High Court of Chancery.
1. THat all Pattents of Offices and places of Trust granted by the late King
or his Predecessors be wholly laid aside; the Pattentees being the men that
swallow up the great Fees of the Court.

2. That no Offices or places of Trust, be bought or sold contrary to the Stat.
of 5. Edw. the 6. but the same may be supplied by persons bred up in such
Office, and so qualified for that purpose, and of approved integrity to the
Commonwealth; and that some additional provision be made for the better
prevention thereof.

3. That there be appointed three chief Officers in Chancery, for the orderly
bundling, entering, and keeping of all Bills, Answers, Replications,
Depositions, and others pleadings and proceedings there; which three Clerks
shall from time to time, end and decide all controversies and differences
betwixt the Clerks and Attorneys of the Court, in relation to the practical
part thereof; or otherwise certify the Court in matter of fact, for further
order therein as the Court shall think fit: Which chief Officers shall take
care for the due observance of the Table of Fees: And that the Attorneys
orderly demean themselves in their places and employments, without sinister or
indirect dealing one with another, or with their Clients: And in case of abuses
of that nature, they shall from time to time, certify the Lords Commissioners
or the Judges of the Court thereof, whereby the same may be timely redressed,
and the said chief Clerks to have an Annual Stipend and allowance from the
State for their service and attendance in the Execution of the Premises, and
no other Fee to be paid unto them.

4. That from amongst the present practicing Clerks, there be appointed 72
Persons, which shall be the Attorneys of the said Court, who shall file all
Bills, enter all Appearences, copy all sorts of Pleadings, and make out all
Subpena's or Process of Appearances, and shall make all other Writs formerly
issuable out of the Six Clerks Office, and advise and direct their Clients in
all proceedings, so far as appertains to the duty of an Attorney, who shall
receive for their pains therein according to the Fees in the Table annexed
mentioned. And upon the death or removal of the said chief Officers, or other
contingent inability, the said Attorneys according to their Seniority and
deserts to succeed them; and their Clerks in like manner to succeed as
Attorneys; which will be a means to preserve Clerkship and persons of integrity
in the said office to serve the Commonwealth.

5. That the Registers and Examiners, and other Officers of the Court, shall
execute their places personally, and not by Deputies, unless in cases of
sickness or other extraordinary occasion, wherein the leave of the Court for
his or their absence shall be obtained, and his Deputy approved of by the
Court, and their Clerks to succeed them according to their Seniority and
deserts.

6. That no person may be permitted to solicit Causes, or to take any reward
or Fees by pretense thereof, other then such as shall be allowed and approved
of by the Lords Commissioners, or Judges of the said Court, and their
soliciting Fees may be ascertained, and their names enrolled, whereby the
formal scandal and imputation occasioned by ignorant persons unwarrantably
owning such employments may be prevented.

7. That such as shall be appointed Judges of the said Court, shall have a
certain Annual sallary, and they to take no Fees under any pretense whatsoever;
For that the variety and multiplicitie of Suits, and long continuance and
proceedings thereupon, may possibly have some influence in relation to the
benefit of those that shall be appointed, if a certain sallary be not provided,
and the Judges restrained from taking any Fees.

8. That all sorts of Injunctions and other special Writs be signed only by
the Attorney and chief Officer, other signitures being merely matters of
formality, occasioning only unnecessary delay and expense.

9. To avoid fraud, that there shall be no relief in equity for any Trust or
Condition, other then what is expressed in the Deed which conveys the Interest,
and that the Statute for transferring of uses into possession, may work as well
for estates for years as freehold: And that whatsoever shall own a Trust or
fraudulent conveyance to deceive a Creditor or Purchaser, shall on lawful
conviction forfeit treble the value to the party aggrieved.

10. That if there be an Estate Morgaged for less then the value, the Creditors
of the Morgagor may be admitted to repay the Morgagee his money and damages,
and so have the Estate for satisfaction, provided they redeem it within the
time of redemption allowed to the Morgager.

11. Whereas it is now provided for, that Injunctions be awarded of course for
stay of all proceedings at Law for the matter complained of in Chancery, on a
Dedimus Potestatem; It is likewise humbly proposed, That the like Injunctions
be hereafter issued forth of course on an Attachment (being never denied on
motion) until perfect answer made clearing contempts, and other Order to the
contrary.

12. That whereas Plantiffs and Defendants are exposed to many difficulties,
apparent delays, and prejudices, and unnecessary wastful expense, by reason of
the Lawyers engaging their Attendance to several persons in several Courts at
one and the self same time, to move and defend motions, viz. The Chancery,
Exchequer, Upper-Bench, Common Pleas, Guild Hall, etc. it being impossible for
one individual body to be at several places at one instant of time: So that
oftentimes the Clients suffer in their absence; and are forced to retain diverse
Counselors to supply the absence of one another; Whereas one or two would
suffice, who being thoroughly engaged in a cause could the better understand it,
and would prove more useful then 20. that are now retained in a cause, which is
frequent now adays for the reasons aforesaid; and perhaps not one of them does
fully know the merits of the cause, to the dishonor of their Calling, and the
great damage of their Clients. It is therefore proposed, that all Counselors
may be confined to practice at one certain Bar, and not elsewhere, as formerly.

The Table.
The Six Clerks Office, worth 2000. l. per annum a piece, and upwards, demanded
by virtue of a Pattent from the late King.
The Six Clarks Fees. What will content the Laborer. What will be saved to the
Commonwealth. FOr all Copies of Bills, Answers, and other Pleadings, for every
Lease (containing fifteen lines) (...) per fol. 0l. 0s. 8d. 0s. 4d 0s. 4d. For
every Attachment with Proclamation and the Seal. 0. 2. 10. 1. 8. 1. 2. For
every Commission of Rebellion, besides the Hamper, Signiture, Entry, Inrollment
and other Fees. 0. 8. 0. 4. 8. 3. 4. For every Dedimus Potestat. 0. 7. 10. 4.
6. 3. 4. For every ingros'd Bill formerly there was paid to the Clerk 6. d. per
fol. being the main and only subsistence he had to live upon, which if taken
away, as indeed it should, being needless and chargeable, then no Clerk can
subsist without a confirmation of this Table. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. This will save
very much trouble, Labor, and needless expense. For every Commission to
examine Witnesses. 0. 7. 10. 4. 6. 3. 4. For every Writ of Execution of an
Order of Court. 0. 7. 10. 4. 6. 3. 4. For drawing and inrolling every Decree,
and every Dismission, formerly 1. l. 13. s 4 d. but far better if 8. d. per
fol. drawing and inrolling, which is the most certain and indifferent way for
the Clerk and Client, and not ingross as formerly. 1. 13. 4. 8. d. per. f. This
will save much and prove a certainty. For every Writ of Execution of a Decree,
per skin 1. 6. 8. 13. 4. 13. 4. For every Exemplification of a Record, which
comes but seldom, per skin 1. 6. 8. 13. 4. 13. 4. For drawing and engrossing
every Injunction, besides Signiture, Inrolling and other Fees, which may be
spared. 0. 13. 4. 6. 6. 6. 8. For every Supersedeas, Certiorar. Procend. Habeas
Corpus, and such other special Writs, which happen but seldom, besides
Signiture. 0l. 6.s. 8. 3s. 4d. 3s. 4d. For the writing of every Patent, which
is great confirmation, Innotessimus, Executorie, Special License, Special
Commission, Pardon. de infortun. and Se defendendo, Duplicat. Constat. or other
special Grants and Patents, seldom used, per skin 1. 6. 8. 13. 4 13. 4. For the
filing of every Bill, every Appearance. 0. 3. 4. For every Certificate of any
Proceedings of the Court. 0. 3. 4. Out of every Cause while it is Depending in
Court (though nothing done by him for it) every Term. 0. 3. 4.

The several Labors, Troubles and Expenses of the Clerks in the Six-Clerks
Office; for which ( by the present Table of Fees, or from the Six-Clerks) they
have no certain Fee or allowance at all; (though they were formerly rewarded by
their Predecessors, with Chamber-rent and Diet.)
1. THe bespeaking of all Subpoenaes, of what nature or quality soever they be.

2. The Filing of all Bills, and Bundling of all Records, and entering of them.

3. The waiting on the Register, for drawing up Copies of Orders, and to assist
the Client therein.

4. The attending upon the Masters, to see the Defendants sworn, and all other
Oaths taken by them.

5. The answering and directing of all Clients, as to the merits of the Cause,
and all other Proceedings.

6. The making of all Bills of Costs, and seeing them entered with the Register,
the Taxing them with the Master; and seeing them Entered in the House-book.

7. The entering of all Attachments in the House-book, the Six Clerks-book, and
the Register.

8. The wayring on the Examiner to see and direct Witnesses to be regularly
Examined, and to give notice to the Clients when Witnesses are Examined against
them.

9. The Waiting and Attending on Council as occasion does require, in the
absence of the Sollicitors.

10. The Attending the Hearing of the Clients Cause before the Six Clerks, the
Masters, the Master of the Rolls, and at Westminster.

11. The drawing of all Decrees, Dismissions, special Commissions, Injunctions,
and other special Writs; The greatest part of the Fees being taken by the Six
Clerks, and the Clerks allowances taken away by the late Lord Coventries Table,
which Table was procured by the Six Clerks.

12. The Examining of all Copies of Pleadings, Decrees, Dismissions, and all
other special Writs, Inrollments of all Patents passing the Great Seal;
Extreats and Inrollment of Decrees, Sheriffs Patents, their Oaths and
Recognizances into Wales, and diverse other places.

13. The finding the Six Clerks with Paper, Ink, Parchment and Candle, in the
dispatch of the Business of the Office, all except that worthy Genman Mr
Pinder, where Paper and Ink is only found by him.

14. Their daily attendance on the Court, and the business of the Office,
neglecting of their Private occasions to serve the Public.

15. The entering of all Rules in the House-book, Six Clerks book, and the
Registers Office.

16. The keeping of Filing-books, Rule-books, and notes of Subpoenaes, and
making of Docquets of Commissions of Rebellion.

17. The giving the Clients notice upon all Orders, Rules and other Proceedings
in Court, and in the Office.

18. For joining in Commissions, and Entering the same.

19. The laying out of moneys for the Clients in all Offices, and trusting them
for repayment thereof, which of necessity they must do in their absence, in
respect of their trust in them, as men from whom only they expect an Account
of their Business, and also for Letters to Carriers, and Posts, and Porters,
too and again, upon all occasions.

For all which labors, hazards and expenses, and other service herein before
proposed to be performed by the Attorneys, now called the practicing Clerks in
the Six Clerks Office, it is conceived reasonable, that the Fee of 3.o. 4.d. on
Filing a Bill, or entering the appearance, and the like Termly Fee formerly paid
to the Six Clerks (who did little or no considerable, service for the same) be
hereafter paid to the Attorneys, now called practicing Clerks.

The Fees of the Inrollment Office ( worth 1000. l. per. an. and upward)
demanded by the Six Clerks, and three Masters of the Petti-bag, by color of a
Patent or Charter from the King.
The Master's Fee. What will content the Labourer. What will be saved to the
Commonwealth. FOr every Roll. 0l. 10s. 0d 5s. 0d. 5s. 0.d For every
Recognizance. 0. 2. 0. 1. 0. 1. 0. For every Exemplification, per skin. 1. 6.
8. 13. 4. 13. 4. For every Scire Facias. 0. 5. 0. 2. 6. 2. 6. For every
Cancellation. 0. 3. 4. 2. 4. 1. 0. For every Dedimus Potestat. 0. 10. 0 5. 0.
5. 0. For every Copy of Indenture or Recognizance, per sheet. 0. 0. 8. 0. 4. 0.
4. For every search in old Books. 0. 1. 0. 0. 8. 0. 4.

Paid to the Mr. of the Rolls over and above the said Fees.
FOr every Deed, Recognizance, or other writing Enrolled 0. 2. 0. For every
Exemplification. 0. 6. 8. For every Cancellation. 0. 6. 8. For Signing every
Commission. 0. 1. 0.

If an Annual stipend be allowed to the Master of the Rolls, suitable to the
dignity of his place, as is generally proposed for all Judges, all these Fees
may be spared.

The Examiners Office ( worth 2000. l. per. annum a piece) demanded by color
of a Patent from the late King.
The head Examiners Fees. What will content. What will be saved. FOr the
Examination of every Examinant. 0l. 2s. 6d. 2s. 6d. 0s. 0d. For Copies of all
Depositions, Examinations and Interrogatories; for every sheet containing
fifteen lines, 1.s. per fol. which in one Cause has come to 30. 40. l. and
some more. 0. 1. 0. 0. 4. 0. 8. For search and their hands to the Copies of any
Examinations to be certified to another Court. 0. 6. 8. 1. 8. 5. 0. For the
Exemplification of all Depositions and Examinations after the rate of every
skin. 1. 6. 8. 13. 4. 13. 4.

The Subpoena-Office, worth 3. or 4000 l. per annum.
The Fees now paid. What will content the Labo. What will be saved. FOr every
Subpoena, Ad comparend. Solvend. Miss. rejungend. Audiend. Judic. 2 s. 6d. if
but one or two names, if three names 3 s. 0l. 2s. 6d. 0l. 1s. 0d 0l. 1s. 6d For
every Supoena of Ducens tecum, or grounded on any Order of Court. 0. 6. 8. 0.
2. 6. 0. 4. 2. For every renewed Subpoena. 0. 1. 6. 0. 0. 6. 0. 1. 0. If at the
fault of the Clerk it is renewed 6 d. though in conscience nothing should be
paid. 0. 0. 6. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 6.

This Office being a Monopoly, and very chargeable and unnecessary, is desired
to be taken away, and the Attorneys, now called practicing Clerks, may
hereafter every one make Subpoenaes for his own proper Clients; which if
granted (as in reason it cannot be denied) will be of much advantage to the
Common wealth, who will be contented to make the same at the rates in the
second Column perfixed, whereby much will be saved to the Clients.

The Registers Office worth 3000 l. per annum and upward, held by a Patent from
the late King.
The head Registers Fees. What will suffice him. What will be saved. FOr taking
of every Order in Court and drawing it up, for every side of a leaf loosly
written, long and short. 0l. 3s. 0d. 1s. 0d. 2s 0d. For entering every Order,
for every side of a leaf of Paper. 0. 0. 6. 0. 3. 0. 3. For Drawing of all
Decretal Orders, Dismismissions and Decretal Orders by consent after the rate
of 6.s. a side, for an extraordinary Fee of the Decree. 0. 6. 0. 2. 0. 4. 0.
For entering the same, for every side of a leaf. 0. 1. 0. 0. 6. 0. 6. The
entering of every Attachment, if it be thought needful to be entered. 0. 0. 2. 0.
2. 0. 0. The entering of every Rule of Publication, Commissions, etc. if
needful, for each of them. 0. 0. 4. 0. 2. 0. 2. For carrying every Decree to
the Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or Court, to be Signed. 0. 5. 0. 2. 0. 3. 0.
For carrying every Dismission to be Signed. 0. 5. 0. 2. 0. 3. 0. For all
Certificates 12 d. besides the writing thereof 6 d. 0. 1. 6. 1. 0. 0. 6. For
entering all Pleas and Demurs in the Registers Book to be heard of course. 0. 1.
0. 0. 4. 0. 8. For all Copies of Reports, Orders, etc. 6 d. every side, and 12
d. the Registers hand for the first side, and 6. d. the side, every side after.
0. 1. 6. 1. 0. 0. 6.

The Cursistors Office Annually worth 10000 l. and upward.
FOr all Writs whatsoever of any debt or damages, there was formerly paid for a
Fine, This is a grievance and high oppression set on foot in times of
Monopolies, and as burdensome and unnessary as Damage clear, and therefore
proposed to be abolished, and the Cursistor content himself with 2.s. 6.d. for
the same, and so for all other original Writs 2s. 6 d. a piece, which is
conceived but reasonable.
after the rate of 10 s. in every hundred, etc.

For every Dedimus Potestatem to leavie a fine formerly, there was paid 1l. 4s.
4d. Instead whereof it is proposed the Cursistor may content himself with 0l.
6s. 8d. For all other Writs upon actions on the case, and other special Writs,
there was formerly paid for some 2. s. 6.d. others 6. 8. and others more,
according to the length and nature of the Writ: It is therefore proposed that
the Fees of such Writs may be ascertained, and reduced to 3s. 4d. a piece,
which is conceived to be sufficient. That whereas there was formerly paid to
the Master of the Affidavit Office for Filing every Affidavit, and for a copy
thereof, and a hand, if never so short. 0l. 2s. 0d. It is humbly conceived to
be too much, and hereafter there be paid for filing every Affidavit 4 d. and
for a Copy thereof attested 4 d. a side, each side consisting of 12 lines, and
10 words in a line. Whereas formerly there was paid for all Certificates 0l.
1s. 0d. That hereafter there be paid for all such Certificates 0l. 0s. 6d. And
this to extend only to such Affidavits as are needful to be Filed, to wit,
such Affidavits whereon the Orders of the Court are grounded, and the charge of
the others to be spared, unless the parties of the other side do require, or
the Court do specially order the same to be filed.
FINIS.

