A Continuation of the NARRATIVE BEING The last and final days Proceedings OF
THE High Court of Justice Sitting in Westminster Hall on Saturday, Jan. 27.
Concerning the Trial of the King; With the several Speeches of the King, Lord
President, and Solicitor General. Together with a Copy of the Sentence of Death
upon CHARLES STUART King of ngland. Published by Authority to prevent false and
impertinent Relations.

TO these Proceedings of the Trial of the King, I say,

GILBERT MABBOT.

Imprimatur,
London, Printed for John Playford, and are to be sold at his shop in the Inner
Temple, Jan. 29. 1648.

THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE High Court of Justice Sitting at Westminster Hall,
Saturday, January 27. 1648.
O Yes made. Silence commanded. The Court called.

First, The Lord President, (who was in a Scarlet Veflure, be fitting the
business of the day.) After him 67. Members more answered to their names.

The King came in, in his wonted posture (with his Hat on.)

A Cry made in the Hall (as he passed to the Court) for Justice and Execution.

O Yes made: And Silence commanded. The Captain of the Guard commanded to take
into custody such as made any disturbance.

Upon the Kings coming he desired to be heard.

To which the Lord President answered, That it might be in time, but that he
must hear the Court first.

The King pressed it, for that he believed it would be in Order to what the Court
would say, and that an hasty Judgment was not so soon recalled.

Then the Lord President spoke, as follows,

Gentlemen, It is well known to all or most of you here present, that the
Prisoner at the Bar has been several times convented, and brought before this
Court to make answer to a Charge of Treason, and other high Crimes exhibited
against him in the name of the People of Here a Malignant Lady interrupted the
C^urt, (saying, not half the People,) but she was soon silenced.
England. To which Charge, being required to answer, he has been so far from
obeying the Commands of the Court by submitting to their Justice, as he began
to take upon him reasoning and debate unto the Authority of the Court, and to
the highest Court that appointed them, and to try and to judge him, but being
overruled in that, and required to make his Answer, he was still pleased to
continue Contumelious, and to refuse to submit to answer, hereupon the Court,
that they may not be wanting to themselves, nor the Trust reposed in them, nor
that any man's wilfulness prevent Justice, they have thought fit to take the
matter into their Consideration, they have considered of the Charge, they have
considered of the Contumacy, and of that confession which in Law does arise
upon that Contumacy, they have likewise considered of the Notoriety of the Fact
charged upon this Prisoner, and upon the whole matter; they are resolved and
have agreed upon a Sentence to be pronounced against this Prisoner, but in
respect he does desire to be heard before the Sentence be read and pronouncd;
the Court has resolved that they will hear him: Yet Sir, Thus much I must tell
you beforehand, which you have been minded of at other Courts, That if that
which you have to saybe to offer any debate concerning the Jurisdiction, you
are not to be heard in it, you have offered it formerly, and you have struck at
the Root, that is, the Power and the supreme Authority of the Commons of
England, which this Court will nor admit a Debate of, and which indeed it is an
irrational thing in them to do, being a Court that acts upon Authority derived
from them. But Sir, If you have any thing to say in defense of your self,
concerning the matter charged, the Court has given me in command to let you
know they will hear you.

Then the King answered;

Since that I see you will not hear any thing of Debate, concerning that which
I confess I thought most material for the Peace of the Kingdom, and for the
Liberty of the Subject, I shall wave it, I shall speak nothing to it; but only
I must tell you, that this many a day all things have been taken away from me,
but that that I call dearer to me then my life, which is my Conscience and my
Honor; and if I had a respect to my life more then the Peace of the Kingdom,
the Liberty of the Subject, certainly I should have made a particular Defense
for my self, for by that, at leastwise, I might have delayed an ugly Sentence,
which I believe will pass upon me; therefore certainly, Sir, as a man that has
some understanding, some knowledge of the world; if that my true zeal to my
Country had not overborn the care that I have for my own Preservation, I should
have gone another way to work then that I have done: Now Sir, I conceive, that
an hasty Sentance once past may sooner be repented of then recalled, and truly
the self same desire that I have for the Peace of the Kingdom, and the Liberty
of the Subject more then my own particular ends, makes me now at last desire,
That I having something to say that concerns both: I desire before Sentence be
given that I may be heard in the Painted Chamber before the Lords and Commons:
this delay cannot be prejudicial unto you whatsoever I say: if that I say no
Reason, those that hear me must be Judges, I cannot be Judge of that that I
have; if it be Reason, and really for the welfare of the Kingdom, and the
Liberty of the Subject, I am sure on it it is very well worth the hearing;
therefore I do conjure you, as you love that that you pretend, ( I hope its
real,) the Liberty of the Subject, the Peace of the Kingdom, that you will
grant me this hearing before any Sentence be past; I only desire this, That you
will take this into your consideration, it may be you have not heard of it
beforehand, if you will I will retire, and you may think of it; but if I cannot
get this Liberty, I do protest, That these fair shows of Liberty and Peace are
pure shows, and that you will not hear your King.

The Lord President said,

That what the King had said, was a declining of the Jurisdiction of the Court,
which was the thing wherein he was limited before.

The King urged,

That what he had to say was not a declining of the Court, but for the Peace of
the Kingdom, and liberty of the Subject.

Lord President.

Sir; This is not altogether new that you have moved unto us, though it is the
first time that, in person, you have offered it to the Court: And afterward,
That though what he had urged might seem to tend to delays, yet according to
that which the King seemed to desire, the Court would withdraw for a time, and
he should hear their pleasure.

Then the Court withdrawing into the Court of Wards, The Sergeant at Arms had
command to withdraw the Prisoner, and to give Order for his Return again.

The Court after about half an hours debate returned from the Court of Wards
Chamber; And the King being sent for, the Lord President spoke to this effect;

Sir, You were pleased to make a motion here to the Court, touching the
propounding of somewhat to he Lords and Commons in the painted Chamber, for he
Peace of the Kingdom; you did in effect receive in answer, before their
adjourning, being pr^^orma tantum; for it did not seem to them that there was
any difficulty in the thing; they have considered of what you have moved, and
of their own Authority: The Return from the Court is this. That they have been
too much delayed by you already, and they are Judges appointed by the highest
Authority, and Judges are no more to delay, then they are to deny Justice; they
are good words in the great old Charter of England, Nulli negabimus, nulli
condemus, et nulli deferremus justitiam: But everyman observes you have delayed
them in your Contempt and Default, for which they might long since have
proceeded to Judgment against you; and notwithstanding what you have offered,
they are resolved to proceed to Sentence and to Judgment, and that is their
unanimous Resolution.

King. Sir, I know it is in vain for me for to dispute, I am no Seperick for to
deny the power that you have; I know that you have power enough: Sir I must
confess I think it would have been for the Kingdoms peace if you would have
taken the pains for to have shown the lawfulness of your Power: for this
delay that I have desired, I confess it is a delay, but it is a delay very
important for the Peace of the Kingdom; for it is not my person that I look at
alone, it is the Kingdoms welfare and the Kingdoms peace: it is an old
sentence, That we should think on long before we have resolved of great matters
suddenly; therefore Sir I do say again, that I do put at your doors all the
inconveniency of a hasty sentence. I confess I have been here now I think this
week, this day 8. days was the day I came here first, but a little delay of a
day or two further may give peace, whereas an hasty Judgment may bring on that
trouble and perpetual inconveniency to the Kingdom, that the child that is
unborne may repent it; and therefore again out of the duty I owe to God, and
to my Country, I do desire that I may be heard by the Lords and Commons in the
painted Chamber, or any other Chamber that you will appoint me.

The President replied, that what he desired was no more then what he had moved
before, and therefore the Court expected to hear what he would say before they
proceeded to sentence.

King. This I say, That if you will hear me, I do not doubt to give
satisfaction to you, and to my people, and therefore I do require you (as you
will answer it at the dreadful Day of Judgment) that you will consider it
once again.


President. The Court will proceed to sentence, if you have no more to say.


King. Sir, I have nothing more to say, but I shall desire that this may be
entered what I have said.


The Lord President then proceeded to declare the grounds of the sentence, That
the Court were resolved to discharge their duty, that he had spoken of a
precious thing called Peace, and it were to be wished that God had put it into
his heart that he had effectually and really endeavored and studied the Peace
of the Kingdom, as now in words he seemed to pretend; That it appeared to the
Court, that he had gone upon very erroneous principles, the Kingdom had felt
it to their smart, that the Court was very sensible of it, and so he hoped the
understanding People of England would be; That the Law was his Superior, and
that he ought to have ruled according to the Law: the difference was, who
should be the Expositors of the Law, whether he and his party out of the Courts
of Justice, or the Courts of Justice, nay the Sovereign and high Court of
Justice, the Parliament of England, that is not only the highest expounder of
the Law, but the sole maker of the Law, and that for him and those that adhered
to him to set themselves against it, was not Law. That what some of his own
Party had said, Rex non habet parem in regno, was granted, but though he was
major singulis, yet he was universis minor, That the Barons of old when the
Kings played the Tyrants, called them to account, that they did frenum ponere,
that if they did forbear to do their duty now, and were not so mindful of
their own Honor and the Kingdoms, as the Barons of old were, certainly the
Commonalty of England would not be unmindfull of what was for their
preservation, and their safety. That if the King went contrary to that end, he
must understand that he is but an Officer in trust, and they to take order for
the punishment of such an offending Governor. That this is not a Law of
Yesterday, upon the division of Him and his People, but of old; and that the
Kings Oath implied as much: and where the People could not have any other
remedy, the Parliament were to do it, who were ordained to redress the
grievances of the People. The Parliaments were to be kept, we find in old
Authors, twice in the year, that the Subject might upon any occasion have a
ready remedy. That his design had been to destroy Parliaments, and that when
they would not engage against his native Kingdom of Scotland, he dissolved the
Parliament. That as Caligula the great Roman Tyrant wished the People of Rome
had but one neck, that at one blow he might cut it off; and this Kings
proceedings had been somewhat like his; For, the Body of the People of England
is no where represented but in Parliament; and could He but have confounded
that, he would soon have cut off the Head and Neck of England. That it was no
new thing to cite Presidents, where the people (when power was in their hands)
have made bold to call their Kings to account; that it would be too long a time
to mention either France, Spain, the Emperor, or other Countries, but he
instanced in the Kingdom of Aragon, where there was a man Tanquam in medio
positus, betwixt the King and the people, and he is acknowledged to be the
Kings Superior, and is the grand preserver of the peoples Privileges; and
what the Tribunes of Rome were heretofort, and the Ephori to the Lacedemonian
State, that was the Parliament of England to the English State; that he needed
not to mention those foraigne stories, if he looked but over Twede, there was
enough in his native Kingdom of Scotland, if they looked upon their first King
Terg^sius, who left two sons in their minority, and the older seeming
disaffected to their peace, and opposing his Uncle, who ruled well, they chose
the younger: that of 109. Kings of Scotland, he need not make mention how many
of them the people had made bold to deal withal, some to banish, and some to
imprison, and some to put to death, no Kingdom had more plentiful experience
then that Kingdom has, or the deposition and punishment of their offending
and transgressing Kings; And not to go far for example, the Kings
Crand^^mother set aside, and his Father an Infant crowned. And there wants not
examples here in England both before and since the Conquest, as King Edward the
second and Richard the second were so dealt with by the Parliament, and
whosoever looks into their stories should not find the Articles that are
charged upon them, to come near to that height and capitalnesse of crimes that
were laid to his Charge, and for succession by inheritance it was plain from
the Conquest that of 24. Kings, one half of them came in by the State.

That the Oath at his Coronation did show there was a contract and bargain made
by the people.

After the Lord President had cited many things to this purpose, in relation to
the power of Kings, and their being called to account for breach of Trust, and
expressed in what sense this present King had been guilty, according to his
Charge of being a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and public Enemy to the
Commonwealth. He further declared in the name of the Court, That they did
heartily wish, that he would be so penitent for what he had done amiss, that
GOD might have mercy at leastwise upon his better part; for the other it was
their duty to do it, and to do that which the Law prescribes, they were not
there jus dare, but jus dicere; that they could not but remember what the
Scripture said, For to acquit the guilty it is equal ^^homination as to
condemn the innocent; we may not acquit the guilty; what sentence the Law
affirms to a Traitor, a Tyrant, a Murderer, and a public Enemy to the
Country, that sentence he was to hear read unto him.

Then the Clerk read the sentence drawn up in parchment.

That whereas the Commons of England in Parliament had appointed them an high
Court of Justice for the trying of Charles Stuart King of England, before whom
he had been three times convented, and at the first time a Charge of high
Treason, and other crimes and misdemeanors was read in the behalf of the
kingdom of England, etc.

Here the Clark read the Charge.

Which Charge being read unto him as aforesaid, he the said Charles Stuart was
required to give his Answer, but he refused so to do, and so expressed the
several passages at his Trial in refusing to answer.

For all which Treasons and Crimes this Court does adjudge, That he the said
Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer and a public Enemy, shall be
put to death, by the severing of his Head from his Body.

After the sentence read, the Lord President said,

This sentence now read and published, it is the act, sentence, judgment, and
resolution of the whole Court: here the Court stood up, as assenting to what
the President said.

King. Will you hear me a word Sir?


Lord President. Sir, you are not to be heard after the sentence.


King. No Sir?


Lord President. No Sir, by your favor Sir. Guard, withdraw your Prisoner.


King. I may speak after the sentence.


By your favor Sir, I may speak after the sentence ever.

By your favor (hold) the sentence Sir --

I say Sir I do --

I am not suffered for to speak, expect what Justice other people will have.

O Yes. All manner of persons that have any thing else to do, are to depart at
this time, and to give their attendance in the painted Chamber, to which place
this Court does forthwith adjourne it self.

Then the Court rose, and the King went with his Guard to Sir Robert Cottons,
and from thence to Whitehall.

FINIS.

