The First DECADE OF Useful Observations, Raised out of Modern Experience.
Scientiae matter Experientia.
Temporis filia Veritas.

I.
HAving fixed a serious eye upon the late holding forth of pretenses, and
managing of Councels, I find, that as one plausible and common end engages,
and for a time unites persons of several opinions, interests, and affections,
distasting the present state of public affairs, and displeased with them that
sit at the Helm, or move in a higher sphere above them, through ignorance,
ambition, spleen, or covetousness for the most part (though some things are
really amiss, and obvious even to vulgar apprehension,) amongst which the great
dealers in the project for a change shuffle other things under the common
notion of errors in Government, and pressures of Liberty, that thereby they may
take in sunder the frame, and overthrow the foundations of that standing
Government, which wisely regulated does make most for the security and
happiness of all, and be a stop to dangerous innovations and particular
designs: so again, through factious ambition, perverse aemulation, and other
passions, the daughters of humane impotence in the heads of parties divided in
their special interests, after close and secret underminings of each other,
when their affairs are in a posture (as they conceive) to affront their rivals,
there is a sudden springing of their mines, to the blowing up (if possible) of
each other, at least to a mutual ballancing, as near as may be, of their
powers, till by advantage of counsels, opportunity of time, and the activeness
(which is ever most vehement and industrious in the younger brethren) as well
as numerousness and train of their adherents, one serpent devours and swallows
up the rest, or charms them so, that they lie as it were benumbed, or retire to
their holes and coverts, where they spit their venom against them, whose
overpowering virtue by force has driven them from the public Stage and
Theater, upon which the newest disguises and latest inventions please the
vulgar spectators best.

II.
As many Factions headed by one, which is most potent and popular at the first,
under its shelter and protection grow up and strengthen themselves, and for a
time contribute their utmost to the pulling down of the orderly structure and
well framed building of that Government which is settled, though in all hearts
not so firm and uniform as in time it may be: So when the first days work of
ruin and destruction is at an end, the next mornings business proves like that
of the worm which bred in Jona^^ gourd, and smote it at the root, so that the
leaves thereof withered and fell away; for the under and weaker faction rooting
it self at the bottom of that which is more grown and spreading, secretly
smirts, and suddenly overthrows it: and as it grew up in a night, so it
perishes in a night; growing up in a night of darkness and confusion
overspreading a people, and perishing in a night of new Schisms and black
Errors supervening the former shadows and obscurity.

III.
Schism as a shaking Ague in the body of the Church, and Faction as a burning
Fever in the body of the State, have the^^ retreats and intermissions, as well
as their violent fits and conflicts: but such their intermissions are no
longer, then either while they are affronted and over-mastered by a superior
commanding power, or by condescentions in way of Treaty, they hope to mount and
raise themselves the higher, or to prevent the provoking of Magistrates, and
the occasioning of strict Laws against their course and motion; in which space
notwithstanding, their putrefaction spreads it self more and more throughout
the veins, until at last an ill-temper'd habit seizes on, and disaffects the
whole, for want of timely vomits, or Phlebotomy in the second place, where
preventional cleansings and seasonable drainings have been neglected in the
first: And because the symptoms of these sickly perturbations, by reason of
their inward and secret workings, often times appear not until the very breaking
forth of the maladies; its wisdom (an imperious tyranny, and arbitrary lording
of it, with an implicit faith, and servile obedience avoided) to hold all to
an outward subjection and conformity; sufficiently providing withal, that
tender and unquiet Consciences may receive satisfaction to their scruples in
public, from select persons designed and authorized for that end in all parts
of the Land, if from the next in office, whether civil, or spiritual, they
cannot: but that (in case of not acknowledging themselves satisfied) under
severe penalties, they shall neither publicly teach or maintain, nor
privately instruct or persuade any, contrary to that which is established in
Church or State by legal Authority, nor divulge, by any means, whatsoever tends
to undermine and overthrow the same.

IV.
The seed of Schism and faction is very small at first, resembling a grain of
mustardseed, which is one of the least of seeds; but if suffered to take root,
in a short time it grows to be so great, that it becomes a tree, so that the
fouls of Heaven come and build in the branches thereof: So Schism and Faction,
not rooted out at the first, become lofty and spreading, so that ambitious and
airy spirits perch upon the boughs, and seat themselves in the branches
thereof, desirous to be eminent, and appear in chief above the rest. As the
little cloud also, which Elijahs servant saw rising out of the Sea like a man's
hand, and suddenly the Heaven was all over black with clouds and wind; so the
malign vapor of Schism and Faction, exhaled out of the foaming sea of men's
restless and blackish passions, appears at the first discovery but of a
hand-bredth, and inconsiderable, in regard of its strength or danger; but
neglected, it spreads apace through turbulent winds, to the obscuring of the
face of a Church and State, and darkening the refulgent splendour and luster
thereof: Wherefore the Poets counsel cannot be amiss herein; Principiis obsta,
sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
Each Schism and Faction in the Craddle smite:
Let not such serpents long enjoy the Light.
When maladies are strong, and aged grown,
That physic cannot cure, in vain we moan.


V.
As it is the cursed fruit, and immediate effect of Schism and Faction, to
destroy Unity, and disturb Order, in regard of that which is peaceably and well
settled, as to the public: so its the usual folly and punishment of either of
them, after a while, to break in sunder into Divisions, and multiply into
Sects; and each fighting more or less against its fellows, whilst they are on
foot; they are not of power, nor so in league, as to imbody themselves any long
time against the forces of an orderly truth, and a well-constituted Government;
and in the end through mutual conflicts destroy each other, or crumble into
such petty Sects and under-Factions, that like so many sparks flying from the
same fire-coal, they go out and vanish of themselves.

VI.
Many are the causes and occasions which contribute to the multiplying of
Schisms and Factions, as affectation of novelty and variety implanted in men by
nature, weary for the most part of things when they grow stale and common, as
children are of babies, with which they are much taken at the first. For if
Manna it self became lothsom to the Israelites, because it grew common, though
it was the Bread of Heaven, and answered at first to every man's taste and
relish, so that they lusted after the fleshpots of Egypt, and after Leeks and
Onyons, even to a nauseous rejecting of that which might have been food for
Angels, if they could have hungered: If men grew weary of Christ himself, and
his heavenly Doctrine, the spiritual Food and Manna of their souls, so that
within a while after the Christian Faith was planted in the Churches of
Pergamus, Thyatira, and Laodicea, the first became infested with the Idolatrous
and impure doctrines of Balaam, and the Nicolaitans: The second suffered the
woman Jezabel, vailing her self under the name of a Prophetess to teach and
deceive many, even such as professed themselves the servants of God and his
blessed Truth, to make them commit fornication, and to eat meat sacrificed to
Idols: And the third was become lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, without zeal,
either to maintain truth, or practice holiness. Is it possible that
schismatical Opinions, erroneous Tenets, and seditious Doctrines, which are the
poison of the soul, though cookt, and set forth, and sweetened by the best art
of Satan, should still please the same appetites, though corrupt, much less
diverse, if they be still the same, and offered after the same mode and
fashion. And as there is a desire of novelty and variety in all men more or
less by a secret spring in nature, though men of wisdom and sobriety much
restrain and rectify the same; so is there oftentimes too a disease of
inconstancy in the same particular men, which, after much acquaintance and
intimate familiarity, grow out of love with, and become strangers to their own
Principles which they held forth to others, and fall away from their own party,
with whom they solemnly, if not superstitiously, had engaged; which inconstancy
of Individuals (for the most part) proceeds from the access of clearer light,
and fuller knowledge, with which by degrees they come acquainted, which
discovers to them the vanity and falsehood of that, whose defects in the
twilight of their ignorance, and first dawnings of their knowledge did not
appear unto them; from discovery of dangers not foreseen, and inconveniences,
as to to their own benefit and proper interest, if they persist in the worship
of that golden Image (their peculiar imaginations) which themselves have set
up, with calling upon others by the various music of the most harmonious and
best tuned Rhetoric of their tongues and pens, to the dedication of, and
falling down to the same; and from new and more advantageous ends presented
upon desisting to prosecute their hitherto professed way, which makes them shake
hands with themselves, and steer a new course, to arrive at a more safe Port
and commodious Haven. The different tempers also which are predominant in men,
the diverse senses which oversway men in their judgments, together with the
several ends which they aim and level at as their whites and marks, occasion
diversity of Sects, Schisms and Factions at their first advance and marching
forth; the which, through some men's spleentique discontent with others in chief
afterward, or their ambitious singularity to set up their own Ensigns and
Standards apart, are much widened and increased.

VII.
Schismatiques and Sectaries though divided amongst themselves, are of several
professions, in regard of their peculiar and specifique Principles, are
fellow-laborers notwithstanding in building up the Devils Kingdom, as the
fellow-craftsmen of Demetrius the silver-smith for Diana at Ephesus, who
(obnoxious without question to private spleens and emulations, faber enim fabro
invidet) being called together with other workmen of like occupations, in an
unanimous shout almost for the space of two hours cried as the Ephesian Diana,
and her Temple: For though the Devils Kingdom, if it were divided against it
self could not stand, yet by the divisions of seduced men through evil lusts,
and seducing spirits, his Kingdom is enlarged and propagated, because such
divisions separate from Union with God, and Communion with his Saints, and make
the divided belong to the same Army under their Captain General Abaddon or
Apollyon, Rev. 9.11. though following diverse Colors, and different Ensigns,
whose service they advance, in seeking by a joint labor, though with sundry
Engines and means to pull down Gods spiritual palace, and holy Temple on
Earth, as Ephraim and Manasses to oppress Judah, the Pharisees and Saduces to
destroy Christ, and the Manichees by their two Principles and fatal necessity,
and Pelagians by their free will and universal grace, to pervert the Catholic
Faith of true Believers.

VIII.
Amongst Schismatics and Sectaries, some [like the Adversaries of Judah and
B^njamin, Ezra 4. ( viz. the inhabitants of Samaria, whom the King of Assyria
had placed there instead of the ten Tribes,) hearing that the children of the
late Captivity were building the Temple to the Lord God of Israel, to the end
they might retard and hinder it, came to Zerubbabel, and to the chief Fathers,
and said unto them, we will build with you, for we seek the Lord your God as ye
do, and we have sacrificed unto him, etc.] to interrupt and trouble the
spiritual workmen about Gods Temple, consisting of many well polisht and living
stones, whose Foundation is Humility and Patience, whose Pillars are Order and
Uniformity, whose Windows are Wisdom and clear Knowledge in spiritual Things,
and whose Roof is Faith arched with Charity, and overlaid with the precious
gold of shining and good Works, and to hinder the advancement and amplifying of
Christ's in the hearts of Believers, will pretend to the same mystical Body, the
same gracious Spirit, the same sovereign Lord, Evangelical Faith, and
Christian-Baptism too, except in this evening of time, and dotage of the world,
when some (though but once born from their mothers womb) will needs be twice
newborn within the bosom of the Church, with those who sincerely follow the
Truth in Peace and Love, and meeting together in the Unity of Faith and
Knowledge of the Son of God, grow up into a perfect man, to the measure of the
stature of the Fullness of Christ.

IX.
An Assembly of Schismatics may be justly styled a generation of Vipers, for
the young Vipers (as Naturalists observe) gnaw their way through their Dams
belly to come into the world: So these struggle in the womb, and tear in
sunder, as it were, the bowels of the Church of Christ, to bring forth
themselves into the world to deceive simple and unstable souls, whose unhappy
labors and pernicious diligence tend to the breach of spiritual Unity, to
corrupt the purity of Faith, to dissolve the bonds of Peace, to untwist the
cords of Love, to stain the beauty of order and grace of Uniformity, to unlink
and sever the chain of heavenly Graces; and in a word* to undermine the strong
Pillars, loosen the Couples, darken the Lights, and shake in sunder the whole
frame of Gods Spiritual House and Building, the Congregation of Believers.

X.
To conclude, The happiness of a particular or national Church free from
Schism, redounds to the happine s and quiet of the Civil State, and preserves
it from unnatural Combustions, unreasonable Divisions, and factious sidings;
Rebellion for the most part masking it self under the visor of Religion, which
teaches Christians, under the yoke of subjection, innocence, prayers and
patience; not arms, resistance, or reviling. Within a Church so becalmed and
settled, the Jerusalem of God is builded as a City which is at Unity in it self,
Christ protecting it, his Spirit breathing on it, his Angels ministering unto
it, who rejoice at its Order, Peace and Unity; the Devil and his Emissaries
cast out, and her spiritual Sons and Daughters growing up into Christ, by whom
all the Body being coupled and knit together, according to the effectual
working in every part, receives increase of the Body to the edifying of it
self in Love.

June 25. 1649.
Imprim.

T. J.

London, Printed for T. M.

FINIS.

