THE CAUSE of GOD, And of these NATIONS. Sought out, and drawn forth from the
Rubbish of the Lusts and Interests of Men, and lifted up into sight and view
for all the upright in heart to follow it. Wherein is showed, What our Cause
was. What opportunity we had for it. How miserably it has been deserted. What
was the Cause of that desertion. The spiritual Judgment that is already upon
the Desertors.
With a Word of encouragement to all the faithful, and persevering friends of
it.

Isa. 59.19 When the Enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord
shall lift up a Standard against him.

London, Printed Anno Dom. 1659.

To all the Honest-hearted of the Land; who though through weakness they have
staggered, yet have not wickedly departed from the Cause of God and the Nation.
GOD has pardoned your sins, You have had your temptations and weaknesses, and
God has chastend and afflicted you for them; You have borne your shame, you
have turned away from God and rejoiced in a thing of naught: Therefore God has
withdrawn from you his presence and blessing, and your Renown is much perished.
You have minded the enriching of your selves, the making your Families and
Names Great: Therefore has God set up a greatness over you to afflict you. You
would be so wise, and so in the fashion of the World, and of the Nations, so
afraid of the meanness of Christ and of the Spirit, that I think ye have had
enough of a Lordly Spirit; and yet in the name of Christ too, bringing you
under. God has paid you in your own Coin. Ye would ride upon horses, and upon
the swift, therefore they that have pursued you have been swift. Glorify God
in his Judgments, Confess him and sanctify his Name.

Are ye willing to be delivered? Or do ye affect bondage still? Will ye be
boared for perpetual slaves? Will ye yet accept of the Government of Christ?
Are ye weary and heavy laden? Will ye put into a good harbor? The Lord opens
his Arms to you, He waits that he may be gracious. He has hid love under all
this dispensation; These winds and waves have been but to waft you over into
his own Bosom. It is one of his Ordinances, In the world you shall have
tribulation. But he is wherever he was, and the Cause is, and lives; All ye
that are the Natural children of it, Come own your Mother. Jerusalem which is
above is free, which is the Mother of us all, and ye are free, and nothing can
inthral you, no Bonds, no Yokes, no Temptations, no allurements can hold you in
that that is unrighteous. Ye can not rest till ye come to your own Land, till
ye see the New Heavens, and the New Earth wherein Righteousness dwells. Of
whatsoever Kindred, Nation, Tribe, or Tongue ye are, no Form can or shall
imprison you long, or hold the truth in unrighteousness. I know ye have your
several Lights, and discernings gradually differing; But ye are one, and agree
perfectly in the true Ground and Reason of your life. Ye would have Truth and
Righteousness take place, that is, Ye would have Christ reign. For Truth and
Righteousness are but so many Names of Him; and he would have ye happy and
free every way, free in your Persons, free in your Estates, free inwardly, free
outwardly: for the Earth is his as well as Heaven, He made it, and that not in
Vain, He made it to be inhabited, Sin and unrighteousness has desolated it.
The fruit of the Earth shall be excellent and comely, when the Branch of the
Lord is beautiful and glorious for his escaped Remnant. He has married you and
calls you by Name: You are the true English race, those that are against you
are strangers and foreigners, Aliens from their own Country; Therefore when I
call you Englishmen, it is as much as if I called you Israelites.

Ye are but a Remnant, yet ye are the seed and hopes of the Land; God has
winnowed and sifted the Nation; those that were not of you, are fallen off from
you. It is your advantage that you know them, you shall not want their Numbers,
nor need you fear their Multitude; for the whole Multitudes that gather against
you, shall be as the Dream of a night Vision. God is arisen to judge them, ye
shall need to do nothing against them, but to stand still and see the salvation
of the Lord.

Their Mighty men are fallen, their strength is perished, the anointing is
ceased and departed from them; Your Cause is risen, I feel it is risen, The
Witnesses thereof begin to stand upon their feet.

The Interest of this short discourse is, First to awaken you, and to point out
unto you the Cause of all our Breakings, since that signal Witness given from
Heaven to our Cause. There was much Darkness, wrath, foolishness, selfishness,
mingled with our zeal, Love, Righteousness, in the managing of the Cause, which
was to be pared and pruned off, burnt up, and separated from us, and the fire
has seized upon it. There was also a mixed multitude with us (as there was with
Israel when they came up from Egypt) who had not a steadfast Spirit, nor a right
aim, Children in whom was no faith, which were to be made manifest, and to be
knocked off. These their buits have caught them, and they are at their journeys
end; they will be left hehind, and that is not the worst that awaits them.
While yon had to deal with the open and declared Enemy, ye were still
successful against them; but these false brethren have betrayed you and your
Cause. Trust them no more, nor that Spirit: It is your great advantage, that
you now know the depths of Satan, you have seen Satan transforming himself into
an Angel of light, the Man of sin working in all deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness, in praying, preaching, weeping, etc. You cannot be cousened
any more with these. Where the Life, the Seed, the Nature is, it will recover
it self, and this Discourse may be serviceable to awaken; and call it forth out
of that Caprivity wherein it lies; but where is only the Notion, the Form, the
Profession, it will wither away more and more. Let all that are the Children of
this Cause hear this Voice, and obey this Call to come out of Babylon, and
partake no longer in her sins, as they would not partake in her Plagues.

A second aim of this Discourse, is, to enlarge our apprehensions in the just
Extent and Dimensions of our Cause, which is not to be restrained or limited by
the scant Models of any private thoughts, but is to be learned and received
from the heavenly pattern as God is pleased to let it down and show it unto
us. Hence all those Designs will be found too short or narrow of those that
would rest in forming these Nations merely into a Commonwealth, or that bound
the Work by Civil or Spiritual liberties, as they are commonly apprehended. The
Cause of God in its latitude and adaequate extent, is, the bringing of all
things in Earth to answer the mind of God, as is done in Heaven. A thing not
done at once nor presently, but by degrees, nor to be perfected but by the
appearance of Jesus Christ, as he lets down the spiritual knowledge and
revelation of himself unto us, in the opening of the Scriptures. We are to be
preparing and occupying our Measures and Talents, till he come and put the
finishing hand to Crown his own work.

3. To direct us in the Way of serving this Cause, That we go not forth headily
and rashly, presumptuously and self-confidently in our own wit, will, wisdom,
or rage, (there has been too much of this) but humbly waiting upon God,
watching and looking up to him, what door he opens, what way he leads, what
means he puts into our hands; and not to be troubled if we cannot see to the
end of our way distinctly, but from step to step. If we be brought to an
obedient following of him, our way shall be as the increasing light growing to
perfect day. This was the way God persuaded the Parliament unto at first, we
had never else taken down Bishops, not being provided of a Discipline in their
room; but God carried us over this Objection then. And so this was the way the
Army professed themselves to be lead in, and they prospered wonderfully. Those
were the days of innocence and simplicity, (though much weakness and
childishness); and God may upbraid us with that time as once he did Israel,
Jer. 2. I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth in the day of thy espousals,
when thou followedst me in a Land that was not sowed, (When thou knew not
how thou should live, but had every meal from Heaven) Israel was holiness
to the Lord, etc. And this is a great thing we have Covenanted and engaged to
the Lord. It is no new thing ye are exhorted to, but the Vows of God are upon
us. The Lord has had livery and seizin of us, we have lived upon him, and he
has found us in a Desert Land, and has borne us upon Eagles wings, and why
should it not be so again?

To conclude, let us consider what a Name and a Praise we began to be made in
the Earth; What people were like England, a People saved by the Lord! Shall we
begin in the Spirit and seek to be made perfect in the flesh? Shall we that
have been assisted and carried forth, to assert the Cause of God against the
corrupt usurpations of the World, when they had so long prescription, a King of
ancient Descent, that had such a fouundation of the National Constitution, the
Laws, an Army to stand upon, the Spirit of the world in its vigor to maintain
and uphold them? Shall we that did not then shrink, but wrought our Cause
through the fire, and through Seas of blood; shall we now after we have
conquered all these real difficulties, be afraid of a thing of naught, of the
shaddows of our own unbelieving fears, that have no foundation or bottom of
reason or righteousness, or consent, or constitution to urge themselves upon
us? Where is the King of whose frown ye should be afraid? Where Is his Power?
Where Is his Army? What is become of the Great men and Mighty men? Who shall
hurt you, if ye be followers of that that is good? If any be stepped up into
their places, and shall offer to oppose the Canse of God, ye need not wish for
weaker Adversaries, for they will be self-condemned, They stand upon a Bogg
which will swallow them up having no righteous foundation.

And for your Comfort, let me add this one Word; The World ye are to grapple
with, has lost a great strength of late; Its very Heart Strings are broke.
This I must say for Him that is gone, It was He that bare up this old ruinous
Frame, which in likelihood had fallen before this, if His Parts, His Courage,
His Religion, had not supported it: Whether He did well or ill in it judge ye.
Indeed it broke him at length, and he fainted under the weight of it; but He
was a strong Buttresse to it, when it was sinking in the time of the little
Assembly, The Law and the Clergy had then cracked, if he had not put thereto his
shoulder. I am not against the Honest Interest of the Ministry or Law, if that
Interest be public, if it be the Interest of Righteousness and of the
Spirit, I call them old and rotten in the corrupt State of them wherein at
present they stand; But (I say) while that Prop of them lasted, there was no
attempting against them; for God had given him to be a prolonging of days unto
them: And as he that stood in the way: did let the revealing of the Man of
sin, till he was taken out of the way: so the Spirit of God in his poor
Witnesses, had not full play against this old and corrupt State of things,
while that Great Spirit acted the Defense of them.

A Word to the Reader, to remove Prejudice.
MY aim is to give my witness against the Present Apostasy, whether this
Generation will hear, or whether they will forbear.

I have believed, therefore have I spoken: These things are not ministered but
with some Faith, that God will appear and revive this Cause and his poor
people: and as I know not which way, so I am not Solicitous. I would be loath
to blow the Coals of another Intestine War. But better our Peace be
interrupted, then Truth perish; which is more our Life, than the blood that
runs in our Veins. I know it must be, not by Might nor Power, but by the
Spirit, that our deliverance is wrought, whether in War or Peace: I should
hope, the present Usurpations should be too much self-condemned in the
Practisers of them, to bear a quarrel; and that if we knew once but how to
Value our Cause and the ground we are upon, our Opposites would quickly rebate
their Courage, seeing the day is so far risen.

I am not against Monarchy as an unlawful Government, we find it owned of God,
and honored to be a Type of the Reign of Christ; but I am upon this Dilemma
withal the Promoters of it here: Either we did well, and were guided by a
divine hand in taking it down, or not: If not, why do we not ask the World
mercy, and restore the old Family again: If we were directed by God to remove
it, let us see the same divine hand leading to the restoring it; else, What a
scandal is it to our Cause, to build again the things we destroyed.

That God leads us not to it, appears; 1. Because his people consent not in it;
and Governments for the form of them are to be founded upon Consent; The
people that adhered and are yet faithful to this Cause, have not only their
Interest among others, but Paramount to the rest of the Nation.

2. Our Condition calls not for unnecessary charge; Taxes lie heavy on the
Commoners; The poor of the Land that want bread, are numerous.

3. Kingly Government is a kind of Scourge; and, at best, an allay of the
freedom of a people; a sacred thing esteemed, of difficult access,
Idolatrously adored, an occasion of great superfluity excess and vanity,
unsuitable to this day that is upon us; and lastly, makes the Person too stour
and haughty to fall under the reproofs of the poor mean servants of Christ,
that come to them only in the name of the Lord; and so exalts their hearts to
their own destruction in the end, and the people's smart in the mean time.

4. The Kings of Judah were Types, but Types are Ceased. Kingship is now to be
preserved in the Person of Christ, He will administer it in Truth, in the truth
of his own righteous and royal spirit, not in figure and shadow, through
pitiful poor base men, servants of lusts. The poorest Saint that Cobbles under
a Stall has more of true Majesty, and is more a King then the greatest Prince
among them, that is under the power of lust in his own soul.

I might give many other Reasons, as the Impolitiquenesse of it to make a
Family-quarrel; the unsafeness of it, for the person or family we should so set
up. But I leave politiques to Statesmen, I am chiefly exercised in the
Conscience of the thing.

The like I say for Lords, I am not against Lords simply. But they are thrown
out; It concerns us to consider by what hand, and on what grounds, before we
admit them again. If they were unnecessary and hinderful of our Cause and
proceedings, either we have altered our Cause, or they are so still. It was not
the Persons we animadverted against but the Power: How unrighteous is it, if
our Judgments be altered of the Power, to place it in New Persons, when many of
the Ancient Peers are yet living, as deserving as the New. Is not this the way
to breed a quarrel between Peers and Peers, as between King and King.

2. Walk not in the way of the Gentiles, The Judgment of God made Kings; Kings,
made Lords; They were only to help the King to inslave the people. What people
that had their choice would set up either? Lords without Lands, can do no more
service for God nor their Country, then other men.

3. I am not against a Distinction of Ranks of men. Variety is the beauty of
the universe, and an exercise of Virtue. Where would bounty and humility be, if
there were not Rich? And where were patience and contentation of mind, if there
were not mean men? I would have every one have their Rights, no industrious men
want, all honest men free. I would not affectedly set up mean men against the
wealthy, nor would Itye wisdom and understanding to men of Estate. Liberal,
and generous Education, is a good quality; but let it not go alone in the
choice of men to rule: but look for the spirit of Government.

4. It is far from me to Monopolize or ingrosse (in my judgment) the
privileges and advantages of that Righteous Kingdom which God is setting up
over the Earth, to Saints only; which shall be shared among all that submit to
it, and oppose it not so far as they are Capable: much less do I reckon of
Saintship, by any form of words that men express themselves in. And though I
dare not abett all that are zealous for this Cause for Saints, yet I must
profess my faith is shaken concerning those that desert it; and it is an
argument of some more Noble, if not divine thing in men, through all Shocks of
temptations on the one hand, and the other, to preserve their Integrity. And
this I am persuaded; As, many have bin already shaken off, (as untimely figgs);
so few or none will hold out with this good Cause to the end, but, those that
are of an Incorruptible seed: whom therefore I shall desire to know by their
fruits, and judge of them according to their works.

5. And, as I am not able to say but a spirit of righteous Government as to
things between man and man, may be found in some who are not Saints upon the
Strictest account of regeneration, (who may therefore, for ought I know, have
the exercise of their talent allowed them even in the Kingdom of Christ,
subjecting that Rule of theirs in due subserviency to the spirit, and Spiritual
affairs): so can I not on the other hand admit that to be the proper Rule and
Government of Christ, be it exercised by whomsoever (though the Highest
Professors in Religion, and on never so high an account) that is contrary to
the light of Scripture rightly understood, or the light of incorrupt Reason in
any sort of men. The Demonstration of the spirit, and the righteousness of that
Kingdom justifying its self undeniably to the conscience of the natural man,
in things that are under his Judgment, as well as to the spiritual Christian in
things which are proper to his discerning: So as there is no Arbitrariness here
in this Kingdom, but all by Rule, and that Rule is so clear and undeniable, as
nothing can rise up against it in any man's conscience.

Lastly, I desire I may be believed, that I have not bin led by any prejudice
against his present Highness in this Testimony which I bear, who as He has
not by any Public Act of his Government disobliged any (that I know of), so
by his affability and Courtesy wins upon all (if any private passages have not
bin so to the Rule, I would not mention them because I would not multiply
them.) As the Place he is in, sought him, not he it; so I desire, He may lay it
and himself at the feet of Christ, to dispose of him and his Interest, as may
be most for his glory. So is he sure not to be layd-by dishonourably, if any
could have a heart or stomach so to do. Christ himself must give up the
Kingdom to God, and so must all Rulers and Potentates unto Christ, else Woe be
to them.

THE Cause of God, AND Of these Nations.
CHAP. I. Of the deplorable Estate of the Nation at this day, after so fair
advantages as were put into our hands.
IT is a certain truth, No man is made unhappy but by his own choice; God has
not bin wanting to let us find, that all the power of our enemies either at
home or abroad could not destroy us, while we had hearts, and were watchful,
to use the means to preserve our seivs: confidence in men and distrust in God,
commonly go together, and are much of like dangerous Issue and Consequence. We
have lost more in this seven years Peace, by trusting too much to a friend,
then we did in all our twelve years war, while we conflicted with hoasts of
enemies; inasmuch as we have been still losing our liberty by little and
little, which all the time of the wars we went on gaining more and more: and if
we get no more by losing him, but resolution to take up our trust, we shall be
confiderable gainers. I am (I confess) so much a Leveller, that in this
corrupt state of men's principles and minds, (corruptible at the best), it is
safer for Laws to govern than Men. Not but that, that blessed day of the Lord's
own righteous Reign, may be nearer the dawning upon us, than perhaps the
present dark and cloudy complexion of our thoughts and affairs would seem to
hold forth: Therefore I would not have the door of a lively expectation shut
against our Lord's appearing as I would not that, in the mean time, (though we
knew, He were to come to morrow) we should throw away our Reason, and put out
our Lights (as men), and despise those liberties he has given us as advantages
for our serving of him.

The late violent turns and changes that have befallen this poor Commonwealth,
since our Arms rested from the common enemy, have (to my apprehension) looked
more like the Trumpets in the Apocalypse, that, with gallantry and state,
brought in Corruption, than the Vials that work it out. These pour not forth
themselves at once with observation, but leisurely and secretly wast and
consume long-rooted Usurpations. And all that either the Civil or Military
power has to do, is but to maintain us in peace and freedom, that so we may
attend unto that Light of God (which, according to the prophecies of Scripture,
is breaking forth) which will certainly undermine and destroy the State
Antichristian, as well as the Church Anti christian: for there is both, and
both shall be destroyed with the Spirit of Christ's mouth and the brightness
of his Appearing: And without his appointment, it will never be done by secular
Sword or Arm.

When I say The Powers are to maintain our peace and freedom, I am aware what I
say, and that it implies, We were in the possession of them; and indeed so we
were, and they were given us of God: If it be demanded, when we were so, and
wherein it appeared? I answer, When our Arms were victorious over all our
enemies in the field, which was not till after Worcester fight: Then was there
nothing in our way visibly, but Mercy and Truth, Righteousness and Peace might
have embraced each other.

The Enemy was subdued in England before that, but there was a remnant of him
in Scotland and Ireland: And then the Rent that was made among us by the taking
off the King, weakened the honest Interest much, as the Action it self gave
opportunity to the ambitious aspirings and designs of some, (when that place
was empty) to get into it, (at least wise such jealousies there were). Perhaps,
when that action shall be reveiw'd by us in Cooler Spirits, we may see Cause to
acknowledge that the King was not so ripe for the Capital Justice of man in
those passive Circumstances, wherein he then stood as a Prisoner of War, till
he had forfeited the security we might have laid upon him; I am sure our Eager
policy in that Action for self-preservation has little succeeded or answered
our desires. However the sickle of Divine Justice cutting him down, it was not
advisable for honest men (when they had discharged their judgments and
consciences in a saithful testimony) to divide thereupon; But notwithstanding
this breach, we were again, as I said, upon fair advantages after the Battle at
Worcester, when nothing was wanting but a Spirit and wisdom to manage so great
an opportunity. A time like that of Augustus Caesar. When our Savior was born
all the World was quiet; So was all our little world, for the Savior to be
born into it the 2d time. Tyrants both in Church and State expelled, their
Armies vanquished: The Nations like wax ready to receive any good and righteous
impression: yea, the Parliament it self expecting what good thing would be
required of them to do; having power to refuse, nothing should have bin
demanded. The Lawyers quaked, the formal Clergy were down in the Mouth, the
Malignant trembled, the loose Nobility and Gentry looked pale; All men were
frighted into a fear and awe of God, and the hearts and expectations of all
good men were up exceedingly. But wherefore is a price put into the hand of a
fool, when there is no heart? Now was the time that God said unto us, as once
unto Israel, Go up and possess the Land which I have sworn that I would give
you, Go fill the Land with Righteousness, plant my Name and my Truth there;
Drive out all profannesse, unmercifulness, injustice, oppression; ease the
burdens, break the yokes, relieve the necessities of my people, stamp my Image
upon the Nation; consecrate it to me; whatever thing in your minds that is
honest, and just, and good, and merciful, bring it forth and fear not, for the
Lord your God which goes before you, He shall fight for you, according to all
that He did for you in Egypt. He that brought you up from under Regal Tyranny,
and Episcopal domination, that has vanquished the Enemy in the three Nations
before you, and all their formidable hosts, He is with you. (4.) This was the
possessing of the Land which the Lord called his people then unto; Even to fill
the seats of Judicature, and all places and things with the presence of God;
not to satisfy our selves, to possess the King's and Bishops Lands, and Deane
and Chapters Lands, or rather to be possessed by them.

All men must here needs understand that I charge the Army. And indeed I do so,
though not them alone, but many of the then Parliament, who took a new scent,
of the Honors promotions and Advantages of those whom God had cast out before
them, and lost the scent of the Cause; yea, and many of the zealous people of
the Nation too were taken off by these things. These were the Moabitish snares
that inveigled the Princes. And what has followed thereupon is sad to behold
at this day. We having lost in a manner all that we had got, and being relapst
deeper into bondage then heretofore in the Kings time; He is not an Englishman
that does not bleed to see how since that Liberty is lost, Property exposed to
Arbitrary Lust and Will, The Public Cause and Interest laidby, A Private
Cause and Interest set up, Men sworn to it, Judged by it, not only as to
liberty and livelihood, (Officers being Casher'd the Army, and others put out
of Places of Trust) but some put to death for not preferring it before the
public; Malignants countenanced and taken into favor, occasion given to the
formal, yea, the profane spirit, to lift up its head, while public spirits
and the precious of the Land were discouraged; yea, that very spirit whereby
our Cause rose and obtained so far, looked upon as an Enemy, and watched over
with a jealous eye. Tryers set up to keep it out of the Pulpit, good Justices
removed, and the old spirit of the Gentry brought in play again, worldly
greatness again affected by those that sometime seemed to set their face
another way. The burdensome pomp and vanity of a Court again revived, and idle
persons therein entertained, and maintained upon the charge of the poor
exhausted Commoners; justice as much delayed, as before; the Lawyers, as
Corrupt and Exorbitant: Those Bawbles (as once they were deemed and styled) and
ridiculous formalities of State again introduced, as vain and excessive
Feastings; and as superstitious and Idolatrous Funerals, as in the darkest
times; in all these things, as if we should profess to glory in our shame. The
election of Members to sit in Parliament, as Corruptly negotiated and
solicited as in the Kings time, Armies modelled and employed not for
maintaining of the Cause of God and the Nations, (save only in name and title)
but indeed and in truth to maintain those that have Usurpt the Dispose of us,
and it, and all our Liberties. A Council receiving pay, for work the Nation
never set them upon: When others would serve gratis. Nehemiah did not so, nor
the former Council of State, though they had their faults. In a word, all
things running again in the old Channel, and not only King, Lords, and Bishops
set up again under new appellations; but even the old Names and Powers claym'd
and contended for, as to the two first; The Negative Voice, and the Militia it
self not excepted, (two main branches of the late Quarrel): and if these
succeed to the desire of some (as, if we look to humane probabilities, there
may be too much Cause of fear, when we consider what attempts were made, and
what means were used the last Parliament to have made a King) we must have
Bishops too, if the old Proverb (which was no doubt the result of a deliberate
consideration and inspection into the Nature of the two Interests, No Bishop no
King) do hold good.

While these things have bin doing, the hand of God has bin upon our Bodies,
our Cattle, our Trading. What strange and New diseases have swept away whole
Families and Towns, almost of late years; So, as we could not avoid taking
notice of an intimation of Divine Displeasure therein: Unnatural and
intemperate seasons, a plague among our Horses, wherein, perhaps we have too
much confided, Our Merchants break and run away daily, Our Ships lost and taken
to incredible numbers; Our Men (the strength of our Nation) sent to digg their
graves with their swords in foreign Countries and disagreeing Climats, whither
they are pressed forth against their Consent (a thing that would not have bin put
up formerly) and the Poor of the Land increasing wonderfully upon us, whole
Families ready to starve for want of Trade and Employment, whilst that which
would maintain many Thousands is lavisht (I may say imbezeld) to keep up the
Port of a few new raised great Ones, at an unnecessary height.

Where these things may End, or whereto they are directed in the Intentions of
many, that drive them on, the Lord alone knows: but it is much, and with too
much ground (or appearance of likelihood) suspected, to be with an eye to
bring-in the old Family as soon as they have made all things ready; which by
that time all is said that these Designers are able to allege of the
Commodiousnesse thereof, to put us out of fear of any more Wars and Changes,
and to save the Charge of maintaining Armies, to keep out that Title; I fear
the Nation may have too strong a Temptation unto: And then what will become (I
say not) of King's and Bishops Lands, which many of the Gentry and Sould'ers
have swallowed down, (it were the less matter if the disgorging of them were
the worst consequence); but what would become of the Estates and Libert'es, not
to say the Lives, of all honest men that have adhered to this Cause? Nay, what
would become of the Cause of God and Religion, which we have bin contending for
against Popery and profaneness; let every indifferent person Judge. Though the
truth is, setting these consequences aside, if there were a Necessity of a King
again, I must profess I should think it more righteous, yea, more honorable
for our principles and our Cause, to take a branch of the old Family that has
not forfeited his Right by actual hostility against us, than to set up any
other Family in that place, so little grudge have I against that expulsed
Family: though I think whosoever pretends to be their Friend, and should wish
them restored to that Office and Dignity in this Day, wherein God seems to be
overthrowing (designedly) the throne of kingdoms, consults neither theirs nor
the Nations peace.

But, which is the Misery of all the rest, There are not wanting that endeavor
to persuade us, that though these symptoms of death are upon us, yet we are
well and upon an excellent constitution; (What would ye have? May ye not be as
good as ye will, say they?) and that this is our Cause we fought for. Which is
so true, as that the Calves were Israel's Gods, that brought them up out of the
land of Egypt: As if the setting up a few men, that seemed sometime zealous
for the Cause, were the triumphing of the Cause, when the body of the Adherents
languish. God knows whether in this I do enviously detract from the Merits of
any (His late Highness, or others, that rose with him) who deserved eminently
in their day; And None, was more joy'd to see the power come into His hands
then those that have since had so much cause to bewail the ill use of it. But,
to take it ill of us, that we cannot dance and sing in these circumstances, is
such an unreasonablenesse as is amazing. Wonder not that men that have been
free, should think it irksom to be in bondage; That those that have purchased
their liberty at such a Rate, should be willing to enjoy it; That those Court
Trinkets and Fopperies, those chargeable Bawbles and Vanities being once cast
out, are not without regret and anguish received and taken in again, No, No: we
cannot so easily take upon us all the Blood that has been shed in this
Quarrel; we cannot state the cause upon a Person or a Family, or the
individual circumstances of Hic and Nunc: Tyranny is Tyranny, and Oppression
is Oppression, be it excercised by whomsoever; and superfluity and luxury are
worse in this Generation than in the former days.

A liberty there is (I grant) to say what you will against the old Court, the
High Commission, the Star Chamber, the ways of the Bishops and former Tyrants
and persecutors, and to profess and practice any thing that touches not
present Corruptions: but shall we have liberty to witness against the same
Evils in new dresses? May Sir Henry Vane freely propound a Healing Q.? A. No:
If he do, he must, for an answer, be sent to Carisbrook Castle. May Col. Okey,
Lt. Genesis Ludlow, and other faithful Officers in the Army freely remonstrate
against incroaching Tyranny? No: they must then be cashiered and sent to the
Tower. May Mr. Cardel freely preach against a formal Ministry and Worship? No:
He must then leave his Benefice in Lumbard-street. May Mr. John Goodwin try the
Tryers? No: He must then be schooled for his pains, and know that He that set
them up will maintain them. May Major Genesis Overton exercise his command freely
without serving the lusts of great ones? No: He must then be banished to the
Isle of Garnsey.
If not, what liberty have we? or indeed, what liberty can be expected? when
those that take upon them to measure it out to us, are themselves the great
Object of Offense, and have made themselves deservedly the very Butt against
which all faithful witnessing must be directed, unless we will put out our
eyes, the light of our Reason and our Consciences, and call Evil Good, and Good
Evil, as too many have been corrupted or deceived to do, in these days.

CHAP. II. Enquires the Remedy in this case, where the forwardness of the
natural Man is rejected, and it is showed, That by the first Covenant there is
no recovery for us, if God show us not a better Covenant, and bring not down
our Spirits to the terms thereof.
THe Case standing thus with us, the Question will be, What way of recovery is
there for us? The flesh and the natural Man is forward and bold, and would be
undertaking presently, like Israel of old; who, when they had offended the
Lord, with refusing to go up at his command, thought to mend all again
presently with changing their resolution; But the Lord tells them, It would not
be accepted then: Because they would not go up in his Time, they should not go
up in their own; If they did, they should fall before the Canaanites.

There is a season and an opportunity, which if it be let slip, is never to be
recovered again, as it was with Jerusalem. O that thou had known, at least in
this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace; but now they are hid from
thine eyes. Ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and shall
not not see it. The night comes wherein no man can work.

1. There is a day of grace, wherein God makes offers and tenders of his
presence and assistance, which is meant by the days of the Son of Man; wherein
the patience of God waits upon the world, Persons and Nations, not leaving
himself without Witness that he is ready to do all on his part, toward the
saving and redeeming of them. Thus the old World had their day, during the
preaching of Noah: The Jews had theirs, during the preaching of Christ, All men
have their day wherein God shows himself, not willing of their death. And thus
England has had its day, as has been showed. But if this be overslipped then
follows,

2. In the second place, the day of Judgment, Heb. 10.26, 27. If we sin
wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery
indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries; That which grace will not do,
judgment shall. There is an Order for the issuing out of all Gods Attributes:
though he have magnified his Word above all his Name, and given it the first
place; yet he has not ceased to be just and righteous, he must make Rebels
stoop to him, else he had as good give up his Kingdom. Therefore, When the
Master of the house is risen up, and has shut to the door, and ye shall begin
to stand without and knock, etc. then, though Noah, Daniel, and Job stood
before me, my heart could not be toward this people. In that age when the Jews
were rejected, they had many friends that were powerful with God, the Apostles,
and others; yet they could not prevail to bring back the heart of God to that
people; though Paul bids high and would have given his salvation for it: No the
fire must now work upon them; Judgment must have its course, the Decree is gone
forth, there is no arresting of it. And though God will take up again and be
reconciled at last, yea and with more abundant kindness gather his people
again; yet it must be through a long tract of suffering, a 1600 years
rejection, and no hopes given them till Jesus Christ be sent the second time,
in the glory of the Father to restore them.

Let this be considered: for if this be our case, that the door be shut, and
that we begin to stand without and knock (as methinks it looks too like such a
thing, we have not that success and admission within that formerly we had) we
shall receive but cold answers without doors; then deliverance must be wrought
through the fire: we must bear our iniquity, before God be pacified toward us.

But we have been so dandled and played with, that, like wanton children not
used to be lasht, we know not how to understand correction; but are ready to
think God is playing with us, when he is laying the rod upon us. Thus it was
with us all the days of the late Protector, we put all upon the account of
jest and trial; All our losses abroad of ships and me (splitting our Designs)
we understood them but as trials, And things running Counter at home to honest
principles and expectation, we thought they were but mists cast before our eyes;
sure the day would clear up, and things would go well at length. Though some
felt the rod to smart, others called it play and sport: therefore we had need
to be awakened to know where we are, that the rod is upon us, and if we
understand not Jezreel, Loruhamah follows: and if that speak not loud enough,
Loammi will. You may observe in that first of Hosea, the Prophet had three
children, The first he was appointed to call Jezreel, that was as the first
drops of the shower of vengeance; now Israel look to thy self, and remember the
day of Jezreel, what Jehu did serving himself when he pretended to serve me; I
will therefore visit, says God, the blood of Jezreel on the house of Jehu:
There was the warning piece shot off, which might have its usefulness to some
tenderhearted Israelites, to drive them into their Chambers till the
indignation was over past. Those that were not awakened by this, hear next of
Loruhamah, I will no more have mercy: And if this do not full execution, Loammi
follows, Ye are not my people. To apply this, Our Mercy runs low already, but
when God shall declare against us, as not his people, we shall be sensible of
his displeasure too late.

CHAP. III. A particular enquiry into the immediate Causes of this dangerous
relapse of ours.
ENGLAND has had many Physicians, yet have I met with few that have hit upon
the very Cause of this relapse of ours, or that prescribe a proper and
sufficient remedy, though many pens are at work, and many brave English Spirits
give their Essay, (say much and very well, as to the rescuing our too far gone
liberty, and more do sigh and mourn, not able to utter and vent the grief of
their hearts (Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent) But few go to the Root
of our distemper, we must go lower yet; Sure that which has blasted all our
hopes, and made us return and sit down as men ashamed re infecta, must be
discovered, and this Light I am apt to think must come out of the Sanctuary;
Those that have traveled through the like passages in their own hearts, and
have known the depths of Satan, the admirable shapes he transforms himself
into, and what an absolute Newness of life and frame of Spirit, is requisite
for the carrying on the work of the Kingdom of God steadily, and without
starting back, they may tell us something of importance and siguificancy in our
Case.

In searching out the Root of our Distemper, we may profitably reflect upon
many things which might be partly Causes of it, and have a hand in bringing us
thus low, when we were in so hopeful a way (as was hinted before.) Such as are,
a carnal Succumbency of Spirit, lying down in the advantanges attained: and so
making the Kingdom of God a thing too outward, consisting in worldly and
outward ease, honor, and the like, and neglecting it within. 2. Making it too
private and narrow, contenting our selves with our own, not traveling of
others deliverance, the poor remaining yet in streights in our own Land,
through want of justice to help them to their own, and want of mercy to extend
something of ours to them. 3. Unwatchfulness of Spirit, through which the enemy
got an advantage to work in the night of our security and sloth, to undo all
again; while we were sleeping and shorting in our private advantages. And many
such like Reasons might be assigned, which if we should be exact to muster up,
we might be lost in them.

But they being infirmities of all Times common to all as Men, they have their
easier and more ordinary censure and pardon from the Lord, and cannot be
supposed to be so severely animadvered against by the hand of his justice, as
to cause him after such intimacy, to turn his back upon a people. And therefore
we must search for some other blacker and fowler thing to charge this great
Desertion and sorsaking of us upon.

And as Physicians use to inquire of their Patients the time when their
diseases seized upon them, and the Manner of its onset, how and where it found
them? where they had bin? what they had bin doing? what they had eaten or drank
that day? or what exercise they had bin at? and such like Circumsiances: so let
us do. We may remember, that it was a constant observation which was again and
again inculcated upon us, both by the Lord himself, and those that were wise
observers of his providence and dispensations, that when ever we began to
consult with flesh and blood, and to deal wisely, to restrain or deal hardly
with the true Israel of God; The Lord did always animadvert against us with
some loss, ill success, or disappointment in our public affairs, which was
as that voice unto us, Touch not mine anointed and do my Prophets no harm. It
is for their sakes that God does all, that he rebukes Kings, He gives Nations
for them, and therefore not to discern this, (the Lords body, whose good and
deliverance is the scope and aim of all God's works and dispensations), No
wonder if it cast us into a sick and weak and languishing Estate: By these we
rose, with these we thrived. It may be remembered, Our affairs never succeeded,
till they came to be managed by these hands in the Army, and then we had not
any considerable stop or Check that did dwell upon us, till the salvation of
the three Nations was wrought out and accomplished. But when God had Vanquished
our Enemies, I dowell remember an evil spirit grew up against the people of
God, we grew jealous of them, we were glad to be Saved by them, but afraid they
should Rule over us: And therefore as their weakness, unwatchfulnesse and
unheedfulnesse to this spirit gave way, (those that should have prevented and
forbid, being otherwise privately taken up and employed, or wanting such a
sense and value of themselves in the Lord, as was requisite to keep off the
World from presuming and incroaching upon them) by little and little they grew
from jealousy to Emnity, and to plant their Engines against that people and
that spirit that had bin their Raepart and defense, in all assaults that had
bin made against their peace and safety. Nay, then says God, if this be your
Requital of me, if you that have bin fellow Soldiers in one Cause, fellow
servants in one house, know no better how to use your peace and liberty, but
fall a beating your fellow servants; I will make one among you, or I will send
in One upon you, that shall seize and secure things you so abuse, not to be
restored again, till you know how to make a better use of them. You love your
Liberty, you love your property, you are not for Me, nor will give my Saints
their Liberty, and free breathing among you: if ye drive me away from you, if I
go up from you, these go with me. And as for those you Malign, I will be a
little Sanctuary to them.

And there is this thing farther in it, which is worthy our observation, The
spirit we were so jealous of, was that growing light in the people of God,
which we knew not where it would end, being a free born Creation that had no
name nor form: for that which was formed, we could admit and grew pretty
familiar with, though at first we were shy of some of them, as Independents,
Anabaptists, etc. But this namelesse thing, this Virgin that was not espoused
nor determined to or by any form; This spirit that owned no Father but God, no
Master but one, and He in Heaven; that was in a pure absolute and constant
dependence on him that professed to follow the Lamb whithersoever he should go,
that had resigned its will, its wisdom, the Conduct of it self wholly to him,
This was the Offense: Top and keep down this spirit, let not this get the head
of us; if it do, we are undone; our Religion, our Consistency is gone, we shall
be the most tossed wavering uncertain fluid ridiculous people in the World. No
Nation will value us, none of the Potestant Churches will own us. Let not this
Man, let not any men in this spirit Rule over us, nor be suffered among us.

Now mark what God did, He took one that was in no form, neither Presbyterian,
Independent, nor Anapatist, and sets him up in despite of all this wit and
contrivance to the contrary; And so the very thing, that generation so
studiously avoyed, fell unto them. The thing they feared (as Job says) came
unpon them, and that very life they sought to save they assuredly lost. This
was the first thing. But this is not all: In the next place, God committs into
his hand a Rule, not heavenly Divine and spiritual, not the sweet and candid
Rule of Christ (whom they refused in his heavenly appearance,) but an Earthly
Lordly Rule, puts an Iron Scepter, into his hand to dash them in pieces like a
Potter's vessel, and so answers these fools according to their folly, yet
answers them not: Their spite was at the spiritual seed, therefore they shall
have the Children of the Earthly Jerusalem Reign over them (for these were his
Body or his Princes which he set over all the Earth). Thus as they did not like
to retain God in their knowledge, or to entertain Christ in his meek large
gentle heavenly appearance, which knows how to give men their Rights as well as
Christians, and every one their food in due season; The Lord gives them up to
their own hearts lusts, and desires, and feeds them with flesh which they
called for (a fleshly Religion) till it came out of their Nostrils, and they
are sick and vomit again, and have enough of this Religious spirit, insomuch
that with all their hearts they would have had the power any where rather in
this hand, that, in the name of God and Religion, could do such things, take
away liberty and property, destroy their Rights, inslave their persons, alter
and change laws and times at his pleasure, break Oaths and Engagagements
without remorse. Any spirit but this spirit. Thus God filled them with their
own ways, and punished them with their own Inventions. Thus he brought fire out
of Abimelech to devour the men of Shechem: and fire out the men of Shechem to
devour Abimelech, for they were a plague to each other, for they were of one
spirit, but thus wonderfully ordered to be each others Torment.

If you ask me now, What spirit this was that made such work, what was the
spirit of that Generation, and of Him that was in Judgment set over them
(though in mercy too, I will grant you, for God did make use of him as a
Bulwark, still against the Common enemy, though we lost ground within doors)?
Was it an evil spirit how then could any good come from it? I answer, It was
not a profane spirit, nor a spirit void of Religion; there was much of Religion
and Righteousness of one sort in it: but if you would know what spirit it was,
It was the spirit of the first Covenant, grafted indeed upon a new and living
stock, Christ and the Gospel, but bearing its own sour grape, The spirit of
the Law (which you know makes nothing perfect) though in a Gospel dress; the
spirit of the first born after the flesh, or the life of Christ's first
appearance, which is never safe and sure from starting back, and returning to
corruption, till it be made a sacrifice seasoned with salt, and salted with the
fire of the eternal Spirit through the offering up of the flesh. And because
this discovery is of so main importance, and concern unto us, therefore I shall
discourse largely of it in the next Chapter, and show you, How this is the
Spirit in which our first life and Activity appears, and how it ministers in
the things of God (that is) in the first Court, and where it is to give up and
resign; which when it does not, it converts into Enmity against that better
and latter spirit, and so is justly rejected and thrown off by God. And these
things I shall, as God assists, discourse to you not as Notions barely, but as
things that have really operated and produced their fruits among us. Which if
the Lord give us to understand and make a right use of, may make us wise to
salvation to save our souls, (I am sure), if not; to save the Nation, but, I
say to save the Nation also, for This man shall be our peace when the Assyrian
shall come into the Land, and this wisdom and knowledge shall be the Stability
of our times: Though I cannot say whether we be yet humble and broken enough to
receive it, but may put the Lord to cast us again into the fire to make us
Malleable to this Impression.

CHAP. IV. Showing what manner of Spirit that was, that miscarryed in this
Cause.
I Am apt to believe that the Instruments which carried on the work in this
Nation generally were not mistaken in themselves, but that they were sincere
and upright with one sort of uprightness, and did indeed intend the freeing
and delivering of us; yea, I am apt to retain that charity of the late
Protector, that He intended no less, when He dissolved the long Parliament,
and did those High Arbitrary things: But it is not every spirit; Nay, it is not
any spirit, be it never so raised and anointed, that can carry through to the
end, in case of some temptations; but that spirit, that is by extraction
divine. That that is of the Earth will seek, and at last find, its Center in
the Earth, though it may by strong Engines be carried and kept aloft awhile:
But natural principles, let them be never so much heightened, will never hold
out to the end of God's Works. As the eye of the fleshly Israelite, could not
see to the End of those things that were to be Abolished. And this is the great
witness which God is minding to hold forth unto us in this day, by all our
Apostasy, and backslidings, even to distinguish between seed and seed, Spirit
and Spirit. Then (says the Prophet) ye shall return and discern between the
Righteous and the Wicked, etc. There is a Righteousness in the flesh, which is
Wickedness before God, not simply in it self, but as it exalts, and magnifies
it self in a sense of its own self-sufficiency, and in the excellency of its
work, opposing the work and way that is more excellent, because it finds not
its own strength, adaequate to it, as being that which Flesh and Blood cannot
endure, and yet cannot give way to Another, no not to the Lord himself, by the
breaking and crucifying it in its Natural abilityes, to do that which it cannot
do. This was the very Case in our Savior's time. The Jews were pitifully at a
loss, and would feign have recovered their ancient splendour, and glory; but
they mistook both their objest and their way to it, expecting a Carnal when the
design of God was a Spiritual Kingdom, and expecting to attain that by their
own Righteousness, which God, discerning the insufficiency and weakness of
the Law to assist them unto, through the Flesh, sent his own Son to do for
them, Romans 8. And this is that alone that can unriddle and resolve our Case.
Therefore I said, We must go into the Sanctuary to understand it.

To clear this up (to those that are spiritual and can judge what I say) I
shall desire to make this Question, Whether this Apostasy that is upon us be
not a Judgment; That is whether to be delivered up to such a Reprobate sense,
as we seem to be (both Rulers and people,) The one to act, and the other to
accept and submit to those very things which we destroyed, be not a judgment
from God upon us. For my part, I take it to be one of the greatest of
judgments, and an effect, and token of Gods forsaking, and declaring against a
people; Spiritual Judgments are the greatest of claring against a people;
Spiritual Judgments are the greatest of Judgments, for thus the wrath of God
was revealed from Heaven against the Heathen, Romans 1. for Corrupting themselves
in their known light, and not improving and going forward in it. Now whether
the manifest tokens of such a Judgment be not upon us; let every sober mind
consider; And if so, If this Corrupting our selves be a Judgment, then
necessarily through the righteousness of God, it must be the fruit and
punishment of some preceding sin; either sinful Acts, or a sinful State, one
or both, and so we shall come home to the point, to see what many of the
adherents to this cause were, and how unlikely it was they should bring forth
any better fruit then as they have done.

And in this disquisition we shall be upon surer ground in chargeing the
sinful State which is general (and which we must needs acknowledge, as being
undeniably witnessed, both by Scripture and all experience) then the particular
Actions that turned them out of the way, which lie more dark, and are more
immediately reserved to the Judgment of God, though we are not altogether
without light to guess at them too. And first we must premise that of the
Apostle. That is not first which is spiritual, but that which is Natural. The
first man is of the Earth earthly, the second man is the Lord from Heaven. As
is the Earthly, so are they that are Earthly, and as is the Heavenly, so are
they that are Heavenly, and as we have borne the Image of the Earthly, so we
shall bear the Image of the Heavenly. For flesh and blood does not inherit the
Kingdom of God, neither does corruption inherit incorruption. It is a
Scripture that was wont to be read at the burial of the dead. We are now, I
hope, burying this dead, the old man, and O that we might lay him down in the
grave of Christ, never to rise in Corruption, or in a Corruptible and weak
state more! But to the Text. As God in bringing forth things out of the first
Chaos, first sets up man in a Natural Image, which was but the figure of the
true, so in restoring things from the Chaos of Confusion, whereinto they are
fallen, he first brings forth man in the exercise of a Natural righteous life,
and principle, which has its beauty and Comeliness, though it be but as a
flower, and soon withers if it be left alont. Yet God is not wanting to it, in
serving it, with all advantages that it desires of him, for the attayning of
its end; and therefore according to his Covenant is just unto it, affording his
presence and blessing, until it turns off from him into its own crooked
ways: For though it be short, and too weak to answer the Call and expectation
of God in it self, and God restifies so much unto it, and therefore calls unto
it, to resign its life, and self activity, and to take it up anew in him by
another Covenant; yet until it refuse this testimony, and betake it self
proudly and perversely to its own ways, he does not pronounce Judgment against
it, not totally desert it. Now in the life and vigor of these first
principles, did many, and those not mean ones, set forth in our cause at
first, which were but Gentile-principles, or principles common with the
Nations, though mixed with better things (a light of Scripture and Prophesies at
least in the Letter) and these managed by men called up by the Spirit of the
Nation which is a mixed Spirit; and persons chosen, having a mixture of Spirit
in themselves at best, and what was of a purer and higher Nature was under, not
above, was fain to serve, and to come as Jacob in Esaus Garments. When I say,
it was but the strength and vigor of a Natural righteousness that girded
most in their first setting forth; my meaning is not, to divest them of zeal to
Religion, and Reformation. I can bear them record with the Apostle, they had
(many of them) a zeal of God that way, and if that be more then Gentiles, we
will admit them Jews, the people of God in Covenant with him. But what will
that profit, if there be a resting in the Law, in things that may be shaken; if
there be only a form of knowledge, and of the truth in the Law? Most of the
Jews had no more, and most professors of Christianity are not beyond that; and
yet I believe they are many of them in very good Earnest, their hearts seem to
be in what they profess, but the very heart of the wicked (says Solomon) is
little worth. The heart is deceitful: The inward and truest life of the
Natural man, is but a form, a figure of life. Adam was no more in his best and
purest state. Therefore true Circumcision is that of the Heart in the Spirit;
not of the heart barely, but the heart in the Spirit. There is one, greater
then the Heart, knows all things (says John.) The heart may lie, therefore
(says the Apostle) my Conscience bears me witness in the Holy Ghost, that
indeed is something: else, Conscience it self is deceitful where the Spirit
has not been at work, cutting down Man in his Natural abilityes, and his own
self-exalting Righteousness. All his Religion may waste and wither away. It
cannot hold out against all batteryes and assaults that may be made. He that
shall desire a fuller witness to this truth, let him peruse Sr. Henry Vanes
book, entitled; The Retired man's Meditations, where he shall find an ample
testimony. This Honor must be given him (for God has given it him) to be the
first that in that clearness has ministered this knowledge to the world, since
the night of Apostasy fell upon it; wherein certainly he has been specially
guided by the Holy Spirit. I can set my seal to it.

CHAP. V. A Confirmation of the former, with the Historical Exemplification of
those Principles in the late Transactions.
SO then there was in our first Engagement, the shooting forth of such a Spirit
as God was pleased to entertain a Trial of, and to join issue with, as far as
it would go in his work; And many of those worthy Patriots and Soldiers,
were, no doubt, accepted of God in their day, and were gathered home; where
they are reaping the wages of their faithful services, being taken from the
Evils to come, the time being not then for the two seeds and principles which
were in this Cause, to be discovered in their distinction, or opposition
rather, and to part asunder; but being complicated together (as light and
darkness, day and night, were in the first Creation before God divided them):
the good seed was the blessing of the Cluster; though, I say, it was the
younger Brother, and the Underling, and the other had the leading forth and
management of all.

But when that Spirit had done its work, and gone as far as it could go, which
was to cut down that Spirit and work that was more unrighteous then it self,
wherein God owned them, and was assistant to them; then other work, of another,
and far different, Nature appeared, unto which this Spirit that had acted so
strenuously, and successfully all this while, did bear no proportion, which yet
was the end that God had, and still has in his eye, as the Crown and
advantage of all that Preparatory dispensation, which was frequently in the
mouths of many, and they called it building work. How often was the late
Protector (while General) heard to say, If ye have any more rough and breaking
work for us to do, We are ready; but how to build or to lay one stone aright,
we have no knowledge.

Now was the time for faith to have been brought into exercise, and to have
looked up for another Spirit, to take the work into its own hands, to have
resigned and given up to Him: which Spirit was amongst us, and not improbably
was discerned to be growing upon us: but men were afraid of it, and could not
trust themselves with it, God ordering things so, that it appeared in much
weakness and unlikelinesse of the flesh, and so was despised and rejected by
the Builders. Many stumbling blocks also of strange Spirits and principles,
being permitted to come forth with it: so that then had been the time for men
to have thought seriously of that Commonition of our Savior, Blessed is he
that is not offended in me.

This work was the work of God, which he has been carrying on through all ages
even the setting up his Son upon his holy hill of Sion; This was that which God
did but justly expect at our hands, That he having subdued all our enemies for
us, and broken and put down all powers that stood in the way, we should
according to our many foregoing seeming promises and professions, have
acknowledged these Nations to be his, and have given them up to be ruled and
governed by him; and this Rule must have been given forth, and (when ever it
appears, it shall proceed) out of Sion from the Lords own Spirit, in his poor
broken Crucified ones, whose earthly wisdom is brought into subjection by the
Cross of Christ, to the Heavenly wisdom which is foolishness with the world,
whose weapons are not carnal but spiritual, mighty through God. The wisdom that
is from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without
hypocrisy.

But the Master Builders reject this cornerstone, and thinking scorn to
deliver up the work to this Spirit, and to be out at any thing, though never so
hard and difficult, having had the Van all this while, they could not fall in
the Rear; having had the guardianship of the Heir, they were loath to part with
it, and to set up their younger Brother. Must our sheaves bow to His? Therefore
they take up a Manly resolution, and having some convictions upon them, of the
right that Christ has to the Kingdom's of this World, they could not down
right deny him; and therefore in part admitting his title they are only
sollicitous to have as great a share with him as may be; and therefore they
will blunder upon the work as well as they may, and they will square and model
out the Government of Christ for him: and so they call a number of Persons
together of all sorts of judgments and interests, which they chose (with as
much discretion as they had) of such as were most likely to be friendly to this
Mongrel Idea of a Kingdom, partly Christ's and partly this Worlds. This so far
as man can guels, was the very Constitution of the thoughts, and designs of the
late Protector, in Calling the little Assembly, after the dissolution of the
Long Parliament, wherein he was upon this advantage, with many honest people:
That he undertook this business not till such time as the forementioned Spirit,
and interest of Christ had been very much rejected, and hardly entreated by the
Builders in Parliament; who had troubled some honest men, and threatened a
further storm upon tender Consciences.

What claim the Lord Jesus did then lay to the Government of these Nations, in
the very heart, and conscience of the then Protector His Speech to that
Assembly (some passages whereof have been since quoted by others) may testify;
and how it was entertained, the sequel will show.

For though this Heterogeneous mixed Assembly, were not found of wisdom, and
moderation sufficient to manage things, according to the Platform in the head
of the Designers; yet they served to give the Protector a colorable ground,
and advantage to reject the thoughts of the Kingdom of Christ, or the Rule of
Saints, having now tried them, and found such an improportionateness in them to
such a work; which, some say, was that which was sought and designed by him in
the beginning. We need not be so uncharitable to surmize that, it is enough and
too much, that there was that ready and at hand, to lay hold on this advantage,
to put Christ by the Throne as unfit to sit there.

And now, having taken this offense without any remorse or regret of mind, that
generation of men turn their backs upon the the Kingdom of Christ, and usurp
the Grant of a longer Lease for a Kingdom of this World: The Heir is an Idiot
and He must have a Guardian, a Protector. Here was the first stone of Jericho
laid again; Now did they set themselves from that very day to build again the
things they had destroyed: How far and how fast the World recovered again after
this, in the space of five years, I think can hardly be paralelled by the
Declensions of any time though some were to the last so Of which number the
Author confesses himself to be one.
foolish as to hope the Protector did but put on a Disguise in all these
Complyances with worldly Interest, and that he would (when he saw his
opportunity) throw off this Mantle and come forth in his own true Spirit, which
was hoped was to exalt Jesus Christ in the head of all.

If therefore it be demanded why we did not lift up our voice sooner, and
restify against this Apostasy in the lifetime of his late Highness? The Answer
is ready, That with great longsuffering we did wait, hoping better things,
looking ever when the Scene would change, especially in every Crisis of
Affairs, the Lord hiding these dark Counsels from many, until the event and
issue declared them of what sort they were. But now God has made them so
manifest, that he that runs may read, and it is that which is due to his works
to take notice of them, and to sanctify his Name (which is holy) in them.

Object. But if the Kingdom of Christ was indeed at the door, and come to the
birth, it should not have gone back again. For when God will work, who can
let? therefore sure that was not the time, and therefore we are guilty of no
such A postacy as you charge us, nor his late Highness of turrning his back
upon the Designs of Heaven.

Ans. The Kingdom of God was not only at the Door and come to the Birth, but
it is born into the World, and is among us though as a Kingdom of Patience:
Know ye not what our Savior said of himself and of his Kingdom? Luke 17.25. It
shall indeed come as irresistably as the light and as generally, and it shall
be as evident and conspicuous as the light, but first must he suffer many
things and be rejected of this Generation. It is no Argument that the time is
not, because men reject the Kingdom: The Kingdom has its time to suffer as
well as triumph, to suffer before it triumph: The Son of Man must be betrayed
before he be inthroned, but woe unto that man by whom the Son of Man is
betrayed, though it be the fulfilling of the Counsel of God: So the Kingdom
must be rejected of this Generation, What Generation? why mark who put the
Question unto our Savior, verse. 20. The Pharisees, the strictest Sect of
Religious persons among the Jews, the Generation we have been describing in the
foregoing Discourse.

The Kingdom of God could not be rejected, if it did not make its appearance:
All men court Christ at a distance, and court the Kingdom of God in the Notion,
in the Prophecy of it, they do not reject it there; but when it comes, not
coming in their way, with observation and outward show, they reject: it coming,
not in the wise, in the mighty, in the noble, in the learned; but Christ riding
on an Ass, coming in Fishermen, in the people that knew not the Law, this was
the Offense, and is the Offense at this day. I have heard with my ears, in the
time of the little Assembly, some of that Assembly say (into whose hands
perhaps this may come, I pray the Lord they may consider it and repent, for
they are now of another mind); That if they did not think and believe there
were some better and greater thing at the bottom, in the design of Providence
calling them together, then merely to go upon an outward settlement, they would
not continue at that work a day longer; such convictions and awakenings of the
Kingdom of God, its being at hand, were upon some Spirits that do now steer
another Course.

But to return: To what uncomfortable and dangerous ways and policies this
disobedience did subject his late Highness, is lamentable to consider,
sometimes to court this party, sometimes that; now with the Cavaliers, then
with the Presbyterians: Then, when they galled him, turn to his old friends,
and speak kindly to tender consciences, living upon the wrack all his days,
which made him, in all probability, seek his peace in foreign designs, with
the noise and reputation thereof to drown the noise of Conscience at home,
which was still gnawing at the Root: Then Antichrist must be conquered, and
the Spanish power that upholds him. Until at last these continual strivings
and fightings within, brought him down into his Grave. The Lord knows, I
mention not this to bring up a blot upon his Memory, nor to insult over his
Ashes; He that shall do so considers not that He was set forth unto us as a
Mirror of humane frailty: (Therefore be not high minded, but fear) and that it
was not his personal ambition, or other Evils, but our sins, in association
together, that both gave him up to that temptation, and us to that subjection,
wherein certainly he was equally unhappy with us, to be the Person that should
take away that liberty that He had been employed to purchase for us, and to
have all this ruin befall us under his hand. As for his sin, it is to God, but
the use of these things is to us, and upon no other account do I repeat them.

CHAP. VI. A farther and more full Character of that Spirit, in many great
Pretenders, that knew not our Cause, nor indeed served it, but served themselves
of it. And a witness against them.
BUt why do I speak of the Cause of God, when most of us are ignorant of it,
and far from righteousness, as the Prophet speaks. The Cause of God is a
divine thing, and, as the day of God, Who may abide it? Is it our ease, our
peace, our liberty, our promotion, our pleasures, our Interests? Nothing less;
The Cause of God is that which searches, and tryes, and burns up all these, is
an enemy to all these in that carnal and dark way of understanding, possessing
and enjoying of them, which men imagine.

The Cause of God is that indeed which has health, pleasure, deliverance, and
salvation in it for every Creature, rightly understood, and truly advanced and
subjected unto; but of all that we have done, God may justly say, Did ye it at
all to Me? Did ye take away the Bishops at all to me? No: ye did it to your
selves, and ye have feasted your selves with their flesh, their lands, their
revenues; Yea, their power and Jurisdiction (so far as for shame ye may) ye do
joyfully exercise over your Brethren: When ye took off the King's head, did ye
do it at all to me? No: It was to your selves, that ye might be absolute and
supreme your selves. And has not the Event showed it? When ye abolished the
House of Lords, did ye it at all to me? Are ye not mad to set it up again? So
that, why do we inquire after particulars wherein we have gone astray? when we
have gone astray from the womb, from our first birth and setting forth in this
Cause, we have acted from a gentile principle, from self preservation, for self
ends and advantages, from stomach and revenge, because we suffered and were
eclipsed by the former powers: Now, the Wrath of man works not the
Righteousness of God (the Apostle tells us), we were never subjected to God in
those Rods that were upon us; we could not lay down our lives and take them up
again as Christ; we fullfil'd our own lust, and were set to save our own lives
in all we did. This is far from the righteousness of God: And this may be
inferred, not only from the State we wrought in, which was dark, and legal, and
fleshly, (as that of old Israel); but from those Characters of wavering
uneavennesse, and uncertainty which accompanied all our Actings. Hence we were
for the King, and against the King; for treating, and then for breaking off;
for carrying on the Cause, and now for carrying it back: thus bringing upon our
selves all the blood that has bin shed in the Land, both on the one side and
one the other: whereas the righteousness of God is a steady thing, is not yea
and nay, pulls not down to set up the same again. The righteousness of God
judges things in their root and principle, be they in whomsoever, not in person
or appearance, disliking the same thing in this person, and countenancing it in
another. If ye desire to see your sin, This is thy sin O England! All our
thoughts, all our ways, all our motions, all our imaginations have bin, are,
will be found before the Righteous God in this Day of his clear Judgment, that
is coming upon thee, evil, only evil, and that continually: thou can not
turn thee to any one of them, to find the least comfort and satisfaction of a
good and righteous working and operation in them, for How can an evil tree
bring forth good fruit, or a bitter fountain send forth sweet water? Thy
fountain is bitter, thy root is rottenness; This I must testify against thee,
from the Lord.

Not but that thou have done Gods work, and fullfil'd and executed his pleasure
upon Kings, Nobles, Bishops, and all the slain and poyled of the Land: Thou
have dressed the Lord's sacrifice but thou have done it in thine own spirit,
and so art no better then Jeroboam, then John, then Nebuchadnezar, and art
accountable for all that thou have done: And God has now taken thee in the
snare of thy own heart, and has spread thy filthynesse (thy unrighteousness,
thy ambition, thy partiality, thy hypocrisy) in the sight of the Sun. Thou art
returned with the Dog to the vomit, and with the Sow to the wallowing in the
mire; Thou have corrupted thy self, and art become abominable, Judah has
justified Samaria. Thy sins are as Scarlet, they are of a double dye to the
sins of the former generation which God has cast out before thy face: Thou
saw the Judgments of God on them, for the ways of pride, unjustice,
oppression, which thou walk in, and wast the Rod in his hand, the Instrument
of his vengeance upon them, shall thou therefore escape?

O! I dread to think what a sad reckoning this Generation has to make! I can
see no glimpse of Comfort for us in any promise; or prophecy, or example, or
record in Scripture: (unless God power out a spirit of grace and supplication,
a spirit of deep contrition and humiliation upon us) but our Carcases must fall
in the wilderness as Israel's did. Loruhamah and Loammi must be named upon us,
Israel shall be as Ethiopia and the bringing up of the Phlistins from Caphtor,
and the Assyrians from Kir shall be of as sacred memory, as our Victories and
successes; the successes of the great Turk, as holy things, as all our
deliverances. I say, unless God make us ashamed not only of our sins, but of
our selves, and of the spirit and root we have grown upon, and acted from in
all this? I speak not now to natural men, I know God judges every one by the
light and law that they are under, but I speak to the Saints of England, that
would be thought and called so, many moral men have done bravely and
faithfully, and those that have corrupted in those principles, having professed
no higher, shall be judged no deeper. But you that say, Ye see, you that have
discerned and cried up a Cause of God, not civil liberties only as men, but a
Cause of God in civil liberties all for God, for the glory of God, for the
Kingdom of God; I say, you shall be judged out of your own mouths. Is this the
Cause of God? Is this the Kingdom of God? You in the Council, you in the Army;
Is this the Cause of God, now your turn is served? Moral men shall only be
judged for their work, not prosecuting the Cause, but letting it fall, but you
shall be judged for no better a spirit unless you judge your selves, I say,
there is no hope for you, unless a spirit of judgment and burning arise up
within you, and cleanse your blood and filthynesse from you. And ye shall pay
not only for your spirit, but for that guilt also wherein ye are in Common
with others for not prosecuting, but letting fall this Cause, when so far
carried on though darkly and blindly by you, and in the letter. For the same
evil made you desist, namely self-Interest, that made you manage it in
unrighteousness.

For be it known unto you, The Cause of God is amongst us, and shall go on, and
is carrying on through all these dark Meanders and Intricacies, whilst you
sleep on your down Pillows, and stretch your selves upon your beds of Ivory,
and the next advance of it will be the routing of you; Except God awaken you to
meet him by speedy Repentance, God will glorify himself in his Judgments on
you, as upon the Cavaleirs before you. Therefore trust not in vain Visions, and
cry not, The Temple of the Lord. Is there any truth, mercy, and justice, in the
Land? Are not the necessities of the poor as great as ever? are not the
oppressions as many? is not pride, luxury, and profannesse, as rife? are not
the Courts of Justice as corrupt? Is not the spirit of God restrained and
persecured? Is Christ in the Throne? Will ye call this a Reformation that ye
are made Kings and Princes? No! the Lord will not own it: This is your work,
and your Cause, it is none of his; and God will make you know one day ye had
power to have reformed these things, but used it not, forsooth, because you
would have offended this great man, and the other useful Interest; ye must have
broak with a broken shattered World, which will not be able to afford you the
least shelter in the day when God shall visit you.

God will carry on his own Cause, if we had never a tongue in the Parliament to
plead it, nor never a pen in the Nation to contend for is, but what will become
of you I know not? How God will do it I know not, but by his own appearing, It
is the day of His Power, the day of the Spirit, that is to have its turn next,
not Man's day but God's, not Man's spirit but God's, and whom He will use as
his Instruments I know not: if any of this Generation, it must be by a
Regeneration of them, new moulding, new framing, new spiriting, new principling
of them. The new wine must have new bottles, but I see little toward any such
thing in any of you. Yet I believe God has a remnant among you, whom He will
lead on to farther things, but it will be with weeping and supplications, with
great brokennesse of heart, and poverty of spirit, with self-judging and
self-abhorring, and then what revenge will ye take of your selves? what
restitution will ye make to the Nation? what right will ye do to all men, even
to your enemies? Then will ye throw away your Idols of Gold and Silver to the
Moles and to the Bats. Then the lofty looks shall be humbled, and the
haughtiness of man shall be laid low, and the Lord alone exalted in that day.

Till the Spirit be thus powered forth from on high, I look for no salvation to
be wrought, but the people shall labor in the fire for very vanity: If it be
not in this spirit, in vain is all the tugging of our friends in Parliament,
though I would not discourage any honest and righteous spirit to be holding up
the bucklers against oppression and slavery upon an honest account. Yet I fear
me; nay, I see, and I see with joy, that the day is gone down upon the head of
man in his highest Activity wherein he boasts himself. The Princes of Zoan are
become fools through our laying too much stresse on them. It is another spirit
that must bring salvation, a spirit that is true indeed, that was never false,
a spirit that cannot lie nor deceive, that cannot be corrupted. A spirit that
has overcome the World. And I hope this spirit is taking the work into his own
hand in this day.

CHAP. VII. Containing a brief Recapitulation of some principal Heads, and the
Conclusion of the whole.
TO sum up all briefly, and clear up more distinctly what has bin in general
hinted; Whosoever is able rightly to discern past affairs, will see there was
a double Cause set on foot amongst us, viz. the Cause of God, and the Cause of
these Nations, which most have had some notion of, but few have adequately
described or rightly distinguished them, only have admitted the Interest of
Spiritual as well as Civil liberties. But certainly, the Cause of God must
needs be higher and larger, of nearer concerr, and of greater consequence than
the Cause of the Nation, though that be great; as the Soul is more noble than
the body, and the Creator to be preferred before the Creature. The Cause of
God, like the Heavens, waters with its dew, cherishes with its influence,
embraces in its Arms and bosom, the Natural Rights and Liberties of men as its
Earth and Spouse, in a subserviency and usefulness, to the illustration of its
own bounty and glory. The Heavens are independent on the Earth, not so the
Earth on the Heavens; The Cause of God needs not us, but we receive all our
vigor and blessing from it.

2. As there were two Causes, so there were two people or sorts of men, that
were drawn forth to serve them: some upon a Natural and Civil account, only
having a just resentment of the languishing state, of their Civil and Natural
Rights and Liberties: and others upon a higher account, as being sensible of
the sad condidition we were in, as to spiritual affairs, by the Ecclesiastical
Taskmasters.

3. These 2 Causes and their Adherents went hand in hand together, in a joint
and socious way: the cause of God and the cause of the Nation. The People of
God were concerned in both Causes, and contributed to both: not only their
lives and fortunes, as we call them in common, with the Nation; but, besides
and above them, their Faith, their Prayers their Comforts, their Experiences,
all their Interest in God, and in the Promises, for the promoting of both; and
this not only out of love to themselves, and their own particular concerns; but
in love to the Nation, and in duty and faithfulness to God; whereby the Cause
of the Nation in some sense became to them the Cause of God, though always the
distinction and subordination preserved.

The Cause of God consists of two parts the one outward and visible, such as is
the object of the Natural Man's discerning, viz. Freedom from outward violence
and persecution, in the external exercise of Religion, and the worship and
service of God: which because of things that relate to God, may in a large
sense be called the Cause of God; but in respect of the Subjects of these
Liberties, which are all Men, or every Nation of men, they are but Natural
Rights, such as every sort of Men and Religions, whether true or false do
challenge and expect; for every Nation will walk in the Name of their God. This
part of the Cause of God, is but as the outward Court, which the Gentiles may
come into and tread down, and is such an Interest as may be played fast or loose
withal by the Owners, if they hold it only on the terms of a Natural Right,
according as its makes with, or against their Ruling worldly Interest, or
Concerns: whether it be profit or honor, as has been too too manifest in
these days: which has made so many go back from those Principles in this kind,
which once they abetted and contended for.

The other part of the Cause of God is wholly spiritual, and so invisible to
that Eye that is only natural, though ever so enlightened, even in the Letter of
the Scripture it self, and is expressed by the Apostle to consist in the
deliverance of the whole Creation, from the bondage of Corruption, into the
glorious liberty of the Children of God. It is the delivering up all to God,
the subjecting of all to him, which is the true liberty of the creature; and
this delivering up to God, is not to Him as the head of the first Creation,
exercising his Rule by natural Light or Principles: but as the Head of the New
Creation by Christ risen from the dead, exercising a far higher and better Rule
in the New Creature; which though it have for its Subject Matter, the same
things that are found in the Rule of the Natural or Moral Conscience, viz. All
External righteousness, Religion, and worship; yet it has them upon another
account, that is, on other grounds, and to other ends; and over and besides
them, it subjects the Mind in all its operations in these, to the Law of the
Spirit of Life which is in Christ Jesus whereby the Creature is brought forth
in newness of operation with Christ: not seeking its own glory, but the glory
of its Head: as Christ seeks the glory of his Father. And this true spiritual
and glorious liberty, where it is brought forth in any soul, is such an
interest as cannot be disposed of, or parted with by its possessor, or made to
serve, but disposes of all things in that soul to the service of the Lord;
seeking always to do the things that please Him, not being able to do any
thing against the Truth, but for the Truth. Thus those whom the Son makes free,
are free indeed, and abide in the house for ever, and never prove false nor
turn their backs upon God, or that that is his interest and glory; Every other
Spirit is corruptible, and the Rule and Law of its walking is uncertain and
variable, may be turned this way or that way, as worldly Interest or advantage
swayes; but though every man be a liar, yet God is true and cannot deny
himself: and so are they true that are thus born of him, and become one Spirit
with him, by the spiritual slaying and crucifying of that life in them, which
is subject to chaxges, and may be corrupted, bribed, and bought off from its
Allegiance.

Had all that took upon them the defense of our Cause been of this Spirit, we
should never have had cause to have complained of the betraying and deserting
of it.

But that there were some of this Spirit under all the several degrees of light
and discerning in this Cause; I do verily believe, who were therefore accepted
of God, and blessed in their Deed and in Christ, were the blessing of the
whole, and are many of them at rest, whither they arrived, some sailing through
the Sea of their own blood spilt in the High places of the field: others spent
and wore out themselves in Counsels leaving the Remnant of their despised and
afflicted Brethren, to suffer the indignation of an Apostate world, and to be
sad spectators of the havoc and shipwreck of a blessed Cause, ready to enter
the Haven of its public obtaining and triumph. While this Spirit was up in our
Counsels and Armies, God never withdrew from them; for God was the Father of
it, and it is his own Child, and he cannot deny himself to this Spirit which is
become a fool in it self, and seeks all its wisdom and dirction from him:
therefore he cannot, he may not be wanting to it, When in the management of the
most outward Affairs viz. our Martial Affairs, the Army or those that had the
conduct thereof, owned this Spirit; they never were without Counsel nor without
Signal ownings, and testimonys of acceptance from God. When they said, They
knew not their way but from step to step, when they had done one thing they
knew not what was next: neve: were they guided in so safe and successful a
path, the Promise being to the bliud, that have thus made themselves blind for
the Kingdom of Heavens sake, (that have resigned their way and the leading of
them to the Lord) that The will lead the blind by a way that they knew not: He
will make darkness light, crooked ways straight, and not forsake them.

But when some thought they had been children and fools long enough, and had a
lust to be wise, and saw, that unless they were so, God did not make have
enough to give them that which it may be he would have given, nay, certainly
will give his people in his own time (Rule and headship over the world, and
that with a clear evidence and demonstration in the Conscience of the world it
self, of the indubitablenesse of their right and title thereunto, and their
fitness alone, separate from all other men to exercise this dominion). But I
say, they would have it in their own time, and by their own way would ravish
and usurp the blessing: and I could wish it were but so as Jacob did, and that
no worse might come of it, though that was bad enough; He got the blessing with
a present curse, and a great deal of sorrow; But here is the very splitting and
loosing of our Cause (so far as in them was to expose it) but that indeed it
cannot be lost, being the Cause of God and the whole world is his, and the
Earth and all things must give up their dead; Whosoever and whatsoever has
swallowed it up, must render it again: That Is the comfort of it, which
therefore incourages me, to hope it may not be in vain to close with a word of
Exhortation to all that are faithful, whether in Parliament or Army, or abroad
in the Nation, or in any of these three Nations, wheresoever these may find
them, That they would not give up their hope, that they would not despond
concerning our good Cause, Joseph is yet alive, the Cause lives still, though
under many gashes and stabs; yet it is alive, being of an eternal nature, it
cannot dye. The Cause of God, the right of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ
cannot be extinguished: Therefore I beseech you, prepare your selves to serve
it, contend vigorously for it: It will show it self to you, and that shortly I
am persuaded, and that not to suffer any more. Maintain it a while, it will be
able to maintain you. I say, All you that are born of it, and born into it,
that have sucked its milk, that are Natural to this Cause, and it natural to
you, Go on to seek the peace and welfare of it, It will reward you all. Perhaps
you may discern it, some of you in one light, some in another gradually
differing, as you may read before, is allowed; Let that make no difference at
all, among you. Some it may be are exercised in the rights of men, others in
the rights of Christians, some more in the Letter, others more in the Spirit:
The more outward not opposing that to the inward work and Kingdom, God accepts
of the one as well as of the other. All did not bring the same offering to the
Tabernacle; but some Badgers skins, while others brought silk and gold, etc.
The lower is in order to the higher, the outward to the inward, and is in some
sense the preservation of the inward: Therefore I say, ye are all one woman's
children. Jerusalem that is above which is free, stand fast in your Liberties;
If any of your Brethren be at present found in opposition, they will, they must
be brought over to you, it cannot be avoided: and those that seemed sometime
friends, but were not, but servants of Mammoni you have an ease and freedom by
the removal of them: for they were but a clog unto you, and for them you have
lost, you shall have double come forth to you, even from whence you least of
all expected; yea, Nations shall flow in unto you. Be but true to God, you
shall never want strength, if all the Armies in Heavou, and all the Interest of
God in the Earth be able to carry you out, you shall not fall, nor shall your
Cause fall. Only be sample, and be not too wise to look before hand, as those
whose way is in themselves; but as he that was brought down to God's foot,
(that righteous man) so be ye waiting truly upon him in a Resignedness of mind,
following him as his Providence opens the way to you: designing nothing of your
selves, and you shall see God will show you what to do, yea how you shall
recover this Cause again; for All things are possible to him, and it lives to
him now: and he will make good what you do, and his glory shall be your
rereward, when He goes before you, and who dares fall upon that Rear. And all
this pitiful poor dark, worldly stuff which has been built upon that precious
foundation which God has laid in this Nation, in the hearts of his people, and
in the works of his providence, shall crumble and moulder away like dirt, and
melt like wax before the fire of this righteous Appearing and arising of God in
his poor broken Remnant, Amen, Hallelujah.

Wherefore serve the Lord without sollicitousnesse, for your labour shall not
be in vain: Believe, so shall ye be established. The words are few, and the
Counsel is short; but heed it well, and lay it to heart; It is of greater
Moment then ye may be presently aware of. I will not say, Heaven and Earth
shall pass away before they shall be unfulfilled; but it may be, ye may find
the Lord has said so. I think I may say, It is the Counsel of God unto you for
your good, which first or last must and shall take place and that ere long too,

FINIS.

