THE INTEREST OF ENGLAND IN THE IRISH Transplantation, stated: Wherein is held
forth (to all concerned in Irelands good settlement) the benefits the Irish
Transplantation will bring to each of them in particular, and to the
Commonwealth in geral, being chiefly intended as an Answer to a scandalous,
seditious Pamphlet, entitled, [ The great Case of Transplantation in Ireland
discussed.] Composed and published at the request of several persons in eminent
place in Ireland, to the end all who desire it, might have a true Account of
the Proceedings that have been there in the business of Transplantation, both
as to the rise, progress, and end thereof.

By a faithful Servant of the Commonwealth, Richard Laurence.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, and are to be sold at the Sign of Sir John
Oldcastle near Py-corner. MCDLV.

THE INTEREST OF ENGLAND IN THE IRISH Transplantation.
TO avoid prolixity, and diverting the judgment of the Reader, by
impertinencies, from the consideration of so weighty a business, I shall
decline the way of an orderly Answer to the several Arguments and Objections of
the Discussor, as they stand in his Book, by which I should have been
necessitated to take notice of many impertinences as to this business in hand,
besides the many scrupulous expressions and scandalous reflections contained
therein against Authority, whose contrary demeanor and actions are so
publicly and well known to many thousands of judicious, sober persons, both
English and Irish in this Nation, that my testimony would be as needless in
order to their vindication, as the Discussors scandalous clamors are like to be
succesless, in the stain of their reputation: and therefore they seem more to
convince the Reader of the Discussors malignity and weakness, than of the
rationality of the thing therein pleaded for; wherefore I shall for brevities
sake confine my self to a plain and true Account (so far as my memory and
understanding shall help me) of this business of Transplantation, in which I
shall use this method, and speak,

First, of the original Authority of this business of Transplantation, from
whence it came.

Secondly, the reasons and grounds upon which it was undertaken by the
Parliament, as they are declared in the Act of Settlement and Instructions for
Transplantation.

Thirdly, the proceedings that have been herein from time to time by the
Authority of Ireland, in observance of the said Act of Parliament and
Instructions, wherein is to be minded their prudence and tenderness therein,
contrary to those in jurious insinuations of severity and cruelty suggested by
the Discussor against them.

Fourthly, Is observed the great mistake the Discussor grounds his whole
discourse upon, the clearing of which, of it self might be a sufficient Answer
to the whole Book, all the Arguments within it being raised therefrom.

Fifthly, several of the most swaying Reasons, and Arguments, offered by the
Discussor against the Work, examined and answered, with some Arguments
presented to consideration in opposition thereto.

First, the weakness and malice of the Discussor is much discovered by his
endeavors to lay the blame of the work of Transplantation (if it were blame
worthy) orginally or chiefly upon the persons in chief Authority in Ireland,
Whereas they were but ministerial and subordinate therein, only putting the
Orders and Instructions of Parliament in execution when received, so that had
they or any subordinate to them there, been as much dissatisfied in the work,
as the Discussor, yet it remained upon them as a duty so far as it was possible
in their power to see the thing done.

Then secondly, for the Reasons which the Parliament grounds the work of
Transplantation upon, as they are hinted and provided for in the Act of
Settlement, page 13, 17, 22. and mentioned in the Instructions page 1, and 2.
you may there observe, they are not upon that hand the Discussor would fix
them, viz. to punish the Irish for Rebellion and Murder for the time past, as
he supposes, and spends his pains about from page 7, to the 15. but on the
other hand, to preserve the English, and so to settle Ireland for the future,
that the English Interest and People might not be liable to the like inhumane
usage and destruction for the time to come, which we have reason to believe)
they judged they could not do without this work of Transplantation, which being
the result of a Parliament (nay, of several Parliaments one after another,
approving and confirming each others Acts therein) and withal not a sudden
Act, admitting of a probability of surprise before they had well advised and
weighed the thing (it being under consideration above twelve Months, and they
being the supreme legislative power of these three Nations) The consideration
of all which might have been sufficient to have cautioned the Discussor (though
he be in his own conceit more able to judge of that work than they all) to have
been more modest in his language, especially in a business of that nature, that
no particular persons could propose self-advantage thereby, and withal of that
weight, that the settlement of a Nation depends upon it.

But the Discussor (me thinks) seems to imply an Objection against this in page
27, and 28. of his Book, that though the business of Transplantation were the
Result of the wisdom of a Parliament, and though the Parliament might consist
of wise considerate men, that understood and weighed well what they did, yet
(says he) (to stop the wonder, how such destructive Resolutions could pass or
be let pass from the hands of Authority all this time) consider,

First, those that were in England must see and hear by these eyes and ears that
were in Ireland, who (as he says) were strangers to that Land, and could not
at the first sight understand the complete interest thereof.

Secondly, the face of things is much different in Ireland, and though then
necessity might have made it fit to have transplanted, yet now the unfitness
makes it not necessary.

Thirdly, though then in their wisdoms they gave out such Orders, yet in their
goodness they did not think fit to execute them even till this time, as if they
did wait a time to be gracious to the Irish Nation.

These things are proposed as a premonishment to stop wonders, (says the
Discussor) But where does this wonder lie? Is it in that we had no wiser a
Parliament that better understood what they did in matters of so great
importance, or that so wise a man as the Discussor should not be found out to
take advice from? It is my opinion, If that Parliament which first contrived
and agreed the business of Transplantation were now in being, they would be
able to convince the Discussor, that the ignorance of the state and
constitution of Ireland, by better Arguments than I can use, is rather the
arise of his Book, than the occasion of their Act.

And if any rebellious consequence should be the effect of his or the like
Papers, in such a nick of Settlement, I doubt not but God would enable that
Authority yet in being, to let out that dramm of rebellious blood, and cure
that fit of sullenness he speaks of page 25. And to let him know what it is to
instigate a People to rebel against the Authority over them.

But (says he) they did see and hear with others eyes and ears, etc.

I suppose he does not mean that (in the interim) they shut their own, and if
not, but they considered of and weighed the advice they received from all
hands; then the more they consulted with, the more their Results ought to be
valued; for in the multitude of Counselors there is safety.

But (says he) those whom they advised with were strangers to Ireland.

I suppose, they that desired their advise did not take them to be so, for they
should not need to send over to Ireland (as he acknowledges they did) for
advice from such as were strangers there; they might have had many such nearer
hand. But by the way, you may observe the Discussor was not advised with, or at
least if they did take his advice, they did not like his counsel, which (I am
assured) proceeded not from a neglect of serious advice in the business, but
rather that those in Authority had not altogether so good an opinion of the
Discussors judgment in matters of that weight as (it appears) himself has. For
I do know very many persons both of interest and understanding of the ancient
English Inhabitants in Ireland, that were advised with in this matter both at
Westminster and in Ireland; besides, those whom he calls strangers, (I hope)
are not so much strangers to the present constitution and state of Ireland, but
that they are able to give judgment, that the present intended Transplantation
is as essential to the future peace and safety of the English interest there,
as the stopping the Leak of a Ship is, to keep it from sinking.

But (says the Discussor in his second Head) the face of things is much
differed in Ireland, etc.

But he does not tell you of which hand, whether better or worse, whether the
Irish be grown so honest that there is no need of it, or whether so
considerable and stubborn that there is no possibility to do it. But I do take
his meaning to be of the later, from what he says to that point page 25. which
I shall further speak to in its place, and shall only give my assent to the
truth of this one Assertion, as to the present state of Ireland, that the face
of things are altered there; for time was when such Incendiaries durst not have
been so impudent in mis-representing the transactions of things there, as the
Discussor by his Lines, and some others of his Accomplices by their false
Reports and mis-representations have done and daily do; but time will manifest
what they aim at and drive toward, that have so employed themselves, to their
shame, and the future caution (I hope) of any of our friends in England, that
have been too apt to credit them. But I am loath to imitate the Discussor by
impertinencies.

But the third Argument the Discussor produces by way of Apology in the behalf
of Authority, to prevent our wondering at them, that they should be so overseen,
as he says they were herein, is to tell you, that what their wisdoms thought
fit to order, their goodness did not think fit to execute, as if (says he)
they waited a time to be gracious to the Irish Nation.

The sum of which, so far as I can make it hang together, is this, that the
Parliament of England, and the Authority under them in Ireland, has been for
near these two years spending their time, pains and treasure, about the work of
Transplantation, and running all those difficulties and hazards that have
attended the same, to no other end, but to bring the People of Ireland into
more misery, that they might have an opportunity to show mercy to them; Truly if
this have been their design, there be a great many more wonderers at them,
besides the Discussor. And I hope there is not the simplest Irishman that is to
remove in Connaught, who will have so little wit, as to believe it, they have
had and may have cause to judge the Authority in Ireland more serious in their
proceeding with them. But I suspect the Gentleman was not serious upon this
Head, for comparing this with the close of his Book, modestly desiring them to
forbear what they cannot perform, think he rather intended it as a reproach
upon Authority, he judging (as I suppose by the way he takes) the best means to
settle Ireland to be, by representing the Authority there not only oppressive
but ridiculous, in regard that wisdom, goodness and and graciousness here,
hinted to be in those that sit at the Helm (as he calls them) is much
inconsistent with that cruelty, oppression and other misgovernments, which in
the rest of his Book he labors to lay to their charge.

Then thirdly, as to the proceedings that have been in Ireland upon the
business of Transplantation, since the arrival of those Authorities and
Instructions from the Parliament and Council of State, as aforesaid.

Upon the 12th. of September, 1653. was a short Declaration (annexed to the
aforesaid Instructions) published by the Commissioners of Parliament then at
Dublin, requiring their ministers under them to cause the same to be forthwith
published in their several Precincts.

And in October following they again published a large Declaration grounded
upon the aforesaid Act of Parliament, and Instructions of the Council of State,
with a further Act of Parliament confirming the same, wherein was not only
expressly required, That notice should be taken thereof, and obedience given
thereunto, but diverse further Rules and Instructions given to the several
Ministers under them, in each Precinct in Ireland, (and especially in
Connaught) for the more orderly carrying on the work, not only as to the
Interest of the Commonwealth, in respect of the Revenue, and safety of the
Nation, etc. But also for the better encouragement of the People to be
transplanted, both as to the security of their Corn in Ground, and what other
substance they should leave behind them, from spoil and loss, and also to
their journying by the way, and accommodations there; after which were several
supplemental Papers published both as to the backing of this first Declaration
(so far as it did extend, which were only to Proprietors and men in Arms) as
also to ease it where it might seem to bear hard upon any of them, it being
much upon the hearts of those in chief Authority in Ireland, to extend their
power to the utmost length of the Line, in a way of tenderness toward the
People to be removed, though there might be some inconveniences hazarded upon
the Commonwealths part thereby, so far have they been from cruelty or severity
toward the people upon this Account (as is charged upon them by the discussor)
for though the Parliament (in their Instructions) included all persons within
any the qualifications in the Act of Settlement, yet they in their Declarations
thereupon, confine it to Proprietors of Lands, and persons who had been in
actual Rebellion, or (to use their own words) that had contrived, advised,
promoted, acted, or voluntarily aided, assisted or abetted the Rebellion,
Murders, Massacres, etc. or have been in actual Arms in the said Rebellion.
And lest any under those qualifications should come to be sufferers for want of
distinction, they issued out Authority to several of the chief Officers of the
Army, and other persons of reputation and ability, to receive Petitions from
any persons in those Rules, who had ought to offer in their own behalfs, either
as to desert from the Commonwealth for particular Acts of favor or kindness
shown to English in their extremity, or any other service or testimony of the
heart, true affection to the English interest, that it might not go
un-required, by which power many hundreds within the aforesaid Rules gained
license to stay, some for altogether, and some for more or less time, as they
did deserve, and their condition require; and in regard there were some persons
who had done particular service and good offices to the English interest or
People, and yet not so much as might deserve a total exemption, yet that a Cup
of cold Water might not go unrequited, (given by the worst of Enemies to the
meanest friends) they obtained suspension for considerable times, some more and
some less, with a provision for a special recommendation to the Commissioners
for the disposing of Lands to the transplanted people in Connaught, to take
special care of them, and their convenient accommodation and settlement,
besides a general provision made by the same Commission, for all aged,
decrepid, sickly persons, that no such (though they had been in Arms against
us) might be put upon hard things. And after all this, the generality of them
(who had nothing to say as to point of merit or disability of body) making
complaint that they should be great sufferers in their Corn in Ground and other
substance, if they were not permitted to look after their Harvest upon the
places whence they removed, obtained license for their wives and families to
continue upon their Holdings till Harvest were in; and after that upon a second
complaint (that they could not dispose of their Corn in so short a time as was
set them, but to their great loss) they obtained general license until
December last; and since that again, complaining of the hardness of the Season
of the Year to travel, they have their Licenses renewed until March next. It
would swell into a Volume to mention the particular persons toward whom this
tenderness has been extended from time to time. But these things thus
generally hinted as a brief Narrative of the proceedings in Ireland in the
business of Transplantation, being admitted to be true, (and if not credited,
there are some thousands of the Natives of Ireland, besides many hundreds
employed in the Commonwealths service, can give their testimony thereto) From
what ground do you judge the Discussor can charge the Authority of Ireland with
such mercilesness and cruelty, as that Book speaks of and implies? Nay, there
are some others who fear the error will prove on the other hand in the exercise
of too much lenity and enderness toward a People that are likely enough to ill
requite it, and to take advantage thereby, to put the work upon more
difficulties. But if that should be the fruit of the Discussors great affection
to them, I doubt not (through Gods assistance) but in the end they would have
as little cause to reward him for his service, as they have their Priests for
stirring them up to the last Rebellion; however, they that have hitherto been
exercised toward them with so much tenderness and compassion, aiming singly
therein at their good, if they should meet with that requital from them or any
of them, I hope would with the more comfort and grounded resolution be
encouraged in the discharge of their duties on the other hand; and if any on
the contrary hand should take upon them to blame the proceedings of Authority
herein, there is sufficient reason to be shown on that hand to justify the
prudent and tender proceedings that have been in this matter; but that would be
here impertinent.

And fourthly, as to the work of Transplantation it self, though it lies not
upon the Authority there to show any farther reason for what they do therein,
than what has been before mentioned, viz. the discharge of their duty, in
putting in execution the Laws and orders of those whom they serve, yet they have
not been unwilling but very ready to admit to consideration, and debate, the
merit of the work it self, and to hear and consider of Objections that could be
offered upon any hand, by any persons, either upon a conscientious or
prudential account; and in order thereto have appointed several solemn
meetings, when not only Officers of the Army and persons in public trust
under them have been called together to advise, but several godly Ministers and
other private Christians have been desired to attend to seek the Lord together
with them for direction in the work, and have accordingly attended, and used
their liberties to speak their opinion of it with freedom, as the Lord has
informed their judgments, and persuaded their consciences therein. And I do not
remember any of them that have manifested dissatisfaction, or offered their
Reasons against the work it self, (so far as it has hitherto been declared
for, and proceeded in,) but very many both godly and judicious persons have
done it on the other hand, as to its limitations and slow pace, yea it has
been the disposition of those in chief Authority to lean most toward that
hand, that was at^oded with least difficulties and hardships, upon the poor
People concerned. From whence you may gather, that this Gentleman is very
singular in his opinion, which might a little plead with him for a more
charitable opinion of his different-minded friends, is to their good meanings
at least, though there should be much reason of his side.

Thus having g^ven you (to the best of my memory) a true account of the
proceedings of Authority in this matter, let us inquire into the weight and
strength of those Reasons which the Discussor offers against the thing, and see
what may be said in ^nswer thereto.

And first, take notice from what has been said before, that the general scope
of the discourse whereupon that Reason (which seems to be in it) chiefly hangs,
is viz. several great Mistakes, (if not worse) For his Arguments are:

First, against a general Transplantation of the Irish, whereas there is only
the Proprietors and men that have been in Arms declared to be transplanted, and
when there shall as much reason appear for the transplanting the whole, as it
does now for such a part, it will be then more seasonable for the Discussor to
offer his Reasons against it: and such as shall be then concerned in the doing
thereof, to give their Reasons for it; but at present there is no such thing in
preparation, much less in practice.

The second mistake, is his Arguments against a promiscuous Transplantation,
without respect to their merit or behaviors, which (as is before asserted) is
not so; for there are several persons ( Irish Papists) who upon that account of
their merit as abovesaid, and different affection from the rest, manifested to
the English in the late Rebellion, are wholly exempted from Transplantation,
either as to their estates or persons, nay (as is before asserted) not any of
them that could produce testimony of their good will to the English interest,
or least good office done to an English person in extremity upon the account of
an Englishman, but there is a mark of favor put upon him for it, which (being
admitted) the Discussors Maxim in Christian Religion in page 6, and 7. is no
ways entrenched upon by the work of Transplantation; but there is much ground
to believe his shooting such poisoned Arrows against Authority thus at the
adventure, was not so much to heal the Irish wounds, as to wound and weaken the
English Government and Interest there; but innocence is the best Armor against
such Darts.

The third Mistake, the Discussor grounds his Discourse upon, (as in page 7. to
the 15.) is the Principle upon which the thing is done, as if Transplantation
were principally proposed as a Punishment for Murder, or avenging the Blood
spilt in Ireland by the Rebellion, in order to which he takes much pains to
prove, that after Justice is done upon capital Offenders and chief Ringleaders
in a Rebellion or Massacre, that then the Body of the People or Commons (as he
calls them) should partake of mercy, etc. This Position (without further
troubling our selves with his proofs) may be admitted without any reflection
upon the work of Transplantation, or the Authority imposing or executing the
same, for the Parliament of England (in the same Act of Settlement in which
they make provision of a liberty to transplant) does there determine and
appoint what the punishment of Murderers and chief Ringleaders should be,
excepting of them therein from pardon both of Life and Estate, etc. And does
therein (in page 2.) declare, To the end all the People of that Nation may know
that it is not the intention of the Parliament to extirpate the whole Nation,
but that mercy and pardon both, as to Life and Estate, should be extended to
all Husbandmen, Ploughmen, Laborers, Artificers, and others of the inferior
sort, in manner as is hereafter declared, etc. And in the Instructions for
Transplanting before mentioned page 2. they say thus, And to the end all
persons in Ireland ( who have right to Articles, or to any favor or mercy held
forth by any the Qualifications in the Act of Parliament, entitled [An Act for
the Settlement of Ireland]) may enjoy the benefit intended unto them and every
of them respectively by the said Act, It is thought fit and resolved, That all
and every the persons aforesaid shall before the first day of May 1654. remove
and transplant themselves into Connaught, etc. Is there in all this one word
tending to ground the Transplantation upon Principles in the extreme of
Punishments or avenging of Blood? surely if a person in a work of this weight
shall so grossly mistake in the very Essentials and Principles upon which his
Discourse is founded, there is little reason to expect soundness and truth in
things more circumstantial and inferior. But if I should proceed to take notice
of all the rest of his mistakes, absurdities, and impertinencies, as to the
thing, with those unjust and scandalous invectives against Authority in his
Lines, I should both have tired my self in writing, and you in reading thereof
to little purpose.

But for the further clearing up the justice and rationality of this work,
admit it in some degree to be done upon the account of punishment (which in a
sense may be admitted) for had they never offended they had never been liable
thereto. Therefore consider what punishment it was they did incurr by their
offense, which will be the better done, First, by considering the offense it
self, which was the most horrid causless Rebellion, and bloody Massacre that
has been heard of in these later Ages of the world, and the Offenders not
particular persons or parties of the Irish Nation (for that had been another
case) but the whole Irish Nation it self consisting of Nobility, Gentry,
Clergy, and Commonalty, are all engaged as one Nation in this Quarrel, to root
out and wholly extirpate all English Protestants from amongst them, who had
(for the most of them) as legal and just right to their Estates and interest in
Ireland, as themselves, many of them possessing nothing but what they had
lawfully purchased, and dearly paid for, from the Irish, and others of them
possessing by right of Grant from the Crown of England, time out of mind what
they did enjoy, and the Irish Nation enjoying equal privileges with the
English, if not much more, as the Discussor confesses page 20. the Lawyers
were Irish, the Jurors Irish, most of the Judges Irish, and the major part of
the Parliament Irish, and in all disputes between English and Irish, the Irish
were sure of the favor (as he calls it) so that they were under no
provocation, nor oppression, under the English Government at that time when the
bloody Rebels in 1641. committed that inhumane Massacre upon a company of
poor, unarmed, peaceable, harmless people living quietly amongst them, wherein
neither Age nor Sex were spared, but from the old man stooping for age to the
Babe of a span long were their cruelties extended, nay the Infants in the womb
were not secure from their merciless butchery, but even the women with child
were ripped up, Virgins deflowred, and Wives ravished in the sight of their
Parents and Husbands, and then all destroyed together by the most inhuman
cruelties that could be devised, and not only English people but English
Cattle and Houses were destroyed for their being of an English kind, and all
this (as I said before) without the least provocation; yet this bloody inhumane
Act with all its agravations were espoused by this People as a National Quarrel,
and a War waged thereupon, and Councels constituted for the management thereof,
who were owned, and submitted unto, by the body of the People as their supreme
legislative Authority, in which rebellious practices and cruel War they
persisted to the ruining of that flourishing Nation, and making of it near a
waste Wilderness, thereby necessitating England (in the time of its own
Trouble) to maintain an Army in Ireland, to preserve a footing there, and at
last forced them to send over and maintain a potent Army, greatly exhausting
their Treasure and People to recover their Interest out of the hands of this
bloody Generation, and bring the Offenders to condign punishment, who had
confidence (notwithstanding what is before mentioned) to dispute (the surrender
of what they had so boldly come by) to the utmost, from place to place, Ireland
having cost England more money and men to recover it, than it is or ever is
like to be worth to them many a time over, and for England now at the close of
all to heal up this wound slightly, and to leave the Interest and People of
England in Ireland at as eminent uncertainties as ever, (whereby the posterity
of this present Generation (if not themselves) shall after a few years come to
be at the mercy and disposition of this bloody People again (except a few
inwalled Towns and Garrisons) if it may be by any lawful and prudent means
prevented) I judge those who are wise and ingenuous of the Irish themselves
would acknowledge it a weakness, and great neglect in those in whose hand God
has placed the power, much more all true hearted English men who are so much
concerned therein.

And therefore it remains now to prove that the work of Transplantation (at
least so far as it is at present declared and intended) i^ the most probable
means to secure the present English Interest (...) Ireland, and obtain one
there able to secure it self without such immediate dependence upon England (as
hitherto has been) for men and money to effect the same.

And for the better making out of this:

First, consider wherein the advantage of the Irish above the English consisted
at the first breaking out of the late horrid Rebellion, whereby the many
thousands of English People then inhabiting in that Country became so
inconsiderable either as to the preservation of their own Lives and Estates, or
the public Interest of England there; which chiefly proceeded from their not
being imbodied, or from their not cohabiting together, whereby they might have
been in a capacity to imbody, they being scattered up and down the whole
Nation, here and there, a few families, being thereby wholly subjected to the
mercy of the Rabble Irish, to the general destruction and ruin of them, before
the Enemy had either Army, Arms, or Ammunition, more than Skeans and Staves,
whereas had those English that were then in Ireland been cohabiting together in
one entire Plantation, or in several Plantations, so they had been but entire
Colonies of themselves, and Masters of the Country in which they lived, the
Irish would hardly have had confidence to have attempted a War, much less a
Massacre upon them; for then before they could have made any considerable
Attempt upon the English, they must have been somewhat formidable themselves,
which they could hardly have attained unto without discovering their Plot, and
there by losing their Design; but in case they could have effected the raising
a formidable force before they had been discovered, yet it would have been a
difficult business for them to have fallen upon all the English Plantations at
once, or to have surprised any one of them more than one quarter upon which
they first fell, from whence the whole Plantation would receive the Alarm, and
either be in a capacity to draw together, to make present resistance, or
otherwise at least to betake themselves with the chief of their substance to
such strong Holds or Garrisons as the Plantation did afford, and there to put
themselves into a posture to defend their Country, and rescue their friends
and substance from their Enemies. And further upon the first Assault of the
Irish upon any such English Plantation, or any part thereof, the whole English
Plantations with the English Army in all parts would forthwith receive the
Alarm, and put themselves into a posture of defense, which in that case they
might have done without much hazard or difficulty to their persons, though
their substance in some parts might have been hazarded by their quiting their
particular Habitations, to draw together, though not much, if their Plantation
had been so settled upon the Seacoasts, as that the Irish could fall but upon
the out-quarter thereof, they then probably might have preserved all their
lives, stock and portable goods by driving and bringing them within or under
the shelter of their Garrison or Rendezvous: as for instance, the Barony of Ards
in the County of Down and Province of Vlster, which being entirely planted by
British People did preserve themselves by keeping Guards upon their Frontiers,
when all the Country besides was totally ruined; and in all former Wars of
Ireland the like security has been enjoyed by the English pale in the County
of Dublin and English Baronies in the County of Wexford, by the same means.
Whereas by their promiscuous and scattered inhabiting among the Irish, who were
in all places far the greater number and in most a hundred to one, they were
even as Sheep prepared for the slaughter, that the very Cripples and Beggars of
several of the Countries where they lived (if they rose against them) were able
to destroy them, for they were neither in a capacity to resist nor fly, being
in the midst of their Enemies, and far from Friends; some having a hundred,
some sixty, some forty, few less than ten miles to travel through their Enemies
Country, where every Bridge and Pass was beset with Rebels to destroy them,
that they were not only without help, but hope in most places, having no other
refuge, but to fly to the chief of the Irish in their Country for succor, who
in several places set their Cow-boys and Footmen to murder and torture them,
and would stand by and make sport of it themselves; and others of the Irish
Gentry that were more civil would send them away with pretended Convoys, who
usually murdered them by the way, though some there were of the Irish Gentry
(whose kindness I hope either has or will be rewarded both by God and man)
that did really use their endeavors and interest to preserve English lives, by
whose means some few did escape (like Job's messengers) to bring the news of
the destruction of the rest of their neighbors.

And if this were the condition of the English in Ireland at the beginning of
the Rebellion, and the chief outward cause of their sad destruction, their
promiscuous scattered cohabitations among the Irish, then surely it must be the
main duty of the Authority of England at this day, to contrive and use their
utmost endeavors to prevent the like sad destruction for the future, which
will hardly be provided against without the removing this main cause before
mentioned. And therefore I would propose (as essential to the security of the
English interest and People in Ireland) that the English inhabiting in that
Nation should live together in distinct Plantations or Colonies, separated from
the Irish, and (so far as the natural advantage of the Country, or their own
ability will afford it) to maintain frontier Garrisons, upon Lines or Passes,
for the security of every Plantation, and to admit no more Irish Papists (that
they had not eminent grounds to believe were or would be faithful to the
English interest) to live within them, then what they might have as visibly at
their mercy and dispose when any new disturbance shall arise, as the Irish had
them at the breaking out of the last Rebellion, and it is my judgment it would
not be safe to admit in any English Plantation, above the fifth part to be
Irish Papists, either in the capacity of Tenants or Servants, unless in such
cases where two Justices of the Peace, with two godly Ministers of that
Engglish Plantation should receive satisfaction of their being converted to the
Protestant Religion, and English Civil Manners and Customs.

For though the Lord has been pleased so far to own the English Cause and
Interest in the late War, that they have been able to engage them with far less
numbers, that one has put ten, and ten one hundred to flight, yet in the work
of surprizings and unexpected assaults and inroads upon the English, the Irish
have been usually more expert and vigilant, for the Irish are naturally a
timorous, suspicious, watchful People; and on the other hand, the English are
a confident, credulous, careless People, as our daily experience in Ireland
teaches us. And therefore if their numbers should be near equal, that
advantage which they would have of their Irish Neighbors to correspond with
them, and fall into their assistance, would much add to their encouragement to
attempt mischief upon the English, with or among whom they lived, though they
were far less numbers. And if this be not admitted, that it is essential in
order to the safety of the English interest and people, that their Plantation
should consist of many more English than Irish (as above,) then there is a
necessity (in order thereto) that some of the Irish should be removed out of
some parts of Ireland, to make way for the English Plantations, and if so, then
a Plantation must be admitted to be essential in order to the security of the
English interest and People there. So that now the Question must be confined to
the extent and manner of this Transplantation, Whether it should be total and
universal or a partial Transplantation? And if but a part, What part? or Which
part?

And secondly, as to the manner; Whether all at one time? or all to one place?
etc. To the first I answer, that so far as the Discussor or my self is able to
judge, who are but private men, and not acquainted with the mysteries and
secrets of State, the business of a total and universal Transplantation is out
of Question (as was said before) All public Papers relating to
Transplantation, confining that work to Proprietors and men in Arms, and
therefore that I may not (as the Discussor has done his) spend my pains in
beating the air, I shall only speak to that part of this first Question, which
is at present in Question, viz. What part that is? and How many, and what sort
of persons are fit to be transplanted.

First, as to the number that is required to remove or transplant, I judge a
less number than what is intended and appointed is not safe, if so little, for
the Proprietors and interessed persons in Lands, with all relating to them,
(required to remove with them) cannot be rationally judged near the twentieth
part of the People of Ireland, for the Lands of Ireland were most generally in
the hands of the Noblemen and chief Gentry, who are for the most part excepted
persons for Life and Estate, or under Banishment by the Act of Settlement, the
remaining part being very inconsiderable for number. And for persons that have
been in Arms (though there be too many of them yet in Ireland) yet much the
greater part of them are transported into foreign Nations, so that though it
be hard to determine the number of these two sorts of persons, yet any man that
knows the state of Ireland must acknowledge they are probably so inconsiderable
that they will not be missed or discerned as to their numbers in the Countries
from whence they remove, farther than one friend may want another; and for such
of their friends, Tenants and Servants, (not within the Rules) who will
voluntarily go with them, the using force to stay the later would be much more
hard than the removing the former, so that as to the numbers (doubtless if any
at all) it is not rational to think of less than these two sorts of persons
will amount unto.

But secondly, as to the persons themselves, Why these two sorts of persons
rather than others? I answer, first, for the men in Arms, I judge there is not
much scruple that this one Reason, if there were no more might serve, That they
have had their hands embrued in the blood of the English, in the late in humane
Rebellion of Ireland, where the barbarousness and inhumanities that were
usually exercised in the Irish Army has so much enured them to Treachery and
Cruelties, that they are much unfitted for living in any humane society, much
more with the English, against whom they are so much exasperated; And besides,
many of them have a very great interest in and influence on the People among
whom they reside, that next unto the Priest and Landlord the Soldier is
esteemed; and therefore the same Reasons that may be given for the removing the
Priest and the Landlord will reach the Soldier, besides their extraordinary
fittedness above others, to carry on, and much more to execute any treacherous
Design against the English, they having not only attained to much more
hardness and boldness, than the rest of the Natives, through use and custom,
but are withal much more skillful in the Tory War than the rest are, being
generally good Guides in the Bogs and Mountains, and experienced where and when
to take their advantages to do mischief.

Objection. But will it not be more dangerous, considering they are a People so
able to do harm in a way of War, to gather them all into one place?

Answer. Unto such as are not acquainted with the way of the Irish War, and
wherein their strength lies, it might seem so, but (as the Discussor
acknowledges in page 25.) the English Soldiers are more afraid of Tories then
Armies, and Woods and Boggs than Camps, where it will be harder to find them
than to vanquish them; and therefore there is nothing more desirable as to the
peace of Ireland than to have all persons therein, of rebellious Principles and
active spirits, either banished or otherwise confined to one or some few
places, that they may know where to provide against them, and keep a watch over
them, which will not only tend much to the peace of those parts from whence
they are removed, but also enable England to preserve their interest in
Ireland, upon much less charge, for ten or twenty of these persons turning
Tories in those parts where they are acquainted, shall require as much force to
attend them, and preserve the Country from them, as twenty times their number
shall do, when confined to a little Circuit, that while we leave them in a
capacity to be skulking Tories, we play our Game in Irish with them (wherein
lies their excellency and skill) but bringing them into a body, confining them
unto small Circuits together, (that if they will be Torying they may be Torying
upon one another, or otherwise if they have a mind to try their strength, they
may be forced to imbody) you are in English with them, wherein upon account of
men you have the advantage much of them, as experience teaches.

But, says the Discussor, this is the way to have Tories, to transplant the
Irish, against which says he page 27. they have ('it is strange) as great a
resentment as against loss of Estate, yea even against Death it self, etc.

He might have left out his Parenthesis ('it is strange) for it is not strange
they should, especially such as are most intelligent and foreseeing among them,
and consider and esteem their rational interest, for they discern well that the
business of Transplantation does more lay the Ax to the root of the Tree of
their ^ure hopes of recovering their lost Ground, as to that, then the whole
fourteen years War has done without it. And therefore (...) there were no more
Arguments to prove the great concernment ^f it, as to the English interest, the
Irish great dislike of it were ^fficient. For it cannot be a personal or
particular suffering that (...) so much affect them therein. For one hundred
pound per an^um in Connaught is as good as a hundred per annum in Lem^r, but it
is the national interest more than their particulars that ^y see in danger
thereby, added to that their unwillingness to ^it the Possession of their
ancient Inheritances, and to be settled ^on other men's Land in Connaught, who
it is like they may fore^ will bid them such welcome as they will bid the
Soldiers and adventures upon their Lands, such nicities as these are, added to
(...) main business, may trouble them; but as to the particular ^sistence and
livelihood, they do believe without doubt they (...) and shall live as
comfortably and plentiful in Connaught, elsewhere in Ireland, after they are
settled.

But how if they will not go but turn Tories? etc.

Truly, if I were convinced there were impossibilities or desperate hazards
attending them, as to their being, or probable comfortable beings, I should be
loath to have a hand in forcing them; but if it be their dramm of rebellious
blood or fit of sullenness, (which the Discussor prophesies of in page 25.)
that alone is attended with sufficient Arguments to advise, it may be put to
the trial, and that speedily, before any more of the Army is disbanded, for if
the business of Transplantation will be a sufficient quarrel to engage them in
a War again so soon, they will not long want matter of equal weight with that
to pick a quarrel with us, and it is like when they may be better and we worse
prepared; for if Ireland be not Transplantation-proof at present, there is
little ground to judge it will be long a quiet Habitation for the English; and
therefore (though a War is to be avoided, if possible, by all good and safe
means, yet) if they have a mind to it, better now than afterward; and
therefore there is much more danger not to do it, than to do it upon that
account.

Question. But though there may seem to be some reason for the transplanting
the Soldiers, What reason is there the Landlord, (or as they are called the
Proprietors in Lands) should be transplanted more than the Tenant, qua
Landlord or Proprietor.

Answer. The being a Landlord or Proprietor singly considered as such, is no
fault, neither is there any proceedings in the business of Transplantation can
give reason for any dis-interessed ingenuous persons to conclude, any man so
suffers, for then all Irish Papists being Landlords or Proprietors should have
been transplanted of course, without distinction, and if that were intended, of
what use is all that care and pains that has been taken to discriminate, as is
before mentioned. Therefore no person is (by the Act and Instructions of
Parliament for Transplantation, or any Order since made in Ireland in the
observance of them) to be transplanted, but such who are within some of the
Qualifications therein mentioned, and do challenge an Interest and Propriety in
such part of their Lands as that Act gives them thereby, by which challenge
they do give Judgment against themselves, by the tenor of that Act of
Settlement, that they have lived in Ireland since the beginning of the War and
have not manifested their constant good affection to the Parliament of England,
during that time, for which they have forfeited all that interest, any such of
them had in Lands in Ireland (in the judgment of the Parliament declared in
that Act) and as it was in the power of the Parliament to appoint what part of
their Estates so forfeited they should enjoy (as an Act of Grace from them) so
was it equally in their power, to assign what place in Ireland they should have
such part of their forfeited Estates set out unto them in, where it might most
consist with the good Settlement, and preservation of the English interest
there. And for such Proprietors of Lands in Ireland as will put themselves upon
the proof of their constant good affection (as I judge several will do) the
Authority there will readily admit the same, and will be so far from
transplanting such (as shall by such legal trial acquit themselves of their
supposed Delinquency against the State) that they will rather rejoice there is
any of that Nation that have been so faithful as to preserve themselves for
fit objects of their especial favor and respect.

Question. But are there not many others that are no Proprietors, who have been
equally guilty with them, and yet are not transplanted with them? And does not
that savor of partiality in the doing of justice?

Answer. The thing it self may be granted, and yet no partiality in the
administration of Justice admitted, for it is one thing to be a respecter of
persons in Acts of Justice (whereby one person shall come to bear more than his
share in punishment, and others less, or to receive less than his right in
Justice, and others more) and another thing to extend in Acts of Grace and
Favor, (which is the present Case) to some more and others less: and therefore
says CHRIST, Why should thine eye be evil, because mine is good? For if the
Authority might justly have transplanted the whole, the suspension or exemption
of any part does neither wrong, especially when the Reason and Aims that lead
to the difference, bear a public stamp, as in order to the better settlement
and fare^y to the Nation.

Question. What are those public Reasons and Aims that may direct to
transplant the Proprietor rather than the Tenant?

Answer. First, there may be something said as to matter of merit, wherein the
Proprietors have generally deserved to suffer more than the Tenant and common
Husbandman; For they have generally been in a capacity to do the Irish better
service, and the Englih mischief, for next unto the Clergy and Soldiery, the
Proprietors were the principal Pillars of that associated confederacy of the
Irish (before mentioned) who as a Nation or Body of People espoused the Quarrel
of those bloody Miscreants that murdered the English in the first year of the
War; and in all Communities and body of People there must be several members
each one acting in his place in order to the good of the other, or else the
whole could not subsist. And therefore Paul (using the same Simile, 1 Cor.
12.17.) says, If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? etc. so I
may say, if the whole Body of the Irish had been Soldiers or public
Ministers, where had been their maintenance and support? so that the
Proprietors differed from the men in Arms as David's men did who staid by the
stuff, from those who followed the pursuit, and had they returned in like
manner with success, they would have expected from their hands an equal share
in the Booty; so it is not their having Lands is the fault, but the
mis-improving that interest and ability which those Lands gave them, above
their poor neighbors, to the greater public damage and suffering of the
English interest; For it may be as well adjudged that Jeffery, Baron, etc. and
other of their chief Head-pieces suffered for being wise men, as to say upon
this account, Proprietors suffered for being landed men; for as it is most
probable if the persons before mentioned had had less wit or ability to serve
the Irish interest, they had been unhanged; so it may on the other hand be
granted, if the Proprietors had had no Land they had not been transplanted; and
yet the Wit of the one and the Lands of the other is not the proper cause of
either of their sufferings, but the abuse of both.

But besides this Argument of the different evil merit or desert proportioned
to their d^fferent interest and ability, there are several others Arguments to
be offered, to justify the reasonableness and justice of the thing.

As first, you will hereby in an ordinary way break, or at least much weaken
and limit that great spreading Interest of the Irish, viz. their spreading
Septs, which has been hitherto the very seed-spots, and nurseries of all
Faction and Rebellion, and withal, the preservers of all their old Heathenish
wicked customs and habits, which are like the humane Jewish, Popish traditions
(though generally of a more wicked nature and tendency) recommended from Father
to Son, and so rivetted unto them by the reputation of antiquity, that there is
little hopes of ever reclaiming them, while those Septs continue; and therefore
the transplanting the Proprietors, will remove the heads and chief of the Septs
from the body: for though many, who have been in arms, will go along with them,
yet not all, and likely the greatest part will not, which the Discussor himself
in p. 23. acknowledges, in these very words, It is evidently (says he) for
the security of the English and the English Interest to divide the Irish one
from the other, especially the Comminalty from the Chiefs; and so in p. 22. to
the same purpose; which thing is done by this work of Transplantation, which he
writes all these invectives against; but contradictions do best suit with that
matter that flows from mistakes and prejudice, and consists of falsehoods and
slanders.

Secondly, Where the Septs do not extend, yet there is generally such a
dependence of the Tenant upon the Landlord, that they are as much at their
beck as their menial Servants, the Landlord not usually receiving penny Rent,
but Sheaf, Provision and Service for their Lands, besides those other ties they
have one upon another by their Fosterings and Gossippings, etc. which are
usually as much obliging amongst them, as their natural Relations; and the
Landlord or Proprietor as much out of policy as principle, labors to preserve
these things amongst the People, as the greatest means of their interest in
them, and as the removing the Proprietor does in an ordinary way remove, or at
least weaken the Interest of the ruling or leading part of them, over the
common People, (whereby Ireland both as to its interest, strength and manners,
will be reduced to much less than the fourth part of the former extent of that
Nation,) So does it open a door and prepare a way for all that good both to
soul and body, which the Discussor seems so much to desire, for the poor
Na^ives of that Nation, without which it is unlikely ever to be effected by
ordinary means; for hereby the whole body of the poor laboring quiet People of
the Nation, will be immediately under the influence, education and countenance
of of the English Proprietor or Planter, and from under the threatening, awing
influence of his old Landlord or Master, and may thereby through Gods blessing
upon the good endeavors of the Government, be reclaimed from all their evil
Customs and lewd Courses they are overspread with, and embrace both the
Religion, Manners, Laws and Language of the English Nation (in Gods time) as
the greatest outward mercy they can enjoy.

Besides the making way and giving encouragement to the Soldiers, Adventurers,
and other Protestant Planters, to plant their Lands with English, and settle
themselves upon them, which not one of many would be encouraged to do, if every
time when he comes to see his Lands, the ancient Irish Proprietor shall salute
him upon it, with a sad story of his sufferings and hard usage, to have his
Inheritance taken from him and given to other men, nay the posterity of that
Irish Proprietor shall hardly ever pass by the English man's dwelling, without
cursing of him and his Successors (in their hearts) and wishing for time to
recover their own again. And this was evident in this last Rebellion, where the
Rebels possessed themselves of the English men's Lands and Houses, with all they
could find upnn it, as their rightful Inheritances, wrongfully disposed of from
their Ancestors, though they had been out of the possession of them for several
hundreds of years; Besides, if any English men were so bad natured as they
could bear their murmurings and complainings, yet few of them (after they came
to discern their danger, and the hazard of all their costs and improvements
upon their wast Lands) would be so stupid as to continue the hazard of their
persons and familes, and their posterities and estates upon a place so near a
neighborhood that (upon principles) were bound to hate and contrive the ruin
of him and his, while he lived there. For a little experience would convince
our new Planters, if what former ages have met withal, be not sufficient, That
it is ridiculous for an English man as a private Country man (though he would
keep none but English men about him) to expect to overtop his Irish neighbors
of equal estate with himself, for the Irish Proprietors that plants with Irish,
shall (upon the same Lands) maintain four times the number of people to be at
his beck, that the other is able to do, and yet be as rich a man at the years
end as himself, and if he keep Irish about him, he is then daily at their
mercy, if the least disturbance or encouragement be given, as was observed
before.

But lastly, it will not only be an encouragement to particular persons and
Plantations of English, but (through the blessing of the Lord in some process
of time) may make these three Provinces wholly British, and thereby enable the
English interest in Ireland to support it self, which has hitherto wholly
depended upon England for all supplies, to Englands great charge and damage;
and the hazards of bringing over English men bred up in England to endure the
hardships of War in Ireland is very great, their bodies at the first coming
will not endure it, hardly one of six lives; Whereas to bring over English to
plant is no such danger, for they not being liable to the hardship of Wars but
accomodating themselves with wholesome diet and warm clothes, not one of twenty
of them usually miscarries, so that hereby in stead of having it a grave and
place of destruction to English men as hithereto, it might become a Nursery and
breeder of English, not only to supply its own use, to serve the interest of
England elsewhere, if occasion should be. Nay we are not altogether without
presidents of this work in Ireland, the wisdom of our Ancestors may afford us
some countenance therein, in the former Wars and Conquest, the English have
gained in Ireland, after which (in order to secure their interest they had
obtained) they have left us some presidents of Transplantation, as a thing they
judged useful in order thereto, as witness the several Cities of Dublin,
Droghedah, Waterford, Cork, Youghall, Limerick, Galway, etc. which have been
entirely planted with English Colonies, and the present Irish Inhabitants we
found in them are generally of an ancient English extract, though degenerated
from the manners and interest of their Ancestors native Country and People.

But especially the English Pale were anciently inhabited and planted with
English, retaining much of the ancient language to this day, besides the
English Baronies in the County of W^xford, both which continue in several
things much different from the rest of the Irish people, which inferior or
smaller pieces of this work may point out to us, it has been before this
judged needful, and doubtless if they had then obtained the same opportunity and
ability to Transplant Provinces as they had to Transplant Counties and
Baronies, they would have made their English pale of larger extent, for,
compare their opportunity and power to ours, doub^less their Transplantation far
exceeded what is now intended. Much more might be added upon this point, to
show that the present persons pitched upon to be transplanted, are the fittest,
and that their Transplantation does answer many public ends, and is essential
to the present and future good Settlement of Ireland, and the security of the
interest of England therein.

The last and great Objection the Discussor makes against this work is the
impossibility of it; which is a considerable Objection if the Gentleman had
produced any reasons to prove it. For Impossibilities, by wise men ought not to
be undertaken, but making search for them, I could find nothing offered to
prove that, more than what may be supposed to be employed in page 25. wherein he
seems to imply those two things.

First, that the Irish may have a dramm of rebellious blood left in them, and
will not go.

And secondly, the power and strength of England in Ireland is but a Scarecrow
and a Hat upon a white stick, only fit to drive Geese, etc. and therefore not
able to make them go.

If the first of these prove true, it may imply a difficulty but not an
impossibility, for when there were many dramms of rebellious blood in the veins
of that People, it pleased the Lord, who is the Subduer of Rebels, to enable
the present Army in Ireland to be an instrument in his hands, to let it out,
and bring them under the power of England, as at this day.

And as to the second part, the same instrument in the same hand depending upon
the same God, for strength has no reason (more than their own sinfulness and
unworthiness) to doubt but they may be as able to compel their obedience to
this work so ess^ntially desirable in order to the future good and safety of
Ireland, as they have been hitherto, to reduce them from their great strength,
and pride they found them in, to the condition they are now brought unto, and a
little compassion as the Discussor would seem to allow in the hearts of the
present persons in power in Ireland toward the Natives there: I hope the sense
of so sad a Judgment as a new Rebellion must necessarily bring upon that poor
People, (if God should give them up to such a spirit of stupidity as to work
their own destruction thereby) would much more affect them than any sense of
their own danger or the danger of the interest they serve, by any thing they
could do against it more than obstruct a present Settlement, and as I do
believe) the Jesuits and Priests in the beginning of the late Rebellion did
profess as much affection and compassion toward the People of Ireland, when
they instigated and stirred them up thereto, as the Discussor does or can do in
his new incitements and encouragements to a second Rebellion, so am I as well
satisfied in the close of the business, if they have a mind to put it upon
trial, they will have as much cause to bewail their unhappiness and misery
therein, and the later shall deserve as little thanks from them, as the former,
in the issue. Which one Answer shall serve to those two Objections.

Objection. But it may be further objected, (which some of the Discussors
Arguments seem to imply) though there be a power in Ireland to compel their
obedience, yet there is no possibility in them to obtain a subsistence in their
journey, or when they come there, to support themselves and families, so that
it is equal to them to hazard their destruction in disobedience, seeing by
obeying they can but perish.

Answer. If this were the true state of this Case, there were much in it, but
let us consider it: Is this the first time that persons have removed from one
part of a Nation to another to inhabit? and is that so impossible a thing, that
it does not consist with the being of such as so do? I pray you consider what
it is to remove from one Nation to another; if that be so, what will become of
all the English that are expected from thence to plant Ireland, who I hope will
be far greater numbers than the transplanted Irish, many of whom must march
much farther by Land than most of them can do, besides a hazardous, chargeable
and troublesome voyage by Sea, to which is added those difficulties that attend
strangers in a strange Country more than what does a people in their own
native Land; and yet I hope we have sufficient experience, and some thousands
of living witnesses, that it is consistent with their being and well-being to,
and has proved to many (if not to most) for their much better being, though it
is to be supposed that such English as dwell on the North-West side of the
River of Thames (though many miles distant from it) would judge it a far less
difficulty to remove their Habitation into Surrey or Kent, than it is to remove
from England to Ireland, though the later is very possible and practicable, as
is before minded, yet the former is as much as the Irish Transplantation
extends unto. Nay, we might bring for an instance to prove the possibility of
the work those many thousands of English, Dutch and French, that have
transplanted themselves out of those Nations into the American Plantations, and
yet are all in being and well-being too (through Gods mercy) and therefore I
argue it is no such impossible thing, as the Discussor would seem to make it,
to transplant the Irish, but it may be done with much consistency to their
beings and well-beings, if themselves be not accessory to the contrary.

Besides, if to this be added those tender regards that have been (as is before
minded) to the condition, age and sex of such as are to be transplanted, who
have not been of a sudden hurried away without respect to their several
conditions, but the method and timing of their remove has had a special eye to
their good and preservation therein, in order to which they have had a full
years time to dispose of what they have (in the places they remove from) to
their best advantage, and withal thereby opportunity to provide Habitations and
needful accommodations at the places they are removed to, and another whole
Summer before them farther to provide for themselves, which sufficiently
evidences the persons in present power in Ireland not to have that cruel
disposition in them toward the Irish, as the Discussor maliciously labors to
insinuate, but much the contrary; for there are many Reasons of State in order
to public safety and settlement, that would have called for more severity in
order to expedition in that work, if compassion and tenderness toward the
persons concerned therein had not prevailed against them, so that not only to
the thing it self, but as to the management and method of it, the least of the
former Causes instanced being attended with equal and most of them with much
greater difficulties than this, and therefore not impossible, but as rationally
and safely practicable as any of the former Cases.

So that I judge there has been nothing offered by the Discussor against the
work of Transplantation that bears any weight, and does not of it self fall to
the ground by admitting those essential gross mistakes in him before mentioned,
but has been fully answered, either as to publibk good security of the English
inhabitants and their interest, or as to the possibility and practicableness of
the thing, without destruction and ruin to the persons concerned, which are
the principal Heads he insists upon; only as to that concerning Religion,
where he endeavors to hold forth that the not transplanting of the Irish,
would no ways hazard the perverting of the English, and would be much in order
to the converting of the Irish, which the Transplantation (says he) will
wholly prevent, as in page 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

But the stress of all that is offered upon this account is laid upon those
forementioned great mistakes, that (like the blood in the veins of the body)
that runs through the whole discourse, viz. a universal and promiscuous
Transplantation, which being denied is a sufficient answer, for I do not judge
the Discussor can suppose that the continuing of the popish, superstitious
Soldier and Proprietor among and over the common people will be a ^eans to
make way for their conversion to the Protestant Religion, more than to continue
their Priests, but is so evident it will ^h rather tend to the contrary, even
shutting that door of hope, but may otherwise be opened to that work, that to
spend time about arguing of it would not be to profit, and besides require ^re
Lines than I am willing to swell this Paper into, it being ^ch larger already
than I intended it.

FINIS.

