AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. FOR The Calling
of an ASSEMBLY OF Learned and Godly DIVINES, to be consulted with by the
PARLIAMEMT For the settling Of the Government and Liturgy of the CHURCH of
ENGLAND.

And for Vindicating and Clearing the Doctrine of the said Church from false
Aspersions and Interpretations, as shall be most agreeable to the WORD of GOD.

With the Names of all the Ministers appointed for the same.

Die Lunae, 12. Iun. 1643. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. London, Printed for J. Rothwel at the
Fountain in Cheapside, 1658.

An ORDINANCE of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the Calling of an
Assembly of Learned and Godly Divines and others, to be consulted with by the
Parliament, for the settling the Government and Liturgy of the Church of
England, and for vindicating and clearing of the Doctrine of the said Church
from false Aspersions and Interpretations,
WHereas amongst the infinite blessings of Almighty God upon this Nation, none
is, or can be more dear unto us, then the purity of our Religion, and that for
as yet many things remain in the Liturgy, Discipline, and Government of the
Church, which do necessarily require a further and more perfect Reformation,
then as yet has been attained: And whereas it has been declared and resolved
by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the present
Church Government by Archbishops, their Chancellors, Commissaries, Deans, Deans
and Chapters, Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical Officers depending upon the
Hierarchy, is evil and justly offensive and burdensome to the Kingdom, a great
impediment to reformation and growth of Religion, and very prejudicial to the
State and Government of this Kingdom, and that therefore they are resolved that
the same shall be taken away, and that such a Government shall be settled in the
Church, as may be most agreeable to Gods holy Word, and most apt to procure and
preserve the Peace of the Church at home, and nearer agreement with the Church
of Scotland, and other reformed Churches abroad, and for the better effecting
hereof, and for the vindicating, and clearing of the Doctrine of the Church of
England, from all false calumnies and aspersions, It is thought fit and
necessary to call an Assembly of learned, godly, and judicious Divines, who
together with some members of both the Houses of Parliament are to consult and
advise of such matters and things, touching the premises, as shall be proposed
unto them by both or either of the Houses of Parliament, and to give their
advice and counsel therein, to both or either of the said Houses, when and as
often as they shall be thereunto required. Be it therefore ordained by the
Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That all and every the
persons hereafter in this present Ordinance named, that is to say.

Algernon, Earl of Northumberland. William, Earl of Bedford. Philip, Earl of
Pembroke and Montgomery. William, Earl of Salisbury. Henry, Earl of Holland.
Edward, Earl of Manchester William, Lord Viscount Say and Seal. Edward, Lord
Viscount Conway. Philip Lord Wharton Edward Lord Howard. John Seldom Esquire.
Francis Rous Esquire. Edmund Prideaux Esquire. S. Hen. Vane Knight senior John
Glyn Esquire, Recorder of London. John White Esquire. Bulstrode Whitlocke
Esquire Humphrey Salloway Esquire Mr. Sergeant Wild. Oliver Saint John Esquire His
Majesty's Solicitor. Sir Benj. Rudyard Knight John Pym Esquire. Sir John
Clotworthy Knight John Maynard Esquire. S. Hen. Vane Knight junior William
Pierpoint Esquire. William Wheeler Esquire Sir Tho. Barrington Knight Walter
Young Esquire. Sir John Evelin Knight.
Oliver Bowls of Sutton, Batchellor in Divinity Herbert Palmer of Ashwel,
Batchellor in divinity Henry Wilkinson of Waddesdon, Batehelour in Divinity.
Thomas Valentine of Chalfont Giles, Bachelor in Divinity Dr. William Twisse of
Newbury. William Reynor of Egham Mr. Hannibal Gammon of Maugan Mr. Jasper H^cks
of Lawrick Dr. Joshua Hoyle late of Dublin in Ireland William Bridges of
Yarmouth Thomas Whincop of Ellesworth, Doctor in Divinity Thomas Goodwin of
London, Batchellour in Divinity John Ley of Budworth in Cheshire Thomas Case of
London John Pyne of Bereferrers Mr. Whidden of Mooreton Dr. Richard Love of
Ekington Dr. William Gouge of Blackfriers London Dr. Ralph Brownerigg Bp of
Exeter Dr. Samuel Ward Master of Sidney College John White of Dorchester
Edward Peale of Compton Stephen Marshal of Finchingfield, Batchelour in
Divinity Obadiah Sedgewicke of Cogshall, Batchelour in Divinity Mr. Carter
Peter Clerk of Carnaby William Mew of Eslington, Batchelour in Divinity Richard
Capell of Pitchcombe Theophilus Bathurst of Overton Watervile Phil. Nigh of
Kimbolton Dr. Brocket Smith of Barkway Dr. Cornelius Burges of Watford John
Green of Pencombe Stanley Gower of Brampton Bryan. Francis Tailor of Yalding
Thomas Wilson of Otham Antho. Tuckney of Boston, Bachelour in Divinity Thomas
Coleman of Bliton Charles Herle of Winwicke Richard Herricke of Manchester
Richard Cleyton of Showell George Gibbs of Ayleston Dr. Calibute Downing of
Hackney Jeremy Boroughs of Stepney Daniel Cawdrey George Walker Batchelour in
Divinity. Edmund Calamy Batchelour in Divinity Joseph Caryll of Lincolns Inn
Lazarus Seaman of London Dr. John Harris Warden of Winchester College George
Morley of Mildenhall Edward Reynolds of Bramston Thomas Hill of Titchmarch
Batchel or in Divinity Dr. Robert Saunderson of Booth by Pannell John Foxcroft
of Gorham John Fackson of Marske William Carter of London Thomas Thorowgood of
Massingham John Arrowsmith of Lynne Robert Harris of Hanwell, Batchelour in
Divinity Robert Cross of Lincoln College, Bachelour in Divinity James
Archbishop of Armagh Dr. Matthias Styles of Saint George Escheape London
Samuel Gibson of Burley Jeremiah Whitaker of Stretton Dr. Edmund Staunton of
Kingston Dr. Daniel Featley of Lambeth Francis Coke of Yoxhall John Lightfoote
of Ashley Edward Corbet of Merton College Oxon Samuel Hildersham of Felton
John Langley of Westuderley Christopher Tisdale of Uphusborne Thomas Young of
Stowmarket John Philips of Wrentham Humphrey Chambers of Claverton, Bachelour
in Divinity John Conant of Lymington Batchelour in Divinity Henry Hall of
Norwich, Batchelour in Divinity Henry Hutton Henry Scudder of Colingborn Thomas
Baylie of Manningford Bruce Benjamin Pickering of Easthoately Henry Nigh of
Chapham Arther Sallaway of Seavernestoake Sidrach Sympson of London Anthony
Burgess of Sutton Coldfield Richard Vines of Calcot William Greenhill of
Stepney William Moreton of Newcastle Richard Buckley Dr. Thomas Temple of
Battersey Simeon Ash of Saint Brides Mr. Nicholson Thomas Gattaker of
Rotherhithe, Batchelour in Divinity James Weldy of Sylatten Dr. Christopher
Pashley of Hawarden Henry Tozer Batchelour in Divinity William Spurstow of
Hampden in Com. Bucks Francis Cheynell of Oxon Edward Ellis of Gilsfield,
Batchelour in Divinity Dr. John Hacket of St. Andrews Holborne Samuel de la
Place John de la March Matthew Newcomen of Dedham William Lyford of Sherborne
in Com Dorset Mr. Carter of Dynton in Com. Bucks William Lance of Harrow in
Middlesex Thomas Hodges of Kensington in Com. Middlesex Andreas Perne of Wilby
in Com. Northampton Dr. Thomas Westfield of Saint Bartholomew le great London,
Bishop of Bristoll Dr. Henry Hammon of Penshurst in Kent Nicholas Proffet of
Marlborough in Com. Wilts Peter Sterry of London John Earl of Bishopston in
Com. Wilts Mr. Gibbon of Waltham Henry Painter of Exeter, Batchelour in
Divinity Mr. Micklethwaite of Cherryburton Dr. John Whincop of St. Martins in
the fields Mr. Price of Paul's Church in Covent Garden Henry Wilkinson junior,
Batchelour in Divinity Dr. Richard Oldsworth Master of Emanuel College in
Cambridge M. William Duning of Coloaston.
And such other person and persons as shall be nominated and appointed by both
Houses of Parliament, or so many of them as shall not be let by sickness or
other necessary impediment, shall meet and assemble, and are hereby required
and enjoined upon summons signed by the Clerks of both Houses of Parliament,
left at their several respective dwellings, to meet and assemble themselves at
Westminster in the Chapel called King Henry the sevenths Chapel on the first
day of July in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred forty three: And
after the first meeting, being at least of the number of forty, shall from time
to time sit and be removed from place to place, and also that the said Assembly
shall be dissolved in such manner as by both Houses of Parliament shall be
directed: And the said persons, or so many of them as shall be so Assembled, or
sit, shall have power and Authority, and are hereby likewise enjoined, from
time to time during this present Parliament, or until further Order be taken by
both the said Houses, to confer and treat among themselves of such matters and
things, touching and concerning the Liturgy, discipline and Government of the
Church of England, or the vindicating and clearing of the doctrine of the same
from all false aspertions and misconstructions, as shall be proposed unto them
by both or either of the said Houses of Parliament, and no other, and deliver
their Opinions and Advises of, or touching the matters aforesaid, as shall be
most agreeable to the Word of God, to both or either of the Houses, from time
to time, in such manner and sort, as by both or either of the said Houses of
Parliament shall be required, and the same not to divulge by printing, writing,
or otherwise, without the consent of both or either House or Parliament. And be
it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that William Twiss Doctor in
Divinity shall sit in the Chair as Prolocutor of the said Assembly, and if he
happen to dye, or be let by sickness or other necessary impediment, then
such other person to be appointed in his place as shall be agreed on by both
the said Houses of Parliament: And in case any difference in Opinion shall
happen amongst the said persons so assembled, touching any the matters that
shall be proposed to them as aforesaid, that then they shall represent the same
together with the reasons thereof to both or either the said Houses
respectively, to the end such further direction may be given therein as shall
be requisite to that behalf. And be it be further Ordained by the Authority
aforesaid,; That for the Charges and Expenses of the said Divines, and every of
them in attending the said service, there shall be allowed every of them that
shall so attend, during the time of their said attendance, and for ten days
before and ten days after the sum of four Shillings for every day, at the
charges of the Commonwealth, at such time and in such manner as by both Houses
of Parliament shall be appointed. And be it further Ordained, That all and
every the said Divines, so as aforesaid required and enjoined to meet and
assemble, shall be freed and acquitted of and from every offense, forfeiture,
penalty, loss or damage which shall or may arise or grow by reason of any
non-residence or absence of them or any of them, from his or their, or any of
their Church, Churches or Cures, for, or in respect of their said attendance
upon the said Service, any Law or Statute of Non-residence, or other Law of
Statute enjoining their attendance upon their respective Ministries or Charges
to the contrary thereof notwithstanding; And if any of the persons before named
shall happen to dye before the said Assembly shall be dissolved by Order of
both Houses of Parliament, then such other person or persons shall be nominated
and placed in the room and stead of such person and persons so dying, as by
both the said Houses shall be thought fit and agreed upon: And every such
person or persons so to be named shall have the like Power and Authority,
Freedom, and acquital to all intents and purposes and also all such wages and
allowances for the said service, during the time of his or their attendance, as
to any other of the said persons in this Ordinance is by this Ordinance limited
and appointed, Provided always that this Ordinance or any thing there in
contained, shall not give unto the persons aforesaid, or any of them, nor shall
they in this assembly assume to exercise any Jurisdiction, Power, or Authority
Ecclesiastical whatsoever, or any other Power, then is herein particularly
expressed.

Many of the PERSONS who were called to attend the ASSEMBLY appeared not;
Whereupon the whole Work lay on the hands of the Persons hereafter mentioned.

The PROMISE and Vow taken by every Member admitted to sit in the ASSEMBLY.
I A. B. Do seriously Promise and Vow in the presence of Almighty God, That in
this Assembly, whereof I am a Member, I will maintain nothing in point of
Doctrine, but what I believe to be most agreeable to the Word of God; nor in
point of Discipline, but what may make most for Gods glory, and the peace and
good of his Church.

William Twisse Prolocutor. Cornelius Burges. Assessors. John White. Assessors.
William Gouge. Robert Harris. Thomas Gataker. Oliver Bowls. Edward Reynolds.
Jeremiah Whitaker. Anthony Tuckney. John Arrowsmith. Simeon Ash. Philip Nigh.
Jeremiah Burroughes. John Lightfoot. Stanley Gower. Richard Heyricke. Thomas
Case. Thomas Temple. George Gipps. Thomas Carter. Humphrey Chambers. Thomas
Micklethwaite. John Guibon. Christopher Tesdale. John Phillip. George Walker.
Edmund Calamy. Joseph Caryl. Lazarus Seaman. Henry Wilkinson senior. Richard
Vines. Nicholas Proffet. Stephen Marshal Joshua Hoyle. Thomas Wilson Thomas
Hodges Thomas Bailey Francis Tailor. Thomas Young Thomas Valentine William
Greenhil Edward Pele John Green Andrew Pern Samuel de la Place John de la March
John Dury Philip Delme. Sidrach Simpson John Langley. Richard Cleyton Arthur
Salwey John Ley Charles Herle, Prolocutor after Dr. Twisse. Herbert Palmer,
Assessor after John White. Daniel Cawdrey Henry Painter Henry Scudder Thomas
Hill William Reynor Thomas Goodwin William Spurstow Matthew Newcomen John
Conaut Edmund Staunton Anthony Burges William Rathband Francis Cheynel Henry
Wilkinson jun. Obadiah Sedgwick Edward Corbet Samuel Gibson Thomas Coleman
Theodore Backhurst William Carter Peter Smith John Maynard William Price John
Whincop William Bridge Peter Sterry William Mew Benjamin Pickering John
Strickland Humphrey Hardwick Gasper Hickes John Bond Henry Hall Thomas Ford
Thomas Thorowgood Peter Clark William Good John Foxcroft John Ward Richard
Bifeild Francis Woodcock I. Jackson.
Commissioners of Scotland.
John Maitland. Alexander Henderson. George Gillespie. Samuel Rutherford Robert
Baylie.
Scribae.
Henry Robrough Adoniram Byfield John Wallis.
Books Printed for John Rothwel at the Fountain in Cheapside.
Mr. CHristopher Love's Works in Two Vollumes. 1. Vollume. Mr. Love, Of the
Different degrees of Grace, in 4o. -- Combat between the Flesh and Spirit, in
4o. -- Of Heavens Glory, and Hells Terror, in 4o.
2. Vollume. Mr. Love's Zealous Christian. -- The Dejected Souls Cure, To which
is annexed The Ministry of Angels. Gods Omnisciency. Sinners Legacy.


Penitent pardoned: Of the Confession of Sin, and the privilege of pardon of
Sin, in 4o. An Exercitation on Confirmation, the ancient way of completing
Church Members as an expedient to promote peace and unity among Brethren. The
Good Old Way, or Perkins Catechism, in 8o. By Charles Broxolme.

