THE CASE OF THOMAS ELWOOD Bricklayer, and RICHARD HIGGINSON Mercer in
Paternoster Row, late Alderman of London.
THat having taken a Lease of a House in Paul's Churchyard upon the annual Rent
6 lb and two Capons, for which the said Higginson received the Rent, and gave
Acquittances in his own name to your Petitioner, that after this, one Richard
Hodgson Cosan to the said Higgison came out of Ireland and sealed a Lease of
Ejectment upon the said House.

That then the Petitioner with some Witnesses, desired the said Higginson to
defend the Title or produce his evidence, which he refused to do, but first
said that he had nothing to do with the house nor this Petitioner, and at
another time said that your Petitioner should enjoy his Right, and not be
wronged of the said House;

That after this the matter was by consent put to Arbitration, but on his part,
nothing was done in it: that thereupon your Petitioner exhibited a Bill in
Chancery for relief against Higginson, Hodgson, and Steel. Steel then answered
and declared that he had a Lease from Higginson, after this, Hodgson by his
answer swore that he gave no authority to Higginson, either by Letter of
Attorney, nor any other way to let any Lease of the said House: but Higginson
not answering stood out to a Proclamation of Rebellion until Hodgsons
departure (supposed back into Ireland) and then by his answer swears that he
had a Lease from Hodgson of the said House, upon payment of a 100 lb Fine, and
a Pepper-corn yearly.

That then it came to a Hearing in Chancery, at which time Higginson feed
Sergeants to arrest your Petitioner upon several feigned Actions, some of a
1000 lb and then by his Counsel pleaded that he would have defended his Title
to the said House, but had no notice to defend it, and that it was a mere
collusion between your Petitioner and one John Elyas, and then thereupon it was
ordered by the Court, that the Title should be tried at Law for the main
profits and damages (and whose House it was) because Hodgson and Higginson had
sworn point blanck one against the other.

That then your Petitioner and Higginson came again to Arbitration of the
matter by friends, and were bound in 500 lb Bond to stand to the award of Mr.
Richard Piggat Grocer, and another which also by Higginsons evil practices came
to nothing.

That thereupon your Petitioner gained the matter to be referred to Alder.
Tichburn, and Alder. Vi^^ and others, but the said Higginson being summoned
refused also to appear before them.

That then your Petitioner Indicted Higginson at Hixes-hall, for wilful and
corrupt Perjury, which Indictment was found by the Grand Jury, the Bench of
Justices thereupon issued forth a Warrant for Higginson, who was taken upon it
and brought before Alder. Ireton, by whom he was bound over to the next
Sessions upon his own Bond of 50 lb and his Security in 40 lb both which he
forfeited on purpose to delay Justice.

That thereupon the Bench granted another Warrant to your Petitioner, by which
Higginson was also taken and brought before Alder. Tichburn by whom he was
bound in a 100 lb Bond to answer at the next Sessions: Higginson thereupon by
Certiorari removed the Indictment to the Crown-Office, where he and his
Security was bound in two Bonds, the one of 80 lb and the other of 40 lb to
bring the Cause to trial next sitting after Michaelmas Term last past before
the Lord Chief Justice Glyn, which Bonds he in like manner also forfeited and
where your Petitioner attending with 3 Counsel, and 14 Witnesses (upon promise
the Cause should be tried) the record not being brought by Higginson, the Cause
was not tried to your Petitioners very great damage.

That the said Higginson being taken both by Sheriff Lawrence, and Sheriff
Bateman upon several amercements issued out of the Crown-Office, stood out and
forfeited all to the Commonwealth, but at length made his appearance this last
Midsummer Term, the Perjury by the Rules of Court would have been tried, as in
next Michaelmas Term; the Premises honorably weighed, and for that by such
potent unjust men, supported in their wickedness by the corrupt practice of
the Law) the just cause of the poor is destroyed, and the poor by them eaten up
as they eat bread, and for that your Petioner by these impious practices is
utterly ruined in his Estate, Credit and Calling, and his Wife and Children
destroyed, and your Petitioner damnifyed above 500 lb.

In tender consideration whereof, and for that the said Higginson is now about
the 27th of July last past deceased, having left a very great Estate.

Thomas Elwood.
August 4 1659.

