THE World Conquered, OR A Believers Victory over THE WORLD. Laid open in
several Sermons on 1. John 5. 4.

By R. A.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1668.

The Contents.
THE Text opened. Page 1. The main doctrine laid down. p. 2. The doctrine
explained and confirmed in the resolution of 5. queries. I. Wherein the enmity
of the world against Souls stands or discovers it self. 4. Things premised to
the answering this question. p. 3. The Enmity of the world against Souls
discovers it self. 1. In withdrawing the Soul from God. p. 4. 1. In withdrawing
our affections from God as our portion. Ibid. 2. In withdrawing us from our
allegiance to God as our Sovereign. p. 5. 2. In witholding it from Christ. p.
6. 1. It holds us back from coming to Christ, and this, 1. By darkning our
sight. Ibid. 2. By deadning our sense. p. 9. 3. By hanging upon our hearts, and
about our necks. p. 12. 4. By furnishing us with excuses. p. 16. 2. It hinders
us from following of Christ. p. 24. Particularly 1. It cuts Christ short of
that service and of those fruits that he should reap from us. p. 26. 2. It
holds us short of that grace and true peace, which we might receive from him.
p. 30. II. Wherein the strength of the world lies, whereby it prevails upon so
many Souls. p. 32. The strength of the world lies. 1. In the Spirit of the
world within us, p. 35. 2. In the God of the world without us, Satan, who gives
strength to and marshals the temptations of the world. 1. By over rating the
good things present and under rating the good things to come. p. 44. 2. By
sharpning the edge of present evils, and blunting the edge of evils to come. p.
47. 3. By an active stimulating and pressing us on, whatever becomes of us
hereafter, to pursue the present good things and to prevent the present evil
things. p. 48. III. Wherein the strength of faith lies whereby it overcomes the
world. p. 56. Here 2. things. 1. The strength of a Christian is his faith. p.
57. 2. The strength of faith is Christ. p. 61. There are two things in Christ
which are the strength of faith, his Power. Ibid. Victory. 64. IIII. The
conflict of faith with the tempting world: or the ways and means by which faith
overcomes the world. These are, p. 66. 1. It gives a right judgment of the
world. p. 67. 2. By faith the Soul pitches upon an eternal inheritance. p. 69.
3. By faith we understand that the good things present cannot further, and the
evil things present cannot hinder our eternal happiness. p. 73. 4. By faith we
understand that the design of temptations is to deprive us of our inheritance.
p. 77. 5. Faith makes experimental and fuller discoveries of the glory of that
inheritance the Soul has pitched upon. p. 79. 6. Faith gives assurance of this
better inheritance. p. 91. V. The conquest of Faith over this conflicting world
p. 95. Where. 1. How far forth, or in what sense, every believer has overcome
the world: answered in 4. particulars. Ibid. 2. Wherein this victory stands. p.
103. Answered. 1. Negatively in 4. particulars. Ibid. 2. Positively: And thus
our victory over the world stands, in our having obtained. I. A power to
possess the things of the world without placing our happiness in them. p. 105.
II. A power to manage our worldly affairs and businesses without the prejudice
of our Souls. p. 107. III. A power to use this worlds goods to their proper
ends. p. 124. IIII. A power to want the worlds good things and to suffer the
worlds evil things, and to keep our hearts and our way whether we prosper or
suffer. p. 133. Then are we eminently endued with this power when we have
attained to, 1. Selfdenyal under the greatest opportunities of self-seeking, or
self-satisfaction. p. 135. 2. Contentment under the greatest straits. p. 159.
3. Patience under the greatest pressures of Affliction. p. 171. 4. Humility in
the height of honor. Ibid. 5. Magnanimity in the depth of danger or
difficulty. p. 174. 6. Aequanimity in the greatest turns and changes of our
outward condition. p. 192. V. A willingness to leave the world, to be gone from
this, and to take our flight to the other world. p. 203. 3. Grounds why worldly
men are unwilling to dye. p. 205.
The Application.
USe 1. of Information and conviction learn hence, 1. That every captive to the
world is an unbeliever. p. 213. 2. That where there is but little power over
the world, there is but little Faith. Ibid. Use 2. Of Direction and
exhortation. p. 247. In Order to the obteining this victory, Direct. 1. Improve
duties this way. p. 248. Direct. 2. Improve Sabbaths this way. p. 253. Direct.
3. Improve Sacraments this way. p. 268. Direct. 4. Improve worldly prosperity
this way. p. 297. Direct. 5. Keep your thoughts, affections and senses under
constant government. p. 312. 1. Keep your thoughts under government. Ibid. 2.
Keep your affections under government. p. 317. 3. Keep a strict watch upon your
senses. p. 320. Direct. 6. Make a solemn surrender of your selves and all that
you have to the government and disposal of God. p. 324. Arguments persuading to
press on for this victory, proposed in several questions. 1. Are you for the
saving of your Souls? p. 328. 2. Is not the world an enemy to your salvation.
p. 329. 3. Is this enemy invincible? p. 331. 4. Is not victory over the enemy
desirable? p. 333. 5. Can this victory be bought to dear? p. 335. 6. What if
this enemy should reign to death? p. 337. 7. Will you now become enemies to the
world? p. 339.
1 JOHN 5. 4. This is the Victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith.
IN this former part of the Chapter, we have a double description of them that
are born of God.

1. A Priori, from that which is the primum vivens, the heart of the New
Creature; that is faith, v. 1. Whosoever believes is born of God.

2. A Posteriori, from one special fruit of the New Birth, Victory over the
world, v. 3. Whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world.

In this whole verse, wherein the Text lies, we have A Proposition. Its
Exposition.


1. A Proposition. Whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world. A Christian
is a Conqueror, a great Conqueror; greater then he that for his Victories was
surnamed Magnus, or The Great. He has conquered all the world.

2. An Exposition of this Proposition. But what is this Conquest of a
Christian! and how is it obtained? why it is a spiritual Conquest, and obtained
by Faith. This is the Vict^ry that overcomes the world, even our Faith.

For the opening of the words;

By the world, understand whatsoever is in the world, that hinders us in that
Race which Christ has set before us, and holds us short of our Crown. Those
three things which the Apostle tells us, 1 John 2. 16. are in the world, the
lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. And also the
objects of these lusts, as they are such; the pleasures, the profits, and the
pomps of the world; together with all worldly tribulations and afflictions.

By Faith understand, a living saving Faith, which unites to Christ, and
thereby engages him in our Combat with us.

This is the Victory, even our Faith. Faith is said to be our Victory.

1. Formally. The world hinders and holds us back from Christ, Faith is our
coming to Christ; our coming to Christ, is our Victory over all that which held
us back.

2. Instrumentally. This is the Victory, that is, this is our arm, or our hand,
this is the weapon of our warfare, that has gotten for us the Victory.

Diverse observations lie in the words;

Doct. 1. The world is a Christians Enemy. A Conquest supposes a Combat, and a
Combat supposes an Enemy.

Doct. 2. A Believer has his Enemies under his feet, even whilst he is in the
fight. He is a Soldier as soon as he is a Believer, and he is a Conqueror as
soon as ever he is a Soldier. His very taking up Arms is his Victory.

Doct. 3. A Christian overcomes the world by his Faith. In the prosecution of
this third Doctrine, whereon I intend to bottom the following discourse, I
shall show, 1. Wherein the enmity of the world against Souls stands. 2. Wherein
the strength of the world lies, whereby it prevails against our Souls. 3.
Wherein the strength of faith lies, whereby it overcomes the world. 4. The
conflict of faith with this warring world; or the several ways in which faith
so maintains the fight, that it obtains the victory. 5. The Conquest of Faith
over the conflicting world; or wherein this victory stands.


1. Wherein the enmity of the world against souls stands, or discovers it self.
The world is an Enemy (as before.) It pretends to be a friend, but its
friendship is enmity; enmity against God, Jam. 4. 4. and therefore against
souls; its kindnesses are darts, its kisses are swords and arrows, its very
peace is war against the soul.

But what is this Enmity, or wherein is it discovered?

For the better understanding of this, I shall premise these four things.

1. Every creature of God is good. The whole Creation, in their Original, were
man's friends or servants; there was nothing hurtful that was made.

2. The enmity that is, came in by sin. Sin was the only Makebate; as betwixt
God and Man, so betwixt Man and the rest of the Creatures; all the Enemies
which man has, in Heaven or Earth, he may thank his sin for.

3. There is no malignity in the creature properly, against man in his lapsed
state. They are yet all capable of being good and serviceable to him.

1 Timothy 4. 4, 5. Every creature of God is good, -- it is sanctified by the Word
of God, and Prayer. Riches are good, yea, and honors and pleasures may be good
and useful to man.

4. It is by accident, and not from the nature of the things, that the
creatures are become enemies to us. Sinful man is a distempered diseased
creature, distempered in his mind; and hereupon he misapprehends and mistakes
the world; and looking for that good that is not in it, he looses that which
is; making it his happiness, it becomes his undoing. He is distempered and
diseased in his heart, yea and his whole man; And hereupon, as in bodily
diseases, the best of creatures, which would be nourishment to the healthy, are
to the sick the nourishment of their diseases; and as such are apt to lust
after those things which are most noxious, so is it with diseased souls; our
appetites are vitiated, and whilst we lust after, either that which we should
not, or more then we should have, those very things which are good in
themselves, become mischievous and hurtful to us, the maintaining and
increasing our disease.

These things premised, I shall now show wherein the enmity of the world
against our souls stands; and that is in these two things especially.

1. In withdrawing our souls from God. Particularly.

1. In withdrawing our affections from God as our Portion. 2. In withdrawing us
from our Allegiance to God as our Sovereign.
1. In withdrawing our affections from God as our Porti^n. The world by the
advantage of our distempered minds and appetites, sets up it self as our God;
as our happiness or chiefest good; it proposes its self for a portion to us,
and that both as a richer portion, and more suitable then God would be; it
persuades us to take our portion in hand, and to take up with what is before us,
as our happiness, and not to be so unwise as to make an adventure for an
unknown happiness, with the hazard of that present felicity and contentment,
which we taste and see to be so good.

God calls, Come unto me, and I will give thee rest, I will be thy portion and
reward; come up to the other world, there is an Inheritance for thee. No, no,
says the world, stay with me, dwell here below; thou see what thine
entertainment is here, there thou know not what thou shall find; here thou
have substance, here thou have Sunshine, here thou have hearts ease, here thou
art full and aboundedst; thou have thy house full, and thy hands full, and thy
belly full, and thy heart full; thou know what thou have, thou can taste,
thou can see how good this world is; the Treasures of the other world, though
they be called Treasures of Light, yet to thee they are but Treasures of
Darkness, thou know not what they are; be content, dwell here below, where
thou art well.

2. In withdrawing us from our Allegiance to God as our Sovereign. When it has
once drawn away the heart, it will with ease pull away the shoulder; if Gods
Crown be despised, his Yoke will quickly be shaken off; we break our faith with
God when once we are fallen in love with the world; if it become our treasure,
we yield our selves to it for servants; the strength of its temptations lies in
the esteem we have of it, and the affection we bear it. What will the Authority
of the Lord do with us, when he has lost our hearts, and we have chosen us
another God! What cannot the world command us to, if we have once set it before
us, as our Goal and Prize? if it be our end, it will appoint us our means and
way; no unrighteousness but will be right in our eyes, that will serve our
worldly designs; farewell faith, truth, mercy, honesty, and all conscience of
sin, further then we can make a gain of godliness: And by withdrawing us from
our love and obedience to God, to this I might add 3ly, It exposes us to his
wrath and displeasure; when we will none of him, he will none of us; when he is
forsaken by us, he sets himself against us; by despising the riches of his
goodness, we fall under his fury and fiery indignation. This is the state into
which the world is leading us.

2. In withholding us from Christ. Christ comes to bring us back unto the
Father, 1 Pet. 3. 18. to reduce us to our duty, and restore us to our
happiness: The world that withdraws us from God, withholds us from Christ.
Particularly It holds us back from coming to Christ. It holds us in from
following of Christ.


1. It holds us back from coming to Christ. And this it does by these four
means: By Darkning our sight. Deadning our sense.


Hanging upon our hearts, and about our necks.

Furnishing us with excuses.

1. By darkning the sight, that we cannot see, either the excellency, or the
necessity of Christ; Christ draws on Souls to him by love and fear. First he
frights us in, by presenting the danger and misery that is falling upon us, and
we cannot escape if we stand out. Look to thy self Sinner, this world will
betray thee to thy ruin: thy pleasures are thy traitors, thy carnal friends
are thy traitors, thy estate is thy traitor; they are feasting thee and feeding
thee, but it is for the day of slaughter: the butcher the butcher of souls is
near thee, into whose hands they are betraying thee: they seek thy life, thou
art but a dead man; death is already feeding upon thee, the curse of God does
already cleave to thee, and is ready to fall upon thee in its full weight; thou will be devoured, thou will be swallowed up ere thou art aware: come away, come
to me and thou shall be safe: this house is falling on thine head, escape for
thy life; the avenger of blood is at thy heels, flee to the City of refuge; I
am thy City of refuge, come unto me. Thus he provokes by fear. And this is such
an argument to drive Souls into Christ, as a clap of thunder, or a storm of
hail is to the Traviler, to hasten him to shelter.

Then Christ draws by love; presents himself and his salvation to the Soul,
displayes all his beauty and excellencies before it; opens the Gospel, wherein
his grace and his glory appear and shine forth: the Gospel is sent down full of
Christ; there are all the treasures and unsearchable riches of Christ, and all
held forth in open sight, to invite sinners unto him.

Now the world dashes all this, that it works nothing on the Soul; by blinding
the eye that it cannot see what Christ sets before it: what is either beauty or
blackness, to the blind soul? 2 Cor. 4. 4. The God of this world has blinded
the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them. We are naturally born
blind, and if our eyes begin a little to be opened, this earth is thrown as
dust in our eyes, that we may not see what is before us. The things of this world
as the Moon interposed, causes an eclipse in our souls, that we cannot see the
Sun, we cannot discern either light or darkness, either the light of the
glorious Gospel, or the darkness of the Pit; either our hopes or our dangers;
this earth keeps both Heaven and Hell out of sight.

The things of the world should be a glass wherein we may behold the glory of
the Lord; we may see God in every creature. The Heavens declare the glory of
God, Psalm. 19. 1. And so does the earth also, and all that is therein; but that
which God made a glass in which we might see his glory, the Devil makes a cloud
to take God out of sight; what God made a window to let in the light, the Devil
makes a shut, to keep it out. Worldly men fix and terminate their eyes in
worldly things; they can neither look besides them nor through them. It is not
with them according to the course of nature [The Sun dazles men's eyes that they
cannot see the Earth] but the quite contrary [The Earth dazles their eyes that
they cannot see the Sun] Men usually carry their eyes in their hearts, they
will not look but where they love; or if they should look heavenward, yet they
could not see, the earth has dazzled their eyes.

Sinners, take heed of these riches, take heed of these pleasures; these
substances and these shadows, which your hearts are set upon; they will not
only be as clogs to keep you down from ascending heavenward, but as clouds to
hinder you from looking thither. It may be they appear as bright clouds, but a
bright cloud will hide the Sun out of sight, as well as a black.

2. By deadning the sense; they can neither see nor feel: they see not the
excellency, nor can feel their need of Christ, who are drunken with these
worldly vanities: they who altogether live by sense, are without sense of any
but the present things: they can make a shift to [live] without Christ; the
less of Christ the better for their turns. Christ and the things of Christ are
the only things that stand in their way; are their way to poverty not to
wealth, to reproach and shame not to honor: they can well enough want Christ
while they live, but what need they may have of him after this life, that
enters not into their hearts; they are so busy with what they find here, that
they look not so far as the grave, much less beyond it.

It Is hard dealing with such hearts, but when you find them alone; retired and
withdrawn from the world; and how long may we wait ere we meet with such a
season? find them in a crowd, among their carnal friends and companions, find
them among their Sheep or Oxen, or at their pleasures, and the noise of these
will so drown all that can be said, that its like to make as deep impression,
as a shower upon a stone: cry out in their ears, fire, fire, throw Death and
Hell in their faces, it moves them not so much, as to draw forth such a
question, What may I do to escape?

We never will come to Christ till we see we need him; and we never see our
need of Christ, till being withdrawn from the hurries of this World, we have
leisure to sit down and consider.

How seldom do carnal hearts ask, What use is there of Christ? wherefore is he
come? what want would there be of him if there were no Christ? If God that
spared not his Son, but gave him a ransom for the world, had spared all this
cost, it had been all one to them; they could have lived as merrily, and as
plentifully here however, and that's all they mind or regard.

Or if they have any sense of their need of Christ at all, it is so little,
that it will do nothing to the persuading them after him: the wound is not so
deep, but the name of a Savior will skin it over. Seldom does it rise so high
as to wring out such a serious question, What may I do that Christ may be mine?

How many Houses, and Markets, and Shops, and Companies may we come into, ere
we hear any such question?

Go into the Field, where Men are busy a plowing and sowing or reaping, and
there you may hear them enquiring, how may I keep off the Birds, or how may I
keep out the Beasts from hurting my field! when will it be rain? or when will
it be like to be fair weather! Come into the Market, where men are buying and
selling and trading, and there you may hear them asking, how goes the price of
Corn, or of Cattle! where are the best Commodities! where is the best choice!
Come into the houses where they are eating and drinking or working, and there
you may hear them enquiring, what must we have for the next meal, what for to
morrow, etc. But oh how seldom do we hear amongst them all, any such questions,
How is my Soul provided for! how, how does my soul prosper! No, no, when the
world is gotten into the heart, there is no sense of Souls or the concernment of
them: where the world is in the heart Death and Hell may be there too, and
never regarded.

Could we once make men deeply sensible, how great their need of Christ is,
what they are without Christ; in what slippery places they stand, in what
jeopardy they go daily, what a dreadful gulf of woe and misery, the wind and
tide of their worldly prosperity, are carrying them down into, and how suddenly
they may be swallowed up in perdition and destruction, and what miserable
comforts their past pleasures, and plenty will then be to them; were they
sensible, that nothing but Christ, and a part in him would stand them in any
stead, to save them from that gulf; that the casting anchor on that rock of
ages, would alone secure them from splitting on those fatal rocks, from
perishing by those tumbling waves and billows, that are hurrying them down to
the lake beneath; were they sensible, that it is Christ only that can secure them
from these dangers, their need would be argument enough to drive them to him.
But being drunken with the pleasures of sin, whilst this wine is in, the wits
are out, they will not consider, they do not perceive the danger they are in.
When the Prodigal, Luke 15. had spent all that he had in his riotous living,
when his whole stock was wasted, and not an husk left, then he had time to
consider, and bethink himself what a case he was in; and the pinching sense of
his necessitous state, to which his folly had reduced him, this brings him to
his wits again; he comes to himself, and then away he will to his father. If
you had met him a little before; in his cups, and amongst his whores, if you
had found him at his riotous table, and in the heat of his lust, and should
there have preached to this Prodigal, Friend this life will not last always,
twill be thy wisest course to consider in time what thou do. Be sober be
temperate, run from these Harlots, and return to thy Father; how would he have
laughed and scoffed at such a sermon; at least the next cup would have washed
it off his heart: but when his hunger and thirst preach thus to him, Get thee
home to thy Father, then away he goes.

3. It hangs upon our hearts, and about our necks: The world has gotten hold
of our hearts, and there it will keep its hold while it can. Its gotten so much
within us, and has so twisted and twined it self about our affections, that it
will be very hard getting it off.

We cannot close with Christ, but we must break with the world; we must be
divorced from this, ere we can be married to our second husband: worldlings see
what work Christ makes, in those hearts where he gets possession; he whips out
the buyers and sellers and their merchandise out of his Temple: he changes the
customs, and pleasures, and business of the heart, Its dealings and its
delights: Its love and its labor must be no longer bestowed, and consumed upon
meat, and drink, and money, and mirth; he has other delights for it, and other
work to keep it doing.

These things must be minded in their place, and in their season, but they must
keep their place: Stand off Farms and Oxen, stand off Lands and money, keep
your distance, get you down and take the lower room, give this man place who is
more honorable then you all. Christ and the world contend for the place, which
shall sit uppermost, and go foremost in the soul: Christ will not come in to be
an Underling, he will have the chief room, the chief respect and esteem; he
will have the command of all that is in the house: herein stands Christianity,
or our conversion to Christ, in surrendering up the Throne to Christ; it is not
the question, whether thou can find a corner in thine heart to entertain
Christ in, but who sits in the Throne, who has the government of thy soul, who
has the right hand within thee; Can thou say to the Lord Jesus, Sit thou on
the right hand, let all thy foes be made thy footstool?

All sinful pleasures, all sinful gains, must depart, and come no more where
Christ dwells; and those which are lawful must come under, and be brought into
subjection to him; no more sensuality or carnal mirth, no more covetousness or
oppression, no more pride or self-exalting, away with these, cast them out, and
never take them in for ever, if thou meanest that Christ shall take up his
habitation in thee: And no more zeal for the lawful concernments of this life;
no more pleading business against Religion, no more pleading safety against
duty, no more pleading credit against conscience, no more pleading gain against
godliness, preserve and improve thy estate, maintain thy credit, provide for
thy safety, follow thy business, thou may, and thou must; but bring all
under, make all to stand aside, and give place to Christianity and Conscience:
Christ will be no underling, he resolves for the Throne, where ever he dwells.

And the world that has already gotten the Throne, is loath to become the
footstool; it is who shall be King, it is who shall be God, that the great
Contest is about; and the world that has King'd it so long, knows not how to
be content to be a subject; it sees it must come down if Christ come in, there
cannot be two Kings in one Kingdom, it must come down, this pride must come
down, this credit, these pleasures, this carnal mirth, this covetousness must
be laid in the dust, if Christ set footing here. And therefore it does all it
can to resist Christ; stops the ears, blinds the eye, turns away the heart from
hearkening to him.

Christ stands at the door and knocks; Christ cries and calls, Come unto me,
open to me. Christ promises and offers, Come and I will receive you, open and I
will come in unto you, and dwell with you.

If the soul begins to listen to the call of Christ, the world steps in, and
objects, What do thou mean simple soul? What art thou doing? whither art thou
going? hearken to Christ, hearken to this Word, hearken to this Conscience, and
what then shall become of me? What shall become of thy estate? what shall
become of thy esteem? what shall become of thy liberty? what shall become of
all thy love, and friendship, and pleasure thou have in the world? art willing
to be poor? art willing to be in bondage? art willing to be in reproach and
disgrace? open that door once, let Christ in, have any thing to do with
Conscience, and thou art undone; all that ever thou have, all that ever thou
love in all the world, must thenceforth become strangers to thee. Have thou
not given [me] thy heart? have not I lain in thy bosom? have thou not
cherished me, and cared for me as thine own soul? and have not I deserved thy
care, and respect? have not I been thy food, and thy raiment, and thy joy, and
all the comfort of thy life? What will thou be when I have left thee, when thy
estate has left thee, thy pleasures have left thee, thy friends have left thee?

I know thou love me; thou love to be rich, and to be great, and to be at
thy ease, and thy liberty, as thou love thy life: I know I have thy heart,
and thou art loath to leave me. I, but therefore consider, and take heed; if
thou hearken to Christ once, if thou meddle too far with Religion, and wilt be
dealing for another world once, then farewell this.

But can thou find in thine heart to leave me? have I been a Wilderness to
thee, or a Land of darkness? has it not been well with thee? have thou wanted
any thing? have thou not been full and abounded? have thou not flourished and
prosper'd? have thou not had thy belly full of meat, and thy belly full of
mirth, and thy bones full of rest, and thy heart full of ease and content? what
have thou wanted whilst thou imbracedst my love? and can thou now find in
thine heart to part? look to thy self; what day thou strikest hands with
Christ, thou must shake hands with all the world. Look for no more favor from
me; thou do not know when thou art well, when thou have enough; but
henceforth, if thou take this course, thou shall have little enough? If Christ
carry thee, he shall carry thee naked, thou shall leave all thy good things
behind thee; and look for it, I have not been so great a friend, but now I Will
be as great an enemy; I Will persecute thee, and plague thee, and vex thee; and
if I may no longer sleep in thy bosom, I Will stick in thy sides; if I may no
longer be the treasure of thine heart, I Will be a dart in thy liver.

But consider, be advised foolish soul, let us not part thus; stay, stay with
me, go not after thou know not what; forsake not an old friend for a new;
believe it, the old is better; if thou will be wise, stay as thou art, and mind
thy present commodity; lay by the thoughts of the other world, let hereafter
take care for it self, never stand amuzing thy self about thou know not
what, I have not been so good to thee, but I will be better to thee then ever;
come let us take our fill of love, eat, drink, and be merry; gather, keep, lay
up what is before thee, and cast away care: And thus it wooes, and flatters, and
bewitches it into a neglect of Christ so long, till it has smitten the soul
under the fifth rib, and stabbed it to death, and drowned it in perdition and
destruction.

4. It will help men to excuses for their neglect of Christ. Men are ashamed to
play the Fools, but they would have something to say for it, to stop mouths
withal; to stop the mouth of Conscience, to stop the mouths of Men, to stop
the mouth of their Judge, if it be possible, Luke 14. 18. Those that were
invited to come to Christ, its said, they all began to make excuses; they were
ashamed to say, they would not come, that had been too gross; but they excuse
themselves, we cannot come, Ruth 4. 6. The Kinsman of Ruth, that had the offer
of redeeming the Inheritance of his deceased Kinsman, answered no, I cannot
redeem it, lest I mar mine own Inheritance. He would not say, I will not redeem
it; no, an excuse must be found out, I cannot redeem it, I should mar mine own
Inheritance, if I redeem my Brothers. So these here, they do not say I will
not, but I cannot come. Why, what is the matter you cannot come to Christ? what
excuse have you? whence have you your excuse? Oh the world furnishes them with
an excuse; I have a Farm, says one, I have Oxen to look to, says another; I
have a Wife to mind, says a third, I pray thee have me excused, I cannot come.

Christians, have your hearts never made this use of the world, to make it your
excuse for your neglecting Christ, and your souls? it has hindered you many a
time from coming to Christ, and then excused you for not coming. How many
prayers has it lost you? how many Sabbaths has it lost you? the loss of these
may be the loss of Christ, the loss of your souls: How much of these spiritual
advantages has the world lost you? and when they are lost, when you have lost
a praying time, or hearing time, lost a Sabbath, or a Sermon, or a Sacrament,
this must serve for an excuse, I was busy, and could not come.

An excuse is a pretense, or a shift that men find out, to save themselves from
blame, for all their neglects of Christ, and their souls; as if they should
say, its a shame for men to neglect Christ that have nothing else to mind in
his stead; its a shame for men to neglect their souls, that have nothing else
to look to; I have no mind to Christ, and his ways, this looking after my
soul, and my Conscience, and the matters of the other world, are things that I
like not, and list not to be meddling withal; but what shall I say for my self
if I neglect them? I am ashamed to say, I care not for Christ, I care not for
my soul, I care not for heaven and everlasting glory, I care not though I
perish and die, I dare not say thus; and yet these things that Christ calls to
me, are so contrary to me, that I have no mind to meddle with them: But what
shall I say for my self, if I do not? some excuse or other I must have, what
may be my excuse?

Why, have thou never a Farm to look to, never a Wife nor Family to look after?
or have thou not an house, or an horse, or a companion? have thou no sports,
nor pleasures, no Hawks nor dogs to follow? have thou nothing to do? have thou
nothing to say? tell Christ, tell Conscience, thou have other business to do;
thou have thy friends, or thy pleasures, that call thee another way; any thing
may serve, a bad excuse is better then none.

An excuse is a pretense to have reason for what we do: no man can have reason
to neglect Christ, no man can have reason to continue in sin; and yet there are
few cases, wherein men will not pretend to have reason for it, especially the
worldling, whoever wants, he will be sure to find reason enough for his
worldliness.

Though the Drunkard can hardly say, I have reason to be drunk; though the
Adulterer can hardly say, I have reason to follow Harlots; though the Swearer
can hardly say, I have reason to swear, or blaspheme; though the Prodigal can
hardly say, I have reason to wast, and spend my Estate; yet the worldling will
easily say, I have reason to get an Estate, to keep what I have; reason to be a
good Husband, and to be provident; who shall keep me when I am old? who shall
take care of my Family? I have reason to take care for my self; who will take
care for me, if I do not take care of my self?

And though this may be looked on as a miserable Plea for the neglect of
Christ, I am following a Whore, and I cannot come; I must to the Alehouse, or
the Tavern, and I cannot come; yet this will pass for a fair excuse, I have a
Wife, or a Family, or a Farm, and I cannot come.

I pray thee have me excused? For what? that thou do not come to Christ, and
hearken to, and follow him? that is, excuse me that I undo my self, that I
stab, or drown, or hang my self, that I go to the Devil and damn my soul: If I
go to hell, and there perish for ever, I pray do not blame me for it, I have
reason for what I do; I [must] take care of this world whatever becomes of me
in the other world: as for those that have nothing else to do, but to mind
Christ and Salvation, if they neglect it, let them answer for themselves, if
they can; for my part I have reason enough to do as I do: Have thou reason to
go to hell? reason to be damned? go then and bear thy burden for ever, till
thy sense too late teach thee better reason.

Oh what wise men are the men of this world! what very fools are the worldly
wise! they destroy their souls to please and provide for their carcasses; they
count the world their happiness, and this their happiness must have the killing
of them: some men's businesses must have the killing of them; some men's money
must do it, some men's pleasures must do it, some men's friends must have the
killing of their souls: some are too rich, some are too busy, some are too
merry, some are too high, some are too civil and courtly, to come to Christ and
save their souls. Behold the wisdom of this world!

Consider this Brethren, if some of you do not find it thus; how is it with
your souls? in what case are your souls? are you in Christ? are you converted
to God? have you gotten any saving knowledge, or any thing of the Grace of God
in your hearts? or are you not still without Christ, without Grace, without God
in the world? what is it that has hindered you, but your fleshly and worldly
hearts, which have held you under the power of these fleshly and worldly
things? it may be you might have had grace in your hearts, if you had not had
so much money in your purse, if you had not had so much to do in this world,
you might have done more for the world to come: whilst you have been busy
here and there, as the man in the Prophets Parable, 1 King. 20. 40. your souls
are lost, the Kingdom is lost: if you had not had so many sheep, and oxen, and
trades to be looked after, it may be your souls had been better looked to; if
you had not had so many carnal friends about you, it may be Christ had been
entertained by you; these are they which you have taken in exchange for Christ,
these are they for which you have sold the Gospel, these are they for which you
have sold your souls to the devil.

You wonder at those poor miserable creatures, the Witches, who for a little
money, or a few years pleasure, do by express bargain and sale, make over their
souls to the devil, and yet will do the same things your selves.

Where are your souls? in whose hands are they? who has the possession? who
has the dominion of them? are they with Christ? does he govern? does he rule
them? has he taken possession of them? do you think he has indeed? are the
ignorant, the idle, the simple, the sensual, the earthly, the careless, the
barren souls of the world, are these the possession of Christ? would Christ
have left you in such a carnal senseless state, if you had ever come into his
hands? do ye think he would? who are they that are without Christ, if you are
in Christ? who are the sinners, if you are the Saints? who are the children of
this world, if you be the children of the Kingdom? are you they whom God has
chosen out of this world, to be a peculiar people to himself? are you they that
have forsaken all for Christ, who have forsaken Christ for this world? are you
the Ch^ldren of Light, Vessels of Honor, the Images of God, his mortified ones,
his crucified ones, his sanctified ones? Will Christ leave his chosen vessels
to be such wooden, and iron, and earthen vessels, as your Souls are at this
day? What a poor and low and miserable thing do you make of Christianity, if
this be it, which you have attained to? look to it, if you have any such
thought, sure you have deceived your selves to this day.

Are you not in Christ? what is it that has hindered you? Christ has invited
you in; the Gospel of Christ has been preached to you, the everlasting door
has been set open to you, the servants have been sent out among you, to call
you and compel you to come in; but the world has kept you back, your friends
have hung about you, your business have lain upon you, your estates have called
you another way, and would not suffer you to enter in.

And that these are they that have done it, it is apparent, since these are
they that must serve you for an excuse. I have had so many encumbrances and
entanglements and diversions every day, that I could not do for my Soul, as
others may.

And oh how glad have you often been of an excuse! that you have had something
to say for your self, and to silence Conscience under the neglect of Christ?
more glad of an hindrance then of an opportunity; there is such an
ungratefulness and unpleasingness of Christ and his ways, to carnal hearts,
that when Christ has been dealing with them, and persuading and awakening
them, to look after them, the world seems to do them a kindness in stepping in,
and calling their hearts back and putting all out of mind.

When Christ calls to a duty, to an ordinance, to bring us near to him, that he
might deal with us, and treat with us about the matters of eternity; whilst
some rejoice to come in, to appear in his presence, to hear his voice, to pour
out their Souls to him in prayer or fasting, etc. Others are glad that they
have something to say, that they could not be there; glad of a business or of a
friend that kept them off, glad of a temptation; that the Devil laid a block in
their way, that the world called them out another way; not considering what an
eternal loss they may have hereby sustained.

Behold now the friend of sinners; the Idol, the god whom they serve, this
present world: this is your beloved, this is your friend. But what is its
friendship to you? what kindness has this world for you? you love it and seek
it and serve it, and work for it; it has your time, and your strength, and
your hearts, bestowed upon it; for this you live, and labor, and sweat, and
toil out all your days; but when all is done, what kindness does it show you?
what reward have you? it feeds you, and clothes you; and pleases and pampers
your flesh, but it kills your Souls: It blinds, it hardens, it holds you in a
sottish, senseless, carnal state and course, keeps Christ and your hearts apart,
holds your Souls in death, and shuts you out from the kingdom of God. This is
your God whom you hug, and worship, and bless your selves in, and busy your
selves for: this is your beloved, here is the kindness of your friend: and is
not this friendship of the world enmity? What can the Devil do more, then keep
you from Christ, and what does the world do less? hitherto it has kept you
off, and when do you think if you hearken to it, will it give you leave to go
over to him? when will it say unto you, thou have served me long enough; thou
have served thy pleasures, and thy estate, and thy friends long enough, now go
thy way and serve thy God, now go to Christ and look after thy Soul; how how
long will it be ere the world will thus give thee leave? or if it will not give
thee leave, how long will it be ere thou take thy leave.

Be not deceived, that which has hindered does hinder, and will hinder thee
from ever making a saving close with Christ, till thy Soul and it be parted.

Depart, depart: depart from your worldly ways, depart from your worldly
pleasures, and let a worldly heart depart from you, and then welcome Christ and
his Gospel, then welcome Grace and Holiness, then welcome God and the
everlasting kingdom.

2. The enmity of the world shows it self, in hindering the Soul from
following of Christ. If it cannot quite keep us off from Christ, it will hold
us back, that Christ shall have but little service of us, 2 Timothy 2. 4. No man
that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may
please him who has chosen him to be a Soldier. Christ's servants are all
Soldiers; and the world is one special enemy we are to fight against: there is
like to be but heartless fighting, where we are in league with the enemy;
whilst we should be charging it, we shall be like enough to be treating for
peace, if not quite to forsake our colors, and run over to the enemies camp:
Christ entertains none, but those that are free and disengaged persons; and by
how much the more free, by so much the more fit for his service: no man that
warreth [entangleth] himself: a Soldier that fights in fetters, fights
thereafter: we must put off our fetters, if we will put on our armor.

[In the affairs of this life] the work that Christ has to put his servants
upon, lies in the affairs of the other life; he that is entangled in the
affairs of this, will do little about the affairs of the other life.

[That he may please him who has chosen him to be a Souldier] The servant must
so serve his master, as to please him; he that is Christ's servant, must devote
himself to the pleasing of his Lord; he must not please men, he must not please
himself; his appetite, his pride, his covetousness; is this thy pleasing of
Christ, to be serving his enemies? If you be Christ's indeed, you herein
displease your selves, in being self pleasers. He that is not angry with
himself for his flesh pleasing, he that can humor, and favor, and gratify
his earthly and sensual heart, and be pleased with himself, and be patient with
himself, for so doing, Christ has little in that man; and if your pleasing
your self cannot stand with the pleasing of your Souls, which have devoted
themselves to Christ, much less will it stand with the pleasing of your Lord,
who has chosen you for his Soldiers.

But more particularly, the world discovers its enmity here.

1. In cutting Christ short of that service and those fruits which he should
reap from us. 2. In cutting us short of that service and peace that we might
receive from him.
1. The world cutts Christ short of that service, and those fruits which he
should reap from us, Hos. 10. 1. Israel is an empty vine he brings forth
fruit to himself. Israel is an empty vine; that is, to his Lord: it is but a poor
vintage, little or no fruit he brings forth to God; he is his vine; he has
planted, he has watered, and he has fenced him, and he looks for grapes,, but
finds none; why what is the reason of it? Oh he has brought forth all his fruits
to himself; he has store of fruit, but no such fruit as God looks for, he
brought forth so much to his flesh, that there is none for his God.

Phil. 2. 2. All seek their own, and not the things of Christ. Here Is little
seeking of Christ among you, says the Apostle; the worship and service of
Christ, the honor and interest of Christ is little regarded; there is a general
neglect of him. None, that is, there are scarce any among you, none in
comparison, that mind the things of Christ: but why is Christ so neglected? Why
because every man is for himself; and all seek their own, that is, their
outward and earthly things.

Their own things? Why are not the things of Christ so much thine own, as the
things of the world? are thy carnal friends more thine, then Christ is thine?
are thy earthly possessions, thy earthly pleasures, thy meat, and thy drink,
and thy money, the things of thy body, more thine then thy Soul, and the
concernments of it? thou art a pitiful Christian, if the things of Christ be
not more thine, then the things of this world; if the things of Christ and
thine own things, be not the very same; but yet thus our fleshly hearts count,
our carnal things are our own things; and the more we seek our own, the less
the things of Christ: the most careful Worldling is the most careless Christian.

Brethren, how little is there done for Christ? how little is Christ served or
sought? Judge ye every one in your own selves: how little has been done for
Christ, or is now a doing! look back, and sum up all that you have done, and
gather together all, concerning which you can say, this has been done for
Christ: this day, or this hour was spent in seeking of Christ; and see into
what a narrow room all will be brought: look into your hearts, and see how many
shops and feilds you may find there, to one sanctuary; how how many Markets and
Fairs have been kept there, to on Sabbath; how many servants has Christ at
work for him within you? all that is within you have the name of the servants
of Christ; every faculty is his servant; your thoughts, affections,
understandings consciences; every member; your hands, eyes tongues, have all
the name of the servants of Christ: but are these at work for Christ? are your
understandings veiwing Christ? are your thoughts searching after Christ? are
your affections working up toward Christ? are your consciences pleading for
Christ? are your tongues speaking for Christ? are your hands laying up, or
laying out for Christ? the Devil has his servants busy a working for him; our
carnal thoughts, our fleshly lusts, our earthly affections, all our earthly
members are hard at work for the Devil; to harden us against Christ, to entice
us from Christ, to defile and destroy our Souls; but how little is done for
Christ twould make our hearts to tremble if we did consider how little; may be
there may be diverse of our souls, in which there has not been one stroke of
work done for Christ, since they had a being, and in whom there is any thing
done, oh how little is it?

What footing has Christ gotten in your hearts? what faith, or love, or fear,
or honor has he in you? how goes his sanctifying work, his mortifying work on
in you? how fares it with his enemies in you, your lusts, and passions, and
carnal affections? are not these still Lording it in his room? Oh how little is
it that is yet done for Christ within us? how little power and authority has
he in us? how low is it with us both in point of grace and peace? how little is
he minded, or loved, or praised, in us? how little pleasure or delight do we
take in him? how little care take we for him? any little good thing that he
has committed to us, how has it been cherished, and nourished, and improved?
does it not languish, and pine away? whilst our faces shine, our flesh
flourishes, our outward man thrives, in what a withering perishing case is our
inner man?

Think with your selves, are matters with you within as you could wish they
were? is it with your souls as Christ would have it? do you think he will say
to you, in the case you are in, well done, thou have been a faithful servant, a
good Steward of my manifold graces? how is it without you? what are your
duties? what are your ways? what praying, or hearing, or walking? oh what
shuffling over duties, what halting in your goings? what do you more then
others? are you not carnal and vain as others? are you not proud and froward as
others? are you not unsavory and unprofitable as others? of what use are you
to those you walk amongst? what examples are you to them? wherein are they the
better for you? does your light shine? do ye provoke them to love and good
works? what do you for your Relations, for your friends, for your families, or
any of the members of Christ?

What mourning is there under the dishonor of Christ? what sense of the
sufferings of Christ? does not Christ suffer much in the world, in his
Ministers, in his Members, in his Worship, in his Sabbaths and Ordinances? how
fares it abroad with Christ? how fares it with his Gospel, with his Saints? is
all well? is it peace? does the Church prosper? does Religion flourish? or does
it not suffer, and mourn, and bleed, and is even ready to vanish away? and yet
who is there almost that cares for any of these things? how few are there that
lay them to heart? where are the hearts that tremble for the Ark of God? that
ask, how fares it with the Israel of God? Oh Brethren, its lamentable to see
how little upon any account whatsoever, the things of Christ are any where
minded But what is the reason? why look abroad every where in the world, and you
may see reason enough; what is there a doing every where? go into one Town, go
into another; go into one house, and another, and another, and what are they
doing? how busy are we in buying, and selling, and building, and planting,
ploughing, and sowing, marrying, and giving in marriage? this is it; we are so
busy for this world, that Christ and the things of Christ are little regarded
by us. 2. It holds us short of that grace, and true peace, which we might
receive from him. The cares of this world choke the Word, that it cannot
prosper in such souls, that it can neither quicken us, nor comfort us: Grace is
a flower that will grow best in those Gardens where it has least of earth: A
worldly-minded Christian, a worldly-minded Professor, will never be but a
Dwarf, will be but an Infant in Religion, at forty years old. How many may we
see among us, that have lived many years under the profession of Religion, and
have had some hope toward God, and some confidence that Christ is in them of a
truth; who if they should take an account of themselves, what increase have I
made in the grace of God all this while? What has been added to me; to my
faith, or love, or zeal of God? to my knowledge of God, to my acquaintance with
mine own heart? how much humility, spirituality, mortification? what power over
my corruptions, my pride, my passion, my peevishness, my fleshliness have I
obtained? what evidences have I gotten for heaven? what clearness, and grounded
confidence and assurance am I grown up to now more then I was, seven, or ten,
or twenty years agone? what have I gotten? how much, and wherein have I
improved in all this time?

Oh how may most of us sadly answer, What have I gotten? how have I grown? oh
the Lord he merciful to me, have I not lost? have I not sunk and decayed? is it
not worse with me now, then many years ago; my faith grown, my love grown, my
holiness and my hope grown, my comfort and my confidence grown? the Lord help
me, rather my fears, and my doubts, my darkness and my deadness, and my sins
are grown upon me; I have less life, and less love, and less joy, and less
peace, then when I first looked after Christ. Let worldly-minded Professors,
prove and consider themselves narrowly, if this, such a lean, starveling,
lifeless state of soul, be not all the kindness they are beholding to their
worldliness for; it has built you houses, and bought you Lands, and filled
your purses, and fed your carcasses, and provided for your Families; but it
has starved your souls. O my leannes, my leannes, my dry and withered soul, my
weak heart, my wasted Conscience; Oh how little truth or tenderness, how little
love, or lise, or warmth, do I feel within me? Oh how much pride, and
frowardness? oh how much lust and liberty to sin, has there grown upon me? I
can fret, and vex, and chafe; I can be false, I can lie, and dissemble; all the
Religion I have gotten into my soul, after so long a time of profession, is not
enough to restrain these vile abominations: Oh my soul, how sad is it with
thee? how low is it with thee to this day? how comes this to pass? why, this is
thy good husbandry, this is thy worldliness; thy laboring so much, thy
hungring so much after the meat that perishes, or thy being given to thy
pleasure, or thy ease; this is it that has held thee in such a poor case, such
an unfruitful and barren state, such a dark and uncomfortable state, as thou
art in at this day: for all this unhappiness thou art beholding to the world,
and thy worldliness.

Thus you have seen the enmity of the world against souls, it holds back from
Christ, darkens the sight, that we cannot see the excellency or the need of
Christ; deadens the sense, and hinders from following Christ, keeps Christ
short, etc.

Let this, by the way, be an argument to dissuade from worldliness; are you
Christians, or would you be so? would you ever come to any thing in Religion?
would you prosper in holiness? would you have the comfort of Christianity? then
take heed and beware of a worldly heart, which will either hinder you from ever
coming to Christ, or else be a Canker and a Moth, to devour and eat out the
spirits of all that Christianity you have.

II. Wherein the strength of the world lies, whereby it prevails upon so many
souls. It is a wonder it should ever prevail so as it does, that ever men of
understanding, endued with immortal souls, should suffer themselves to be led
up and down down as they are, by such a pernicious and mortal Enemy; that when
they have seen so many lost and undone by it, they should never take warning;
that it should ever be trusted as it is, that it should ever be loved as it is,
that it should ever be hearkened to as it is, especially considering how
unreasonable its demands are, and how inconsiderable its rewards.

What does the world demand? what would it have? This is it, if it would speak
out; Come sell me thy God, come sell me thy hopes that thou have for the other
world, come sell me thy soul, come give me thy heart, love me, and serve me.

But what shall be mine hire? what will thou give me then? if it would speak
out, this is the reward it gives, Vanity and vexation, death and destruction;
Hell shall be thine hire. But suppose it should give what it says it will; all
the good things on this side the grave; riches, honors, pleasures, ease,
abundance of all these, and all manner of contentment in the enjoyment of them;
yet what is all this thou should gain, on this side the grave, to what thou
shall loose, and to what thou shall suffer on the other side of the grave?
what is Earth to Heaven? what is Time to Eternity?

Suppose it should say plainly, come take thy good things here, and thy evil
things hereafter; take thy riches in this, and thy poverty in the other world;
take thy pleasures here, and thy plagues beneath; be full or be merry, prosper,
flourish, rejoice for a few hours, or for a few days, and be miserable, cry
howl be in torments to Eternity.

If the World should speak out thus to Men (this it designs) if it should speak
out thus, into what madness must those Souls be bewich'd, that would hearken to
it? and yet behold, though this be the design its driving on, and men might
know it if they would but consider; yet behold how the whole world almost, are
wondering after this beast, and busy in making bargains with it to be its
captives and servants: yea not only suffering themselves to be persuaded, and
beguiled in o this bondage, but also willingly offering themselves for
servants. I pray thee take me into the number of thy servants: Take [my] Soul,
world says one, take [my] God, says another, take my hopes, says another.
Let me be but a rich man, let me be a great man, let me have so much money, or
so much lands, or so much pleasure, or ease or honor; let but this Moon shine
upon me, and take the Sunshine, whoever will; let me be this worlds favorite,
and I am content to be its servant; and so along they go after it, till they be
lost for ever.

What a wonder is this? and yet how many such prodigies are to be seen every
day, and in every place? this is the case of every worldling; thou that wilt be
rich, thou whose heart goes after thy covetousness, thou who art given to thy
pride, or thy pleasures, or thy ease, thou art boring thine ear to the
threshold of thy mortal enemy; thou art doing away thy patrimony for husks,
thou art doing away thy Soul, and its eternal inheritance to buy in thy life
into an house, or parcel of Land; or for a bundle of crackling thorns, to make
thee blaze, before which thou may dance and be merry for an hour or two, and
then go down to everlasting darkness.

This being such a marvelous thing; that such an enemy, that is so known and
confessed to be, by the very men that suffer themselves to be led Captive by it,
(for what worldling is there that will not confess that this world is an Enemy)
that such a known Enemy, should still so easily prevail in the world: (as the
Apostle in another case, Gal. 3. 1. 3. O foolish Galatians who has bewitched
you? are ye so foolish that having begun in the Spirit ye will be made perfect
in the flesh? O foolish worldlings who has bewitched you! are ye so foolish
that being born to things Spiritual and Eternal, you will be thus led captive
by things Temporal and Fleshly?) this being such a marvelous thing, it will be
worth our time to enquire, wherein the strength of the world lies, whereby it
so strangely prevails.

And indeed it is a piece of the best policy, and that which gives great
advantage against an enemy, to study and find out where his strength lies,
Judge. 16. 6. etc. When Dalilah attemped the delivering of Sampson bound into
the hands of the Philistimes, she lies at him day by day, tell me where thy
great strength lies, tell me where thy great strength lies: in vain did they
assault him, in vain did she bind him; her Cords, and her Withs, and her webs
could never hold him, till at length she found out where his strength lay;
which when she had once found out, she quickly spoiled him of it, and delivered
him a captive to his enemies: find out the strength of the World, what it is,
and wherein it lies, and then you will understand your way to the conquering of
it.

But where lies this strength of the World? I answer.

In The Spirit of the World within us. In the God of the World without us.


1. In the spirit of the world within: the world has a strong party within
man, which sides with it, 1 Cor. 2. 12. We have received not the spirit of the
world but the spirit which is of God [we] have not; we who have that spirit of
God in us have not received the spirit of this world: but all others have no
other spirit. In the whole generation of worldly men, there is the same spirit;
as in the whole generation of the Saints there is the same divine spirit, the
same spirit of grace, the same spirit of faith, the same spirit of love, the
same holy spirit. So in all the men of this world there is the same worldly
spirit.

The spirit of this world is an earthly Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 47. the first man is
of the earth, earthy: in his creation he had an earthy body, and by sin he is
come to have an earthy Soul. Sin was his fall from Heaven to Earth, as in his
choice he made for himself: he chose an earthly inheritance; so in his temper,
and disposition, and tendency; his very nature now inclines, and bends toward
earthly things; his Soul as well as his Body, lusts after, and feeds upon dust.

The spirit of the World is a short sighted spirit: it cannot see afarr off, 2
Pet. 19. Heavenly things are too far distant to be discerned by it, it loves
and gapes for, and grasps things present, things to come are far out of its
sight.

The spirit of the world is a low and narrow spirit, these poor and beggarly
things that this earth affords, are the highest of its ambition.

Seek thou great things for thy self? Yes I do: what, worldly greatness? are
these the great things thou seek? a great name, a great estate? great
possessions? thou mistakest thy self man, these great things are but small
things, below the spirit of a man, below a divine and immortal Soul: meat, and
drink, and mirth, and money? are these the best things thou find for thy
heart to be set upon? for thy soul to take pleasure in? sure thou have changed
Souls with the bruits, that can take up with such things as these.

The Spirit of the World is an homebred spirit: it has never been abroad, but
has been born and bred in this worldly region: it has never set foot, nor
been acquainted in a better land: the spirit which is of God, carries up to the
upper regions; the regions of light, and life, and glory and immortality; where
it has made discoveries of other manner of treasures, and joys, and glories,
then are here to be found; but the spirit of the world has ever dwelt at home;
the souls of worldlings dwell in their houses of clay, and never travail
farther; then they can, with the snail, carry their houses upon their heads:
their Souls travail no farther then their carkases.

This Spirit of the World, by what has been hinted, of the make and temper of
it, you see, has a suitableness to worldly things; and this is the great
advantage the World has upon us, it tempts us to that we love and like: all
that the World persuades us to, is to seek what we have a mind to, to do what
we have a mind to, to follow our natures and dispositions, to find out what
will best please us, and there to take our fill.

The difficulty of Christ's victory over Souls, lies in this, that he calls and
commands them to things and to ways contrary to their natures; not to please,
but to deny themselves; to kill their Flesh, to cross their appetites, to
contradict their own mind; to pursue an happiness, which is so sublime and
spiritual, and so unsuitable to their carnal natures, that it is altogether
unsavory to them; and hereupon he has hard work to prevail, and it is but here
and there one amongst many, that will be prevailed upon, to hearken to him: to
how many houses may we come, to how many souls may we bring the everlasting
Gospel, ere one will open and accept? how many are called to Christ, to one
that comes? O brethren, you are witness, how hardly any of your souls were
persuaded to come along with Christ; and may be, some of you stand off, and
hang back, and will not be persuaded to come fully in, to this day: What Is the
reason of this? Oh carnal men think that Christ calls them to their loss,
persuades them to their hurt, that they have a better being, whilst they are
wallowing in their riches, and their pleasures, then ever they should find in
following of Christ.

But now the advantage that the world has on Souls, is, that it tempts them to
things pleasing to them; their natures join with the world, and draw them the
same way: Whilst Christ calls, if any man will be my disciple let him deny
himself, and take up his cross and follow me, this is all the world requires,
if any man will be my servant, let him seek himself and shift for himself, and
please himself, and shun the cross, and follow his own heart; and what great
difficulty is there, to persuade men to follow their own minds? when worldly
temptations meet with worldly spirits, when temptations to pride, meet with
proud hearts, when temptations to pleasure, meet with flesh-pleasing hearts,
when temptations to vanity meet with vain hearts, when temptations to
covetousness meet with covetous hearts, how mightily must they needs prevail?
From this suitableness of the spirit to worldly things, it does Readily take in
of the World. Greedily make out after the World.


1. It does readily take in of the World, the world never knocks but the heart
opens, the world never offers, but the hand is ready to receive; yea though the
terms upon which we must have it be never so unreasonable; though for every
draught of pleasure, they must after drink the double in wormwood, though with
the gains of the world, they must drink in a curse, yet like men in a dropsy,
though to drink will be death, their thirst must be quenched.

It may be when the world is a tempting the Soul, conscience stands by, and
gives it warning, take heed of these pleasures there is poison in that cup, or
there is wormwood at the bottom; take heed of these deceitful riches, there is a
snare lies under, there is a curse cleaves to them; look to thy self Soul, the
world is but a playing the Devil with thee; these pleasures and these riches it
has sent to fetch away thy Soul: it holds thee so busy about thine earthly
affairs, that thou may the mean while loose the opportunity of making Christ
thine, of making the other world sure to thee: look to it, thou will never have
any part in Christ, thou will never have any hope toward God, if thou be
tampering thus, and trading thus greedily for this present world: it may be
Conscience does thus stand by, and give warning to the worldly heart; but alls
one for that, come what will come the heart is so set upon it, that it will not
be warned.

2. Hence it is that they so greedily make out after the world, Oh what have
do they make to be rich? how do their Souls hunger after worldly greatness?
they covet greedily all the day long, Prove. 21. 26. They enlarge their desire
as Hell and are as death and cannot be satisfied, as it was said of the
Caldean, H^b. 2. 5. they enlarge their desire as Hell, of which it is said, he
has made it deep and large; they have deep desires, the bottom of their Soul
comes up; they have large desires, they never have enough, Ezekiel. 33. 31. Their
heart goes after their covetousness: that is, either after those earthly
things, which are the objects of their covetousness; or after the ductus or
leading of their covetousness: their covetousness leads on and their heart
follows: their heart goes, yea it runs after it: their heart out runs their
feet, their heart out works their hands: when I awake I am still with thee,
says the Psalmist; and when the worlding awakes, where is his heart presently?
in the field, in the shop, in the market; his heart is there, before his body
can get there: it may be that must stay a time in the house after he awakes,
and put on his clothes or take his breakfast, or may be to make a short prayer,
for a fashion; but his heart goes presently abroad, as soon as ever he awakes,
and leaves only his tongue behind to pray.

But whence is this eagerness this hungring and riding post after the world?
why it is his love to the world that makes him gape so wide after it; he loves to
be rich, he loves [give ye.]

Christ is proposed and set before his eyes, the bread of life, the water of
life, the windows of Heaven are opened, the fountains above are broken up; the
durable riches, the everlasting pleasures, life and peace, and rest, and joy,
and glory are set forth in open sight before the world: and as Psalm. 14. 2.
God looks down to see if any would understand and seek God: to see who amongst
all the world had a mind to his riches, to his treasures; who was for Christ,
who was for Grace, who was for Heaven; but behold they are all running another
way; there is none that understands, none that will seek God; every door is
shut, every heart's asleep when God passes by. If he should never give, till
many ask, if he should stay till they seek him, how long might he stay? he must
come and call, and knock and break open their doors, and pour into their
mouths, and it is well if Heaven will down with any at last; whilst full tables,
and full draughts of this world, will down and never stick, now and then a
crumb, now and then a drop from above, is all that will be taken in. Oh this
agrees not with our stomach, it is the world that is our favoury meat.

Oh what abundant proof is there brethren, of this difference of our appetites,
to things spiritual and things carnal? Oh what thriving and what grown
Christians had we been, had we been as hungry after grace, as after greatness
in this world; had there been so much craving and catching after God, as after
Mammon; had there been such good husbandry among us for things to come, as for
things presen?

What Is the reason that our Souls are such dwarfs, and babes, and starvlings?
Are they not so? is it not very poor and very low with us? what treasures have
you gotten? how little knowledge or Faith, or love, or power, or vigor of
spirit, have you attained, how is death still feeding upon us? Death in our
understandings, Death in our affections, Death in our Consciences, Death in our
duties? we walk up and down more like the Ghosts of Christians; then like
living Christians; pale and wan, and weak and cold; mere carkases of
Christianity, when the Soul and Spirit of religion is not. Look about, enquire
among you and see, how many such dead carkases there are, to one living lively
Soul: how many empty caskes that make a little sound, to one full vessel.

The Lord be merciful to us, though the name and shell of Religion be among us,
and upon us, yet the spirit and kernel of it seems to be almost quite vanished
out of the earth.

It was once said Revel. 3. 4. Thou have a few names even in Sardis, that have
not defiled their garments: But oh may it not be said, thou have [but] a few
names, neither in Sardis, not Thiatira, nor Philadelphia, nor any where among
all the Churches; thou have but a few names any where, that have any more then
a name that they live.

Brethren, how is it with us who are here before the Lord? turn in every one
his eye upon his heart, go down and ask every one of you, Soul how fares it
with thee? how art thou fed oh my Soul? how art thou clothed? what have thou by
thee? what what grace, what peace, what hope to comfort thee? who is there
within thee? is Christ there? is the holy spirit there, quickening thee, and
cleansing thee? or is not the world there preying upon thee and consuming thee?
Ask your Souls, art thou in health O my Soul? do thou live, and thrive, and
hold up thy head, and hold on thy way, and thy work? or art thou not sick? head
sick, and heart sick, and weak, and poor and blind and naked? look in each one
of you, step down, and take an account of your state. If you would do so, I
doubt there are few of us, but would find all within, in a very pitiful and
lamentable case.

What Is the reason of all this? the Lord God has offered to feed us, and
nourish us, and nurse up these languishing Souls; the Lord God has stood among
us, with his baskets of bread and his bottles of wine; has put such meat to
our mouths, that would have nourished us up, from babes to be men from such
weaklings to be strong in the Lord; but there is such an unsuitableness betwixt
the things of God and our carnal hearts, that we have no appetite to them, and
so they will not down; whereas the things of the world do find such a Spirit of
the world in us, that of any thing that it has to offer us, nothing comes
amiss; we not only readily take it in, but greedily hunger and make out after
it.

By the way Christians learn, that if ever you would get victory over the
world, you must first get you another spirit: in vain do you think to live
other then a worldly life, whilst the spirit of the world lives in you: Oh
have you been so long professors of Christianity, and have not yet gotten the
Spirit of Christianity? Is this the Spirit of Christ, that leads you on in an
earthly course? did God give you his Spirit, to teach you, how to be such
drudges to the world? did God give you his Spirit, to teach you how to plow,
and sow, and buy, and sell, and hoord up treasures on earth? what are your
thoughts, your designs, your courses, your ordinary talk and discourse? what is
it but earth earth? are these the thoughts, the ways, the language of the
Spirit? can any one that beholds our conversation, that in the general bent and
tenor of it, is all about the world, and but now and then a cold wish, or a
few heartless words, about the things of God; can any man that beholds us, say,
I, these are the persons that are dead to the world; that are crucified, that
are mortified to things below? these are they that have received the spirit of
Christ indeed? these speak like Christians, and look like Christians, and live
like Christians, like men of another world? can it be said thus of us? can we
say thus of our selves? my life is a spiritual life, my course is an heavenly
course, my steps are all bending to another country? can we say thus? would
not our daily course, our daily discourse, give us the lie if we should? Oh we
are yet of an earthly sensual Spirit; the Spirit of this world is yet bearing
rule in us; our very Soul is but a lump of earth and flesh; Oh for another
Spirit, a new Soul, a more divine and cellestial frame! O seek, O wait for this
better Spirit, and then we should quickly see another life: once let the world
be thrust out of the heart, and we shall quickly see more of Heaven breaking
forth in the life,

2. The strength of the world lies in the God of this world, Satan gives
strength to, and marshals its temptations so, as that the success of them
depends much on him: this he he does.

1. By over rating the good things present, and underrating the good things to
come. 2. By sharpning the edge of the evil things present, and blunting the
edge of the evil things to come. 3. By an active stimulating, and provoking the
Soul, on any terms whaatsoever, to pursue the present good, and to escape the
present evil.
1. By over rating the good things present, and under rating the good things to
come: He that looks on the world through the Devils glass, shall see it double
to what it is: he gives the same prospect to us, as he did to our Lord, Matthew.
4. 2. shows it in its Glory; every Comet Shines as the Sun; he makes the silver
as gold, the brass as silver, stones as iron; every thing has a borrowed face,
and looks better then it is. The Apple whereby he tempted our first parents,
Genesis 3. 5. he makes a deifying Apple. In the day that you eat your eyes shall
be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. Satan's design is,
to blind, and put out men's eyes; knowing, that they can never see the terrene
glory, till their eyes be out; but his pretense is to open eyes; to make such
discoveries of the hidden excellencies in these earthly treasures, as will
transfigure Earth into an Heaven.

He presents the world, as that which has substance, sufficiency, contentment,
hearts ease, satisfaction in it: he says to his friends, as the Lord says to
his, Prove. 8. 17. etc. I love them that love me, and them that seek me early
shall find me: riches and honors are with me, yea durable riches and
righteousness; I will cause those that love, me to find substance, and I will
fill their treasures: thus the Lord speaks to his, and the Devil gives the
world a tongue, to speak at the same rate. I love them that love me, I have
riches and honors, durable riches, and I will fill them with treasures.

And as the world speaks, so worldlings think, it cannot boast greater things
of it self, then will be believed. Hos. 12. 8. I am become rich, says Ephraim
I have found me out substance: the shadow is a substance in those eyes, that
see no better things.

Hence these things are taken up by the men of this world, as their portion as
their heritage, as their happiness and hope: thou give them their portion in
this life, Psalm. 17. and they take them as their portion: and now Lord what
wait I for, says the Psalmist, my hope is in thee: and now world, what wait
[I] for? what work I for? what live I for? truly my hope is in thee: the
worldling says, God is my portion; and in a sense he says true, for the world
is his God.

And on the other side, as Satan over rates this, so he under rates the other
world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. The God of this world has blinded the minds of them which
believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image
of of God, should shine unto them. The Gospel is a window, through which the
light and glory of the other world breaks in, and shines down upon this: here
the pretended opener of eyes, smites with blindness; by a vail of unbelief, he
keeps the Gospel, and all the glory of it out of sight: unbelief gives the lie
to all that the Gospel speaks; calls all into question, holds under
uncertainties, whether there be any such thing or no; and what is doubtful and
uncertain whether it be or no, will be vallewed there after.

What a low price do carnal hearts put upon the deep things of God, upon the
great things of eternity? Glory and honor and immortality and eternal life,
what cheap things are they accounted? whilst soul, and conscience, and peace,
and hopes, and life are so ordinarily sold, to purchase an earthly inheritance,
(that is the bargain that every where is driving in this earth) how few are
there that will deal for Heaven and Glory, though it may be bought without
money, and without price? though it may be had for the seeking for; though it be
bought to their hands, yet they will not take it. Now what advantage is this to
wordly temptations, when the price of things to come is so beaten down, when
the price of things present is so hoised and raised, as if the one could hardly
be over-bought, and the other were scarce worth the dealing for?

2. By sharpening the edge of present evils, and blunting the edge of evils to
come. The afflictions of this life are made to cut deeper than the vengeance to
come. The persecutions of men are more feared than the Plague of God: Satan
makes his Vassals to think, there is no Heaven or Hell to those on Earth;
Poverty looks more dismally than eternal Fire, Disgrace than Damnation, the
Wrath of man than the Cnrse of God.

Let Death and Damnation be preached to the World, and this stirs them not, let
the Devil preach of Tribulation and Persecution for righteousness sake, and how
are they frighted,? Let the Word declare unto them, with never so much
plainness and power, He that believes not shall be damned; If you live after
the flesh you shall dye; The Wrath of God shall be revealed from Heaven against
all unrighteousness and ungodliness of men; Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his
Power: And how little is this regarded, who does believe this report? how few
are convinced? how few are awakened, so much as to consider how they may
escape? How weak are all those Arguments, which are either fetched down from
above, or fetched up from the deep, and how little will they work? On the other
side, let men be told, He that departs from evil makes himself a prey; All
those that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution; Ye shall be
reproached, reviled, and cast out of men, made as the filth of the world, and
the offscouring of all things; Ye shall be as Sheep among Wolves, as Lilles
among Thorns; The Devil shall cast you into Prison; You shall be as Signs and
Wonders in Israel; Many are the troubles of the Righceous, etc. Let the Devil
take such Texts as these, and preach to them, and how deep does his word go? If
this be the portion of Christians, if this be the wages of Righteousness, and
the fruit of Holiness, let me take heed of Christ and his ways. A mocking
Ishmael, a cursing Shimei, a railing Rabshakeh, will do more to fright them off
from holiness, than the Worm, than the Fire, than all the Vipers, and
Scorpions, and Stings, and Torments beneath will do, to drive them back from
Sin: They dare not be Saints for fear of the barking of Dogs, but they dare be
Sinners notwithstanding the roaring of Lions; The Devil has made such fools of
them, that a few grains laid on them at present, seem more heavy, than those
Talents that the Almighty is casting down upon them.

3. By an active stimulating and pressing them on, what ever becomes of them
hereafter, to pursue the present good things, and to prevent the present evil
things. If the Devil can but make the Premises take with them, That the good
things present are so good, that there is nothing better, That the evil things
present are so evil, that there are none greater; then he will easily gain the
Conclusion; Therefore it is the best and wisest course, per fas aut nefas, to
secure the one, and escape the other.

But more particularly, the Devil manages and quickens the temptations of the
World, By proposing of Objects. By provoking the Appetite.


1. By proposing of Objects. He brings the World in sight. Sometimes he
presents it immediately to the fancy; he raises great thoughts of heart about
it; he calls the thoughts abroad with him, to take a view of the glory, and the
riches, and the pleasures of his Kingdom; sets men a thinking on the pomps and
fashions, or the sports and pleasures of the world; a rolling over in their
minds, the gains and sweetnesses of a worldly life.

Sometimes he presents it to the Eye. There is a quick passage from the eye to
the heart: If the Devil can but turn the eyes to behold vanity, by the eye he
will easily infect the heart. The Devil presents Objects to the eye, leading
men up and down, where his baits and snares do lie, 2 Timothy 3. 6. Sinners are
said to be lead about by diverse [Lusts.] The Devil leads Lust, and Lust has
the leading of the Man. But whither do men's Lusts lead them? Why every where,
up and down, where the Devil has laid his baits to take them: Some men's Lusts
lead them to their Companions, to their sports and pastimes, to the Alehouse,
to the Tavern; other men's Lusts carry them into the City, or into the Field,
over Sea and Land, to find them out wealth and substance; Some men's Lusts lead
them to the Courts of Princes, to the Palaces of Nobles, to see fashions, to
get favor, and to climb up into dignities and high places. Men need consider
whither they go, and what their call is thither; the Devil has oftener an hand
in the leading us up and down, than we are aware of; and he that goes whither
the Devil leads him, it is ten to one but he is in the Net before he returns: We
are never more secure than when we keep aloof from temptations, when the Devils
baits are out of sight. We are never in more danger, than when the hook is out
of fight and the bait is in sight: that is Satan's course, as to hide the hook,
so to show the bait. He turned Eve's eye to the Apple, Achan's eye to the wedge
of Gold, Ahab's eye to Naboth's Vineyard, and then what work did he make with
them.

2. By provoking the Appetite; And this he does, not only by propounding of
Objects at all adventures, but such objects as are most suitable and taking
with those he has to deal: Satan is a skilful Philosopher; he understands our
natures and complexions, and the several inclinations that flow from them:
Satan is a cunning Fisher, and knows at what baits every kind of Fish will
bite; and accordingly angles for them: Some men he observes are naturally of a
sensual heart, given to the pleasures of the flesh; for these he has sports
and pastimes, Mirth and Jollity, Wine, Beauty, etc. Look thee here says the
Devil, what a life thou may live if thou will; Arise, take, and eat, here is
meat thou love, take thy fill, and make thee an happy man: if thou meddle too
far with the Scriptures, or hearken to these Preachers, what a sad Soul will thou become? a sour unpleasant and morose spirit, thou will be even eaten up of
thy melancholic dumps: thou must cross thy self, and be ever vexing thine
heart, with intolerable severities, if thou will hearken to them: let them
alone, let them Preach to whom they will, run not after them, hearken not to
their words; believe thy senses, taste what I set before thee, taste if it be
not good.

Others he observes to be of earthly minds, gaping after wealth and riches; it is
not mirth, and jollity, and pleasures, and such like trash, and chafe, that
will take with these; they must have substance; and for these he has money,
and lands, fields, and farms and oxen: Will thou be a rich man? will thou be a
wealthy man? will thou increase thy stock and thy store? will thou enlarge thy
possession? hearken to me, be a good husband; wast not thy time about
impertinencies, reading hearing, praying, etc. Mind thy business, and thine
interest, set thine heart upon thy work, let this be the one thing thou
mindest. Nourish not needless scruples, this is a forbidden course, this ought
not to be done; away with such fears; the more free thou art to venture on any
thing, the greater will thy gain be: let Men or Conscience clamor against
thee, call thee Earth-worm, unjust, extortioner, oppressor; let them alone,
thou shall increase in substance, and that will make thee amends for all; and
for conscience, if that be sore or troublesome, a little repentance at last
will heal that sore.

Others are of aerie Spirits, proud and ambitious; and for these he has the
breath of popular applause, respect and esteem in the world, honor and
reputation.

Others are of a timorous and fearful heart; and with these he deals in thunder
and storms; threatenings, persecutions, bonds and banishments reproaches and
cruel mockings. Look before thee foolish creature: what art thou a doing? what
art thou preparing for thy self? see what rods I have in brine for thee;
know thou not that I have power to make thee or to undo thee! art thou able
to stand against all the world? See how all my Armies are confiderate against
thee, and running upon thee to devour thee, and swallow thee up: consider the
rage of their hearts, the fury in their faces, the violence of their hands;
behold them already on their march against thee; they are many, they are
terrible, they are potent, they are near that seek thy ruin. Awake from thy
folly, be not accessory to thine own undoing: save thy self, go and make thy
peace with them, cast in thy lot amongst them, join with the multitude, be as
they are, let thy voice and thy way be as theirs; let go this pride and
singularity, and be as others, and it shall be well with thee.

Thus subtly does our adversary deal with us; with every man according to his
humor, according to the several dispositions of their hearts; and in this
subtilty, his strength lies, and thereon his success depends. What wonder, that
the fearful are frighted? that the proud are lifted up, that the greedy gape so
wide? that the full draughts of the worlds stolen waters, do so easily down
with such, whose Souls are panting after them?

Christians let us learn wisdom of this Serpent; Does he make advantage of our
Tempers? does he observe our dispositions, and accordingly order his
temptations? Let us learn this wisdom, to know our own hearts, and to observe
our own inclinations, and accordingly there to stand most constantly on our
guard, where we find the adversaries most like to assault us; and to have a
special eye to those enemies that are most like to make a breach upon us.

Art thou a person given to pleasure? Is a merry, jolly, frolic, wanton,
luxurious life grateful to thee? art thou given to appetite? to indulge thy
throat, to study thy belly? are meats and drinks, curiosities and varieties of
them, the things thou mindest? Art thou given to pride? is honor or applause,
is the highest place, the finest clothes, the newest fashions, are these thine
hearts delight? Is merry company, lightness, vain jesting, wanton or amorous
books or discourses, are these the delight of thine heart? When ever thou see
them before thee, tell thine heart, how pleasing soever these be to thee, these
things I must never allow thee: When ever thou see such objects before thee
and opportunities inviting thee to satisfy thy lust, when thou fallest into
company that are of the same spirit, when sports and pastimes when delicates
and dainties or any other voluptuous Objects are before thee, then say, Now I
must look to my self; the Devil stands in the crowd, to steal away my soul:
these are the flies with which he uses to bait his hook for me,; he has
caught me with them many a time, and now he is come angling for me again: O my
soul I know thou have a lust to be nibing: these are the things thou naturally
love, here thy great danger lies, and I must look the more narrowly to thee
here. An heart given to pleasure, should hold it self under a greater
restraint, and allow it self less liberty, than others that are not thus
inclined; that may be safe for them, which would prove fatal to thee.

Art thou an earthly minded person? and do thou see substance before thee; a
Field, or an House that may be gotten? does the world come crowding and flowing
in upon thee? Have thou good trading, rich merchandise, gainful bargains before
thee, and is thy soul in chase of them? Take heed to thy self, these are the
things by which thou art like to be lost: thou art never in such danger of
becoming poor, as by growing rich: When are Worldlings hearts so ready to take
their leave of God, and Heaven, as when they are entertained with the
flatteries of a smiling World? their gains are usually their greatest loss,
they never decline or go back so much, as when they have the best trading. How
hardly shall rich men enter into the Kingdom of God? When riches increase, how
hard is it for such, not to set their hearts upon them?

How little are the Counsels or Promises of God regarded, whilst we have the
World at will? how little is it regarded, that God Promises, I will be thine,
Christ shall be thine, the Kingdom shall be thine; whilst the World stands by
and says, I will be thine, Money says, I will be thine, Sheep and Oxen say,
we will all be thine! The Lord is hereupon often put to it, to take away our
money, to drive away our cattle, to burn down our houses, to turn our fruitful
Land into a Wilderderness, to bring us to wants and straits, ere he can be
regarded, Hos. 2. 14. I will bring her into the Wilderness, and there will I
speak to her heart: speak to her any where else, and she will give me the
hearing; in the Wilderness my Word will reach her heart.

Oh that men were sensible of this; that they are never so like to starve as
upon their heaps, that their prosperous times are the Devils seasons to
impoverish their souls; that the abundance that is set before them, are the
Devils tokens, whereby he is enticing their hearts after him.

I am rich and have found me out substance, now I shall be happy? No, no,
foolish soul, these riches are Satan's Milstones which he hangs about thy neck,
to drown thee in perdition and destruction; if any thing sink thee, it is this
load upon thy back; thy Golden age is like to be thine Iron age: Satan knows
thy mind, and what will please thee; he is trucking with thee for thy life: He
knows thou have a greedy heart, and that there is nothing so dear unto thee, but
he can buy it for money, and that is the bargain he is driving with thee; Sell
all that thou have, thy God, thy Hopes, thy Soul, and come and follow me, and
thou shall have treasures on Earth.

Christians, stand ever upon your Watch, but especially when there is any thing
before you, that your carnal hearts like, and are apt to fall a lusting after,
if ever you would fear the Devil, fear him then, when he is tickling your
flesh: he never does us more mischief, than by doing us good turns: God seldom
does us more good than by his srowns, and the Devil never does us more hurt
than by his kindnesses. It never fares better with Gods Children than when they
are crossed, nor ever fares it worse with the Devils Children, than when they are
cocker'd: never suspect the Devil more, than when he pretends to do you a
courtesy; what ever it be, by which he usually pleasures you, dread that as
Death and Hell: Mistake not Gods chastisements, nor the Devils complements; be
content that God should displease you, and be afraid when the Devil pleases
you; be convinced that Gods smitings are a precious Balm, and the Devils
stroakings are stabs at your heart; fear not his Thunder and Storms so much as
his warm Sun.

Beware of this folly, Whatever pleases me is good for me. Beware of this
madness, I [must] be pleased what ever comes of it, mine eye must be pleased,
my humor must be pleased, mine appetite must be pleased, I must be pleased
what ever it costs me: If you be for that, the Devil knows where to have you:
though God does not please you, though holiness does not please you, though
Heaven does not please you, the Devil that knows your palate, will find
something that will: If Money will do it, if Mirth will do it, if Meat, and
Drink, and fine Clothes or merry Company will do it, this he offers you, and
by this he holds you captive at his will.

III. Wherein the strength of faith lies, whereby it overcomes the world.

What a mighty enemy is here? who can stand before it? What is little David to
Goliath? what is a sling and a pebble to a sword and a spear? to an helmet and
greaves and a target of brass? The mighty Philistim comes blustering, and
boasting, and fuming, and chafing, so that he made an earthquake in the Camp of
Israel; and what could a poor stripling do to undertake this mighty Champion?
what hope is there of victory over him? little David tells us, 1 Samuel 17. 45.
Thou come to me with a Sword, and a Spear, but I come unto thee in the Name
of the Lord of Hosts: this day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand; and
all this assembly shall know, that the Lord saves not with Sword and Spear,
the battle is the Lords, and he will give you into our hands.

The strength of Israel is this David; the strength of David is his Faith, the
strength of Faith is the Name of the Lord, Prove. 18. 10. the Name of the Lord
is a strong Tower, the righteous runs into it and is safe.

But to come closer to the matter in hand, this general I shall dispatch in
these two Particulars.

1. The strength of a Christian is his Faith. 2. The strength of Faith is
Christ.
1. The strength of a Christian is his Faith, Mark 9. 23. to him that believes
all things are possible; there is nothing impossible to Faith, because there is
nothing impossible to God: The 11th. chapter to the Hebrews is a short
Chroniele of the mighty Acts and Achievements of Faith. It spoiled Death of
its prey; as in the case of Enoch, verse 5. his Faith carried him to Heaven
another way, he was translated and did not see death: It made an Ark to save
from a Flood; as in the case of Noah, verse 7. It caused a living issue to
spring out of dead bodies; as in the case of Abraham and Sarah, verse 12. It
received a living Child from the dead, by offering it up to death; as in the
case of Abraham offering up his Son Isaac, v. 17. 19. It foretold things to
come, and conveyed down the Fathers blessing on his posterity; as in the case
of Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, v. 20.

But more fully to our purpose, It overcame the world.

1. It despised and rejected the prosperity of the world, v. 15. They were not
mindful of their earthly country, they had a better, an Heavenly country in
their eye, and were content to be Pilgrims in this, in hope to be possessours
of that better inheritance. v. 24. Moses by faith forsook the glory of Egypt,
the Court of Pharaoh, the bosom of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season.

2. It triumphed over the power, and wrath of the world, v. 33. It subdued
Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the
edge of the sword; out of weakness it made strong, turned to flight the Armies
of the Aliens; endured cruel mockings and scourgings; yea moreover, bonds and
imprisonments; endured stoning sawing asunder, wanderings about in sheepskins
and goat skins, destitute, afflicted, and tormented. In all these things the
servants of God were more then conquerours [through Faith] in him that loved
them.

Christians, where is your faith? how is it that the world is still on
horseback, riding on conquering and to conquer! not only riding over our backs,
but riding over our Faith, crowing over our consciences, triumphing over
religion, and righteousness; as if Christ had lost the day, and conscience had
run the field?

Oh how many Captives has it taken from the mighty? what multitudes of
prisoners has it gotten? Some it has in golden chains, fettered in riches and
worldly gains, in honors and dignities. Some it holds with a Spiders web,
which yet they cannot break; the fashions and fooleries of the world; its
pomps, pleasures and humors: others it has laid fast in iron chains, manacled
with fears, and dread of its fury and violence: they dare not be Saints any
longer; their faith, and their love, and their zeal, are all thrown away; they
dare not appear in their Armor, lest they should be known for Christ's
disciples.

How many renegadoes, and Apostates has the world made; that have run from
their colors, and have listed themselves under the Devil; under whose conduct
they are fighting against that faith, and holiness, which once they professed?
and those that are left behind, how weak and faint-hearted are they most
become? afraid not only of sufferings but of their duty. O how are we lost in
our conflicts with temptations? whither are our hearts run? some into our
fields, some into our shops, some into our gardens, some into our beds of ease,
where we may sleep in a whole skin. Some are gotten into sanctuary, turned
aside to iniquity to escape affliction.

Oh how few hearts are there left behind with Christ, and those that are how
cold and spiritless are they become! it is woeful to observe with what a pale face
Christianity looks at this day.

May we not sadly invert the words of the Text, This is the victory that has
overcome our Faith even this present world? whilst the Apostle boasts that the
believers of old, by their faith, subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness,
obtained promises, stopd the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of Fire,
etc. May we not now hear the world triumphing, that it has, shaken the Kingdom
of Christ, wrought wickedness, vacated promises, stopped the mouth of
Conscience, quenched the heat of zeal, slain holiness with the edge of the
sword, put to flight the hopes of the Saints, left for dead those whom God has
raised up to life, left the Church that living vineyard as a field of dead
carcasses, their peace slain, their comforts slain, the Spirit of light and
life within them vanished into dimness and deadness? and all this because our
Faith has so much failed: what are we become? to what a low ebb are we
brought O we of little faith? well, but yet there is hope concerning this
thing. This stump if there be but life in the root, will spring again and
recover again: you that have but a little faith, blow up that living sparkle,
and your sick, and spoiled and half dead Souls, will revive again; let your
faith once out of weakness be made strong, and it will recover all you have
lost.

Believe more, nourish and cherish and exercise Faith more; lean on the rock of
ages, look unto Jesus, lay hold on the Covenant, live in the word of promise,
hang upon the shoulders, feed upon the fullness of the Lord, and there let your
Faith gather strength again, and this will be the strength of your hearts; will
renew your life, recover your love, inflame your zeal, set your holiness, and
your hopes again upon the wing, and bring the world and its temptations again
under your feet: the strenth of a Christian is his Faith.

2. The strength of Faith is Christ. Christ is the mighty one: the mighty God,
If. 9. 6. The rock of ages, in whom is everlasting strength, If. 26. through
Faith this mighty God is our God, this rock of ages is our rock, 1 John 4. 4.
Ye are of God little children and have overcome them, because greater is he
that is in you then he that is in the world: who is he that is in you? it is
Christ that is in you: who is he that is in the world? the Devil is in the
world. Christ is greater then the enemy, and therefore you have overcome. He
that is in the world is great, but he that is in you is greater, he that is in
the world is strong, and subtle, but he that is in you is stronger and wiser
then he [little] Children ye have overcome: what are a company of poor children
to a mighty giant? But behold the childrens Champion, and you will quickly see
on which side the victory will go.

There are 2. things in Christ which are the strength of faith.

His Power. Victory.

1. His power: he is a mighty one as before: I have laid help on one that is
mighty, Psalm. 89. 19. he has power, Temptations. To prevent To deaden To
succor those that are tempted.



1. He has power to prevent temptations, 1 Cor. 10. 13. he will not suffer us
to be tempted above what we are able: You may conclude from the promise of
Christ, to his power; he will not promise more then he can do; when he says
he will not suffer us to be tempted, you may be sure he has power to restrain
the tempter. Christ has all our tempters and temptations in his power; the
Devil in his power, the World in his power, they must have leave ere they can
strike a stroke. If he say the word, the Assyrian shall not come against
Jerusalem, nor dig a trench about them, nor shoot an arrow against them, he
has his hook in the nose, and his bridle in the Jaws of all his enemies. As
the Devil could not tempt Christ, so neither any of his servants unless the
Spirit lead them into the wilderness to be tempted: therefore he directs us to
pray, Lead us not into temptation.

2. He has power to deaden temptations; to take off the edge of them, that so
though they come, yet they shall not enter: though Satan strikes, yet his
arrows shall not stick, Gal. 6. 14. By him the world is crucified to me and I
am crucified to the world. Christ by his Cross has slain the world; its now
become to the Saints as a dead thing. Its beauty and glory is dead, dried up
and withered. Christ by his cross has discovered the glory of the other world;
life and mortality are hung forth in open sight on the Cross of Christ; and
that sunshine has withered all the flowers here below; who will play at such
small games, that sees the invisible Crown, which the Cross of Christ has set
before his eyes. And as the beauty and glory, so the power and wrath of the
world is slain. Christ by his death killed all the powers of darkness: a
Christian sees, that the world can now do him neither good nor hurt, it can
neither befriend nor mischief him: who would be enticed by a dead Carrion, or
affrighted by a dead Lion?

[And I am crucified unto it] Christ has slain the World without us, and our
worldly Lusts within us: Our old man is crucified with Christ, Romans 6. 6. ye
are dead, says the Apostle, Col. 3. 3. dead to this World: Set your affections
on things above, for ye are dead to things below: I am crucified to the World;
that is, worldly temptations are no more to me, than if I were a dead man: What
are meat, and drink, and clothes, and pleasures, and honors to a dead man? If
the Devil should go and preach among the tombs, and call out to the dead,
hearken to me, and I will feed you with delicates, cloth you in scarlet,
enrich you with silver and gold, exalt you to honor; what skull or bone would
be moved? the same success will he have in his tempting crucified Saints: were
they totally thus mortified, the highest temptations would move them nothing at
all, no more than a Carcass in the grave; and according to the degree of that
mortification, they have attained to, so far forth is the edge of temptation
blunted.

3. He has power to succor those that are tempted. Though the Tempter be let
loose, and temptation come thick, and strike deep, as by reason of our
imperfect mortification they may; our experiences sadly restifie, how much the
World is often too hard for us, how often we are entangled and led away by it;
what breaches it makes on our peace, what wounds in our hearts, and what fears
and misgivings hereupon arise in our souls, how we shall stand for the future;
thus are we weary and distressed and hard bestead; but though it be thus with
us, in the midst of all these there is this to support us, Heb. 2. 18. In that
he suffered being tempted, he is able also to succor those that are tempted.

2. His Victory over the world. Christ has power over the World to restrain it
from tempting, to deaden its temptations, to succor those that are tempted;
yea more than that, he has already overcome the World, and thereby secured our
fifinal victory, John 16. 33. In the world ye shall have tribulation, but be ye
of good comfort, I have overcome the World. Why what comfort's that, that he
has overcome? Why, 1. It Is some encouragement, that our enemy is not
invincible; he that has been beaten, may be beaten. 2. There Is this farther
comfort to us, that in his victory we have overcome: Who is it that has
overcome? Our Captain, our Champion has overcome; he has overcome, and
overcome for us; he has overcome, and we in him; We are more than Conquerours
through him that loved us, Romans 8. Faith unites to Christ; and thereupon,

1. All the Power of Christ is engaged to our help and assistance; We are
hereby interess'd in his Victory; Christ's Victory is our Victory; and also in
his Power; he is now concerned to protect and help us: we are his own, the
attempts that are made against us, are made against him; the spoil that is made
upon us, is made upon him, as in all our afflictions he is afflicted, so in all
our temptations he also is tempted; our enemies are his enemies, our sufferings
are his sufferings, our temptations are his temptations: Is not Christ
concerned to look to his own? Isa. 63. 15. 19. Look down from Heaven and behold
from the habitation of thine holiness, and thy glory; where is thy Zeal and thy
Strength? Why, what have you to do with me, or with my strength? O we are
thine, say they, ver. 19. So are not our enemies, thou never barest rule over
them, nor are they called by thy Name, Psalm. 119. 94. I am thine, save me: I am
thy Child, says the Believer, thy Servant, a Lamb of thy Flock; thou art my
Shepherd, I have committed my self to thee, and thou have undertaken for me: If
Satan prevails upon me, he prevails upon thee; if the World steal away my
heart, it robs thee of thy due: I am thine save me.

2. By virtue of this Union, there is a diffusion and shedding forth of the
strength of Christ into the soul: strengthened with might by his Spirit in the
inner man, Ephesians, 3. 16. Believers as they have the mighty hand of Christ over
them, so they have the mighty Spirit of Christ in them, whereby they wax strong
in the Lord, and in the power of his might.

Christians, be ware of excusing your falls, by pleading want of strength, as
sometimes some do; I could not help it, I am not able to stand in the day of
temptation; the cares of this life are too hard for me, either to bear, or to
deliver my self from: there is no man knows what a load they are to me, how they
run upon me like a flood, which I am no way able to withstand. I [cannot] keep
my heart free, I cannot mind my God and my Soul, as I would and desire to do;
one business or other, one care, one trouble or other is still upon me,
dividing, distracting me so, that I cannot do as I would; it is no comfort to me
to live at the rate I do, but I can do no more then I can, I cannot help it.

Others, it may be, will make the same complaint, concerning the pleasures of
this life; I know a severe and self denying life would be much more comfortable
to me, if I could bring my heart to it; I am troubled at my self, and angry
with my self, that I am so often led aside to fleshly liberty; I find mischief
enough and sorrow enough afterward, that my vain mirth and my vain company
bring upon me; I have many a sad night after my merry days; but yet there is
such an unhappy proness of my nature and disposition, to such a life, that when
ever I have temptations before me, I have no power to forbear. It has cost me
something, I have prayed and hoped for more seriousness and circumspection, but
still I am overcome, and how to help it I cannot tell.

But art thou a Christian? where is thy Faith man? have thou Faith, and no
Christ? have thou Christ and no strength? Is the world too hard for Christ? Is
the flesh to strong for the spirit? have thou the spirit of the living God in
thee, and yet can thou say, I cannot help it to be thus earthly and thus
fleshly? Mistake not thy self; thou have reason to fear lest thy [cannot help
it] be a [will not help it] or a [care not to help it] thou art too willing of
this carking caring life; thou art too willing of this vain and looser life;
and it may be art glad thou have so much to say as [I cannot help it] thou art
inexcusable O man, who pleadest inability, when all the power of Christ is
before thee, and he has said to thee [if thou believe thou ma^st]

IIII. The conflict of Faith with the tempting world: or the ways and means by
which faith over comes the world. These are,

1. It gives a right Judgment of the world: It discovers its true value, what
the world is worth. By faith we understand, Heb. 11. 3. as whence the world
was, we understand its original; so what the world is, we understand its worth
and its power; what it can do for us or against us; what help there is in it,
and what hurt it can do us: and we understand its end too, of what durance it
is, as well as its beginning.

Faith takes its estimate of the world from the word, and gives its judgment of
it according to the Scriptures. The word speaks of every thing as it is; of God
as he is, of Sin as it is, of the present World as it is, and of the world to
come, as it is: what the word speaks, God speaks, and whatever Faith speaks, it
has it from the word.

What a poor and contemptible thing does the Word make the World? a figure, a
shadow, an image, a dream, vanity, a lie, things that are not, of no
consistency, or endurance.

When the word speaks of the world to come, how highly does it speak? what a
wonderful and glorious report does it make, of the promised land, and the new
Jerusalem, that state of blessedness prepared for the Saints? a Kingdom, a
Crown, an eternal weight of glory, an inheritance incorruptible underfiled that
fades not away. Riches rest joy pleasures, such as neither tongus can express,
nor hearts conceive.

And how dreadfully does it speak concerning the miseries of the other world! A
prison a place of darkness, a bottomless pit, a lake of fire where is weeping
and howling and gnashing of teeth.

Faith seals to the Judgment of the Scriptures, Joh, 3. 33. He that believes
has set to his seal that God is true: when the word speaks most highly of
things to come, Faith says it is even as it has been told me of the Lord; and
it cannot speak so contemptibly of things present, but Faith will believe its
report.

Unbelievers will not be persuaded that the world is so poor a thing as it is,
Hos. 12. 7. He is a merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand: the
unbeliever will not weigh things in the balance of the sanctuary, but in his
own deceitful balances. Balances may be said to be balances of deceit in a
double sense. There are balances where by men deceive others, as those false
balances, which unrighteous men use for their own advantage, to buy or sell
by; which may be those there meant; and there are false balances, whereby men
deceive themselves. Ungodly men as they weigh their commodities they sell, in
false balances, thereby to deceive others; so they weigh their gains that they
get to themselves, in false balances, and thereby deceive themselves: their
bargains that they make, they could never count them such good bargains, unless
they weighed them on their deceitful balances. If sense may be Judge, the
world is a good bargain when dearest bought; though if faith may be Judge, when
the world may be had cheapest, it is not over safe dealing for it.

Now when the worth of the world is understood, the Devils market is spoiled.
No man will care to deal with such a pedlar, whilst the Merchant stands by:
who will sell his inheritance for counters, or his patrimony for dirt and dung?
who will spend his money for that which he knows is not bread, or his labor
for that which profits not? the strength of the temptation is broken, when
once we understand of how little value the things are, we are tempted by.

Christians, study the world more; search the Scriptures, and what these
testify of it, believe the Scriptures, which have written upon all under the
Sun, Vanity and vexation of spirit; understand what an insignificant cipher
this figure of the world is. Believe your own words; you can sometimes speak
contemptibly of the world your selves. Who of you will not say, this world is
but a shadow, and the fashion of it passes away? do ye think as you speak? do
not dissemble; either speak your minds plainly, that this earth is your
substance, your treasure, your portion, and that its worth the venturing your
Souls for it; or if you go on to say, this is not your rest, you have here no
continuing City, there is no building on this sand, here is no contentment nor
continuance here, if ye go on to speak thus, believe your own words, and then
Judge how wisely you deal for your selves, in venturing your eternity for such
empty perishing things.

2. By Faith the soul pitches upon an eternal inheritance. Its our choosing the
good part, Luke 10. 42. our laying hold on eternal life. 1 Timothy 6. 12. those
believers Heb. 11. 14. are said to seek a country; they were not mindful of
this, they confessed themselves, and were content to be strangers and pilgrims
here, their country was on the other side Jordan, and thither they sent their
hearts.

Faith descries a better country; it sees into the invisible world, Heb. 11,
27. its the good spy that is sent out to search the land of Canaan; and finding
it to be a good land, there the Soul pitches. It says unto the Lord, thou art
my God, thou art my portion for ever: this is my rest, here will I dwell. If I
can bear through this weary land, and at last enter into that rest; however
matters go with me here, I am not careful about that, if I can but attain to
the resurrection of the dead, if I can but get to Heaven, that's all my desire
and design.

Meet a believer where you will, and ask him, whether art thou bound? Oh for
the Holy Land: whom seek thou thou? Jesus of Nazareth: what runnest thou
for? what waitest thou for? The incorruptible Crown.

Ask him again, will nothing less content thee? Look about through all the
earth, can thou find nothing worthy thy love? what is silver and gold, and
houses, and lands, and honors, and pleasures, are these nothing with thee? may
not these satisfy thee? No no, these are not God, this is not Heaven; there is
no rest here for the sole of my foot; my house, and my home is above, my hope,
and my treasure is above, and my Soul is above, and cannot be content to dwell
in the dust.

Ask him yet again, But how will thou get into that good Land? there are
difficulties and dangers in the way; thou have a wilderness to go through, a
red Sea, and a Jordan to pass over; there are Lions in thy way, there are
Giants in thy way; thou may be a prey to thine enemies, torn in pieces of
wild Beasts, or swallowed up in the waters, or at least thou may wander in
the wilderness, and loose thy way, and never come into thy rest at last.

Well, but however, I [must] venture, I am resolved for heaven, how difficult
or dangerous soever the way may prove: I Will venture all here; Heaven or
nothing, Christ or nothing. Henceforth let no man trouble me with other
business, for I bear in my heart the prints of the Lord Jesus, he is gotten
within me, he is engraven upon my breast, and on my soul, and this heart can
never be at rest till I be with him where he is: Lord be thou my God, and bring
me into thine holy habitation; lift up the light of thy countenance upon me,
and show me thy salvation; this one thing I desire, let this be granted me, and
then my heart shall be glad, and my glory shall rejoice, my flesh also shall
rest in hope. I have enough; thou will show me the path of life; In thy
presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.

And now world, where art thou, with all thy glory? this earth is trodden to
dirt, when the heart is once in earnest for heaven.

Christians, come pitch your Tents here; where will you that your lot shall
fall? you have two worlds before you, which will you choose? hang not betwixt
both. Will you get up to the Mountains, or will you dwell in this Plain? Come
to a resolution; you will never get clear of this world, till you climb up to
the other.

It Is only the milk and honey of Canaan, that will wean your souls from the
Onions and Garlic of Egypt. The flowers of the field will be beautiful, till
you see the Roses of the Garden. The fatness of the earth will be your delight,
till you understand the sweetness of heaven: you will never be content to loose
from this shore, till you see the banks of a better Land: you will not part
with your present purchases, till you see where you may have a better bargain.

Its to no purpose to think to get off your hearts by common arguments; This
world is vain, this world is troublesome, uncertain, fading, a barren Land; if
that be all you can say, 'twill never do; your hearts will answer, A barren
Land is better than none, an house of Clay is better then no habitation: If my
soul may not dwell here, where shall I be better?

Where may thou be better? Come and see; lift up your eyes to the hills; look
you toward Sion, the City of the great King; mark all her Bulwarks, tell all
her Towers, behold her Foundations; Is it not a strong City? walk through the
midst of her, behold the Tree of Life, bearing all manner of fruits, of which
whosoever eats shall live forever. Behold the River, those streams of
everlasting pleasures, that run through the City of God; of which whosoever
drinks, shall never die. Behold the Palms, and the Robes, and the Crowns, the
rest, the joy, and the glory of the Inhabitants of this City; God is in the
midst of her; the all-blessed, all-glorious, all-sufficient God, he is their
light and their life; there shall be no Clouds, nor storms, no night nor
darkness, no wants nor fears, no sorrow nor complaining in her street;
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, and sorrow and sighing shall flee
away. Look toward this holy City; live in the view and contemplation of the
glory to come; and then look down, and see what a dark Mist will becloud the
worlds most glorious Sunshine.

And then demand; Now soul, which will thou choose? where will thou pitch? both
Lands are before thee, which shall be thine Inheritance? art thou for God or
the world? for heaven or earth?

What shall I say? I wot not what I shall choose? why is the choice so hard? Is
it such a difficulty to determine whether light or darkness, joy or sorrow,
life or death, be the better choice?

Well, jacta est alea; the lot is cast; God shall be my portion, and the lot of
mine inheritance. O my God, will thou be mine? shall my dwelling be with thee?
The matter is ended; the lines are fallen to me in a pleasant place, and I have
a goodly Heritage. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor thou bear to thy
children, and visit me with thy salvation; let me see the good of thy chosen,
let me rejoice in the gladness of thy Nation, let me glory with thine
Inheritance, and I have no more to ask.

Brethren, when once you have by Faith made this choice, there is an end of the
Devils hopes. Look up therefore, look up to that blessed Country, cry unto God,
Lord open mine eyes, and let me see, Lord reach down thine hand and help me up,
take up this heart to thee, and there let it fix. Oh what clods of earth, what
dead lumps of flesh are these hearts, that do not yet begin to rise; Lord let
this flesh become Spirit, let our ashes flame and ascend to thee; once for all,
let us come to thee, and never return to this dust again.

3. By Faith we understand that the good things present cannot further, and the
evil things present cannot hinder our eternal happiness: We are apt either to
be pleased or distasted, with the various objects and occurrences we meet
withal, according as they serve or cross our end. He that has made God his
end, and Eternal Glory his end, does value all things according to their
tendency thitherward; as any thing hinders or helps heavenward, so is it
regarded: It Is a sign thou have made thy flesh thy end, when flesh-pleasing
objects and courses are the taking things with thee, and every thing is a cross
that touches upon thy fleshly interest: what is a furtherance to thy soul, thou
can want it; what is an hindrance to thy soul, thou can bear it, and find
no trouble; but what serves or disserves thy flesh, these are the things that
move thee: Let such souls never talk of making God their end. If God be your
end indeed, if you be for heaven in earnest, it is what will please God, and
what leads heavenwards that are the only considerable things.

Now by Faith we understand that the things of the world, in themselves, make
neither one way nor other as to our future happiness: The good things of the
world cannot further our happiness; there is no man the nearer heaven for being
rich or honorable; the Palaces of Princes are not the porch to glory: Believe
it Christians, to be rich in this world, and to be rich toward God, are two
things; the favor of Princes is no mark of divine honor, nor medium to it;
the pleasures of the flesh are not of kin to the pleasures above, nor
subservient to them. These things may undo us, our gold may sink us, we may
break our necks from our high mountains; our temporal prosperities and
advantages may shut us out from the everlasting Kingdom, Matthew. 19. may be the
death and damnation of souls, (and do they not often prove so) but never their
salvation.

And so on the other side, The troubles and afflictions of this world cannot
hinder or happiness. Faith sees as open and near a way to heaven, from the
dunghill, as from the Pinnacle of the Temple; from the Prison, as from the
Palace; from the Cross, as from the Crown: The gate of heaven shall never be
shut against any, because he is poor or persecuted; it is not a Purple Robe, or
a Gold Ring, that shall procure entrance, nor are they rags, or sores, or
reproaches that shall shut the door. We read Jam. 2. 2, 3. that there was such
a practice among men; If any one come into [your] assembly with a gold ring, or
goodly apparel, or in a poor habit and vile raiment, they were entertained
thereafter; they had their different respect, according to the pomp of the one,
or the poverty of the other; But 'will not be so in the great Assembly above.

'Twill never be demanded, when you knock for entrance into glory, what Estate
have you gotten in the world? in what honor and grandieur did you live? where
are your Bags and your Barns, your Mansions and Manors, that you have gotten?
Will the Lord, think you, ever say to him that comes and knocks, and calls,
Lord, Lord, open to me; will he ever say, No friend, you are a poor man; here is
no place for you? you were so greedy after grace and holiness, that you never
minded the getting an estate in the world; you have wasted your time in
reading, and praying, and fasting; you have wasted your Estate, in giving and
lending, in feeding and clothing others; you are a poor man, away from me,
here is no place for thee; will the Lord ever say thus at last?

Men covet, and labor, and hoard up these earthly things, as if this were the
condition of everlasting blessedness, as if their souls and eternal life lay on
them* men shift and shun affliction, as if these were the way to the Pit: But
Faith sees, that these things will not be so: No man shall be disowned because
he bears in his body the marks of the Lord Jesus. Well may the Cross be a
Ladder by which we may ascend into glory, but it shall never be a clog to
detain us from ascending.

These things being by Faith understood, the world looses a believers heart;
the good below he can spare, and the evil below he will not fear.

There Is the same ground why believers sit so loose from the world, and the
things thereof, as there is, why unbelievers sit so loose from God, and the
things of God.

Carnal men can want the presence and favor of God; can spare Religion, and
the duties and comforts thereof, and never find any miss of them; why so? why,
because these things do not at all serve their design; they can be as rich, and
as great, and as merry, without minding God, or holiness, or any such thing.
And upon a like ground, a Believer can want his ease, or his pleasure, or any
of his outward comforts; why so? why, because these if he had them, would as
little serve his design, as Religion will the Worldlings.

Hearken to me, says Satan, and whatever the world does afford shall be thine:
Why, will this world stand me instead in reference to the world to come? Can my
soul feed upon this earth and ashes? Shall I be ever the better man for being a
rich man? Will these earthly things commend me to God? Is he a respecter of the
rich above the poor, of the honorable above the despised? Is this following
after riches or pleasures thou perswadest me to, Is this my way to life? Avoid
Satan, thou come but to mock me, and beguile me.

4. By Faith we understand, that the design of temptations is to deprive us of
our Inheritance. A Believer knows, that the Devil owes him no good will, how
fair soever he treats him; he sees that all his promises are cheats, that all
his gifts are bribes, to corrupt us first, and then to destroy us: he marks him
for his mortal Enemy, whose drift is to keep him out of the Paradise of God: he
has learned from the Scriptures, who 'twas that at first thrust him out
thence. This Serpent was he, Genesis 3. and now he has him out, that his work is
to keep him from ever recovering in. And he observes how his particular
temptations do serve his general design, to destroy souls: whatever the voice
is, this is the meaning of every temptation, Thou shall never see God, thou
shall never get to heaven, if I can help it.

Faith understands what use the Devil [hath] made of the world; whither did the
rich man's Purple, and fine linen, and delicious fare lead him? Luke 16. 19.
23. If you had seen him in the state he was in, v. 19. in his gorgeous
apparel, at his voluptuous Table, what carnal heart but would have blessed
him? O this is an happy man! but where do you find him v. 23. Oh how sadly is
the Scene changed; Behold this brave Gallant in hell torments. A Believer would
have seen him in hell in his first view; whilst in the midst of all his
Gallantry and Gluttony.

Psa. 73. 17. When I went into the Sanctuary, I saw the end of these men. How
was it with them when he saw their end? where were they? why in the midst of
all their prosperity, in the height of their pride, in the heat of their lust,
in the heaps of their wealth; fat and flourishing, as full of mirth and jollity
as their hearts could wish, and out of all fear of a fall; even then he sees
their end, in their very noontide he espied their night: Where shall we have
you a few hours hence?

But what end was it he saw these men would come to? v. 18. Thou have set them
in slippery places, thou castest them down to destruction; how are they brought
to desolation in a moment? that is the end he saw was hastening upon them,
Desolation and Destruction.

But how came he so soon to see their end? I went into the Sanctuary, there I
understood their end. When I consulted with God about it, when I left
consulting with Sense, and consulted with Faith about it, then I understood,
how matters were like to go with them.

Believers, while they consult with flesh and blood, are to apt to be envious
at the foolish, to fret themselves at the ungodly, whose way does prosper, and
to call the proud happy: yea and to murmr and think hardly of the Lord, who
suffers his enemies to eat up the fat and drink the sweet, and feeds his people
with hunger and thirst. I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity
of the wicked.

But when they come to understand themselves, what the meaning of all this
plenty and prosperity of the ungodly is, and where it lays them at last, no
more envy then; much good may do them with all their glory and greatness; by
that the fruit of all their doings comes up, they will pay for all their pleasure
dearly enough.

Christians, do ye see the proud insulting oppressing ruffling world? do you
see the vile of the earth scrambling for wealth, climbing up to honor,
dividing the spoils and sharing among themselves the preferments and pleasures
of the world? beware you envy them not. Look a little farther, and you will see
no matter of envy but of pity and praise. Pity over them, who are but fatting
for the slaughter; and praise on the behalf of your selves, that you Souls are
not gathered with them. But this by the way.

Faith understands from those many instances it finds in Scripture what use the
Devil has made of the world; what mischiefs and ruins he has hereby brought
on Souls; and when this is understood, then sure its bewitching face
notwithstanding all its paint, will not look so beautiful and amiable.

5. Faith makes experimental and fuller discoveries of the glory of that
inheritance the Soul has pitchd upon. As I said before, there is no way
possible to divide the heart from this world, till you can show it a better:
that's the voice of every heart, which is said, Psalm. 4. 6. to be the voice of
the worldlings heart, Who will show us any good? and whatsoever it finds and
apprehends to be good, that it graspes, and will hold till an higher good come
in sight.

This world is apprehended to be the worldlings good; and it is the best he
knows; and he must be bought out of it, ere he will let it go; he must be
bought out of his house, bought out of his livings and pleasures, by something
that is, or is apprehended to be a valuable price at least, ere he will quit
what he has. Its vain to persuade the rich to voluntary poverty, unless you can
present him with a reward that will compensate his loss. All the arguments in
the world, from the unsufficiency, instability, vanity, vexation in these
earthly things, will be easily answered. But where shall I have better? better
half a loaf then no bread, a short meal is better then starving the heart will
not let go this world but upon the discovery of a better.

And according to the degree of the manifestation of those better things above,
so will there be more or less an abatement of our affection to things below. A
little light from Heaven will make the world look dim; and as the Sun rises
higher, all our stars creep into darkness: at the first entrance of God upon
the Soul, the world looses the place, as was said before; and its thrust lower
and and lower still as God rises higher, till at length it be brought quite
underfoot.

Its impossible that God and the world should be intensely loved together: that
both should be our God, our end, and chiefest good, is a contradiction; Its
irrational for any to conclude that they have any great respect for God, who
are strongly affected to the world. Many professors of religion may be
convinced, that their religion is vain, by this, that to what ever height it
seems to be raised its still overtop'd by their earthly mindedness. 1 John 2.
15. If any man love the world (intensely, chiefly) the love of the Father is
not in him.

Never talk of Christianity till you cease to be worldings, and never look to
be less worldlings, till you understand better what Heaven is.

Faith in its first entrance into the Soul brings this tidings, that God is
better then the world; and according as it grows higher so is its testimony to
this truth, more clear and full. As the Apostle says concerning the
righteousness of God, Romans 1. 17. so is it true of his Goodness, kindness,
mercy, alsufficiency; the goodness and kindness of God is revealed from faith
to faith: that is, according as faith grows, so is God and all the excellencies
of his glorious name more known. Every cubit added to the stature of our faith,
is a new beam of light sprung forth from the face of God: and God known is
Heaven known; our blessedness, our inheritance known; God is our inheritance.

Faith, as was said before is the good Spy Number. 13. sent forth to view the
land of promise. The two Generals, Christ and Satan, have each of them their
Spy, which they send forth. Christ's Spy is Faith, the Devils Spy is Sense.
The Devil will be sending forth his Spy; Sense must go and view the
inheritance of the Saints. But this being shortsighted, and not able to travail
far, must take up all its tidings upon hearesay; and finding no good report
amongst all its acquaintance, (sensual men will never speak well of the things
of God) it hereupon returns with an evil report; Its a dark land, and a dry and
barren land; there is nothing of all that thou love to be found in it, and it
is uncertain whether there be any such land or no: everlasting joy and rest are
represented as fancies and conceits, to carnal hearts. Its better here, here
are houses and lands and pleasures, we know there are, we see there are, but
what there is in the other world, is altogether dark and uncertain to us.

Beloved, has your sense never dealt thus by you? what apprehensions have you
of the glory to come? have not your blind senses disparaged and disgraced the
things of the Kingdom of God to you. You take every thing to be as sense
Judges it; and what is the Judgment of sense, of these glorious things? It
speaks highly of things temporal; this world is good, a land flowing with milk
and honey; But what says it concerning things eternal? Are none of you the men
and women, whose carnal hearts have told you, and you have believed them, that
it is uncertain whether there be an Heaven or no; or if there be, yet the
happiness of it is so much unknown, that if you might, it would be more to your
content, to live your eternity among these sheep and oxen, in these gardens and
orchards, in the possession of your earthly delights and pleasures, then ever
to be carried hence to that unknown world?

Your opinions of these higher things, we may guess at, by the care you take
about them.

What care is there taken about the things of God? what is there a doing, in
your houses, in your closets or any where about these matters? Have you taken
up any design for Heaven? are you taking any effectual course for eternal
blessedness? Are you as hearty and serious in seeking God as in seeking this
world? whilst your hearts are so hot and so zealous and busy, in pursuing
things temporal, is it not, upon the matter, indifferent to you whether you do
any thing or no, or how you do it, in seeking the Kingdom of God? do you pray
and labor and watch for your Souls, with as good a will as ever you did work
for your living? do you hunger and thirst after the knowledge and grace of God,
after a part in Christ, after the pardon of your sins, as ever you do after
your appointed food?

What enquiries do you make? How is it with me? what evidences have I for
Heaven? have I any right to the tree of life? Is there no fear I may fall short
of the rest, and be shut out of the Kingdom of God? how may I know whether
Christ be mine or no? Consider are there any such enquiries? no no, your sense
has so much disparaged things to come, that they are to you, even as if they
were hardly worth the inquiring after.

But now Faith is the good Spy, that makes a good report of that Holy Land: it
makes more diligent search after the riches of it, and finds out its hidden
treasures, and then speaks as it finds: faith has a glass, wherein it can
behold, and whereby it does reveal to the Soul, the glory of God. The gospel is
its glass, 2 Cor. 3. 18. the promises are its glass, those great and precious
promises, 2 Pet. 1. The promises are the deeds and conveyances by which this
inheritance is made over. Now as among men, in their Deeds. there is a recital
of all the particulars made over by them: The houses, the lands, the gardens,
the orchards, the rivers, the royalties and all the immunities belonging
thereto; so is it here, the promises are a Map or Survey of Heaven; and Faith
is often looking into these deeds, reading over the writings, and thence
understands what a glorious purchase it has.

Nay more, Faith brings down some of the fruits of this good land; this good
Spy comes in laden with some clusters from Canaan.

A believer that walks with God, God lets fall to him now and then some
handfuls of that harvest, some drops of that vintage, which is ripening for him
above: what are those beams of divine light, that sense of divine love, those
intimations of divine acceptance, those communications of the divine image, in
the increases of holiness and righteousness, that joy of faith, and peace in
believing, what are these, but a Specimen of Heaven, the first fruits of glory?

By Faith the Kingdom of Heaven is within us: there is God within us, and Christ
within us, and glory within us. Those believers that live in the power of Faith
and holiness, need not travail far in search for Heaven, it is but looking inward
and there they may find it; say not who shall ascend, in search for Heaven, it is
in thine heart. Sinners need not go down to the deep, to search for Hell,
there is an Hell within them? The filth and stench of Hell, in their vile
affections; the smoke and flames of Hell, in their reeking and burning lusts;
the darkness of Hell, in their darkened and blinded minds; and sometimes the
torments of Hell, in the anguish of their guilty and self revenging
consciences. And as sinners may find an hell, so believers an heaven in the
heart; an heaven of light, an heaven of love, and joy, and praise: Thus it is
with some, and thus it might be with all, were we stronger in Faith.

Oh what do we lose by living thus by Sense, when we might live by Faith! how
have our carnal hearts, by consuming and spinning out our days in sloth and
idleness, sticking at the labor of duty, whining under difficulties, shrinking
from sufferings, indulging to our ease, and our pleasure, and liberties; how
have our carnal hearts robbed us of the life of God, the pleasures of Angels,
the joys of the Upper Region, and left us little more of Christianity, then its
wounds and bruises, its mournings and complainings, its sighs and sorrows! Oh
foolish hearts, that consult so unwisely for our selves; that choose rather to
live in Brakes, among these briars and thorns, then among the Beds of Spices;
that will rather laze it in a Wilderness, then get us up to the Garden of the
Lord:

The life of Faith is an heavenly life. The life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18. though
Faith shall never come into heaven, it self, yet thither it translates our
hearts. It came down from heaven; it is the gift of God; and though it must not
return thither ('it is love not Faith that shall dwell before the Throne of God)
yet thither it raises those hearts in which it lives.

Though it may not dwell there hereafter (Faith shall then be lost in sight)
yet now its traveling thither, going and returning every day and hour.

Phil. 3. 20. Our conversation is in heaven; there is all our business: where
should a Christian be? where does he live, but where his business lies? A
Believer that had heretofore so many things to do, dividing his heart and time,
has now cast all his business into one, has brought all his business near his
home; he has nothing to do abroad in the Tents of wickedness, in the Camps of
the Uncircumcised; he has done with serving flesh and lusts, and times, and
tables, and carcasses; here his whole work did lie, but no more of these now,
they must be all laid aside, or at least made to come and serve with him in his
higher business: God and glory, the loving, and praising, and serving, and
securing God to his soul, is all he has to do, Phil. 3. 13. This one thing I
do, forgetting that which is behind, and reaching forth to that which is
before: I press to the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God, in
Christ Jesus our Lord. These lower things, his outward privileges, hopes and
advantages, were once the things before him; but he is now gotten beyond, and
has left them all behind him; not only his Jewish privilege, whereof he had
boasted, but much more all earthly things; he has cast off these weights, and
is now flying upon the wing of Faith, ascending in flames of love, winding up
his soul by constant labor, above this dung and darkness, to the Regions of
light and glory: This is his business.

And hence is his blessedness; heaven is his work and his meat, his labor and
his hire; he will know nothing for a blessing, or a comfort, but what his Faith
brings him down from above.

Why art thou cast down O my soul? why art thou so disquieted within me? Bid
him, Hope in God; tell him, thou shall yet praise him, who is the light of thy
countenance, and thy God; and this will comfort him.

Say to him while you will, Man be of good comfort, the fig tree blossoms, the
labor of the Olive will not fail; there is fruit in the Vines, there are
Flocks in the Folds, there are Herds in the Stalls, comfort thine heart, what
would thou have more? And how little will this ease him?

Oh where is my God? how is it with my soul? what tidings from above? have I a
treasure there? does God smile? what tidings from within? Is it peace there?
does my soul prosper? Is there grace there? is truth in my inward parts? this
is good news; Come in thou blessed of the Lord, thou come with good tidings;
this shall comfort me.

This is the life of Faith; a conversation in heaven: Thus we should, and thus
we might live more then we do; but I doubt I have been here in telling you a
Mystery, whereof the most of us have but little experimental understanding.

Christians, what acquaintance have you with this life of God? Is this your
business, heavenly work? are these your comforts, heavenly supports? we are yet
carnal, and walk as men: Oh this earth, earth, how does it hang on our spirits;
we live as if there were a middle Region betwixt heaven and earth; a middle
state betwixt Faith and unbelief: Some little we have attained of this heavenly
life, and blessed be the Lord for any thing* but oh how little is it?

Friends, wonder not that you see no more of the Divine Glory, conclude not
that there is no more to be seen; put it to the proof, live more with God, more
purely, more closely, more constantly with him; live in the daily exercise of
Faith, and you will get the sight of other manner of glorious things then can
be told you.

What Is the reason that unbelievers are so wholly in the dark, and can see
nothing of God, no more then they can despise and laugh to scorn? O it is
because they come not near where God is; they are alienated from the life of
God; their whole business is in the heart of the earth; here they dwell, and
here is their whole converse.

Speak ye unbelievers, where dwell ye? what is your Occupation? where is your
Conversation? far enough from heaven sure, where ever it be.

Speak ye proud and haughty ones, where is your Conversation? our Conversation
is in the air, we feed on wind, live upon breath; honor and applause is all we
work for, and live upon.

Speak ye Covetous, where is your Conversation? our Conversation is in the
earth; we feed upon dust and ashes, and in these our business lies.

Speak ye contentious quarrelsome ones, where is your Conversation? our
Conversation is in the fire; in storms and tempests.

Speak ye voluptuous Sensualists, where is your Conversation? our Conversation
is in the mud and mire, in lasciviousness, wantonness, and all manner of filthy
lusts.

Speak ye Ranters, Ruffians, Swearers, Cursers, Blasphemers, where is your
Conversation? our Conversation is in Hell, in the Alehouse, the Tavern, the
Brothel-house; we live where Satan's Throne is, in the very Suburbs of Hell.

Oh what a difference has Faith put betwixt Believers and all others in the
world! whilst they only live the life of God, all others live the life of
Bruits or Devils.

Oh bless God for Faith; even ye of little Faith: at its first entrance it
gives your soul a lift from heaven to earth. There it lists your names, no
longer men of this world, but henceforth, Citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God; there it has laid you up an Inheritance, and thence it brings
you your maintenance: thither it turns your eyes and all your streams; it shows
you what you have there, and by those beams it draws you up thither. Those to
whom it shows the least of that glory, it shows enough to disgrace the glory of
the world; and as this Sun-light grows, so does all the beauty of the world
fade, and vanish out of sight.

By Faith our conversation is in heaven. Now by how much the more our
conversation is in heaven, by so much the more our hearts are there; by how
much the more our hearts are in heaven, by so much the less on earth; and when
once the world has lost our love, it has lost its power over us.

1. By how much the more our conversation is in heaven, by so much the more our
hearts and affections are there; we ordinarily love to be where we use to be.
No such damp grows upon affection, as by distance and estrangement: when we
loose our acquaintance, we loose our delight in God. Acquaint thy self with
him, and be at peace, Joh 22. 21. Acquaint thy self with him, and be in love;
there wants nothing to fix our affections on heaven, but being better
acquainted there. Intimacy begets dearness.

Do you not love God? it is a sign you have had little to do with him. Is not
your delight in Heaven? it is a sign you are seldom there. Is prayer and holy
meditation and exercising your selves in the Scriptures and attendance on
ordinances, a weariness and altogether unpleasant to you? sure you have little
known what the spirit of Prayer and Communion with God in his word and
ordinances mean: those whose Souls dwell by the wells of salvation, and often
let down the bucket, do taste that the waters thereof are sweet; they shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thine house, and thou shall make them
drink of the rivers of thy pleasures, for with thee is the fountain of life,
Psalm. 36.

Those that walking closely with God, do dwell in the secret of his presence,
under the sweet dewes and influences of his grace; the business of whose life,
is to behold, and love, and serve the Lord, their hearts have found such rest
there, that they can find no rest elsewhere.

2. By how much the more our hearts are in Heaven, by so much the less are they
on earth: worldly professors have all their religion in their mouths, there is
little within, whatever they talk. If any man love the world the love of the
father is not in aim; If any man love the Father, the love of the world ceases.
Heaven and Hell may meet as well as Heaven and Earth, in the same heart: Set
your affections on things above and not on the earth; on both you cannot: your
bodies as easily as your Souls, may dwell in Heaven and Earth together. You use
to say, I cannot be here and there too; no, sure enough you cannot; whilst
your Souls are the inhabitants of this, they are exiles from the other world;
and when they have their dwelling in Heaven, they are but strangers and
Pilgrims on the Earth: this world has lost your hearts when God has gained
them.

3. When once the world has lost our hearts, it has lost its power over us:
who will be enticed by what he hates or slights? God and the world rule, both,
by love. If God has our love, he has the command of all that ever we have: if
we love the world, what can it not do with us? whither can it not lead us? If
the world has lost our love, it were even as good lay down its weapons, and
let us alone: let them follow God, let them be holy, let them to Heaven, their
hearts are gone and there is no holding them back. It may still hang in their
heels, and retard their motion Heavenward, but their hearts being gone, thither
their main course will bend it self.

6. Faith gives assurance of this better inheritance. Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the
subsistence of things hoped for and the evidence of things not seen. It is an
evidence, not only that there is another world, and a better world then this;
and that this better state may be obbtaind; that there is an entrance into the
everlasting Kingdom possible; that these mortals may] be clothed with
immortality; that these corruptibles may put on incorruption; and these poor
worms, that creep on the dust, may get them wings, and fly away hence into
everlasting bliss; but it is also an evidence, that all this [shall] be; that
there shall be a performance of all those glorious things which God has spoken
concerning his Saints. Blessed is he that has believed for there shall be a
performance of all that has been told him. Luke 1. 45.

Faith has taken bond for performance. The Almighty God has bound himself to
us; and lest through unbelief, we should stick at taking his single bond, he
has given security, has brought in his Son and heir, the Lord Jesus Christ to
stand bound with him. Faith has taken this bond; and having it self sealed to
the Articles or conditions on our parts, upon the performance whereof the
inheritance stands sure to us, upon the greatest security that Heaven and Earth
can give; it keeps it by it, and has it ready to produce upon all occasions,
to stop the clamours of unbelief. The Covenant of God, that is our security, The
Almighties bond and articles wherein he has made over all that ever he has,
by an immutable and irrevocable deed to his Saints, Heb. 6. 17, 18.

Nay more, Faith will show a believer his own name in this deed.

If it can but show it self to us, can make it evident, that it is what it is,
the Faith of Gods elect; if it does but once appear that we do sincerely
believe, it therein shows us our names in the promise of God. To say to any one
that knows he believes, to say to him, He that believes shall be saved, is
fully as much, as if it had been said to him by name, Thou O man, even thou
shall be saved; thy name is written in the book of life.

Unbelief will be staggering at the promise, and will call in question all that
the Lord God has said. And when this world comes upon us and tempts us; opens
its pack and shows us its wares, and offers us our choice of whatsoever will
please us; Take it says unbelief, make sure of something; let not go such
penniworths, they may be the best thou art ever like to have. May thou be
rich? may thou live in pleasure and in honor here? Be not such a fool as to
neglect thy self for a conceit of some strange things (thou know not what)
thou may find hereafter. Who can tell what there is in another world? whether
there be any other state of blessedness then what our eyes do see? But grant
there be such an happy state, what may this be to thee? God knows whether ever
thou may be the better for it: when thou have done all thou can, and lost
all thou have, and left thy self a poor and miserable and forlorn wretch, an
abject an exile from all thy comforts and contentments; after all this, thou
may never come to Heaven at last: foolish man loose not a certainty for an
uncertainty, know when thou art well, and keep what thou have; what thou have
thou art sure of; thine house is thine own, thy estate is thine own; thy
friends and thy pleasures and thy liberties, do not thine eyes see them, do
thou not taste that they are good? here thou have something, but what thou may
have heareafter who can tell?

And what can a poor Soul answer to such temptations, that is held under
unbelief? I confess there is no great wisdom in losing certainties for
uncertainties; I see I have something here, and if I were sure it should be so
well with me hereafter, I could be content to venture all I have; to follow
Christ naked, to follow holiness even to bonds imprisonment and death. But what
if there should be no such thing as Heaven, or I should never come there?

But now Faith will reply, what are thy good things, thou countest so sure to
thee? what, but vanity and vexation? but were they better then they are, and
worth what thou countest them, what is the assurance thou have of them? for how
long are they thine? for how many years? for how many days? what thine eye
sees to day, where may it all be by to morrow? or suppose the most thou can,
thou can have but a lease of life in them; when thou die, thy estate dies,
thy pleasures die, thy friends dye to thee; and here is the assurance thou
boastest of; at present thou have something that pleases thee, and may be, they
may last for an hour or two longer, or for a few days more; but to be sure
after a few years at utmost, they will be gone and thou must know them no more.
This is thy assurance.

But is Heaven no more sure then this? Is that enduring substance, like these
transient shadows? can stability be removed, or eternity expire? or if the
doubt be, whether ever thou shall obtain this blessed state, what has God
said? He that beleiveth shall be saved.

Is it uncertain whether God be true? Has God helped me to believe, and
therein told me I shall be saved, and shall I yet question whether I shall or
no?

At least this is sure beyond all contradiction; Heaven [may] be had; thou
shall certainly be saved, if it be not thine own fault; if thou will thou
may; The Gospel is a mockery, if this be not true; it apparently offers life
to all that will, and therefore to thee amongst the rest. Rev. 22. 17. The
Spirit and the bride say come -- and [whosoever will] let him take of the water
of life freely: there is this only uncertainty now remaining, Its a question
whether thou will or not; If thou will thou may.

Now when a Soul is brought to this, much more when a beleiver, understanding
that he beleives, can read his own name in the book of life, then let the world
try its skill: what an hard task will it have before it? Come change thy God
and thy glory for that which profits not; forsake the fountain of living
waters for these broken Cisterns, purchase the pleasures of time with the loss
of Eternity. Come let the other world go: what will thou give me then? why what
ever thine heart desires, of all that thine eyes do see. No, no, deceitful
world, I have better things then these, and I will now use thine own words, I
will not loose a certainty for uncertainties. God is mine, but after a few
days whose shall these things be, that thou offerest me? I mean not to be so
put off, as to take mine Heaven on Earth. Let this earth be my prison, my
purgatory, my Hell rather then my Heaven; my life is bought into that eternal
inheritance reserved in Heaven for me and I will not sell mine inheritance.

V. The Conquest of Faith over this conflicting world, this I shall dispatch in
showing, 1. How far forth, or in what sense every believer has overcome the
world. 2. Wherein the victory stands.


1. How far forth or in what sense, every believer has overcome the world,
this in 4 particulars.

1. He is actually interess'd in Christ's victory. 2. He is radically endued
with Christ's conquering power. 3. He has actually broken the head design of
the world. 4. He is effectually marching on, in the pursuit of the victory.
1. He is actually interess'd in Christ's victory: he has overcome in capite: a
believer is in Christ, and as such, whatsoever Christ has done, as redeemer of
the world, is his and for him, Joh. 16. 33. aforementioned; Be ye of good
comfort, I have overcome the world. Christ's victory is a believers security. [I
have overcome, be ye of good comfort] why what comfort is that to us? If an
unbeliever had asked, what comfort is that to me? it must have been answered,
none at all, whilst thou continuest in unbelief; thou have no part in Christ,
nor art like to reap any profit by him? while he is a conqueror thou art a
captive still; its lusts fetter thee, its thorns choke thee, its pollutions
cleave to thee; thou art at present, and thou may dye a worldling, and from
this temporal, it may carry thee down to an eternal bondage.

But if it be asked, what comfort is it to a believer, that Christ has
overcome? its great comfort. In him thou have overcome; his victory is thy
victory; Christ says to thee, not only as Joh. 14. 19. because I live ye
[shall] live also; because I have overcome ye [shall] overcome; but because I
have overcome ye [have] overcome. 1 John 4. 4. ye are of God little children
and [have] overcome.

2. He is radically endued with Christ's conquering power: he has overcome in
causa: he has that within him which will be the death of his enemies, he is
not only interess'd in Christ, and what he has done; but Christ is in him, the
spirit of Christ, which is the power of the living God, is in him. He that has
not the Spirit of Christ is none of his. Romans 8. 9. The same power by which
Christ overcame, is already communicated to the Soul of a believer: and thence
may he be said, to have already conquered, because he has received that spirit
of power, which will certainly work for him the victory.

What can a living child, new born do? He is as weak as water; he cannot speak,
he cannot stand, he cannot conquer a flea: but what may not this child do, when
he is grown up? there is the spirit of a man in him, there is a Soul in him,
which in time will do wondrous things: a dead child, neither can do any thing,
neither is there hope that ever he should; but a living child has a soul, has
that within him that in time will do much.

How small are the appearances of the Saints in the Infancy of their New Birth?
how low are their hopes, that they should ever come to any thing? it is a weak
Enemy indeed, and a weak assault, that is not too strong for them: a little
wind may blow away a small twig; but despise not this day of small things,
consider their Root, the Spirit of Christ that is in them, and thence you may
expect great things.

Are there any of you that are grown Christians, strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might? that are able for service, and mighty for sufferings; that
can stand against the temptations of Satan, and endure the contradictions of
sinners, and not be weary and faint in your minds? yet look back, and consider
what you were in your original; time was when it was as low water with you as
with others, when you were as weary and weak as the weakest: But behold what
that mighty Spirit that was in you is at length grown up to, the same spirit is
in every newborn Saint.

What contemptible things were Joshua, and Gideon, and Sampson, and David, when
they were children? but when they were grown, and the Spirit of the living God
came upon them, what Victories did they obtain? the Sons of Anak, the Armies of
the uncircumcised, the great Goliath, were then but children to them.

You that are yet little children; but of little time, and but of little
strength, that are newly begotten by the Gospel, and brought forth into a
tempestuous world; let not the greatness of your work, nor the potence of your
enemies, nor those astonishing tempests that meet you at the threshold of
Christianity, discourage or dismay you, as weak as you are, as many fears and
faintings as you are surprised by, as many doubts as arise in your hearts, what
shall I do? how shall I stand? how shall I go through? yet comfort your hearts;
greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world: ye are of God
little children, and [have] overcome them.

Mat. 13. 31, 32. The Kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of Mustard Seed,
which is indeed the least among seeds, but when it is grown is the greatest
among herbs. This greatest of herbs, is virtually in this smallest of seeds:
Who knows what a little grace may grow to? what is there in that bitter root of
sin? all those monstrous wickednesses, and prodigious villainies which infest
this earth, and fill up hell; all the drunkennesses, adulteries, murders,
rapines, and most barbarous inhumanities, which are the plague of this earth,
and the fuel of that Furnace; they all lie in that little bitter root, Jam. 1.
15. And so on the other side, all the beauty and glory of holiness, all the
powers, victories and triumphs over sin, the world, and the devil, are
seminally contained in the first grace begotten in the heart: The whole Harvest
of Glory is in the least seed of grace: The least drop from the Fountain of
Life, is a Well of water springing up to life eternal, Joh. 4. 14.

Beloved, are you in Christ? has the dayspring from on high visited you? is
the Spirit of the living God within you? then whatever your doubts,
difficulties, hazards, temptations, or weaknesses are, the victory has already
passed on your side. Death where is thy sting? sin, devil, world, where is thy
victory? Here are thy Armies, here is thy power, here are thy policies, thy
fury, thy fawnings, on every hand; before us, behind us, on the right hand, and
on the left; here are thy Armies, but where is thy victory? Thanks be to God
that has given [us] the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ: Thanks be to
God who makes us always to triumph in Christ Jesus; from the first time, in
the worst time, when we are hardliest bestead, hotliest pursued, nearest to a
fall, yea even when we fall, (for though we fall we shall rise again) thanks be
to God, which causes us always, even when we despair in our selves, to
triumph in Christ Jesus.

3. He has broken the Head design of the world: this is, to keep Christ and
the soul apart, to keep the soul from ever coming to Christ. Herein, as has
been said already, stands the deadly enmity of the world against souls, in
holding them under its dominion, and thereby under the damnation of hell. When
we are once come over to Christ, this great design is broken; when we are
conquered, we are Conquerours. A soul subdued unto the Lord, is the world
conquered to the soul: every Convert to Christ is a Captive set at liberty, a
soul broken out of prison: that is the word that Christ has to preach, Isa. 49.
9. To say to the prisoners go forth, and to them that are in darkness, show
your selves. And that is the work that Christ has to do, To bring forth the
prisoners out of prison, Isa. 42. 7. Every Convert to Christ is a prisoner
broken loose.

It is a sufficient Conviction that thou art a worldling still, that thou art
no Convert to Christ, and it is a sufficient Conviction that thou art no
Convert, if thou be still a worldling: he that is come to Christ is come off
from the world, Joh. 15. 19. and he that is still under the world, is not come
to Christ.

That Is the great contest betwixt Christ and the World, who shall carry the
heart: Come along with me, says Christ, give me thy heart, be my servant, be
my Disciple: No, no, says the World, stay with me, be my servant; or at least,
if thou will not any longer be wholly mine, then it says as the Harlot, be
neither his nor mine, but suffer thy self to be divided; let him take one half,
and let the other half be for me; halt betwixt Christ and the world; keep both
worlds; what hinders, but thou may have thy gains and thy pleasures here, and
yet have Christ too?

When the heart is convinced; that there is no compounding betwixt Christ and
the world, that Christ is the better Master, and that it cannot serve two
Masters, but must necessarily take to the one, and let the other go, and
hereupon yields it self to Christ: Lord I am thy servant, and will follow thee
whatsoever become of the world; whether I sink or swim, want or abound, prosper
or suffer; whatever my condition be here, thine I am, and thee will I love and
serve; when the soul is come to this, there is conversion; there is the Head
design of the world broken.

4. He is effectually marching on in the pursuit of his victory; he is
overcoming: So the word in the Text, he overcomes the world; he has already
gotten the better, and he is pressing on after a total victory; he has his
foot on the neck, and his hand still in the fight.

He keeps his enemy in his eye, and stands upon his guard daily; he dispatches
messengers, his prayers, his sighs, his tears, to fetch down fresh supplies
from above: his prayers speak, his sighs cry, his tears have a tongue, and all
go up with the same message, as the Gibeonites sent to Joshua, Josh. 10. 6.
Slack not thine hand from thy servant, come down to me quickly, save and help
me.

He sets all his graces, his faith, his love, his hope, his patience, in battle
array against it.

He is still making sure the party that the world has within him; keeps lust
under, keeps pride, and covetousness, and sensuality low; that is, more or
less, according as he acts as a Believer.

He secures the strong hold; keeps his heart, keeps his Farms, and his oxen,
and his pleasures, at the greatest distance he can from his heart: he sends his
heart far enough away out of their reach, he conveys it into the other world,
where it dwells, and builds, and plants, and sows, and gathers, and lays up a
better treasure; where it rejoices and recreates it self; where it has better
work, and better company, and better pleasures to wean it from these below; he
lives in the view and contemplation of God, in the Society and Communion of
Saints and Angels, and is so satisfied with the Fountain of Living Waters, that
he be neither thirsty after the waters, nor choked with the mud of these
broken cisterns.

He studies the world more, and comes to a better understanding of it; of its
vanity, of its enmity, of its treachery, power and policy: and the more he
knows it, the more he fears it: the more he knows of God, the more he loves and
thirsts and longs after him; the more he knows of the world, the less he loves,
and the more he fears it. He fears not so much its anger as its kindness: he
fears his worldly pleasures, his carnal friends, his earthly businesses and his
prospering in them: he carries a sense of the danger he is in by them, and a
fear of the snare they may be to him, wherever he goes: whilst he is
necessarily detained and busied here, he carries this fear as his guard to
secure his Soul, whither ever he walks: to his table, to his bed, to his shop,
in his journeys; he feeds with fear and works with fear, and travels with fear,
and trades with fear, lest whilst he is thus necessarily conversant in the
world, he be again entangled with its temptations.

And in this warfare he grows, and gathers strength daily; is more able to
contemn the world, it becomes every day less and less to be a temptation to
him. Time was when, whenever the world came enticing him after it, hearken to
me, mind thy earthly concernments, and thou shall be rich and prosper and
abound; follow Christ and this holiness and twill be thine undoing; time was,
when these were arguments of great weight with him; that could command his
heart, control conscience, conjure his affections, and persuade him to any
thing; but now they come too late, they are scarce temptations to him: his
heart is so set upon the securing his eternal interest, and so transported with
the sense of the importance of that great concernment; those higher things are
so great in his eye, and so much upon his heart, that it seems but a very small
thing to be possessour of all things here, and to make but a small difference
upon his condition, whether he has or wants.

2. Wherein this victory stands: which I shall answer, Negatively. Positively.


1. Negatively, and this in 4. particulars.

1. A believer has not so overcome the world, as to be above all need of the
world: though man lives not by bread only, as Math. 4. Yet he must have bread,
yea and must work for his bread, and therefore must diligently follow his
calling, wherein he may provide things honest; provide him an honest livelihood.

2. Not so but that he is still free to use the world in his need: every
creature of God is good, good for use, being sanctified by the word of God and
Prayer. 1 Timothy 4. 4. Both necessaries and the abundance of the things of this
life, are a blessing from God; and the free use of them, so far as to fit us
for service, is not only lawful but a duty; that self denial, that
over-sparing use of the creatures, which impaires our strength, or dulls our
Spirits, is not a virtue, but usually, is either the fruit of a melancholique
distemper, or a temptation.

3. Not so, as to be for ever freed from all noxious temptations of the world:
This world is an enemy still, and this enemy will be still fighting against the
Soul. A Christian will never be such a conqueror here, but he must still keep
on his armor, and stand upon his guard; hereafter, when the victory shall be
complete, he shall sit down. Rev. 3. 21. To him that overcomes will I give to
[sit] with me in my throne: at present we must: stand, Ephesians. 6. 13. And having
done all to stand stand upon our watch, stand to our arms; but hereafter we
shall sit down: we are yet in our march with our Lord, in his Chariot of war;
for our place in his triumphal Chariot, for sitting down with him in the
throne, we must wait till hereafter.

4. Not so, as to be for ever free from all surprisals, and falls by these
temptations. The world will assault us, and in these assaults too often gets
the better of us: though it cannot command us quite back from Christ, yet it
may turn us aside, and much hinder us in our following of him; though it cannot
now destroy us, yet it may distract and disturb us; though it cannot recover
its absolute dominion over us, yet it may lay our feet again in the Stocks. We
may love it too much, and fear it too much, and mind it too much, and follow it
too hard, and our souls may become great loosers by it: God may be forgotten,
Souls may be neglected, Conscience may be defiled, Duties omitted or shuffled
over, and all sense of Eternity for a time, buried in an heap of worldly cares
or delights. We have experience enough to give in evidence to this, and much
more.

2. Positively; and thus our victory over the world stands, in our having
attained, 1. A power to possess the things of the world, without placing our
happiness in them. 2. A power to manage our worldly affairs, without the
prejudice of our Souls. 3. A power to use this worlds good things, to their
proper ends. 4. A power to want this worlds good things, and bear the worlds
evil things; and to keep our hearts and our way, whether we prosper or suffer.
5. A willingness to be gone from this, and to take our flight to the other
world.


1. Victory over the world stands in our having attained to a power to possess
the things of the world, without placing our happiness in them. The Supremacy
of the world is founded, in its apprehended sufficiency, to bless us and make
us happy: Whilst we hold it our treasure, we resign our selves to it as our
Governor, Mat. 6. 21. Where the treasure is, there the heart will be also. The
heart will never dwell in, or serve this world, when it has chosen another
treasure; the world can never hold the dominion of a Lord, longer then it can
hold the reputation of our God. The soul will not be governed or commanded by
it, unless it be content to take it as its reward; when the heart has said to
the Lord, Thou art my portion, it can say to the world, Stand thou as my
footstool: when we neither promise our selves contentment in our expectations,
nor feel our selves at rest in our possessions of the world; when the heart is
fixed on an higher good, and so strongly working upward, that it will not be
detained from the pursuit of it, by any thing it either has or hopes for here,
then the world is vanquished.

Now in this is included,

1. Our making God our happiness. Its vain for any man to say or think, the
world is not, who cannot truly say, The Lord is my happiness and Heritage. Its
natural to man to desire happiness, and to pitch some where or other, where he
hopes it is to be had: what he apprehends to be the best of all he knows, most
suitable and most satisfactory to his desire and appetite, there he fastens.

Worldly men, that know no better, promise to themselves a worldly happiness,
and here they fix; and it is impossible for them to loosen hence, till they
discover and close with some higher good; till God comes in, the World will not
out. The Psalmist could never but have envied, and Idolized the portion, and
prosperity of the ungodly, had not God been his portion. First, he must say,
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and then he can add, There Is none in earth that
I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73.

2. The due limiting our desires after, and moderating our delights in the
things of this world; and a subordination of them all to our great end. If the
world be not our happiness, we shall love it and seek it thereafter. The world,
if it be any thing to us, it must be either our end, or our means; if God be
our portion, he is our end; if God be our end, the world ceases to be such; two
last ends no man can have, till he have two souls; if the world be not our end,
it must be either our means, or nothing to us.

Our desires and delights are proportionable to our conceits of, and our
expectations from the objects of them: that which is apprehended, and accepted
as our end, is desired accordingly, has the stream and strength of the soul
running out after it; there it desires and loves without limit: that which is
apprehended only as a means, is so far only amiable and desired, as it
subserves our end. When ever the world ceases to be accounted our happiness, it
will necessarily be judged only as a means to it; and thence will follow this
limiting our worldly desires, and moderating of our worldly delights; we shall
desire them no farther, nor delight in them otherwise, then as they are
conducible to God.

2. Victory over the world, stands in a power to manage our worldly affairs
and businesses, without the prejudice of our souls. Psalm. 112. 5. He will guide
his affairs with discretion: and his discretion herein appears:

1. That in the multitudes of the thoughts he has in his heart, and the
businesses he has in his hand, he has still an eye to the main. He Is a
discreet man that rightly understands, and duly minds his great concernment:
the world must be minded, the Plough must be followed, the seed must be sown,
the Flocks must be kept, the Oxen and the Asses must be cared for; But what is
the world to my soul? what is my food to my life? this must be chiefly looked
to, that I perish not, that I run not upon an eternal undoing, that my soul may
live, and it may be well with me hereafter; I must first seek the Kingdom of
God, and then let other things be minded as they may. He that said, Be diligent
to know the state of thy flocks, and to look well to thy herds, Prove. 27. 23.
said also with an Emphasis, Deuteronomy. 4. 9. Only take heed to thy self, and keep
thy soul diligently; above all keeping keep thy heart, Prove. 4. 23. And
therefore to this he has a most special eye; his eye looks most inwards; its
well with me without, or whether it be or no, how is it within? how goes the
work of Faith and Repentance on? how goes the work of Mortification and
Sanctification on? here he bestows his special labor, in working out his
salvation, in laying up treasure in heaven. I shall never count my self to
prosper, whilst my soul prospers not; I shall never count my self a good
husband, whilst mine own Vineyard has not been kept; and I shall never count
my self poor, while I am growing rich unto God; I shall never count my self an
ill husband, whilst I have been wise and busy for Eternity.

2. That to this end, he overcharges not; pulls no more of business upon him,
then he can go through with, without neglecting his soul; though he must employ
himself, yet he will not entangle himself in the affairs of this life, 2 Timothy
2. 4.

His Lord has given him fair warning, Luke 21. 34. Take heed lest at any time
your hearts be overcharged with the cares of this life; and he is willing to
take the warning: He Is wary how he undertakes more business then God calls him
to; if God put him upon a more busy life, and lays on a greater load of work
or care upon him, he cheerfully sets his shoulders to it, knowing that where
God sets him on work, he will be with him in the work, and help him out; but he
would have no more to do, then God sets him about.

Christians, besides the Call of God, there are too often other Masters call us
to work: it is not seldom, that men's lusts set them on work; as their lusts
call them off from work, call them to play, or to sleep, or to be idle; so
sometimes also men's lusts call them to work. Some men's pride sets them on work;
many an hard days work they have, to get something to maintain it: Some men's
prodigality sets them on work, that they may have to spend on their throats,
their bellies or companions; but most of all, men's covetousness sets them on
work; this is an hard and cruel Master; oh what a labourious weary life do such
men live? their life is a mere drudgery, rising early, going to bed late,
eating the bread of carefulness. How many irons has the covetous man in the
fire? how many cares? how many projects is he ever laden withal? he never
rests, his hands are ever full, his thoughts are ever busy; whatever he has
done or gotten already, yet there is still more work coming in, more load laying
on; the other house, or the other field is in his eye; the other groat, or the other penny
more to be gotten: the Ephah is not yet full, his large heart, that daughter of
the Horse-leech, is still a crying upon him; Get, get; Gather, gather.

But whilst thou have been so busy here and there, what is done for thy soul?
how does that work prosper? what trade has been driven for Eternity? O the Lord
forgive me, I never thought of that; I had so many other things to do, that I
had no time to mind it.

But who set thee on work about these other things? who has hired thee? oh my
necessities have hired me; my back, and my belly, and the necessities of my
family; God has set me on work. I but consider, art thou not mistaken? it may
be it is the Devil that has set thee on work, thy pride, or thy covetousness,
that has put thee upon this busy life all the while.

But now a Christian resolves, I will hearken what the Lord God will speak;
when he says go, I will go; when he says do this, I will do it; I will have
nothing to do, but what I may answer for it; this is that which the Lord would
have done: God says, Look diligently to thy soul, Deuteronomy. 4. 9. God says, What
will it profit a man to win the whole world, and to loose his own soul? Matthew.
16. 26. God says, Lay up in store for thy self a good foundation against the
time to come. Provide thee bags that wax not old, a treasure in heaven that
fails not. God says, Mat. 6. 33. First seek the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto thee. God never said,
first seek food and raiment, and the Kingdom of heaven shall be added to thee;
Christ shall be added, righteousness shall be added, salvation shall be added
to thee; but first make sure the principal, and the appurtenances shall be cast
in.

And hereupon, a Christian will do accordingly, will look to the main, whatever
become of any thing else; and will not engage further in any other affairs,
then will consist with the securing his great concernment: whatever business he
has, he must have room for duty; he must have his praying times, and reading
times, and hearing times; he must have his daily seasons for special converse
with God, for communing with his own heart; he must duly set his watch, and
walk the rounds, through his thoughts, affections, conscience, and all the
powers of his soul; and finding so much work, and of so great consequence of
this kind, whatever wants, this must have his daily attendance.

I must have bread, I must have clothes, I must not starve? I, and I must have
Christ, I must have grace: whether I have bread or no, clothes or no, whether I
starve or no, I must not be damned; a praying time is more necessary then an
eating, or drinking, or sleeping time, and therefore much more then a working
time.

It Is not the least part of a Christians Victory over the world, to have the
command of himself in his lawful affairs and businesses. In licitis perimus
omnes. When he has such power over himself, that he can assign to every thing
their proper places, measures and seasons, then he is Conqueror.

Christians, how sadly does this speak concerning many of you? what say you,
Conquerours or Captives? Let your care of duty speak. Do not your oppressed and
curtailed duties cry out, We are beaten, we are beaten! we are beaten out of
the field: we are not regarded when the world has any work to be done: Is this
your care of the main? Believe it Brethren, when business gets the upperhand of
duty, the world has gotten the upperhand of the soul.

Consider therefore, how is it with you? Do you allow duties their proper time
and place? Do you first seek the Kingdom of God? Is the world made to give
place to prayer, or is prayer ordinarily made to give place to the world?

Do you set your times for daily duty? and do you allow sufficient time? do you
not put the Lord off with short and hasty duties, and then tell him, Lord, this
is all the time I can spare thee; Soul, this is all the time I can allow thee.
Hasty duties are next to none. Do you allow your souls room to make the best of
their suits? room for enlargement and importunity, or are they not mostly
forced to shuffle over and shut up, almost as soon as they have begun.

Is there not too great a fault among Professors, on this account? do not their
businesses borrow of their duties; borrow, but never pay? Conscience, I pray
thee lend me this praying hour? Soul, I pray thee spare me this reading time: I
want time to dispatch my business, hereafter I Will pay it again? How little of
your time must ordinarily serve the turn for your attendance on God; a short
prayer, short meditations are all you will allow, and your souls ordinarily
fare thereafter; you are too much in have to speed well, God will be waited on,
and wrestled with ere he will hear. We read, Genesis 34. 26. when Jacob was
wrestling with God, he held at it so long, that God said, Let me go; enough
Jacob, let me go, for the day breaks; but he resolved, I will not let thee
go, unless thou bless me. But is it not with us the quite contrary? By that we
have been at it a little while, Let me go Lord, I must be gone: Whether thou
hear me or not, whether thou bless me or not, let me go, I am in have, and must
be gone, give me leave quietly to depart, and that shall serve for this time
instead of a blessing.

Oh Brethren, if we would trace our selves into our Closets, and observe our
short stay there, the slight and hasty work we make before the Lord, and our
quick returns we make to the world; sure methinks it should make us say, I am
afraid this world is still too hard for me, I am afraid it has me still under
its dominion; it will not trust me to be long alone with my God, its presently
calling me off; and when it calls once, I must presently take my leave, away I
must. Consider this Brethren, do you allow your selves sufficient time for duty?

If you have appointed your set times, and sufficient time, do you keep your
times? does not the world ordinarily steal away your hours of prayer: when the
time draws nigh for the worship of God, does not the world use to step in, But
I must be first served, my Cattle must be first served, my Customers must be
first served, I have a friend that must be first waited on? and when one
business is dispatched, another falls in, and another, and another, till it be
too late and time to go to bed, and so God and the Soul must wait their time
till to morrow; and when to morrow comes, that is as this day, and much more
busy.

Judge Brethren, whether it be not too ordinarily thus with us, and then tell
me, which do ye think has the greater interest, God or the world?

Prayer is one of our weapons, wherewith we are to maintain the fight against
the world, Ephesians. 6. 18. Exodus 17. 11. When Moses hands are lift up, this
Amalek falls: And can you think the world has you not sure enough, when it can
at pleasure command your weapons out of your hands: or if it leave them with
you, can so blunt their edge, that they are good for nothing?

No man that is a Soldier will lay aside his weapons, but one of these, either
a Conqueror, or a Captive, or a Fool. A Conqueror (whose victory is complete)
needs his Arms no longer; the work is done, the Enemy is fallen, and shall no
more be able to rise. A Captive (who is totally and irrecoverably lost) has no
further use of his Arms; they will now stand him in no stead; it is too late to
fight, the field is lost. He that is yet in the fight, and will lay down his
Arms, is a fool: in laying by his weapons, he gives his enemies the day: he is
a fool, that thinks to stand in the fight, and will not stand to his Arms.

In heaven, when our warfare is accomplished, no more need of praying then; no
more watching, no more fighting, no more exercises of faith and patience then;
the Enemy is under our feet; the triumph is all that then remains; the Robes,
and the Palms, and the Crowns, singing, and shouting, and rejoicing; no more
need of praying and watching.

In Hell, when the captivity is irrecoverable, there is no more use of weapons;
it is too late then, they will stand them in no stead: it is too late to pray, and
watch, and wrestle; the day is lost. The shame the contempt, the prison, the
mill, the dungeon, the torments of their captivity is all that there remains.
Prayer, that men now make to give place to lust and vanity, to laughing or
laboring; God will then make it to give place to cursings, and ravings, and
roarings; to tearing of hairs, and gnawing of tongues, and gnashing of teeth:
you that now count it a trouble and a cumbrance to attend on praying, and
fasting, and such like duties; if you ever fall into that prison, you shall
have your liberty from these burdens; you shall live an eternity of days and
nights, and never be put to the trouble of one Prayer more, of one Sermon more,
of one exercise of religion more: there is an everlasting end of Prayer in
Heaven and Hell.

But now, though the perfect conqueror may, though the perfect captive must,
lay by his weapons, have done with prayer for ever; yet he that is yet in the
fight, is a fool, if he stand not to his arms: either he triumphs before the
victory, or else cares not on which side the victory goes. Thou art a fool with
a witness, that either slightest such a potent enemy, or hold thy self
little concerned in the victory.

May all his cost and labor be spared? can thou stand in thine own strength?
need thou not be beholding to the Lord for his help? or is the help of the
Lord so cheap, as to he had without seeking for: or will any slight seeking now
and then serve? serve thy governor so. Will the world give thee leave to take
sufficient time for seeking God, if thou will not take whether it will or no?

Brethren, learn hence forth, not to put God off with the worlds leavings, but
let the world be content to take Gods leavings: if time fall short for any
thing, see that it be not for your Souls: let God have his daily due, and your
Souls have theirs, whatever go without. Let not the world any longer say, give
place Bible, stand aside Prayer, I have no leisure for you; but let your Souls
daily say, stand aside world, business, trade, I must serve the Lord.

Never look to be other then worldlings, whilst any thing below has so much
power with you, as to keep God and your Souls asunder; to hold you either under
a total neglect, or ordinary remisness in your religious duties: whilst it can
keep you either so busy, or so slothful, that you restrain prayer, it has you
sure enough: if the Devil can but keep you out of your closets, he will not
fear to meet you in the field; he will not doubt your standing on your feet, if
he can but keep you from falling on your knees.

Because there is so much depending on this, both as to the issue of our
conflict, and the evidence of our victory over the world, give me leave to
press you the closer to it, by giving you a short view, of the sum of what I
have here suggested, in these following propositions and advice.

1. The death of the world will never be either compassed or witnessed, but by
the life of religion.

2. The life of religion cannot be maintained, but by keeping up the life of
duties: no prayer no holiness, little prayer and but little holiness. The
vigor of grace is maintained from above; and nothing will come down unless we
often look up.

3. The life of duty will not be kept up, unless there be set and sufficient
time allotted to it: occasional duties will be but short and seldom.

4. Seldom recesses from the world, and sudden returns to it, short and hasty
prayers the Devil will allow us, and the world will be no looser by them.

5. If business, or slothfulness ordinarily get the upper hand of duty,
whatever time be allotted for it, little enough will be bestowed on it. If we
never pray but when we have list or leisure, there will be but little done; the
world will either fill us with work or weary us into sloth. Therefore,

6. Resolve whatever the countermands of the world or Devil, of your busy or
weary Spirits are, to set and keep up your daily duties: if time fall short,
yet let not your Souls fail of their due; be constant, be instant in prayer. If
this counsel be not accepted, I look not that any other of the counsels of God
should prosper with you. Are you worldlings? are you in bondage to your carnal
and earthly hearts? there I look to find you to your dying day, if constant and
instant prayer do not fetch you off.

3. That in the multitude of his businesses he neglect not the Souls of his
Relations: He that neglects his families Souls, sins against his own Soul.

Worldlings hold all they have in the same bondage with themselves; the sons of
these bondmen are seldom suffered to be freemen: like the Scribes and Pharisees,
Math. 23. 13. They neither enter into the kingdom of God themselves, nor suffer
those that would to enter in. Like Pharaohs taskmasters, Exodus 5. 17. Ye are
idle, ye are idle, is their word, when any of theirs will worship God: an hour
spent in prayer or reading, by such as belong to them, is as great a crime, as
so much time wasted in play or idleness: to your work to your work; any work
that is done for God is counted lost to them.

He that fears God would have God served by all his, and never counts himself
served, when God is neglected.

He sees that the education of those that are under him in the knowledge and
worship of God is necessary work and excellent work: a godly family is a
nursery for Heaven: he counts it his best husbandry to be husbanding up such
choice plants, as will afterward be for trees to be here and there
transplanted in the vineyard of the Lord: he would train up a new generation
that may rise up in his room to bear the name of God in their generations;
whereby the Lord may have a seed preserved to show forth his praises from
generation to generation, Genesis 18. 17. I know Abraham that he will command his
children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord.
It may be written over the sayings of the seed of the righteous as Prove. 31. 1.
The words of King Lemuel, the prophecy which his mother taught him: over others
it may be written, not the prophesies but the profaneness, the oaths the lies
the scoffs that his mother taught him; the covetousness and the oppression
that he has learned of his Father.

What Is the reason of that rudeness, and those debaucheries, that Ignorance,
Atheism and Irreligion, that abounds in wordly families: it is all they have been
bred up to; they have learned to be wicked, of Children: the iniquity of their
Fathers covetousness would not allow them time, to teach them better things.

He whose own foot is escaped out of the snare, would not leave any of his in
prison behind him. It Is a vain argument for the Devil to use with such: thou will never thrive, if thou spendest so many thoughts and words and hours about
such matters: thou will if thou take this course bring thy self to a morsel
of bread; and wilt teach all thine the way to the same poverty, and make them
all as bad husbands as thy self: this would do something with earthly minds;
but he that fears God, if it must be, had rather be undone then to preserve or
increase his estate by the murder of Souls. This may be my way to increase my
store; for what is labor without a blessing, and what blessing where God is
not known? this may be my best husbandry for [this] world, but whether it be or
no, God must be served.

Oh what dark and dismal holes are the dwellings of worldlings: their
habitations are full of violence; cruelty and blood lodges in them: they live
by murder and rapine, the blood of Souls, is their meat and drink: the lives
of their Children must be sacrifices to their lust; they buy them livings and
raise them portions out of their own ruin; all the purchases they make for
them, they may call the Potters field, for they are the price of blood: they
will suffer them to run down to Hell, for fear they should leave them beggars
on earth: they will make them too good husbands to be ever good Christians: they
are bondmen themselves, and they sell all theirs for servants to the same
master.

Christians, you that hope you are gotten free, prove that you are so by being
zealous of getting that freedom entailed upon your posterity; leave them no
longer at the brick kiln, but bring them away with you to serve the Lord.

1. Bring them with you before the Lord: lay them often at his feet: pray over
them; Here be my blind (Lord) and my lame, my creeples and my captives. Lord
open their eyes and bring forth these prisoners out of prison: behold the Souls
which thou have given me, here they are before thee, Oh that they might live in
thy sight, let all mine be thine. Have thou delivered thy servant? O let all
these be as the Soul of thy servant: have thou brought me out of bondage, O let
me not leave a Child behind.

2. Bring the Lord to them, let these poor prisoners hear of a redeemer; make
Christ known to them; and that they may accept of his redemption, make them
first known to themselves? Instruct them often, make them to know their sin and
their misery; the dreadful bondage that they are under at present, and the
dreadful pit they are hastening to; and then tell them of that redeemer that is
come out of Zion.

3. Bring them over to the Lord: be an Ambassador for Christ to them; cease
not to warn them to command, persuade beseech them in Christ's stead, till they
consent and be reconciled to God.

Be industrious, be at pains with them: lie at them from day to day; bethink
not your time and labor. And if the world step in and reprove you; this is not
the way to thrive, these hours spent in thy trade or calling would turn thee
and them to more profit, then prove thy self to have broken its yoke from off
thy neck, by turning away thine ear from its suggestions.

4. That in all his dealings in the world, he have respect to truth,
righteousness, and mercy. He would not live by lying, he would not get by
unrighteousness, nor save by unmercifulness.

The worlds vassals must stick at nothing that will serve their turns; must
lie, defraud, oppress, extort, grind the faces, starve the bowels break the
bones of their poor brethren, this is for their interest.

1 Timothy 6. 10. The love of money is the root of all evil: whence is it that
there is so little faith, or truth, or righteousness, or mercy among men? so
little truth in their words, so little faith in their promises, so little
righteousness in their dealings, no more bowels of compassion? we may be
ashamed to think how little, we may fear and tremble to think how little; so
much praying, and hearing, and professing, and yet so much falsehood and wrong?
so much knowledge of God and yet so little conscience toward men? such
pretenses to faith, and yet so little exercise of charity? this is dreadful;
but whence is all this? the love of money is the root of all evil: this is the
liar, this is the oppressor this is the barbarian, the love of money: there
had been more faith, and more truth, and more mercy, had there been less of
this love: where this root is dried up, where the world is no longer loved, it
will be no longer served or obeyed; nothing of it will be regarded but what
comes in, in a way of truth and righteousness.

He that loves truth above the best trading, righteousness above the greatest
riches, that counts mercy the best good husbandry; he that had rather stand to
a bad bargain, then break promise; make a bad market, then advance his gain by
a lie; suffer bad wares to lie on his hands, then say they are good; he that
had rather have no blessing in his hand, then no bowels to lay it out for God;
He that however he has this world about him, has an estate, houses, lands,
money in greatest abundance; he that however he labors in all fair and
innocent ways, to preserve and improve what he has; yet chooses rather to be
poor then not to be honest, to have nothing then not to be a good steward of
what he has; he that will not be tempted to be false, unrighteous, or
unmerciful, for the getting or saving an estate, the world has not much in the
heart of that man.

Oh brethren, if this be to overcome the world, then how many more captives
has it still then the most are aware of? what trade is there driven almost any
where in the world, wherein the trade of lying has not a great stock going?
Are there not even among men pretending to religion, too many found, who
instead of using the Psalmists prayer, Keep me from the way of lying, will
rather content themselves with the Syrians prayer, The Lord pardon me in this
thing; the Lord forgive me, I know not how to help it. It Is true that men of
great dealings have great temptations to it, and is it not as true, that they
are taking temptations?

But how can you then take your selves to be any of Christ's disciples? or how
can you stand here praying with the same mouth, that it may be within a day or
two, will be found in the market lying? Can the same fountain send forth sweet
water and bitter, Jam. 3. 11. Deceive not your selves, you do but lie unto God
in your duties, that make it your practice to lie unto men in your dealings. If
any man seem to be religious and bridleth not his tongue (from lying as well as
other ill language) that man's religion is in vain, Jam. 1. 26.

And as little truth as there is in men's words, is there not as little
righteousness in their ways? the lying tongue and the oppressing hand are
animated from the same heart. How very few are there that weigh their actions
on that unerring beam, Do unto others as you would they should do unto you?
Would thou be oppressed? thou would not: why then do thou oppress?
would thou not be defrauded? why then do thou defraud? would thou not
over-buy nor undersel? why do thou then in the same kinds, go about to
overreach thy brother?

Brethren you do not know your own generation you live in, if you do not
understand, how commonly and how greedily men are every where heaping up to
themselves the gains of unrighteousness, and for mercy there is little hope of
finding that, where righteousness is departed.

And now Soul, where is thy victory over the world? thou pretendest to Christ,
take thy self to be a beleiver, and hopest thou have chosen God for thy
portion, and renounced this present world; what and yet lie for a little
worldly advantage? be unrighteous that thou may be rich: sell thy conscience
for a penny, and bless thy self in thy good bargain? Has the world such power
of thee, that for its sake thou will be thus false and deceitful and cruel, and
yet have thou overcome it?

Is this thy Faith? is this your Christianity, to be disciples of Christ so far
as it may be for your profit? was there any such reserve in your engagement to
be the Lords, I Will be thine so thou will abate me lying? I will serve thee in
any thing, so thou will allow me, the gain of unrighteousness? I Will profess thy
name, and i will pray and i will hear, and i will be godly in all things wherein my gain
is not concerned? In these things the Lord pardon thy servant, in these things
let me have the liberty to be as other men, and in any thing else command me
what thou will?

Brethren, be plain hearted throughout: be able to say with the Apostle, Heb.
13. 18. We trust that we have a good conscience, willing to live honestly in
all things: convince the world that you are none of theirs, but are come out
from among them, and are of Christ indeed, by being in all things as he was in
the world, who did no sin, neither was any guil found in his mouth.

3. Victory over the world stands, in a power to use our worldly goods to their
proper ends. What is there on this side Hell, (sin only excepted) but being
well used, will prove our blessing? Romans 8. 28. All things shall work together
for good to them that love God. What is there on this side Heaven, (grace only
excepted) but being ill used may degenerate into a curse? Psalm. 69. 22. Let
their table be made a snare and that which was given to them for their wealth
be an occasion of falling.

All things in the world, as they have their various particular uses, and
intermediate ends, so they have but one common end, in which they all
concenter. God who made man, has made all things else also for himself: and
man only of all these lower creatures, is made capable, both of understanding
the end to which all things are, and of directing them to it, and accordingly
is obliged so to do.

Then only may we be truly said to enjoy what we have, and are secured from the
mischiefs of it, when we have so much power over it, as to use it aright: he
that has not an heart to use what he has, and to use it well, is rather
possessed by it, then the possessour of it: upon this account are worldly men
the worlds servants; servants of their estates rather then the masters of them:
will you call him a master that is under the command of his servant? that
cannot govern nor order nor dispose of himself, and what he has, but is always
governed by it? when the world says go he must go, when this says come he
must come, when it says work he must work, and till it says sit still, he
must not rest; who must neither eat, nor drink, nor give, nor lend, but where
the world gives him leave? who is a slave if this be a freeman?

He that understanding his dominion of all that is in his hand, and his way to
use it aright, accordingly exercises his dominion, this man is Lord and the
world his servant.

Now (as I hinted but now) the proper end to which all we have should be lastly
directed, is God. God made all things for himself; and he has put us in
possession that we may use them for him, for whom they are made. All we have
are our talents entrusted in our hands by our Lord, with this charge, Occupy
till I come, Luke 19. 13. Occupy till I come, as those that must give an
account to me when I come; that I may receive mine own with advantage, v. 23.
twill be but a lame account we shall give of what we have received, if we bring
not in, every talent employed for God.

We must work for God, and get for God, and lay up for God, and lay out for
God: he that works for bread or for clothes, or for money; he that works for
wife or for children, and does not therein work for God; he that bestows any
thing of what he has, on himself for food or raiment; he that bestows any
thing on his wife or his children, for their present provision, or their future
portions, and does not bestow it there for God, is an evil steward and
unfaithful to his trust.

And as we must work for God, and bestow for God, so we must keep for God and
save for God: A good steward must see there be no wastes made on his Lords
estate. He must not save any thing from God; when God calls for a penny, or a
pound, or all that he has, he must let it go and keep nothing back.

He must consider, that God has more mouths to feed, and more backs to
clothe, then his own or his families. There Is a poor neighbor by thee, that
wants bread, go and feed him; there is a poor orphane by thee, go and take care
of him, and what thou layest out, put it on account to me: he must consider,
that God has other ways to dispose of his estate, then on backs and bellies;
There are a company of poor children by thee, that are like to be bred up for
Hell; to be bred up in ignorance and profaness; go and be at charges with them,
put them to School, or help to the disposing of them, so that they may be bred
up as Christians, in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: and other like
ways has God for the bestowing what he has.

He that must save for God, and see that there be no wast made, that nothing be
spent upon strangers, upon his pride upon his gluttonous appetite, upon his
vain companions; he that must not be thus prodigal of his estate, to satisfy
his own or others lusts and humors, must neither be a niggard, and think to
save any thing from God: He that spends and not for God, and he that saves from
God, will both prove but evil stewards. This saving will in the end prove the
greatest wasting: as Christ says, Math. 16. 25. He that saves his life shall
lose it; so upon the same account, he that saves his estate; he that saves
his bread or his money, shall lose it: there is not a shorter cut to beggary,
then sinful parsimony: it is ill saving from Gods poor: that bread thou savest
from the mouth of the poor, whom God would have thee feed, that bread will
become an eater; that penny which should have gone for an alms, may rust out all
thy pounds.

Thou think thou art more provident then others, who are so free and
liberal; and blessest thy self in thy better husbandry; when God calls for an
alms thou shiftest him off with an answer, I have nothing for thee; when God
calls for a liberal alms, some of thy pounds, thou put him off with a penny
or a groat; and then please thy self to think how well thou came off, and
what a good husband thou have been; but boast not to soon.

On the other side, thou that art a prodigal of thy estate, that swillest it
down thy throat, that spreadest thy table with it, or trimmest thy carcass or
debauchest thy companions with it; thy costly fare, thy gorgeous apparel, thy
riotous company, thy sumptuous buildings, must devour all thou have; what
answer will thou give to thy Lord, when he shall require thee, Give an account
of thy talents? how will thy account be taken whereof this is the total sum,
All spent in sin and vanity?

These things I have spoken, to give you a short account how we are to use our
worldly comforts, namely all for God: and he that has power thus to use the
world; yea he that does charge this on himself, and is heartily resolved on
this course, making it his ordinary care thus to dispose of himself and what he
has; though in many things he fall short, and too often transgress his rule,
may without arrogance write himself, By the grace of God, crucified with Christ
and conqueror over the world.

Christians, if these things were considered and well weighed, how much would
our bill of expenses, on our selves, and our flesh be shortened; and how greatly
might it abound to our account?

O how many superfluities would be pared off, even from such of us, who have
been the best stewards for God? How much is there daily wasted of our Lords
talents? how much of what we have, does our flesh totally consume, whereof the
Lord has no share at all? how much is there spent daily, concerning which we
cannot have the face to say, this has been spent for God? how much has been
lost to God by our full bellies and pampered flesh? Do we never eat to
unweldiness, drink, though not to drunkenness, yet to drowsiness? how many
times have we been chearing our selves into sottishness, recreating our selves
into uselesness, whilst we have pretended to be fitting our selves for
service? how many a prayer and praise has the Lord lost by a feast? we have
been feeding our wantonness, clothing our pride, nourishing up our selves into
mere frothiness and vanity, whilst we have professed to be refreshing and
comforting our hearts for God.

Has not the Lord had the less for his bounty to us? should we not have been
like to have served the Lord better in hunger and thirst, then we have
sometimes done, in the abundance of all things?

Have we indeed used all for God? our estates for God? our liberties for God?
our interest and esteem in the world for God? might not God have been often
better served in a prison, then we have served him in our liberty? might not
God have been better served in our sickness and weakness, then we have served
him in our health and strength? has not the Lord been often as it were forced
to resolve concerning us, well I must even smite them with sickness, that they
may serve me better, I must take away their talents that they may be better
stewards!

What use has been made of that esteem and respect we have had from men? has
our care been, what the resolution of a worthy servant of Christ, now with God,
once was? I would (said he) entitle God to every inch of Ground I get upon the
opinions of men; I would make my advantage to be dealing for God with them, to
be pleading for God with them, I would improve all my interest with them so,
that if it be possible, God may become of the acquaintance of all my friends.

Oh how very few of us are there, whose aim and care is, to live at the rate
and in the way that God would have us live? who resolve, Religion shall have
the whole ordering of me; this shall choose my company and govern my whole
behavior with them: this shall appoint me my habitation; this shall furnish my
house and my table; shall appoint me the quality and limit the proporof my
daily food: this shall order me for my habit, both the cost and the fashion of
my raiment: this shall direct me in the visiting and entertaining my friends:
this shall set me my business, and allow me my recreations; this shall measure
my days and my nights, and set me my times for my sleep, my watch, and my
work: this shall dispose of my estate while I live, and make my will when I
die. This shall give, my self mine allowance, my wife her dower, my children
their portions, and Gods children, his poor orphans theirs. I would so feed,
and so clothe and so recreate my self, so work and so rest as God would have
me. I would never spend nor save but for the Lord. I would visit whom God would
have me visit, I would entertain as God would have me entertain; I would never
visit a friend, but to whom God sends me, nor entertain but as God bids me; I
would put it into the hands of the Lord to divide mine estate; no more to my
children, and no less to his, then my conscience tells me he would have.

O how few are there who are thus resolved? And why is it not thus with us? Oh
these worldly hearts hinder us; these put in for a share; they would carry all,
but if that may not be, they will divide with God: something for thy self,
something for thy flesh, something for thy friends, and let God take the rest:
and as the heart would have it, so ordinarily it goes; insomuch that it often
comes to pass, that by that every one else is served, he to whom all is due,
has little or nothing left; God shall be last served, and by that his turn
comes the store is spent*

Oh these false and treacherous hearts! Is the Lord our God or not? to whom do
we owe any thing but to him? is not all his? is not he Lord of all? is there
any thing in our hands, concerning which we can say, this is mine own, this is
none of his. Do we not eat his bread and dwell in his houses, and wear his
clothes, his wool and his flax? Is not the earth the Lords and the fullness
thereof? and may he not require of his own what he will?

And what does the Lord require? does he not require all? does God reserve only
a chief rent to himself, and let the rest go which way it will? has he allowed
any part to be bestowed on his enemies? would God, that the Devil and lust go
sharers with him? Do we not know and these tongues confess, that all is his due
and expectation? what then is this flesh, what are these lusts, that we should
hearken to them, when they put in for a part?

O rebuke and repel these imperious beggars: you shall have a whip and a
scourge, but no alms at my door; you are none of the beggars that God would
have me feed and clothe. Did God ever allow me to clothe my pride or feed my
covetousness or nourish this unruly and greedy appetite? away away, nothing is
allowed you, but a cup of cold water to quench your flames. The Lord he is God,
the Lord he is God, my sovereign and supreme proprietour? of him and through
him and to him are all things: his I am and to him I owe and devote whatever I
am or have; my streams shall fall into no other channells but what will convey
them into the Ocean: he is my Ocean who is my fountain, O my God my springs do
all rise and rest in thee.

O what a strange change would this doctrine and the practice of it make upon
us: then we should live like Christians indeed, and be able to say with the
Apostle Philip. 1. 21. To me to live is Christ.

O what exemplarie Christians should we be, had we nothing to do but to bring
forth fruit unto God; how rich should we grow were all our business to lay up
treasure in Heaven; how roundly would the work of our salvation go on, were all
our works made to fall into this? what a tribute of praise and honor would be
raised to the name of the Lord, if our united streams ran all upward, how
glorious should the Lord be, if God should thus become all in all?

4. Victory over the world stands, in a power to want the worlds good things,
and to suffer the worlds evil things, and to keep our hearts and our way,
whether we prosper or suffer.

Philip. 4. 12. I know both how to be abased and how to abound; every where and
in all things I am instructed, both to be full and to be hungry, to abound and
to suffer need. It Is one thing to know [what] it is to abound, and what to want;
and another thing to know [how] to do both: it may be, though the Apostle knew
sufficiently [what] it is to want and to be hungry, yet he knew but little what
it is to be full and to abound; but he had learned [how] to want and how to
abound,

To know how to want and how to abound, is to know how to carry it as a
Christian in both estates. Poverty and riches have each of them their
temptations. Prove. 30. 8. Lest I be full and deny thee, or lest I be poor and
steal and take the name of my God in vain: both estates have their temptations,
and he knew how to deal with either of them, so that neither the one nor the
other should put him besides his duty, or draw him to any thing unworthy of a
Christian.

He is a Christian, that neither, beholding to the world for his religion (he
has other arguments to persuade him to be godly, then that godliness is gain)
and that will not be forced out of it, by all that the world can give or take
away: he that is not beholding to the world for his religion, will be the more
like to be religious in spite of the world: if the loaves were not they that
drew him to Christ, neither will the want of bread drive him away; those that
come to Christ in hopes of a temporal Kingdom, will when they see themselves
disappointed, go back from him again: those that found nothing but Christ to
draw them after him, will find nothing whilst Christ is Christ to draw them
off.

A Christian counts Christ sufficient: a sufficient reward and a sufficient
safeguard, enough to satisfy him and to secure him; and thereupon can be
content in all his wants and patient in all he suffers: we seldom depart from
God, but it is either from discontent or impatience; either we think it
intolerable abiding with him, or at least, that we may have a better being
elsewhere; our turning aside from God to the world, is in hopes some way or
other to mend our condition; either to be better provided for or better
pleased: when God is accepted as a sufficient portion, so that we need not the
world to make us happy, when God is accounted our sure refuge, so that we fear
not that the world can make us miserable, then twill be all one as to our
godliness, whether the world be with us or against us.

He that can say God is my portion whether I want or abound; I have never so
much but I have need of a God, I have never so little but a God will suffice;
He that can say God is my refuge whether I be in safety or in danger; I am
never in such hazards but in God I am secure, I am never so out of hazard but I
need his security; how little is it that the world with all its glory on the
one hand, or all its fury on the other, can do upon that Soul? thou may then
go on thy way rejoicing, thou may serve the Lord without fear, in holiness
and righteousness all the days of thy life.

He that knows and feels what God is, can want or suffer what ever is in the
world; in him he finds a supply of every vacuity, and a salve for every sore;
He that knows what pinching want and piercing sufferings are, will understand
that nothing but God can hold him up or bear him through. You are mistaken if
you think, that natural hardiness and self confidence will do, without divine
supports in pressing cases. He that has this power, has gotten it from above;
he that has this power, may be whatever the Lord will have him.

Then are we more eminently endued with this power when we have attained to, 1.
Self-denial under the greatest opportunities of self-seeking or
self-satisfaction. 2. Contentment under the greatest straits. 3. Patience under
the greatest pressures of affliction. 4. Humility in the height of honor. 5.
Magnanimity in the depth of danger or difficulty. 6. Equanimity in the greatest
turns and changes of our outward condition.


1. Self-denial under the greatest opportunities of felf-seeking and
self-satisfaction. Self-denial properly, is the neglecting the interest, and
the crossing the inclinations of our flesh, in order to service or the
preventing of sin. Then only self-denial is a virtue, or a duty, when our
allowance of our flesh in its liberty, would be either a sin, or an occasion of
sin, or an hindrance of duty; when it would be a preferring the advantages of
the flesh above the service and honor of Christ.

Now by how much the greater our opportunity to please our flesh, by so much
the greater virtue it is to deny it. He that might be full and yet for Christ's
sake is content to be empty; he that might be rich and yet is content to be
poor; he that might live at ease or in honor, and yet for Christ's sake is
content to be vile or in trouble? He that chooses rather to be serviceable then
to be safe, to be holy then honorable, he that upon the account of Christ,
flies from fleshly advantages when these fly after him, this is the man.

It Is a virtue to be quiet when Providence denies us; to be content to be poor
and in affliction, when it comes unavoidably upon us: it is something to be able
to say, I cannot help it and therefore will be quiet. But when we can let
Conscience deny us, let love to Christ, let zeal for God straiten us, when
Providence allows us our liberty and our fill, this is something to purpose.

To neglect the world when the world neglects us or flies from us; not to seek
great things for our selves, when we have no hope of obtaining; not to mind the
pleasing our pride or our appetite, when we have not wherewith to maintain
them; to spare from our flesh when we have nothing to spend upon it; to fast
when we have no bread, to put on sackcloth when we have no better raiment, not
to contend for our wills when we see we cannot have our wills, there is not so
very much in all this, though it be more then every one has attained to; But
voluntarily to lay down all at the foot of Christ, to part with all for the
sake of Christ, when we might have even what we would in a way of sin; to keep
our flesh short when it is in our power to make it a larger allowance; this is
a great testimony how high the interest of Christ is exalted, and how low the
world is brought in us.

One great instance of this self-denial, you may read in Moses, Heb. 11. 24.
25. By faith Moses when he came to years, refused to be called the son of
Pharaohs daughter choosing rathor to suffer affliction with the people of God,
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

Observe it, fairer opportunities of flesh pleasing, of living in the splendor
of worldly glory, and the Grandieur of a prime favorite in the court, few of
the sons of men ever enjoyed; he was adopted the Son of Pharaohs daughter,
nursed up upon her knee and in her heart, and upon this account, what his hopes
and advantages might be, it is easy to imagine.

But at once he forsook all; he had a service to do for his God, and such an
affection to the people of God, that away he goes, puts himself out of Pharaohs
favor, and casts in his lot among his suffering brethren.

I shall consider diverse circumstances, which all heighten this noble instance.

1. The circumstance of time,

[When he came to years] it was not a childish folly, done when he was so young,
that he knew not what he did; but when he came to age, when he came to
understand himself; whilst he was a child, he suffered himself to be dandled
on the lap of these carnal pleasures, but when he came to age, and understood
what these things were, and had gotten those higher things of the other world
in his eye; when he came to age he put away these childish things: this world
is a paradise only to children and fools; pictures, and babies, and rattles
will please children, men must have manly delights; thou that art so taken with
the embraces, and dalliances of this world, thou that make thy self sport
with images and rattles, when thou come to have the understanding of a man,
thou will wonder at thy childish folly.

2. When he was (upon the matter) newly come to age; a young man, in the prime
and vigor of his time; when he had but begun to taste the sweet of his youthful
pleasures; the pleasures of this l^fe are most taking at the first tasting, the
first draught is the sweetest; when they grow more common, and ordinary, they
sour and become less savory.

Oh how rare a thing is it, to see young men, in their prime to disgust and
despise the world: Old men, whose strength is gone, whose spirits are dead, who
have been glutted and tired out with pleasure, have lost their appetite, 2 Samuel
19. 35. I am this day fourscore years old, and can I discern between good and
evil? can thy servant taste what I eat or drink; can I hear any more the voice
of singing men, or singing women? are these any longer a pleasure to me? the
world ceases to be such a temptation to old men, it is a dead and a dry tree to
them, in the winter of their age, which looked so green and so beautiful in the
spring of their youth.

But behold Moses whilst he was a young man, whilst all looked fresh and
green, yet even then he rejects it. Young men, you whose wanton and sprightful
hearts cry in your ears, in the words of the Preacher, Eccl. 11. 9. Rejoice O
young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy
youth, walk in the way of thine own heart, and in the sight of thine own eyes;
eat, drink, be merry, take thy pleasure, take thy liberty: Behold here is an
instance that preaches another Doctrine to you; and what does it preach? the
next Text you find after the former, Chap. 12. 1. Remember thy Creator in the
days of thy youth. Remember my Creator? so I will in time, I intend it
hereafter; it is for old men to be serious, the Grave will teach gravity; I
cannot be old while I am young, time enough to think of the other world, when I
am leaving this; I am but newly come into the world, I cannot receive my
welcome, and my farewell together; I mean to think on God hereafter, but you
must give me leave to mind my self, and please my self a while. No, no, it is
another manner of Doctrine then this, Moses though dead, yet speaks; Remember
now thy Creator in the days of thy youth; make thy present choice, and let
this be it, Choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Oh that young men would set this Copy
before their eyes; see what this young Moses did, and do likewise.

Give me leave to take the hint, and in a short digression, to speak a few
words to young men, to persuade them to make Moses his choice betimes, to
renounce the world, and to remember their Creator in the days of their youth,
and to consecrate their first time to God. This I shall press to by the
following arguments.

1. Otherwise this is like to be the worst time of their lives. Such is the
heat and strength of their lusts, that nothing but a God will be a bridle to
them, Jam. 3. 3. Behold we put bits in the horses mouths. What ruling an horse
without a bridle? what bridle will hold these wild horses, but the memory of a
God?

Some young men are so headstrong, that they catch the bit in their teeth, and
run on their course with full career; though God be set before their eyes, and
all the terrors of the Lord be put as a bridle in their jaws, yet all will not
do to stop them, but on they run, as the horse rusheth into the battle.

Young men living without God, are as Esau, wild men; wild-headed and
wild-hearted, they run a wild Race.

Young men will do more work for the Devil in a day, then afterward is done in
many days; and therefore Satan uses to hire his laborers in the first hour of
the day; when they are but newly started out of the shell, he stands ready to
press them for hell. And O what haste do they make on their way? like swift
Dromedaries, like the wild Ass, which none can tame, or turn her back.

Youth is the Devils seed time. All the tares that grow ripe in thine age,
these were the seed of thy youth; all the Frogs and Toads of the Summer, were
from the Spawn of the Spring.

O friends, this world has been aforehand with Christ, and is gotten first
in, and there its busy in complementing your hearts, showing you its
treasures, entertaining you with its carnal delights, insinuating into your
affections, captivating and intangling your souls, building Forts and strong
holds against Christ, that he be not suffered to enter, and filling you with
all wickedness, that you may become a loathing and abomination to him.

O hearken, and open to the Lord, make room for the King of glory, who stands
at the door and knocks: Will you say to him, Go away to day, and come again to
morrow, let Christ stand a while longer? let his Enemy be first served? let me
be wanton, and foolish, and fleshly a while longer? I am not vile enough yet,
not wretched enough yet? a little more of this madness, let me be a fool and a
beast a little longer, let this Lust and this Devil alone yet a while? let me
be laid faster in the Stocks, let my prison be double locked, let my soul, and
my life, and the everlasting Kingdom, be brought to more desperate hazards? a
few days more of bondage and misery, no Redemption yet, no Reconciliation yet,
no pardon, nor grace, nor hope; no God nor Christ come here a while? will you
speak thus to the Lord?

O open to Christ, this day open; while sin is yet but a youngling, while the
world is yet but a new Comer, before you be rivetted into such acquaintance and
friendship with it, as may never be broken off.

2. Youth is the fittest time. Young men have many advantages which old men
have lost, and will never recover; they have this threefold advantage.

1. Youth is more docile and tractable. Old men are more dull and hard to
learn, more refractory and hard to be persuaded; therefore you know its the
practice of men to put theirs to Schools, and to Trades, in their younger time.
Prove. 20. 6. Train up [a child] in the way that he shall go, and when he is old
he will not depart from it. What Is the reason that old men are so tenacious of
their customs and ways? O they were trained up in them of children.

That which is learned in youth, is easier gotten, and longer retained: Old
men's capacities are dull, and their memories slippery; they are hard of
hearing, and as hard to remember what they hear. Old men's hearts are
preoccupated, the Devil (as before) has been beforehand with them; they are
so overgrown with tares, that the good seed comes too late, to be like to take
any root in them.

And therefore the Lord charges Parents, Ephesians. 6. 4. To [bring them up] in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord. In the morning sow thy seed; our evening is
usually the harvest of our morning seed; the lusts of youth are ripe in age,
and the graces of the Aged, are ordinarily the fruits that are grown up out of
the seed of their youth.

Hence is it, that it is such a blessing to be the children of godly Parents:
they have not only the blessing of the Covenant, the promise entailed upon
them: To Abraham and his seed was the promise made; and therefore it was a
blessing to be a child of Abraham; but they have also the blessing of holy
Education; I know Abraham, that he will command his children and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. Paul commends
Timothy, or rather his Mother in him, that he had of a child known the
Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3. 15. David begun with Solomon, whilst he was a young man,
1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Fathers.

And as the Lord charges parents to give holy education, so is it the duty and
the happiness of children to receive and submit to it: a towardly and tractable
childhood promises a gracious and fruitful age. When he is old he will not
depart from it, that is, there is hopes he will not: it is true it does not
always prove so; sometimes there is too much truth in that proverb, A young
Saint and an old Devil. Some there are, whose youth is the winter that withers
all the buds of their childhood, or at least their age is the grave, that
buries all the flowers of their youth: who however it was with them, whilst
they were under the influences of instruction, and the restraint of discipline;
no sooner do they get their neck from under the yoke, and feel the reins of
government loosened, but presently they grow wild and wanton; and fall to
pulling down what has been built, to rooting up what has been planted, and
razing out those holy principles they have sucked in, and so letting themselves
loose to all manner of rudeness and debaucherie: these are monsters; a
degenerate brood; and of all persons in the world, most likely, after this
first step from Saints to brutes, to take their next from brutes to Devils. O
let all such tremble, whose youthful lusts have gotten the head of their
religious education; the Devil has broken into Gods nursery, and snap'd off
those twigs, to engraff them in his own Orchard, among those trees that are
only for the fire.

I say, thus it may happen; (and look to it, that this be the case of none of
you) that those who have been trained up whilst children, in the good way of
the Lord, depart from it when they are come to age; yet there is such a
flexibleness in young ones, and such an aptness to receive and retain the
impressions of their holy education, that there is great hope it may abide by
them all their days. If it should wear out, its usually worse with such, then
with those that have been born and bred up in the dark; but there is hope it
will abide.

2. Youth is more vigorous and sprightly; of warm affection, and full of
action; quicquid agit valde agit, there is life in its action: it is not clogged
with the infirmities, nor depressed with the weakness and unweldiness that
creeps on with age. In this morning the Soul is free and fresh, the spirits are
quick and lively, the edge is sharp and keen, which in time grows more blunt
and dull. We may now both act more for God, and taste more of God; there would
be more service, and we should find more sweetness in it, did we begin betime,
before our native warmth is cooled, and our edge turned.

What work do rude young men make in the world? how much service do they to the
Devil in a little time? laughing and mocking, drinking and gaming, rioting and
revelling, giving themselves to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness? what haste do they make to undo themselves? how hot are they in
their lusts, how heady in their ways, how swiftly and violently does the
torrent run down toward the burning lake? in how little time are the plants
and flowers rooted out, which had been setting and nursing up all their time,
and how suddenly are their weeds sprung up, and how rank are they grown? what
might not this heat and activity have brought forth to God, had it been but set
right? how greatly might God have been honored, how much might Souls have been
advanced, what a treasure might have been laid up in Heaven, had the stream in
this springtide been running toward God, as it has been toward Hell?

You that have thus foolishly lost your season, and run out the flower of your
days, oh be ashamed and bewail your loss; you that have yet your day before
you, be warned, let others folly make you wise: know in your season what a
price you have in your hand.

O it is pity such a treasure should be lost and wasted: what is God, that he
must have only the last and worst? Sin and the world must have the first and
best, and only the lees and dregs left for him, to whom all is due; the Devil
must have our marrow, and if God will accept our dry and weary bones, that is
all we ordinarily design for him.

Brethren, how many of our morning hours are already run out, and what has the
Lord had of them? how few early Christians are there of us? who of us are there
that came along into the vineyard, at the first hour of the day? we think the
last hour the best, and enough for our work; soon enough to come into the
vineyard, when we are going out of the world; we will not bear the burden and
heat of the day, but choose rather to come in the cool of the evening. Unworthy
Spirits; we will first make our selves good for nothing, and then we will be the
servants of God.

3. Young men have day before them: he that has a long journey to go, had need
set out early; he that has much work to do had need be at it betimes: he that
goes an Apprentice to a trade when he is old, is not like to do any great
matter at it; either to get any great skill, or to make any great gain: they
are never like to come to much, who are so long ere they come to any thing: the
journey of a Christian is long, vita brevis iter longum; the work of a
Christian is great. Young men, if you would come to Christ this day, the
youngest of you would find work enough, to hold him the longest day he has to
live: these strong holds which have been so long a fortifying against Christ,
will not be battered down in a day; your evil customs and evil habits which
have been so long growing and rooting in you, will require time to be well
changed and rooted out; grace and peace and assurance are ordinarily the fruits
of many years labor and travail: when you have wrought your selves out of
work, then wish you had staid longer out of the vineyard.

3. The first time is the acceptable time. 2 Cor. 6. 2. Behold now is the
accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation. The present season is the
blessed season. [the accepted time] that is the time wherein you may be
accepted, and which God will take well at your hands, if you will accept. Now
you may be accepted, for behold he calls you; it is a question whether
hereafter you may or no: if you will not accept to day, it may be God will not
accept to morrow.

Its very acceptable to the Lord, he likes it, and takes it well at our hands
that we give him a present answer: delays are as unpleasing to him, as they
are dangerous to us: Will thou say, when he calls thee, suffer me first to go
and bid them farewell that are at my house? yea will thou say, when he says
come and be my servant, suffer me first to go and serve my belly and my
appetite, and afterward I will be thine? suffer me first to get me an estate,
to get more money or lands and then I will be for getting grace? how do ye
think God will take such an answer?

The Lord loves to see a willing people; of a ready and forward mind; that will
offer up their first fruits unto God. It Is recorded to the perpetual honor of
that good King Josiah 2 Chronicles. 34. 3. That in the eighth year of his reign,
while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his father. He
was but 16. years old, when he began to look heavenward; and you may perceive
how well the Lord took it, by his recording the very year.

O it is a pleasant thing to see the buds of grace putting forth in the morning
of nature; to see men growing up in grace, as they grow up in stature; this is
by so much the more beautiful, by how much the more rare and seldom found. A
godly young man is a Jewel, that sparkles forth a luster, among all the gravel
and pebbles of the earth: what a vast difference is there, betwixt an humble
meek sober gracious young man or woman, and the rude proud wanton riotous
brutish of that age? Old age is a crown, and this crown will be much more
glorious, if it be decked with the flowers of the spring.

4. If the Devil has the first time, he will endanger to have the last too. It Is
seldom seen, that those that pass over their youth and their strength, in the
service of sin, do ever become the servants of God at last: those that stand
out against Christ, to their last day, do mostly stand it out in their last
day. How seldom do we hear of an old overgrown sinner, ever prove a sincere
Convert at last?

The experiences of the Ministers of the Gospel do testify, that the success
of their Ministry is ordinarily most upon the younger sort; a twig is more
easily bowed, or plucked up, then an old tree: if thy heart be too hard for the
Word, whilst it is young and tender, how difficult will the case be, when its
brawn'd and crusted by age?

Zophar in Job, speaking of an old sinner says, Job 20. 11. His bones are full
of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down with him in the dust. Observe
here these two things.

1. That age does often pay the scores of youth; the pains of age are often the
reward of the pleasures of youth; the wantonness of youth is often revenged by
the weakness and diseases of age; men's aged bones do remember them of their
wasted marrow. Sinners, though you think you can never fill your bellies with
your lusts, while you are young, yet God will fill your bones with them when
you are old; and 'twill be but a sad meeting, when young sins and old bones
meet together. O what a strange difference will there be betwixt feeling our
aged aching bones, full of the duties of our youth, our prayings, watchings,
fastings, labourings and sufferings, and having them filled with our youthful
lusts and lewdness?

2. Where sin breaks its fast and dines, it often sups and lodges, it lies down
with him in the dust. If timely repentance do not lay thy sin in the dust, when
thou art young, vengeance is like to lay it down with thee in the dust when
thou art old. [It shall lie down with him in the dust.] A dreadful word; the
meaning is, it shall never be pardoned, or done away, he shall carry his sins
out of the world with him, as he lived, so he dies.

It Is ill having sin thy bedfellow; it is ill sleeping one night in unrepented
sin; but O what will it be to have all thy wickednesses, thy companions in the
grave? it is a wretched thing to live in sin, but beware of dying in sin:
whilst the Worms eat up thy flesh, these Vultures shall gnaw upon thy soul.

Young sinner, take heed of going on in the hardness of thine heart: If the
Word of Life do not part thee and thy sins, death shall not part you, the grave
shall not part you: Death shall part betwixt thy body and thy soul, betwixt thy
sins and their pleasures, betwixt thy sins and their gains; but it shall never
part betwixt thy sins and thy soul, they die with thee, and are buried with
thee, and they shall rise with thee, and become the fuel of that fire that
shall burn to the bottom of Eternity.

Well now at length what say you young men? when for God and the other world?
when for wisdom, sobriety, chastity? when for Religion in earnest? now, or not
till hereafter? will you yet be so unworthy as to give your marrow to the
Devil, and reserve nothing but dry bones for the Lord? will you offer up your
first fruits to Bacchus and Venus? will you burn out your Candle to light you
on in your noisome lewdness, and never be sweet till you be consumed into a
stinking snuff?

How few are there that will hearken? what wild creatures, wild Asses Colts are
the most of the youth of the earth? what a wanton wastful luxurious loose Age
is this first Age? It cannot be said, as to Israel, Jer. 2. 2. I remember the
kindness of thy youth, and the love of thine Espousals; but I remember the
lusts of thy youth, the lewdness, and the madness, and the wantonness of thy
youth; art thou willing it should be hereafter thus said to thee?

Remember now thy Creator, and see if that will not hold thee to another
course. Do thou not want a bridle in this unruly age? what bridle but the
memory of a God?

Remember that there is a God. Thou runnest on thy course as the horse rusheth
into the battle; thou art wilful and obstinate in thy way, and wilt not be
turned back; thou say in thine heart, my tongue is mine own, my time is mine
own, my estate is mine own, who is Lord over me? But remember there is a God.

Thou committest thy wickedness it may be in secret, thy way is in the dark,
thou make thy advantage of the twilight, and imboldenest thy self with this,
what eye shall see me? but remember there is a God.

Thou despisest wisdom as folly, thou hate instruction, seriousness is thy
scorn, sobriety thy derision; thou make a mock of holiness, and laughest at
the reproofs of thine iniquities: Bid thee be wise, and repent of thy
wickedness, as good speak to the wind, or the stones of the earth; tell thee of
Death, or of Judgment, as good tell thee a dream: Let a Parent advise thee, let
a Minister or a Christian friend warn thee, and how are they either slighted or
laughed out of countenance. But remember that there is a God.

Thou will know no other heaven but below; thou blessest thy self in the earth,
in thy pleasures, in thy companions, and can fancy no other happiness but thy
fools Paradise; But remember that there is a God.

Remember that this God is thy Creator; and therefore thy Governor and Judge,
to whom thou owe thy self, and thy time, and to whom thou must give up thine
account.

Remember and return to thy God; remember and repent; remember God, and then
run on if thou dare, be a drunkard if thou dare, be a wanton if thou
dare, be a worldling if thou dare. Remember thy God and repent.

Remember thy Creator [now in this day of thy youth.] If ever, why not now? Is
not this the fittest time? Is not this the accepted time? May not this be the
only time? How know thou but that this may be the Word of the Lord to thee,
Now or never? Will thou never learn wisdom till thy loss teach thee it? Will thou never know thy day, till thy Sun be set? Young men, reckon not upon the
evening, your Sun may be set at noon: Consider what thou art to day; as one of
the fools in Israel; a vile insipid useless thing, the filth, the refuse, the
offscouring of the earth; and if thou would not be found thus at thy dying
day, let not this night overtake thee, before thou have run from thy self, and
thy sins, unto thy God.

Such of you, Brethren, as have already returned to the Lord, and accepted of
his Grace; as have had the grace to consecrate your youth to the Lord, Oh bless
the name of God, bless him while you live and have any being. Who has redeemed
your life from death, and crouned you with loving kindness and tender mercies;
who has taken you out from among the dirt and rubbish, and made you polished
stones for his Temple; who has cured you of your madness, and made you the
children of Wisdom; who has separated the precious from the vile, fetched you
out from the rude Rabble, and those Potsheards of the earth, wherein there is
no pleasure, and marked you up for his Vessels of Honor: What day the Lord goes
forth among the wild Herd, and takes out here and there one of the company, he
says, These shall be for me; this young man, or this young woman shall be
mine; they shall be mine in the day wherein I make up my Jewels; and for the
rest that will not hearken, let them run, till death seize upon them, and the
pit swallow them up.

Yet say, young man, of which number will thou be? of the taken, or the left?
will thou along after thy Creator? or will thou stay with thy companions? what
will thou say to the Lord? Take me, or leave me? let me be thine, or leave me
to my self? let me this day repent and be sober, or let me run mad still, till
there be no place for repentance? Consider and be wise.

But to return to our matter in hand,

2. The circumstance of his education. He had been bred up from a child, in a
gallant Princely way; he knew not what belonged to a low estate: those that
never had much, forsake but little when they forsake all; it is but a short step
from a little to nothing: he can take no great harm in a fall, who always sits
on the ground; want will never much pinch those who never understood plenty;
it is no such hard change, to be cast from the Cottage to the dunghill: we poor
little ones, if we had hearts, might say we have not opportunities, to leave
much for God; it is those who dwell on high, whose Mountains are exalted among
the tops of the Mountains of the earth, and that have had their Nest among the
Stars, it is these are like to feel it, when they must take up their dwelling in
the dust; and this was Moses case, from the height to the depth, from the
height of ease and honor, to the depth of affliction and hardship.

3. The circumstance of his Obligations. Pharaoh's Daughter had strangely
obliged him, had saved his life, took him up an abject Infant, and adopted him
for her Child, given him Princely breeding, and set her heart upon him as her
own: and hereupon the ingenuity of his Nature could not but plead with him
thus: Unworthy unthankful creature, what art thou meditating? whither art thou
going? a running away from her, whose pity gave thee thy life? who pitied
thee, and loved thee? who loved thee, and took thee in? who took thee in, and
bred thee up? what art thou? what have thou, that she may not justly call her
own? and will thou thus requite that pity, love, bounty, which thou can never
recompense? what a reproach will thou become, marked out for infamous, an
unworthy, unthankful, disingenuous, ill natured man? whither will thou cause
thy shame to go? oh how would such suggestions gall and gravel an ingenuous
spirit.

Well, but Moses breaks through all; let my fame be infamy, let me be accounted
any thing, unworthy, unkind, foolish, or any thing that is worse; God is worthy,
for whose sake I should bear all this; and away he goes.

It Is not the least of temptations which lies on some men's spirits, and which
unhappily keeps them from Christ, that they shall discontent their friends,
disoblige their dear Relations, seem to put a slight upon the love, and
kindness, and dearest respects of those, whom they have loved as their own
souls; if I take this course, if I fall into this uncouth discountenanced
reproached way, what will they call me? how will they look on me? how shall I
look my Father in the face, or my Husband, or my Wife in the face? what will
become of the esteem, and affection, and dearness which now I have with all my
intimates, and acquaintance? what shall I be accounted? with whom shall I be
reckoned? how shall I bear up under those evil reflections, and those unworthy
imputations, that I cannot but expect?

But now a resolved Christian will weigh the other side too: But how shall I
look God in the face? how shall I look Christ in the face, if upon such grounds
I refuse to hearken to him? who has been such a friend as God has been to me?
who has loved me as Christ has loved me? who has done for me as he has done
for me? who has laid down his life for me? who must save my soul from death?
how shall I look God in the face, if this be all I have to say, I would have
followed thee Lord, I would have hearkened to thee, but my Father and Mother
would have been angry then, my Husband or Wife would have taken it unkindly, I
should have displeased my friends, they would have counted me a fool, or a mad
man, or unkind, or unthankful, if I had hearkened to thee? Oh I remember what
he has said, Mat. 10. 37. He that loves Father or Mother more then me, he that
loves Son or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me. He that forsakes not
Father and Mother cannot be my Disciple; therefore I have no more to say, my
Friends are dear, my Husband is dear, my Wife is dear to me, I rejoice in their
love, and I would not their displeasure, I would not worthily be counted
unworthy, or unkind, or disrespectful, or undutiful to any of them; but God is
more then all.

My friends, if you will go along with me, if you will to Christ with me, if
you will be for holiness with me, (and oh that you would) come along, let us
along to Christ together, let me have your company to heaven; oh that I could
pray you thither, oh that I could persuade you thither, I love you so well,
that I am loath we should part companies; if you will go along with me, if I
may be the Lords, and yet be yours, I am much more yours then ever; but if this
be the condition of your love, you will love me so I love not Christ, you will
be my friends, so the Lord be not my friend; you will respect me, and esteem
me, so I will despise and disrespect holiness; you will be for my company, so I
be not for heaven, or so I will not go so far, or so fast that way; if this be
the condition of your love, stay with us, do as we do, live as we live, be
merry, be vain, take thy pleasure, take thy liberty as we do, and we will love
thee; if you will not love me on other terms, then farewell to you all, and to
all your love: I have learned what this means, he that loves Father or
Mother more then Christ, is not worthy of him; he that loves favor or respect
more then Christ, is not worthy of him; and till you can make it out, that you
have obliged me, more then Christ has obliged me; that your love will be
better to me, then the love of Christ; that respect from men will be better to
me, then acceptance with God, you must give me leave to run the hazard of
losing such friends, whom I cannot keep without losing God, and my soul.

4. Circumstance. But when he went from Pharaohs Court, whither went he? when
he left the bosom of Pharaohs Daughter, to whom did he join himself? why to a
company of poor bondmen, that were laboring at the brick Kilns; and not to be
a Taskmaster, or Ruler among them; but to take his lot of suffering with them,
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, etc.

Now lay all these circumstances together; Moses that had been bred up, and
lived in the Equipage of a Prince, and might have so continued; when he came to
age, and understood what the advantages of worldly greatness were; when he had
his senses quick about him, and could make the highest experiment what the
sweetness of worldly pleasures was, in the highest Springtide of worldly lusts
and temptations; when 'twas high water without, and his youthful blood was most
aflote within; when he had time before him, to make the most of the worlds
favors; who had never known what an harder and lower condition meant; who had
been so strangly obliged, by signal favors, and could not but be strongly
prompted, from principles of ingenuity, not to slight such favoures: in the
midst of all these temptations, for the service of his God, and from his
affection to his brethren, he voluntarily, not upon force but of choice,
disrobed himself of all his glory, and espoused the sufferings of his brethren;
esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures in Egypt. v.
27.

O brethren how may we be filled with wonder? and which of the two wonders are
the greatest, Moses his self-denial, or our denial of Christ? Moses his coming
off in so great a flood of temptations, or our being so ordinarily overcome in
those little temptations which daily occur? how little is it that we do or
can deny our selves in for Christ? what have we forsaken, or what are we
willing to forsake for Christ? upon what inconsiderable terms have Christ and
our Souls so often parted? what cheap duties will we not do? what cheap sins
will we not abate? what small temptations are hearkened to, when Christ cannot
be heard?

How often have we neglected to reprove a sin, for fear of loosing a friend?
how often have we neglected to speak of God, for fear of displeasing our
company? how often have we denied conscience, that we might not deny our lusts?
what sinful pleasures, that our hearts have been lusting after; what sinful
gains, that our eyes have been set upon; what pleasant morsels, that our
appetites have been craving, have we been able to deny them? how do we let
conscience lie at the mercy of every lust? if lust will but crave, it must be
granted whatever become of conscience.

If the name of Christ should prevail no more in Heaven, then it ordinarily
does on earth; if God should so ordinarily deny those prayers, we offer up in
Christ's name, as we deny those precepts, which in the same name are sent down
to us, we should have as little hopes toward Heaven, as the Lord has honor
on earth.

We grudge, we murmur, we quarrel with God, if he deny us in any thing, cross
us in any thing, and yet how many denyals must he bear from us, and be patient?
2 King. 5. 13. If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou
not have done it? how much more when he says, wash and be clean? If it had
been some great thing the Lord had required of us; (that it is not) all we have
is but a little: if it had been some great thing, twere a shame to deny it to
God; but when such little things cannot be granted, not a word spoken sometimes,
in a whole day together; not an alms given, not a vain pleasure abated, not a
wanton fashion laid aside; not a proud look, or a froward tongue, or a wanton
eye, or a greedy appetite restrained at his word; when we fail in such little
things, what should we have done had we stood in Moses his stead?

Brethren, when we are led aside from a self-denying, to a flesh pleasing life,
we are ready to say to those that reprove us for it, Oh you do not know my
temptations; if you were in my circumstances, you might have done the like. But
you do know Moses his temptations; and if you had had more of Moses heart, you
would not have complained so much of great temptations.

Beloved, you that dwell in your sieled houses, lodge in your warm, and easy
beds, are clothed in your soft and costly raiment; fed at your full tables,
cheared by the countenance and courtesies of your friends; compassed about with
your accommodations of all sorts; when you can choose rather a poor cottage, an
hard lodging, rough or ragged garments, hungry meals, hard usage, from friends
and enemies; when you can choose all this, rather then sin against Christ; when
upon a little sin, all your comforts might be continued to you, there is that
self-denial, that will prove, that you can live without being beholding to the
world for its good will, or without fear of its ill will.

2. Contentment in greatest straits, Phil. 4. 11, 12. I have learned in
whatsoever estate I am, to be content.

[In whatever estate] whether I have little or much, something or nothing,
still content: contentment is the heart at ease, our well pleasedness with our
condition, without quarrelling at our lot, without murmuring against God, and
without self-tormenting vexations. Those whose God is the world, cannot long be
quiet: the world like the moon, waxes and wanes; the world like the Sea, ebbs
and flows; and the heart of the worldly is like their God, Isa. 57. 20. The
wicked are as the troubled sea, that cannot be at rest: when it is full sea
there is a little stand; but when the tide turns, away their rest swims down the
stream.

The world is too little when at fullest, to fill the heart; this Sea is to
narrow when at broadest, to extend it self parallel to our expatiating desires,
Isa. 28. 20. The bed is shorter then that a man can stretch himself on it, the
covering narrower then that he can wrap himself in it. The wide Ocean to the
heart of man, is but as the narrow Seas; he can drink it up and be thirsty
still: when it has spent its store upon him, that is the voice, what no more?
Is this all. But what is the world to content a Soul, when it is low water? What
rest can there be, when ever and anon the banks will be empty?

God is the same; enough and he changes not: the manifestations of God are
unequal; sometimes bright and sometimes dimmer; sometimes he is seen, and
sometimes out of sight: and hereupon there is sometimes less quiet in the
hearts of the Saints, then at other times; but whilst the heart feels that God
is there, there is no want. Disquiets there may be, but it is not whither the
world ebbs or flows, but whether God be present or absent that makes the change
upon the Spirit: let God be with me, and then let the world be with whom it
will: let me have an houseful or but an handful, it is all one as to my Soul
contentment. A Christian is as little beholding to the world for his
contentment, as he is for his godliness; and that sure is little enough: as he
will be godly, without asking leave of the world, so he will be contented,
whether the world will or no: godliness and contentment grow both together; as
much as you find of the one, so much of the other: if contentment be but small,
godliness is not great; they grow both together, and the same root bears them
both. Godliness comes down from Heaven, and never did contentment spring up out
of the earth; they have the same fountain, both come from the Father of lights,
Jam. 1. 17.

You that are ordinarily male contents, look to it that you be not strangers
from God; if there be any thing, yet sure there is but little of God in you,
that need so much of the world to keep you quiet: if this be it that can [only]
still you, look to it, this is still your God. Oh what restless Spirits for the
most part have you? never well, never at rest: what is the matter? what is there
wanting? what would quiet you? A better house? a greater estate? better
trading? kinder neighbors? And can you not be content as you are? content
without all these? must you be rich? must you have all to your mind, or you
will still be thus angry? go serve the world then, and take it for your God,
say no more the Lord is my portion, if he be not enough to content you.

Contentment in God will be one of the best evidences of your conquest over the
world: he is a Christian of proof, that cannot be content with the world, and
yet can be content without it: that cannot be contented with the world, when he
has most of it; and yet can be content when he has the least of it, yea can
be content without it, if God be his.

If the world can content you, to be sure it can command you; if you make it
your play master it will be your task-master: whither will not men go, what will
they not do for contentment?

Why run we so often from God, but for our contentment? what seek we in our
fields, in our beds or among our companions, but our contentment? company to
please us, pleasure to content our minds? We mistake the ground; contentment
does not grow in any of these fields, but however, there we are digging for it;
and we never bethink our labor for any thing that will promise us, I Will content
thee for thy pains: this the world promises, I Will content thee, I Will content
thee; and as long as we dare take its word, it has us sure enough for servants:
once find your mistakes; hear riches say, it is not in me, hear pleasures
saying, it is not in me, hear friends saying, God help thee to a contented mind,
we cannot, hear the whole world saying, there is no such plant in all my gardens;
thou may go from plant to plant, from flower to flower, till thou have tried
all my store, and never find contentment amongst them all; it is in another
field, in the other world, the paradise of God; send thy heart thither for it,
purchase that field, and there dwell and satisfy thy Soul. Once hear every
creature, every condition telling thee thus, it is not in me to content thee, it is
from within, it is from above that thy contentment must come; and then, when thou
see that all the world cannot content thee, what wants of any thing the world
has will discontent thee? whatever it be the fruition whereof cannot content,
its want need not discontent us.

O what a constant calm and serenity should we feel in our spirits? what
steadiness would appear in our lives? what triumph over the World, and all its
changes, did we feel this truth in our hearts? In God alone my contentment lies.

Oh how much below the excellency and the sweetness of such a life do we live?
how hard to be pleased? how soon out of patience? what a small matter will put
our hearts upon the Rack? Some there are that are ever malcontents, there is
no condition that can keep them quiet, if they be the greatest Candidates of
Providence, they are still murmuring; they not only know not how to want, or to
be crossed, or to be in straits, but neither how to abound; they are never well
f^ll nor fasting, but will be still picking quarrels, even with their most
plentiful and prosperous state; they will be vexing and fretting themselves for
they know not what, though they can scarce tell what they would have more, or
otherwise then they have, yet they are angry that it is thus; what pleases them
to day, they nauseate to morrow; these are their own pests, the most miserable
of men.

But when we are in straits indeed, when Providence does frovvn upon us, and
keeps us lovv and short of what our minds desire, then how fevv of us can
say, It is well?

Brethren, look not on discontent as a little evil; that we should count it
but a small thing for God to save our souls, unless he will please our senses;
that we should count it but a small thing, that God should give us our lives,
unless he also give us our wills; as if nothing would please us, unless the
Lord will set us on the Throne, and let us carve for our selves, and be
Governors of the world.

A discontented person says, It Is but little that God has done for me, it is
but little that God has given to me; he has but given Christ to me, he has
but pardoned my sins, he has given me nothing but Heaven and everlasting
glory; what Blasphemy is here? Ah Wretch! do make a But of Christ, a But of
Pardon and Salvation? thou have reason enough to fear, that Christ and Life is
none of thine, who make so little account thereof.

Think not that mischief little which discontent will bring forth; how great
things will this little thing do? Whence are all our wanderings from God after
sin, after vanity, but from a present discontent with our condition? whence is
envy? whence is covetousness? whence are frauds, oppressions, robberies, but
from hence, that we are not content with our own? Whence is that lusting and
running out after fleshly liberty, after unlawful pleasures, after an easier
and looser life, but from this, that we think to mend our condition, and to
make our selves happier then Religion allows us to be.

Is that little, which makes God little, and Christ little, and the everlasting
Kingdom little, and sends us to the Devil to enlarge our quarters which God
allovvs us?

To close up this, I shall give you a short and more distinct view.

1. Of the evils and mischiefs of discontent. 2. Of the excellencies and
svveetness of contentment.
1. The evils and mischiefs of coffeehouse (as has been already in part
hinted) are these follovving.

1. It denies Gods sufficiency; it says, In the fullness of [his] sufficiency
I am in straits. Discontent argues want, or else

2. It impeaches Gods goodness and bounty. Whatever is with him in the house,
yet there is no good housekeeping: If in my Fathers house there be bread
enough, yet he keeps me short enough, I have but little, the Lords hand has
been shortened to me.

As we go along, consider Brethren, whether you would not be ashamed thus to
speak; and yet is not this the voice of your discontented hearts? If God should
challenge us, as he did Israel, Jer. 2. 5. What iniquity have ye found in me?
Or as Micah 3. 6. O my people what have I done to thee, wherein have I wearied
thee? how have I used thee? Come forth, testify against me. Or as Pharaoh
asked Hadad, 1 King. 11. 22. What have thou lacked with me, that thou will be
gone? If the Lord should ask us thus, Discontent would answer, Yes I have
lacked, thou have been an hard Master to me, thou will not let me have my will;
this I have lacked, and that I have lacked, I have been straightened in the Lord,
he has been a Wilderness, and a Land of darkness to me. Though Conscience must
say with David, The Lord is my Shepherd, I want nothing, yet this
male-contented heart will still be complaining.

3. Hereupon it rebels, and will not stand to Gods allowance: When God will not
satisfy, we fall to sharking and shifting for our selves: Discontent with our
lot (as I said before) lies at the bottom of all our unlawful carving for our
selves; hence is covetousness, hence is fraud, oppression, etc. because we are
not content with Gods allowance.

4. It disgraces godliness. Whatsoever is boasted of it, that its ways are the
ways of pleasantness, and all its paths are peace; that the merchandise
thereof is better then silver, and its gain then gold; that its a tree of life;
that length of days, riches and honors, attend upon it; as Prove. 3. Whatever
the Scriptures speak, and men's mouths speak, of the excellencies, the
sweetness, and satisfaction that a godly life brings in, a discontented heart
denies all, and tells the World there is little in it: Peace, and joy, and gain,
and satisfaction, where is it? there is not enough to keep the heart in any
tolerable quiet; there is not enough to still the soul from murmuring and
complaining: What do our discontents speak less in the ears of the World?

5. It is its own plague and punishmont; it eats out and devoures the good and
the comfort of all we have: the want of Mordecai's Cap and Knee, made all the
honor that Haman had in the Kings Court, to be as nothing to him. Ahabs whole
Kingdom could not keep him in health while he wanted Naboths Vineyard.
Discontent is such a sickness of the heart, as makes it disrelish whatever else
it has to delight and please it.

Discontented persons are apt to think, that all their troubles are from
without, one thing is wanting, and another thing is amiss; as he that has a
tender foot complains of his shoe, it is too strait, or too hard; or as a sick
man of his meat, or his drink, or his bed, his bed is hard, or not well made,
his meat is not good, or not well dressed; but the fault all the while is in
his foot, or his stomach, in his weakness and weariness; his tender foot makes
his shoe wring, his sick stomach makes his meat unsavory, his weary bones make
his bed uneasy; it is this evil sickness of thine heart that makes thee angry
with thy state, and makes the very comforts of thy life uncomfortable to thee;
this thou want, or that thou likest not, and that vexes thee; why if this
want were supplied, and that vexation were removed, thy sickly heart would ever
find something or other to torment thee; thou will never want a plague whilst
thou carriest this evil heart about thee.

6. It Idolizeth the world, and argues captivity to it: What, could the World
do, if thou had it, that which God cannot do without it? Could the World
content thee? or can thou not find contentment when any thing of that is
wanting? who then is thy God?

2. The excellencies and sweetness of contentment.

1. There is a cheerful submission in it; a resting in Gods allowance, and a
well-pleasedness with our condition; let the Lord deal out to me, and keep back
from me whatsoever he will; its the Lord, let him do whatsoever seems him good;
God is pleased it should be thus, and therefore I am pleased. O what a sweet
life were this? all the perturbations of our lives arise from the clashing of
Gods Will, and our wills; when ours is swallowed up in his Will, then there is
rest: Nothing comes amiss to us, there is nothing to grieve or offend, when we
like what ever God wills.

Brethren, this we pray for, Thy will be done: this we profess, Not my will,
but thine; and when our hearts consent that our prayers should be heard, and
will come in and subscribe our Petitions, how sweetly will all run on: When we
can heartily say, Not my will, but his be done, we shall be also able to say,
Because his will, mine is done.

2. There is satisfaction in it; satisfaction with God, Prove. 14. 14. A good
man is satisfied; satisfied from himself, from within him: God is within him,
and thence his satisfaction; there is no true contentment, but what is bottomed
on God: Thou have many wants, and many wishes, and many hopes; if these were
once answered, then thou think all would be well: No, no, it would not do;
if thou had thy wish, and thy hopes, there would still be something wanting
till thou come to take up with thy God: When thy soul can dwell at ease in
the midst of straits and wants, that is a sign thou have taken God as thy
sufficient portion.

3. Independence from the world; I mean wholly, as to matters of Religion and
Conscience: thou can now be happy with, or without the World, and he that can
be happy with, or without it, can be holy which way soever the world goes; as
long as thou can be content, thou will dare to be conscientious. For

4. Its an Antidote against temptations: it is the hungry Hound that follows his
game, when he is full he will not hunt: When thou find this self-sufficiency,
thy soul will not bite at the Worlds baits.

5. Its its own reward: Its both our duty, and our comfort. Let us be content,
this is one of those Commandments, [In] keeping whereof there is great reward:
this is the sweet of thy life, contentment: this is the sauce of thy meat, the
sugar of thy cup, the crop, the cream of all thy enjoyments.

Oh Christians, Would you be happy? be content, and you are happy: Would you
not be in want? be content, and you have enough? Would you not be poor? be
content, and you are rich: Would you have your houses, and your businesses, and
all your concernments, according to your mind? be content, and it is done:
Would you be free from trouble, and passions, and perplexities of mind? be
content, and they all vanish: Would you live at hearts ease, and carry all
things sweetly and smoothly on? be content, and then soul take thine ease:
Would you be content? I, there is the difficulty; this would heal all my sores:
But how shall I be content? seek not for it here, in any thing below thee, or
without thee, seek for it within, seek it from above, take up with God, and in
him thou shall find rest.

Only that you may find contentment in God;

1. Make God your own: Look not for content in the World, and look not for
content in God, without a propriety in him: Look not for content, and dare not
to be content without God: It is a shame not to be content with God, but it is
a madness to be content without God, and an interest in him. May be some of you
will say, I thank God I am none of these malcontents, I am of a sedate and
quiet spirit, I am well pleased with my state; what, and yet a stranger from
God? Is God none of thine, and yet content? Its well with thee to day, but
where may thou be to morrow? Is it no matter where? Will these bubbles and
shadows, will Death and Hell content thee? art thou content to go down into the
Pit, and perish everlastingly? God would not have thee to be patient of his
wrath, much less to be contented. Oh Brethren, let your spirits boil up, while
you will, into the highest extremities of impatience, under sin and wrath; how
can you be quiet, whilst God is angry? beware of having one good thought of
your state, suffer not your hearts to have one hours rest, till God be yours:
make God sure, and then be content with any thing, but dread that contentment
that is where God is not, Psalm. 16. The Lord is my portion, -- the Lord is at
my right hand, therefore mine heart is glad, says the Psalmist: But will thou
say, The World is my portion, the Lord is not my portion, yet my heart is glad?

2. Advance in godliness. What is God to the contenting of a soul without
godliness? you can neither understand, nor taste of God, without godliness:
Contentation arises from communion; and by how much the higher our communion
with God, by so much the more full our contentment. Godliness is the proof of
God, of his riches and satisfying excellencies, Romans 12. 2. Be ye not conformed
to this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, [that ye may
prove] what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. You that are
but young beginners in Christianity, you yet but little know what a treasure
the Lord is; no man knows but he that has it, and no man has much of this
treasure, but he that is rooted and grounded in the love of God, and raised and
enlarged in the experimental exercises of godliness. 1 Timothy 6. 6. Godliness
with contentment is great gain. When godliness rises so high, as to bring in
contentment, (a little will not do it) then you shall find it great gain. Never
look to find the gain of godliness, but according to the proportion you find of
contentment, and never look for great contentment, nor count that content you
have any great virtue, where there is but little godliness.

3. Patience in the greatest distresses: Patience (as I have elsewhere noted)
is the flesh mortified, and the flesh mortified is the world vanquished: the
flesh, while it is alive, will quickly feel; and when it smarts, twill kick and
fling, and put the whole Soul into a combustion: when the world with all its
fury, either cannot make the flesh to smart, or not so, but that the Soul can
bear it and still keep quiet, there is patience. When the world has not only
made some lighter onsets, by its vollies of reproaches and mockings; but
persecuted us to Bonds and Imprisonments, prepared for us its instruments of
death, and forced us to resist unto blood; when scourging, and stocking, and
stoning, and starving, and sawing a sunder, as it was the case of those
believers, Heb. 11. are all put to it and not pleased and cannot force a
murmuring or repining thought against God, nor an unworthy reflection on those
holy ways which have cost us so dear: but the Soul still keeps silence; and
with our Lord, Isa. 53. we lie as lambs dumb before the shearer, yea before the
butcher, when we are in such great patience in so great sufferings; when the
world has done its worst by us, and yet cannot have its will of us, there is
the victory, shall I say? nay there is the triumph of faith over the world.

4. Humility in the height of honor: When the world can neither depress nor
sinfully exalt us, neither sink nor swell us; when it can neither beat us on
the lower ground, nor on the pinnacle of the Temple.

Some Christians have been highly exalted in the world; have been raised from
the dust to sit with the Princes among the people: have been numbered among the
great and the honorable; and made to ride on the high places of the earth.
Joseph from the Prison, is lifted up to be the second in the Kingdom; Mordecai,
from the threshold of the Kings house, to be the man whom the King delights to
honor; David from the sheepfold to the Throne.

Others have had the nobler advantages of inward worth and accomplishment.
Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. Paul brought up at the
feet, and furnished with the learning of Gamaliel; too great a disputant for
the Philosophers of his age. Apollos an eloquent man and mighty in the
Scriptures.

Others have been had in great renown for their noble acts and mighty works
which they have done. How was it with David upon his slaughter of the
Philistine, with Daniel upon his interpretation of the Kings dream, with the
Apostles sometimes upon the miracles that they wrought?

Such a state as this, a state of honor and renown, is a keen weapon in the
hand of the world whereby it often stabs the Soul of all virtue and grace:
those that are blown up to the top of the mountains, are often blown away by
the winds of pride and popular applause

Those who can keep humble in such heights, whose hearts still keep their
dwelling on the lower ground, who are little ones in all their greatness;
little in their own eyes, and willing to be little in the eyes of others; who
can take their crowns, and their garlands that are set on their own heads, and
translate them on the head of their Lord; who account it their honor to
decrease to his increasing; here are the persons whose humility signifies
something.

What is it to be humble, when we have nothing whereof to be proud? to be low
when we cannot climb high? when the conscience of our poverty and penury, that
we have no worth in our selves and are of no value with others, checks every
aspiring thought? what is it not to boast, when we have nothing nor have done
any thing whereof to boast? Some are so foolish, as to be proud of mere
conceits; to dream themselves something, and then to be proud of their dreams;
but those that are not thus madly proud, what great matter is it if they be not?

When there is store of fuel for this lust to feed upon, and the bellows of
popular breath blowing it up, and yet it burns not, this is something. Do
thou not know thy self what thou art, and what thou have, and how thou art
esteemed? every one loves thee, and admires thee, and applauds and speaks well
of thee, and thou have merit enough in thee to deserve it all; why should
thou not accept of all this respect, and be of the same mind with all that know
thee? why should thou not think as well of thy self, and prize thine own
worth, and know thine own place, as well as they? Then to have all checked and
repelled with such thoughts as these; But who am I that I should lift up my
self? what have I that I have not received? I have wisdom, I have strength I
have riches, but whose are all these? are they mine own? of mine own getting?
Have I done any thing more then others, through whose strength was it? in whose
name was it? this is humility indeed.

Act. 3. 12. Why look ye on us so earnestly? The Apostles, Peter and John, had
done a great cure upon the lame man, and the people were greatly taken with it;
they ran together to see these men, and wondered at them, and the cure which
they had done; These are strange men, Gods rather then men, by whom such a
mighty cure was wrought. But behold, they are not at all transported with the
peoples wonderment, nor will accept of their applause; Ye men of Israel why
look ye so upon us, as though we by our own power had made this man to walk.
You are mistaken in us, we are not the men you take us to be; we could no more
have cured this man by our own power, then any of you could have done; wonder
not at us, give glory to God, give glory to God; God has magnified his Son
Jesus; it is his name, and through faith in his name, by which this man is made
whole.

4. Magnanimity in greatest difficulties and dangers, Magnanimity notes,
Generosity. Fortitude.


1. Generosity, A Soul abstracted from the world is a generous Soul: eximiae
virtutis, vigorous and sprightful: its a Soul restored to it self, grown up
toward its original vigor, which was lost and chok'd in the mud of this
world. It is for great action, for higher and more noble achievements, It is
of the Berean extract, of whom it was said, Acts 17. 11. they were more noble
then they of Thessalonica, (...) -- more generous then they, such large Souls
it will not satisfy, to have done some little and lower things.

The Spirit of this world is a poor and narrow Spirit, ignavae animae quae
ambire magna non noruut; sluggish dull and heavy Souls; whom either a little
action must suffice, or if there be more, it is about these little things: this
world conquering Spirit is a Soul upon the wing, that being unclog'd of earth
flies high: pursues higher things, and by a swifter, and more vigorous motion,
Math. 5. 47. what singular thing do ye? God has done great things for it, and
this great mind is for great returns.

It wills great things, and it dares to attempt great things; It will not
despond or be discouraged with difficulties; This is to much, or this too hard;
Difficulties are the delight, and the proof of a generous mind.

What shall I do for him whom my Soul honors? what would I not do? what would
I refuse for his sake! Oh what little things are my great things, even the
greatest that I can do! how much have I received, how little have I to return?
Oh for more work for God, for more strength for work? I can never do enough
when I have done all, and therefore I will never say it is enough, whilst there
is more to be done.

Oh how little must suffice a carnal heart, and how much is every little
accounted? a magnanimous Spirit does much but thinks all but little; others do
little, but over reckon. A little praying or praising, or speaking or thinking
or working for God, must serve, and how much is that little reckoned?

How soon are we at our Lands end, and have even wrought our selves out of
work? or else how quickly are we discouraged by the greatness of our work? the
least straw is a stumbling block, the least Molehill a Mountain; every duty is
a difficulty, and every difficulty an impossibility. How shall I stand under so
much work? Who would venture on so great difficulties? Am I God, and not man?
spirit, and not flesh? the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak: No, no,
thy spirit is weak too, this spirit is but flesh: How weak is thine [heart]
that it is so soon discouraged?

O Brethren, where is the victorious spirit? where are the Heroes of
Christianity, the Nobles that set their necks to the work of the Lord? What
designs have you for advancing in holiness, for magnifying the grace of God in
you, for exalting his name in an heavenly life? Where are the Trophies of your
prowess? bring forth the Captives you have taken: Can you show your lusts in
Chains, your pride in Chains, your covetousness in Chains? Here are the
prisoners I have taken, Behold houses, and honors, and dignities, and
pleasures, behold my feet upon the necks of them all: This little I have done
for God, Yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me: This little have I
done for God, the weights are laid aside, and now will I run with patience the
Race which is set before me: Now for a fruitful life, for laboring and
abounding in the work of the Lord; for growing rich unto God, rich in good
works; I cannot sit down by that little I have done; he is worthy, he is
worthy, for whom I should do other manner of things then these, for whom I
should live another manner of life then this: O were I all soul, all wing, all
life, all action, how little would this my [all] be, to what I would it were:
Rise up O my soul, shake off thy ashes, open thy sluices, let run all thy
streams, what will thou do for thy good? I have done for my flesh, I have done
for my family, I have done for my friends, what shall I do for my God? Read O
my soul, in the Book of Records, as that King did, Ester 6. 2. and search what
the Lord has done for thee, how he has pardoned thee, and sanctified thee,
and subdued thine enemies under thee; how he has brought thee out of thine
house of bondage, and redeemed thee from the house of servants: And then ask,
What honor has been done the Lord for all this?

O Brethren, how are we straightened? we walk as if we were still in our fetters;
if we were still Vassals to this earth, we could hardly be less active for
heaven: Whilst we tell one another what the Lord has done for our souls, how
little have we to tell, what our souls have done for the Lord? Empty vines we
are, that bring forth our fruit to our selves, that sow for our selves, and
reap for our selves, and thresh for our selves, and live to our selves, and how
little to him?

And that little we do for God, how hardly are we brought to it? Am I bound to
do this? am I bound to do that? bound to give so much to the poor? bound to
spend so much time in prayer? bound to such constant care and labor? May not
less suffice? will not less be accepted? may I not be a Christian at a cheaper
rate? And if our flesh can but make us believe, that less may serve, how glad
are we to sit down and save our labor?

Brethren, is it not thus with the most of us? must we not be dragged and driven
on to duty? what do we more then bare necessity forces us to? if fear would let
us alone, if Conscience would let us be quiet, how little is it that love to
Christ would put us upon? Oh where are the large hearts to God, the flowing
souls, that freely offer themselves to the Lord: Woe to us, this earth still
sucks up our streams.

2. Fortitude. By this we stand against the fury of the world: That Is a
magnanimous spirit, that delights in difficulties, and despises danger; a bold
soul; that not only loves to serve, but dares to suffer; that is not careful
about this matter, Dan. 3. Whom none of all these things move, Act. 20. 24.
that is strong, and of good courage.

Victory attends the valiant, and makes more valiant; a little Conquest fleshes
the faint. This Christian fortitude comprehends in it these three things.

A boldness With God. In God. For God.

1. A boldness with God. A free and confident access to God; a coming boldly
before the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. 16. And this arises from a sense of
Reconciliation with God, from an inward acquaintance with God, from a
conscience of uprightness before the Lord, Heb. 10. 19. 22. Having therefore
boldness by the blood of Jesus, -- let us draw near with a true heart, -- with
an heart sprinkled from an evil conscience. There Is no coming before God with a
guilty or guileful heart; it is Innocence that gives boldness; the conscience of
guilt or guile, makes us afraid and ashamed to appear before God. We are afraid
of our Bibles, ashamed to look toward our Closets, when God has a quarrel
with us. We go into our Closets, as the Thief to the House of Correction: We
sneak in ashamed and afraid, and shuffle over in haste, and are glad when we
get out again: We cannot pray, we scarce dare to lift up our eyes to heaven, we
blush before the Lord, and cannot be free and open-hearted with him: Guilt
stops our mouths, or at least the heart keeps silence where this cries in its
ears.

How can I go before the Lord? What am I like to hear if I speak to him? What
will he answer me if I call upon him? Why eryest thou to me? Go to the Gods
whom thou have served, go to thy pleasures, go to thy companions, go to thy
Mammon which thou have served; thou art privy to thy treacheries, to the
Whoredoms thou have committed with thine other Gods; why cryest thou to me in
thy distress? go to the Gods after which thou have loved to wander: how will
that heart hang down the head, and give it self the repulse that is conscious to
such treachery?

When the soul can reply, I have no other God to go to; this Flesh is not my
God, this World is not my God, my heart is with thee, my desire is to thee, and
I have kept me by thee; thou know Lord, it has been my care to keep me from
the way, and from the lusts of this world, and to walk before thee in mine
integrity, then will it lift up its face with confidence in his presence.

Now he that can thus be bold with God, that can with openness of heart make
his appeal to God, as the witness of his integrity, and that can hereupon make
his request to God, make known his want, and his straits and distresses, and be
bold to leave it upon him to relieve and support him; he that can be thus bold
with the Lord, will be bold with all the world.

Brethren, you that think you shall be bold for the Lord, when ever you are put
to the trial, that have now a forward mind to own the worship and ways of God,
and have hope that in nothing you shall be ashamed, but that at all times, and
in all things, Christ shall be magnified in you, whether by life, or by death;
let me ask you, Have you boldness with God? Is he your friend? Is it peace
betwixt him and your souls? How came this peace in? time was when there was no
peace; you were Runawayes and Rebels against God; your natural state was a
state of enmity; are you reconciled by the Blood of Christ? are you returned
and become Converts to God? has the Lord been at work with your souls? has he
convinced you, humbled you, broken you, slain the enmity, and brought you into
a Covenant of peace with himself? Its dangerous to talk of being bold with God,
till you are brought home unto God; it is for the stubble to be bold with the
flames; it is to dash on the Rock, to sleep on the Waves, to take Sanctuary in
wrath and fury, and to trust to indignation; as little succor and relief will
the unconverted find with the Lord: Are you reconciled? are you the friends of
God?

Are you of the acquaintance of God? friends may grow strangers, and strangers
cannot be bold: Do you use to converse and walk with God? how often do you
visit him? is there constant intercourse and correspondence maintained betwixt
the Lord and your souls?

Are you tender how you break your peace, and lose your acquaintance? is it
your care to walk before him in uprightness? do you not ordinarily grieve, or
offend, or carelessly neglect the Lord? Is there no allowed treachery or
falsehood in your hearts to him? do you not suffer new quarrels to arise betwixt
the Lord and you? or if there be, have you therein a quarrel against your
selves? When you offend him, do you offend your own hearts? Is every sin
against God a wound to your own souls? are you ever angry with your selves but
when God is at peace? Is it your constant care to keep all clear and fair
betwixt the Lord and you? and hereupon, can you come boldly before the Throne
of Grace, and make known your wants, and your grievances, and ease your hearts,
by opening them, and emptying them into the bosom of your friend? fear not,
this your boldness with the Lord, will give you boldness on the behalf of God,
how frightful soever the case may be.

Oh take heed that your confidence that you shall stand your ground in the day
of trial, be not presumption. And certainly whatever your thoughts are at
present, if you be not the real and inward friends of God now, if you have but
the name and the face of his Disciples, if you follow him for fashion, or for
company, or for novelty; if notwithstanding all the regards and respects you
profess to have for God and his ways, there be still a Conscience of guile and
deceit within; if notwithstanding all your heat and forwardness in his public
worship, you are strangers to the love and life of God, and are still in league
with his Enemies, serving your flesh and this world: And hereupon whatever you
do in public, yet you have no freedom in secret with God, no secret
familiarity, no secret entercourses of love and friendship, you cannot be bold
and open-hearted when you have him alone; if you cannot be thus bold with the
Lord, your promising your selves that you shall be bold for him is your
presumption, and will deceive you.

Only let me tell you (for fear of discouraging such who should not be
discouraged) he that has the ground of this holy boldness, that through the
blood of Jesus has peace with God, whose constant care is to please the Lord,
and to walk before him in his uprightness; though by reason of the darkness and
misgivings of his troubled trembling heart, he scarce dares to call God Father,
and can hardly at any time look him in the face without fear and shame, and
hereupon shakes at the fore-thoughts of the day of trial, this poor trembling
soul may expect, when he is put to it, to be enabled to stand as Mount Zion
that shall never be removed.

2. Boldness in God: We were bold in our God, 1 These. 2. 2. This boldness
stands in a firm dependence upon God, Job 13. 15. Though he kill me, yet will I
trust in him. A resolved Christian will depend upon God, for his counsel and
conduct, Psalm. 73. 24. Thou will guide me with thy counsel: he will not lean
to his own understanding; he is fearful enough to walk in his own counsels; he
knows that it is not in man that walks to order his own steps, but withal he
knows he has a better guide: he depends on God for his aid and assistance: His
faith says the same which Christ says, Isa. 50. 7. The Lord God will help me,
therefore I shall not be confounded; therefore have I set my face as a flint,
and I know that I shall not be ashamed. He will keep his way and adventure
events and issues upon God: God will provide, is his encouragement in his most
difficult cases: and hence he bears up under the most frightful aspect of his
present case what ever it be, 1 Samuel 30. 6. But David encouraged himself in the
Lord his God. He was in a great distress and in great danger, but yet he bears
up. All is gone, and worse is coming: mine enemies have carried away all, and
my friends are become mine enemies; my friends are against me, and I have none
to stand with me; I am in great distress, what shall I do?

But where is the Lord? who is the Lord but my God? O there is enough. Why art
thou cast down O my Soul, and why art thou discouraged within me? Hope in God,
be strong and of good courage.

3. Boldness for God: There is a boldness to which God is nominally entitled,
which is not boldness for God, but for our selves. The bold asserting our own
conceits and opinions for divine truths; the bold imposing our own inventions
as the will of God; the zealous pursuing matters of religion for our own
advantage, and crying out over it zeal for God: the intemperate insisting on
the controverted and questionable matters of religion: this our boldness we may
call our weakness, and wilfulness; our pride and selfishness. God will never
thank you for such boldness; father not your follies or phrensies upon the most
high; God will reward such boldness either with frowns or with fury.

Boldness for God stands, in a constant maintaining our fidelity and allegiance
to God; in a resolved promoting the real interest and honor of his name and
worship: a boldness to pray, as in the case of Daniel, Chap. 6. 10. When the
King forbad him: a boldness to preach, as in the case of the Apostles, Acts 5.
When the Priests and Rulers forbad them: a boldness to be holy and upright and
not to sin against God as in the case of Job. chap. 1. When the Devil afflicted
him for it: a boldness to confess Christ before men; both in our ordinary
conversation, and in special when called before rulers: bearing witness both by
word and works against all the sins, the profaneness, the Atheism, the
Idolatries and Apostacies of the world; a boldness to suffer rather then sin
against God.

This is Christian fortitude, and is then the clearer proof of our victory over
the world,

1. When we follow God and keep his way, with the contempt of the [greatest]
advantages on the one hand, and the [sharpest] sufferings on the other; when
the highest price that the World can give, cannot entice us, and the greatest
mischief that the World can do, cannot force us to unfaithfulness: when its
best and worst are contemned, in comparison of a good conscience toward God.

Will thou mind and serve and follow me says the World? why what reward will thou give me? Thou shall have wealth: what nothing else? yes thou shall have
pleasure: what no more? yes thou shall have honors and preferments, thou shall
be a great man, and exalted in the earth, and what more can thou desire?

And if thou will not hearken, if thou will forsake me; why what then? look for
all the mischiefs I can do thee: look for reproach and scorn; if that will not
do, look for hunger and thirst; if yet it be not enough look for stripes, and
bonds, and prisons, and torments and death: Well is this all that thou can
give? is this the worst thou can do? Away from me, I neither love nor fear
thee, I will keep the Commandments of my God: there is a bold Soul, one of
Christ's worthies.

2. When we choose the greatest of sufferings, rather then little sins. May be
thou would be afraid to run upon horrid sins; If these were the terms that
were given thee, Curse God and live, Renounce thy part in Christ, forswear thy
Lord, blaspheme and live; These horrid wickednesses have too ghastly a face,
these look too much like Hell; thou dare not buy thy liberty, or thy life, at
so dear a rate. But may thou escape by Zoar, will some little sin secure
thee? some little sinful shift, a little compliance, or that which has but the
appearance of evil, what say thou now? If thou can not drink down a full
draught of the cup of fornication, can thou not sip of the cup, or so much as
put to it thy mouth, can thou not kiss the cup? no no, every drop is poison,
and a drop of poison is deadly, every little sin is the price of blood; the
very appearance of evil will be a blot on my holy profession. 1 Cor. 9. 13. I
had rather dye then that any should make my glorying void: Not only what is
unjust, or impure, or dishonest, but what is dishonorable, what ever has an
evil face, or an evil sound, my life shall go, rather then I will redeem it by
any such unworthy way.

3. When we refuse the greatest advantages rather then neglect the least of
duties: When we can resolve from love, what Balaam did for fear, Numb. 22. 18.
If Balak would give me an house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the
word of the Lord; to do less or more. I will not willingly fail of a tittle of
all that the Lord requires me. I will not be bought out of my duty: weigh me my
price; whatever can be given, houses, or mountains of gold and silver, they
will be contemned in comparison of faithfulness to God. I will not be hired,
not only to a total neglect of God, but not to do less then he requires. I can
make no abatements, I will not keep back part, there is unfaithfulness in the
least, the whole World shall not hire me to be unfaithful. If God says, Keep
thy self pure, keep thy self unspotted of the World; If God says, Be faithful,
be circumspect, be zealous; If God says, Hold fast that which thou have, Hold
forth the word of life, be not ashamed to confess me before men, be harmless,
be blameless, in the midst, and in the sight of a crooked generation; endure
hardness, deny thy self, take up thy cross and follow me, without turning
aside, either to the right hand or to the left. As the Lord lives, as I will
not go beyond, so neither will I take up short of the word of the Lord, to do
less or more.

It may be if the profane World say, let [all] alone, give up [all] thy
religion; have done with this praying and hearing, yea and this professing of
religion; scrape out all prints, and raze out all principles of righteousness
and holiness, and prostitute thy self with us to all manner of licentiousness;
possibly thou will not dare to do thus.

But if thy carnal friends say, at least be wise, be not righteous over much,
be not fondly precise; remit of thy heat, abate of thy zeal, conceal thy self;
Have thou faith? have it to thy self. Have thou conscience? have it to thy
self. If thou will follow Christ still, yet walk no more openly with him? thou
may be a Disciple and no body the wiser if thou will be a little more
moderate and wary. What say thou to this? no if all the friends I have in the
World should thus plead with me, even in this I cannot hearken.

What Christ says is over much, shall be abated; when Christ says be less
precise, be not so zealous, keep thy religion to thy self, keep thy conscience
to thy self, I will hearken. What Christ calls discretion and moderation, I
will embrace; what Christ calls pride, and fondness, and nicety, I will avoid:
where Christ says, be sober, be wary, hide thy self, I will obey; but beyond
the word of the Lord I will not go, to do less or more; I will not be rash or
heady, I will not be wilful or obstinate; I will not be turbulent or
contentious; I will not contend for any thing as religion, which Christ has
not called so, nor for that which is, farther or otherwise, then he has
required me: Christian wisdom, and moderation, and meekness, and gentleness,
and condescension, and peaceableness, I will embrace, and follow after with all
men, for this is the will of my Lord.

But say no more to me, be less holy, be less zealous for righteousness and
holiness; I cannot be righteous overmuch and I will not be wicked in a little.

If you ask further, what are the properties of this godly boldness, I answer,
it is,

1. An humble boldness, that does not make a noise, that does not boast and
bluster, nor show it self in uncomely heats and animosities; that has firmness
and undauntedness, but joined with lowliness and meekness.

2. A prudent boldness, that does not espouse needless controversies, that is
wary of mistaking matters or measures; that does not rashly and headily run
upon dangers which it might without sin avoid; that does not unwarily create it
self nor needlessly provoke enemies, but fears not to meet them in his way, nor
will either turn aside or stand still to escape them.

Now put all these together; he that is bold with the Lord, who being
reconciled by the blood of Christ, and walking before him in his integrity; can
with an holy boldness approach, and make known his requests to the Lord, for
grace and mercy and help in the time of need; He that is bold in the Lord,
whose heart is fixed trusting in God; He that is in his name, bold for the
Lord, bold to be faithful to God, bold to be holy and righteous; that will
follow God and keep his way with the neglect of the highest worldly advantages
on the one hand, and the sharpest sufferings on the other; that will choose the
greatest of sufferings, rather then little sins; that will refuse the greatest
advantages rather then neglect the least of duties; that is meek, and yet
mighty through God; that trembles at the word, and yet stands against all the
world; that is tender as a bruised reed, and yet stands against all the world;
that is tender as a bruised reed, and yet not terrified at an army with
banners; whom a child may lead and yet a giant cannot drive; an innocent dove
with a serpents wisdom; a patient lamb, with a Lions heart; who will not
strive nor cry nor make a noise in the streets, and yet in the strength of the
Lord brings forth judgment into victory; Here is the valiant Christian, that
triumphs over thrones and Dominions; that in the name of Christ, has spoiled
principalities and powers, and has led captivity captive. Here is a man
clothed with the Sun, who has the moon under his feet.

Christians, where is this mighty spirit of the Gospel? Behold, some who seem
sufficiently high flown, are yet as weak as water: whose hopes and whose
comforts lie at the mercy of every temptation; whose religion must strike sail,
at the fight of every enemy, or tack about at every turn of the wind; who are
no body but in the sunshine and the calm: whose course must be steered by their
commodity and safety: who are for duty, yet dare not pray to their loss; who
protest against iniquity, yet will sin rather then suffer.

Is not this thy case? would thou not have been better if thou had dared?
thy conscience is for more praying, and hearing, and closs walking with God,
but thine heart will not serve thee, the times will not bear it, thy estate
will be in hazard, thy liberty, yea and thy life too in danger: thou dare not
turn Apostate from Christ, thou would be one of the company still, though
thou be but a midnight Disciple, and this must comfort thee under all thy
disguised unfaithfulness: thou haltest betwixt Christ and the World, thou
dare neither utterly to forsake him, nor resolvedly to own him; thou can
not tell what to be, nor where to find thy self: were it not for love of this
World, what a Christian would thou be? were it not for fear, who should
outstrip thee? but as Matters are, what to do thou know not, and whose thou
art, who can tell? to day thou art with the Disciples, but who can tell where
to find thee to morrow? weak Soul, have thou good will for Christ, why will thou not venture after him? have thou the name, where is the Spirit of a
Christian? arise shake off thy fear and be bold.

Be bold for God: Some are bold enough, but it is for themselves; God has the
name but self is the mark that's aimed at; beware that this be not it thou
countest thy godly boldness. Some are bold upon God; upon the patience and
forbearance of God; bold to slight and affront the Lord, bold to sin against
him, to stand it out against him, against all his commands, threatenings and
judgments; bold to continue unbelievers, impenitent, blasphemers, unclean
livers, though God has said that all such shall be damned: to be thus bold is
to be desperate; they dare the Almighty to his face, to bring his Counsel to
pass, and to perform all his words that he has spoken against them. Be bold
but see that it be for God not against him.

Be bold for God, but let it be also in the Lord. Be bold in the Lord, but that
you be not more bold then welcome; look to it, that you be the friends of God;
the boldness of strangers, is sauciness or presumption: The Lord upbraids his
rebellious people with their confidence in him, Mic. 3. yet they will lean upon
the Lord; they love me not, yet they will lean upon me. Its hard to say which
is more dangerous, the trust of the ungodly, or their distrust: God will be no
Rock to those, who will not that he be their Lord: He will not accept of a
testimony from a devil; it disparages a good Cause to be pleaded by an evil
mouth; and as he will not regard thy confession, so neither will he bear thee
out in what it costs thee: If thou will not submit to God, confess him at thine
own peril; depend on [me] for my help? expect countenance or encouragement from
me? lay hold on [my] power? lay claim to [my] all sufficiency or faithfulness?
how dare thou be so bold? what art thou to me? a stranger, and yet so bold?
an enemy, and yet so bold? away Confident, look to thy self, stand on thine own
bottom, I have nothing for thee: Art not thou he that wilt not be ruled by me,
that wilt not accept of my love and peace, that dissemblest with me, that
speak me fair, but thine heart is not with me? art not thou he that dare
continue in thy sin, and to walk after the flesh, and in friendship with this
world, whose heart goes after thy covetousness, and thy companions, and thy
pride, and thy pleasures? and wilt [thou] lean on me, and strengthen thy self
in me? I have offered to be reconciled to thee, and thou will not; I have
offered to change thee, to change thy mind, and change thy way; to make thee a
new soul, and a new life, and still thou refusest, and art the same man that
ever thou wast: may be thou have gotten thee a new face, and a new tongue, and
I have thy company sometimes; thou draw'st nigh to me, and come in among my
Saints; but behold the same heart still that ever thou had; thou will not be
a Convert, thou will not be brought into a Covenant of peace with me, but are
still in league with thy flesh, and this world; and how can thou say I trust
in God? I will be no sanctuary for sin?

Brethren, beware there be not any among you, who make your trusting in God, to
serve you instead of turning to God; your outward forwardness in the cause of
God, to serve instead of your hearty accepting the grace of God; the Lord needs
not, nor will regard your good words, whilst your hearts are not with him; go
and be reconciled to your adversary, (for such the Lord is yet to you) go and
be reconciled to God, accept of his grace, resign to his Dominion, set him up
as Lord and Ruler within you, let his Law and his love be in your hearts, and
then you may be bold, both upon his acceptance of whatever service you do for
his Name, and upon your security in it: Be the Lords in truth, and then fear
not to make the Lord your trust.

5. Aequanimity in all the changes of his outward condition: An equal, steady,
fixed frame, in all turns and changes. If prosperity alone, if afflictions
alone, will not corrupt or discompose us, they are often made to take their
turns, sometimes one, sometimes another, if that may do it.

Though all wet or all dry will not, yet sometimes wet, and sometimes dry, will
rot the sturdy Oak. He is a strong man indeed, upon whom great and sudden
changes of weather, air, diet, and his whole course and way of life, does make
no change. Those souls are often tossed with turns of fair weather and foul,
which can ride at anchor in constant tempests; we can hardly be long the same,
whilst matters go not with us after the same way.

As the Psalmist, Psa. 55. 19. Because they have [no] changes; so sometimes may
it not be said, Because they have [many] changes, therefore they fear not God;
we may be so long emptied from vessel to vessel, till we have lost our savor.

He is a Christian indeed, whose soul is not tossed out of its peace, whose feet
are not turned out of course, by all the tossings and turnings of his outward
state, whose heart is not moved within, when every day proves, that all he has
without are movables.

Inward changes there are, and ought to be, according to the vicissitudes and
varieties of providential occurrences; every providence should make impression
upon our spirits, proportionable to it: a due and different sense there ought
to be, of our outward mercies and crosses; a sad sense of paternal displeasure,
is as necessary under corrections, as a cheerful sense of bounty and kindness,
when all things prosper with us: We may not be as stocks or stones, upon whom
the Summer or Winter makes no difference; God looks that worldly changes be
seen and felt in hearts; we may and must have our light and dark, our joys and
sorrows, our hopes and fears, there is need, and use of all.

But now in all these outward, and their corresponding inward changes, a
Christian as to the main changes not; his heart is fixed trusting in God; he is
not out of frame, though he be in another frame to day, then yesterday he was;
both in his prosperity and in his patience, he possesses his soul; he is the
same to Godward, and toward sin; still in motion heavenward, and in defiance
with iniquity.

As it is on the other side with the wicked, though they are as a troubled Sea,
yet they are still at rest in their iniquity; whatever changes pass over them,
their hearts, as to the main, are not changed; ever besides themselves, and yet
ever themselves, wicked still; emptied from vessel to vessel, and yet their
sent goes not forth out of them. Ungodly still, hardened still, for sin and the
devil still; let their condition be what it will, let them be in health, let
them be sick, let them be full, let them be empty, let their steps be washed
with Butter, or sprung with Vinegar; let their way be straw'd with Rosebuds, or
hedged with Thorns; let them be merry, let them be sad, all is one, they are the
same men, and holding the same course; wicked under mercies, wicked under
judgments, wicked in their joys, wicked in their sorrows:

O how do we see the providence of God thrown away, and lost upon the ungodly
world: Let the Lord do what he will with them, shine upon them, or thunder upon
them, deal gently, or deal roughly with them; cloth them, or strip them, feed
them, or famish them, it comes all to one, their hearts will not be broken, nor
turned to the Lord.

Oh what strange changes has the Lord of late made upon this wicked age? what
turns and returns have we seen, smitings and healings, scatterings and
gatherings, wars and peace, sickness and health; and yet behold the world still
where they were, lying in wickedness.

So for the Saints, let the world do what they can upon them, let [them] shine
or thunder upon them, deal gently, or deal roughly, feed or famish them, they
are still where they were, their heart is fixed, trusting in God.

And he that by all this feels the [least] disturbance upon his spirit; he that
sails most steadily in all winds and weathers, whose heart is not unhinged by
all his turnings, who is not inordinately exalted nor depressed by his fair
weather and foul, nor hurried out of himself by passionate and troublesome
transports, on the one hand or the other; but holds his soul in such an even
equal poise, that his moderation appears unto all men, there is another that
rides in triumph over earth and hell.

Oh Brethren, how is it with us upon this account? If we have made over our
selves to the Lord, and have ceased to be numbered among the men of this World;
if we no longer seek our treasure on earth, and have laid hold on that better
treasure above, yet are we gotten so clear of things below, that they have not
still too great a power upon us? Has not this Moon a mighty influence upon our
waterish spirits? do not these ebb and flow, according as it waxes and wanes?
are we the same men, when things are not with us after the same manner? are we
the same in summer and winter? can we keep our hearts and hold our course in
all weathers? Is it come to be all one with us, as to our inward state, which
way matters go with us without? can we want and yet be quiet, can we be full
and not be wanton? can we be full and not forget God, and be hungry and not
fret our selves against him? can we love God when he smites, and fear him when
he smiles? Is it peace longer then there is plenty, have we sunshine in cloudy
days? do we keep warm in the winter, and not sleep in the summer? how small a
sunshine will steal off our garments, and how little a wind will blow us off
our legs?

Consider brethren; it may be whilst the Lord has prospered you, and matters
outward have gone according to your hearts, then you could love and serve and
praise and rejoice in the Lord; then you could be active, and lively and
fruitful, and cheerfully go on your way; but the next cross providence has
been as water upon all your fire; a little storm that has risen, has put out
all your light, turned you besides all your duties and comforts: turned you
besides praying and rejoicing in God, to vexing and fretting and murmuring
against him, and to questioning his love and goodness to you; all the flowers
that your sunshine has nursed up, how does one frosty night wither away.

Or else, if your Souls have been prospering in the winter how has the next
summers day chok'd them up with weeds. Sometimes God has brought thee into the
house of mourning, girded thee with sackcloth, laid thee in ashes, proved thee
in the furnace of affliction; and then how humble, and serious, and mortified!
then what praying, and repenting, and covenanting with God, and strengthening
thine heart in him! then dead to sin, crucified to the world, living by faith,
walking in fear; nothing but God, and holiness, and glory in thy heart and in
thy tongue; but no sooner has he turned thy captivity, put off the garments of
thy widowhood, brought thee out of darkness into light, and redeemed thy Soul
out of trouble, but all is presently forgotten, and fleshliness vanity and
security returns upon thee.

Oh how little is there yet done to what must be done, ere we shall come to any
steadiness, whilst every wordly change does so rout and disorder us.

Christians, let us be like our God, holy and unchangeable; get you changed
into his image, and then be unchangable.

Oh that my Soul were in such a case, but how may I obtain? Why,

1. Seek earnestly after a more abundant diffusion of the establishing Spirit
of grace. Let the Psalmists prayer be yours, Psalm. 51. 12. Uphold or establish
me with thy free Spirit. The Spirit of this World, is as Reuben, Genesis 49. 4.
Unstable as water: the Spirit of grace is an establishing Spirit.

Have thou received this Spirit? have thou a little grace? open thy mouth yet
wider, enlarge thy desire as Heaven. A double portion, a double portion of thy
Spirit O Lord. Consider these two things,

1. The greater measures of grace are the portion of those that are the most
importunate seekers of grace.

2. Those are the most established Souls to whom grace has abounded.

1. The greater measures of grace are the portion of those that are the most
importunate seekers of grace. To his Saints, the Lord gives his Spirit by
measure; to some a lesser, to some a fuller measure; they have all drank in the
same Spirit, but not all a like draught: our Heavenly Father will give his
Spirit to those that ask it of him, and every man has according to his asking:
it is not with this as with the Manna in the wilderness, He that gathered much
had nothing over, he that gathered little had no lack; He that asks much has
never the more, he that asks little, has never the less; it is not thus, but
God gives to every man according to his asking. The reason why we go on from
day to day, from year to year, with our vessels so empty, with so little grace,
is because our little suffices us, we are content and sit down by our little.
If the Widow had brought more or larger vessels, she had had more oil, 2 King.
4. 6. The largest hearts go away with the richest loading. Do ye see Souls,
that ply at the bucket, that are often letting down into the well of salvation;
that dwell at the throne of grace, whose very breath is prayer, that are every
day and every night wrestling with the Angel for a blessing, whom one blessing
will not suffice, but are still for more and for more, these are the thriving
Souls: full of prayer and full of the Spirit.

2. Those are the most established Souls, to whom grace has abounded: it is not
every little measure of true grace, that will bring the heart to a comfortable
consistency: poor weakling Christians sadly prove, how even Disciples may be so
tossed in the waves, that they know not where to find themselves: We are reeds
shaken with the wind; Oh how are our hearts thrown up and down hither and
thither, by a perplexing succession of hopes and fears, joys and sorrows,
comforts and crosses, and scarce ever at rest: sometimes lifted up, sometimes
depressed; sometimes all upon the wing, by and by in the dust; sometimes in a
fever, anon in a cold ague; yea sometimes breathing out prayers and praises,
and at the very next minute flameing out in passion and impatiencies: thus it
is, and there is no hope it should be otherwise, whilst so low in grace; what
wonder, if whilst we are such children, we be carried to and fro with every
wind? those that are grown up to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might, these will have strength to sit still.

O be aspiring Christians; be making up to the highest form, and be not content
here to take a lower room. Be filled with the Spirit, follow on, follow hard
after the Lord, and look not to be long your selves, till you be fuller of him.

Brethren, do not go about to excuse your sinful perturbations, when there is a
way before you to cure them. You are ready to say, do not blame me for it, I
cannot help it. I know it is very sad to be in a perpetual storm, but how can I
mend it? you know not my trials, none knows where the shoe wrings but he that
wears it.

Do not blame you for it? why do not you blame your self for it? are you
willing of such a troublesome life, and to be let alone in it? Is the ease of
an excuse, all the cure you desire? Is there not a remedy for your disease? I
cannot help it? what, would not more grace help it? would not more faith, and
more patience, and more mortification help it? You mistake your self, you are
yet carnal, your proud flesh, your fretful angry flesh is too hard for that
little grace you have; get more grace, and the cure is done.

2. Let your hearts be more strongly intent upon God; By how much the more
intensely God is minded, by so much the less impression will any thing that
occurs make upon our spirits; when the Scales are but just turned, every little
dust falling in, will make them hover: A Bowl that runs strongly toward the
mark, it is not every little rub that will turn it out of its course: When the
soul is making a main heavenward, and intends all its powers, in the more
vigorous pursuit of the Invisible Crown; when the heart is possessed, and much
taken up with its more weighty and glorious concernments; when the thoughts,
affections, resolutions, are all deeply engaged, and busily working toward
God, the greatest occurrences of this life are past over as little things; it is
because we are so weakly moving heavenward, that we are so moved with every
trifle.

Thou complainest of the frequent distractions and fluct^ations of thy mind,
wave upon wave, billow upon billow come rolling in upon thee, and invincibly
roll thy soul out of it self; would thou be cured of this palpitation of
thine heart? mind thy God more, mind thy business more, set thine heart on thy
home, and upon hasting on thy journey thitherward, and see if this will not
keep thee in frame.

Put on more weight, Christians, and your wheels will run more even, and more
constant; let the importance of your eternal state be much in your eye, and
upon your heart: Look often into the blessed eternity that is before you; steep
your hearts in Divine Contemplation, and when you are transported into
admirings of that glory, then ask your hearts, what little things are the
Sunshine or the storms of this lower Region? tell me not of pleasures, of
plenty and prosperity here; tell me not of crosses or disappointments here; how
shall I get to heaven: Oh may I come there once, no matter how it be here. Look
also into the black and dreadful eternity; put your finger into the eternal
fire; think, and think over and over of those flames, of the gripings and
gnawings of the Infernal Worm; think of these things, till you feel them to
smart, and begin to scorch and burn in your hearts; and then say, What if this
should be my place; if this fire, and this Worm; if these gnawings, and this
burning, should be my portion for ever? may I but escape this death only, what
is there else should trouble me?

Take a view thus of Eternity, and then set down, This is the work I have upon
me, this is the business of my day, to make sure for Eternity. Let this sink
into your hearts, hang on this poise, and see if it do not hold your souls in
such constant and vigorous motion heavenward, that all the noises of this
world, which now so amuse and confound you, will be but whispers that will be
little regarded.

3. Reckon upon nothing but God: Make sure of God, and reckon upon nothing
else: Reckon on no good thing but God, and reckon on all the troubles and
miseries on this side hell: What you look for, and count upon, will work the
less disturbance when it comes; count upon all losses but the loss of God; him
(if you be his) you shall never loose: Count upon all woes, but the last woe,
upon all sufferings but hell; God would never have thee count upon these, (if
thou be his) these shall never come upon you; bless God for that, so long it is
well enough; any thing else, the worst you can think of, may come, reckon upon
it, and you will the better bear it.

4. Put your flesh upon the frequent trial of a voluntary restraint, and
self-crossing. Restrain your selves, and you will the better endure when God
straitens you: He whose flesh is ordinarily curbed by his Christian prudence,
will be less moved when crossed by Divine Providence: allow not thy flesh what
it craves, though thou have to satisfy it; think not opportunities of
satisfying thy flesh to be a divine allowance; count it not thy Warrant to
allow thy self whatever pleases thee, that thou have wherewithal,
opportunities are often but temptations: God sometimes does as a wise Master,
who lays an apple, or a piece of money in the way, to try his child or servant.
Use to give thy heart no more then God bids thee, and thou shall find that God
will never give it less then will content thee. Inure thy self to live daily at
the allowance of Religion, and thou shall never want thy allowance: When thou
usest to have no more then thou should have, thou will be like to be content
with what thou should have; and when thou art content with what thou should
have, thou will ever be content to have what thou have: Though it be often said
of some of the servants of men, yet it shall never be said of any of Gods
servants, that they have not what they should have. And he, who whatever falls,
whatever his portion or condition be, in every turn or change that comes, can
find his heart saying, still it is with me as it should be; yesterday it was so,
this day it is so, to morrow it shall be so; he whose heart says thus of every
condition he is in, It is with me as it should be, will say, It is well; and so
sit down quietly in his lot.

5. Lastly, Victory over the world, stands in a willingness to be gone from
this, and to take our flight to the other world, in a willingness to die:
Worldly men, if they could help it, would never die; they would rather live
among the dead, then die into a better life; they are dead while they are
alive, dead in sin; and they would that this might be their eternal death: Oh
might they be allowed an everlasting day to sin in, to drink, and swear, and
whore, and curse, and covet in, what other heaven would they wish for? Were
there a message brought down to the World, that their houses of Clay should
stand for ever; that this buying, and selling, and building, and planting, and
getting wealth, and rolling themselves in pleasures, should be their
everlasting employment; that all the noise and fear of graves, and tombs, and
death, and mortality, should be for ever silenced, what a Gospel would this be
to them? how would the word then be changed, not the poor, but the rich receive
the Gospel?

Worldlings, if Ministers were sent this day to preach to you, that you should
never come to heaven, but that you should abide here in your houses, in your
fields, in your pomp, and peace, and wealth eternally: O what a Jubilee would
this day be unto you? what ringings, and bonfires, and shoutings, and triumphs
would there be at the news? Oh this would be the best Sermon that ever you
heard in your lives, this would be the best tidings (in your account) that ever
came into the world.

Death is a terror, the great dread of the world, the King of terrors, Job 18.
14. the hopes of heaven would willingly be parted with, so the fears of death
might be no more. How do the expectations and approach of death appale the
faces, weaken the hands, shake the hearts, sour the pleasures, damp the
jollities, cool and cow the spirits of the mighty ones of the earth?

If it should be said this day to any of the Worldlings among you, Set thine
house in order, for thou must die; if you should see a Tekell written on these
walls; thy day is finished, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee; thou
have eaten thy last morsel, have drank thy last draught, thy last sand is
running out; were this my message to you this day, what a sad Funeral Sermon
would this be to such?

But now a Christian is willing to be gone. Luke 2. 29. Lord, now let thou
thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, Said old
Simeon: I desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better, Said
Paul the aged, Phil. 1. 23. Egredere O anima, go forth O my soul, linger not,
these fourscore years thouhast served the Lord, fear not now to go and receive
thy wages.

Its true, there is even in the Saints a degree of unwillingness to die; but it
is chiefly, because their Victory over the world is not perfect and complete.

There are three grounds of men's unwillingness to die; 1. From a natural
abhorrence of death. 2. From a lothness to part with their treasure here. 3.
From an uncertainty whither they shall go, when they go hence.


1. From that abhorrence of death which is implanted in the natures of all
living: And upon this account there may be even in the best of Saints an
unwillingness to die: Our Lord himself, who was without sin, discovers
something of it, when he cried out, Matthew. 26. 39. Father, if it be possible,
let this Cup pass from me. Its true, in his case, there was more in it, there
was wrath in the Cup, there was a curse in the Cup, there were all the sins of
the World wrung in, to mingle him a bitter draught; but this was also something
of it, there was death in the Cup. He that said a little before, Luke 12. 50. I
have a Baptism to be baptized with, (this Baptism of Blood was it) and how am
I straightened till it be accomplished? I think long ere that day come; yet when
it came, his Innocent Nature you see how it was put to it.

Christians, you that seem to have triumphed over the fears of death; that upon
good grounds have said unto it in the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 55.
Death where is thy sting? grave where is thy victory? yet when it comes to it
in earnest, you know not how this flesh may shrink, and if it do, yet be not
discouraged; possibly, this very instance of our Lord, may be left upon Record
to this very end, to comfort his Saints when they shall be thus troubled.

It will be your wisdom, to whatever confidence you are arrived, that your
death is already swallowed up in victory, that you shall entertain your dying
day as the most joyful day of your life, though in this confidence, your hearts
pant after the approach of that day, Make haste my beloved, come Lord Jesus;
yet will it be your wisdom to buckle on all your armor, all your hopes, all
your graces, all your evidences, all your experiences and comforts, and to
expect that the conflict of that day may be such, as may need your utmost
preparations for it.

2. From a lothness to part with their treasure here. What men have, they
cannot carry it with them, and they are loath to leave it behind them. When men
die, can they carry their money with them? can they carry their houses or Lands
with them? they covet, they purchase, they build, they lay up with so much care
and zeal, as if they could ship over all they have, into the other world; but
yet they know, that as they came naked in, so naked they must go out of this
world, Job 1. 21.

But now a Christian that has Conquered the World, the World from thenceforth
ceases to be his treasure: A Worldling, what he has here, it is his treasure,
for it is all he has: God is a treasure, but he is none of his; Christ is a
treasure, but he is none of his; heaven is a treasure, but man it is none of
thine; this earth is all thou have; a Christian has another treasure; he has
not his hopes in his hand, that is to come.

But yet in regard we have hitherto conquered but in part, there may be some
unwillingness, upon this account also, even in the Saints, to die-Woe to us,
there are still such remains of the spirit of this world in us, our hearts are
still carnal to such a degree, so suited to an earthly and fleshly life, taking
such large allowances of our fleshly delights, and finding such pleasure in the
enjoyment of them, that this makes us linger and hang back, when God calls away.

And indeed, such Christians who indulge themselves the pleasures of the flesh,
and are overgrown with an earthly mind, (is not this the case of too many?)
such Christians do but deceive themselves and others, while they say, they are
willing to die. Thou say, if I were sure that Christ were mine, I would not
care to live a day longer; I want assurance, and that is the only reason I would
yet a while longer abide in this Tabernacle: No, no, there is something more in
the matter, the world has still such hold of thy heart, thou find such
pleasure in an earthly life; thy friends, and thy estate, and thy contentment
thou have herein, are so taking with thee, that yet thou can not find in
thine heart to part: Search Christians narrowly, if you find not the matter to
be thus with you; I never look to be more willing to die, till I find mine
heart more loose from the pleasure of an earthly life.

It Is the mortified Christian, he whose soul is already dead to this world, who
is ready to die out of this world: Those who live most with God, whose souls
being weaned from this milk and honey, can keep their distance from it, whose
self-denying course has made the pleasures of the flesh to loose their
gratefulness to them; whom their communion with God, their converse with
Eternity, their delightful fore-views of the pleasures above, have already
carried up their hearts; these are the Christians that are ready to be gone: I
will believe such an one, that he is in earnest, when he says, Make have my
beloved.

3. From an uncertainty whither they shall go, when they go hence; what world
they shall find, when they leave this: Upon this ground I cannot blame
worldlings to be afraid to die: art thou afraid? thou may well enough; for
whither will thy death carry thee? O the Lord knows! I know not whither, nor
where it will lay me; Do thou not know whither death will carry thee? thou
may be sure into no good place, if it find thee thus: Captives to the world
are Captives to the Devil, and whither will the Devil carry his prisoners?

Who would be willing to leave his Country, his habitation, and acquaintance,
for an unknown Land, especially when he had a jealousy he should be sold for a
Bondsman? Is this thy case Worldling? I wonder not that thou say, Its better
to abide here.

A Christian may know whither he is going when he goes hence, 2 Cor. 5. 1. We
know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. And
hence says the Apostle, v. 2. We groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon
with our house which is from heaven. Whatever our dwelling be here, we know
where we shall have a better when this fails; we groan not under the ruins of
this, but in hopes of a better building, earnestly desiring that joyful day.

Its true, Christians may be at some uncertainty, through the weakness of their
faith, and in doubts what their place and portion hereafter may be; and
therefore also may fear to be gone.

But however, upon the whole, thus far forth every Believer is willing to die;
though he still feel a natural dread of death, though by reason of the
remainders of flesh, he be too much taken with the pleasure of an earthly life,
and being at some uncertainty, and under some doubts what his future estate
after death may be, he may linger and hang back; yet were these doubts removed,
and were he grown to an assurance, that whenever his soul looses from this
body, it should immediately be received into the Paradise of God; he so much
prefers a life with God, in perfect holiness and blessedness, above the most
prosperous worldly life, that though his flesh could wish a longer stay, yet
his spirit would be willing, when ever the Lord calls, to depart and be with
Christ, which is far better.

And according as the mortification of his flesh, his Crucifixion to the world,
and his assurance of salvation, grow more complete and clear, so is his
willingness heightened into more earnest desires and longings: Come Lord Jesus,
why does my Lord delay his coming? when Lord? when shall this dust return to
the earth, and this spirit to God that gave it? make haste my beloved, and come
away.

Oh Brethren, what an argument is here to press you to put hard for this
Victory over the World? when the World is Conquered, death is Conquered, the
fear of death ceases: Would you be delivered from this fear? would you not
count it a mercy better then life to be bold to die? arise then and buckle on
your armor, treat this world no longer as a friend, but deal with it as an
enemy; watch against it, fight against it, and what day you prevail over it,
you have both won the field of all your doubts and fears, (Victory over this
world is a sure evidence for heaven) and got the Mastery of your carnal hearts,
which alone make death formidable or unwelcome.

Brethren, death comes, you know, and it may be upon you on a sudden; do you
not perceive its approaches? do we not, some of us, already feel our
Tabernacles to totter? do not the walls moulder? the windows grow dim? do not
our pillars shake, and grow weak under us? you that are youngest and strongest,
do you not know that death may be at the door? do you know what a day or a
night may bring forth? are you ready to be gone? are you bold to go forth, and
meet this last Enemy? or do you not shake and shrink at the very mention of it?
Be mortified once, and then let death do its worst: Give the Word leave to kill
this world, give the spirit leave to kill this flesh, and then you may give
death leave to do its office.

Consider, whither ever you go you carry your life in your hand, and know not
whether ever you shall bring it back. O think with your selves, when you are
going forth into the field, think with your selves, I carry my life in my hand,
and God knows whether ever I may return with it, whether ever I may come home
alive; when you go into the house, think with thy self, God knows whether ever
I may come abroad; when you arise in the morning, God knows whether my next
lodging may not be in the dust; when you lie down in the evening, God knows
where my soul may be before morning; I may awaken in another world, and what if
I should awaken in flames, and feel this soul wrapped up in a winding sheet of
fire? Is there no fear it may be so? Has this world kept me from Christ all my
life long, and will it let me to heaven at last? has it held me in Chains all
my time here? how will it use me when it carries me hence?

Are you ready to die? how shall I die when this earth is still my treasure?
take away my Gods, and what have I more? How shall I die, when my soul hangs in
doubt? whither must I when I go hence? can I follow this grisly Messenger, when
I know not whither he will lead me? let mine Enemy die first, let sin and the
World die; let mine Enemy be dead, and let him that lives be my friend, let me
cease from this earth, and let heaven be my treasure, and then I shall be
willing to be gone.

Be it thus with you Friends, and then you will be ready to be offered up:
Whatever Executioner be now sent to take away your life, if old age be sent, if
a disease, a Fever or Consumption; if a distaste, a fall, or a fire, or any the
like casualties; if a son of violence, a thief, or a murderer; whatever
Executioner be sent to take away your life, and when ever he comes, whether in
the first, second, or third Watch, you will say with the Apostle, The time of
my departure is at hand, I am ready to be offered up; I desire to depart and to
be with Christ: Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine
eyes have seen thy salvation.

And now at length, Behold the man. Here is the Conqueror, and this is his
Victory.

He that is come unto Christ, to whom the world has ceased to be his treasure,
and he has accepted of God as his happiness and Heritage; the moderation of
whose affections to things earthly, does evidence that they are now only his
means, not his end: He that can manage his worldly affairs without the
prejudice of his soul; that whatever his hand finds to do, has still an eye to
the main; that overcharges not with business, but makes business leave room for
duty; that so cares for the Oxen and the Asses, that he neglect not the souls
of his sons or servants; that in all his dealings, has a due respect to truth,
righteousness, and mercy; that will be true, though to his own hindrance, that
will be poor, rather then dishonest or unmerciful, whom the whole world cannot
hire to lie, or be unrighteous: He that can use the world to its proper end,
all for God; he that can want the worlds good things, or suffer the worlds evil
things, and can keep his heart and his way, whether he prosper or suffer; that
can deny his flesh when he has to satisfy it; that can want, and be content;
suffer, and be patient; that is humble in the height of honor, magnanimous in
the depth of danger and difficulty, that keeps in an even equal poise, sober,
temperate, serious, in all the turns and changes of his life. He that can thus
live in the world, and can die out of the world, that is willing to be gone;
this is the Conqueror, and here is his victory.

Use 1. The application that I shall make of the whole, shall be by way of
Information and Conviction. Direction and Exhortation.


1. By way of Information and Conviction. Learn from what has been said, 1.
That every Captive to the World is an unbeliever. 2. That where there is but
little power over the World, there is but little Faith.


1. Every Captive to the World is an unbeliever; without Christ, and in the
state of damnation: Oh think not light of your worldliness, it is a death token
upon you, and such as marks you up with those that perish; that this is
certainly so, that every worldling is an unbeliever and unconverted, I shall
make evident by these infallible demonstrations.

1. Can that man be a believer, who is a lover of the world more then a lover
of God? Art thou a believer who love not? can thou say thou love God,
when the better part of thine heart is with the world? will this be accepted,
when thou can only say, Lord, I bring thee half mine heart, and but the least
half neither; here it is divided, let the world I pray thee have the first
choice, and take thou all that the world leaves? give me leave first to mind my
earthly things, and next to these, God shall be regarded? Speak Conscience,
will God accept such a gift? such a little piece of a soul, when the main is
bestowed on another? Will God say, Surely this is my Child, surely this is my
Servant, next to the world he loves me best of all? Do ye think he will? what
says the Scripture? Mat. 10. 37. He that loves Father or Mother m^re then me,
is not worthy of me; he that loves Son or Daughter more then me, is unworthy
of me. Find, if you can, a more convincing argument of an unbeliever, then that
of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 4. A lover of pleasure more then a lover of God.

He that loves the world more then God, is none of his; that cannot be denied.
And art thou not the man? do thou love God as thou love the world? let thy
life speak; what seek thou? whom servest thou? where do thou bestow thy
self? in whom do thou bless thy self? what is the chief pleasure and comfort
of thy life? Is God he? Is it God whom thou seek, and servest, and blessest
thy self in? does not thine heart know that thy Mammon is the God whom thou
servest? that thou love to be rich, and to prosper in the world, more then
ever thou lovedst to be holy and righteous before God.

Do thou love God? where are thy labors of love? what have thou done for God
ever since thou were born? where are thy fruits thou have brought forth unto
the Lord? have thou been serving God all thy days, and yet have nothing to
show of all that thou have done? thou have son ething to show for thy serving
the world; this house thou have gotten, or that Farm, or these Sheep and Oxen,
or this stock of money; something thou have to show, to prove thee a servant of
the world; but have thou been serving God all thy time, and have nothing to
show for it? Sure Brethren, worldly men are either very fools, or very false to
themselves, if they do not condemn themselves here. I confess I have done
little for God all my time; I have been busy for this world, but I confess I
have but loytered, and neglected the things of the other world. I must never
lie for the matter, mine own Conscience tells me it is thus.

Foolish soul, Have thou served the world more then God, and can thou yet
make thy self believe, thou love God more then the world? to say thou love
God above all, though thou have but little sought or served him; is to say, I
love him above all, but I care not much for him; if another man should have
said so, would not thine own heart have laughed at him for a fool, or condemned
him for a liar?

Tremble Worldling, and hear this first evidence against thee; thy whole life
tells thee thou love the world more then thou love God; and God himself
tells thee, that he that loves the world more then God, is none of his.

2. Is he a believer that is not come to Christ? Coming to Christ, and
believing in Christ are the same, Joh. 6. 35. Art thou come unto Christ? whence
art thou come? from the world? what, and yet thine heart still in the world?
art thou come to Christ, who art still where thou were, when thou were without
Christ? can thou be here and there too? deceive not thy self, thou may as
well be at once in heaven and hell, as thine heart be in Christ, and in the
world.

Are Christ and the world friends? are God and Mammon become but one Master?
are the two kingdoms united, and may the same persons at once be subjects of
them both?

Has Christ ever said, be mine, and then stay where thou art? list thy name
under me for a Disciple, and then go and serve the world still? be proud, be
covetous, be sensual, be in all things as the men of this world are, only be my
Disciple?

Is not the renouncing of the world, included in our coming to Christ? does not
he that says to thee, Come, first say, depart? and is not thy coming to
Christ, in the very nature of it, a departing from the world, thy choosing of
him, a refusing of it? when Christ and the world are offered to thy choice,
can thou choose both? must thou not necessarily take to the one, and let the
other go?

And have thou renounced the world, who art still a worldling? what have thou
renounced of it? or how far forth have thou renounced it? Is it not thy
treasure still? is it not thy Lord still? Is not this it which thou still
take, as thy governor and reward.

Do thou love it as thy God, and serve it as thy God, and hold it fast as
thy God, and yet have thou renounced it? does every one that knows thee point
with the finger at thee, there goes an earthworm, there goes a Mammonist, there
lives a true drudge to the world, and will thou yet say, I have done with the
world?

Is thy lust, and thine appetite after more, as greedy, and insatiable as ever?
is thy love, and delight, and rest in what thou have, as great as ever? is it
so hard to get any thing out of thine hand for God, so that that little which
comes, must be wrung as so many drops of blood from thine heart? art thou so
pinching and sparing, that scarce any without thine own belly is ever the
better for thee, and have thou yet renounced the world.

Art thou so crucified, and vexed, and tormented, when thou art crossed or
miscarriest in any little of thy worldly interest, and can thou yet say, I am
crucified to the world?

Can the world make thee lie, and dissemble, and play the knave, when it is for
thy advantage; can it command thy conscience, and thy religion, and thy hopes,
to do obeisance to it; can it keep thee out of thy closet, out of the Church;
must prayers and sabbaths and sermons and Sacraments be neglected, when the
world has any business for thee, and has it still so much business for thee,
that thou can scarce have one prayer or one sabbath clear of its
encroachment? does it follow thee into thy closet, and follow thee into the
congregation, and so fill thine head and take away thine heart, that thou can
make nothing of thy religion? or whatsoever transactions there have been
sometimes betwixt the Lord and thy Soul, does the World still meet thee at the
door and make all void and null? Has it held thee in such ignorance, and
Atheism, that under all the means of knowledge and grace, thou still live
without God in the World, and can thou yet say thou have shaken off its yoke.

Stand worldling and hear this farther evidence; Thy greediness, thy
penuriousness, thy lying and defrauding, thy neglected duties, thy neglected
sabbaths thy neglected Soul and all upon the Worlds account, these will tell
thee thou have not renounced the World, and that will convict thee, that thou
art not come unto Christ, nor have be lieved on him.

3. Is he a believer who has [absolutely] chosen this world, and has only
[conditionally] chosen Christ? who will first seek his own things, and in the
second place, the things of Christ? who will model his christianity into a
consistency with his carnal interest? Is he a believer who will have both if it
may be, Christ and this World too, but if he cannot have both, will let Christ
go? Is he a christian that says, i will serve Christ though it cost me nothing,
I Will be for him when I have nothing else to do, he shall have all my spare
hours, if that will content him? is this to give Chhrist the pre-eminence, or
is he a Christian, that will take in Christ to be an underling to the world?

What are the terms on which Christ is offered? has he given thee leave to
make thine own terms? or must thou not stand to his? what are Christ's terms,
but that thou take him absolutely, that is purely on his own terms without
putting in any of thine. Do thou understand what his conditions are? Is it
only, that he shall be second in the kingdom? that he shall be obeyed in all
things provided the world do not contradict it? Is this Christianity, that the
world should be suffered to give check to the authority and interest of Christ?

And is not this all thy Christianity? thou say indeed, thou have chosen
Christ absolutely; God forbid that I should prefer any thing before Christ,
that I should mind any thing more then Christ; I mind the World, it is true, and
I ought so to do; but Christ has my heart, and I had rather loose all that
ever I have, then at last be found out of Christ.

But consider; thou may best judge of thine heart by thy life; as I said
before, so I demand of thee again, whither does the course of thy life mainly
bend? what art thou doing all the year round? what proportion has Christ of
thy daily care and labor? speak truth; would not thine heart tell thee thou
lie, if thou say, thou art more earnestly and more constantly caring for the
things of Christ, then of the world?

Again, thou may best Judge of thy choice by observing thy critical hours.
How is it ordinarily with thee, when Christ and the World stand in competition?
when it comes to be a case, that one of the two must be neglected, which of the
two then use to carry thee?

Thou know thou have often neglected Christ for the world; thou know that
thy businesses, or thy pleasures, or thy companions have often lost thee a
prayer, or a sabbath, or a sermon; thou would have prayed oftener, or heard
oftener, but thou could not have leisure: thou know it has been too often
thus: and consider if it be not commonly thus. How seldom is it that thou can
remember, that thou have carried thy self as a Christian, to thy loss; that
thou have followed Christ in any duties, when thou knew it would have been
more to thy profit, to have put Christ off to another time. Many a time have
thy gains, or thy friends, or thy pleasures, lost thee thy conscience, but how
often could thou ever say, My conscience has lost me a friend, my conscience
has lost me a good bargain? Whatever Christ has at any time called thee to,
If thou could say, it is not for mine ease, it is not for my credit, it is
nof for my safety to hearken, has not this been counted argument enough to
hold thee back, and excuse sufficient to save thee from blame?

And will thou yer say, thou have chosen Christ absolutely? or can thou think
thy self a true believer, who have chosen him only conditionally? Is this the
Christianity on which thou will venture thy Soul, I will be for Christ as far
as the world, and this flesh, or (which is all one) as far as the Devil will
give me leave?

I have known some poor ignorant wretches, whom when I have been pressing to a
serious minding of God, and their eternal concernment, they have answered me,
why I do, as far as God will give me leave; No no wretch, thou mistakest, it is
only as far as the Devil will give thee leave; and this is the common case of
Worldlings; thou that wilt be a Christian no farther then the World will give
thee leave, wilt be such, no farther then the Devil will give thee leave; and
sure thou that wilt be a Christian no farther then the Devil will give thee
leave, when he will give thee leave, thou shall to Heaven.

Wanton, when will thou be chaste? when my flesh will give me leave. Drunkard,
when will thou be sober? when my companions will give me leave. Earthworm, when
will thou to Christ? when the World will give me leave: how much of
Christianity will thou take up? what the world will allow me: how much is that?
as much as please the Devil. But when will thou to Heaven then? why when the
flesh and the World and the Devil are all agreed to send me thither.

Stand Worldling, this once more stand, and hear thy whole evidence; Thou art a
lover of the world more then a lover of God; thou art not come unto Christ; or
if thou seem to be come, thou have accepted of him only on condition, that
though thou be his Disciple, yet thou may still continue a servant to this
world. Surely if the God of this world, who has blinded thy mind, that thou
believe not, had not so blinded thee, that thou can not see thine unbelief,
thine own heart would condemn thee, and thine own hand would subscribe thy
sentence; and this is thy sentence, That thou art yet under the dominion, and
therefore under the damnation of the world; Thy soul abides in death, and the
wrath of God abides on thee.

Thou art a man of this world, thou have taken thy portion in this life, and
art like to have no better then thou have chosen: If thy day run out thus, thy
word at last will be that which was the rich man's, Luke 16. Son, remember thou
have received thy good things. Oh what is the meaning of that word? why this is
the meaning of it, thou have all the good that thou art like to hsve for ever;
an end, an end is come upon all thy comforts, the Sun is set upon all thy good
days, not one good day, not one merry hour more for ever and ever; thou have
had thy day, henceforth nothing remains to thee, but an eternal night, the
blackness of darkness for ever; thy temporal joys are swallowed up of
everlasting sorrows, thy honors are expired into everlasting contempt, thy
riches have taken wings, and now thy poverty is come upon thee as an armed man,
which thou shall not escape. All this is included in this word, which will be
thy word, Thou have received thy good things.

What eyes have ye, O ye sons of the earth, if you do not yet see? what hearts
have you, if you do not yet tremble? The Lord be merciful to me, if these
things be so, what is like to become of me? I have spun a fair thread; Oh I have
coveted an evil covetousness, I have been busy in gathering dirt, and building
my Nest, and providing for my young, but whither is my soul taking her flight?
If the rest of my days be as the days that are past, (and God knows whether
after so long an Apprentice I may ever go out free) if the rest of my days be
as the days that are past, what remains but a fearful expectation of wrath and
fiery indignation, which will devour me for ever? I have kindled a fire, and
compassed my self about with sparks, and after I have walked a while in the
light of my fire, and of the sparks that I have kindled, this shall I have of
the hand of the most High, I shall lie down in sorrow.

O ye worldlings, shake up out of your stupendous security; will you yet
receive the Word of the Lord, and suffer your selves to be convinced? will you
yet believe your selves to be unbelievers? What say you? Do you not believe
that Worldlings are unbelievers? can you have any other thought but you are
Worldlings?

Open your eyes upon all your ways, view the whole course of your life, what
it has been from your first time until now, and let Conscience speak freely.

If these two things might stick in your hearts, that you are Worldlings, and
that Worldlings have no part in Christ, then there were hope, that you would
accept of those counsels which I shall give you from the Lord, in order to your
escape, after I have first urged the second word of Conviction.

2. That where there is but little power over the world, there is but little
Faith. As the first Conviction will overthrow the Faith of some, and prove it a
mere nullity, so this will call in question the confidence of others, and at
least take them some degrees lower.

There are some Professors who have a name among the first three of the
Worthies of our Lord; have the site and the aspect of stars of the first
magnitude, and are ranked among the chief of Saints; who have risen high in the
easier and sweeter, but less significant parts of Religion; who have gotten the
language, and tasted, as they imagine, of the milk and honey of Canaan, and
learned much of the more pleasing manners of that good Land; who seem to be of
the more intimate acquaintance of the sublimer spirit, and power of the Gospel,
and to be much elevated in the spirituality of their notions and duties, above
the seize of vulgar Christians; and hence are grown up in their own and
others apprehensions, to be as the Cedars of the Lord among the lower shrubs;
whom yet if we enquire into, about those severer points, of mortification,
self-denial, and crucifixion to the world, possibly they may be found in these
things as low as the least of Saints: The faith of these, if it prove to be the
faith of Gods Elect at all, yet sure it will be found to be by many degrees
less then it appears; and these arietes gregis, must yet for the real spirit of
faith and holiness, come behind the littles ones of the flock? where there is
but little power over the world, there is but little faith.

In order to the mannaging, and carrying home this Conviction, consider, that
1. According to the truth or falsehood of our faith, so are we either
Conquerours, or Captives to the world. 2. According to the proportion of our
faith, so will this victory over the world be more complete or imperfect.


1. According to the truth or falsehood of our faith, so are we either
Conquerours, or Captives to the world. Every unbeliever is a Captive, every
believer is a Conqueror of the world; both these have been already proved.

Faith is our choosing and laying hold on another portion; our resigning our
selves to the dominion of another Lord: the world is gone, when it may no
longer be our Ruler or reward.

Faith changes the heart, Act. 15. 9. it kills the Spirit of this World, and
that other Spirit that rises up in its room, is this Spirit of faith. By faith
Christ is formed upon the heart, the old Soul is made new, renewed after the
image of God in righteousness and true holiness: this new Soul is suited to a
new treasure; earthly things wax old, and old things pass away, when the soul
is made new: it is argument enough that thou art an unbeliever, and an enemy to
the Cross of Christ, that thou still mindest earthly things, Philip. 3. 19.

2. According to the proportion of our faith, so will this victory over the
world be more complete or imperfect. We may best take the height and degree of
our faith, by observing the elevation of our spirits above the earth: a low and
earthly spirit, whatever show it makes, is but of little faith: Faith has a
general influence upon every grace and lust; as to the nourishing of the one,
so to the withering of the other; lust and the world run parallel; where one
is, there you shall find the other, on the Throne, or at the footstool: Faith
lays lust in the dirt, and the world ever falls with it: Faith is our arm, and
according as this arm grows stronger, so is the blow it gives to our Enemy,
more mortal. The power of God is revealed in us from faith to faith; there is a
more abundant communication, and a more vigorous exerting of this Divine Power
where faith is grown; where we are but of little strength, its certain we are
but weak in faith; and where our adversary is so strong, it is argument enough
that we are weak.

Growth in grace is then proved to be most real, when it is most equal and
universal; it is an imperfection in Nature where one member outgrows the rest;
as grace and peace, so grace and grace have their due proportions each to
other: great peace, and little grace, will make it questionable, whether that
peace be peace; something of one grace, and nothing of another, will make it as
doubtful, whether that grace be grace; high in knowledge, and low in love;
strong in confidence, and loose in conscience; hot in affection, and cold in
practice; in the solaces of the spirit, and yet walking in the flesh: Behold a
Christian, like Nebuchadnezzars Image, the head of gold, the feet of iron and
clay; desinit in piscem mulier formofa superne.

It Is strange to observe what contradictions some Professors of Christianity
are; they are what they are not, they are not what they are: whilst they would
be the great reconcilers of flesh and spirit, of earth and heaven, and make the
serving of God and their own bellies, the same service, behold how they are
divided from themselves; they love God, and love him not; they serve God, and
serve him not; this they may do as well as love God, and this present world.

Oh how different are many of us from our selves; our practices from our
principles, our doings from our sayings; and yet how little differing from
others: you pray as others do not, you hear as others do not, you swear not as
others, you curse not as others; but do you not covet as others? are you not
carnal as others? Consider your ways, who more intent upon their present
commodity, who more hot upon the chase of an earthly inheritance, then some of
those who profess to have laid up their treasure in heaven? Are there none to
be sound, who pretend to the greatest confidence of Divine Love, to the highest
pitch of Spirituality and Divine Communion; who seem to pant after the Lord,
and breath out their souls in their warm and passionate duties, and yet are
eaten out, and swallowed up of the cares of this life?

It is an amazing thing to consider, what a strange degree of earthliness is to
be found among such; what infatiable hunger, what indefatigable labor after an
increase of their estates? how little respect to soul or conscience, where
their gain is concerned? how ordinarily dispensing with lying, promise
breaking, and almost any unrighteousness, when it is for their advantage? how
many grains must there be allowed them, e're charity it self can judge them
honest?

And where is all bestowed that is thus gotten in? how little goes out for God,
or any of his? how many hypocritical bemoanings of the hard case of the poor,
to one liberal alms? Some gather only that they may lay up, others that they
may have to spend upon their lusts, to build them houses, and furnish their
tables, to trim their carcasses, to please their eye, or their palats; and all
this either justified and allowed, or at least made up with some such
hypocritical complaints, Woe is me this world is too hard for me, O it eats up
my time, O it steals away mine heart; how am I overcharged, how is my soul even
choked within me, what shall I do to help it? And when the complaint is thus
made, the matter is mended; now a good Christian, now ease, and joy, and
confidence returns; and then on again the same course.

Brethren be serious; consider your selves, feel your own pulses, view your own
faces, and ways, observe your hearts, see where their daily walks* are; may you
not find them ten times walking to and fro through the earth, to once or twice
casting a look toward heaven?

What are their daily tasks? what is the work you every day put them upon?
Instead of those higher and nobler Offices of Vessels of Honor, waiting before
the Throne of God, standing in his Courts, bearing his Name, beholding his
Face, setting forth his Praises; have not our hearts been made, hewers of wood,
and drawers of water, carriers of burdens, servers of tables, purveyors for
the flesh, caterers for the appetite, servants to the back and the belly, the
great traders and merchants of the earth, to buy in provision for lust? Worthy
employment for immortal Souls; as if the utensils of the Temple, the golden
altar, the golden table, the candlesticks, the bowls and the basins, all of
beaten gold, should have been fetchd out and set up in a blind Inn or a dirty
alehouse, for the service and the pleasure of every drunken companion,

Have not your Souls, none of you, been thus dealt withal? are not these your
heart-works? when any thing is to be done for God, the body must do that; the
body must to the closet, the tongue must pray, the ear must hear, the eye must
read, but the Soul must stay abroad; when any thing is to be done for the other
world, that must be but bodily exercise, but when this flesh must be served,
that is the heart-work, that is work for the Soul. If these Souls could be seen
with bodily eyes, a man that goes into the field, or into a fair, or to a
feast, might see an hundred Souls more there then bodies; and he that went into
the congregation of the Lord, if there were never so great a throng, may be, he
might see but a few hearts in the company.

Christians consider, is this your faith? is this your victory over the world?
is this to be mortified? is this to be crucified with Christ? or to have your
conversation in Heaven? or can you think your selves believers, especially of
so high a form, when so earthly and carnal?

What think you of those Jews, of whom the Lord speaks, Ezekiel. 33. 31. They*
come unto thee as the people comes, they sit before thee as my people; they
hear thy words, but they will not do them, with their mouth they show much
love, but their heart goes after their covetousness. Are these the people of
God, all whose religion is to come to hear, and to pray? to have a mouth full
of God, a mouth full of love, and an heart full of covetousness?

Give me leave to interpose a word or two to the carrying on the former
conviction, as to many profess^rs of religion, in order whereto let us a little
consider that Scripture, Philip. 3. 18. 19. Where the Apostle speaks of a sort
of professors much of this earthly make, and he speaks with tears in his eyes.
Many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that
they are enemies of the cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is
their belly, and whose glory is their shame, who mind erthly things.

In the former part of the chapter you may observe how

1. He gives an account of himself, and his own Christianity: and this in these
particulars.

1. He set such an high rate on Christ, and an interest in his righteousness,
that in comparison hereof, he counted all things else but loss and dung: let
this gain be loss, this earth be dung, trodden under foot as dung, cast out as
dung, so I may win Christ and be found in him.

2. He unites interest in Christ, with conformity to Christ: they lie both
together in the same heart, and his Soul is making out after both in the same
breath. That I may win Christ and be found in him; and that I may know him, and
the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made
conformable to his death. He would not only rejoice in Christ, he would not
only live in Christ, but be dead with Christ; and then be raised with Christ
above these earthly things: he would have his interest in the death and
resurrection of Christ, witnessed by fellowship with him in both, by the power
of his death and resurrection, made manifest in him: he would that both the
death of Jesus, and the life of Jesus, be made manifest in his mortal flesh.

3. He sets his face, and bends his whole course toward the obtaining of
Christ: I follow after: I press toward the mark: and this not in his prayers
only, but in his whole practice, this one thing I do: this one is all: whatever
I am doing, this I am doing, I have nothing else to do, nothing else to do,
nothing else to seek, but this interest and conformity to Christ.

4. He turns his back upon all things else: forgetting those things that are
behind: that is, not only his pharisaical righteousness, and his external
privileges, to which this especially refers, but much more, all carnal and
earthly things, v. 8. Yea doubtless I count all things but loss: he leaves all
behind; first he setts his feet upon them, and treads them into dung, and then
he turns his back upon them, and leaves them all b^hind; and henceforth his
whole conversation is heavenward, v. 20. our conversation is in Heaven. Lo this
is the man who is bold to say of himself, Galat. 6. 14. The World is crucified
unto me, and I unto the World.

2. He proposes himself as a pattern to all beleivers, v. 15. 17. Let us be
thus minded: I have told you my mind, come let us be all of one mind, and be ye
followers together of me: let your heart be as my heart, let your conversation
be as my conversation: my conversation is in Heaven, come along and there let
yours be also.

3. He points with the finger at some among them, who though they professed
Christ with them, and worshipped God with them, and walked with them, yet they
walked not after them: and setts this brand upon them, They are the enemies of
the cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, who
mind earthly things.

Here are the men and their censure; here is their mark and their brand; their
mark or description, whose God is their belly, who mind earthly things; their
brand and their doom, the enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction.

Professor, is thy face like the faces of these? Is thy heart, and thy way as
the heart of these? So shall the judgment be: You say as the Apostle, v. 3. We
are the circumcision, we are Christ's, we worship God in the Spirit and rejoice
in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. But yet have you not
fellowship with the flesh? do you not walk after the flesh? even whilst you
pretend to rejoice in Christ Jesus, and to worship God in the Spirit?

Oh how many such marked and branded Disciples, may we find among us! whom
while their lusts have marked, for belly-gods and earthly minded, the word has
branded for enemies, and vessels of destruction: whilst the Devil has branded,
and the World has branded the whole generation of the Saints, for a proud,
deceitful, earthly, self-seeking generation, Christ has set this brand on
thee, earthly sensual devilish.

Oh brethren, if we could speak of these with the the heart of the Apostle, we
should with his tears also; we should speak weeping, that they are the enemies
of the Cross of Christ; the wounds, and the sores, and the scabs, the shame and
the reproach of the profession of the Gospel: good had it been for the Gospel,
if never a good word of it had ever proceeded out of such mouths; and better
had it been for such souls, if they had never known, nor so much as heard of
the Gospel of Christ.

Friends, if you do not yet fall a weeping for your selves, for your
hypocrisy, your carnality; for your self-seeking, and self-deceiving, my soul
weep thou in secret for them: Oh that mine head were waters, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for you, till either this
earth be thrown out of your hearts, or the name of Christ out of your mouths: O
for more of the Gospel, or for less; for more of the power, or nothing of the
name; for more of its holiness, or less of its hopes, and boastings; come ye
and be crucified to this world, or talk no more of the Cross of Christ.

Oh how many enemies has the Cross of Christ made him! oh how few friends have
the severities of Christ left him? are those the friends of Christ, who are the
enemies of his Cross? are you the friends of Christ, who are the intimates of
the world? will professing, and praying, and hearing, baptize such into the
name of Disciples? If lying, and promise breaking, if serving of bellies and
satiating of appetites, if pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness,
or abundance of labor, a little tip'd over with a silver tongue, be the marks
of Disciples, we may find them walking on every side, whole Towns, whole
Countries of them: if these may be reckoned for the seed, how great an herd
would the little flock become? if those Swine that are rooting in the earth, or
wallowing in the mire, must go all for Lambs; if these Sensualists, and
earth-creepers must all be thrown into the number; if the wise of the world,
Politicians and Projectors, must all pass under the same name, to what a bulk
would the Body of Christ swell? But if all these, these speckled and spotted,
must be set aside as none of the sheep, oh what a small parcel will there then
be left: If of earthworms and Epicures it must be said, these are not they,
the next word may almost be, where are they to be found?

But be not deceived, God is not mocked; as you sow, so shall you also reap;
your sowing to the flesh, even while you boast of the spirit, is conviction
enough whose you are, and what your end will be, whose end is destruction.

Ob. But I mean not for all this, to cast away my confidence; God forbid that I
should think, that I have professed in vain, that I have heard, and prayed, and
believed all this while in vain; I know whom I have believed, I feel that I
love God, and I am persuaded that nothing shall separate me from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord; whatever corruptions I have, yet the
spirit witnesses with my spirit, that I am the Child of God, I am sealed by
that holy spirit unto the day of Redemption, and I will not cast away my
confidence.

Sol. The meaning of all these good words may be no more but this, you will
hold your Opinion against the greatest evidence of Scripture and Reason: For
what is that which thou call the witness and the seal of the spirit, but an
Opinion of thine own; a voice within thee, or a strong persuasion of thine own
heart, that thou art of God? which because it is attested by some gifts of the
spirit, and some affectionate workings of thine heart, at times, heavenward;
thou take to be the voice of the Divine Spirit, though it be never so
contradictory to the Word of God; and so wilt hold thy confidence,
notwithstanding what the Word speaks to the contrary.

But that thou may no longer thus deceive thy self, know and consider,

That the Spirit witnesses and seals in this double way,

By being the mark of the Lord upon us.

By being the light of the Lord in us, whereby we come to discern the mark of
the Lord upon us.

1. By being the mark of the Lord upon us, 1 John 3. 24. he that keeps his
commandments, dwells in him, and he in him, hereby we know that he abides
in us, by the Spirit which he has given us. By the Spirit we are to
understand, the graces of the Spirit; that holiness and heavenliness of mind,
which the Spirit has wrought upon us. The spirit of God forms us into his own
likeness, and this image of the Spirit is Gods mark upon us.

As men's, so Christ's sheep may be known whose they are, by their masters mark
upon them: whose mark is an earthly mind? Is it of Christ, or is it not the
mark of the God of this world? Holiness and spirituality is the mark of Christ,
earthliness and sin is of the Devil. To whom does thy Soul belong? The Spirit,
thou say, witnesses that thou belongest to God; I but whose mark is it that
is upon thee? is this covetousness and greediness upon the world, is this lying
and defrauding, this unrighteousness and unmercifulness, which the world can
ordinarily command thee to, is this the mark of God or the Devil? the Devil is
this thy master, for behold his mark still upon thee.

It Is true Christ buys all his sheep out of the Devils flock; but whatever
sheep he buys and brings home, he scrapes out the old, and claps on his own
mark upon it: and though there be some prints of the old yet remaining, (till
we have put off flesh some dirt will stick) yet the new mark which Christ has
set on, now carries it.

Say not thou art sealed with the Spirit, whatever thy comforts or confidences
have been, unless thou see his mark upon thee; say not thou art marked by the
Spirit, whilst the Devils mark [an earthly mind] is the most visible and
conspicuous upon thee.

2. By being the light of the Lord within us, whereby we are able to discern
our Lords mark upon us, 1 Cor. 2. 12.

The Devil so amuses and deludes Souls, that they often know not what to make
of themselves; but conclude themselves to be quite another thing then they are:
and this he does by this threefold device; by Counterfeiting Christ's mark,
Pulliating his own mark, Blurring and blinding the mark of Christ.


1. By counterfeiting Christ's mark, and setting it on his own sheep. Christ
marks his sheep especially in the heart; that is the throne of the Spirit,
that is the seat of Grace, the heart; the Devil can do something to the
counterfeiting of this; he can make common grace look like saving grace, he can
paint the face of a Saint upon the heart of a beast.

But he can more easily dissemble the outward marks of Christ. Christ has his
outward marks; his earmark, Joh. 10. 27. My sheep, hear my voice. His mark in
the forehead, the owning or confessing of Christ before men, Luke 12. 8. He
that confesses me before men him will I confess before my father which is in
Heaven. His mark in the mouth; he circumcises their lip, and makes them a
people of a pure language, Zeph. 3. 9. All these the Devil can counterfeit with
more ease: he can bring his sheep to hear Christ's preaching: he can bring them
to own and confess Christ before men: he can teach his to pray, and to be
expert in the language of Disciples: and when he has done thus, then he tells
them, see thou art one of Christ's; for behold thou prayest, and hear and
confessest Christ; and what are these but Christ's marks upon thee; when
whatever is upon the tongue or the forehead, the image of the Devil is still
upon the heart,

2. By palliating his own mark: Christ's mark upon thee? I but whose is that,
this earthly mind, that stands above it? O he has a device for that too: he
has a cloak for covetousness: it is but providence, or good husbandry; nay this
gain is godliness: all this carking and caring and drudging for the world, is
but in obedience to the will of God, to provide things honest in the sight of
all men. And in this the Devil is so damnably successful, that it is one of the
hardest tasks, to help poor worldlings to the sight of what is under this cloak,
though all that know thee, do see that thou art an earthworm, yet thou will not
be brought to see thy self.

And as the Devil thus deceives his own, so he distresses the Saints,

3. By blurring Christ's mark that it cannot easily be seen, or known to be his.
As he can make a mere paint look like sincerity, so he can make sincerity look
like hypocrisy: as many carnal confidents bless themselves in the opinion of
their uprightness; so many mortified, broken, upright hearts condemn themselves
for hypocrites: though Christ be in them, and has set his seal upon their
hearts, yet the Devil raises up so many black mists, of melancholique thoughts
and fears, that they cannot see what there is of Christ in them; and thereupon
they judge very sadly of their case. I doubt I am an hypocrite, and none of
Christ's, for what is there of the grace of Christ found in me?

But now the Spirit of the Lord; as it works grace in the heart, so it gives
light to the eye: it brings men's persuasions and opinions to the word, and
compares them with that; it searches the scriptures, and shows the Soul what
Christ's mark is; it irradiates the heart, and shows the very same mark which is
written in the word, stamped upon the Soul, and thereby establishes it in
power; if there be no such mark found there, but the quite contrary to it, the
peace that is spoken is not of the Spirit of God, but of the Devil.

Worldly professor, do thou not see the scripture death-mark upon thee? or
if thou do not, does not every one that knows thee, behold it? Does not this
earthly mind, appear upon thy forehead, upon thy tongue, upon the palms of
thine hands, and the prints of thy feet? may not thy love of the world be read
in every look, in every word, in every line of thy life? and will thou yet say,
it is the Spirit of the Lord that speaks peace to thee? whose mark is this [they
mind earthly things?] of them that are saved, or of them that perish? and is
not this the most proper character that can be given of thee? see and take more
perfect knowledge of thy self: can thou not see? have thou received the
Spirit, and yet not so much light, as to discern betwixt earth and Heaven?

Is the Lord divided; and become contrary to himself? do not his hand and his
seal agree? does his word write this man no child, and is that his Spirit that
calls thee, a child of God? once again, see and compare the writings; that in
the word, and that in thy heart; and if the voice within thee be not according,
call it not the witness of the Spirit, but the false witness of the Devil.

If thou will yet understand thy self no better, (it is much to be feared, thou will not; there is too much dust in thine eye, for thee to see it,) If thou will
not see it, yet there it stands written upon thee in most legible characters, a
minder of earthly things, whose end is destruction.

But beloved, I am persuaded better things of you, to whom I am now speaking;
even you of little faith; though it may be of a great name: yet with you also
must I plead a while, and tell you from the Lord that I have somewhat against
you: and oh were it but a little somewhat, that I have to speak, even against
you: but sure, there is very much to be spoken, unless you will save me the
labor, and speak against your selves. So much may be said, as if it be duly
considered may take you down many rounds lower then you imagine your selves to
have ascended? how few of you that are risen with Christ, but are too often
letting your affections run down again to this earth? who though you have
really counted this earth but dung, yet are too greedily gathering up this dung
into your bosoms; that have your hands full and your mouths full of this dung
and much more then you are aware of it is still in your hearts; that are not
able to loose what you have accounted loss. In whom though Christ may be really
formed, yet there appears little conformity, to his life or death. To whom
though it has been long since said, Lazarus come forth, yet to this day you
have scarce gotten your heads above ground: whose bellies creep upon the dust,
whilst your eyes and your hopes are in Heaven: in whom there is such a mixture
of flesh and Spirit, that it is hard to discern, which has the predominance:
whose hearts seem still so divided betwixt Christ and the world, that no body
that knows you can tell which has the better part; whose time, and whose care,
and whose labor, run out so much on things below, that without some great
charity, it may be judged your hearts are there also: And yet, by some clearer
insight into the mysteries of the Gospel; by some affectionate intercourses
with God in your secret recesses and retirements from the world, by your
serious heats and inlargements in your duties with others, by some tastes and
relishes of the pleasure of ordinances, by some raptures of joy, and the
seeming serenity and uncloudiness of your spirits, by not considering what
abatement the carnality and earthliness of your course must necessarily make
upon you, are grown to an hope and opinion that you are the highly favored of
the Lord, and his greatly beloved.

But do you not blush then at your unworthiness? are you not ashamed that such
love, and such hopes, should no more wean your hearts from these breasts of
vanity, from which you suck nothing but filth or froth? that you should defile
such an heavenly treasure, by lodging it in such earthen vessels; that you
should so disgrace that divine portion which you count is yours, as that it
should not be enough for you, but leave you as hungry as if you had no God, nor
hope in him? that you should so disgrace your Fathers table, by your unnatural
appetite after coals and dirt? Is your profession that God is your happiness,
your treasure, your all, Is your none but Christ, come to more then this? Has
your covenanting with God, for renouncing the world, mortifying your flesh,
denying your self, brought forth no better fruits then these? Oh the impudence
and disingenuity of our hearts, that can carry the conscience of such treachery
before the Throne of Grace, without shame and consternation; how can you lift
up your face before the Lord, without hanging down the head?

Nay, do you not fear that [your] hearts also have deceived you, and that
matters may not be so well with you as you sometimes conclude? that your hopes
are but delusory, that your joys are but dreams, and all your comforts are but
the lying divinations and prophesies of your own deceived heart? Is it out of
question with you, that you are risen with Christ, and ascended with Christ
when these hearts are gotten no further up out of their graves?

Believe it Christians, the severities of Religion, will be a surer testimony
to you, then all its suavities: an humble, patient, contented, self-denying,
mortified Christian, under all his doubts and fears, under all his complaints
of darkness and deadness, is fairer for heaven then you all.

Those are the joys of faith, which spring up out of the ruins of carnal joys;
those are the genuine comforts, and delights of the Saints, that arise up out
of the ashes of earthly delights; those are the confidences of true believers,
which grow out of their contempt of the world; then will the world think better
of our Religion, and then may we hope better of our selves, when the joy of the
Lord is our strength, and the joys of the earth are strangers to us, and
despised by us.

Oh Brethren, let us no longer dishonor our God, nor delude our selves; let
not the world any longer say in our reproach, these men are even as we: Let
them see that our ways are not as their ways, that our joys are not as their
joys, and then they will know, our hope is not as their hope, our Rock is not
as their Rock.

Children of the Kingdom, (if I may be bold to call you so) where is the proof
of your heavenly extract? where is your fathers spirit? how can you be patient
with your selves, whilst you are such degenerate plants? how can you satisfy
your selves, that you are the genuine offspring of God, when so unlike your
father? how can you without weeping, behold the glory of these later Temples,
to fall so far short of those that were in the Ages before us? where is the
primitive spirituality, the mortification and self-denial of the primitive
Christians? how have the stars changed their Orbs? from moving in the Celestial
Spheres? how seem they now to be fixed in the earth, how can you count your
selves Stars, and not Comets, when your highest elevation is seldom above the
middle Region, you hang betwixt heaven and earth?

We take up a general complaint one against another, it is in every ones mouth,
Oh how earthly are we become, our gold is mixed with dross, our wine with
water; behold a second but sad Incarnation, our spirit is become flesh; every
one loves gifts, and follows after rewards; how hard are we driving after
bags of earth? we assemble our selves for corn and wine, and when riches
increase, who is there almost that sets not his heart upon them? who is there
that labors to be holy as to be rich, to thrive in grace as in purse? though
the Lord has taken off our Chariot Wheels, yet still we drive on; though he
has been whipping us upward, yet behold still we are all below; though he has
burnt up our houses, and fired us out of our Nests, yet behold our hearts are
still among among the rubbish; though he has mingled wormwood with our milk,
and gall with our honey, yet we say it is sweet, and will not be weaned; though
he has testified against our pride, and testified against our covetousness,
and made such stains upon our beauty, and such holes in the bottoms of our
bags; though we see plainly and say, God is angry with us, and angry for the
iniquity of our covetousness, yet who are they that have given off, and are
gone back from their so eager pursuit of the world? Oh what is like to become of
us? we are so set upon this Idol, that it is much to be feared desolation is
determined upon us.

Do we not ordinarily hear and make such complaints? but if we should with our
complaints, let fall a tear upon the guilty, may they not return upon us, weep
not for us but for your selves, for your own covetousness, for your own
carnality: and what should we say for our selves, if they do so? Oh the Lord
help me I am one of the company, I even I also am guilty; this Idol has a
tabernacle in this heart also, though I considered it not.

But must our complaints suffice us? is it enough to make all well, to confess
it is so bad? must this be all our heavenliness, to bewail our earthliness? will
God take our acknowledgments for amendments? is this your redemption, to bewail
your captivity? But when shall it be better? when shall it be said to these
prisoners, Go forth? when for the other world? when for God alone, for nothing
but the everlasting kingdom? Arise O captive, put off thy prison garments, get
thee up out of this house of bondage; unclog unfetter thy Soul; get thy foot
out of the snare, and away for the holy land: leave this earth to its heirs,
let the men of this world take to their portion, and be the only servants to
it, but go thou and serve the Lord: let God and the world take their own;
whilst worldlings will not be the servants of Christ, let it no longer be
said, that Christians are the servants of the world.

Brethren, conclude upon it, that you have no more of christianity then you
have of spirituality: that this spot of earthliness will unavoidably be, a blot
upon your evidences for Heaven. Have you assurance that you are the Lords? how
can that be when you are so much the worlds?

What ever arguments you have, that seem to conclude well for you, yet how many
objections are there also? Oh how many Buts are there against us. Such a one is
a judicious understanding Christian, But, he is greedy upon the world: such a
one is of a savoury gracious behavior, But, he is unmerciful to the poor: such
a one is much in prayer, and will pray singularly well, But there is no trust to
his word: such a one is of a free and liberal Spirit, But he is proud. Shoot
down these Butts if ever you would stand established in your confidence.

Have you not assurance? Is this yet to be gotten? Oh how can you so eagerly
mind any other getting? can you have such leisure for Earth when Heaven still
hangs in doubt? or do ye think that the same way does lead to both? that the
same labor will serve for both? will the same wind, and the same course carry
you toward both the Poles? can you at once be sailing Northward and Southward?
can you ascend and descend by the same motion? when you are progging for your
flesh, building your houses, enlarging your border, laying you up treasure on
earth, and making it as sure as you can; Is this your laying up treasure in
Heaven? your giving diligence to make God sure, your calling and election sure?
once be bound in good earnest for glory, and take the strait course
thitherward, and then farewell World, thy kingdom is finished, thy dominion is
at an end.

Brethren receive this word of conviction and submit to it; the sum whereof
is, that where there is so much of the Spirit of this World, there is but
little faith, and where there is but little faith, it is more then you can tell
whether there be any at all. God is a convincing of us; if his word does not,
his providence shall convince us, and lay us yet lower in our own eyes: what
means his undoing and ruining providence, but to try us what spirit we are of
and to teach us with his briars and thorns, to understand our selves better,
and to recover? why is his face so against us? why is his hand so heavy upon
us? what do the ashes of our wasted treasures speak to us? If it do, not speak
out this to us, Thou have a name that thou live and art dead, yet does it
speak less then this, Thou have but a little strength; thou have but a few
names, that have not defiled their garments, strengthen the things that remain
that are ready to dye? Is not this its word, seek thou yet great things for
thy self? when I am breaking down what I have built, when I am plucking up what
I have planted, is this a time to seek great things for thy self? yea or to
think great things of thy self? seek them not, no nor think any more such great
thoughts: lay thee down in the dust, be ashamed and confounded for what thou
art and have done, and climb no more up those trees that are hewing down under
thee.

Brethren when do ye think the Lord will cause his fury toward us to cease?
when will the flames be quenched, when will his repentings be kindled? what
hope is there that our conflagrations should be at an end, till our Idols be
burnt up? it is vain to think, that our prayers and fastings and weeping before
the Lord will put out the fire of his jealousy. Get thee up, wherefore lie
thou thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned -- they have taken of the accursed
thing -- I will not be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from
among you. Josh. 7. 10, 11, 12. The Lord has broken us with a great breach,
the Lord has smitten us with a very grievous blow; and now we fall to fasting
and praying and prostrating our selves before him in hope that this may make up
our breach and be the healing of our wound. But will this do? Get you up, get
you up, why lie you thus upon your faces? Is there not an accursed thing among
you? think not that the Lord will be with you, till that be destroyed from
among you: hope not for any thing from those prayers or fastings, that do no
execution upon your accursed things. Do your prayers leave your pride alive,
your covetousness alive, your wantonness alive? your selves are like to dye
notwithstanding all such prayers.

God is either upon refining or rejecting: he has cast us into his furnace,
kindled his fires, been blowing with his bellows; if our dross may yet be
consumed. If that be not done, the next word we may hear, may be that of the
Prophet, Jer. 6. 29, 30. The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed by the
fire, the founder melts in vain, for [this dross] is not taken away,
reprobate silver shall men call them, for the Lord has rejected them.

Use 2. Of Direction and Exhortation: Brethren, have I not yet said enough to
fetch you off from your servitude? will you go free, or have I spent my labor
in vain? must I leave you at the Brickkiln, or will you go over to Canaan? what
are your thoughts? Is it good to continue in your servile state? is the
vassalage of unbelief better then the victory of faith? what are your
resolutions? have you sold your selves for servants, and will you stand to the
bargain? may you go free and will you not? have you not understood enough of
the worlds enmity? have you not felt enough of the worlds tyranny? have you not
sinned enough, and suffered enough already by it? what say you, are you for
liberty or bondage? for captivity or victory? why what may we do to obtain the
victory? why will you hearken then? are you willing of help? will you take Gods
counsel when it is offered you? well in hope that some of you will hearken, I
shall yet farther adventure these few directions.

In the first place I shall mind you of what has been already spoken, touching
the ways by which faith overcomes the world, and shall turn them into these
6. counsels.

1. Get a right judgment of both worlds: study and get an understanding of
Earth and Heaven; and give not off this study, till you be thoroughly convinced,
of the unspeakable transcendencies of things to come, above things present.

2. Choose your lot in the best of the two: determine for Heaven, that
infinitely better inheritance. Be unalterably at this point, I am for the
everlasting blessedness, however it be with me here.

3. Be convinced, that the good things of this World cannot further, nor can
the evil things of this world hinder your eternal blessedness, and esteem of
all things temporal, according to the respect they bear to the things that are
eternal.

4. Be convinced that the Design of all the temptations of this World is, to
deprive you of your eternal inheritance.

5. By living more purely a life of faith, get clear apprehensions and a deeper
sense of the blessedness to come.

6. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure: by turning your eyes
back upon what has been already said, you may make fuller improvement of these
directions, upon which I forbear any farther enlargement.

To these I shall add this one general direction.

Make your advantage of all those means, by which your faith may gather
strength, and in which it is strength is to be put forth and exercised.

Particularly

1. Improve all your duties this way: Let all your seekings of God be a
wrestling with the World. Put this great affair into every prayer: put it into
your daily confessions, put it into your daily petitions. Carry the sense of
your sore bondage into the presence of God: let the misery and the danger it
has subjected you to, be written upon your hearts, and go and spread the
writing before the Lord. Let the throne of grace be a Judgment seat where this
traitor may be daily arraigned and condemned. Take unto you words, confess unto
God. Lord I have dealt very falsely with thee, and foolishly for my self. I
have forsaken the Fountain of living waters for broken Cisterns, wherein is no
water. I have taken the World into my bosom, and thrown the Lord at my heels. I
have set the World on the Throne and trodden Christ under my feet; I have
served mine enemy, and slighted the Rock of my Salvation. I have sold my soul
for silver, and my hopes for handfulls of barley. I have followed vanity, and
neglected alsufficiency. I have been a true drudg to this muck, a good husband
for this flesh; but what have I been to the Lord? what an evil and slothful
servant* If I should say I were not a worldling, or a sensualist, mine own soul
would call me liar to my face; but though I see what a fool, and what a beast,
and what a slave I am, this sottish heart will not yet be wise, it has loved
these Idols and will follow them still. Confess thus unto God, and if one days
confession will not shame you out of your folly, to it again; the next day, and
the next day, and every day as long as you live: Bring in new Indictments
filled up with all the aggravations you can gather up, I have been often told
of the evil of a worldly heart and life, of the danger of it, of the
unworthiness of it; I have been counseled to take heed of it, and I have known
it has been good counsel; I have been obliged against it, by commands, by
kindnesses, by covenants, by interest, by experiences of the gall and the
Wormwood it has still proved in my belly, whatever it has been in my mouth.
My judgment and Conscience has been against it; I have been offered a better
service, and a better reward; and I have understood it was a good offer, and
worth the accepting; I have been charged upon pain of death, and everlasting
damnation to take heed and beware of it, and yet still I am where I was.
Counsels have been despised, commands have been broken, kindnesses have been
slighted, covenants have been violated, reason and conscience have been
baffled, yea, death and hell have been despised for the sake of this lust, and
love of the world, so foolish am I and ignorant, and as a beast before thee.
Thus quicken and sharpen your confessions with all the aggravations imaginable,
till, if it be possible, thy folly may depart from thee, not being able to bear
such an hot prosecution. Deal thus roughly and thus closly with your earthly
hearts when ever you have them before the Lord, that they may not dare to meet
you so there again.

Put it into your daily Petitions. Speak unto the Lord, let not thy soul keep
silence till he hear. Let thine oppressed heart lift up its voice to the most
high; tell him, Oh I have surfeited of this flesh, I am sick of this World,
these briars and thorns, yea, and these Lillies and Roses are a grief of mind
to me, I must have them out ere I can be at rest. Make these thorns to scratch
me, these flowers to stink in my nostrils. Beg a new heart, beg a better
spirit, that may neither find pleasure, nor so much as ease in such things as
these. Oh for mortification! oh for a more raised spirit! where is the life of
faith? where is the power of the Spirit? help Lord, help Lord, a renewed heart,
a chaste spirit, when shall it once be? let not my soul be held any longer an
adulteress from thee; let not these husks be my meat, these ashes be my bread,
this earth be my treasure while God stands by. Let not Christ and my soul be
kept strangers, whilst I am the familiar of this flesh, and the servant of
vanity.

Plead with the Lord for relief. Plead with him upon his own interest. Who is
it O Lord that's must wronged? whose right is it that's most invaded? whose am I?
Am I not thine Lord? Is not my love, and my labor, and my strength, and my
time, and my body, and my soul, is it not all thy right? shall thine enemy
command and carry away that which is thine? recover, recover thy due. Take this
heart and all that I have, take possession Lord, set thy name upon my door, and
suffer not these strangers to enter or encroach upon thy right. Plead with him
upon the blood of his Covenant. Whence is the Covenanted Redemption! is it only
from Hell? is it not from lust also? can it be from one, if it be not from
both? a total redemption Lord, an universal redemption; from every Plague, from
every enemy. I cannot escape the pit, if I be held in the snare; if I break not
this outer; I shall fall also into the inner Prison; by the blood of the
Covenant send forth thy Prisoner out of this Prison. What does this blood
speak! Does it only say Deliver them from the pit, for thou have found a
ransom? Does it not also say, Whilst thou keep them in the World, keep
them from the evil? and will not God hear the cry of such blood?

Cry unto the Lord. Be instant, be importunate with him. Try the strength of
Prayer. Be uncessant, resolve against denyals. Cry unto him day and night,
avenge me of mine adversary. Rid my soul out of thraldom; whilst thou live
give not over, if thou will not, thou shall not be denied.

Has thou gotten a little ground, take the same way to maintain what thou have
gotten. Does the Conquered World rally upon thee, and do thy affections begin
to stoop to it? Pray them up again. Does thine heart begin again to wander
after it, Pray it in again. Do thy corruptions and temptations begin to get
head again and to prevail? Pray them down again; meet them with a Prayer at
every turn, The Lord rebuke thee false heart; The Lord rebuke thee deceitful
World; The Lord uphold thee oppressed Soul.

Beloved, your Victory over the World can neither be gotten, nor maintained,
but by power from above. It Is God only that's able to give battle to the flesh.
In vain do you engage, unless he engage with you. Prayer will set faith on
work, and faith will engage the promise, and the promise will engage Christ
with you, and Christ will engage the Father to your help. If Heaven be too hard
for earth, the World shall fall before a Praying soul.

Brethren will you take this counsel? put it thus into every Prayer you make,
and if you find this to be your Great enemy, Bend the main force of every
Prayer against it, Fight neither against small nor great, in comparison, but
against this King of Evils. This is the great Thief, Lord, that meets me at
every turn, and is robbing me every day; that robs the Lord of his due, and my
Soul of its peace: this is the Moth, that eats out all my Strength; this is the
Murderer, that kills my Soul; O let this Strong be bowed down; this is the
Heir, kill him, and the Inheritance shall be mine.

And when ever you have made your prayer, judge of the acceptance of it, by the
success it has on this Adversary: When at any time you have found your souls
most melted and enlarged in prayer, and greatliest refreshed by sensible
illapses and incoms from above; at such a time presently return into your
heart, and demand; But how goes it now with the interest of the World in me?
How stands my heart now affected to my carnal things? am I weaned? Is my clog
fallen off? What has my flesh lost, by what my spirit seems to have gained?
What has my earthly-mindedness, my covetousness lost in this prayer? Can I now
go away and be contented, and be patient in any condition? has this Divine
warmth left a chill upon my fleshly appetite? can I the better want the Quails,
now I have tasted of the Manna? am I less careful, and less concerned, which
way the World goes with me? or can I go down presently into my shop, or forth
into my fields, and be as hungry and as much swallowed up of my earthly cares
and delights, as if I had never tasted any thing of God? Can I so? Oh this is
not the Prayer I took it to be; I may not sit down by this, I must to my knees
again, to my God again, and again; while I live I will not give over thus; I
will wrestle, I will wait, I will enquire; to day, to morrow, next day, after
every prayer, Is it yet better? yet more mortified? yet more weaned? Yet more
humble and contented? I can never, I will never satisfy my self with any
praying, with any answer, whilst my flesh thus holds up its head.

This is the first Direction, the stress whereof I lay upon these two things;
Bend the main force if every Prayer against this evil; level your Arrow against
the face of this enemy: And then judge of the acceptableness of your prayer, by
the success it has upon it.

2. Improve Sabbaths this way. The Sabbath is the test of God, Heb. 4. Our holy
keeping of Sabbaths is our entering into his Rest; our recess from the World,
and our retiring to the Lord, to take our Rest with him.

The end of the Sabbath is the preservation and propagation of Religion; it is
for the continuing in memory the Redemption of Christ, for the more abundant
diffusion, and shedding abroad of the Spirit of Christ, for the more solemn
Celebration of his Worship, and so consequently for the maintaining the power
of Holiness; all which the World would destroy and bury with him in his Grave,
and roll it self as a stone upon it all, that it might never be remembered.

There are four special means, by which Religion is kept up in the World, and
transmitted from Generation to Generation.

1. A fixed Rule or Standard of Religion: whereby the knowledge of God, his
Will, Worship and Ways, is preserved and propagated; to wit, the holy
Scriptures, Isa. 8. 20. to the Law, and to the Testimonies, etc. 2. Fixed
Officers: To interpret, expound, and give the sense of the Word, and to
publish, and preach it to the World, Nehem. 8. 4. 8. Mal. 2. 7. 3. Fixed
Ordinances: Wherein the Lord is to be solemnly worshipped: the Observing and
keeping pure and entire whereof, is required as in many positive Precepts, so
also in all those Scriptures, which forbid Idolatry, Superstition, and
Will Worship. 4. A fixed time, for instruction in the Law of God, and for his
more solemn Worship: This fixed time is the Sabbath day, Isa. 66. 23. etc.
The Adversaries of Religion have attempted its destruction, by heaving at
these Pillars npon which it is supported; and the opposition which has been
made against them, has been carried on (some part of it at least) much after
the same way. The Authority of the Scriptures has been inunded, by pretenses
to other rules besides, to be added to them; as unwritten Traditions, or
enthusiastical Revelations. Ordinances have been assaulted by the addition of
humane Inventions, to Divine Institutions. The destruction of the Ministry has
been by some of its Adversaries attempted, by making all Teachers; and Sabbaths
have been undermined by others, by pleading for an every day Sabbath; First
enclosing the six days to the Lord, and thereby at length laying the Sabbath
in common to the World.

Upon these four pillars is Religion upheld; let these be removed, and what
becomes of it! and the destruction of this one (this fixed time) how greatly
will it endanger all the rest. An every-day Sabbath will soon bring us to no
Sabbath; and from no Sabbath, we shall quickly come to no Ordinances, no
Ministry; and from no Ministry, how long will it be ere we arrive at No
Scriptures, no Religion, no God.

But whatever the adversaries of Religion, and their ways to supplant it be,
that which makes them adversaries, and engages them in this wicked design, are
the lusts of this World. Religion levels at the flesh, its affections and
interest; and these set themselves to make their batteries upon Religion, and
all its supports and foundations.

Keep up Sabbaths, and you are like to keep up Scriptures, Ministry,
Ordinances, Religion; keep up Religion and the World falls under you.

But the more immediate influence, the due sanctification of the Sabbath will
have, upon the conquering the World, will appear if you consider, that this day
is 1. A day of separation for God. 2. A day for special communion with God. 3.
A day of special provision for souls.


1. A day of separation for God. The people of God, as such, are a separated
people, separated from the lusts of men, to the Law of their God, Neh. 10. 28.
Ezra 6. 21. In their first day, their day of Grace, they separate themselves
from the evils of the World; in this day they are to separate themselves from
the affairs, yea and the thoughts of the World, Isa. 58. 13. This day is an
Hallowed day, sanctified by God, and to be sanctified by his Saints. Gods
sanctifying it, is his setting apart the day for an holy use; our sanctifying
it is our setting our selves apart thereon for his holy service. This day is a
privileged day, nothing that's common or unclean may encroach upon it.

The day of the Lord, is as the house of the Lord, a kind of meeting betwixt
heaven and earth; wherein God calls us up to the Mount, and comes down to give
us a meeting. And as when he came down on Mount Sinai, he required that his
people (who yet were to come no nearer him than the foot of the Mount) should,
by washing their clothes, and separating themselves from their Wives, make
ready against his coming down, Exodus 19. 11, 15. So does he here give us as
strict a charge, [Remember] be ye also ready. Be ye washed, and be ye separate.
Wash your hearts, empty your hands, come in from your fields, come out of your
shops, lay by your work, leave this earth below, come up to mere your God.

There are two things that give to objects their greatest efficacy and
advantage upon us. Their nearness to us, and the remoteness of their
contraries. The World on this day loses both these advantages, wherein we are
called to stand aloof from it, and to draw nigh to God.

We are then fairest for victory over the World, when we are farthest off it:
it is ill fighting a Cock on his own Dunghill: while the world is at our elbow
there is little like to be done against it; whilst it is in our eye, or our
hand, it is not easy to keep it out of our heart: when the Lord has gotten our
company alone, and the World has nothing; not an Ox, nor an Ass, not a
business, nor a pleasure to solicit our love, or labor; When we are gotten
out of sight, and out of hearing of the wooings of this Harlot, and its cries
after us, then is it most like to lose its hold of us.

The reason why we ordinarily make no more advantage of Sabbaths this way is,
because however we pretend to draw nigh unto God, yet we do not withdraw from
the World: we come into the Sanctuary as Israel went out of Egypt; we carry,
not our Wives, and our little ones only, but our Flocks and our Herds, and all
our Substance; we carry all we have with us, when we come before the Lord. The
lowing of the Oxen, the bleating of the Sheep, the sound of the Millstones is
so still in our ears; the Butter and the Honey, the wine and the oil, the
silver and the gold are so continually in our eye, that we cannot hearken what
the Lord God does speak, nor see his face.

Brethren, who is there with you at this hour? here you are before the Lord,
but who is there with you? search every room, look into every corner; Is there
none within, that should not be there? is there no messenger of Satan, has the
World no agitatour now at work within you? O behold, whilst the Lord is a
treating with our cares, what a mixed multitude are there within; cares, and
thoughts, and lusts, and projects for this world; and what a stir do they all
make that God may not be regarded? The Devil will be most most busy in such a
time; he doubts how matters might go with him if he now keep silence. Doubtless
many a Soul more might have been gained over to Christ, had not Satan stood by
and hindered, and had those ever near us, who forbad the match: use to be alone
with God; out of the company, and out of the noise of these harlots, and then
there is hope the Lord may gain your love.

What wonder that that seed dies and becomes unfruitful, that falls into a
brake of thorns? or amongst such birds as stand watching to catch it all away?
what hope that the counsel of the Lord be accepted, of a mind prepossessed, and
actually st^ff'd with the cares of this life? Intus existens prohibet alienum.

How can thou ascend, with thy burden upon thy back? unload unload; lay
aside every weight, and then go up and prosper.

Say to all thou have, stay you here, whilst I go and pray before the Lord;
let the night before each Sabbath, be as the grave betwixt the two worlds;
there let thy dust be buried, and thy Spirit fly naked to thy God. Let that
night which is the partition betwixt thine own days, and the Lords, be thy
Souls taking its leave of all thou have; any [sinful] thoughts works or
pleasures, thy lusts and thy evil ways, give them an eternal burial. Be gone,
see my face no more for ever: and for matters [lawful and honest] that concern
this earth, charge them not to thrust in before the Lord: go you also your way
for this time, and when I have a convenient season I will send for you: and if
from Sabbath to Sabbath thy feet stand thus on the mountain of the Lord, thou
may find them all the week long, on the tops of the mountains of the earth.

Brethren, where is our Sabbath separation? Is there not a fault among us upon
this account? let him that hears enquire, How it is with me? Am not I faulty?
what are my Sabbath thoughts? what are my Sabbath discourses? If I be better
employed in the house of God, what do I in mine own house? what are my morning
and evening, and midday thoughts? what is my table talk, my chimney talk. If
business, if bargains, or journeys be not admitted, are not visits or
complements, or vain stories or impertinent news suffered to fill up the time?
is it thus or not with thee? Is it well that it is thus? O clear your Sabbaths
of such worldly encroachments, or you will never clear your hearts: drive all the
world into Pathmos, into banishment, and be wholly in the spirit, on the Lords
day. Be abstracted from earthly things and earthly thoughts bring them with you
neither to the house, nor to the day of the Lord; let your own houses, and your
own tables, be as the house and table of the Lord; have nothing to do from
morning to evening but to wait on God.

2. It is a day for special Communion with God. Tbe meeting of God with his
people on that day, is like unto that meeting which is promised to Moses Exodus
25. 22. before the mercy seat: There will I meet thee, and commune with thee:
there will I show thee all my mind, and hear all thy requests.

It is a day of blessing: thither the tribes go up, to bless the Lord, and
there he comes down to bless his people. It Is said Genesis 2. and Exodus 20. that
God blessed the Sabbath day: Gods blessing the day, makes it a day of blessing,
a good day to his Saints, he then comes unto them, in the fullness of the
blessing of the gospel.

Those that question whether the first day of the week be the Christian
Sabbath, let them consider which of all the days of the week the Lord has,
since the death of Christ, so exalted above the rest of the days, that they
can with most confidence say, This is the day which the Lord has blessed? on
what day were the gates of death broken, the Lord Jesus declared to be the son
of God with power, by his resurrection from the dead? on which day was the
spirit of God most signally shed abroad on the Apostles and primitive
Christians, in those extraordinary gifts, whereby they were made more capable
of publishing the blessed Gospel to the ends of the earth, and in that special
grace which seized three thousand Souls in one day? Act. 2. What day is it that
has been honored to be the birth day of the greatest number of Saints ever
since? that has been their feast day, wherein their Souls have been most
sensibly nourished, and they have been increased with the increasings of God?
what meals have they had to their Lord's Day meals? what joys, to their
Lord's Day joys Surely if this may determine the question, which day is the
Sabbath of the Lord, the day that of all others, God has blessed and made a
good day, the experiences of Christians in all ages would bring in their vote
for the first day. This is the day that God has made we will rejoice and be
glad in it: this by the way.

This day as is said before, is the rest of God: a little Heaven let down to us
on earth: God calls us up hither, as he called Moses up to Pisgah, to give us a
view of the promised land. The Sabbath is Heaven opened; we may give a guess at
the glory to come, by those glimses, and tastes, we have of it now.

It is the day of interview, betwixt the bridegroom and the bride; wherein he
beholds our faces, and shows us his loves; wherein he comes down into his
garden to eat his pleasant fruits, and we behold his goings, the goings of God
in his Sanctuary.

The business of this day is to look into the Ark of the Covenant, to review
and renew the Covenant transactions betwixt God and our Souls; to search out,
contemplate and admire the mercies and lovingkindness of the Lord; to receive
the overflowing of his goodness and to pour forth our Souls as an offering to
him, in our prayers and praises: to give and receive mutual tokens and pledges
of Love and faithfulness; to seal to our fidelity to him, and to receive
farther assurances of his grace and good will to our Souls; to obtain help from
God against our enemies, whereby we may execute upon them the vengeance
written; and upon this mountain ordinarily is the victory obtained, there
breaks he the arrows of the bow, the sword, the shield, and the battle.

Christians, have you ever experimented this Sabbath Communion? has the Lord
God appeared thus unto you? have there been such friendly and familiar
intercourses betwixt him and your Souls? Oh how contemptibly has the world
looked in that day?

But oh what dark and cloudy days are our Sabbaths ordinarily to us; Sundays,
per antiphrasin, the Sun not once appearing it may be, for many days together;
no wonder our Souls are so eathed all the week, when they are so seldom in
Heaven, on the day of the Lord: what dry feasts are our Sabbath feasts? rather
fasts then feasts: real Communion with God is a strange thing to us, even in
the day of God: Heaven is opened but our eyes are shut; God comes down to meet
us, and to bless us, but our hearts are not there: the breasts of consolation
are full, but we have no skill, or no list to draw at the breasts: we come to
the well, but we do not let down the bucket; we stand by the pool, where the
Angel comes down, but our creeple Souls put not in to the waters: we stand
without, in the outer court of the Lords house; our Sabbaths are to us but
figures of Sabbaths; the ordinances of them are to us, as wells without water,
lamps withoul Oil, mere shadows of good things: we go up from week to week, to
meet one with another, but how seldom do we see God in the company? and
hereupon Sabbaths come and go, and leave us still as we were: the Devil may
well enough trust us with such Sabbaths, the world may give us leave to go thus
before the Lord, and be no looser by it.

Brethren, get you into the inner court, which on these days especially was to
be set open, Ezekiel. 46. 1. there is an entry through the house of the Lord, that
leads in to the heart of the most high; get you into that sanctum sanctorum and
there let be your rest: as often as the morning of that blessed day looks forth
upon you, get your vessels ready, and go you forth to meet the bridegroom: open
your eyes with these thoughts, this is the day which the Lord has made I will
rejoice and be glad in it: climb up betimes, and let every duty be a stair by
which you ascend to your Lord: let divine contemplation, let prayers and
praises, etc. be the whole work; let the blessings of Divine Communion, be the
whole expectation of that day: and when you find your hearts refreshed with his
presence, and filled with the company of your God, and he sends you away laden
with the tokens of his love, and with the impress of his face upon your hearts,
and the relish of his goodness fresh upon your palats; when you thus go hot out
of the presence of the Lord, then you will learn to despise that day of small
things, with which the World entertains you: Shall I forsake my sweetness,
says the figtree, shall I forsake my fatness says the Olive, and become King
over the trees? let the bramble take that honor; farewell dignities and
dominions, farewell pomps and pleasures, farewell houses and lands, I have
enough, I have seen the face of God.

3. It is a day of special provision for Souls; whereon the Lord brings forth
out of his treasury, his spiritual provisions, to keep the Soul in heart.
Hunger-starved soldiers are but poor fighters; they are the weak souls whom
the World has vanquished.

Sabbaths are the Souls Market days. Men have their Markets whence to be
supplied with necessaries for their bodies; and on this day God keeps a Market
for Souls: He has his Milk and his Honey, his Wine and his Oil, his Bread and
his Water of Life; and on this day in special, he makes Proclamation, Ho every
one that thirsts, come to the Waters, and he that has no money; Come ye buy
and eat, yea buy Wine and Milk without money and without price.

The bread which comes down from Heaven, though it be to be had every day, (our
Week-dayes may in their measure, be all Sabbaths) yet on this day it falls more
plentifully. The Jews had their corporal Manna on the six days, and none on
the Sabbath; but the hidden Manna falls more thin, and more sparely on our
other days, and on this day more abundantly. They were to gather double on the
sixth day, that they might have to supply them on the Sabbath; but for the
Spiritual Manna, all our other days are to be supplied from our Sabbath
provision.

A Christian who is not fit to meet the Bridegroom, is neither fit to meet his
adversary, without Oil in his Lamp. It Is the great commodity that's set to sale
in this Market, Oil for our vessels. Come bring your empty vessels, here is Oil
to fill them. The Ordinances which are this day administered, are the pipes
opened, those golden pipes by which the golden Oil is emptied forth, and
conveyed down from the living Olive, Zech. 4.

It Is no wonder that men hunger after this world, who know no better feeding. An
Asses head, or a kab of Doves dung are of great price, when there is no bread,
2 King. 6. 25. It Is for want of bread that worldlings can make such a feast of
their Locusts and wild Honey. Those that have eaten of the hidden Manna, will
not lust after Quails; the Worlds dainties will come out at their nostrils,
whose bellies have been filled with this hid treasure. Those whom God has fed
in his green Pastures, those whom God has led by his still waters, they cannot
live in these salt Marshes or stubble fields. Those whose souls God has made
well watered Gardens, will not need the Pools of the Wilderness.

Its no wonder that the World beats us, when we go for many days together
without making one good meal. When our souls are famished into weakness, then
are we our enemies prey; they are the hunger starved sheep, that are a prey to
Crows and Kytes. If Satan can but keep us low, if he can either keep the Manna
from falling about our Camps, or keep us idle when we should be gathering, he
may then lead us after his lure at pleasure. It Is not a little strength that
will suffice us against his great temptations, and it is not a little bread by
which we are like to gather any great strength; we had need feed well if we
will be strong, and we had need be strong or we shall never fight well.

A Soul that uses to come before the Lord with an appetite, that feeds
hungrily, and is as the thirsty earth that drinks up the showers that come often
upon it; whom the Lord satisfies with the fatness of his house, you may turn
him loose to the World, flesh, and Devil; the life of God within him maintained
by influences from above, will much secure him against all their assaults.

Christians, know your Sabbath privileges; the advantages of Sabbath
separation, Sabbath communion and Sabbath provision. Understand your advantage,
and make your advantage of them.

Be ye separate. Remember your Creator, and rest from your works, as God did
from his. Remember your Redeemer, and rise from your dust as Christ did from
his. Let this day of his Resurrection, be the day of your Resurrection and
Ascension. Let Sabbaths be Sabbaths indeed, holy to the Lord, and wholly his.
Divide not the day betwixt flesh and Spirit, God and Mammon, but let it be
entirely the Lords day.

Let every duty and Ordinance of this day be a Communion. Prepare to meet your
God, and go up to meet him. Seek his face in hope to see his face; see and
love, see and rejoice, see and admire and praise him in his excellent
greatness. Hearken what the Lord God will speak, and let him hear your voice.
Confirm your friendsh^p, renew your acquaintance in Heaven; repeat your
Covenant transactions. Have you chosen the Lord for your portion, tell him you
stand to your choice; have you renounced your flesh and the World, promise him
not to return to folly. Have you made the Lord your trust, put forth fresh acts
of faith upon him. Look to him, lean on him for his righteousness and strength.
Let such as these, let faith, and love, and hope, and prayers, and praises,
which are the stairs to the other World, and your weapons against this, be your
Sabbathwork and delight.

Let not finer clothes and better fare, let not idleness and ease, no nor
filling up a place in the Congregation, be the only difference betwixt Sabbaths
and other days, but this better work and meat for souls.

Provide against the days of scarcity, provide against the days of
temptation. Let not the Manna fall besides your vessels. Let him that has an
ear hear what the Spirit says to the Churches. Catch at every word, observe
every look of your Lord upon you. And whatever you receive lay up, and ponder
in your hearts. Have you received a check or reproof, lay up your reproof; have
you received a word of counsel or instruction, lay up your instructions. Has
he spoken peace to you, lay up that word charily by you; whatever transactions
have passed betwixt the Lord and your Souls, keep the records; and when you go
forth, whither ever you go, carry all this upon your hearts, that whenever the
World meets you again, and tempts you again, you may be thus well appointed,
and thoroughly furnished against its assaults.

Brethren, put hard on every Sabbath, for such an undisturbed attendance on the
Lord; single out the Lord for the object of your whole converse; knit your
hearts thus to him, solace your selves thus in him, get you thus elevated and
raised in your spirits from earthly to heavenly; and every inch of ground you
get of your adversary, maintain it carefully from Sabbath to Sabbath. If this
were seriously designed, and more generally attempted by Christians, we should
find both another face, and another power of Christianity in the earth; the
children of the Kingdom would be more visibly differenced from the men of this
World, and both the guilt and reproach of earthliness and sensuality, be wiped
off from the Professors and Profession of the Gospel.

3. Improve Sacraments this way. The advantage that we have in Sacraments
against the World, lies In our Preparation. Participation.



1. In our preparation. One confessed preparatory duty is self-examination, 1
Cor. 11. 28. A great security of this Idol is the secret of its tabernacle; Its
covert in which it lurks unseen. Worldlings (many of them) if they knew what is
within them, their Conscience would so prick, that they could have no rest or
ease, till this thorn were pulled out; but they are not aware that the World is
within them. Yet this enemy lies not so close but upon a privy search it may be
discovered. Sacramental trial should be close and through, no corner within us
should be left unransacked. The reverence of this great Ordinance and the
dreadful consequence of coming so solemnly before the Lord with a Traitor in
our bosoms ( eating and drinking judgment) will cry in our ears, Make diligent
search.

The evidence that this one thing [an earthly mind] carries in it of our
treachery toward God, is so notorious, that he has but little understanding
in the matters of God, that would not from this alone, conclude himself an
unworthy guest at the Table of the Lord, were all things else never so specious
and fair. Dare thou say, Surely the Lord will accept me, for he has but this
one thing against me, That I love the World more than I love God. I can own his
name and ways, I join with the Assemblies of his people; I can pray, and hear,
and fast; I am neither proud nor froward, nor envious, nor malicious, there is
no evil but this covetousness, but I hope I can acquit my self of? Dare thou
say thus? I am no drunkard, I am no Adulterer, I am no swearer, I am nothing
but an Idolater? the Lord I hope will excuse me in this thing? Do think he
will indeed? And may it not be like enough, that upon this diligent search thou
may find this to be thy case?

Friends, get the sense of these terrible truths upon your hearts, He that
eats and drinks unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord; He
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself;
He that is an Idolater, eats and drinks unworthily, He that is covetous is
an Idolater; Let these things sink into your hearts, and then see if you dare
come without a narrow search; make a narrow search and then you will see how
great your unworthiness and danger is. Certainly were there a due care taken of
this duty, it were not possible that men could go on from Sacrament to
Sacrament under the power of their earthly hearts, this would surely startle
them. This Ordinance would either make them afraid of their worldliness, or
this worldliness would make them afraid of Sacraments.

Worldly Professors, what care is there ordinarily taken of this duty? do you
examine? do you make diligent search? do you make particular search for this
evil? It may be you enquire, Am I in the faith? am I in charity? do I bear no
malice? has no man a quarrel against me? nay possibly you may go a little
farther, and ask, Am I unjust? am I an oppressor, an extortioner? have I done
wrong to no man? and if you can acquit your self here, then an end. But do you
further ask, Do I not love the world? Is not mine heart too much upon it? Am I
not too busy for the world? is not my time spent too much upon it? are not
duties neglected? is not my soul, or my families souls neglected for its sake?
am I not so bent upon growing rich in the world, that I mind not how poverty
grows upon my soul? do I honor the Lord with my substance? am I merciful? am I
bountiful? do I seek no more nor no otherwise then God would have me seek? do I
aim at God? do I entitle God to all I have? do I know how to abound? can I want
if the Lord will have it so? is God enough if I have nothing? is not all the
world enough if God be a stranger? how can I bear crosses and disappointments
in the world?

Speak friends, are any of these things enquired after? I doubt whether you be
faithful in this matter; oh might I prevail with you to put upon this closer
and severer trial, you know not what it might gain you: If you can but
apprehend your Enemy at such a time as this, when you are making this solemn
approach to the Lord, when it would be so dreadful to you to be found in league
with it, at what an advantage would you then have it? Now is a time, when if
ever, we are like to have you serious; loose not the season; beware of solemn
triflings; hide not now your eyes from seeing your disease; beware of
palliating and mincing, be zealous to know the worst of your case; put
Conscience close to it, what say thou, Guilty, or not guilty? If Conscience
plead Guilty, then come before the Lord if thou dare without serious
repentance and resolution to reform.

Another preparatory duty, (to name no more) is the renewing of our repentance.
This is necessarily included in the renewing of our Covenant, which cannot be
without repenting of our covenant breaches.

Repentance, if it be sincere, will be universal, of every known sin; If this
evil we are now dealing against, be found upon thy score, this must be the
matter of thy repentance: he that repents not of every thing that's evil, truly
repents of nothing.

Repentance has respect, not only to the time to come, and so is Reformation
or the amending of our ways, a ceasing to do evil, and a doing well, Isa. 1.
16, 17. but also to the time past, and so is a Retractation or undoing what
has been done: what has been done cannot be undone properly, but in a sense
it may; the hearty wishing it undone, is in Gods acceptance, the undoing what
has been done: and this is essential to true true repentance, an hearty
wishing all the evil undone that has been done. Can that man be said to repent
he has been a worldling, that would not for any thing but he had been so? has
he repented, that if he were to begin again, would take the same course? Now
this, if it be well considered, will, in the present case, appear to be the
hardest part of repentance: how difficult soever it be for him whose heart has
hitherto gone after his covetousness, to force it at length to a retreat, yet
this has much more difficulty in it, heartily to wish he had never been guilty
of any covetous practices. Such an undoing of his sin would be his undoing in
point of estate.

It may be his covetousness has brought him in his whole living, and gotten
him all the estate he has in the world; if he had not been an oppressor or a
fraudulent dealer, or at least a zealot for this world, possibly he had been
but a poor man at this day, and had never gotten any thing; his house and his
money and his lands are all, the income of his covetousness. To wish he had
been true, and honest, and moderate in the affairs of this life, may be the
same as to wish himself in perpetual poverty.

It may be when thou considerest not what thou say, thou could wish thou
had been honest, but when thou weighest what there is in that wish, Now I am
full and abound, I eat and drink and wear and lodge and dwell in the fruit of my
labor and care, but O that I had been empty and hungry and, naked, that I have
been a bankerupt and beggar rather then grown as rich as I am upon such terms?
Is this so easy a wish?

May be the drunkard will more easily wish, O that I had ever been sober, the
adulterer will easily wish, O that I had never been unclean, the prodigal will
easily wish, O that I had never thus foolishly wasted my estate, but will the
covetous so easily wish, O that I had never gotten an estate thus? And yet this
is essential to repentance. He that does not wish his wickedness undone, does
certainly will to do it again, if he have the same opportunities and temptation.

This I say, is in the present case an hard piece of repentance; it is not so
hard a trial for a rich man that has now enough, to be required to covet no
more, to be unjust no longer, never again to neglect his God or his Soul for
his worldly interest; for if he be never so strict this way for the future, his
flesh is not like to suffer so much by it, he has enough by him already to
feed and pamper it; but to wish his meat out of his mouth, his clothes off his
back his money out of his purse, to wish himself back to that dunghill from which
his covetousness raised him; yea so heartily to wish this, as to be ready to be
refund and to make restitution of all his dishonest gains, he whose conscience
is so awakened as to press this upon him, will sufficiently understand he has
hard work before him. And he that perceives how hard this is and yet how
necessary to repentance, will take heed how he goes on: he that has thus
unravel'd his former evil doings, is fenced against future; he will beware how
he goes on to heap up such a treasure to himself, which he sees will cost him,
either so much distress, or his Soul.

Brethren, dare you come to Sacraments without repentance? that is, dare you
mock God to his face? dare you say you have repented of all your sins, when you
have not repented of your covetousness, when your hearts know, you would not
for any thing but you had been covetous? can you say you wish you had not been
dishonest, when you will not make restitution of your dishonest gains? when do
we hear of any such thing as restitution? Is it enough that you do evil no more
whilst you thus justify what you have done?

Surely friends, if you understand what repentance is, and dare not venture
upon Sacraments in your impenitence, you would find all your sins, and this
amongst the rest, to fall before that sacred Ordinance.

2. In our Participation.

There are many singular advantages that may hence be gotten against the world:
for the understanding whereof consider, that there is in the Sacrament, 1. A
lively representation of the blessings of the other World, 2. A sensible
obligation against the lusts and temptations of this World, 3. An abundant
communication or exhibition of the blessings of the other World.


The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is called, Luke 22. 20. The New Testament;
This cup is the New Testament in my blood.

The New Testament is Heaven opened, life and immortality brought to light by
the Gospel. Its our Lords last will wherein we may read, what rich and glorious
legacies he has bequeathed to his Saints.

The Sacrament may be said to be the New Testament in this threefold sense, 1.
It is the New Testament signified. 2. It is the New Testament sealed. 3. It is
the New Testament blessings exhibited.


1. The Sacrament is the New Testament signified: or a lively representation of
the great blessings of the covenant; it is a visible Gospel, Christ crucified
before our eyes.

It is a commemoration of Christ crucified; as sometimes you know dying friends
bequeath unto their dear survivers, some token of their love, a ring or a Jewel
or their picture to preserve their memory, with them, so did our dying Lord
bequeath this signet, this picture of Christ crucified to his living Saints,
with this charge, as often as you look on this think on me, Luke 22. 19. Do
this in remembrance of me.

It is the showing forth Christ crucified in open sight, 1 Cor. 11. 26. And in
this Cross may be seen the Crown, as you may give a guess at the purchase by
the price that is laid down for it. The pardons, the peace, the hopes, the
robes, the mansions, the inheritance incorruptible undefiled immarcessible, to
which we are redeemed, we have a survey of them all in this price that was paid
for them. The love of Christ, his kindnesses and compassions do all look forth
upon us; His sweat, his stripes, his grief, his groans, his blood, do all
speak, Behold how he loved us, behold what he has laid up for those that love
him.

Brethren, will not this price buy off your Souls from this Earth, which has
bought them from Hell? will neither the price nor the purchase do it? will not
Heaven be taken in exchange for clay? you have been at the table of the Lord,
but sure you do not use to see Jesus there, if your Souls yet dwell in the dust.

Look ye to that tree, the cross of your Lord; that instrument of death, behold
how it is become a tree of life; a tree of life hung with all manner of
precious fruits: there are all the curses naild and witherd, there are all the
flowers, and fruits of the Paradise of God growing up and flourishing; there is
joy and glory, there is life and peace, Sursum Corda: What are these Souls?
what, moles and batts? what, no eyes to see this glory? what see it and not
desire it? what, still feeding with the worms? Let these moles get them eyes,
let these worms get them wings; look till you can see, and see till you can
love, and then ascend and be satisfied: When I am lifted up I will draw all men
after me, Joh. 12. 32. Is not the Son of Man lifted up? do thou not see him
before thee? what is thine heart that does not yet begin to ascend?

O what is Christ? what not worth the thirty pieces? will thou again sell thy
Lord for money? once more look on him whom thou have pierced and then say, O my
Soul whom will thou? Jesus or Barabbas? this World is a robber? what do I here?
am I come to crucify the Son of God afresh? to set him at naught again, to
sell him the second time? my money perish from me rather then it should again
become the price of blood.

2. The Sacrament is the New Testament sealed: the use of a Seal is to secure
and confirm; therefore Seals are affixed to writings, bonds or covenants, to
give them their full force and ratification.

The writing to which this Seal is set is the Gospel; the great and precious
promises, which are full of life and immortality, and all the riches of the
promised land.

The Lord in giving us the Sacramental Elements, his Bread, and his Cup, does
therein deliver us the Covenant of Grace sealed, to assure us of the truth and
certainty thereof; as if he should say, This shall be a sign betwixt me and
thee, that if thou accept of my Gospel treasures upon Gospel terms, if thou will have no other God, but wi^t forsake all and follow me, this shall be to
assure thee, that I will be thy God, and all that I have is thine.

And as the Lord seals on his part, so we set our seal to our part of the
Covenant; as the Covenant is mutual, so is the sealing; Gods giving is his
sealing, and our receiving is ours; our receiving the Elements from the hand of
the Lord, our eating and drinking, is our seal, to witness our acceptance of
God upon Gods terms, let this be a sign betwixt me and thee that I accept Lord,
I accept of thee according to the tenor and terms of thy Covenant.

Our acceptance of these Elements is as a Servants taking Covenant money, or a
Soldiers taking Press money, which binds the one to his Master, the other to
his Captain; and our sealing in this manner, does in a sense ratify Gods Seal,
as to our particular interest in the promise; as upon a servants receiving his
Covenant money, the Covenant is confirmed not only on his own part, but also on
his Masters: His Master is now engaged to own him, provide for him, protect
him, and reward him as his servant: Its true, Gods Seal alone fully confirms
the truth of the Covenant in general, but upon my sealing to the condition on
my part, (provided it be sincere and unfeigned) hereupon Gods Seal does not
only confirm the Covenant in general, (that he which believes and obeys the
Gospel shall certainly be saved) but it now makes it sure to me, and gives me a
certain propriety in all the promises of God. There Is not a man in the world
that thus accepts and sets to his Seal, but the Seal of God stands good to him;
he has it under Gods hand and seal that he shall be pardoned, he has it under
Gods hand and seal, that grace, and peace, and all things necessary unto life
and salvation are his.

Only it must be understood and remembered (as before) our acceptance is not to
be only of what God promises, a willingness to be pardoned and saved, but of
what God requires, a willingness to serve him, and forsaking all others, to
cleave only unto him; as a Soldier takes his Press money, not only in token
that he accepts of his pay, or a servant his Covenant money in token that he
accepts of his wages, but it is their taking pay upon terms to fight, and
taking wages on terms to work.

Now hence arises a double advantage in our war against the world, an
Encouragement. Engagement.


1. Gods Seal encourages us on. The Covenant of God assures, not only a Crown
to the Conqueror, but assistance to the Combatant: He will be not only the
rewarder, but the helper of all those that diligently seek him: He has said,
Heb. 13. 5. I will never fail thee, nor forsake thee. And hereupon thou may
boldly say, The Lord is my helper. He has said, Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put my
spirit within you; and ver. 26. I will give you a new heart. This flesh will
never prevail, but what cannot the Spirit of the Lord do? this old heart and
the world will never part, they were ever friends, and ever will be; but he
will take away this, and give you another heart.

Fright not thy self with the difficulties thou see before thee, from the
strong party the world has within thee, thy carnal nature with all thine
earthly members; from the Allies and Confederates it has without thee, Satan
with all his instruments and temptations; thou will be like to say, How can I
turn this stream of nature? how can I stand against this flood of temptations?
Can I create me a new spirit? or can I conquer whilst this old spirit lives?
can I command my love, and my fear, and my hatred, as I please? can I love what
I will, and hate what I will, and fear what I will? can I fly from what my
heart follows after, or fight against what I so love and desire?

How can I endure such hardness, as not only the fight, but the victory will
bring upon me? Can I be poor? can I be hungry, be naked, be destitute? can I be
in reproach, in disgrace and contempt? will this heart ever bear the watchings,
the fastings, the labors, together with the distresses and afflictions of this
warfare? I shall surely perish one day or other by the hand of this Enemy.

Discourage not thy self thus; what cannot God do? what will not God do, who
has said, who has sealed to it, I will never fail thee, nor forsake thee?
Behold his Seal; Is it not in thine hand, and in thy mouth? Trust in God; set
to thy Seal that God is true, and then say, Though my flesh and my heart fail,
God is the strength of mine heart, and my portion for ever: I will go in the
strength of the Lord, through him I shall do valiantly, he shall tread down
mine enemies, and my difficulties.

2. Our Seal engages us on. Have thou sealed to the Lord, and not bound thy
self to him? Have thou set thy seal to a blank? have thou engaged thy self to
be the Lords, and not therein to be no longer the worlds? Can thou serve
these two Masters? Is not thy renouncing the world necessarily included in thy
Covenant Obligation?

Brethren, that the tie may the more sensibly lie upon you, I advise, that as
often as you come before the Lord in this Ordinance, you put this expressly into
your engagement; Father, I am sensible of the plague of this earthly heart, and
of the tyranny of these worldly lusts, how impetuously they set upon me, and
how imperiously they lead me on after them, how false and unfaithful have they
made me to my God, how ordinarily am I led away by them against my Covenant,
and my conscience: But I here bewail it, I detest it, it is my grief and my
shame that ever I have been so false and unworthy: Behold now again, in thy
fear, I open my mouth to the Lord, I take hold of thy word, I hang upon thy
help, let the Lord my righteousness be my strength, and in his Name I again
lift up mine hand to the most High, solemnly protesting before the Lord, that I
so avouch thee to be my God, and so entirely and unreservedly make over my self
unto thee, that through the grace of God with me, I will henceforth, and while
I live, be the avowed enemy of a worldly heart and life; I will use all thy
means for the overcoming of it; I will study, I will watch, I will pray
against, I will rate, and check, and restrain, and resist all the motions,
lustings, and temptations by which I have been so often led aside and overcome;
I give my self, my estate, my strength, my parts, my time, all that I have unto
the Lord; Lord take me at my word, and all that I have for thy servants, I am
thine save me. Thou that know all things, know that I would not lie unto
God, but that I sincerely intend, in thy strength, to stand to this word, in
testimony whereof I here take this holy Sacrament from thine hands. I have
opened my mouth to the Lord, help me, and I will not go back.

And now, O my soul, look to thy self; Shall I again break my Covenant? shall I
wickedly repent, and alter the word that is gone out of my lips? shall I any
longer walk after the course, and in the lusts of this world, fulfilling the
desires of the flesh, and of my mind? shall mine heart still go after my
covetousness? shall I study and project, and plot and prog for this flesh at
that rate, as if the world were still my God? shall it climb up from the
footstool to the Throne? shall it again give Laws to my heart, and set limits
to my Religion? shall interest Lord it over Conscience, and carnal inclination
bear down devotion? shall I suffer this Robber to break in again into the
Sanctuary of the Lord? shall it eat up my Sacrifices, steal away my Sabbaths,
curtail my duties, and enervate Ordinances? shall the Lord have no more of me
then the world will spare him? shall business be ever again pleaded against
duty, or gain against godliness? shall my soul take up its dwelling in my shop,
or in my fields, and only give some short visits to heaven at its leisure?

But oh shall lying and promise breaking, shall fraud and oppression, shall
unrighteousness or unmercifulness be nothing with me, or but excusable
failings? Are these things according to the vows of God that are upon me? Look
to thy self, O my soul, be not found a liar against God.

O Brethren, were there this solemn and express transaction betwixt our souls
and the Lord at every Sacrament, and did we thus live in the conscience of this
Obligation, and the dread of being found false to God, from Sacrament to
Sacrament, what might it not bring forth? what a wound would be given to the
head of this deadly Enemy?

3. The Sacrament is the New Testament blessings exhibited: The new wine
broached; this Conduit runs with Gospel Wine: Our partaking in the Sacrament,
is our coming into the Garden of our Lord, to eat his pleasant fruits.

We read, Cant. 2. 3. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his
fruit was sweet to my taste. I shall stay a while here, and shall gather a
bundle of these fruits, and present them to your eye. I shall in short show, 1.
What the special fruits of Christ are. 2. That these fruits are sweet and
pleasant, and then I shall add, 3. That these fruits are exhibited in the
Sacrament. 4. The advantages we hence have against the world.


1. What the special fruits of Christ are; which I shall reduce to these two
heads.

The fruits of His Blood. His Spirit.


1. The fruits of his Blood. These are especially two, in which all others are
comprised, Viz.

Righseousness. Peace.
1. Righteousness. He is therefore called the Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23.
6. Joh. 16. 8. He shall convince the world of righteousness; that is, of the
righteousness of Christ; he shall evidence and make manifest unto the world,
who all lie in wickedness, that in him there is righteousness; not only that he
is righteous as an individual person, but as a public person; that he has in
the name and on the behalf of all those that believe on him, fulfilled all
righteousness, and has hereby a stock and treasure of righteousness to bestow,
and wherewith to cloth all those that come unto God by him, to whom he is made
wisdom, [righteousness] sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

Beloved, are there any guilty souls among you, any unrighteous ones? do you
know what it is to be guilty? do you know the dread and terror of the Lord? do
you consider what the face of a righteous incensed God will be to an
unrighteous soul? do you understand how naked you lie, and open before
everlasting vengeance? how can you endure? or how can you escape the wrath to
come? righteousness of your own you have none, and that which you seem to have,
is not your righteousness: But behold here is righteousness for you, come to
Christ, put in here, dip you in his blood, and then you are clean; though your
iniquity be searched for, yet it shall not be found; this righteousness shall
answer for you, for all your unrighteousness; this righteousness shall purchase
for you the eternal inheritance, O methinks we should hear you all crying out
with those Jews, though with another heart, and in another sense, His blood be
upon us, and upon our children.

2. Peace. That Is another fruit of Christ's blood; he has made peace by the
blood of his Cross, Col. 1. 20. He has made peace, not only betwixt Jew and
Gentile, reconciling them both into one body, but betwixt God and men,
reconciling both Jew and Gentile in one body unto God, Romans 5. 1. Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God.

This peace has all blessings in it; love, good will, pardon, grace, life; as
the wrath of God has all woes in it, all the plagues and miseries, both of
this world and that to come; you need say no more to mark out any person for an
unhappy and lost person, but this, The wrath of God abides on him; you have
said enough, you need not smite him the second time; as the wrath of God has
all woes, so the peace of God has all blessings in it.

2. The fruits of his spirit. The former fruits, righteousness and peace, which
I call the fruits of the blood of Christ, are in a sense, the fruits also of
the spirit; as also these latter which I call the fruits of the spirit, are in
a sense, the fruits of his blood: the spirit convinces of righteousness, and
preaches peace, Joh. 16. 14. He shall take of mine, and show it unto you. The
spirit first indeed takes of our own, and shows that unto us; that same Gospel
spirit that brings life and immortality, brings first death and mortality to
light; he that convinces of sin, is the same spirit that convinces of
righteousness.

He shall take of our own, and show it unto us. Look thee here soul, what a
vile and unclean thing thou art, what a wretched and unhappy thing thou art,
what a Leper, what a Viper, what a devil in flesh thou have made thy self, what
an Egypt, what a Sodom, what an hell thou have within thee, what a portion,
what a treasure thou have laid up for thy self; Serpents, and Scorpions, and
Dragons, Blood, and Wrath, and Fire, these must be the portion of thy cup.
Secure sleepy soul, jolly merry soul, that art quiet and at ease, sporting thy
self with thy pleasures, loading thy self with riches, decking thy self with
ornaments, open thine eyes soul, look thee here, all that is thine I here set in
order before thee: these sins, and this guilt, and these curses, and these
plagues, these are all thou can call thine own, these shall dwell with thee,
these shall stick and cleave to thee, as thy flesh to thy bone, as thy body to
thy soul: this sad and amazing sight the spirit shows us, takes of our own, and
shows it unto us: But then says Christ, he shall take of mine, of my
righteousness and peace, and show it unto you.

I say, even these fruits of the blood of Christ may be also called the fruits
of the spirit.

But besides these, there are others that the Scripture expressly calls the
fruits of the spirit; what these are you may read, Gal. 5. 22, 23. But the
fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, temperance; all the graces and the comforts of the spirit
issuing from them, these are the fruits of the spirit.

2. That these fruits of Christ are sweet, 1 Pet. 2. 7. To them that believe he
is precious: He and all his, root and branches, tree and fruit; he is pleasant
to the eye, the thoughts of Christ are precious, Psa. 104. 3. My meditation of
him shall be sweet. It is a pleasant thing to behold this Sun; he is sweet to
the ear, his words are sweet, sweeter then the honey and the honey comb, Psa.
19. 10. His house and his dwelling is sweet, Psa. 84. 1. How amiable are thy
Tabernacles O Lord. How might I enlarge here! But more close to the matter in
hand, because sense will give us the fullest proof of sweetness let me ask.

1. How sweet have you found the fruits of the blood of Christ? Ask the guilty
if righteousness be not sweet, if pardon be not sweet, ask the prisoner if
liberty be not sweet, ask the debtor how he would receive his discharge from
all his debts. Do thou know what blood guiltiness means, I need not commend
to thee, the blood of atonement.

2. How sweet are the fruits of his Spirit? would it not be a pleasure to you
to be holy and humble and meek? is not love sweet? is not holy joy sweet? that
is, is not sweetness sweet? nay is not godly sorrow sweet? the mournings and
meltings for sin, have more sweetness in them then the sportings and laughings
of sinners.

Is not the sense of integrity, clearness and uprightness, is not peace of
conscience, the assurance of divine love, are not these sweet? Ask those that
labor under the gripes and pangs of a wounded conscience, or are stung with
the conscience of guile and treachery, how they would prize peace of
conscience: ask those who have received the sentence of death in themselves,
and lie roaring like bulls in a net, full of the fury of the Lord, how precious
assurance of the love of God would be. Ask those whose souls do dwell at ease,
who walk in the light of the Lord, and have tasted that the Lord is gracious,
what they would take in exchange for those comforts, wherewith they feel
themselves comforted of God.

I appeal to some of your experiences, whether ever you have had so much
pleasure in all your lives, as when you have found your hearts ascending Heaven
ward, in your flames of love, and receiving testimony from the Lord, that you
are accepted with him: surely your souls have tasted how good the Lord is.

But here note that these fruits of the Spirit (some of them especially) are
sweet only To the Souls. Healthy Hungry



1. To the healthy Soul: that is, to the holy Soul, to the sick every pleasant
thing is bitter: is grace unfavoury? is holiness harsh to thee, do thou find
no relish in it? are thy gourds and thy husks thy locusts and wild honey, the
pleasures of thy flesh only grateful to thy palate? O thou art a sickly Soul,
there is no health in thee.

2. To the hungry Soul: The hungry he fills with good things, and the hungry
will relish his good things, the full Soul loathes the honey comb: can thou
not taste the sweetness? O thou art a full Soul; Satan has filled thine heart,
thou have an heart full of dirt and trash; the Devil has made a very stable or
barn, or dung pot of thine heart; meat and drink and money and mirth have chok'd
up thy soul, and that is the reason that Christ is no more savoury.

Are there any empty souls among you, hungring and thirsting after the bread
and water of life? what if Christ should come down and meet you here, and feed
you with these good things? would you not say, O this is sweet feeding, O this
is a sweet morning, O this is a pleasant meal?

If you could see all the blessed fruits of the gospel, spread upon this table;
if you saw pardons sealed before you for every one of your souls; if grace and
peace, if love and joy, if holiness and power, and every thing your souls want
or wish for, if you should see them here on the table; if you should hear a
voice from Heaven calling unto you, Eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly
O beloved, you that want a pardon, there it is for you; you that want holiness,
humility, patience, power, assurance, here it is for you, take it; It may be the
full souls among you would be nothing moved, it would better please them to
hear, there is a penny for you, there is a sheep or an house or a living for you,
But every hungry soul would cry out, O this is sweet, 'its good to be here.

3. That these fruits of Christ are exhibited and given forth in the sacrament.
The sacrament is a communion: the Communion of the body of Christ, the
Communion of the blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 16. wherein we come not only to
see, but to receive Christ crucified, to receive of his fullness grace for grace.

Isa. 12. 3. we have a promise, with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells
of salvation, here note,

1. That the Church of Christ has her wells of salvation: without is death and
destruction: sinners have their pits, and their pools, and their cisterns, but
no wells. There is a fountain and a fountain opened Zech. 13. 1. but it is to
the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: to the Israel of God not
to his enemies; to these the fountains opened, is a fountain sealed, Christ
shall profit them nothing; Christ is the Churches enclosure, no common for
aliens.

If you ask what are those wells, I answer the word is a well, the ordinances
are wells, in particular this ordinance, this sacrament to which we are come
this day to draw, this is a well: it has the depth of a well; this ordinance
is a deep mystery, it is not every hand, no nor every eye that can reach the
water. 2. It has the spring of a well: wells have not a standing and underived
fullness, but they have a spring that feeds them: Christ is the spring that
fills this well. 3. It has the fullness of a well, cisterns will hold little
water, in the well there is store: all Christ is here, in whom all fullness
dwells.

This well is the Churches, it belongs only to those that belong to God, 1 Cor.
3. 22. 23. whether Paul Apollos or Cephas, whether ministers or ordinances, all
are yours because you are Christ's and Christ is Gods: Romans 9. 4. who are
Israelites, to whom pertains the adoption and the glory and the covenants; to
whom the adoption and the covenants belong, theirs are the seals.

The things that are without are yours sinners; sin is yours, guilt is yours,
temptations snares woes, death is yours, because ye are none of Christ's; this
well of life is none of yours. It will be demanded of you, as Math. 22. 12,
Friend how camst thou in hither? what have thou to do to take my covenant or
the blood of my covenant into thy mouth, since thou hate instruction and
castest my words behind thee, Psalm. 50.

Such may not come to the well, or if they come, it may prove a well of
damnation to them, not of salvation: and so the Apostle tells them it will
prove 1 Cor. 11. 29. This water of life may prove as the water of jealousy,
that bitter water that will cause their belly to swell and their thigh to rott,
may be a curse and not a blessing.

Look to it sinners, you may be drowned in this well when you come to drink;
you may drink flames and fury instead of the water of life.

Oh how many have been drowned in these waters? who rushing unpreparedly upon
this dreadful ordinance, have drowned all that little good they seemed to have:
something possibly they formerly had that was hopeful, but by the just judgment
of God upon them for abusing such an ordinance they have lost all: at first
they came it may be with some little tenderness and trembling of heart, but not
being upright in the main, they have at length lost all their sense, and have
been smitten with deadness and hardness.

O consider what you are, and how it is with you now you come here? are you
Christ's? are you sincerely his? are you resolvedly his? if you have not
assurance that you are his, what probable evidences have you that you are? are
your souls wishing for Christ, waiting for Christ, thirsting and panting and
following after love to Christ, likeness to Christ, subjection to Christ,
evidences that he is yours? are you resolved, never while you live, to turn
back and give over your pursuit of Christ nor to sit down by any thing short of
an universal conformity to his image and will?

Are you crucified with Christ? Is the world crucified to you, and you unto the
world? Is the old man slain, and all your earthly members? feel every limb of
the old man, if there be not life still found in them; feel the heart of the
old man, is there not self-will, self-love, and the love of this present world
yet alive? feel the head of the old man, is not pride and self-conce it alive?
what plottings and contrivances, what great designs are there carrying on for
the flesh and the world? feel the gall and the spleen of him, is not bitterness
and wrath, envy and malice yet alive? observe the eyes, and the ears, and the
tongue, and the habit, and the way; does not the old man live in all these? are
not the eyes pleased with beholding vanity, the ears itching after fleshly
fooleries? Is not the sound of him upon the tongue, the show of him in the
countenance, the habit, and whole way of life? feel the pulses of the old man,
his breathings and pantings, is it not after earth still?

Brethren, if there be any sad remains of this earth and flesh in you, as
doubtless there are, yet is there an abatement of the power and vigor of them?
if the old man be not quite dead, yet is he in a Consumption? are the waters of
lust fallen; yea, and still falling lower? are you in good earnest [for]
mortification, for the death of every lust? and are you impatient while they
live? are you come to this point, you will never be the friends of your flesh,
you will never take its part again, against warnings, against reproofs, you will
never live in peace with it, but will wrestle, and fight, and wait for the
victory as long as you live? This will give you good hope, that Christ is
yours; and good evidence that he calls to you, Come unto the waters.

2. In this Well of Salvation there is water of life: Ye shall draw [water]
that is, living water: In this water is comprehended all things belonging to
life and godliness: Here is bread in this water; he that is the Rock springing
in the earth, is the bread that came down from heaven, Joh. 6. 48. 50. Here is
blood with the water; out of his side came water and blood. Here is wine and
milk in this water, Is. 55. 1. Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the
[waters,] come buy wine and milk. Come to the waters, why what shall we get
there? O there is wine and milk in the waters; come to the waters for wine and
milk.

What case is there of any of the Saints, but here is that which is proper for
it: Here Is water for the filthy, here is blood for the guilty, here is bread for
the strong, here is milk for the weak, here is wine for the sad; here is for meat,
medicine, and delight; here is the flower of the wheat, the healing balm, the
sweetness of the fig tree, the fatness of the Olive, the Tree of Life, Christ
is in these waters.

3. This water of life is [to be drawn] out of this Well of Salvation. Hence
it is that we must come, every man with his Pitcher. Faith is our Pitcher, what
need of a Pitcher if there were no water to be drawn? unbelievers might then
speed as well as believers.

4. Its a joy to the Saints to work at the Well. [With joy] shall ye draw, etc.
We read, 1 Samuel 7. 6. that the people of God once drew other waters, and out of
another Well; they drew water, and poured it out before the Lord. The Wells
were their repenting sorrow-bitten hearts, the waters were their tears, which
they poured out before the Lord: these were bitter waters, and drawn with
sorrow; the waters you are now come to, are pleasant; faith, and love, and joy,
and praise, are here to be both your work, and your waters; the three latter
are the pleasures of the other world; the first [Faith] is your Pitcher to
fetch them in, and your mouth to drink them down. God has brought you hither
to prove the sweetness of love, to taste what it is to love, and be beloved; God
opens you a Spring of everlasting joy, thereby to dilate and enlarge your souls
in admirings and praises.

4. The advantages we hence get against the world; are amongst others, these
following.

The precious things of Christ thus exhibited in the Sacrament, will 1. Quench
our thirst. 2. Renew our strength. 3. Sharpen our weapons. 4. Set the reward
before our eye.


1. They will quench our thirst after the world. The world invites as Christ,
Ho every one [that thirsteth] come to my waters; If any man [thirst] let him
come unto me and drink. God and the world are both for the empty souls; he
that is empty of God, there is a man for the world; he that is empty of the world,
there is a soul for God; he that is surfeited of the pleasures of sin, will
nauseate the joys of Religion; he that is satiated with the pleasures of
Religion, will slight the joys of the world.

John 4. 14. Whosoever drinks of the waters that I shall give him, shall
never thirst; that is, either when he is come up to the Well head, and shall
have drank his full draught, he shall thirst no more for ever, he shall be
satisfied for ever; or else, he that shall drink of my waters here, that shall
drink of the brook in the way, shall not be thirsty after other waters; he that
has drank of the upper springs, will better spare the nether springs.

Our intimate converses with Christ, and those gracious savours and divine
impressions they leave upon our hearts, do naturally weaken and allay our
fleshly appetites and inclinations: wisdom is not more necessarily expulsive
of folly, light of darkness, holiness of sin, then the love and joy of the
Lord, of the love and the lusts of this world.

Brethren, whatever divine touches, whatever peace and joy you seem to feel
upon your hearts, if the world be not a looser by them, if it stand its ground,
and maintain its interest and esteem in you, all that you seem to feel of God
upon you, look to it, that it prove not a fallacy, and a dream: for my part, I
shall ever suspect that intimacy my soul has seemed to get in heaven, and all
the pleasure of it, if I be not the more content to be a stranger in this
earth: O my God will thou draw forth the breasts to me, let me suck, and be
satisfied; let the Lord God be my satisfaction, and then let the world try the
strength of its temptation.

2. They will renew our strength. This staff of bread will be the strength of
our hearts, they are the weak souls whom the world conquers. But of this having
spoken in a former direction, I pass it over here with the naming.

3. They will sharpen our weapon. We never are foiled, but when our faith
fails: This is our victory -- even our faith; this weapon of our warfare is
mighty through God: By how much the more our faith is exercised on God, by so
much the more vigorous; believe and you shall be established, believe, and you
shall be strengthened, believe, and all that you see before you shall be meat
for your faith to put it in heart.

But how shall I believe? yea rather, how should thou but believe? whose
Table is this to which thou art come? whose word was it that said, This bread
is my body which was given for you; This cup is the New Testament in my blood
which was shed for you? This bread is the communion of my body, this cup is the
communion of my blood? what is this body, what is this blood, but virtually all
the spirit and life of the Gospel? what is the meaning of those words, Take,
and eat, and drink, but that its the will of God, if it be your will also, that
all this shall be yours? would Christ say, take, what he meant not to give?
would Christ say, eat, that which is not bread? will be feed souls with common
bread? did he bring you hither to mock you? how should you but believe?

Believe, and you shall find his flesh to be meat indeed, his blood to be drink
indeed; this bread to be Manna, this cup to come to you full of the spirits of
the Gospel, which will so nourish and quicken your faith, that as a mighty man
refreshed with wine, it will rejoice to run its course, and tread down your
Enemy under you.

4. The reward is set before our eye. Rev. 2. 17. To him that overcomes will I
give to c^t of the hidden Manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the
stone a new name written which no man knows but he that receives it. Chap.
3. 21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne. There Is
the Conquerours reward, the hidden Manna, the white stone, the new name, the
Throne: Now all these are here set before us, we taste of the Manna, we have a
sight of the stone, and of the Throne; what encouragement is it to the heart to
have the reward in the eye: It was said concerning our Lord, Heb. 12. 2. that
for the joy that was [set before him] he endured the Cross, and despised the
shame. And we are exhorted in the foregoing words, Let us run with patience the
race that is set before us, [looking to Jesus.]

Let us run, looking to Jesus, let us bear, looking to Jesus, let us watch, let
us wrestle, let us fight, looking to Jesus; looking to Jesus who endured the
Cross, and is set down on the Throne: This Cross is here presented to us, and
in the Cross the Throne; if we suffer with him, if we overcome with him, we
shall also be glorified with him.

Lift up the hands that hang down, confirm the feeble knees; behold the Captain
of your Salvation, whose reward is with him, and his work before him: Do say
it is hard to follow Christ, it is hard to forsake all for Christ? can thou
[now] say so when he shows thee the treasure he has for his followers? open
thine eyes, look again upon that treasure, and then see if all the labors,
straits losses, sufferings of this life, be worthy to be compared to that glory
which he has revealed.

4. Improve worldly prosperity this way; turn the world upon it self, beat it
with its own weapons: As the Lord, Judge. 7. 22. set Midian against Midian,
every man's Sword against his fellow; so let Christians set the world against
the world, let its own hand be against it self. The prosperities of the world
are the keenest, and most deadly weapons in all its quivers; if these might be
turned against its own breast, what a slaughter would be made?

But how may this be done? hearken to me, and I will tell you how: Receive all
the good things of the world, As Talents. Temptations.



1. Receive all the good things of the world as Talents, for which you must
give an account: Consider your selves as Stewards of all that you have; you
have nothing under your hand, but what is your Masters, and for which you must
be responsible: This is a truth written in nature, as well as in Scripture; you
may as well reckon your selves your own Makers, as your own Lords; and you may
as well reckon your selves your own Lords, as unaccountable for what you have.

If you have an estate, if you have friends, if you have great offices, honors
and dignities; if you have a larger proportion of bodily health, better parts
and endowments of mind, you have so much the more to reckon for; as your riches
increase, as you are advanced higher in the world, so your work, and your care,
and your Obligation thereto increases; the more you have committed to your
trust, the harder will your task be to manage it well, and the more dreadful
will be your doom if you miscarry: If the doom for one talent hid in a Napkin
be so dreadful, Mat. 25. 30. Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, what will thy judgment
be for ten talents, all spent upon Harlots, or in riotous living?

The sense of this will both still your flesh, from craving what you have to be
bestowed upon it, and kill your desires after more: Give what you will to it
upon such terms, to use it all for God, and to be liable to a severe account
for whatever is otherwise employed, and your very flesh will be ready to turn
it back upon your hands.

Say to thy covetous heart, here is an opportunity for thee to be rich; work as
hard as ever thou will, get as much as ever thou can, but when thou have
done, know that whatever thou have gotten, is none of thine; thou do but get,
that thou may have so much the more to use for God, or to loose for God; not
an house, not a field, not one penny of all that thou have labored for, must be
spent upon thy flesh; thy pride, or thy appetite, or thy covetousness, shall
have never the more for all thy store, but all must go another way; tell thy
heart thus, that thy flesh must not have the spending of it, and then see how
little pleasure 'twill have in gathering.

Tell thy slothful heart, here is an estate for thee, here are honors, here is
the love, and good will, and good opinion of men for thee; if thou likest it,
take it, but know, that this is all to set thee the harder on work; they are
all thy Masters goods, which he gives thee with this charge, Occupy till I
come. Have thou an estate? look to it, for he will look for it, that thou honor
the Lord with thy substance; and the more thou have, the more care will it cost
thee, and the more labor to use it well. Have thou dignities, and art thou set
in authority? take heed and see to it, that thou be good in thine office; woe
to thee if thou neglect the charge of the Lord, and what will thou do to
fulfill it? Have thou the love and good will of men? this gives thee the fairer
opportunity, and thereby imposes on thee the greater necessity, to deal roundly
with them, in counselling, admonishing, and reproving them, as occasion shall
require; they will take that from thee, which they will not from another, and
upon that account there is none in the world that owes them so much of that
service, nor shall pay so dearly for his neglect as thou; and so whatever else
thou have, wisdom, learning, natural parts, bodily health, the more thou have
of them, the more work they will find thee: Tell thy slothful heart thus, and
what thank will it give thee for such advancements whatever they be.

Tell thy voluptuous heart, here are pleasures for thee; here is meat, and
drink, and fine clothes, and sports, and pastimes; here are Gardens and
Orchards, Apes and Peacocks; but what will thou do with them, now thou have
them? so much as will help thee to be more useful, and serviceable to the ends
of thy being; to glorify thy God, to promote the salvation of thy soul, so
much thou may take, but take more at thy utmost peril; tell thy sensual
heart, the more thou have of these things, the more will thou be put to that
hard duty of self-denial; thou must vex, and torment, and crucify thy flesh
the more, by how much the more thou have to satisfy it; whatever thou have
before thee, and how much soever thou lustest after it, thou must not touch
more then thy allowance; though thou have it in thine hand, yet thou must
rather put a knife to thy throat, then thine hand to thy mouth.

What, says the flesh, Is this all that I gain by having so much about me,
only so much the more labor, and vexation at present, and the heavier account
hereafter? May I have an estate, or honors, or pleasures, and when I have them,
must they be none of mine? shall I be never the better for them, never the
richer for all my store, never the higher for all mine honor, never the merrier
for all my pleasures? I had even as good go without them, as have them on such
terms as these, even take them back again.

Any man of understanding would reason thus, why should I so eagerly wish for
more then I have? have I not trouble enough already, labor enough, and care
enough already? have I not enough to answer for already? is it so hard to be
faithful in my little, how then shall I do, if I be ruler over much? Is it so
hard to deny my flesh when I have not to satisfy it, how shall I say it nay,
when it lusts for what I have in mine hand? will this be an advance to my
contentment, to have, and not to enjoy, to see and not to eat; not to taste what
is at my mouth, nor to look on what is before mine eyes? and yet must it be
thus with me, and the more I have, the more thus? Well, the Lord who knows my
frame, and what condition I am best able to use, proportion out to me,
according to the good pleasure of his will: no more talents then he gives me
power to use well; no more money, no more honors, no more love and respect
from men, then will furnish me for the work of God, and further me in the way
of life, and abound to my account another day: away with that load, though of
gold or greatness, which is more then I can bear, without the neglect of God or
my Soul; let me be entrusted with nothing, but what I am able to steward well;
and what ever I have, let me be such a good steward of it that I may give up
mine account with joy and not with grief, which would be unprofitable for me.

O brethren if we did see Talent written upon every worldly comfort, and a
redderationem, to be the Motto upon every talent, our flesh would be suffered
to make but short meals on what we have, and yet would be less hungry after a
larger allowance.

What is it that makes prosperity so pleasant to carnal minds? O here is a feast
for my flesh; eat drink be merry, here is enough for many years: belly, take thy
fill, here is a full table before thee. Pride, spare not for charges; put on thy
attire, deck thy self with ornaments, crown thy self with garlands, fear not,
thou shall not want to maintain thee. Soul take thy pleasure, arise choose what
will delight thee, withold not thy self from any joy; the sun shines upon thy
tabernacle, put away sorrow from thee: see the store thou have about thee;
varieties of all that thou love, go feed thy self on what ever best likes
thee, squeeze out the juice of all thy fruits, fill thy cup and be merry.

But what shall I do in the day of reckoning? Give an account of thy
stewardship; how will that word sound? oh that will be such an ill looked lace
on every garment, such sour sauce to every dish, such a stinging spice to every
cup, that the flesh would rather have no garment, meat, or cup; then thus laced
sauc'd or spic'd.

If the rich men and mighty, if the greedy horseleaches, the oppressing
extortioners; if the riotous ruffians, the proud wantons, those sons of Bacchus
and spawn of Venus, that debauch their Consciences and prostitute their Souls
to their filthy lusts; whose life is nothing else but either a raking together
of fuel to maintain their fires, or a dancing before them, and sacrificing all
their virtue modesty yea and humanity in those flames, if these most brutish
among the people, would for a few hours, put off beast and put on man, and
view their reckoning they have to make of their masters goods, all either
hoorded up in the dark, or spewed out into the draught, and pissed against the
wall; and consider how this account would pass in the great day: this would
rust out the comfort of all their treasures, stain the beauty of all their
pleasant ways, and cool their lustings after them.

2. Receive the prosperities of the world as temptations: What God bestows as
Talents, the Devil makes temptations; what God intends as instruments for
service, the Devil makes forage and weapons of war; provision for lust which
fight, against the soul, God says, Make ye friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that when these fail you may be received into everlasting
habitations, Luke 16. 9. Make God thy friend, make conscience thy friend, make
Gods poor thy friends, make thee friends for hereafter, with what thou have.
The Devil says, make thee friends here, make the rich thy friends, make thy
companions thy friends, make thee friends here, with what thou have, fear not
for hereafter, for when will these things fail thee? God says Honor the Lord
with thy substance, Prove. 3. 9. Thou have received much, now think what to
return. The Devil says, now thou may kick against God, and spurn with the
heel; now thou may be merry and mad; it is for poor men to be honest and
sober, to pray and seek God, thou need no such ways to supply thee:
wherefore is it better with thee then with others? wherefore have thou money,
and houses, and lands? is it, that thou should bury all under a bushel, or
hide them in a napkin? was it ever intended, thou should be poor whilst thou
art rich? that thou that have, should be as those that have not? why does thy
way prosper? what is the meaning of all thy abundance? does it not call to thee,
eat that which is good and let thy soul delight it self in fatness.

1 Timothy 6. 9. They that will be rich fall into a temptation and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction.

He that falls into the hands of his riches, falls into the hands of his
foolish and hurtful lusts; he that falls into the hands of these, falls into
the hands of the Devil, into temptation and snare; and a he that falls into
temptation, is swimming down the stream into perdition and destruction.

He that dreads not temptation, knows not himself nor it. What art thou? what
is temptation? do thou know what thou art? what a weak and silly thing thou
art? how ignorant of Satan's devices? what a ductile sequacious soul thou art,
apt to be led away with every lust? what a dry tree, what tinder thou art, apt
to take fire of every spark? Brethren, if you know not your own weakness, if
you are not sensible how hard it is for you to resist, how easily you are
overcome of temptation, you are strangers from your selves. Christ knew you
better when he bid you pray, Lead us not into temptation. He knew well enough
what work the tempter would make with you, if he could but get you within the
reach of his net, and therefore taught you to pray to be kept out. Have you
never proved your own weakness? do you not remember how you use to come off
when you have been tempted? have you no sad experiences by you, your broken
peace, your wounded spirits, your wasted Consciences to remember you of it? do
you not still use to come off by the loss?

Consider friend, it may be thou art of a Covetous heart, and an earthly mind;
and this, when it meets thee in the presence of God, what a shame and sorrow is
it to thee? thou bewailest it, and abhorrest thy self for it; thou confessest
it to God, prayest against it, covenants against it; and by that thou have
stood a while before the Lord, and tasted of the delights of his love, thou
have gotten thine heart a little raised to things above; thou can scorn this
earth, and hopest thou shall never be so taken with these beggarly things
again; and yet, no sooner has the Devil gotten thee abroad, into thy house
among thy treasures, into thy field among thy sheep and oxen, but thine heart
is gone presently after them; all the prayers and tears and vows are forgotten
and thou art as busy and eager upon the world as ever.

It may be, thou art possessed of a slight and frothy spirit, given to vanity,
carnal mirth and jollity* and when thou come to pray or to humble thy self;
when thou art alone and have freedom to be conversant about the matters of thy
soul, thou art for the time, gotten to be a little serious; the sense of
eternity falling upon thee, thy soul taking a walk to the grave, and looking
over to those deeps that are on the other side, thy spirit is hereby
consolidated and gotten into a more sober frame; and then presently thou hopest
thou shall never evaporate into such froth and folly again: and yet behold, as
soon as ever thou fallest into company with vain persons, and have been
entertained a while with their unsavory merriments, thou quickly becomest as
one of them.

It may be, thou art of a pettish and froward spirit, and this has cost thee
dear; many tears and troubles of heart; and sometimes possibly thou have prayed
and humbled thy self into more meekness and patience and quietness of spirit;
and yet the next cross that comes, if but a very look, a disrespectful word,
nay, may be but a surmise or a jealousy of a slighting thought, will put thee
besides all thy patience, and set thee all in a flame.

How many such experiences have thou of thy self? have thou not often found it
thus? must thou not acknowledge it has been thus again and again? Have not
these been sometimes thy groans before the Lord, at such times when thou have
felt thy self in a better frame, Oh that it might be ever thus? O that this
might hold; that I might never sink into this earthliness, that I might never
swell with this froth or fury again? O this slippery and unstable heart; I fear
it, I doubt how it will serve me; if the world or this flesh do but call me
away; if any temptation comes, either to court me or to cross me, I fear me,
all this calm and serenity will quickly become clouds and tempests: Speak
Christian has it not been thus many a time? O what a weak thing art thou?

And what is temptation that you do not fear it? if you know not I will tell
you: there are these four things in it.

Deception. Infection. Seduction. Perdition.
1. Deception: temptation is an artifice contrived on purpose to beguile and
deceive us, Genesis 3. 13. The serpent beguiled me and I did eat: it is a juggle,
or a cheat, that carries a stinging tail under a fair face: that promises a
kindness or advantage, but either has nothing in it, or a mischief: there is no
temptation, but its outside and inside, its head and tail has as much
difference, either as substance and shadow, or as bait and hook.

2. Infection: the heart by reason of its filth and rottenness, is apt to take
infection ('it is dangerous for persons abounding with ill humors, to come into
ill aires) and temptation is as the air from a plague sore, that conveyes
infection: temptation does so ferment innate corruption, that it putrifies into
the more deadly malignity: our being conversant with the pleasures, and
fashions, and lusts of this World, our living in such evil airs, do leave such
corrupt impressions and dispositions upon us, as do suffocate our spirits, and
destroy the very vitals of religion in us.

See it in experience: look what men's outward condition, and their ordinary
converses are, such are their tempers and complexions: you may see in their
faces, and smell in their very breaths, where they use to live. Those that are
dwelling, and have their whole occupation in the earth, are they not mostly
earthen souls? those that dwell at ease, and with the careless and idle, are
sluggish and sleepy souls: those that live in pleasure, in mirth and jollity,
what are their Souls but bladders of froth and vanity? He that dwells in the
pomps and glories of the world, proud and haughty, scorner is his name, and
according to his name so is the man: he that is the companion of drunkards, and
partaker with the adulterer, his very inwards often become debauchery: possibly
their ways of life at first found them in sounder tempers; but behold now they
are all infected persons: this earth has infected them, their ease has
infected them, their pleasures, and their pomps, and their companions have
infected them, leavened them into their own natures.

Oh what sad metamorphoses do we sometimes see, even of the most promising
ingenuous natures, by their overbold or unwary converses; spoiled not only of
their most gracious inclinations, but of all tinctures of good nature; grown
proud, and wanton, and froward, and rude, and perverse, who were once loved for
their humility, sobriety and meekness; and all this by the infection they have
received from their ways, or companions.

Those that will run into temptations, that will adventure themselves any where
whither their lust leads them, that will not first enquire, Is it good for me
to be here? is it safe for me to walk thus? are as mad and foolish, as those
that will run into a Pesthouse, or lodge amongst Lepers. Do thou not see what
thy boldness has already cost thee? Is not the hew of thy Society already
grained into thy face? art thou not become as one of them thou conversest
withal? has not the Infection seized on thine heart, and does not the Leprosy
appear in thy forehead? take heed foolish soul, if it be not already, in how
little time, may this disease be incurable.

3. Seduction. Leading aside to errors and mistakes, to believe a lie: there
are temptations that corrupt the judgment, as well as the affections, that
change the principles, as well as the dispositions. When the heart is leavened
into vanity, it must have a Religion that is suited to it; its vain ways must be
all made right in its eyes: when the heart is become a Libertine, all its
principles must be latitudinarian: What say the great men, and wise men? what
say many of the wits of the world, the men whose eyes are opened, in comparison
of whom all their fathers were but children, and knew nothing at all? are these
for this strict and circumspect self-denying life? do they not teach us better
doctrines? the Spirit of Religion is not nice and morose, nor so straitlac'd as
represented by some, but more Noble, and generous, and free, not feeding men
with fears and jealousies, not loading them with heavy burdens, nor limiting
them within narrow bounds, nor imposing on them such severities as some others
plead for; that is, in other terms, (if some men's doings may be a Commentary on
their sayings) Religion is for licentiousness, a Patron for lust, a friend of
the flesh and fleshly liberties; as if Christ was out when he said, Strait is
the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life; and his Apostles after
him when they exhorted, See that you walk circumspectly: Pass the time of your
sojourning here in fear.

But why may not these be in the right? this is the easiest and least
troublesome way; O that this might be Religion indeed! and why may it not?
these men see as much as others, and these men have souls as well as others;
well, I am for them.

And when our spirits are suited to carnal ways, and our judgments are bribed
to give their suffrage for them, how easily does our foot fix in them: our
lusts lead us aside, and our evil principles warrant our wanderings; our corrupt
affections carry us into crooked ways, and our corrupt judgments will take upon
them to make the crooked strait.

4. Perdition: that is the term, or Gulf, whether these streams are carrying us
down; temptation is destruction begun, and destruction is temptation finished:
the Devil has done his work, temptation has served his turn, when it has
drowned the soul in perdition and destruction.

Well now, Is not temptation to be feared? would you not fear to be deceived,
to be infected, to be seduced, to be destroyed? and is not prosperity a
temptation? will the devil be friend you for nothing? is not this chaff a bait?
is there not a Net spread under? who is it that said, The prosperity of fools
shall destroy them? and how does it destroy, but by first deceiving them?

Can you rejoice when you fall into temptation? can you sport your selves in
your own deceivings, and bless your selves in your own destruction? will you
lust, and covet, and lie, and labor, and toil, and all to treasure up gins,
and snares, and nets, and hooks, to take your souls withal, and will you take
these, as the reward of all your labor?

Are you temptation proof? are you gotten above the danger of temptation? dare
you challenge the tempter into the field? when so many great men, and wise men,
and good men have so sadly fallen, and suffered such unspeakable loss, are you
secure from any such prejudice? are you gotten to that pitch, that you can now
touch pitch, and not be defiled, or walk upon coals, and not be burnt?

Have you never suffered by your prosperity? has your soul never suffered,
your conscience never suffered? have you never been deceived and beguiled by
it? have you never lost some better things, by your over-loving these? have you
been deceived formerly, and is there no danger of being deceived for the
future? have you been deceived, and is there no danger you may be destroyed?
has the first work of temptation prosper'd, and is there no fear but that it
will miscarry in its last?

Christians, study thoroughly the mischiefs of temptations, and be convinced,
that the prosperities of the world are the most mischievous of temptations;
receive them as such, and then see if this will not cool your covetousness.

A little to quicken and give life to these two particulars, ponder deeply,
what a dreadful thing 'twill be to miscarry in the Judgment. It Is not who shall
stand in the Synagogue, or sit in the Palaces, but who shall stand in the
Judgment; it is not, who has been clothed in Purple, fared sumptuously, lived
deliciously; it is not, who has gotten the fairest houses, the largest fields,
the greatest flocks; it is not, who has been the greatest Landlord, but who
has been the best Steward, that will be the concerning question: whatever thy
receipts have been, whether little or much, what if thy Bill of accounts should
be rejected with this underwritten, Away from me thou evil and slothful
servant, thou have been unfaithful: Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

What if this should be thy case? to be fetched down from thy high places, to
be thrust out of thy Storehouses, to be snatched out of thy shop, or thy field,
to be arrested at thy table, in the midst of the feast, and carried away
before thy Judge, with the account of an unprofitable servant, or an unfaithful
steward? oh how dreadful will be thy appearance at that day? how will thou hide
thy self, or how will thou bear the face of thy Judge, before whom thy own
Conscience shall arraign and accuse thee, for a false and foolish servant?

And what hazard is there that this may be thy ^ase, whose way does prosper?
when the very same things that are thy Talents to be accounted for, are thy
temptations to neglect thy account; when the very matter of thy trust is a
temptation to abuse it; the more thou have, the more thou have to answer for,
and the less like to have what to answer; the more thou have, the more will thy
flesh be craving for it self, every lust will come in for a share; thy pride
must have some, thy appetite must have some, thy passions must have some, thy
covetousness would have all, and the more they see in thine hand, the more
clamorous will they be for it; these beggars will neither take a denial, nor an
ordinary alms at a rich man's door.

How hard will thy case be, either to grant or deny; if thou deny, thou seem
cruel to thine own flesh; if thou grantest, thou art false to God and thy soul.

Were these things duly weighed, there would not be such scuffling after the
world, nor such whinings under its want; he that had least would not murmr at
his poverty, and he that had most would not boast of his riches; he that had
least would be content, and he that had most would be afraid; and all would
conclude, that abundance is less to be desired, and want less to be feared.

5. Hold your thoughts, affections, and senses, under constant government.

1. Your thoughts. Where the thoughts are, the soul is, Psa. 139. 8. When I
awake, I am still with thee; that is, my thoughts are presently with thee, my
meditations are of thee; and where my thoughts are, there am I. When the
thoughts are with God, the soul is with God, when the thoughts are in the earth
and mud, the soul is all bemired.

The soul goes forth, to view, to taste, and to choose for it self; the thoughts
take a view, the affections and senses taste and take the relish, and then
accordingly the will chooses: The will should nakedly follow the understanding,
and choose only what the unbyassed judgment tells it is good; but it does too
ordinarily follow the affections and senses; these blind the reason, and so
engage the will; we choose what we love, and what pleases, rather then what upon
an impartial deliberation, we judge to be good.

The things of both worlds work upon hearts objectively; by the good or evil
that is apprehended in them, they accordingly affect us; our thoughts search
into things, what there is in them; when our thoughts by searching find out
God, God is regarded; and when they are in search after the world, they make a
shift to fancy this to be good, and accordingly it is embraced.

The thoughts are the feet and the eyes of the soul; the feet, Eccles. 5. 1.
keep thy feet when thou go into the house of God; that is, keep and look
well to thy thoughts. The eyes, Prove. 17. 24. The eyes of a fool; that is, his
thoughts, are in the ends of the earth; the rovings of the thoughts, are the
souls compassing the earth, and its walking to and fro to the ends thereof.

Keep your thoughts in by the Lord, and you keep your souls in; your thoughts
will be in exercise, will be walking daily and hourly, some whither or other;
there is no keeping them in, they will abroad, either to heaven or earth: oh
send them to heaven daily, and hold them there, let them have no leisure to
wander in this earth.

Brethren, think your selves up to heaven; as we may pray our selves up, and
believe our selves up to heaven, so we may think our selves thither: worldly
men think themselves into pride, or think themselves into covetousness, or
think themselves into wantonness, are so long thinking, and thinking in fuel
for lust, till they have set it all in a flame: as worldly men think themselves
into wickedness, so let Christians think themselves into holiness, think
themselves into humility, sobriety, contentation, and heavenliness of mind;
call off your thoughts from this earth, and you will cease to be earthly, call
them back from vanity, and you will cease to be vain; call them up to heaven,
and you call them off from what is below.

Think on God more Christians, and the everlasting Kingdom; think on the way
that leads to it, on the dangers that lie in the way, on the dread of perishing
in the way, on the beauty, and pleasure, and comfort of being upright in the
way, of the goal and prize that is at the end of the way.

Take up such thoughts as these; Is not God better then the world? that is, is
not all things better then nothing? Is not grace better then sin? that is, is
not fair better then foul? Is not peace better then wrath, peace with God, then
friendship with the world? are not the fillings of Gold, better then heaps of
earth?

Is a little grace so good, and is not more desirable? can there be much grace,
where the desire is so divided betwixt it and vanity? Is gold in the Our so
precious, as gold out of the fire? Is the twilight pleasant, O what is the day
light? Is a mixture of flesh and spirit, of heaven and earth, as desirable as
all spirit, all heaven? If grace be so good, if peace with God be so precious,
why do I not seek it? if I have a little grace, if I have a little peace, why
do I not press for more? when shall I increase, and grow rich toward God, if I
do not decrease toward this earth?

Be thinking thus on heaven and heavenly things, and if you will be thinking of
earth too, think of the dark places of the earth, and the dark side of its
brightness; think of the precipices, the marshes, the quagmires, the barren
Mountains, and desolate Wildernesses, the briars, and thorns, and wild beasts
of the earth; my meaning is, if you will study the world, study its vanity and
vexations, the danger you are in of being lost, or torn in pieces, or swallowed
up of them.

How uncertain are these riches? how vanishing is this mirth? how unconstant
are these friends? what a blast are these honors? what a flash are these
pleasures? what a bubble are these buildings? how long will they lust? what
will be left of them a few years hence? But O the thorns, and the briars, the
vexations, the cares, the fears, the disappointments, the crosses, the sweat,
and the sorrows, that are mingled with these pleasures and possessions. But yet
farther, O the darts, and the arrows, and the stings that come after! O the
stabs, and the wounds that they give to the soul, the darkness, and death, and
damnation, that they are dragging it into!

If you will be thinking on the world, let it be with such thoughts as these,
and then see if it would be so hard to make an exchange of earth for heaven.

Brethren, the reason why it is so hard a work for the Ministry to persuade in
souls to Christ is, because we cannot get them to entertain any serious
thoughts of Christ, and of the blessedness that comes in with him: the reason
why we cannot fetch them off from the world, is, because we cannot persuade
them to think as they should of it, of the vanity of it, of the bondage it
holds them in, and the misery it subjects them to: If we could but set you a
thinking once, what harm would it be to me to hearken to Christ? what will
become of me if I do not hearken to him? when shall I come to Christ, if I
still cleave to this present world? what if I should never come, but should
stand at this distance from him to my dying day? Can I ever hope for mercy from
Christ, if for the love of the world I now refuse him? will he regard my cries,
when hereafter I shall call, Lord open to me, Lord answer for me, Lord save me;
if I reject him when he calls, Soul open to me, Soul submit to me: How shall I
stand in the Judgment, if I have no Christ to stand with me? will my estate,
will my pleasures, will my friends be good Advocates for me in that day? will
this be a good Plea, Lord Jesus appear for me, let thy wounds plead, let thy
blood plead for me, let me stand as one of thine, for I am he that would none
of thee; I set at naught thy counsels, and despised thy Covenant, and trampled
upon thy blood, and preferred my house, and my money, and my pleasures, and my
lusts, before thy love? I am he, whom when thou calledst I would not come, whom
thou would have turned, but I would not turn; when thou would have pardoned
and healed me, I sold thy pardon, and refused to be healed, and will thou not
plead for such a one as I? I have chosen [this] world for my portion, I have
loved it, and served it, and when I should have been praying or hearing,
minding my soul, and laying up treasure in heaven, I was loath to be such a bad
husband, I was busy in following my affairs, looking to my Corn, and my
Cattle, and my Trade; and here I have gotten money and Lands, and will not
these plead for me? Is not a rich man's Plea good? will not my gold, and my
silver, my honors, or my ornaments, get entrance into thy Kingdom? if not
Lord, this is all I have to say for my self, if this will not do, who shall
plead for me?

O Brethren, if you would be persuaded to sit down daily, and to think over
some such thoughts as these, then there would be hope: If we could but preach
you upon this thinking, there would be hope that you might think you into
Christ.

2. Hold your affections under government, Prove. 16. 32. He that rules his
spirit, is better then he that takes a City: and no wonder, for he has taken
the whole world captive. All victories imaginanable are summed up in this one
victory, the conquest of the heart.

By spirit we are here to understand, the passions or affections, the spirit of
man is, as the Apostle says Jam. 3. the tongue of man is, an unruly evil;
impatient of subjection, and pressing for dominion.

God has placed our affections under government; under the government of our
reason, and those principles of heavenly wisdom, faith, righteousness and
holiness, which we are endowed with; but these (like an unbroken horse, that
will not go whither the rider, but whither it self lists) do rise up and
rebel against reason, and will be the leaders and not followers: and this
unruliness of the passions is the root of the distempers and disorders of the
life: when men surrender up themselves to be lead by affection whither does it
carry them? reason leads us up to God. It is the Candle of the Lord; that
lights us our way to him: our affections are blind guides; love is blind,
desires are blind, and whether will the blind lead us? If we could live by
faith, nay if we could but live more by reason (by right reason) we should get
us up out of this earthly country: even reason will tell us, that God is better
then creatures, and that the inordinate following of creatures, is the
forsaking of God.

For the better holding your affections right, take these two directions.

1. Keep your selves in the love of God. 2. Whatever you love in the world, let
it be also your fear.
1. Keep your selves in the love of God: let affection follow the conduct of
reason to Heaven, and there let it dwell, but till reason lead it down again:
keep your selves in the love of God, Jude 21. keep up a right understanding of
God and that will keep up your affections; keep up your affections to God, and
that will keep them off from the world: the heart will ever be in love; and
till it find a better, this harlot must be its beloved: deformity is as beauty
whilst beauty is out of sight. He says in vain, set not your affections on
the earth, that does not first say, set your affections on things above. He
that says, set your affections on things above, and not on the earth, if he be
heard in the first, will not be denied in the second: keep you in the love of
God, and you keep you clear of the love of the world.

2. What ever you love in the world, let it be also your fear: fear will be
loves bridle, and reason would teach you to fear what ever you love here:
nothing has such an advantage upon us, to steal away our hearts from God as
the things we love. The Lord is seldom such a looser as by his bounty, when he
lets down his silver cords of love, to draw up our hearts, we make chains of
them to fetter us here below. His gold and his Jewels, his bracelets and
earrings, which he sends us to allure our love, are often molten into an Idol
and engross our hearts to them.

Whatever thou love in all the world, have thou a wife or a child that thou
love, have thou a friend or companion that thou love, have thou an house a
pleasant habitation, have thou gardens or orchards, fields or vineyards that
thine heart is pleased withal, O be jealous of them: Keep your distance come
not too near; thou come for my Soul (my child) my house, my money my friends,
I must have an eye to you, you come to steal away mine heart.

What a sad requital, and yet how commonly is this the requital, which we make
for bounty and kindness? I should have loved God better, if he had not been so
good to me: I should have loved God better, if he had not given me so good a
wife, so dear a child, so fair an estate, so many friends: will thou fear such
unworthiness? then fear whatever thou love.

If what you love be not also your fear, it is like to be your loss and sorrow.
If Sampson had feared his Delilah whom he so loved, he had saved his locks, his
God and his life: his love to that harlot did him more mischief, then all the
armies of the Philistimes. Solomon's wives became his tears: fondling children
often revenge their parents dotage, by becoming thorns in their sides and
swords in their hearts: whatever thou overlovest, look for it, to find it thy
cross or thy curse: what will thy friends, or thy money be, when either thou
have lost them, or thy soul by them? what ever thou overlovest God will tear it
from thine heart, if ever he mean thee good, he will touch thee in the apple of
thine eye, he will try thee in thine Isaac, he will tear off that Jewel that
entices thy Soul from him: what thou can not part with, look for it, that
must go, or thy soul.

3. Set a strict watch upon your senses: By these it is, that Satan with all his
temptations, has such an easy passage to our hearts: our senses are the doors
of our hearts; the outlets of corruption, and the inlets of temptation; they
bring the outward objects, and the inward lusts together; when the fuel and the
fire are laid together, then there is a flame.

Both the Evil and the Good that is in us, came in much by this way. How came
Sin and Death into this world, and all the plagues and miseries we are
laboring under, or liable to? which way came they in? By the eye they came in:
when the woman [saw] the fatal apple, then she lusted and tasted, Genesis 3.

How came life and immortality, grace and peace, and all our glorious hopes in
again? By the Ear they came in. By this the promise entered, by this Faith
entered, Romans 10. 17. Faith comes by hearing.

Nihil est intellectu quod non fuit prius in sensu, says the Philosopher,
there is nothing in our understandings, and as little in our affections, whether
good or evil, but what made its way by our senses. If God has our eye and our
ear, he has our heart; if the Devil have gotten these once, it is not like to
be long, ere he be possessour of all: of such mighty consequence is the keeping
our senses, as Heaven and Hell amount to.

Our senses are now vitiated and corrupted; pre-occupated by sin and the Devil;
shut against God, and open to iniquity. Sin has gotten the start of grace; and
having gotten possession of the house, makes good the doors for it self and
friends: whatever knocks for entrance, the word presently is who comes there:
and if it be a friend, a friend of sin, there is free admission: So that now in
pleasing our senses or leaving them at liberty to please themselves, we betray
our Souls to the hands of Hell: to be a Sensualist is next to being a Devil: to
leave our senses unguarded, is to leave open the floudgates of Hell: the Devil
could not wish our Souls in other hands, then to be given up to our senses:
neither Devil or World need doubt of entrance, while they have a friend at the
door; these earthen gates like that iron gate, will open of their own accord to
them, when ever they come.

Our depraved senses are the great adversaries to Christianity: whatever is
said of the enmity of the world, of it is gains and fashions, its pomps and
pleasures, all lies upon this score, as they are the objects that tickle and
please the senses, and by these, deprave the mind and turn away the heart.

What is it that lies in the way of the Gospel; that obstructs it is passage and
hinders it is work upon Souls? why is it that Christ is not more gladly and
generally received? O this is it that hinders; 'twould deprive us of many a
sweet morsel, of many a pleasant draught, 'twould pull off our vain habits,
and wanton fashions; 'twould pare off our fleshly pleasures: no more indulging
to appetite, no more pleasing our eyes, and ears, and palates, if Christ be
once entertained: now we can take our liberty to make provision for the flesh,
and let the flesh take it is fill: we can feed our selves with the finest,
cloth our selves with the best, we can soke our selves in all sorts of
sensualities; we can fetch in load upon load, and make the best of what is
before us: we can milk every dug, we can suck every bottel, we can dig in every
mine, we can plough and reap in every field that the world has; there is
nothing but Christ can hinder us; once give ear to him, and that will spoil all
our mirth and mar all our markets: then we must keep within bounds, and
neither get nor spend more then he allows us: we must keep to our allowance and
but a short allowance neither, such as will be too strait for flesh and blood
to submit to.

And hereupon our eyes and ears, which are so open upon the World and it is
vanities, do as it were invite, and call in all the help the world can make, to
resist Christ and his work; do call in all the baits and temptations that the
whole world is furnished with, to divert and turn aside the heart from
harkening to Christ. Help World; help O my carnal friends, help O my fleshly
pleasures, help O my house and money, Christ is come for mine heart, I am loath
it should go there; can you do nothing to stay it with you? help or it is gone.

Friends, would you not that the world keep Christ out, or draw you aside from
him? shut the doors against it; make a covenant with your eyes and ears, set a
watch upon them; put a bridle upon your appetite, and keep the door of your
lips; shut the world out; be deaf to it is flattery, be blind to it is glory,
wink it into darkness; shut the doors and keep the world out, and then Christ
will be the better accepted.

Live above the pleasures of sense. What have you no higher pleasures, no
Nobler delights? have you not a God to delight you in? have you no soul
delights? or are these they, wherein the Bruits have as great a share as you?
Is meat, and drink, and clothes, and sports, the food of souls, your heart
delights? must your immortal part live at the Trough, and feed on swill and
husks? where is peace with God? where is the fellowship of the spirit? where is
the joy of the Holy Ghost, and the hope of glory? where is the sweetness of
sincerity, and the peace of conscience? are there no such things, or is there
no pleasure in them? Are you content to take up with this mud, whilst those
pure streams run by? or must you have both? Is it not enough that your souls
may rejoice, that your hearts may feast and sing, unless your flesh also may
frisk and frolic it out in it is brutish mirth and pleasure? Go taste and see
how good the Lord is, drink of his rivers, acquaint your selves with his
pleasures; and then see, if an Heaven satiated soul can envy the brutes the
pleasures of sense.

Lastly, Make a solemn surrender of your selves and ull that you have to the
government and disposal of God, lay down all at his feet, and resolve to take
up nothing, but with his leave and for his use.

Let the Lord have the whole ordering of you, for your, Getting. Keeping. Using.


1. Seek no other things, nor any greater abundance of them, then God allows
you to seek: Buy not an house, nor a field, or a living, but make God the
purchaser: go not into the fair, or the market, into the shop or over the seas,
but when God sends you; drive not that trade or that bargain, concerning which
you cannot say, I am herein trading for God: let the Lord appoint you, your
work and your rest, your labor and your profit, be content with what comes in.
Seek not great things for your selves, and quarrel not with providence, if by
all your seeking you get nothing.

Seek no more, nor no other things then God would have you, and seek them no
otherwise then in Gods way and order. God has other works then these for you
to do; God has other things then these for you to seek. God says seek my
face, seek my Kingdom; [first] seek my kingdom and the righteousness thereof:
what is this done? Is God sure? Is the kingdom sure? have you grace? have you
peace? have you enough of these? have you wrought your selves out of work here?
is there no more to be done, no more to be gotten? is there never a gulf yet
fixed betwixt you and glory, that needs your care how to get over? are you past
all danger of miscarrying for ever? is your way cleared of all your
difficulties and hazards? have your souls no enemy left alive? Are your lusts
dead, the world vanquished, and the Devil trodden under foot? have you as much
grace as you need? as much faith and love and patience as you need? Are you
past that prayer Lord increase our Faith? Are you past those counsels, Hold
fast that thou have. Grow in grace, follow after, press to the mark for the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus? have you hit the mark, have
you won the prize?

Is there not much of this work to be done which God would have [first] to be
done? yea with some of you, is it not all behind hand? nothing done for your
Souls; no knowledge, no grace gotten? nothing of the work of conversion, nothing
of the work of repentance done; the first stone of the new building yet to be
laid, yea not so much as the old rubbish removed, not a lust cast out, your
carnal hopes not yet thrown down the hard heart not so much as touched?

What is there nothing done for the other world by so many of you, and so
little done by the best of you, and are you yet so busy for this world? Is this
as God would have it? is this to seek the world as God would have you seek it?
Go and ask counsel of God, Lord what would thou have me to do? how far forth
for this world? how far forth for the other world? which shall be first minded?
which shall be chief? and what ever the Lord does speak, let this be thy
resolve, I will first seek the kingdom of God, and for other things I must do
as I may.

2. Keep and lay up no more by you, then God would have you: Say of all you lay
up, This is Gods stock, this is his treasure: whatever you have, let God keep
the purse: when he says, Bring no more into the treasury, stay your hand,
bestow it elsewhere as he shall appoint you. Let no stolen goods be found with
you: all is stolen, stolen into your purse, stolen into your house, which the
Lord would have otherwise disposed of. Be not then laying up, when God says
lay out, be not then sparing when God would have you spending.

God says, Cast thy bread upon the waters, be ready to distribute: What says
he to those rich men, Jam. 5. 2, 3. your riches are corrupted, your garments
are moth-eaten: your gold and silver is cankered, the rust of them shall be a
witness against you; you have heaped up treasure (an evil treasure) against the
last days: what do you treasure up for the moth and the canker and the rust? no
more such heaping up, bring forth out of your treasure.

3. Use what you have as God would have you use it: bring forth, but only by
Gods order. Be good stewards; remember your account, book down all your
expenses: let nothing go any way, but what you are willing should be book'd,
and let nothing be book'd, but what you would have read in your reckoning day.

Let your flesh have no more then the Kings allowance: feed it as a servant,
let it not want what is necessary, but feed it not into wantonness or idleness:
let it have never a meal nor a morsel more, then is fit for a servant. Let it
not have the command of your estate, or be it is own carver, but let it be at
the finding of conscience; let never a penny be laid out upon it, either for
food or raiment but what conscience allows. Let your families be provided for,
your friends entertained so, as that nothing be wanting, nothing be wasted. Be
provident but not penurious, use hospitality but hate to be prodigals: give to
all their due and no more: and whilst your flesh has it is due, your friends
and families their due, let not Gods friends want theirs: whomever he sends to
you for an alms, send them not away empty, send portions to those for whom
nothing is provided: feed, cloth, harbor, lend, give, according as God has
communicated to you, and shall command from you; and in giving thus to all, the
things that are theirs, you give unto God the things that are Gods.

Remember carefully this last direction: Lay down all you have at the feet of
God, and neither seek nor use any thing, but according to his order and will.
Never let lust set you on work, and leave nothing to its dispose: feed not your
eye or your appetite, feed not your pride or your covetousness, till God bids
you feed them; and then you shall find your lusts to starve under your hands;
and when worldly lusts are dead, the enmity of the world is slain, it is
temptations vanquished, and from being your Lord, it is henceforth become your
servant: now you may make your friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, and
when these fail, you shall be received into everlasting habitations.

For a close of all, let me yet a little farther persuade you, to press hard
for this victory over the world; and to this end, let me ask you these
following questions, 1. Are you for the saving of your Souls? 2. Is not the
World an enemy to your Souls, and the salvation of them? 3. Is not victory over
this enemy possible? 4. Is not victory over this enemy desirable? 5. Can this
victory be bought to dear? 6. What if this enemy should reign to death? 7.
[Wil] you henceforth become enemies to this enemy?


1. Are you for the saving of your Souls? what are you for? for Heaven or Hell?
it is the same question as, are you for Heaven or Earth? speak friends, where
would you that your lot should fall? will you be written in the earth, or
amongst the living in Jerusalem? will you have your good things here, or will
you wait for them till hereafter? which do you most regard, the joint and
eternal interest of your bodies and Souls, or the single and temporal interest
of your bodies? In a word, will you be saved or damned?

Do you so verily believe, a resurrection from the dead, and a judgment to
come? that there is another world? that this world shall vanish away, and the
other world shall abide for ever; that there is an eternal state of blessedness
and misery, into one of which states your Souls must immediately enter, as soon
as they are loosened from this body? that the future blessedness is
unspeakable, that the future misery is intolerable? Are you Atheists or
Infidels, or else do you so verily believe this, that it is the great aim and
desire of your hearts, to obtain this blessedness, and to escape those torments?

Descend into your hearts, consider the choice that is set before you, and come
to a resolution: what do you choose? light or darkness? life or death? ease or
anguish? rejoicing or howling? lifting up of the head or gnashing of teeth?
eternal pleasures, or eternal fire? With whom will you dwell? with the Saints or
with Serpents: with Michael or the Dragon? in the joy of the Lord or in the
terrors of the Lord? What shall be your sentence? Come or depart? come ye
blessed or depart ye cursed? inherit the kingdom or away into the fire? what
say you? consider and speak, will you be damned, or are you for the saving of
your Souls? If you say you are for salvation, then let me farther ask you,

2. Is not the world an enemy to your salvation? Is salvation possible without
a victory over it?

Is it not against the declared will and purpose of God? Romans 8. 30. Whom he
did predestinate, them he also called; whom he called, them he also justified;
whom he justified, them he also glorified: who are the justified and glorified?
is it not, only the called? is there ever another man of the number? And who
are the called of God? is it all those that are bid to come? is he of them that
makes light of it? that says, I cannot come: that says, no Lord, I pray thee
call some other guests, and let me alone as I am; to follow my oxen and my farm
and my wife, I pray thee have me excused? is this one of the called of God? If
not, what hope of his salvation? will God change his purpose and baulk his way,
to gratify thy carnal mind, and reconcile lust and eternal life?

Is there not an inconsistency in the nature of the things? to be saved, and
left under the power of the world, is to be saved, and yet left under the power
of the Devil? to be saved and yet left unsanctified: to be made free and yet
left in bonds. Does it not enervate and resist all the means of salvation?

Does not the world hinder the word, that that cannot prosper with you? is not
this it, the lusts and love and cares of this life that choke the word that it
becomes unfruitful? Math. 13. 22. Has not the world hitherto dealt by you, as
in the beginning of this discourse, I told you it would? darkened your eye, that
you could not see? deadned your sense that you could not fear? hung upon your
hearts and about your necks that you could not come to Christ? Have you seen?
have you feared? are you come to Christ? or are you not yet in your sins? why
what is it that has hindered you, and kept you back from Christ hitherto, but
either the cares of this life, or the deceitfulness of riches, or the pleasures
and lusts of this present world?

Does not the world hinder prayer? hold you back from going to God to seek your
lives at his hands? while you should be with God to seek your lives, the world
calls you abroad to seek your livings: a little praying must suffice a worldly
heart; when the tribes go up to pray before the Lord, how often is the
worldlings place empty? If I were to go in search for a worldlings heart, I
would seek all the places of the earth first, ere I would seek him before the
throne of grace: he is so seldom there, that you may as well seek an idle
shepherd in the pulpit, as a worldly heart in the closet: O if worldly men did
no more diligently seek the world, then they use to seek God, what poor men
would they be?

Get you asunder worldlings, let your Souls and this harlot part, that Satan
tempt you not for your incontinence, that your prayers be not hindered: what
praying whilst the world is still with you? and what hope of salvation, whilst
no praying?

3. Is this enemy invincible? Is not victory over it possible? is it not
possible for thee to become an enemy to this world? if thou art an enemy thou
art a conqueror. It Is true thou have an hard field to fight, and there is great
hazard thou may be eternally lost by it. It has slain so many Souls, and
laid them up in everlasting chains; there have been so very few have escaped
with their lives, that it is a great question, whether thy life may not also go.
Thou have been so long a captive, that it is much to be doubted whether ever
thou may be set at liberty. Thou bear such a love to the world, thou will
so hardly be persuaded, that it is thine enemy, and art so apt to take it to be
a better friend then God is to thee; thou art so hardly persuaded, that he is a
friend to thee, that does but tell thee, the world is an enemy, and art so
angry at any that offers to assist thee against it, or but persuades thee to
take heed of it; thou art so apt to take all the counsels, warnings, reproofs,
that are given thee, to put thee upon thy watch against it, to be injuries,
unkindnesses; that it is much to be feared, how it may go with thee.

There have been so many charges made against it without success; the axe has
been so often laid at the root of this tree; God has been hewing at it,
conscience has been hewing at it, may be, all thy life long; the word has
been fighting against it, prayer has been wrestling with it, meditation has
been considering about it; Thou have been so often warned, Take heed and beware
of covetousness; Love not the world, nor the things of the world; mortify thy
members which are upon the earth; Flee youthful lusts; Get thee up from the
tents of these men, set not thine affections on the earth; Thou have been so
often told, That the fashion of this world passes away; those that will be
rich fall into a snare; the friendship of the world is enmity against God; and
after all this there is so little done; thy heart is so much upon it still, it
holds to this day, so strong an hand over thee; thou art still siding with it
and taking its part, against God and thine own Soul; thou art so loath to hear,
that it is a sin to be worldly minded, or to be convinced that thou art a
worldling; that I must tell thee, 'twill be hard work for thee, to obtain the
victory, and to escape with thy Soul.

Look to it, such a disease which has been so long rooted in thy nature; such
an enemy that has so long lien in thy bosom, that thou will not be persuaded,
that it is thy disease, that it is thine enemy; such a disease will hardly be
cured, such an enemy will hardly be conquered.

But yet, is not a victory possible? Is this disease unto death, and is there
no remedy? Is there no balm in Gilead? is there no Physician there? Is the
field lost, and is there no recovery? who is it that has bid thee fight
against this enemy? Is it one that had a mind to mock thee? Look upon the
Captain of thy Salvation, has not he overcome the world? Has not he said, Be
of good comfort; look unto me, and be saved; come unto me, and ye shall have
rest? Does he not call to thee, Will thou not be made clean; will thou not be
made free: If thou will thou may, there lies all the difficulty, that is all
the doubt, whether thou will or no; as hard as the victory is, if thou perish
by the world at last, thy destruction will be laid at thine own door; it is
because thou will not accept of deliverance, if thou will thou may.

4. Is not victory over this enemy desirable? Is not liberty desirable? is not
life desirable? be an enemy and live, the world kills none but its friends.

Would it not be well with you, if this spirit of the world were cast out, and
God had given you another spirit? would it not be a good exchange, if for this
carking, caring, anxious earthly greedy heart, you had obtained a contented
patient mortified spirit, an heavenly mind? would not the matter be well mended
with you, if for your treasure on earth, you could make God your treasure?
could you not wish it were so?

Can you say, I thank God I am yet a worldling? I thank God my heart is still
below? I can mind my pleasures, and gains; I can satisfy my lust, and take my
liberty, and follow my affairs, without troubling my self about these higher
matters that I know not? Hitherto I thank God, this world has been too hard
for the Gospel; the devil has kept possession, and has kept Christ out?
whilst others have puzzled and amused themselves with their thoughts, and
hopes, and fears about another world, have made an adventure for the unknown
riches, have been filling their heads, and perplexing their hearts, with cares
for hereafter, and have neglected and straightened themselves here, I thank God I
have been no such fool?

While you may say, I thank God, [I have] an estate in the world, I have
friends in the world, can you also say, I thank God this is my treasure, these
are my delights? I can never trouble my self with thinking of, or serving any
other God but these, I can take these in exchange for my soul? I thank God for
that unrighteousness, or that unmercifulness, which he has left me to, and let
me alone in, whereby I have gotten me an estate, and preserved it entire to me?
it had been worse with me then it is, if I could not have ly'd and defrauded; if
I had made Conscience of Sabbaths, of praying, and hearing, and spending so
much time this way as others do? I had been a poor man had I taken this course,
but I thank God I was wiser then so? Can you say thus?

Christians may, and will say, I thank God I am crucified to the world, I thank
God for Faith, and Prayers, and Sabbaths, for a new heart, and a new life;
blessed be God that has chosen me out of this world, and called me by his
grace; blessed be God for a part in Christ, and hope toward God; blessed be
the day, wherein my soul was divorced from this world, and espoused to another
Husband; I would not be in bondage to this earth again, I would not be a flesh
pleaser, a self-seeker again, if the devil would hire me with all the Kingdoms
of the world; there is not a Christian in the world but will say thus: But
where is the worldling that dares deliberately to say, I thank God I am a
worldling still, God has dealt well with me, that he has left me out, and let
me alone to follow mine own heart?

Speak worldling, had it not been well for thee if thou also had been brought
in to Christ? would it not be well for thee, if yet thou might, might
cease from this earth, and be a Candidate for heaven, might cease to be a
drudge, and a slave, and be delivered into the liberty of the Sons of God?
would it not be well with thee if thou were? would it not be well with thee if
yet thou might? do thou never wish, O that my soul were in such a case?
why then will thou not, in this thy day?

5. Can this victory be bought too dear? There Is nothing in this world but may
be over-bought: An Army may be so weakened in the fight, that victory will not
repair it; Crowns and Kingdoms may be bought too dear; all the royalties and
revenues of the world may be purchased at such a rate, that they may not be a
saving bargain: But can redemption from the world be over-bought? will not the
salvation of thy soul pay all thy charges? Its true, thy rescuing from this
enemy may not be without much damage and loss, not only of the ship, and the
lading, but of thy life: when thou conquerest this enemy, thou will loose a
friend; in thy conquering thou will purchase enmity; therefore the world hates
you: Thou will not only create thee enemies by thy Conquest, but wants, and
straits, and labors, and cares: when thou ceasest to be a servant to this
world, think not to have an easy idle life, thou will have more and harder
work then ever; the pursuing thine enemy that he rally not again upon thee; the
watching thine heart, the guarding thine eye, the governing thine appetite,
that they run not again after it, the pleasing and following thy Lord in all
things that he commands thee; what day thou breakest with the world, and
joynest thy self to the Lord, this life of labor and care thou put thy
self upon; thou must no more thirst after thy stolen waters, nor taste of thy
forbidden pleasures; thou must no more traverse thy most pleasant ways, nor
stick at the most painful duties; nay, not thine ease only, or thy pleasure,
but thy life also, and all that thou have must go, when ever thy Lord calls
thee to it.

What course short of this, will either obtain, or secure thee the victory? but
how will such a life down with thee? how will thy spirit bear it? when thy
faint heart shrinks from it, when thy proud or stubborn heart swells against
it; when thy old pleasures and liberties, when thine old friends and
companions, when thy silver and thy gold cry after thee, can thou leave us
thus? can thy soul part with us for ever? thou will then find that this victory
costs thee dear.

But is not thy soul more worth then all this? wilt say, Better I were damned
then saved at such an hard rate; hell rather then this way to heaven?

It Is hard to be a Christian, it is true; but blessed be God my soul is escaped,
my foot is gotten out of the snare, liberty, liberty is brought to this
captive, and the opening of the prison to the bound; he whom I now serve, how
hard soever his work is, is no hard m^ster, he gives good wages; were his work
harder then it is, yet it is not worthy to be laid in the balance with salvation:
I will not die for an easy life.

6. What if this enemy should reign till death? how do you think your worldly
life will look, when you come to die? do you think you shall then say, I have
done well to be a worldling? it may be, if God should ask you now, do thou
well to be covetous? do thou well to be a self-seeker? you would answer him
as Jonah did, Jonah 4. 9. when God asked him, Do thou well to be angry? it
may be you would answer as he, yes, I do well to be angry, I do well to be
covetous, or proud, or sensual; but do ye think you shall say thus at death?
shall you then think you say, I have done well, I have done wisely for my self,
I have coveted a good covetousness, it is well for me that I did not hearken to
these preachers, that I have lived in pleasure, that I have heaped up treasure
for these last days? if I were to begin the world again, and were to live over
my life the second time, I would take the same course I have taken; and I could
wish every friend I have in the world, every companion I have, every child I
have, to take example by me, and to live as I have lived? would you say thus?
would you wish thus in that day?

Sometimes we hear a dying Worldling to wish all his friends, Take warning by
me, O take heed as you love your souls, that you spend not your days as I have
done; but do you ever hear them say, Take example from me, follow my steps; now
I find the comfort of my earthly-mindedness, now I find the comfort of my lusts
and pleasures; O that you might all have the comfort at your dying day
wherewith I am now comforted? when did you hear of such an instance?

Speak worldling, let thy Conscience speak; when death comes to arrest thy
soul, and to carry it hence immediately before thy Judge, there to receive thy
sentence according to what thou have done in the body; is this the state thou
would be found in? reeking in thy worldly lusts, soaked in sensuality, eaten
out of worldly cares, laden with worldly goods, and as empty of the knowledge
and grace of God, as thou art at this day? would thou be content to say in
respect of divine grace, as thou must in respect of worldly goods, Naked I came
into this world, and naked I must go out of the world? would you that death
should carry you thus before your Judge? would you have that written on your
forehead, when you come to stand before that dreadful Tribunal, which was
written on the Tomb of that Edomite, Psa. 52. 7. Lo this is the man, that took
not God for his strength, but trusted in the abundance of his riches, and
strengthened himself in his wickedness?

Do not your hearts tremble when ever you give them leave to think of that day?
do not the fore-views of death, and those anticipations of Judgment you
sometimes feel in the Court of Conscience, use to shake you?

But how will it be when it comes? when the pale horse comes to your door, and
you are just mounting for the other world; when your Judge, whose eyes are as
flames of fire, his feet as burning brass, with his sharp two edged sword in
his mouth; when your Judge shall be set on the bench, and your guilty Souls be
brought to the Bar? when he shall make inquisition for blood; for the blood of
Christ, which has been trampled under foot, for the blood of the poor, which
has been sucked out of their hearts; for the blood of your Souls, which has
been sold and sacrificed to lust; when all your oaths and lies, your frauds and
oppressions, your unrighteousness and unmercifulness; when your profaned
sabbaths, your neglected duties, your wasted consciences; when either the rust
and the canker of your riches, which you have wickedly gotten, or the wast and
the ashes of them, which you have as wickedly spent; when the roll wherein all
these things are written, shall be spread and read before the Lord, and your
Souls struck dumb and speechless in his presence; Judge Oh Judge what your
thoughts will then be of your present ways.

Lastly [will] you now become enemies to the world? Be enemies and you are
conquerours, will you deal with the world as an enemy? will you fear it as an
enemy? will you fly from it, will you fight against it as an enemy? shall the
Lord be your God? shall the Lord be your friend? shall the Lord be your
treasure? will you cast away all your Idols and will you come and be reconciled
to God? what say you? will you be crucified to this, and make an adventure for
the other world?

Now because this is so great a question, and such as on the answering thereof,
the whole issue and success of all that has been said, depends, I shall give
you the opportunity to pause a while here, and deliberate upon it, ere you give
in your answer.

Before you answer this question, consider yet farther, 1. Does not God call
you off from the world? 2. What is there in your denial?


1. Does not God call you off from the world? who is it that said, 1 John 2.
15. Love not the world nor the things of the world? Consider and compare these
two Scriptures. 2 Cor. 5. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God, and Jam. 4. 4. The friendship of the world it enmity against
God; whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.

What is the errand, upon which the Ministers of the Gospel are sent from the
Lord unto you? I, it not to persuade you to be reconciled to God? the word
which they preach, is therefore called, the word of reconciliation Can you be
reconciled to God, whilst you hold in with the world? Can any thing be spoken
plainer then this, He that will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God?
when we therefore warn you be ye reconciled to God, do we not therein call you
to make war with the world? and does not God himself call you by us? warn you
by us?

But besides the call of the word, do not both the goodness and severity of God
call upon you?

1 Does not the goodness, the mercy and kindness of God call upon you, Romans 2.
4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and long suffering, and
forbearance not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance?
Romans 12. 1, 2. I beseech you by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies
a living sacrifice; holy acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service:
and be ye not cenformed to this world. Worldly men mind worldly things, having
their conversation in the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the
mind; But will you be conform to them? I beseech you be not. I beseech you by
the mercies of God, be ye not conformed to this world: If there be any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, any fellowship of the spirit, if
any bowels of mercies, be ye otherwise minded. You profess that Christ is your
consolation, that the love of God is your comfort, that the fellowship of the
Spirit is your rejoicing; Are there any such things? Is there any thing in
them? then let these suffice you: will you have your conversation, and take
your portion, with those who are strangers to Christ, and the comforts of his
Spirit? I beseech you by the mercies of God that you do not. Do you hope for
mercy? have you received mercy? do you live upon mercy? has mercy pitied you,
spared you, pardoned you? does mercy feed you, cloth you, and comfort you, and
will you not hearken to its beseechings?

Why what does mercy speak? is this it is word, Continue in sin for grace has
abounded? now follow thy pleasures, and thy liberties; God is reconciled, thy
sins are forgiven, thy Soul is secure; now thou may slight the Lord, now thou
may trample upon mercy, now thou have obtained it; is this the lesson that
mercy teaches? or what does it speak? is not this the voice of all the
kindnesses and compassions of the Lord, come back from your vanities, come away
from following Idols, he sacrifices to God, and prostitute not your selves any
longer to the lusts of your flesh? come away; for our sakes come; as you love
mercy come, as you have received mercy come, as you hope for mercy come. Is not
this the voice of mercy, and shall it not prevail? how shall mercy be heard
when it pleads for you, if it cannot be heard, when it pleads thus with you? Is
this the rate and price you put upon the grace of God, that you will deny it,
in those little things it demands of you? not a carnal pleasure to be abated,
not a vain companion to be displeased, not a few handfuls of earth to be trodden
under foot, for its sake? Does all the interest, that Christ and his grace has
in you, come to no more then this?

Brethren, where is ingenuity? is not goodness obliging? will you show what
power mercy has with you, how much you can do, how much you can leave for
love? you at least, that have obtained mercy, methinks your hearts should be at
your mouth, ready to take their flight from this wilderness, to the mountains
of spices. Has God given himself? has God given me his Son, and granted me
mercy unto life? now let him take all; farms and oxen, silver and gold,
honors and pleasures, let all go, and thou O my Soul become a sacrifice to the
most high: my love where art thou, my desires whither run you? come back from
these vanities, and get you up to your God; mercy has descended, let me ascend
with it, and no longer dwell in the dust.

2. Do not the severities of God call you off? what mean the Judgments of God,
which he executes on the earth, but to drive us up from our cisterns to the
fountain? what mean the wormwood and the gall, but to wean us from these dugs?
wherefore are our disappointments, vexations, distresses, but to tell us, this
is not your rest? what speak the winds and the storms, the floods and the
fires, the sword and the famine, the thief and the moth, but get you up, get
you up out of this place? of what use is the cross but to crucify? to crucify
us to the world, and to crucify the world unto us?

Brethren, have we not sufficiently smarted for our folly? what is it that
makes us so many rods, and makes the lashes of them to cut so deep, but our
unmortifiedness to this earth? how easy would our crosses lie were we dead to
the world?

That Is the voice of the cross, Be mortified, be crucified; prevent the greater
severities of God: Be crucified or God will crucify you: Be crucified to the
world or look to be crucified by the world: Friends, would you have but one
cross in all your lives? choose you whether you will have one or many; get your
earthly minds nayld to the cross of Christ, and there is an end of all your
crosses; every other cross that comes, will thenceforth be so easy, that it
will even loose its nature.

2. What is there in your denial to hearken to these calls of God? Is there any
thing less in it then this I will not be reconciled to God! I choose rather
that God be mine enemy, then that the world be not my friend; I had rather have
the wormwood and the gall, then not the milk and the honey. God says give me
thine heart, no he shall never have it, I have bestowed it on the world, and
there let it go. God says Take me for thy portion, no I will not, let me have
my portion in this life. God says take me for thy Lord, no I will not; I will
not that God shall reign over me. God says, as thou hopest for mercy hearken,
as thou hopest for mercy submit to me; refuse at thy peril; be a worldling at
thy peril, be a sensualist at thy peril: well at my peril be it, I will run the
hazard of that; mercy or no mercy, I cannot hearken to that word which is so
contrary to me.

Is not all this comprehended in your denial to come off from the world? O
tremble, and now at length come and give in your answer.

Are there any of you that will yet say to me as those Jews, Jer. 44. 16. The
word which thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord we will not do? or as
those Jer. 2. 25. there is no hope, as good hold thy peace, speak no more to us
about it, for we will not hearken; we have loved strangers and after them we
will go; we have loved our companions, and after them we will go; There is no
hope, but we will walk after our own devices, we will walk after the
imagination of our own evil heart, Jer. 18. 12.

Is there no hope indeed? would you henceforth be given over as hopeless? would
you that the Ambassadors of the Lord keep silence, and for ever give you over
as lost men? shall there be no more treaty with you about this thing? would you
that we should preach no more to you, nor pray no more for you, that you may be
brought to a better mind?

May there not be yet hope concerning you? may you not yet be convinced? may
you not yet be persuaded?

This once let me prevail with you; Oh might we hear such a word from you, We
have done with all our Idols; to the Moles and to the Batts with them all: we
have done with this vain earthly life; no more such madness to venture eternity
for minutes, to stake the everlasting kingdom for pictures and shadows. Come we
will hearken to the Lord this day; hitherto we have been written in the earth,
henceforth for the invisible world: hitherto we have lived in pleasures, we
have been sowing to the flesh, we have been laboring for the wind, we have
been laying up our treasure on earth; we have been gathering in dirt and
throwing away Manna, we have fed upon ashes and trod upon pearls; our life has
been either a mere play or a labor for bubles; Henceforth for substance, for
the durable riches, for the everlasting pleasures, for the bags that wax not
old, the treasure in Heaven that fails not.

What say you brethren, shall this be your voice? will you hearken to the Lord?
at length give in your answer, will you now become enemies to the world? will
you indeed? shall your Souls and it now be parted? Then go and draw up a
writing of divorcement, carry it before the Lord, and acknowledge it as your act
and deed; and giving your selves to him, go presently and take your leave of
all things under the Sun. Bid farewell to those that are with you in the house,
farwell Father, farewell Child; farewell Husband, farewell Wife; Bid farewell to all
within doors and without; farewell Goods, farewell Money, farewell Sheep and Oxen,
Lands and Livings; farewell my pleasant habitation, farewell my merry days and
easy nights; farewell my friends and dear acquaintance; farewell love friendship
credit in the world, farewell liberty and life.

Go take your leave of all the world to day, stay not till to morrow, lest it
again entangle you, and bewitch you into another mind; And this is the leave I
would advise you to take of all you have; Be able to say to them all, I am none
of yours, you are none of mine. I am none of yours, I have given my self to the
Lord; you are none of mine, with my self I have given away you all: the Lord
has given you me, and to him I return you, and shall not henceforth count you
any thing to me, but what you are to him. I have given him the right of you and
when he calls for it, I will give him possession. I can enjoy you and I can
want you, I can be thankful for fruition and I can bear your loss* with what I
have I am content, if I have not, I will be patient, whether I have or no, I am
still the same; and henceforth, I will seek you as if I sought you not, I will
use you as if I used you not; while you are with me I will rejoice as if I
rejoiced not, that I may weep as if I wept not when we must part, and I must
know you no more.

Go thus and take your leave to day, or if you find it more then one days
work, as it is like you may, set to it every day, let not your hearts be quiet
till they and this world be thus parted.

And then arise, put on thy sandals, and after thy crucified Lord, Deny thy
self, take up thy cross and follow him and thou shall have treasure in Heaven.

FINIS.

