AN ANTIDOTE Against HERESY: OR A Preservative for Protestants against the
poison of Papists, Anabaptists, Arrians, Arminians, etc. and their pestilent
Errors.

Showing the Authors of those Errors, their grounds and reasons, the time when
and occasion how they did arise; with general Answers to their Arguments taken
out of holy Scripture and the Ancient Fathers.

Written to stay the wandering and stablish the weak in these dangerous times
of Apostasy.

By RICHARD ALLEN, M. A. sometime Fellow of Penbrooke College in Oxford.

Pro. 23.23. Buy the Truth and sell it not London, Printed by John Macock, and
are to be sold by Nathaniel Brooks at the sign of the Angel in Cornhil.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT. Grace
and Peace be multiplied.
Right Honorable,
DIfferences in the Church have always caused differences in the Commonwealth;
and differences in the Commonwelth do commonly widen those differences in the
Church. Differences in Religion did cause these unhappy and unnatural Wars; and
these Wars have not ended but increased them. For notwithstanding the Solemn
League and Covenant to extirpate all Popery, Heresy, Schism, etc. and in
pursuance thereof your late pious Ordinance to stop their farther growth,
besides the excellent labors of many learned men, yet Heresies are increased
above number, like the unruly waters, the more they are stopped, the more they
rage and swell. And indeed Heresy, Profaneness, Barbarism, and Atheism it self
have always and in all places followed war as close as famine or pestilence do;
times of war and confusion, being as fit times for the envious man to sow his
tares in, as times of peace, sleep or security. And now for composing these
differences; The Italians in a proverbial speech use to say, that Hard to Hard
never makes good stone-wall: Meaning, that in any difference, there must be
some yielding, or else there can never be any firm uniting. In matters of
Religion, I have v^ntured to do something, my calling thereunto engaging me,
with extreme longings to see peace and truth settled amongst us: These poor
labors, I humbly present unto your Honors, hoping your Honors will take in good
part, what is intended to a good end, though perhaps it may come much short of
it; and accept the work though small, seeing the smallest stone will help to
repair the greatest breach.

Your Honors humbly devoted RICHARD ALLEN.

(...) monster, that neither of the Swords yet could tame or cut off. But when
I heard the most horrid Blasphemies, and saw the monstrous Heresies that every
day new-sprang up, to the high dishonor and displeasure of Almighty God, the
reproach of his truth, saddening the hearts and dejecting the minds of his
people: the enemy in mean space riding in triumph and treading down all before
him: Setting aside all doubts and fears, at last I finished and published this
small book, partly inclined thereunto to yield some account of my late
unpleasing leisure; but chiefly, for discharge of my duty, and a double
engagement that lay upon me: 1. As a Christian, being all bound, as the Apostle
exhorts us, Jude 3. To contend earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered
to the Saints. 2. As a Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which we are
bound more specially to defend, and not to give place to false teachers, No not
for an hour that the truth of the Gospel may continue, Gal. 2.5. Besides the
solemn Covenant to extirpate all Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness, and
whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine.

And now (right worshipful) I present you with it, such as it is, being engaged
also thereunto by the many favors and kindnesses I have received of you,
whereof be pleased to tak this as an acknowledgment.

I hope it may prove some help to discover the manifold sleights and impostures
of false Prophets and Deceivers that are entered into the world, that privily
bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them. And many
follow their pernicious ways, but my prayers are always for you, that ye may
ever escape their snares.

Your Worships much obliged Nephew, Richard Allen.

A TABLE OF THE HEADS OR CHAPTERS.
Chap. I. OF the holy Scripture. Page 1. Chap. II. Of the Blessed Trinity. Page
14. Chap. III. Of the Creation. Page 26. Chap. IV. Of Providence. Page 29.
Chap. V. Of the Fall of Man, and Original Sin. Page 35. Chap. VI. Of Freewil.
Page 40. Chap. VII. Of the Person of Christ. Page 44 Chap. VIII. Of the Office
of Christ. Page 48 Chap. IX. Of the Death of Christ. Page 50 Chap. X. Of the
Resurrection of Christ. Page 54 Chap. XI. Of Predestination. Page 56 Chap. XII.
Of Vocation. Page 64 Chap. XIII. Of Justification. Page 73 Chap. XIV. Of
Sanctification. Page 78 Chap. XV. Of the Moral Law. Page 84 Chap. XVI. Of Good
Works. Page 87 Chap. XVII. Of Death and Burial. Page 90 Chap. XVIII. Of the
Resurrection of the flesh. Page 94 Chap. XIX. Of Glorification in Heaven. Page
96 Chap. XX. Of Hell. Page 98 Chap. XXI. Of Purgatory. Page 99 Chap. XXII. Of
Images. Page 102 Chap. XXIII. Of the Church. Page 106 Chap. XXIV. Of the
Sacraments. Page 115 Chap. XXV. Of Baptism. Page 119 Chap. XXVI. Of the Lords
Supper. Page 126 Chap. XXVII. Of Reformation. Page 134 Chap. XXVIII. Of
Toleration. Page 143
The Preface.
GOD never wrought miracle to convince Atheism, because his ordinary works
convince it: For the Invisible things of him, even his eternal power and
Godhead, are clearly seen and understood by the works of the Creation. Romans
1.20. And indeed never any people was heard of so barbarous, but did acknowledge
a God, and though otherwise, rude and void of all civility, yet did profess and
practice some Religion. The very nature of man it self so far abhors direct
Atheism, that the Heathen made them Gods of wood and stone rather then have
none at all, and gave Divine Honors, not to men only like themselves, but even
to base and vile creatures, rather then be without a Religion. The Devil then
not able to root up this persuasion of a Deity, so deeply and strongly fastened
in the hearts of all men by nature; from Atheism he turned to Heathenism, from
denying to multiplying the heavenly Deity, and with a multitude of false Gods
abused the world almost 4000. years. But When the fullness of time was come, God
sent his Son, a light to lighten the Gentiles, who with the beams of his
glorious truth so scattered this universal fog of Paganism, that those lying
vanities were shortly discovered, men's consciences convinced of their former
gross ignorance, and turned from dead Idols to serve the living God. And now
this old Serpent is put to a new shift, which the Father of lies was not long
to seek of, but driven from Heathenism, betakes himself to Heresy, for the
worship of false Gods, setting up false worships of the true God, wherein he
multiplied so exceedingly, that now there are as many false worships, as before
were false Gods. To trace this crooke^ Serpent through all his turnings and
windings, from the primitive times to this present, to observe the subtle ways
and methods he has used, to note by what steps and degrees he has from time
to time insinuated himself into the very bosom of the Church, spreading this
deadly poison over all its Members, and every point of Doctrine so, that the
true Religion at this day lays gasping and laboring for life, is a work too
great for so small a volum. The first Instrument he found fit for this purpose
was Simon Magus, of whom we read Acts 8. how he bewitched the people of
Samaria. This Sorcerer is the Father of all Heretics, and his Heresy the
cursed womb, from whence sprang that numerous brood, that now covers the face
of the earth, and has raised the devil a mighty Kingdom. At this day it is
divided (though not against it self) in two main provinces, the Mahumetan in
the East, in the West the Antichristian; of the one the Turk is Viceroy, of the
other the Pope is Vicar: Under these two Generalissimoes all those enemies of
Christ are listed, both the enemies of his Person, and the enemies of his
Office; among whom, though there be a seeming difference, yet indeed there is a
secret league; like Sampsons Foxes, their heads look contrary ways, yet they
are all Foxes, and joined together by the tails. These are the Foxes that spoil
the Lords Vineyard, and do more hurt by secret fraud, then the wild Boar by
open force. Baalam a false Prophet, did the Israelites more hurt then the
Amorites with all their Armies: And that Heretic Arrius did the Christian
Church more hurt then the Savage Emperors did with all their Legions. No
marvel then we are so often warned in holy Scripture to beware of these
Seducers, and false teachers, because they creep in unawares. Jude 4. They
bring in their Heresies privily, and insinuate themselves with fained words. 1
Pet. 2.1, 3. They have a form of godliness. 2 Timothy 3.5. And with their fair
outsides get within us, surprise, and lead us captive. And therefore we had
need be very wary, and never more need then now; for Seducers wax worse and
worse, deceiving, and being deceived. 2 Timothy 4. They compass Sea and Land, they
fill Town and Country; and not only creep into houses, but up into high places,
so bold they are grown. Now as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so do these
resist the truth; men of corrupt minds, of no judgment concerning the Faith. 2 Timothy 3.8. But that they proceed no further, here are discovered their Errors,
that being seen, they may be shunned and avoided. And though here be not
discovered all, which is almost impossible, yet here are, if I mistake not, the
principal, whereunto the rest are but accessory. The end of this small work is
to furnish the weaker sort, with general answers out of Gods own Word to the
Arguments of the Adversaries, and with plain Reasons, if not sufficient to
defeat the enemy, yet enough I hope to defend themselves; that they may be
provided for them, whenever they be encountered by them, lest being
unprepared, at unawares they be led away with the Error of the wicked. 2 Pet.
3.17. These are the first fruits of a larger harvest, if it be accepted, being
but a handful taken out of a heap.

Imprimatur

James Cranford.
March 28. 1648.
AN ANTIDOTE Against HERESY.
CHAP. I. Of the holy Scriptures.
THe holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are the very Word of God,
Truth.
written by holy men as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and contain all
things that are necessary to be known, or believed, to eternal salvation, being
sufficient of themselves to instruct the Church or people of God thereunto. By
holy Scripture we understand only those books that were anciently accounted,
and are now received by the Church of England for Canonical.

Adversaries and Errors Errors.
that oppose this truth are many; but may all be reduced to these three heads.
1. Are those that enlarge the Canon of holy Scripture, adding many things to it
that are not of it. 2. Are those that diminish the same, denying some parts,
and taking some books from it. 3. There be those that refuse and re^ect the
whole, debasing and despising the Authority of the holy Scriptures, and
esteeming no better of them then of humane writings.

1. Of this latter sort were anciently Simon Magus, Montanus, and such
deceivers; and they are followed at this day by the Anabaptists, who call the
written Word a dead letter, and ground their new doctrines upon revelations,
dreams and visions, whereunto they give such credit that at Sangal, a Town of
Switzerland, one of them cut of his brothers head, pretending a revelation or
command from heaven so to do: Sleidan Comment. l. 6. By this art Mahomet
brought his damnable religion in credit with the world; for having the falling
sickness, he pretended it was a trance wherein he received revelations from
heaven; and by the same art Muncer, Becold, Cnipperdolling, and other false
Prophets of the Anabaptists in Germany seduced a world of poor miserable people
to their own destruction. The Papists say the Scriptures are of no more credit
and authority then mere Fables, without the Testimony and approbation of the
Church; and take them quite away from the reading of Lay People as dangerous
and hurtful: and have burnt not only the books of Scripture, but bodies of men
too, for having them in a known tongue; such bitter enemies they are to the
Word of God.

2. There be others that deny not the whole, but diminish only the Canon of
holy Scripture, refusing some parts and rejecting some books: 1. The whole
New Testament, as the Jews do. Or 2. all the Old Testament, as the new
Libertines do, who affirm it is abrogated: the Socinians, who say it is
unnecessary, and may well be spared.

3. And there be others that enlarge the Canon of holy Scripture, adding many
things to it, that are not of it; so the Papists do; not only traditions or
unwritten verities, as they call them, but fabulous legends also and written
lies, upon a pretense of want and defect in the Scriptures, as not containing
all truths necessary to salvation; nor sufficient to instruct us thereunto,
without a supply of Apochryphal books, traditions, and diverse humane inventions.

Antidote
The Scriptures are the only touchstone to try and discern Truth from Error by;
and are called a Testament, because they are testis mentis, the witness of Gods
most holy will; against all adversaries then, and their errors, we affirm;

testimony or approbation of any man or men. If the Scriptures be the Word of
God, then who dares deny their authority, refuse what they command, or do what
they forbid? But the Scriptures are the Word of God. For,

First, The penmen, that wrote them, were called and sent of God; they were
assisted of God, confirming their doctrine with mighty signs and wonders,
beyond any humane power or skill: and they were inspired of God, teaching and
writing, though themselves simple and unlearned, most high and divine
mysteries, above the reach of any natural wit, and such as the very Angels of
Heaven desired to look into.

Secondly, The doctrine, or matter that is written, is, 1. Heavenly and divine
about heavenly and divine things. 2. It is most certain and true, all things
that were foretold, most certainly came to pass; and though they were written
in several places, ages, and times, by several persons, of several arguments,
yet all the books of holy Scripture, from the beginning to the end, do most
sweetly accord or agree together, as the dictates of one and the same Spirit of
truth.

Thirdly, The effects of this heavenly doctrine are divine and wonderful, as
never any writings in the world did produce the like; For though it be contrary
to humane reason, and most cross to our natural lusts and affections, yet it
works and wins so upon men both powerfully and sweetly, that it wooes and weans
men, not only from the world, but also from themselves; It discerns the
thoughts, comforts the heart, enlightens the mind, convinces the conscience,
and makes such a change in the whole man that it makes him a new man,
transforming and conforming him to the image of God in true holiness, all most
sure arguments of a divine Spirit.

Fourthly, It has made a thorough conquest of the whole world, by the
endeavors of very weak and silly men, bringing mighty Nations in obedience unto
Christ, maugre all opposition that could be made against it, a plain
demonstration that it is the Word of God and not of man; and it has continued
and been preserved even to admiration, though a world of counsels have been
taken, and attempts made to destroy it.

Fifthly, The testimony of the Church in its due place is to be esteemed as not
a little moving; the consent and confession of Christians in all ages, but
especially the sufferings of holy Martyrs in defense of the same.

Sixthly, The testimony of the Holy Ghost to our hearts and consciences puts
all out of doubt: this does not only persuade, but most certainly assure us
that the Scriptures are the Word of God; it imprints a firm belief of it in our
hearts, called the sealing of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13.

Lastly, The holy Scriptures give testimony of themselves: 2 Timothy 3.16. All the
Scripture is given by inspiration of God. 2 Pet. 1.21. Holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. And the Prophets always delivered their
message, with, Thus says the Lord, The Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

The Scriptures then are of supreme and sovereign authority; above the Church
and greater then the Church by so much as the authority of God is greater then
the authority of men. The Scriptures, for the matter or substance, were before
the Church, even that immortal seed whereof the Church sprang and grew, and is
still the ground whereon it stands, the pillar whereby it is supported; Ephesians.
2.20. The pillar and ground of the Church is the Scripture: Irenaeus l. 3.
cont. Haer. c. 11. The authority of him that spoke it, is sufficient to confirm
it: Theodor. in Ezekiel. c. 34. The Scripture is to be judge in all matters of
concroversie: Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony. Joh. 5.39. Search the
Scriptures for they testify of me. Acts 17.11. The men of Berea searched daily
the Scriptures, whether those things were so as Paul spoke.

Tim. 3.16. All Scripture (the Old Testament as well as the New) is profitable
for instruction. Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, says our Savior, (i.) the
Old Testament; for then there was no other. Our Savior spoke many things out
of the Old Testament to confirm the doctrine of the New, therefore it is of as
great authority.

the Law and the Prophets were until John, since that time the Kingdom of God
is preached, Luke 16.16.

John, and then not abrogated but swallowed up of a greater light; the Old
Testament is the same Gospel that is in the New; the same Spirit, same Christ;
Christ yesterday, to day, and the same for ever, Heb. 13.8. Yesterday under the
Law, to day under the Gospel, and the same still. The Old and New Testament
give mutual light and testimony one to another; the one foretelling those
things that the other testifies are really and truly come to pass.

Thirdly, The Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are perfect and
sufficient of themselves, without any other help or supply, to instruct us in
the means of salvation. We are forbidden to add to, or diminish any thing from
it, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Rev. 22.18, 19. And if a part were so perfect that it needed
no addition, how much more the whole? Psa. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the soul. Joh. 20.31. These things were written, that
believing we might have life everlasting; and what can be desired more? 2 Timothy
3.15.17. The Scriptures make us wise unto salvation: they make the man of God
perfect. This perfection of the Scripture excludes tradition; For what shall be
added to that which is perfect? or what supply needs to that which is
sufficient of it self? Tradition is either written or unwritten: 2 These. 2.15.
Written Tradition is the Scripture it self: Unwritten Tradition, if it be
agreeable to the Scripture, is included in the same, and so to be received as
the Scripture it self: if it be against or contrary to the Scripture, it is to
be rejected as the fruit of some lying spirit, and not the Spirit of God, for
as much as that Spirit of truth cannot contradict the written Word, whereof
himself was the Author.

Prove. 6.23. The Commandment is a lamp or candle, and the Law is light. Psa.
19.7, 8. The testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple;
the Commandment of the Lord is pure and gives light unto the eyes. Psa. 119.
Thy Word is a lanthorn unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. And if it be a
light, it must needs enlighten others, and cannot be hid but only to them that
are lost; not that the Scriptures themselves are hidden, dark, and obscure, but
the god of this world has blinded Their eyes, etc. 2 Cor. 4.3. The end of the
Scriptures, is the instruction of the Church; Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were
written, were written for our learning; and one necessary mean to attain this
end is the perspicuity and plainness of the Scripture; for if it were dark or
doubtful, how should it instruct us? In vain is it called a Light, if it be
dark in it self; and to no purpose are we sent to learn it, if it be so to us.
The Scriptures are an instrument to beget Faith: Joh. 20.31. Romans 10.17. And
the first step or degree of faith is knowledge, which the Scriptures could not
beget if they were dark, difficult or obscure.

Peter says, there are many things in S. Paul's Epistles hard to be understood,
which unlearned men wrest to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16.

August. de Doct. Christ..l 2. c. 2.9.24. all things are seen by the light, but
light by it self.

Apocrypha are not of divine authority, because they were not written by the
Prophets or men divinely inspired, as the other Scriptures were, that are
therefore called the Scriptures of the Prophets, Romans 12.26. Our Savior
divides all Canonical Scripture into Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16.29. But
none of those books were written by Moses or any of the Prophets, nor dictated
by the Spirit of God, but savor of a profane and lying spirit, as containing
matter and stories, both vain, foolish, and fabulous, very often contradicting
themselves, and also the known Word of God; as in the books of Tobit and the
Maccabees, the Stories of Bell and the Dragon, are specially to be found.

The Jews received none of those books in their Canon: neither by any of the
primitive Christians or ancient Fathers were accounted for Canonical: and what
account the learned Papists themselves make of them, may appear by Arias
Montanus, who in the front of his Bible has these words: There be added in
this Edition the books written in Greek, which the Catholic Church, following
the Canon of the Hebrew, reckons amongst the Apocrypha.

CHAP. II. Of the Blessed Trinity.
Truth.
THere is but one living and true God everlasting; and in the unity of this
Godhead there be three persons of one substance, power and eternity, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

Errors.
This one point of Christian Religion is the very basis or foundation of all the
rest; and if this be shaken, the rest must needs totter and fall to the ground:
and therefore the devil has raised up such furious adversaries to oppugn it
with strange and monstrous blasphemies; as of old did Simon Magus, Cerinthus,
Ebion, Manes, a Persian, a man according to his name furious and mad, and such
like: at this day the adversaries to this doctrine of the Trinity are all the
enemies of Christ and his divinity, as the unbeleeving Jews, all Mahometans,
Turks, Moors, and such miscreants; among Christians only such as have sucked
their principles from the schools of those Infidels.

They stand marshalled all in two Regiments. 1. The first is of those that deny
all distinction of persons in the Godhead, making the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost but several names only of one and the same person in regard of some
distinct actions or offices. This Heresy was commonly ascribed to Sabellius,
but Noetus a disciple of Montanus hatched it, and Simon Magus laid the egg long
before; at this day it is revived by one M. Erbury, a late Chaplain of the
Army, who taught, That there is but one person in the Godhead, and when we read
of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, we must not take them for so many distinct
persons, but only as so many appearances of God unto men. And truly if M.
Erbury had been that Sorcerers own disciple, he could not have devised a
doctrine more like his, as it is recorded by St. Augustine, lib. de Haeres. ad
Quodvultdeum cap. 1.

There be others that admit a distinction of these 3 persons but deny the
equality of them, That the Son and Holy Ghost are not God equal with the
Father, of one substance and eternity with the Father. This was the Heresy of
Arius, whose chief undertaking was against the Son of God and his eternal
generation; and of Macedonius who denied the Godhead of the holy Ghost. They
are both revived at this day among us: that of Macedonius by one M. Biddle, who
not questioning the Godhead of the Son, a point, as he professes, wherein he
is not yet so well resolved, denies only the Godhead of the holy Ghost,
granting no more but, that he is an excellent creature, and chief of all the
ministering spirits. One M. Best, not fearing that fearful judgment that befell
Arius, (who burst asunder in the midst like Judas the traitor, that his bowels
gushed out) has notwithstanding revived his Heresy, and in these times of
general and desperate Apostasy has found many favorors and followers. Now the
fountain of all these impure waters was Simon Magus an impious sorcerer: and
the conduit that conveyed them to our times almost was Mahomet, an impudent
impostour: For about the year 630. or as others please 670. that vile and lewd
Arabian began his cursed book called the Alcoran, and therein amongst a
multitude of other impure follies, impious fables, and lies he raked also
together and commended to his barbarous followers all those Heresies and
Blasphemies against the Trinity: Out of this filthy puddle Michael Servertus a
Spaniard, a man better read in Mahomets cursed Law then in the holy Gospel of
Jesus Christ, sucked his Heresy; about the year 1530. for denying the eternal
Son of God he was burnt at Geneva; and out of his ashes arose that monster
Socinus. But to pass by particular persons, the first Country that made
defection from this truth was Transylvania, a Country bordering upon the Turks,
from whom they received this point of their Religion; for to gratify or comply
with those barbarous neighbors, they abjured their Faith in the holy Trinity
about the year 1593. denying the Son and holy Ghost: the contagion of this pest
is now spread into most places of Christendom.

The devil has devised and used many ways and manifold sleights to elude this
sacred truth, but all drive at this one end, even to spoil (if it were
possible) our Savior Christ of his Divinity, and so destroy at one blow the
whole body of Christianity.

The Antidote we shall divide into three doses or propositions.

1. That there are three persons in the eternal Godhead, etc. sc. Father, Son,
and holy Ghost. 2. That the Son is God everlasting, equal with the Father. 3.
That the holy Ghost is God everlasting, equal with the Father and the Son.
1. That there are three persons in the Godhead, etc. Genesis 1.26. And God said,
let us make man in Our Image. Genesis 3.23. And the Lord God said, behold the man
is become as one of us. Isa. 6.8. And I heard the voice of the Lord, saying,
whom shall I send, and who will go for us? [I] plainly expressing the unity of
essence, and [Vs] the plurality of persons. Genesis 19.24. And the Lord rained
upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah fire and brimstone, from the Lord out of heaven.
Hosea 1.6, 7. God said unto them, I will save them by the Lord their God. So
Zech. 2.8, 9. and 3.2. Psa. 2.7. -- the Lord said unto me thou art my son. Genesis
1.2. The Spirit of God moved upon the waters. Mat. 3.16, 17. and 28.19. The
Father, Son and Holy Ghost are plainly and distinctly named. So 1 Ioh. 5.7.
There are three that hear record in heaven, the Father, the Word (that is the
Son) and the Holy Ghost.

We see how this sacred truth, which at the beginning was more obscure, in
every age grew clearer and clearer like the morning light till it came to
perfect day; first a plurality of persons is intimated; then a Trinity is
expressly named; and lastly a plain difference or distinction is made of diverse
persons, one speaking of or to the other, and both are called the Lord of hosts
and Lord God. So Job. 8.17, 18. The witness of two men is true, I am one, etc.
plainly making his Father and himself two. Ioh. 5.32.37. There is another that
bears witness of me; sc. the Father: and Ioh. 14.16, 17. And he will send you
another Comforter, even the Spirit of truth. Here the word [another] puts a
manifest and plain dif^erence between the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; so that
there is another and another, (i) three distinct persons in the Godhead, but
not another and another thing, for one single undivided essence is ^ommon to
all three.

Joh. 15.26. The Comforter etc. which comes out from the Father. Joh. 16.28. I
came out from the Father. Now by these emanations or comings out of the Son and
Holy Ghost from the Father, it is evident, that they are distinct persons from
the Father, each of them having a true subsistence proper to himself. And yet
these three persons are but one essence; three in one and one in three;
differing but not divided; several but not sundered; many and yet one: all
distinct for their persons, all one for their nature, substance, or essence;
according to that 1 John 5.7. -- and these three are one.

v. 8. and these three agree in one.

witness he calls the testimony of God in the singular number, v. 9. knitting
three in one, because though they are three in number, yet they are but one in
nature, three persons in one substance or essence: and so three bear witness in
heaven, and yet all is the testimony but of one God.

Secondly, The Son is God everlasting, etc. Isa. Who shall declare his
generation. Joh. 1.14, 18. and 1 John 4.9. The only begotten Son of the Father.
He is not a Son by grace, either of Creation as the Angels, or Adoption as the
Saints are; for then he were neither the only Son, nor begotten; To which of
the Angels said he at any time thou art my son? Heb. 1.8. No: for though they
are all the sons of God by Creation, yet this is the only Son by generation and
God has no other. The Son of God then cannot be a creature (as wicked Arrians
affirm) because he is begotten; for if he were made, created or adopted, then
he were not the begotten Son, nor the only Son, because by creation and
adoption God has more sons then one. Now begetting is always of the nature and
substance of the parents; and so this Son is begotten of Gods own substance,
therefore also called his Own Son, Romans 8.32. And because God is a most single
essence, that cannot be divided or communicate it self by parts, therefore he
has not a part, as the sons of men have, but the whole substance of his
Father, and so must needs be one God with the Father. He must needs also be
coequal, of the same power and majesty; and coeternal too, everlasting as the
Father himself is everlasting, because being both but one substance or essence,
they were never nor could be one without the other.

He is called in Scripture expressly God, as Isa. 9.6. The mighty God. Tit.
2.13. The great God. 1 John 5.20. The true God. Romans 9.5. God over all. Psa.
40.7. Heb. 1.8. -- to the Son he says, thy Throne, O God, endures for ever.

Such works are ascribed to him as agree only to God. 1. The work of Creation.
Ioh. 1.3. All things were made by him. Of Preservation. Heb. 1.3. All things
are upheld by him. Mat. 9.2. Forgiveth sins. Ioh. 10.28. gives eternal life,
which none but God o^ do: and Ioh. 5.19. whatsoever the Father does, that the
Son does likewise.

The essential attributes of God are given to him; as 1. Omnipotency, Rev. 1.8.
Eternity, Isai. 9.6. Omniscience, John 21.17. He is equal with the Father, John
5.18. Phil. 2.6.

Divine worship is given to him, which is due only to God: Psalm. 97.7. Worship
him all ye Gods, Heb. 1.6. Let all the Angels of God worship him. Which were
plain Idolatry, if he were a creature; and John 5.23. the same honor is due to
the Son that is due to the Father, The Apostles profess themselves the servants
of Jesus Christ, Romans 1.1. 2 Pet. 1. 1. Jude 1. Rev. 1.1. We are commanded to
trust in him. Isai. 11.10. Romans 15.12. To believe in him as we do in God, John
14.1. and Psalm 2.^2. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him. But
Jer. 17.5.7. it is, Cursed are all they that trust in man, and make flesh their
arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord: It is apparent then, that the Son
is God equal with the Father.

Thirdly, The Holy Ghost is God everlasting, one living and true God with the
Father and the Son. For, first, he is called expressly both Lord and God, 1 Cor.
12.5. and 6.28. the mighty God, Isai. 40.13, 18. and Isai. 6.9. compared with
Acts 28.25, 26. Psalm. 95. compared with Heb. 3. Levit. 26.12, 13. compared with
1 Cor. 3.16. and 6.19. and 2 Cor. 6.16. where he is called the Lord our God,
the Lord our maker. Our bodies are the temples of the living God, 1 Cor. 3.16.
and the temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.16. Now if we were commanded to
build him a temple of wood and stone, it were a clear proof of his Godhead,
because this service is only due unto God; how much more, seeing our selves are
called his temple. August. lib. 1. Cont. Maxim. Arian.

Omniscience. 1 Cor. 2.10. Omnipresence, Psalm. 136.7. Eternity, Heb. 9.14. But
above all, that which God takes to himself as a peculiar mark to be known from
all false Gods, even to foretell things to come, Isai. 41.23. is ascribed to the
Holy Ghost. 2 Samuel 23. 2. Acts 1.16. 1 Timothy 4.1.

Job 26.13. and 33.4. Of Preservation. Genesis 1.2. Of Regeneration,
Sanctification, John 3.5. Tit. 3.5. 1 Cor. 6.11. Also he raises the dead, Romans
8.11. And therefore the second general Council held under Theodosius the great,
condemned Macedonius in these words: If he were created, how does he create?
How does he sanctify? How does he give life? etc. for these are not the works
of a creature. but the peculiar works of the great and mighty God. Lastly, The
very name of Spirit shows his nature; for as the Spirit of man is of the
nature of man, so the Spirit of God is of the nature of God; not a part, as the
spirit of man is a part of him, but the whole Godhead, for the Divine Essence
is not compounded of parts. And whereas he is called the Spirit of the Son as
well as of the Father, and is said to be sent or come by and from them both;
from hence appears clearly the essential Union that is between them, that all
three are but one God.

The Catholic Faith then is this; That we worship one God in Trinity, and
Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance:
The Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and yet they are
not three Gods but one God: For the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost are all one, the glory equal, the Majesty coeternal. In this
Trinity none is before or after other, none greater or less then other; and he
that will be saved must thus think of the Trinity. Athanas. Symb.

CHAP. III. Of the Creation.
Truth.
IN the beginning God created the Heaven and the earth, and all things therein,
both visible and invisible. Man he formed of the dust of the ground; not
corrupt and sinful, as now he is, but according to his own likeness or image,
in true holiness and perfect happiness.

Errors.
There were anciently many Errors about the Creation that now we do not hear
of; the Masters whereof were Simon Magus, Cerinthus, Marcion, Manicheus, and
diverse others. At this day, first, the old Anthropians or Anthropomorphites are
new risen: they conceived grossly, because it is said, man was made after the
likeness of God, that therefore God had a body in shape like man's body:
Epiphanius imputes it to their rudeness, sparing to call them Haereticks, but
rather Schismatics. So the Messalian Haereticks, of old, thought that God
might be seen with bodily eyes, mistaking that saying of our Savior, Mat. 5.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. This Error is
maintained at this day by those that affirm, that Adam was created after the
likeness of God in personal shape, and that God has a personal shape, the
which he can make visible when he please. Ofiander taught, that man was made
like unto God by influence of the divine substance; an Error borrowed of the
Manichees and Priscillianists: For M^^^s taught, that the body of man was made
of the substance of the Prince of darkness, but his foul was part of the Divine
substance. From the same stock sprang that doctrine of one E. Avery, who
published in print, Anno 1647. That the reasonable soul in all mankind is God
himself. With these rank the Familists, who say, That Adam was all that God
was, and God all that Adam was. The Papists also have their Errors, concerning
the Image of God in Adam, original righteousness, the place of Paradise, tree
of life, etc.

Antidote
Man was made after that the heaven and earth were finished, as a creature
partaking of both; in his soul heavenly, in his body earthly: a little model of
the whole Creation. And it is said, he was created after the likeness or Image
of God, not that the body of man is like God in shape and proportion; for God
is a Spirit, and has no body or bodily members, no visible form or lineament,
and therefore is called the invisible God. Col. 1.15. But man is like God. 1.
In the grace, majesty, and comeliness of his body, excelling the other
creatures, and after a sort resembling the Divine Majesty. 2. In his soul;
Because 1. It is immortal like God. 2. It is endued with understanding and will
like God, and adorned with Divine graces, as wisdom, knowledge, righteousness
and true holiness, and that these are the more special and principal parts of
the Image of God in man, appears, Ephesians. 4.23. Col. 3.10.3. Man is like God in
his dominion over the other creatures given him in his first Creation, Genesis
1.28. being in that regard a petty God to other creatures, as Magistrates are
to other men, Psalm. 82.6. Lastly, The very name of Image does clearly evince,
that the soul of man is not God himself, nor any part of the Divine substance,
because nothing is the Image of it self, or can be said like it self. And the
souls of wicked men shall perish for ever in hell, Mat. 10.28. And therefore
the soul of man is no part of the Divine substance, but an immortal nature
created of nothing by the power of God, and breathed into the body.

CHAP. IV. Of Divine Providence.
GOD having made the world of nothing, did not leave it to it self, Truth.
but does still by his Almighty power and wisdom sustain and govern the same;
preserving all things that are, and disposing all things that are done freely,
and according to his own good pleasure; so that nothing is, or comes to pass
rashly, or by chance, but according to the counsel of his heavenly will.

Errors.
Adversaries to this truth are, 1. Atheists and Epicures that deny all
Providence, holding, That all things were created, and are daily acted by
chance and fortune. 2. Stoics and Stoical Patrons of fate and destiny, that
have devised a certain chain of second causes, wherewith they have tied Gods
hands, as it were, and not left him the liberty to change, alter or order
things at his own will and pleasure. 3. Familists hold, That all things are
ruled and ordered by nature. 4. Some place many things in our own power and
freewill, which they say are not subject to Providence. 5. Worldlings ascribe
all the good that befalls them to their own wisdom and endeavors. 6. Diverse
imagine that Gods Providence does not reach unto every small and trifting
matter, conceiving it not agreeable to his Majesty and greatness, even as it is
too low and base for a Prince to look into the affairs of his Kitchen.

Antidote
That there is a Divine Providence over-seeing and overruling the whole world,
and all things therein, is clear, because there is a God infinite in wisdom and
power, which were not so, if any thing came to pass by chance or fortune, or
could be done without him, or beside his will and pleasure. The whole
Scriptures bear witness unto this truth; and in particular, Prove. 15.3. The
eyes of the Lord are in every place. Psalm. 113.6. He abaseth himself to behold
things done in heaven and earth. Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that
did he in heaven and in earth, etc. For Isai. 43.13. If he work, who shall
hinder it?

1. First, God does order and dispose all things freely according to his own
good will and pleasure, without the least compulsion or restraint: and it
pleases God to do many things contrary to the course of nature, as when he
caused the Sun to stand still at Joshua's command, and go back at Hezekiah's
request, to show that the order or course of nature is nothing else but a Law
or Statute of his own making, that he can repeal, alter and change when he
please; and that all second causes are but several links of Divine Providence
that depend one upon another, and all upon God.

2. Secondly, Gods Providence extends to all creatures, even the most base and
vile, Psalm. 104.27. All creatures wait upon him, Psalm. 147.9. The poor Ravens
as well as the stately Lions, the peasant as well as the Prince, Psalm. 82.1.
God stands in the Congregation of Princes, Psalm. 113.6. He takes the simple out
of the dust, and poor out of the mire, Psalm. 146. He relieveth the oppressed,
and loses the prisoner. Psalm. 33.13. The Lord beholds all the children of
men, and considers all that dwell upon the earth.

3. Thirdly, To the most casual actions, Prove. 16.33. The lot is cast into the
lap, but the whole disposing thereof is from the Lord: and what more casual
then lots?

4. Fourthly, To the most trivial things, Mat. 10.29. An hair does not fall
from our heads without his Providence, and what more trivial?

5. Fifthly, Even wicked and sinful actions are subject to Divine Providence;
so that sin it self is not committed without or beside his will, his most wise
Providence ordering and turning it beyond the purpose or intent of the sinner
to his own glory and good of his people, Acts 4.28. His hand and Counsel
fore-determined whatsoever was done against Christ: So that God was an actor in
the business as well as Judas, and yet God was just and righteous, Judas wicked
and sinful, because in all one thing which they both did, there was not all one
cause or end for which they did it. August. Epist. 48. ad Vincent.



Romans 3.5, 6.

All things, then, that are, or are done ^n the world, are subject to Gods
Providence; both Angels and men; bruit creatures, and devils themselves; all
degrees of men, high and low; their persons, life, liberty and estates; all
their actions, both natural, and voluntary; good and bad; nothing so small that
is hid from his sight; nothing so casual, but he directs it; nothing so
trivial, but he takes notice and disposes of it.

Great are the works of the Lord, insomuch that after a mavelous and
unspeakable manner, that is not done beside his will, that yet is done against
his will, because it should not be done if he did not suffer it; neither does
he suffer it against his will, but with his will; neither would he, being good,
suffer evil to be done, unless, being also Almighty, he were able to bring good
out of evil. August. Enchirid. cap. 100.

CHAP. V. Of the fall of man, and of Original sin.
OUR first Parents, Adam and Eve, Truth.
were created in a perfect and blessed estate, both holy and happy, but through
their own voluntary disobedience in eating the forbidden fruit, contrary to
Gods command, they fell from the same, plunging themselves, and all their
posterity, into the contrary estate of sin and death; so that by, and ever
since that unhappy fall, the Image of God is defaced in all mankind, every
mothers son is conceived in sin, and born a child of wrath.

Some endeavoring to extenuate the sin of Adam, and make it less, say, That it
was only the intemperance of the Appetite. Pelagius, and his followers, deny
Original sin, affirming, That Adam sinned only to his own hurt, and nothing at
al hurt his posterity thereby, so that no man shall ever perish in hell for
Adams sin: That sin is derived from the first man by imitation or example only,
not by generation or natural descent: That Infants derive no sin from their
Parents, and therefore need not to be baptized, in their steps tread the
Anabaptists. The Papists do not deny Original sin, but yet extremely lessen it,
and make nothing almost of it; and they say, that concupiscence or sin
remaining after Baptism, is not truly sin, nor so called, because it is
properly sin, but because it comes of, and enclineth unto sin, or is the
matter whereof sin is more easily bred; so they have decreed it quite against
the Scriptures, accursing all that dare say the contrary. Council. Trid. Sess.
5. c. 1.

Antidote
These are the devils subtilties, by covering and hiding the disease to make it
incurable; but that Adams sin was no small offense, being an act of horrid
rebellion against God, will appear, if we do but open and dissect the same, and
see how many foul sins that one contains within it. As, 1. Intolerable pride
and ambition, for not content with the Image of God stamped upon him; he
affected also to be equal unto God in Majesty, Genesis 3.5. Ye shall be as Gods.
2. Unthankfulness for that variety and plenty of all other creatures freely
given for their use. 3. Foul Apostasy from God to the devil Gods enemy. 4.
Unbelief, the ground of all the rest in despising the Promise and Commandment
of God, giving credit to the devil, who charged God with untruth, malice and
envy of their good. v. 4.5. And therefore this sin is not to be weighed by an
apple, or measured by the excess of natural appetite.

David, Psalm. 51.7. I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother
conceived me. This Original or birth-sin, is propagated over all mankind, and
that two ways according to the two parts of it, sc. the guilt of Adams
transgression, and the corruption of nature; the first is propagated by
imputation, Romans 5.19. By one man's disobedience many were made sinners. And v.
18. By the offense of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation. And v.
15. By the offense of one many be dead. For being all in Adams loins, we sinned
in him, even as Levi being in Abraham's loins paid tithes. etc. Heb. 7.9 The
second comes by generation, (whereon the first by imputation also is grounded:)
For Adam was the common stock and root of al mankind, and could not derive unto
us who are the branches any better sap or quality then he had himself; the
streams cannot be sweet if the spring be bitter, or pure if that be unclean,
Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? truly no man. This
Original corruption consists 1. In a disability and aversness to all that is
good. 2. In a proneness to all manner of evil, Romans 7.14. et seq. The parts
affected with it, are indeed all the parts and powers of body and soul: the
understanding darkened, 1 Cor. 2.14. the conscience benumbed, Ephesians. 4.19. the
will enthralled, Romans 7.23. affections disordered, James 4.1, 2. all the
members of the body made Instruments of sin, Romans 3.13, 14, 15. and 6.19. And
so it is said of Adam (though himself were created in the Image of God; yet
after his fall) that he begat a son in his own likeness, (i.) corrupt like
himself, the Image of God being defaced, Genesis 5.3. It is clear then, that there
is original sin, (i.) an haereditary guilt and corruption that comes to us from
our parents by natural generation, both by plain testimonies of Scripture, and
also by experience in Infants: For although they have not sinned after the
likeness of Adams transgression, Romans 5.14. (i.) actually, yet seeing death,
which is the punishment of sin, has passed upon infants as well as men; it is
evident, that they are born in sin, for where there is no sin, there can be no
punishment due. Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death. Ephesians. 2.1, 3. We are dead in sin,
and by nature children of wrath. John 3.3, 6. Except a man be born again he
cannot see the Kingdom of God: For that which is born of the flesh is flesh. If
we were not corrupted with sin in the first birth, there would not be such
necessity of a second: a man in his natural birth is nothing but flesh, and
that this natural corruption remains still in the regenerate, and is properly
sin, see Rom 7.14. et seq. Gal. 5.17.

CHAP. VI. Of Freewill.
Truth.
SInce this lamentable fall of our first parents and by means of the same, the
nature of man is so wholly corrupted, and the whole race of mankind brought into
that miserable bondage under sin, that no man is able, by any natural power in
himself, to believe in God, or turn unto him, to will or think, much less do
any thing that is good and acceptable in the sight of God.

Errors.
Adversaries to this doctrine were of old certain Philosophers, out of whose
schools crept the doctrine of Freewill, taught first by Pelagius, and now
followed by the Anabaptists, Arminians, Socinians, Papists, etc. who say; That
natural men have a power and freedom of will to choose and do those things that
God commands, and to omit or refuse those things that he forbids: for
otherwise, say they, God gave his Law in vain; in vain also are all counsels,
exhortations, precepts, promises and threatenings; rewards and punishments:
neither can a man be justly punished for not doing those duties that are
impossible for him, or he not able to perform. That our Freewil was not lost in
the fall, but only weakened, that we are but half dead, and have some life and
power still left in us to stir up our selves; that grace is only an help to
weak nature: and the like.

Although by the fall of our first parents, Antidote
the Image of God was defaced and our nature corrupted, yet man remains still a
creature reasonable and capable of grace, having the same parts and faculties
that he had before, and in them some relics of Gods image; in the
understanding some light and knowledge of God, and some notions of good and
evil: in the will a liberty in natural and civil actions, and in all things a
freedom from compulsion. But there is a fourfold estate or condition of man: 1.
Of Creation. 2. Of Corruption. 3. Of Renovation. 4. Of Glorification. All the
question is about the second, what power a man in this condition has to
convert himself or to do good; and it is resolved, according to the Scriptures,
that man by nature has no power at all to do good, or turn himself to God. For
2 Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves; but our sufficiency is of God. Phil. 2.13. It is God that works in
you, both to will and to do, of his own good pleasure. Ephesians. 2.1. We are by
nature dead in sin; as unable to turn our selves unto God as a dead man to
raise himself to life. Joh. 15.5. Says our Savior, Without me ye can do
nothing. Joh. 6.44. No man can come unto me, except the Father draw him. Joh.
6.29 This is the work of God, that ye believe, etc. Mat. 16.17. Flesh and blood
cannot reveal Christ unto us etc.

Council. Arausic. cap. 19. If man could not retain, without the grace of God,
what he had received; how shall he recover, without the same, what he has
lost. Ambros. lib. 1. de vocat. gent. Never let a man trust his own strength,
now it is broken, that could not support him when it was sound and fresh about
him. Bern. de gra. and lib. arb. It were better we had never been, then to be
at the disposing of our own will: It is our own will that makes us the devils
slaves, not his power; it is Gods grace that makes us his servants, not our own
will. More testimonies might be brought; but whom these few will not suffice,
thousands more will never satisfy; Cui pauca non sufficient, plura non
proderunt. Council. Arausic. cap. 25.



Eccles. 7. God made man upright, but they have found out many inventions: It
is not unreasonable then or unjust with God to require his own of us again,
though we have prodigally lost or misspent it.



Paul says, God works in us both the will and the deed, and yet cease not
to exhort us unto both: Our Savior invites us often to come unto him, and yet
faith, No man can come unto me except the Father draw him, Ioh. 6.44.

CHAP. VII. Of Christ his Person.
Truth.
IN this miserable and forlorn plight, the merciful God left us not to our
selves, hopeless and helpless, but sent his Son to take our nature upon him,
that being perfect God and perfect man, he might fully satisfy for our sins
and redeem our souls from death and hell.

Errors.
The enemies of Christ are of two sorts. 1. The enemies of his person. 2. The
enemies of his office. Of the first sort were Simon Magus, Cerinthus, Marcion,
Samosatenus, Arius, Nestorius, and such Monsters: whereof some denied his
Divinity, others his Humanity; Some the purity of his conception, others the
truth of it: some confounded the two Natures, denying their distinction; others
denying their union, divided the person, of one making two: some said he took
tne body, but not the soul of man; others that he took an aetherial or
spiritual, not a true body, and such like. They are seconded at this day by the
unbeleeving Jews, Turks and all Mahometans, Antitrinitarians, New-Arians,
Anabaptists, Familists, Socinians, particularly by Mr Paul Best and others* who
deny the Divinity of Christ, affirming, That he was but a mere man: some fear
not to say, He was a sinful man: some, That he was God, but not from
everlasting: the Son of God, but not before his, incarnation: God by merit,
office or excellency of gifts, not by nature and generation. The Anabaptists
say, he brought his flesh with him from heaven, and took it not of the Virgin.
The Familists turn the Incarnation of Christ into an Allegory; holding, That
every one of their family is Christ, and the taking in of their belief is the
Incarnation: Having discourse once with one of them, he would not say, Christ
came or was come, but is now come in the flesh; Christ is now come in my flesh,
said he, and now I speak, Christ speaks to you. So also Mr Erbury, By flesh,
says he, is not meant the humane nut are, but the coming of Christ is the
manifestation of the Godhead in the flesh of Saints.

Antidote
Against these hellish Blasphemies we oppose these heavenly Truths.

Isai. 9.6. Unto us a child is born, etc, the Mighty God, Romans 9.5. of whom
Christ came, who is God over all blessed for ever. 1 Timothy 3.16. God manifest in
the flesh. Romans 1.4. Declared mightily to be the Son of God, etc.

Mary, therefore often called the son of man: And 1 Timothy 2.5. The man Christ
Jesus. Isa. 7.14. A Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son. Mat. 1.20. She was
found with child by the Holy Ghost. Gal. 4.4. He was made of a woman. 1 John
1.1. The Word of Life, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes,
and our hands have handled: He had a true body then, his humanity was obvious
enough to all the senses.

If Christ be not God, why do you adore him? It is plain Idolatry to worship
Christ if he be not God. Cyril. Alexand. Cont. Eunom. The second Nicene Council
Charged Nestorius with Idolatry, because he affirmed Christ was a mere man, and
yet adored him. S. Paul condemns serving the creature. Romans 1.25. and yet
professes himself Servant of Jesus Christ, Romans 1.1. Therefore Christ is no
mere creature (or man.) Ambros. lib. 1. de fide ad Gratian, August. c. 7.
Arrians, then, Socinians, Mr. Best, and the rest that deny Christ to be God,
and yet grant that he ought to be adored; what do they differ from Turks and
Pagans that worship the creature? Romans 1.22.25. Professing themselves to be
wise, they become fools, and change the Truth of God into a lie: This then is
Argument enough against the Arrians, Socinians; etc. to prove the diety of
Christ, because according to their own divinity he ought to be served,
worshipped, and adored.

The Heathen that knew God, and yet glorified him not as God, Romans 1.21. And
the Arrians, Socinians, etc. that glorify Christ as God, and yet acknowledge
him not for God, are a like vain in their imagination, and their foolish heart
is darkened.

CHAP. VIII. Of Christ his Office.
Truth.
THe Office of Christ, being God and man, is to mediate between God and man and
reconcile them together again: God, who is angry for sin; and man, who is
guilty of sin. This Office is threefold: For, 1. as a Prophet, he does
instruct his Church. 2. As a Priest, he makes satisfaction and intercession for
it. 3. As a King, he gathers and governs it.

Adversaries are those, that affirm. 1. Errors.
That Christ is Mediator only in respect of his divine nature: So Osiander. 2.
That he is Mediator in respect of his humane nature only: So Stancarus. And of
this opinion are the Papists, who most wickedly set up other Mediators also
besides Christ, even Saints and Angels, whom they pray unto to intercede for
them. But the Papists are enemies to every part of his Office. 1. To his Kingly
Office, in that they make the Pope head of the Church. 2. To his Priestly
Office, in that they set up other Mediators and Intercessours besides Christ,
and other satisfaction for sin besides that which he has made. 3. To his
Prophetical Office, in subjecting his holy Word to the Authority of the Church,
and Judgment of the Pope a sinful man; and equalizing traditions, and humane
inventions with the same.

Against these Errors we teach, Antidote
and are taught. 1. That there is but one God, and one Mediator between God and
man, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. He makes intercession for us, Romans
8.34. Heb. 7.25. The Saints do not hear us, or know our wants. Isai. 63.16.
Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel does not acknowledge us. Eccles. 9.5. The
dead know not any thing: Job 5.1. Call now, if there be any that will answer,
and to which of the Saints will thou turn? If Paul were a Mediator, then the
rest of his fellow Apostles were so too: and if there be many Mediators, then
S. Paul's saying 1 Timothy 2.5. does not hold good, that there is but one
Mediator etc. August. lib. 2. Cont. Epist. Parmen. cap. 8.

Christ is Mediator according to both natures, according to his humane, he
suffered and dyed; by the power of his divine he overcame death, and rose
again: without his humane nature he could not suffer: without his Divine to
give price and value to his sufferings he had not satisfied; therefore it is
said, God purchased his Church with his own blood, Acts 20.28. Both natures did
work in this Office of Mediatourship, each of them doing his own proper work,
and yet both together producing but one common effect.

CHAP. IX. The Death of Christ.
Truth.
THe Office of Christ, as Mediator, consists of three parts, whereof his
Priesthood is principal; and of his Priesthood, that oblation he made of
himself upon the Cross, whereby as the only Sacrifice for sin, he pacified the
wrath of God, and redeeming our souls from eternal death, purchased for us the
favou^ of God, and life everlasting.

Errors.
Adversaries to this truth, are, 1. Arrians and Socinians, who affirm, The
Christ by his death did not satisfy for our sins. 2. Papists, who say, That
Christ by his death indeed satisfied for our sins, and for the eternal
punishment due unto us for them; but for the temporal punishment we must
satisfy out selves, either in this life, or else hereafter in purgatory. 3.
Arminians affirm, That Christ dyed for all men, as well those that perish, as
those that are saved; for Cain and Judas, as well as Abell and Peter: From
whence 4. Another rises, That a man whom Christ dyed for may perish.

The death of Christ being the consummation and total sum, as it were, Antidote
of all his sufferings, from his cradle to his grave, is therefore commonly
taken for the whole satisfaction that he made unto God for our sins. To the
Adversaries we say,

Isai. 53.5, 8, 10. His soul was made an offering for sin, etc. Mat. 20.28. --
A ransom for many. 1 Cor. 5.7. A Sacrifice for us. Romans 4.25. He was delivered
to death for our sins. And 5.10. We were reconciled by his death. 1 Pet. 2.24.
He bare our sins in his own body on the tree.

Micah 7.18. God forgives iniquity, because he delights in mercy: If Christ
satisfy for sin, how is it mercy?



trod the wine press of his Fathers wrath alone, and none helped him, Isai.
63.3.) if we must satisfy for some part our selves. 2. It cannot stand with
Gods mercy, who forgives us freely for Christ's sake. 3. It cannot stand with
his Justice, when the fault is forgiven in exact any punishment; but they
confess Christ has satisfied for the fault fully therefore in Justice there
can be no punishment left for us to undergo.

Mat 1.21. He shall save his people. John 10.15. I lay down my life for the
sheep. And 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, etc.

John 10.15. And I give them eternal life, and they shall never perish, etc. 1
Pet. 1.5. They are kept the Power of God unto salvation; and what is able to
control that power?

Tim. 2.6. Dyed for every man. Heb. 2.9. For the whole world. 1 John 2.2.

John 6.33. and John 17.9. for the reprobate only. By [all] understand, all
sorts and degrees of men, all Countries and Nations; not the whole multitude of
mankind, but the amplitude of grace only. August. Tract. 45. in Joan. He spared
not his own Son, but delivered him for us all. Romans 8.32. For all, whom? for
the elect; as it follows, v. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? ^ld. Cont. Donat. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself;
and the son of man came not to judge the world, but to save it; but the world is
not reconciled unto God, nor saved, unless by world ye understand the Church,
which is both reconciled and saved.

Id. Epist. 48. Tom. 2. The whole world lies in wickedness, (i.) the tares
that grow all the world over: And again, Christ is a propitiation for the sins
of the whole world, (i.) for the wheat that likewise grows all world over.

CHAP. X. Resurrection of Christ.
Truth.
CHRIST did truly rise again from death, and took his body, flesh and bones, and
all things appertaining to the perfection of man's nature; wherewith he ascended
into Heaven, and there fitteth at Gods right hand, until he return again to
judgment at the end of the world.

Errors.
David George, the Father of the Family, affirmed, That Christ's body was
dissolved into ashes, and so rose no more as of old Apelles said, It was
resolved into the four Elements, whereof it was at first compounded. 2. The
Swenkfeldians affirm, That it is quite laid aside. 3. The Vbiquitaries, That
it is every where, even as his Godhead is every where. 4. There be at this day,
who affirm, That it is in the Sun; an old heresy of the Manichees and
Seleucians, who affirmed, That Christ in his ascension left his body in the
Sun, taking their ground for it from Psalm. 19.5. He set his tabernacle in the
Sun, (as they read.)

It is no great matter to believe that Christ dyed, this the Jews, Heathen,
Antidote
and all wicked men believe: but the faith of Christians is the Resurrection of
Christ, August. in Psalm. 120. This one point is the very lock and key of all
Christian Religion: For 1 Cor. 15.14. If Christ be not risen, then is our
preaching vain, our faith is also vain, we are still in our sins. But Mark
16.6. -- He is not here, he is risen. 1 Cor. 15.4. He was seen of Cephas, then
of the twelve, then of five hundred brethren at once. Acts 2.31. Neither did
his flesh see corruption. Mark. 16.19. He was received into Heaven, and sat at
the right hand of God. Acts 3.21. Whom the heavens must receive until the time
of restoring all things. 1 Cor. 11.25. The Communion is a remembrance of his
death, till his coming again.

Behold I am with you always, even to the end of the world.

Me ye have not always, Mat. 26.11.

CHAP. XI. Of Predestination.
Truth.
SEeing the benefits of Christ's death reach not to all, but to a certain chosen
number: now follows the Decree of Gods Predestination, choosing some to life
eternal, and rejecting others, leaving them in their sins to be damned for the
same.

Adversaries, to this truth, are 1. Errors.
Pelagians, both old and new, that scoff at this doctrine, denying the same; as
there are at this day that say, it is not suitable to God, nor agreeable to his
nature, to pick and choose thus among men; to choose some, and refuse others is
partial and unjust. 2. Libertines abuse this doctrine, as of old the
Predestinates did, to all looseness, thinking, that now they are predestined,
it is no matter how they live, because nothing can help or hinder their
salvation. 3. Socinians and Arminians say, That Predestination signifies
nothing else in holy Scripture but Gods decree and purpose, to save those that
shall believe and obey, and dam^ those that shall not, denying the Independency
of it. 4. Denying the eternity of Predestination, affirm, That God does elect
none until they do believe. 5. And deny the certainty and stability of it,
affirming, that it is changeable, so that the elect may become reprobates, and
the reprobates elect. 6. The Papists in this point are contrary to themselves,
affirming, both that God has chosen freely of his mere grace, and yet has not
chosen us but upon foresight of our good works. Bellarm. l. 2. de Gra. et lib.
arb. c. 16. But the general opinion among them is, That the Kingdom of Heaven
is prepared for them that are worthy of it, and deserve it by their well doing:
and that a man does make himself eligible to life eternal by his good works.

Antidote
(i.) an election of some to eternal life, and a reprobation of others to
eternal destruction. Romans 9.22, 23. There are vessels of wrath, fitted for
destruction; vessels of mercy prepared for glory. Acts 13.48. As many as were
ordained to eternal life believed. Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made all things
for himself, yea the wicked for the day of evil. Jude 4. Before of old ordained
to this condemnation. August. De civit. dei. l. 15. c. 1. There are two Cities
or Societies of men, one predestined to reign for ever with God; the other to
suffer eternal punishment with the Devil.

Romans 9.11. Before we are born, or have done good or evil. Ephesians. 1.4. Before
the foundation of the world. 2 Timothy 1.4. Before the world began.

Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.
Ephesians. 1.5. We are chosen according to the good pleasure of his will. Verse 7.
According to the riches of his grace. Verse. 11. After the Council of his own
will. 2 Timothy 1.9. Not according to works, but according to his own purpose.

There can be no other cause beside the Will of God, because there is nothing
before the Will of God, which is it self the cause of all things that are.
August. Faith and obedience are the effect of election, and cannot be the
cause, because they follow after, and do not go before it. Acts 13.48. As many
as were ordained unto eternal life believed. 1 John 4.19. We love God, because
he loved us first, Romans 8.29.30. From Gods Purpose proceeds Predestination,
from Predestination Calling, from Calling Justification, Faith, Obedience, etc.
To say then we are predestinate in respect of our faith or works, is not only
to invert the words of the Apostle, and falsify his doctrine, but even to
alter the very course of nature, by setting the effect before the cause. Romans
9.12. Before they had done either good or evil, it is said, Jacob have I loved,
but Esau have I hated. Was it the foresight of their good or evil works to come
that moved God hereunto? That the Apostle denies in these words, That the
purpose of God according to election, might stand, not of works, but of him
that calls. August. lib. de Predest. c. 7.

Tim. 2.19. The foundation of God remains sure, having this seal, the Lord
knows who are his. Luke 10.20. Their, names are written in the book of life.
John 10.3. He calls his sheep by name. 1 Pet. 1.5. They are kept by the power
of God unto salvation. They can never fall away and perish, for whom he did
predestinate, them he also called, etc. Affording them in due time all those
means that shall infallibly bring them unto glory. If any man, making a fair
show of holiness, fall away, it is no Argument that the elect may fall away,
but that those which fall away are not elect. 1 John 2.19. They went out from
us, because they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have
continued with us.

We see it plain now, that God has made a difference between men, choosing
some, and refusing others: Latet discretionis ratio, non latet ipsa discretio.
Ambros. de Vocat. Gent. We see the effect, we cannot perceive the cause; the
thing it self is manifest, the reason of it is hidden, and secret to us; and
yet, though it be unknown, we know it cannot be unjust, because it is the good
pleasure of his will, who is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works. Does any man yet complain? Hear the Apostle, Romans 9.20, 21. O man, who
art thou that reply against God! Has not the Potter power over the clay? Do
not dispute, but fear and admire with the same Apostle, Romans 11. O the depth of
the riches of the wisdom of God, how unsearchable searchable are his Judgments!

But we are all by nature one mass of corruption; one is chosen, another is
left; God shows mercy upon one, and not upon another: how can any man
complain now, when all were alike corrupt and culpable, and no desert in any?
Will every man dispose freely of his own, and shall not God? If any man be
saved then, he has nothing to glory of but the riches of Gods mercy; and he
that is damned, has nothing to complain of but the merit of his own sin.



without holiness we shall never see God, Heb. 12.14. -- This cannot make us
slothful or careless, but more diligent and studious of good works, that by
such evidences we may make our calling and election sure; sure unto our own
consciences, which before was sure enough in Gods eternal Counsel. Some be
ordained to destruction, but yet none shall be damned but for sin; this cannot
make any careless, but more careful to fly sin, and be studious of good works,
which are not the cause, but yet the way to salvation, which God has prepared
for us to walk in, Ephesians. 2.10. And so long as God affords the means of
salvation, offering Christ daily unto us in his Word and Sacraments; no man
that waits upon the means has any cause to despair.

But, do thou find the signs of election in thy self? praise God for them.
Do thou not find them in another? pray to God for him. Do thou find them
in thy self? be thankful. Do thou not find them in another? yet be
charitable, and hope still, that God, who calls at all hours, may have an hour
yet for thy neighbor as he had for thee. Shun all curiosity, and let these be
the uses you make of this doctrine.

CHAP. XII. Of Vocation.
Truth.
AND whom he did predestinate, them he also called; not only outwardly, by the
preaching of his holy Word, but inwardly also, and effectually by the operation
of his holy Spirit, powerfully working with the Word, and winning their hearts
to cleave unto him inseparably to salvation.

Errors.
This is the second link of that golden chain of salvation, that diverse
Adversaries, both of former and latter times, have labored to break asunder:
They are of three sorts. 1. Those that condemn the outward Ministry of the
Word, as vain and unprofitable: So the Anabaptists, Gaspar Swenckfeldius, and
his followers, who affirm, That men are called, and faith is given, not by
means of the Word, but by illumination, and immediate working of the Spirit;
and being wholly intent upon Speculations and Revelations, they imagine, that
God does reveal his Will unto them in dreams and visions. By this device many
lewd impostours have risen, and abused the world with their lies, as Mahomet
and Muncer did; and in the primitive times Simon Magus, Cerinthus, Montanus
with their harlots, who, under the name of visions and dreams, did broach and
vent their own monstrous dotages. The grossest Errors that are now in Popery,
as Purgatory, etc. were first founded and confirmed by visions and dreams; and
by the same means the Father of lies, and spirit of Error, has prevailed so
far in the Church, as we see at this day; such strange and monstrous ways men
presently fall into; when once they depart from the light of Gods known Word.

2. A second sort there be, that do not indeed condemn the outward Ministry of
the Word, but yet esteem very meanly of preaching and expounding the same,
thinking and affirming, That bare reading the Scriptures to the people is
sufficient for edifying them unto salvation, and that much or frequent
preaching is not only not necessary but hurtful: This opinion was (if it be not
still) very current with many, both Ministers and other people, and was
mightily confirmed in their minds, not by the connivence only, but also ill
example and practice of the Bishops themselves, who, as if preaching were no
part of their office, or derogatory to their high dignity, did most of them
most shamefully cast it quite off, (though indeed it would have been their
greatest glory:) and therefore now God has justly covered them with shame for
it, and poured contempt upon them. 3. The last and worst sort are those enemies
of grace, and patrons of freewil, the Pelagians, Papists, Arminians, etc. who,
to maintain the pride of nature, deny the power of grace, and to make good
their former doctrine of freewil, have brought these seconds into the field:
Viz. 1. That the grace of Vocation is nothing else but a moral swasion or
probable inclination of the will, (which the outward preaching of the Word may
effect;) denying the powerful operation of the Spirit inwardly working upon the
same. 2. That sufficient grace to believe, and be converted, is offered and
given to all in the Gospe^ preached, and that with a serious intention in God
to save all, but the Reason, why one receives grace, another receives it not;
one believes, and is converted, another is not, is only in man's freewil, in
whose power it is to receive and obey, or refuse and resist the offers and
operations of grace. 3. That grace when it is gotten may be utterly lost again,
faith quite cut off; and the like.

Antidote
and turn him unto God, without the inward working, teaching, and calling of
the Holy Ghost. But yet for all that, since the word has been committed to
writing, the written Word and preaching thereof, is the only outward and
ordinary means ordained of God, to beget faith in us, and bring us to the
knowledge and obedience of Jesus Christ. Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the Word of God. Acts 10.44. The Holy Ghost fell upon them that
heard the Word. And this was the Scripture or written Word; Luke 4.16. Our
Savior himself took the book of Esaias, and preached the Scripture. Acts 8.35.
Philip preached the Scripture to the Eunuch. Acts 17.2. Paul reasoned out of the
Scriptures. It is evident that all Churches both Jewish and Christian used
always to preach and hear the Scriptures for their edification. Nehem. 8.9.
Acts 15.26. and 13.15. It is given Timothy as a commendation, that he knew the
Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.15. And it is called the Word of Grace. Romans 10.8. The Word
of Faith. Act. 20.32. because it is a means to convey both unto us. In times
past indeed God was pleased to make his Will known unto his Servants the
Prophets, and by them to the people, diverse ways, and after diverse manners; as
by Dreams, Visions, Oracles, Vrim and Thummim. But in these last days he has
spoken unto us by his Son, Heb. 1.1. who coming from the bosom of his Father,
has revealed all his Fathers Will unto us, that now we need no more any new
Revelations: and therefore as the Apostle says, 2 Pet. 1.16, 19, 20. We do not
follow devised fables, for we have a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto we
take heed, even a prophecy of the Scripture, or written Word.

reading unto them a few plain Chapters out of the New Testament, God giving a
blessing thereunto, when better means were not afforded; yet it is evident,
that bare reading without preaching is not enough, neither can we expect a
blessing from God upon one without the other, when he has afforded the means
and liberty of both. The common practice of all, both Jews and Christians,
confirms it: who were not content with bare reading but Nehem. 8.9. they read
in the Law, and gave the sense, causing the people to understand the reading.
Acts 13.15. After the reading, they desire a Word of Exhortation. And our
blessed Savior, the great Doctor of his Church, after he had read, closed the
book, and then preached, Luke 4.16. For bare reading without preaching or
expounding, is as bad to most people as speaking in an unknown tongue, which
Saint Paul accounts madness. 1 Cor. 14.23.

of God. 2. Renovation, Regeneration, and Conversion of the heart and will, by
changing, turning and winning the same to cleave unto God by Faith. We say then,

John 6.29. and the Gift of God, 2 Timothy 2.25. It is not moral swasion or force
of Argument; it is not the enticing words of man's wisdom can change or turn
that stony heart that is in the midst of every one of us: it is Gods Work,
Ezekiel. 36.26. called a Creation, Psalm. 51.10. and therefore his peculiar work.
John 6.44. None can come to me except the Father draw him, says our Savior.
It is not in the power of man's will, being in bondage to Satan, and the powers
of darkness, Col. 1.13. to return and come unto God; but we are called and
believe, according to the exceeding greatness of his power, and according to
the working of his mighty power, Ephesians. 1.18. And our Faith stands not in man's
wisdom, but in the power of God. 1 Cor. 2.5.

John 6.37. All that the Father gave me shall come unto me: Not that God offers
any compulsion or violence to the will, for then it were not will; he draws us
indeed, but with cords of love; most sweetly wooing us, and yet so powerfully
winning us, after a manner unspeakable, that we cannot resist, because we
cannot but yield; our nature being changed by his grace, and of unwilling made
willing to obey.

according to Gods purpose, Romans 8.28. and that is unchangeable. Romans 11.29.
The Gifts and Calling of God are without repentance. And so the Regenerate,
those that are effectually called can never fall wholly away again: For Jer.
32.4. God makes an everlasting Covenant with them, and puts his fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from him.

endeavor, or given for any dignity or worthiness in the person called, but
freely according to Gods good pleasure: so that the reason why one man
receives grace, another receives it not; one believes, another does not; one
is converted, another is not; is not in man that wills, but in God that
works and dispenses his grace according to his own pleasure, opening the
heart of one, and not of another. John 3.8. The wind blows where it lists,
etc. Even so is every man that is born of the Spirit.

Acts 13.48. and Romans 8.30. Whom he did predestinate them he also called; and
none else. Indeed, many are called that are not chosen, Mat. 22.14. but none
effectually. There is a calling of nature, and a calling of grace; many are
called by the voice of the creatures, that never heard the Scriptures; many are
invited by the Word, that are not won by the Spirit; have their minds
enlightened too, and yet their hearts not opened or renewed. Many are called
outwardly, that are not inwardly and effectually: this is peculiar to Gods
chosen, who are called by his Spirit working in due season; through grace they
obey that calling; are freely justified; and at last most certainly glorified.
The Elect are still sure of salvation, because the links of this golden chain
are so strongly fastened one within another according to Gods unchangeable
purpose and invincible power, that they can never be broken and undone.

CHAP. XIII. Of Justification.
AND whom he called, Truth.
them he also Justified; and we are Justified or accounted righteous in the
sight of God, not for any works or worthiness of our own, but for the only
merits of Jesus Christ, and by faith in him, our sins being imputed unto him,
and his Righteousness unto us.

Adversaries to this Doctrine are the Papists, Errors.
with their brethren the Anabaptists. The Anabaptists teach, That we are not
justified by faith alone, but by the cross and affliction. The Papists affirm,
1. That we are not justified by faith only, but by faith and works together,
and works in their account carry the greatest stroke. 2. That we are justified
by faith, not as an Instrument, but as a virtue meriting or deserving, and so
it is a part of that Righteousness whereby we are justified before God. 3. That
we are justified before God by a Righteousness that is inherent in us; infused,
not imputed. 4 Osiander imagined, That we are substantially righteous in
Christ, as well in Essence as in quality; and that the truly righteous do not
apprehend Christ by faith, but have him and his Righteousness essentially
derived unto them; so that in our Justification God conveying himself into us,
makes us a part of himself: So the Familists say, That every one of their
family is Christ, godded with God, and deified. 5. Many Pharisaical Christians
there be that think to be justified by civil and external Righteousness. 6. And
certain Libertines, That taking no care of weldoing think to be justified by
faith alone, or a solitary faith. 7. A world of carnal people regard neither
faith nor works, and yet hope to be saved as well as the best.

This point of Justification, Antidote
is the greatest that is in Controversy between us and the Papists, which they
quite overthrow, and therewith the whole Gospel, burying Christ again, that is
risen for our Justification: For if our works before or after Justification do
merit grace and life by congruity or condignity, then is Christ in vain, and
become of no effect.

To the Adversaries we say; First, Psalm 143.2. Enter not into judgment with
thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified, Job 15.15. What
is man that he should be just, or he that is born of a woman that he should be
righteous. Romans 3.20. By the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. Gal.
3.11. And that no man is justified by works, is evident For the just shall live
by faith. Romans 3.28. We conclude then, that a man is justified by faith without
works. Good works indeed may justify us before men as an evidence of our
faith, and of this S. James speaks, James 2.24. Ye see then how by works a man
is justified: But before God we are justified only by the perfect Righteousness
of Christ, applied unto us by the hand of faith, wherein our own works have not
the least finger.

Romans 3.22. The righteousness of God is by, faith of Jesus Christ unto all that
believe: And v. 24. We are justified through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ. And Phil. 3.9. The righteousness whereby we are justified before God,
is called the righteousness that is through the Faith of Christ: and the
Righteousness by faith; and therefore when it is said we are justified by
faith, it notes the use or effect, not the merit or dignity of faith: For 1
Cor. 1.30. Christ is made unto us Righteousness. And 2 Cor. 5.21. We are made
the Righteousness of God in him.

Romans 4.5. Abraham was justified by a Righteousness imputed or accounted unto
him. 2 Cor. 5.21. We are made the Righteousness of God in him; the
Righteousness of God, not ours; in him, not in us, August. Enchirid. cap. 41.

Fourthly, When we say we are justified by faith alone, we do not mean a faith
that is alone, that is solitary without good works, but a living faith, and a
working faith; for a dead faith cannot justify, and a living faith cannot be
idle, but works by love, Gal. 5.5. We are justified by faith alone, without
works; not that works are separated from faith, or can be; but only excluded
from the act of Justification.

The parts of our Justification, are, 1. The imputation of Christ's
righteousness. 2. Forgiveness of our sins. The inward moving cause is Gods
mercy: the outward is Christ's merit. The formal cause is the imputation of
Christ's righteousness; the instrumental faith, and faith without works; whereby
works are excluded not from the nature of Faith, but from the act of
Justification.

CHAP. XIV. Of Sanctification.
Truth.
WHom he justified, them he also glorified: Our glorification, which shall be
finished and completed in the life to come, is begun in this life; partly in
regard of our condition wherein we are made happy, and partly in regard of our
nature wherein we are made holy. We are made holy in our nature by the grace of
Sanctification, which is the renewing of our whole nature (though not wholly in
this life) according to the image of God in righteousness and true holiness.

Adversaries to this truth were, 1. Errors.
Simon Magus and his disciples, who gave liberty to all looseness and
uncleanness, saying, That sin defiled the body, but not the soul: and they are
followed by the Libertines of our age, who scoff at all sanctity or holiness
of living: And if you observe you shall find, that holiness of life is had in
great esteem and reverence among all sorts and sects, among Papists and the
very Turks themselves, after their way; only it is in disgrace among our common
Protestants, who usually despise and brand those with odious names, who are any
way strict and severe in their lives, endevoring to live in the fear of God. 2.
Some Anabaptists, as the Adamites and Familists, say, that they re perfect and
pure from all sin, and that there are men living as perfect and pure as Christ
was. So the Pelagians and Donatists of old; of latter time^ a Sect called
Fratricelli affirmed, that a man might attain in this life to that perfection,
to be without sin; and he that is so, is freed from all subjection to mortal
men, and had no more need of prayer, fasting, or such exercis^s of piety: Among
these Perfectists we reckon also the Papists. 3. There be others so contrary to
the Papists, who would have justifying righteousness inherent in us, that these
will have none at all, affirming, that Christ is the new creature, and all
graces are in Christ as in the subject, none in us; upon which follow many
other strange doctrines.

Antidote
Now we are justified by faith through the free grace of God, we ought to follow
after holiness with the more diligence: 1. That we may glorify Gods name, who
has done so great things for us: 1 Cor. 6.20. Mat. 5.16. 1 Pet. 2.12. Because
2. it is the will of God. 1 These. 4.3. Because 3. it is the end of our
election: Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us that we should be holy. 4. It is the end
of our Redemption, Luke 1.74. He has saved us that we should serve him. 5. It
is the end of our calling: 1 These. 4.7. God has called us unto holiness: and
Heb. 12.14. Without holiness we shall never see God.

John 1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth
is not in us. James 3.2. In many things we offend all. 1 Kings 8.40. There is
no man that sins not. Prove. 20.9. Who can say I am pure from my sin. Eccles.
7.10. There is not a just man upon earth that does good, and sins not: as is
evident by the confessions and examples of holy men of God. Noah, Genesis 9.21.
Abraham, Genesis 20.2. Lot, Genesis 19.33. David, 2 Samuel 11. Paul, Romans 7. and Peter
denied his Master Christ, Mat. 26. The Perfectists themselves have enough in
themselves to convince them of their folly; as pride, envy, malice, etc. being
subject to sickness, death, etc. which are the wages of sin, and therefore they
are not without sin.

perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect. Mat. 5,

[As] notes the quality, not equality.

John 3. Whosoever is born of God sins not.

If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves. We sin then, (i.) sins of
infirmity: and we do not sin, (i.) we do not fall back into the service and
dominion of sin finally or totally. There is a perfection, 1. Of degrees, and
stands opposed to imperfection. 2. Of parts, and stands opposed to hypocrisy.
This latter we may have, (i.) be sincere and upright, not the former, (i.) be
free from all sin, defect or imperfection. Many men in Scripture are called
righteous, just, perfect, not because they were without all vice, but because
they had many virtues; Hieronym: For otherwise Noah was drunk, David committed
Adultery, etc.

Cor. 4.16. The inward man is renewed day by day. 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the grace
that is in thee. 2 Pet. 1.6. Add to your faith virtue, etc. For if these things
be in you, etc. the Righteousness then of Sanctification is subjectively in us.

Romans 8.1. 1 John 3.10, 14. Gal. 5.24. 2 Cor. 5.17.

David; who also confesses the same, was punished, and prayed for pardon, 2 Samuel 12.10. Psalm 51. If God did not see sin in him, how did he send Nathan to
reprove him for it; why did he punish him for it? Our Savior teaches us to
pray for pardon of sins. Mat. 6.12. The Apostle 1 John 1. to confess our sins.
And Mat. 28. Peter wept bitterly for his sin. We ought to sorrow for sin; and
renew our souls daily by repentance.

CHAP. XV. Of the Moral Law.
Truth.
CHrist has delivered us from the rigor and curse of the Law, not from all
obedience unto it, but that it still remains a rule of life unto us.

Errors.
Antinomians or Adversaries to this truth (because it is said, We are not under
the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6.14. And that the Law is not made for the
righteous. 1 Timothy 1.9.) hold, That the Moral Law ought to be cast quite out of
the Church, that we be no more troubled, or our Consciences terrified with the
preaching thereof, but that we be gently exhorted by the preaching of the Grace
of Christ: That the Law and Christ are two contrary things, whereof one cannot
abide the other: That it is of no use to a Believer, no rule for him to walk or
examine his life by.

Antidote
Christ is the end of the Law; finis perficiens, not interficiens. August. A
consummating, not consuming end; not destroying, but fulfilling the same. So
our Savior himself says, Mat. 5.17, 19. I came not to destroy the Law, or the
Prophets, but fulfill. Whosoever therefore shall break the least of these
Commandments, and teach men so, etc. Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the Law
through Faith? God forbid: yea we establish the Law. 1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision
is nothing, nor uncircumcision, but the keeping the Commandments of God.

We are not under the Law, but under Grace; not under the Law as a Tyrant, but
now as a Father; being freed from the curse and rigor of it, not obedience
unto it; which we yield now, not of compulsion or fear, but love, with all
cheerfulness and willingness, our hearts being inclined and disposed thereunto
by the work of Gods Spirit. 1 John 5.3. This is the love of God that we keep
his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous; and so the Law unto
the Regenerate becomes, as it were, Gospel, even a Law of liberty. The Use of
the Law is twofold: 1. Civil to punish and restrain sin. 2. Spiritual to
reveal it. Luther in Galat. In the first regard it is not given to the
righteous, because good men are a Law unto themselves, Romans 2.14. The most
proper and principal Use of the Law is to reveal sin, and so the Law is light,
not to discover grace and life, (this is the office of the Gospel) but to
discover sin and death; therein, as in a glass, we may see our own blindness,
etc. For our natures are so corrupt, that we should not know they were corrupt
but by the Law. Romans 7.7. The Law then serves to humble us, and drive us unto
Christ; to make us know sin, and so know our selves, and so renounce our
selves, and fly unto Christ. And so the Law is our Schoolmaster to bring us
unto Christ, Gal. 3. And Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to
every one that believes, Romans 10. because the end of the Law is perfect
Righteousness, which we cannot attain of our selves, but by Christ, who has
fulfilled the same for us. And when the Law has brought us unto Christ, it
goes no farther; the coactive power of it cease but not the directive: it is
still a guide and rule of life unto us, which we follow, not to seek
Righteousness to our selves, but to testify our thankfulness unto God; we
endeavor to keep the Law, not to justify our selves, but to glorify God, and
edify our neighbor by our good example. And therefore we are still exhorted to
do the works of the Law, though we shall not be justified by the same.

CHAP. XVI. Of good works.
ALthough we are justified freely by the Grace of God through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ. Romans 3. Truth.
yet we ought still to maintain good works. 1. Out of thankfulness unto God,
for so great a benefit, and to glorify his name. 2. To assure our selves of the
truth of our faith by the fruits thereof. 3. To edify, win and provoke others
also by our good example.

Adversaries are, 1. The Papists, Errors.
who think good works are meritorious, and so overvalue them. 2 The Libertines
that undervalve them, and think they are repugnant and contrary unto faith;
that understand our liberty that we have in Christ carnally, thinking that now
we are freed from all care of good works, and may follow what course we please.

Antidote
That we ought to follow good works for the Reasons before named, is evident by
those places of Scripture. Ephesians. 2.10. We are created unto good works that God
has prepared for us, that we should walk in them. Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself
for us, that he might purify unto himself a people zealous of good works. 2
Cor. 5.10. Rev. 20.12. We shall be judged at the last day according to our
works; therefore look to your works. So 1 Pet. 2.12. 2 Pet. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13.5.
Heb. 10.24. 2 Cor. 9.2.3. And our best works have not that worthiness in them
to deserve at Gods hand; 1. Because they are imperfect. Isai. 64.6, They are a
debt that we owe unto God: Luke 17.10. When you have done all you can, or are
commanded to do, say you are unprofitable servants; for we do but our duty: we
must do them, to serve, not deserve. 3. If they were perfect, yet they are
Gods, not ours. Phil. 2.13. He works in us both the will and the deed. Joh.
15. Without me ye can do nothing. 4. If we ascribe merit to our works, we make
the death and merits of Christ either unnecessary or insufficient.

a reward. Romans 2.6. Rev. 20.12. et 22.12.

Romans 4.4. Heaven and eternal life is a reward of grace, not of debt. God has
made himself a debtor to us, not by receiving any thing from us, but by
promising all things to us. August. in Psalm 132.2. It is said we shall be
rewarded not for, but according to our works; the merit of works is plainly set
aside: and when God does crown our works, he does but crown his own gifts.
August. Enarr. in Psalm 102.3. The Apostle calls the reward of sin wages,
because it is of due debt; but eternal life he calls a gift, because it is not
of debt, but grace. Romans 6.23. 4. The Kingdom of Heaven is called, not the
wages of servants, but the inheritance of Saints, or those whom God has chosen
for his children. 5. The good man of the house, (i.) Christ, Mat. 20. paid at
night all his laborers equal wages, to show, that they received a gift of
grace, not a reward of works.

CHAP. XVII. Of Death and Burial.
Truth.
THere is no man living that shall not see death; for our life is but a race that
will come to an end; and when we have finished our course here, our body shall
turn to dust in the earth, and our soul return to God that gave it.

Errors.
Enemies to this truth were, 1. The old Heretics, called Nazarens, affirming,
That the soul of man, and the soul of a beast were both of a like nature and
substance: from whence sprang up those Heretics in Arabia the stony, called
therefore Arabici, who affirmed, That the soul of man dies with the body, even
as the soul of a bruit beast does. 2. Others affirmed, That the soul did not
dye, but sleep in the grave until the day of Judgment: Both these Errors are
revived at this day by those that affirm, The whole man is mortal. And books
are written of the mortality of the soul. Pope John the 23. was of this
opinion, That the soul should not see God till the day of Judgment. 3.
Familists say, They ought not to bury the dead, because it is said, let the
dead bury the dead. 4. And those are greatly to be blamed, that despise
Christian burial, and though not guilty of Heresy, yet of inhumanity, that
expose their dead friends undecently or irreverently. 5. The Papists account
burial of the dead a meritorious work; borrowing their authority from the book
of Tobit.

The Reason why the Arabians were so easily taken with this Error of the souls
mortality, was, because they were, Antidote
and are at this day, a very lewd, dissolute, and theevish people; and this
doctrine does fit such peoples turn very well: and the same may be the Reason
it is received by many at this day; happy were it for them if the soul dye, or
if it but sleep till the day of Judgment: it cannot but be a little refreshing
to the thoughts of wicked men, that seeing their life so uncertain, yet they
shall not go presently into torment. But Eccles. 3.19, 20. is to be understood
of the state of the body after death: for, of the soul it is said. v. 21. That
the soul of man goes upward, and the soul of a beast goes downward toward the
earth. Eccl. 12.7. The dust shall return to the earth as it was, and the Spirit
shall return to God that gave it. Acts 7.59. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Luke
23.43. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. That answer of our Savior
to the Sadducees Mat 22.32. puts the Adversary to silence; for God is not the
God of the dead, but of the living. Lastly, The exceeding joys and hopes of
good men, and the fears and terrors of wicked men at their departures; are
sufficient Arguments, that the soul sleeps not, but goes presently to a place
of joy or sorrow whereof the soul has some secret inklings, instinct, or
divine assurance, and whereunto those hopes and fears seem to invite or usher
it.

that our selves are subject to. The holy Patriarks, and all Gods people of old
were very careful of their Sepulchers, or burying places, as you may read; and
the Jews used many Ceremonies of comeliness at their burials; not out of any
superstition, but in a godly consideration of the Resurrection, in the hope
whereof those Ceremonies did seem to confirm them; and as that doctrine grew
clearer, so these Ceremonies grew fewer; as Tabitha, her body was only washed.
Acts 9.37. And therefore we condemn those numerous, superstitious, and impious
Ceremonies used by the Papists at their burials; but yet still we should
consider, that the dead bodies of our godly and Christian friends are precious
things, and were the Members of Christ, Temples of the Holy Ghost, and shall at
the last day be raised again, and made like unto Christ's glorious body, in hope
whereof in mean space we should lay them up, with decency and reverence: It is
no matter to the dead; but 1. It is an honor done to the common nature of
mankind. 2. A comfort to surviving friends. 3. Many ways useful to all that are
present.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Resurrection,
Truth.
ALthough our bodies when we are dead shall be turned to dust and ashes; yet at
the last day they shall be raised again, and be united to our souls, and both
together be taken into everlasting joy, or depart into everlasting sorrow.

Errors.
The first adversaries that we read of were the Sadduces, who denied the
Resurrection, but were put to silence by our Savior, Mat. 21. afterward
Hymeneus and Philetus, whose words eat like a canker, 2 Timothy 2.17. Then Simon
Magus, Menander, and their followers. At this day the Familists and other
fanatics, will understand no resurrection, but a rising from sin: or that the
resurrection spoken of at the last day, is not to be understood literally of
the body natural, but mystically of a certain spiritual body, that all the
Saints shall be gathered into, and that the body of flesh shall be annihilated
and for ever brought to nothing. 3. The Manichees imagined a certain
Pythagorean transmigration of souls out of one body into another: and 4. The
Anabaptists imagine, we shall rise again, but with other new bodies, not the
same that now we have.

But 1 Cor. 15.19, 30, 32. Antidote
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable; why, stand we in jeopardie every hour? If the dead rise not, let us
eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye: but be not deceived, for, Joh. 5.28.
The hour shall come, that all that be in the grave shall hear his voice, 1 Cor.
15.52. For the trumpet shall sound and the dead shall be raised, Revel. 20.13.
The Sea shall deliver up the dead that are in it, death and the grave shall
deliver up the dead that are in them, 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must al appear before
the tribunal of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body.
Job. 19.26. Though after my skin worms consume this body, yet shall I see God
in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold and none others
for me.

CHAP. XIX. Of Glorification in Heaven.
Truth.
ANd whom he Justified them he also glorified; after the resurrection, and the
last Judgment is past, the Saints or chosen of God, shall go with Christ in
triumph into heaven, and there reign with him for ever.

Errors.
Cerinthus of old taught, which he said he received by Revelation from Angels,
That Christ should reign after the resurrection 1000 years, upon earth, where
the Saints should enjoy all pleasures of the flesh. This doctrine that false
Prophet Mahomet embraced, and put in his Alchoran, and is greedily embraced not
only of his followers, but also of the Anabaptists and other among us, who
expect such a temporary kingdom wherein the godly shall reign alone and inherit
the earth, after that the wicked be all destroyed. The Familists say, The joys
of heaven are here in this world, etc.

But 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Antidote
The Lord shall descend from heaven (to what place? to the earth? no; but) then
we that are alive shall be caught up together with them, in the clouds, to meet
the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. 2 Cor. 5.1. When
this earthly Tabernacle is dissolved (i.) when we dye, our next building or
habitation to dwell in, is eternal in the heavens. 1 Pet. 1.4. The inheritance
of the Saints is reserved in heaven for them. where, 2 Timothy 4.8. a Crown is
laid up for them, and 2 Cor. 2.9. things prepared for them that the heart of
man cannot conceive. But Phil. 3.20. their vile body shall be made like the
glorious body of Christ. Dan. 12.3. They shall shine as stars for ever and
ever, Revel. 22.5. the Saints shall reign in heaven for ever and ever; as for
those 2000 years Rev. 20. they are to be understood of the condition of the
Saints in this present world, when Satan was bound 1000 years that he could not
deceive the Nations.

CHAP. XX. Of Hell.
Truth.
BUt the Reprobates, wicked and ungod^y men after they have received their
fearful doom, shall go into the everlasting torment of hell fire, prepared for
the devil and his Angels.

There be some that say there is neither Devil nor hell: Errors.
no Devil or evil spirit but a man's own vile affections: nor hell, but a man's
own evil conscience. 2. Others say there is a hell, but not till the day of
Judgment. 3. Others, that hell tormen^s are not everlasting, but that the
damned and devils themselves shall be saved at last: as a Sect of old called
therefore Liberatores said; or as many as in hell call for mercy, say the Turks.

Antidote
But, 2 Pet. 2.4. The Angels which fell at the beginning were cast down into Hell,
and delivered into chains of darkness, Jude 6. Everlasting chains, where, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Their destruction shall be everlasting, Mar. 9.44. Their worm never
dies, their fire never is quenched, Revel. 20.10. Are tormented day and night
for ever and ever: there were devils then and a hell from the beginning; into
which, with the Devil and his Angels, the reprobates, all wicked men are cast,
Mat. 25.41. not for a time but for ever: for out of hell there is no
Redemption, Luc. 16.26. betwixt that and heaven there is a great gulf fixed, so
that th^re is no passing between, Deuteronomy. 32.29. Oh that men were wise! then they
would understand this, they would consider their latter end.

CHAP. XXI. Of Purgatory.
THere is no other third or middle place between Heaven and Hell, Truth.
whereunto the souls departed do go: And therefore the doctrine of Purgatory
with all its appendices, as pardons, prayers for the dead, etc. are not only
fond vain and unwarrantable, but heathenish also, and blasphemous.

Errors.
This was a device of the old Heathens; was received among Christians, first by
Simon Magus, Montanus, and other lewd Heretics, and is now embraced by none
but the Roman Church, through the covetousness and filthy lucre of their
Clergy, because it fills not only the Popes coffers, but also the private purse
of every mass Priest. The place they say is next unto hell: the pains of it are
all one with hell fire, though some mitigate the matter: But King Henry the
fourth of France, resolved this doubt best of any. The time it lasts, is till
the day of Judgment, at utmost, no longer; and yet if surviving friends will
pay, the Priest pray, or the Pope but say the word, they may be released at any
time sooner. It was invented for the purging of souls departed, which had not
fully fatisfied in this life.

Antidote
But as there be but two sorts of men in this world, so there are but two places
prepared for them in the world to come; and as there are but two places, so
there are but two ways and gates that lead unto those two places. Whereof you
read, Mat. 7.13, 14. If there were a third place, certainly our Savior, who
came to teach, and afterward sent his Spirit to lead us in the way of all
truth, would have showed us the way to that place too. But seeing the Papists
themselves could never yet agree about the place where, the pains what, or the
time how long it shall last; and that the infallible Doctor of the Porphyry
Chair cannot resolve it, nor will of his charity release them without money, as
they say he can for money; we leave it as a heathenish and sottish invention:
and if there be no purgatory, then pardons, and prayers for the dead are of no
use; and howsoever the pardons of a sinful man, or the man of sin cannot be of
any value. An Irish Gentleman, and a Papist, being upon a former agreement to
pay a certain sum of money to a Priest for Masses said, for delivering his
fathers soul out of purgatory; brought the money and laid it down: But quoth he
to the Priest, be ye sure now that my fathers soul is clear out? Yes, I Will
warrant you quoth the Priest: Nay then quoth the Gentleman, by my troth I have
even done a child's part; if he be out, let him take heed how he comes there
again; and so putting up his money gave the Priest the baffle, Countermining
one cheat with another. If all Papists would serve their Priests so, and Pope
too, it would prove the best Antidote against this Heresy: For money is the
fuel that feeds this fire, (if it be fire, and not water, as some learned
Papists have doubted it is.)

CHAP. XXII. Of Images.
Truth.
THe worship of Images, Relics, the Cross, etc. are not only vain,
unwarrantable, and contrary to Gods Word, but also heathenish and abominable
Idolatry.

Errors.
The Papists, not only erect and adore Images themselves, but also accurse and
condemn as Heretics to the fire, yea to hell fire all those that will not do
the like. 2. The Pseudo-Lutherans retain Images in their Churches, esteeming
them not only as Ornaments, but also as laymens books, to edify, admonish,
and put them in mind of some heavenly things, but yet allow them not to be
worshipped; doing herein like the Turks, who in the sack of Constantinople,
seeing the Temple of Saint Sophia, a goodly structure, and the marble pillars
enameled and filleted with the pictures of Saints, were loath to deface such
goodly pieces, though Images are contrary to their Law, and Religion, but only
put out their eyes. Images were creeping in apace here in England; and I saw
once the assumption of our Lady wrought upon the Communion Table, or Altar
cloth, as it was called, in a Church held in Commendam, by Bishop Goodman of
Gloucester, which I note above all other, because it is a fabulous legend that
the Papists themselves scarce admit.

The old heathen Romans for a long time had no Images, Antidote
accounting it sacriledg to present heavenly things by earthly forms; seeing we
cannot possibly any way attain unto the knowledge of God, but in mind and
understanding. Plut. in Vita Numae. The Turks have none; nor the Jews, as
contrary to Gods Law. The ancient Christians would not suffer an Image so much
as in the Church Porch, so jealous they were of Idolatry stealing in. The
Papists think they quit themselves of Idolatry, when they say they worship not
the Image, but the Saint or diety in the Image: But the same excuse is made by
Plutarch for the heathen Idolaters, who were none of them so sottish to take
the Images of wood and stone for Gods able to help them. God forbad not only
graven Images to be worshipped, but also himself to be worshipped in the Image. If
we make an Image of the true God to worship, then we fall either 1. into
Idolatry by worshipping the Image, or 2. Error and Heresy by ascribing to God
a bodily shape, which he has not. Abulensis in Deuteronomy. cap. 4.

The Images of Saints are not to be worshipped, because the Saints themselves are
not to be worshipped. The worship of Angels is expressly forbidden, Col. 2.18. and
the Angels themselves forbid it, Rev. 19.10. and 22.9. with this Reason,
because they are our brethren, and fellow servants: Much less the Sains, whose
greatest honor is to be but as the Angels. Mat. And the liveliest picture of
Christ is in the Scriptures, there he is painted before our eyes, Gal. 3.1. A
man may look upon a Crucifix as long as he lives, and never the wiser, never
the holier. In the Bible you have a speaking picture of Christ; in a distressed
brother, a living Crucifix; in the holy Supper, a more lively Image of his
death and passion, then any painter can devise, and show us those holy
Mysteries that a picture can never do.

Images, though not worshipped, yet are not useful but hurtful, in the place of
Gods Worship; the picture of Christ is so far from putting us in mind of him,
that it draws our minds from him, tying our imagination to a corporal object.
Few pray before an Image, but they pray likewise unto it, a secret belief
stealing into their minds, that when they look upon it they think it hears
them. August. Enarrat. in Psalm 113. And therefore another says, it is
Diabolicae deceptionis inventum, one of the Devils Arch-cheats.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Church.
Truth.
THe Church is the body of Christ, or the Church is the whole company of Gods
Elect called and gathered by his holy Word and Spirit out of all mankind from
the beginning to the end of the world, into one fellowship with Christ, and
communion one with another. And although many are called and but few chosen,
many are joined unto the Church that are not united unto Christ, hold outward
communion with the Saints that have no inward fellowship with the Son of God,
yet we are in charity to account all those for members of the true Church, that
are outwardly called, and accordingly make profession of the true Faith, until
the Lord the searcher of all hearts, who alone knows who are his, do make the
truth appear, as he shall do at the great day of his appearing.

Errors.
Adversaries to this truth are; 1. Those that say, there is no true Church upon
earth, as the Seekers do. 2. Those that would have the visible Church to be
void of sin and sinners, as the Anabaptists, Familists, Brownists, and all
Separatists. 3. That will have the true Catholic Church to be a mixed company
of good and bad together, as the Papists do. 4. The same Papists to the great
contumely and reproach of Christ advance their Pope to be head of the Church.
5. To uphold their Antichristian Synagogue, among many other they maintain
three special errors that are the very props and pillars of the same: sc. That
the Church cannot err: That the Church is always visible: That the Word and
Sacraments are not proper marks of the true Church. 6. The Anabaptists abuse
the communion of Saints in the Church, to bring in a community of goods in the
civil state, and make all things common.

The word, Church, Antidote
Church or Kirch we borrow of the Duch, among whom it is commonly taken for
Gotteshause, Gods house or the place of divine worship. It seems to come of
(...) or by contraction of (...) the Lords or the Lords house; the material
temple is Gods house: Joh. 2.16. Matthew. 23.21. and so are the Saints too: 1
Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.22. But the word that properly signifies the congregation or
assembly of the Saints, and is so often in the New Testament translated
[Church] is Ecclesia, and this also is applied by S. Paul to the place of
divine worship or meeting place: 1 Cor. 11.18, 22. The name of Church then is
not so peculiar to the Saints, but that it belongs also to the place of their
public meeting, and therefore they are much to blame, that make such a
needless ado about the word, in derision calling our Churches Steeplehouses etc.

But taking the word only for the assembly or company of the faithful, we
affirm,

Adam in Abel, Seth, Enoch, Noah, and their families, till Abraham; In his
posterity to Christ; and then the walls of the Church were enlarged by pulling
down the partition wall, and calling in the Gentiles: Matthew. 28.19. Acts 2.47.
Revel. 2. and 3. Churches were gathered and confirmed by the Apostles; men set
apart for the work of the Ministry; Acts 11. and 13. and those ^lso had
authority given them to sepa^ate and ordain others also to the same work: Tit.
1.5. and so to continue successively in all ages, as it has done to this day.
And now where the same Gospel is truly preached, the same Sacraments duly
administered, Believers professing the same Faith, and submitting to the same
ordinances, as at this day are in England, Scotland etc. there is a true Church
of Christ as was in the Apostles times.

Christ gave himself for it, Ephesians. 5.25. This is the Church of the first born,
who are written in heaven, Heb. 12.22. The body of Christ, Col. 1.18. The
household of God, Ephesians. 2.23, In which is no condemnation, and out of which is no
salvation: and of this Church, hypocrites or wicked men are not members; for
what fellowship has Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. 6.16. This Church is both
invisible and invincible; the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, Mat.
16.

Mat. 20 16 and hereunto belongs that parable of the tares, Mat. 13. whereby we
are warned, that although tares may grow, (i.) wicked men or hypocrites may
live in a visible Church, yet not to condemn it, or separate our selves as the
manner of some is, lest we forsake and condemn a company of Gods chosen, but to
esteem it for all that as a true Church, for the better or more principal part,
(i.) the Elect that are in it; even as S. Paul calls the Church of Corinth a
Church of God, though there were Heretics, Fornicators and incestuous persons
among them.

Col. 1.18. Ephesians. 5.23. And there can be none other, because none else can give
life, sense and motion to that body: and so the Pope cannot be head of the
Church: Not a temporal or secular head, because the kingdom of Christ, that is,
his Church, is not of this world: Not a spiritual head, because he cannot give
spiritual life and grace: Nor a ministerial head, because he cannot minister
the Word and Sacraments to all Churches in the world, neither does it to his
own pastoral charge; and there can be no other reason why he should be called a
ministerial head, but for this ministry. He cannot be the L^eutenant General or
Vicar of Christ: for a Lieutenant supposes the absence of him whose place he
holds: but Christ is always present with his Church himself; and so there is
no room for the Popes Vicarage.

Asia and Judea, who are now fallen and become no Churches, are sufficient
witnesses to this truth, that no Church on earth is privileged or freed from
error. Not the Church of Rome; specially being guided by such a head as the
Pope is, who being but a man, may err; that man of sin, and cannot but err:
most of their Popes for many hundred of years have erred, both in matter of
Faith and manners; their own Histories testify that they have been
Negromancers, Conjuers, Blasphemers, Heretics, Athiests, Adulterers,
Murderers, incestuous persons, etc. They have done and do sti^ deny Christ,
persecute his Church, condemn his truth, deride his Gospel, tu^ his holy
ordinances into ridiculou^ Mock-shews: and therefore the Church of Rome can no
longer juggle and hide her abominable errors under the pretended infallibility
of such a miscrea^^ 2. Although Christ has and ever had (...) Church visible
upon earth, some companies of Believers making profession of the same common
Faith, yet it hat^ and may come to pass, that either through the infirmity of
some that cannot discern it, the malice of others that will not acknowledge it,
or through persecution being driven into corners, the Church may lie hidden as
it did i^ the days of Elias, 1 King. 19.10. th^^ it may not be visible to every
eye: (...) the Papists ask then, where was the tru^^ Church before Luther and
Calvin, (...) the Roman Church were not it? We answer, it was in the
wilderness; and yet in those darkest times of Popery, it was not so
over-shadowed, but that the very flames of persecution did discover what and
where it was, plainly discerning the true sheep of Christ from those hellish
wolves. 3. The marks or notes of the true Church, are the same whereby it was
at first called and gathered, sc. the preaching of the Word and administration
of the Sacraments: those 15. substituted in their place by the Romanists, are
uncertain, and may most of them agree with a Synagogue of Satan, as well as a
Church of Christ, as Antiquity, Multitude, Miracles, etc. For that old Serpent
had a Synagogue from the beginning: and the primitive Church was a true Church
though not ancient: Christ's Church is a little flock; and Antichrist come shall
with lying wonders etc.



Object. It is said, Act. 4.32. they had all things in common.

Sol. It is answered Act. 5.4. whiles it remained was it not thine own? and
after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? The community spoken of was
only of things dedicated to the Churches treasury for relief of poor brethren,
there remaining still something to a man that was proper to himself, and a
liberty to retain what part he pleased, as is plain. For otherwise, if all
things were common, to what purpose are we exhorted to liberality? What need
Paul work with his own hands? or how could he be burthensom to any one, if all
things were common?

Lastly, Though the Church be but one, as there is but one Faith etc. yet it is
distinguished into Catholic or Universal and Particular: The Catholic so
called, because it comprehends the faithful of all times and places: the
particular named according to the place where that part is seated. The Roman
Church then is unduly called Catholic, because it is a particular Heretical
Church, neither universal nor orthodox: Those are mistaken and to blame that
call the Papists Catholics, because they profess not the Catholic faith, or
faith of the Catholic Church: neither is their Religion the old Religion, but
new and upstart, being a fardel of late humane inventions, not at all to be
found in any sacred Record.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Sacraments.
THe Sacraments are holy and visible signs and seals ordained of God, Truth.
the more fully to declare and assure unto us the promise of the Gospel. The
Sacraments of the New Testament are only two, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Adversaries are, 1. Errors.
Those Heretics both old and new that deny all Sacraments, saying they are of
no use in the Church. 2. The Anabaptists think, there is no other use or end of
the Sacraments, but only to serve as badges of our Christian Profession. 3. The
Papists say the Sacraments confer grace by virtue of the work done. And 4. That
there are seven Sacraments of the New Testament; and hold them accursed that
say there are fewer, or that they are not all truly and properly Sacraments
ordained by Christ.

Antidote
Although the name of Sacrament be not to be found in the Scriptures, yet we
find Mystery there, a word of the same signification; and the things themselves
were ordained by Christ in the Scriptures: Math. 28.19. Go teach all nations
baptizing them etc. Luke 22.19, 20. He took bread etc. and after supper took
the cup etc. saying, Do this in remembrance of me. And God has ordained the
Sacraments, not to be bare signs, but seals also and pledges to assure us of
the promises made in his Word; and so the Apostle Romans 4.11. calls
circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith: Not as if the Sacrament
gives strength to the promise as weak of it self, but as a seal confirms and
assures it to us.

to the inward understanding. Yet this is done, not by virtue of the work done,
or by uttering certain words, but by the virtue of Gods ordinance and power of
the holy Ghost working with the same. If the Sacraments did contain grace
essentially within them, as Medicine in a box, then indeed it might follow,
that by the outward work done grace should be conferred; but we see the
contrary; That invisible sanctification has been without the visible signs:
and again the visible signs have been given without true sanctification, Aug.
in Levit. qu. 84. as we see in the examples of Cornelius the Centurion and
Simon Magus. And therefore also though the Sacraments cannot be despised or
neglected (being Gods ordinances) without great impiety and unthankfulness
toward him, who by them has so tenderly provided for our weakness, yet they
are not so absolutely necessary to salvation, that without them it is
impossible to be saved; for God is above his ordinances, and can save us
without them. It is not the want but contempt of the Sacraments that is
dangerous and damnable: Bernard.

Some few signs for many were delivered unto us, and the same in doing most
easy; in understanding most holy; in observing most pure, as are Baptism and
the Lords Supper: August. lib. de Doct. Christ. c. 9. And therefore those five
other Sacraments reckoned by the Church of Rome are not Sacraments of the New
Testament, neither have any Warrant in Gods Word. For, 1. Penance and Matrimony
cannot be Sacraments of the New Testament, because they were in being and as
necessary both before and under the Law as now they are. 2. The use of
Matrimony belongs to Heathens as well as Christians. 3. The Papists contradict
themselves, for they accurse those that shall say the Sacraments are not
necessary to salvation: Council. Trident. Sess. 7. Can. 4. and yet debar their
Priests from Matrimony, which they account one of those Sacraments; and so
highly extol single life in all, as if there were no other way to heaven for
any. They say the Sacraments confer grace, and yet deny Matrimony to their
Priests, and so deprive them of that grace that Matrimony might confer upon
them, and so keep them honest.

CHAP. XXV. Of Baptism.
BAptism is the Sacrament of admission or entrance into the Church, Truth.
wherein by the outward washing or sprinkling of the body with water, the
inward cleansing of the soul from sin, thorough the sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ, and washing of the Holy Ghost is signed and sealed unto us. The
Baptism of Infants is in any wise to be retained in the Church as most
agreeable with the institution of Christ.

Adversaries; 1. Errors.
Some explode Baptism quite out of the Church, as some Heretics of old, and
now adays do. 2. Others allow it to folk of riper years, but deny it to
children, as the Pelagians did and Anabaptists do, and both upon the same
ground; some of them say it is an horrible abomination. 3. Some esteem of
Baptism as a thing indifferent. 4. The Papists say it is absolutely necessary
to salvation, that children dying without it are not saved. 5. Lastly, the same
Papists also abuse and adulterate this holy ordinance, adding to the element of
water, salt, spittle, oil, etc. using tapers, exorcisms and other silly
ceremonies, in number as they reckon 22. and also profane the same in applying
it to things without reason and life, as bells, banners, swords and daggers,
and that to bloody ends, etc.

Antidote
That Baptism was ordained and commanded by our blessed Savior is expressly
mentioned Mat. 29.19. whereunto is annexed a promise of salvation, Mark 16.16.
And therefore it ^s not a thing indifferent, because it is an ordinance of
Christ, nor yet absolutely necessary to salvation, as has been said before.
Baptism is called the lavacre of regeneration, Tit. 3.5. and Joh. 3.5. it is
said, Except a man be born again of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. not that any part of our Regeneration is ascribed to
water, but only by water the office of the Holy Ghost is declared; as also by
fire, Mat. 3.11. which some mistaking, did brand their children with a hot
iron. Though the outward washing of water then be not the very washing away of
sin, yet it is so called, the sign borrowing the name of the thing signified,
for the more forcible persuasion of our hearts, and stronger confirmation of
our Faith, that our eyes are not fed with bare signs, but presented with the
thing it self, and that our sins are as certainly done away by the blood of
Christ, as our bodies are cleansed by the washing of water.

To let pass those ridiculous toies of salt, spittle and other stuff used by
the Papists: the main difference at this day among us is concerning
circumstance of time. The Pelagians and Anabaptists deny Infant Baptism, and
both upon the same ground. With this Error of the Anabaptists, many godly
people are entangled, that are free enough from the rest of that pestilent
Sect. Their Reasons are, 1. Because there is neither precept nor example for
it. 2. Infants do not believe, but it is said. Acts 8.37. If thou beleevest,
thou may be baptized. Mat. 28.19. the examples are Acts 16.15, 33. and 1 Cor.
1.16. where Infants are included as part of the nations and households: and
although there be no express command for baptizing Infants, yet seeing also
there is no express exception, they must be baptized, or else those general
precepts and examples, including all, both Infants as well as men, are not
followed and observed. And if it be sufficient Reason against Infant Baptism,
that there is no express precept or example for it, then let the Anabaptists
themselves for shame leave off that shameful stripping and dipping their
proselytes, or else show me where they have any express command or example for
it. Ergo. Whosoever does not labor shall not eat. 2 These. 3.10. But Infants
cannot labor; Ergo. which belongs only to men of years. And indeed this latter
is the better of the two, because it has an express text for confirmation,
which the other has not. But to remove that rub of the Anabaptists out of the
way, concerning the Faith of Infants: We say, 1. That they have reasonable
souls, faculties of understanding and will, which are the seat of Faith, and
the weakness of the Organs cannot hinder the power of the Holy Ghost to work
Faith in them, if he please. 2. Without Faith there is no salvation; if Infants
then have not Faith, the Anabaptists must show some other way of salvation
besides Faith in Christ, or else conclude, that all Infants dying are damned;
but yet I hope they will not pass this cruel sentence upon them, unless they
provide a Limbus, or place of ease for them, as the Papists do. 3. Circumcision
is the seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.11. And yet it was
administered to Infants: Infants therefore ought to be baptized; and as good
reason there is to baptize as there was to circumcise them. 4. We have many
presidents of children that were regenerate and sanctified; as of Jeremiah,
John Baptist, etc. who were filled with the Holy Ghost from the womb: and if
children have the Holy Ghost, then they may be baptized. Act. 10.47. Can any
man forbid water, that these should be baptized who have received the Holy
Ghost as well as we? 5. Our Savior himself testifies in express words, That
Infants believe in him, Mat. 18.6, And that babes and sucklings confess him,
and bear witness unto his name. Mat. 21.16. And did grace them with many
favors, own them for the children of God, taking them in his arms, laying his
hands upon them, and blessing them, saying, That to them belongs the Kingdom of
God: Who then shall be so bold or impious to refuse and reject those that our
Savior himself received and embraced so lovingly, giving such gracious
testimoneis of them? with whom God entered into Covenant, as well as with their
parents. Genesis 17.7. And unto whom the promises of God were made, as well as
unto them? Acts 2.39.

But (say the Anabaptists) how shall we know that children believe? And (says
one) If I had a certificate from God, that a child believes, I would not stick
at his Baptism: Let them tell us, what infallible certificate they have for
men of riper years? And whether they do not plunge more hypocrites and
unbelievers in their floods, then we sprinkle at our fonts, is a question to be
made. But the Anabaptists contradict themselves, crossing one Argument with
another, overthrowing their own grounds, and destroying the foundation that
themselves have laid. As for their stripping, it is against common honesty and
modesty; and that dipping is not necessary to be used, is clear by their own
Argument, because they have no where one express word of command or warrant for
it: And also, the blood of Christ is called the blood of sprinkling, Heb.
12.24. And as it was typified under the Law by diverse sprinklings, so it is
expressed under the Gospel by sprinkling as well as dipping.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Lords Supper.
Truth.
THE Lords Supper is the Sacrament of Preservation in the Church; wherein by the
signs of bread and wine, are signified, sealed, and exhibited to every faithful
receiver, the body and blood of Christ, for his spiritual nourishment and
continual growth in him unto life everlasting.

Adversaries of old were many, that did either despise and refuse this holy
Sacrament, or abuse or profane it, either mingling, adding, or altering and
changeing the Elements, and substituting others in their places. But to let
them pass, at this day the principal Errors Errors.
are these three.

Antidote
The first is of Transubstantiation, and that holds, that after the words of
Consecration, and by virtue of the same, there is a conversion or turning of
the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, so that the very true and
natural body of Christ is corporally present and carnally eaten in the
Sacrament, the substance of bread and wine being vanished away, nothing
remaining thereof, but only the outward accidents to serve the senses. The
first occasion of this heresy seems to be given by the Capernaites, John 6.52.
but was confirmed under this title by the Council of Lateran, called against
Berengarius in the year 1215; and this is now the opinion of the Papists,
followed with many Blasphemies, Idolatries, and ridiculous Mummeries.

The second is of Consubstantiation, invented by some, who, to shun the
absurdities of the former opinion fell into worse, affirming, That the
substance of bread and wine, and of the body and blood of Christ, are jointly,
or both together, bodily present, and eaten in the Sacrament; the body of
Christ being in, with, and under the bread. The first Author of this opinion,
and the time when it began is uncertainly reported; and although it were long
before Luther, yet it was taken up in haste by him about the year 1525. is
still maintained by his followers, and gave occasion to continue that bowing
and cringing that was lately used to the Communion Table.

The third is of bare figure, and only signification, affirming, That in the
Sacrament there is nothing but bread and wine, bare signs, and no other
presence of Christ's body but only in figure and signification; so that the
faithful receive nothing but naked and bare signs. The foundation of this
Error was laid about four hundred years after Christ, by some Heretics, that
came as short of this mystery, as the Capernaites went too far, making no
account of this Sacrament, saying, that it did neither good nor hurt. This
Error was set on foot again by Carolostadius, a rash-brained man, about the
year 1524. and is now followed by the Anabaptists.

Antidote
The doctrine of our Church Art. 28. is the same that the Apostle delivers, 1
Cor. 10.16. To all the three Adversaries together we say; If there be nothing
in the Sacrament but bare signs, why does our Savior say of the elements, This
is my body, and this is my blood? And S. Paul, The bread which we break is the
communion of the body of Christ. If his body and blood be not there at all? And
if his body and blood be there corporally and carnally, present, even whole
Christ, why then does our Savior say, Do this in remembrance of me? And St.
Paul, Ye show forth the Lords death till he come? 1 Cor. 10. And St. Peter,
That the heavens shall receive him to the end of the world. Acts 3.21. Refusing
then and denying, both Transubstantiation, and Consubstantiation, as more then
our Savior intended in these words (This is my body, etc.) And also bare
signification as a great deal less; we admit and acknowledge Transmutation, or a
change, and that great and mavelous, in the use of the Elements; not in
substance, but in virtue, power and operation. The sanctified signs are, in
substance, creatures; in signification, mysteries; in operation, the things
themselves, whose names they bear; the change is in their operation and use,
and therefore also in their names: For Christ has honored the Symboles with
the names, or appellation of his body and blood, not changeing their nature,
but adding grace unto nature. Theodoret in Dial.

In the Sacrament then, there must needs be more then bare signs, or naked
Elements, for how should earthly bread be an Instrument of heavenly grace and
life to quicken and strengthen the soul, but by some great and mavelous
change? which change is not in the substance of the creatures, but in their
virtue, power and operation; and such virtue, power and operation could not be,
unless the very body and blood of Christ were truly present, truly given, and
truly received in the Sacrament: And yet the body and blood of Christ is not
present, given or received corporally and carnally; the bread and wine being
turned into the body and blood of Christ, as the Papists affirm: For, 1. It is
contrary to the Scripture, 1 Cor. 11.28. Where after consecration they are
called bread and wine. 2. It overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, for where is
no Element, there can be no Sacrament. 3. It is contrary to nature it self,
that an accident should be without its subject. 4. Experience daily shows, that
the Elements by continuance corrupt, by eating nourish the body, go down into
the belly, etc. which cannot be said of accidents, or of the body and blood of
Christ. 5. A carnal eating is unavailable to salvation, (by the Papists own
confession) unless it be done by Faith; but receiving by Faith without carnal
eating is available. Council. Trident. Sess. 13. c. 8. et Cat. Romans Why then is
it contended for? Lastly, It is contrary to their own Canon taken out of St.
Augustine. Can. Vt Quid.

This is my body, the night before he dyed, no time to utter dark Parables, but
plain words.

This is my blood, Mark 14.23.24. If you understand it literally, then the cup
and not the wine must be turned into blood: but if here be a plain figure,
(their subtilest Doctors cannot tell how to avoid it) then why not a time to
speak in figures? Why not (This is my body) a figure too?

But when our Savior says, This is my body, he does not intend to show what
the bread is, but what his body is; not that the bread is turned into his
flesh, but that his body is food for our souls, even as bread is for our
bodies: It shows not any conversion of one substance into another, but only the
relation that is between them. He which before called his body bread, John 6.
does now call the bread his body, that by this change of names we might
understand and believe the change that is made by grace; and not so much heed
the things we see, as mind the the things we see not. Theod. Dialog. 1.

Why do thou prepare thy teeth and thy belly? This is no meat for the belly,
but for the mind; believe and thou have eaten. Augustine in Joan. Tract. 25. ad
cap. 6.

2. Consubstantiation is farther from the truth then Transubstantiation;
neither so possible nor probable: It is not so likely or agreeable to our
Saviors words, who says, This is my body, and not, my body is in, with, or
under the bread. And yet they are both gross Errors, and the occasions of
gross Idolatry. They are both far from our blessed Saviors meaning, when he
spoke the words, This is my body, from the Apostles sense. 1 Cor. 11. From the
Judgment of the Ancient Fathers, who call the elements, signs, figures, types,
etc. of the body and blood of Christ: and particularly St. Augustine says, the
words (this is my body) are to be understood in a figurative, not a litteral
sense. l. 3. de Doct. Christ. And besides they are impossible in nature.

But setting aside that barren opinion of bare sign and figure, the question
between us and the rest is not about the substance of the thing; for we
confess, That the very body and blood of Christ is given and received; all the
question is about the manner: they say it is corporally and carnally; we grant
indeed it is really, if by really you understand truly, and indeed, but yet
that it is spiritual, heavenly, and divine: The matter of the thing present the
Apostle shows plainly, 1 Cor. 10.16. But for the manner of presence, we have no
such evident demonstration. To conclude, the truth is present with the signs,
the Holy Spirit with the Sacrament, feeding our souls with the truth of Christ's
body and blood; but the invisible working of that Divine Spirit herein is
unsearchable, the natural man cannot perceive it, because it is spiritual: Let
us firmly believe then what we cannot conceive, and rest assured in this truth,
that we receive in the Sacrament the very body and blood of Christ by Faith,
though we cannot conceive it by sense or reason.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Reformation.
Truth.
THere is no particular Church on earth, and never was so privileged, but that
it may and many have fallen into dangerous Errors both of life and doctrine, as
the examples of all both former and latter times have witnessed; so that there
is no Church consisting of men that may err, but may need Reformation, even as
a material building does need often reparation. And for as much as many
horrible abuses and superstitions were lately brought, through the
deceitfulness of some, into the Church of England, to the great dishonor of
Almighty God, the decay of piety, and imminent ruin of the true Protestant
Religion, therefore this present Reformation was extremely necessary; and is no
Innovation, but a Restoration only of our Church to its ancient purity of
doctrine, discipline and divine worship, as it was established by the noble
Princes K. Edward 6. and Q. Elizabeth of famous memories.

Although this truth be as clear as the light, Errors.
as shall immediately be made appear, and that this present Reformation has
cast out many gross abuses, that contrary to the determinations of our Church
have been lately put upon us, yet there are diverse adversaries that either out
of malice, or ignorance, or both, do still with all their might oppose it: And
so I shall reduce them all under three heads: The first is of those that do it
of pure malice, as all lewd and dissolute persons, who hate all reformation
whatsoever, that shall hedge up their extravagant ways, and give a check or stop
to their loose courses; among these we may reckon some Papists and other
Sectaries. The second is of those that do it of mere ignorance, as diverse civil
Protestants, that think no Religion so ancient as that they were bred in; and
strangely mistaking Churchmen for the Church, take up most of their religion
upon their credit. The third sort do it of malice and ignorance both; as diverse
fiery spirits, that think there is no way to reform the Church, unless they
pull it to pieces, as if there were no way to cure the headache but to knock a
man's brains out. There be also diverse hypocrites that can drive on a
reformation for their own ends and advantages, and yet are as great enemies to
the truth of it as any of the former.

Antidote
I shall endeavor to satisfy the honest Protestant, that is engaged against the
reformation for want of better information, and would soon perhaps embrace the
truth, if he were not courted with so many lies, by deceivers that abound in
the world. The common complaint and cry is, for the Religion that was in Queen
Elizabeth's time again. And that we have not now the same Religion. The Answer
in brief is, that we have the same Religion still, not a new. And that the true
Protestant Religion which was then professed, is now, not altered, but settled,
being restored to its pristine purity, and purged from many abuses wherewith it
was but lately corrupted. As,

First, Many Popish and Arminian tenants were taught and publicly maintained,
that are contrary to the doctrine of our Church at first established, as will
appear by comparing them with the 39. Articles and the book of Homilies; the
nine Articles of Lambeth, and other learned writings of our former Bishops.

Secondly, Many Crucifixes, Images or Idols were set up in our most eminent
Churches, and most eminent places of them; and that partly by connivence,
partly by command of men, at that time of most eminent place and note, whereby
Superstition was nourished, and Idolatry committed. But now these Images are
contrary, 1. To the Word of God, expressly forbidding them: 2. To the judgment
of the ancient Christians, Fathers and Councels, with great zeal condemning
them: And 3. of our own Church of England, as in the book of Homilies and 39.
Articles may be seen.

Thirdly, The Communion Table was altered both in name and place; from a Table
to an Altar; from the body of the Church to the head or upper end of the
Chancel, contrary to express order s^t down in the book of Common Prayer,
before the communion; where it is said, that the Table shall stand in the body
of the Church or in the Chancel, and the Priest shall stand at the north side;
which he cannot do if he stand close up to the wall: And if it might be placed
according to the discretion of the ordinary, yet he must have more discretion
then ordinary that will make the end of a table the side, as one endeavored to
do but that his Geometry failed him.

Fourthly, The Bowing used to the Communion Table, was a matter of worse
consequence then was commonly imagined; It is the attendant on
Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation; It serves to nourish those Errors
still in men's minds; ushers in many other Popish superstitions, and is the
occasion of gross Idolatry.

Fifthly, The rails, wainscot, and traverse courtains before the Table, as if
it were the Sanctum sanctorum of the Jews, or a Chapel intended for private
Mass; or as if none were holy enough to approach near it but the Priest: also
the Tapers, Copes, Vestments, and many other things, lately used, though they
seemed but small matters to some, yet they were not the less dangerous for
being little; for like little thieves they crept in at our Church windows to
open doors to the great ones: and if these had continued, by this time they
would have brought in the whole Mass of Popish Idolatry; and those that plead
for them, are but the devils pimps that seduce the people, and under the name
of things indifferent would lead them a whoring after Idols.

Hereunto we may add that horrible abuse of Excommunication, the highest
censure of the Church, that in the Courts Christian was made a messenger to
fetch in fees; and men were cast out of the Church for not coming into the
Court: to say no more. Lastly, They err as much on the other hand, and are to
be condemned, that scornfully or basely abuse the Church and places set apart
for the use of Gods Ordinances, which is seldom done but in open or secret
contempt of the ordinances themselves. Let them among other examples remember
that of Julian uncle to the Apostate, who in contempt pissed against the
Communion Table: his bowels rotting out, he voyded his own excrements at his
mouth. Our own times have not wanted like examples of man's impiety and Gods
judgment. But leaving them to their nasty stables etc. although we know God
does hear us in all places when we call upon him, yet that decent places be set
apart and beautified with comely ornaments, is very fit and becoming such holy
duties and services.

There is one main rub yet that many stumble at, and that is the strict
examination of communicants, and suspension upon some causes from the holy
communion: to remove this, let them understand it is no more but the duty of
the Minister formerly enjoined by the Orders of our own Church, as is to be
seen in the book of Common Prayer: and therefore is no innovation.

These things and the like duly considered, we may see the Error of many, who
under the name of the Protestant Religion, do most of all oppose it: and think
to establish the Church of England with those Engines that will utterly destroy
it. Let all true-hearted Protestants consider these things, and as they love
the Church of England their Mother, vindicate her quarrel against those that
have so basely abused her; those crafty chapmen that under the name and
authority of the Church of England, have cheated the people with those
counterfeit stuffs, that the Church of England never commended but condemned.

If there be any other alteration in our Church then what ^^th been mentioned,
It is not of any sub^^^^ce, but some circumstance: there is no alteration in
the body, but in the apparel: An eminent Doctor of our own says (I am sure no
friend to Novelism) that Clerical habits and vestiments are not the body, but
swaddling clothes of Religion; and we know there is a time to leave off such
things. And so all other Ceremonies were judged alterable by those that first
ordained them. As the Philosopher said of his son, Scio me genuisse Mortalem;
so they knew their decrees when they made them were not Median-Persian Laws,
but that they might and must be altered, if after times should see as good
reason to remove these Ceremonies, as they themselves did to remove many
before. See the Prefaces to the book of Common Prayer.

But the Bishops are put down, and that is a great blot to the Reformation. But
tell me, did stately Palaces, great attendance, and lordly titles, agree with
the poverty, meekness, humility of our Savior, whose servants they profess
themselves? And for a farther trial of the lawfulness of these things, a trial
that will not deceive. Let a form of prayer be drawn, and ther^ (...) a
complaint unto Almighty God for ^^ese things, and a supplication to restore
them particularly, and by name, and let me see who dares go into the presence
of God with such a prayer in his mouth? Things lawful and conscionable we may
with comfort pray for: but those things that a man's conscience dares not pray
for, his own conscience condemns for unlawful.

But the Church is trodden down, her lands and goods embeziled, etc. that is
the Bishops Lands, etc. still a shrewd mistake. If they are taken from them,
and restored to the right owners, that every Church may have its proper
maintenance, and they enjoy the means that take the pains; is this sacriledg or
Justice? And what was it when the Bishops, etc. held and enjoyed so many tithes
and profits, properly belonging to other poor Ministers, that were Church men,
as well as themselves, and took care of the Churches? So much of their means as
is not this way due to others, may well be employed to settle a more useful
Ministry, as the present necessities of the Church every where require.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Toleration.
THough the Heathen had infinite Gods almost, and as many several Religions,
Ceremonies, and forms of worship, yet we never read of any contention among
them about any difference of Religion; the Reason was, because the Gods of the
Heaven (as one says) were goods fellows, and content to share that glory
amongst them, that was none of theirs; but the true God is a jealous God, and
cannot endure a partner of that glory, that is properly his own. And therefore
there can be no greater Argument against the Sectaries, that they are not of
God, then their great desire of Toleration of all Religions. But Joan. Vlt. a
small Error is sharply taken up; it may warn us, not to suffer the least
Error, though not fundamental; for, tares, if suffered to grow, at last will
pluck down the wheat. We must follow St. Paul's example, Gal. 1.5. Who would not
give place to false brethren, no not for an hour, that the truth of the Gospel
might continue. So we must not give place to any Errourist: But as the Apostle
says, Tit. 1.11. Their mouths must be stopped, because their words eat like a
canker. 2 Timothy 2.17. And though small at first, yet will eat out the very heart
and life of all Religion at last.

FINIS.

