CERTAIN SELECT DISCOURSES On those most Important Subjects, requisite to be
well understood by a CATECHIST In laying the FOUNDATION of Christian Knowledge
in the Minds of Novitiates, Viz. First, DISCOURSES on I. The Doctrine of the
TWO COVENANTS both LEGAL and EVANGELICAL. And, II. On FAITH and JUSTIFICATION.


By WILLIAM ALLEN.

SECONDLY, DISCOURSES ON I. The COVENANT of GRACE, or Baptismal Covenant, Being
Catechetical Lectures on the Preliminary QUESTIONS and ANSWERS of the
CHURCH-CATECHISM. II. Three CATECHETICAL LECTURES on Faith and Justification.


By THOMAS BRAY, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by S. Hawes in the Year MDCXCIX.

TWO DISCOURSES, The FIRST of the NATURE, ENDS and DIFFERENCE OF THE TWO
COVENANTS.

And the SECOND, A PRACTICAL DISCOURSE ON FAITH: SHOWING The Nature and
Difference of that Faith which is Justifying, and that which is Not; and the
Reason of that Difference.

By WILLIAM ALLEN.

THE PREFACE.
THE following Discourse upon the NATURE ENDS and DIFFERENCE of the TWO
COVENANTS, may be well reckoned the Opus Palmare of the Judicious Mr. WILLIAM
ALLEN, though nothing came from the Pen of that very judicious Writer, which
may not be esteemed among the best in its Kind. And even in his Polemick
Discourses such was his Discretion and Temper, that every Thing he spoke was
very convincing, but never provoking; so that he had the Happiness which few
Controvertists enjoyed, that even his Adversaries would not mention him without
Expressions of Esteem. But the Character I had from two most Excellent and
Learned Bishops, not many Years since deceased, of the subact Judgment of this
truly Great Man, and particularly as it appeared in this Tract of the TWO
COVENANTS, were sufficient with me to value with a particular Regard, whatever
came from him, and This in a more especial Manner.

The learned Bishop Williams who had been intimate with him, said of him, That
though be was the most candid Person living, and never heard him pass harsh
Censures of Men and their Writings; yet such was that Awe with Respect to him
which the greatest Men in those Times, as well as himself, found upon their
Spirits, that whenever they gave Dr. Tillotson a Turn at his Tuesday's Lecture
at St. Lawrence, if they should happen to cast an Eye upon Mr. ALLEN in the
Congregation, they could not help being under some Concern, lest an Expression
should drop out of their Mouths which could not bear the Test. And the Reverend
Bishop LLOYD being asked his Opinion concerning the Reprinting this Discourse
of the TWO COVENANTS; He advised it with these Words; By all Means: It was that
Tract of Mr. ALLEN made me a Divine.

I never met with the Person who did not easily allow this Excellent Prelate to
be the greatest Scripturist perhaps of any Age. A Man indeed like Apollos
mighty in the Scriptures. And this Tract of Mr. ALLEN is a Key of excellent Use
to the Opening of them, as it discovers in the different Oeconomies and
Dispensations of the Law and the Gospel, the Aim of God in both to be the same;
Namely, the selecting to himself a Church out of the wicked World, and the
tying the same in the closest Bonds of Allegiance to him by Covenant; but yet
by such, as though different in Appearance and Circumstances, according to the
Difference of Times and Persons, yet agreeing in the main Design of Erecting
and Preserving a Church to God, and the Salvation of Men through one Mediator
Jesus Christ. And that the Old and New Testament are but as distinct Editions
of the same Covenant in Substance.

The Occasion of Printing it in Folio after a former Edition in 8vo. but before
all his Works were collected in folio, was to prefix it to the Lectures on the
Preliminary Questions and Answers of the Church Catechism, the Subject of the
Baptismal Covenant, to which this of Mr. ALLEN, 'twas thought, would be the
best Introduction. And that they would most naturally cohere together, the one
treating upon that great and comprehensive Subject, the Doctrine of the
Covenant in general, the other of the Covenant of Grace into which we
Christians are baptized in particular. And both Tracts were bound up together
to be bestowed into the Parochial Libraries then begun, and which God be
praised still continue to be dispersed, so far as the Stock of Books will
reach, in some of the poorer Livings throughout the Kingdom.

The Design of these Parochial Libraries is to supply the Ministers in such
mean Cures as will not enable them to furnish themselves with Necessary Books.
To supply them, I say, with the Means whereby they may be enabled to declare
unto the People, both by Preaching and Catechizing, the whole System of
Christian Doctrine, so as to be able with St. Paul at their Departure, whether
by Death, or Cession, to call them to Record that they have not shunned to
declare unto them the whole Counsel of God, Acts 20, 27. And as in a Scheme of
such Libraries the Books ought to be adapted to the whole System, and the
several Parts thereof; so they could not be formed upon a better Plan, it was
supposed, than that of the Two Covenants; and more especially the Covenant of
Grace, or Baptismal Covenant; On the Nature, Terms and Conditions of the same,
both the Mercies on God's Part, and the Conditions to be performed on ours; On
the great Mediator and Mediation by which it was obtained for us; by what
Assistance and Means we shall be enabled to perform it; under what sacramental
Seals we entered into it; and lastly, on that Repentance after Breach of
Covenant, whereby alone we can be re-instated in the Divine Favor.

Under these Heads is comprehended the whole System of Saving Doctrine, at
least of Catechetical, according to that best Plan thereof ever exhibited by
any Church, Ancient or Modern, the Catechism of the Church of England. And the
same in a more enlarged Manner ought to be the Subject of the Concionatory
Scheme. But though it be infinitely desirable with Regard to the Eternal
Salvation of both Minister and People, that the former should not shun both in
the Catechetical and Concionatory Method thus to declare unto them the whole
Counsel of God; and in thus doing, they will no doubt be judged to have duly
fed the Flock of Christ which he purchased with his Blood, and over which the
Holy Ghost has made them Overseers; Acts 20, 25. yet how is it possible,
humanly speaking, to do this without the Help of Books? And those not a few; as
would appear when the several Articles of Christian Faith necessary to be
believed included in the general Summary thereof, called the Apostle's Creed,
come to be considered; more especially when the vast Series and Chain of Duties
of the Christian Life necessary to be practiced, shall be drawn out into a View
of the Particulars. Each of the former requires particular Explanations and
Proof, and of the latter particular States of their several Natures, together
with proper Application. And as often entire Tracts are written upon the
several Points both Doctrinal and Moral: How can it be expected any Minister
should sufficiently discharge his Duties by thus instructing them without the
Supplies of such Books written on the several Subjects both general and
particular? No: it is not possible out of the mean Profits of most Parishes,
scarce sufficient to provide the mere Necessaries of Life, he should be capable
to buy himself such necessary Helps! It was for these Reasons thought a great
Work of Piety, or Charity to the Souls of Men, not the least wanted in this
Nation, where there are more Cures of Souls unprovided of necessary
Maintenance, than in any Established Church perhaps throughout Christendom, to
furnish as many as possible with Parochial Libraries. Some of which though
slenderly provided of Books at first, may probably in time become well
replenished. And as such Parochial Libraries are formed in the main Part
thereof, the Didactical, on the Plan of the Doctrine of the Covenant considered
both in its general Nature, and its particular Terms, both Mercies on God's
Part, and Conditions to be performed on ours; on the Means by which we shall be
enabled to perform our Covenant Engagement; On the Seals of the Covenant; and
on Repentance after Breach thereof: And the first general Doctrine in such
Plan, being the Doctrine of the Two Covenants, on which Subject Mr. ALLEN
having written so judiciously in the following Tracts, as not to be omitted in
any one Library; and is therefore so material an Ingredient in the whole
Collection: so it was thought not improper here to give some Account thereof,
and with what View it has been published, so as to appear Introductory, as it
were, to all that follows.

As to the Discourse on Faith annexed to his Discourse on the Two Covenants;
that also has its peculiar Excellency, as coming from the Pen of so judicious a
Person. And being so stated by him as not to exclude Conditions in the Covenant
necessary to be performed on our Part, in order to our Justification through
CHRIST, is very requisite to be perused in order to the better understanding
the Covenant it self, and was therefore annexed by the Author himself to his
former Discourse on the Two Covenants.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Nature, Ends, and Difference OF THE Two Covenants.
THE mistake of the unbelieving Jews, about the true import of God's Promise to
Abraham, and of the Law of Moses, was a principal cause of the rejecting Christ
and his Gospel, and their own Salvation thereby. To rectify which mistake, the
Apostle St. Paul used various Reasonings, according to the various Errors
contained in it. In which Reasonings of his, there being some things hard to be
understood; there are others again which probably mistaking the Apostles
reasonings against the Jewish Notion of Justification by Works, ran into a
contrary Extreme, thinking they might be Saved by Faith, without Works; as on
the conrary, the incredulous Jews thought they might be Saved by Works, without
Faith. And if many in our days had not run into somewhat alike Extreme, through
a misunderstanding also of the Apostles Writings, labor and pains would not
have been so necessary, as now they are, to rectify their mistake, and to
prevent it in others. To the end therefore that the plain Truth may the better
appear, touching God's Promise to Abraham, touching the Law of Moses, and the
Apostles arguings about these; I shall very briefly endeavor these seven
Things.

I. To open the Nature and Design of God's Promise to Abraham, And to show. II.
For what end the Law was added to the Promise. III. By what Faith and Practice,
the Jews under the Law were saved. IV. That the Law contained a Covenant,
different from that with Abraham. V. The grand mistakes of the unbelieving
Jews, and St. Paul's counter-arguings, touching both the Law and the Promise.
VI. The Mistake of some pretended Christians in the Apostles days, Touching the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith, without Works. VII. That the Doctrine of
St. Paul, and St. James, about Faith and Works, in reference to Justification,
do not differ. I shall begin with the first of these.
CHAP. I. The Nature and Design of God's Promise to Abraham.
I Shall endeavor to open the Nature and Design of God's Promise to Abraham:
Which Promise is also called the Covenant, Act. 3.25. Gal. 3.17. In doing of
which, these eight things will come under consideration. 1. What the Nature of
this Promise is in general. 2. What the Design of it is. 3. What are the
special Benefits promised. 4. What the Extent of it is. 5. The Security given
by God for the performance of it. 6. That this Promise was Conditional. 7. What
the Condition of it was. 8. What we are to understand by God's accounting
Abraham's Faith to him for Righteousness.

Sect. 1.
Of the Nature of it in general. This Promise I take to be of the same nature
with that, which in the Gospel is called the New Covenant. It Is true indeed,
they greatly differ in the Administration; the one being but general,
implicit, and obscure; and the other, more particular, express, and
perspicuous. But though in this they differ, yet in their general nature, they
agree in one, and are the same. For, 1. This Covenant, as delivered to Abraham,
was confirmed in Christ, as well as the Gospel afterward, Gal. 3.17. and
that is a Character of the New Covenant, Mat. 26.28. 2. The Gospel is said to
have been Preached to Abraham in the Promise that was made him, Gal. 3.8. 3. He
was justified by Faith; which he could not have been, but by virtue of a
New Covenant: And it was by Faith in the Promise made to him by God, by which
he was justified: Which two things supposed, it necessarily follows, That that
Promise was of the Nature of the New Covenant. 4. St. Paul argues against the
erroneous Jews, in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, the necessity of
Evangelical Faith unto Justification now under the Gospel, from Abraham's being
justified by Faith, and from God's setting him forth for a Pattern and Example
to all after-Ages, of his justifying both Jews and Gentiles upon the Condition
of Believing. The strength of which arguing seems to depend upon this
supposition; That the Promise, by the belief of which Abraham was then
justified; and the Promise in the Gospel, by the belief of which Men are now
justified, do both agree, and are one in the general nature of them. And upon
these grounds, and under this notion of the Promise to Abraham, I intend to
discourse of it.

But when I consider for what reason he that is least in the Kingdom of God, is
said to be greater than John the Baptist, (though not Abraham himself, nor any
of the Prophets were greater than he) and when I consider likewise, how
ignorant the Apostles were for a time, touching the necessity of the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, notwithstanding the many plainer Revelations thereof in
the Prophets, than we find Abraham had; I cannot, I confess, think that Abraham
had, or could have a distinct notion of all that was contained and implied in
the Promise, as now it is opened and unfolded in the Writings of the New
Testament, it does appear was wrapped up in it. And therefore, though I think I
may well found a Discourse of the New Covenant, upon the Promise made to
Abraham, as it is now explained in the New Testament, yet I would not be
understood to suppose Abraham's apprehension or Faith to have then been
commensurate to the Promise, as it is so explained.

Supposing then the Promise to Abraham to be the New Covenant it self, in a
more imperfect Edition of it than afterward came forth; I shall now a little
farther consider what it was, and what the New Covenant is, and ever has been,
in the general nature of it, since it first commenced. And it is a new Law or
Covenant, made by way of Remedy against the rigor and extremity of the Law of
Nature, under which Man was Created. For the Law of Nature, the Law of God's
Creation, as well as his Instituted Law in Paradise, being violated, and
impossible to be kept inviolable by Man in his Lapsed state, by reason of his
moral Impotency, and the Pravity of his Nature derived from Adam; he must
inevitably have sunk and perished under the Condemnation of it, unless there
had been a new Law instituted to supercede the procedure of this Law against
him, in its natural and proper course. If Salvation had been attainable by Man
in his Lapsed state, without this remedying Law of Grace, there would have been
no need of a New Covenant. If there had been a Law given which could have given
Life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law, Gal. 3 21. But there
was no such Law given besides this New Law. Nor could the Original Law be
repealed for the relief of fallen Man, it being founded in the nature of God, and
the nature of Man, as he was created after God's own Image; and is no more
changeable, than the nature of Good and Evil are changeable. And therefore, as
I said, there was a necessity that Man must have Perished under the
Condemnation of the Law of his Creation, as the lapsed Angels did under theirs,
unless a Law of Indemnity had been Enacted. But God, whose tender Mercies are
over all his Works, to the end so great and considerable a part of his
Creation, as Man is, might not be wholly lost and undone to all Eternity, out
of his infinite Compassion, Mercy, and Love, did constitute a New Law or
Covenant for Man's Relief, (which well may be called the Covenant of Grace)
against the rigor and extremity of the first Law.

Which new Law was in some degree, though but obscurely, made known to Man not
long after Adam's Fall, or else there would have been no ground for that Faith
which we are assured was in Abel, Enoch, etc. Heb. 11. But it was doubtless
somewhat more fully declared to Abraham than to any before, and at last
completely established and published by Jesus Christ the Mediator of it, who
was given for a Covenant to the people. And this new Law, in the last Edition
of it under the Gospel, is variously denominated; being called, the Promise,
the New Covenant, the Law of Faith, the Law of Liberty, the Gospel, the Grace
of God, or the Word of his Grace. And so we come.

Sect. 2.
To consider what the design of God was in this New Covenant or Promise unto
Abraham. Next to his own Glory, it was to recover the humane Nature from its
degenerate state, to a state of Holiness, to that likeness to God in which Man
was at the first made, and therein and thereby to a state of Happiness, both
which were lost by the Fall. Holiness, Love, and Goodness, as they were once
the Glory and Happiness of Man before he lost them, so are still perfective of
his Nature. And therefore it is impossible, in the nature of the thing, to
recover Man to Happiness, without recovering his Nature to a conformity to God
in these; or for Man to be perfectly Happy, whose Nature is not perfected in
them. Sin is the Disease and Sickness of the Soul; and it is as possible for a
Sick Man to enjoy the pleasure of Health, as it is for the sinful and corrupt
Nature of Man, while such, to enjoy the pleasure, which the humane Nature did
naturally enjoy, or was capable of enjoying in its Innocence and Purity. But
when the Nature of Man is once recovered to perfection in Knowledge, Holiness,
Love, and Goodness, it will then be matter of unspeakable delight to him, to
love God, Angels and Men, and to do the will of God in every thing. It is so to
the holy Angels: And it was so to our Blessed Savior, who counted it as his
meat and drink, to be doing the will of his heavenly Father. And to what degree
the Nature of Man is here in this World restored toward its proper perfection,
to the same degree it is matter of pleasure and delight to him, to act holily
and righteously, and to be doing good; It is joy to the Just to do judgment,
Prove. 21.15. It is a pain to a Man to act contrary to the bent and inclination
of his Nature, by compulsion, or fear. And therefore unless the corrupt Nature
of Man were changed, Heaven would not be Heaven to him, in case he were there.
Those Divine and Heavenly Exercises which are there the unspeakable delight of
Saints and Angels, would be his Pain and Torment, as being contrary to his
Nature; and the pleasures of that state, as having not what will satisfy the
unsatiable lust of Man's corrupt Nature, would not be such to him, but add
rather to his anguish. For, as it would be a Torment to a Man to be in
e^tremity of Hunger and Thirst, and to be without Meat and Drink, and all hopes
of any to satisfy him: So will it be a grievous Torment to the corrupt Nature
of Men in another World, to retain their lusts, and the violent cravings of
them, and yet to be without all hope of having wherewith to satisfy them
(which yet is like to be the condition of Men in Hell.) Here Men's unnatural
Lusts are not such a Torment to them, because they can make provision to
satisfy them, or live in hopes so to do; and in the mean while drown the noise
of them, by diversion. But in Hell it will be quite otherwise. And therefore
it is easy to imagine, that the Torment which will arise from the corruption of
Men's Natures there, will be unspeakably great, besides the piercing sense of
the Happiness they have lost, and the other intolerable pains which they must
endure; and therefore, as whoever has not his Nature renewed in this World, is
never like to have it renewed in another; so without renewing of it, it is
impossible he should be happy there. Except a Man be born again, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3. That is, he cannot enjoy it, and why? It is not
only from God's Decree, or established Law to the contrary that he cannot, but
also from the utter incapacity of his Nature, as corrupt. Wherefore, all the
Vessels of Mercy are such as God aforehand prepares unto glory, Romans 9.23. They
are such as are made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light, Col. 1.12. Such as God has wrought for the self same thing, 2 Cor. 5.5.
So that, as I said, there is a necessity in the nature of the thing, that if
God would design the Restoration of the Nature of Man to Happiness, that in
order thereto he should design a Restoration of it to Holiness, as indeed he
has. He has chosen us to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, 2
These. 2.13. And therefore the end of Christ's great undertaking for the
Redemption and Restoration of Man, is described, by his saving his People from
their sins: By his redeeming them from all iniquity, and purifying to himself a
peculiar People zealous of good Works. By his washing and sanctifying of them,
that he might present them to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing.

That this was the design of God's Promise to Abraham, appears, in that at the
very first it was propounded to him by way of Motive, to quit the Idolatry of
his Fathers, and the evil Customs of his Country (for they served other Gods,
Josh. 24.2.) Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy Kindred, and from thy
Father's house; and I will make of thee a great Nation, and thou shall be a
blessing, and in thee shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed, Genesis
12.1, 2, 3. In which, God had a farther design than to reform Abraham only: His
design in him, and by him, was to set on foot the Reformation of the World, and
the recovering the Nations thereof from the dregs of Idolatry into which they
were sunk. And therefore God said unto him, Thou shall be a Blessing. And this
he designed, not only in giving him a numerous Issue, and making them a great
Nation, whose Education in the Worship of the true God was founded in Abraham,
but also in making both him and them eminent Examples of his special favor in
the sight of the Nations, by which they might see how much better it was to
serve the God of Abraham, than the Gods of the Nations: And thereby to invite
and draw them from their Idolatry, Superstition and Ungodliness, to Worship and
Serve the true God. And God in promising to Abraham, both the Messiah in his
Seed, and also that he would bless them that should bless him, and curse them
that should curse him, and that his Seed should possess the gate of his
Enemies; had, it should seem, this in design, viz. to encourage and quicken
them to a holy Life, Luke 1.72, 73, 74, 75. To perform the Mercy promised to
our Fathers, and to remember his holy Covenant: The Oath which he swear to our
Father Abraham, that he would grant unto us; that we being delivered out of the
hands of our Enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him, all the days of our life.

But besides all this, considering that the Promise made to Abraham was the
New Covenant as it was then exhibited, (as I have showed before) the benefits
therein promised had a proper tendency in them, to restore Man again to a
likeness to God in the Moral perfections of his Nature. For the great and
precious Promises contained in the New Covenant as such, are given for this
very end, that by them we might be partakers of a Divine Nature; the glory
whereof, is knowledge, purity and charity, 2 Pet. 1.4. And for God by such
Promise to make overtures unto Man of Love and Good Will, and of desires of
Reconciliation, is the direct way and method of recovering fallen Man from a
state of enmity against God, to a mind reconciled to him, to think well of him,
to love him, and delight in him. For we love him, because he first loved us, 1 John 4.19. And God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself; and how? by
not imputing their trespasses to them; but being willing, upon their repentance
and returning to their duty, to forgive them, 2 Cor. 5.19. God uses the same
way of overcoming Man's enmity against him, which he has taught us to use to
overcome Man's enmity against us; and that is, by overcoming their evil with our
good, Romans 12.21. David dealing so with Saul, though a bitter Enemy, melted him
into Tears, and made him cry, Is this thy voice, my son David? 1 Samuel 24.16.
And, to whom much is forgiven, the same Person loves much, Luke 7. 42, -- 47.
And if God by these methods do once recover Man's love to him, he will quickly
recover him to his loyalty and duty; of which, Love is the proper Source and
Spring. If a Man love me, he will keep my Words, Joh. 14.23. Now that God's
Promise to Abraham, did contain expressions of wonderful grace and love, and
consequently, what is most apt to beget in Man a love to God again, and all the
desirable effects of it, will appear, if we consider the special benefits
comprehended in that Promise; which is the third thing now to be considered.

Sect. 3.
The special benefits contained in the Promise made to Abraham, were such as
these.

1. It contained a Promise of the Messiah, a Promise of sending Christ into the
World, and that he should come of his Seed: In thy Seed shall all the Nations
of the Earth be blessed, Genesis 12.3. and 18.18. and 22.18. which Seed is Christ,
as is said, Gal. 3.16. And in this Promise of sending Christ, were employed the
things he was sent for, the things by which he should bless the World, as his
Death and Resurrection, and what else pertained to his Mediatory Office;
because these are the things by which the Nations of the Earth became blessed
in him, which was the thing expressly promised. That such things were employed in
the Promise, appears not only by the reason of the thing, but also from St.
Paul's Testimony, Acts 13.32, 33. We declare unto you glad tidings, how that
the Promise which was made unto the Fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto
us their Children, in that he has raised up Jesus again. I do not say, that
Abraham, from a Promise that was but so generally expressed as that was, could
apprehend in particular what the Messiah should both do and suffer, though they
were wrapped up in it. He apprehended so much by it in general, that God Would
send the Messiah into the World, and that he would send him upon such terms, as
that his coming should be matter of great benefit to the World. Abraham had
such a prospect of this, though at that distance, as made him rejoice and be
glad: So says our Savior himself, John 8.56. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to
see my day; and he saw it, and was glad. And the Promise to Abraham, as it was
a Promise of sending Christ to be the Savior of the World, was expressive of
the greatest love. For in this was the love of God manifested toward us,
because God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live
through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4.9, 10. A
Propitiation for our sins: That is, one that by his Death has procured favor,
having taken off that sore displeasure which God by his Law had declared
against all the transgressors of it. For the wise and just God, did not think
the Righteousness of his Government; and the Honor and Reputation of his Law,
would be sufficiently saved, and his great hatred of Sin sufficiently
manifested, without some considerable satisfaction given for the dishonor done
to Him and his Law by Man's Transgression. And yet that this might not be
exacted at the hands of the Guilty, in executing the Curse of the Law on
themselves; he was most graciously pleased to accept of the Sufferings of his
own dear Son, instead of what the sinners themselves were to have undergone. He
has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, Gal.
3.13. Christ suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, or in their stead, 1
Pet. 3.18. Upon account of which undertaking of Christ for us, all the benefits
of the Covenant do accrue to Man. Whatever is required of Man by way of
condition of his acceptance with God, becomes accepted to that end, upon
account of Christ's suffering. And his Intercession in Heaven, through which
all our sincere (though otherwise imperfect) performances, become acceptable to
God, and rewardable by him, is made in the virtue of it. For the whole Covenant
itself, is founded in the Blood of Christ, which he shed for the remission of
sins. Therefore it is called the New Testament in his Blood, Mat. 26.28. And
his Blood, the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, Hebr. 13.20.

2. It contained a Promise of Justification or Remission of sin through Christ,
unto all that should so believe, as thereupon to repent of their former folly,
and become sincerely obedient for the future. For that is necessarily employed
in the Promise of Blessedness to the Nations in Abraham's Seed; it being
impossible Men should be Blessed without Remission of sin, which consists in
removing the Curse of the Law, in remitting the penalty. Blessed is the Man
whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered, Psalm. 32.1. St. Paul
acquaints us that this Blessing of the New Covenant, was declared to Abraham in
the Promise, Gal. 3.8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the
Heathen through Faith, preached the Gospel before unto Abraham, saying, In thee
shall all Nations be blessed.

3. It contained in it tacitly, a Promise of Divine Assistance unto Men in
their endeavors to fulfill the condition of the Promise. For God in promising
Blessedness to the Nations through Abraham's Seed, therein promised all that
was absolutely necessary for him to vouchsafe to make them blessed, and without
which they could not be blessed. And if so, then he therein implicitly promised
to assist the endeavors of Men to perform the condition of the Promise,
without the assistance of whose Grace they cannot savingly Believe, Repent, and
Obey. And so it should seem the Old Testament-Church understood God's subduing
of sin, as well as his pardoning of sin, to be comprised in the Promise to
Abraham, Mich. 7.19, 20. He will subdue our iniquities; and thou will cast all
their sins into the depths of the Sea: Thou will perform the truth to Jacob,
and the mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn to our Fathers, from the days
of old. And Christ his turning Men from their iniquities, which he does
accomplish by appointing them means, and by assisting them in the use of them
to that end, is part of the Blessing contained in the Promise made to Abraham,
and was so reckoned by St. Peter, Act 3.25, 26. Ye are the Children of the
Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers, saying unto
Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. Unto
you first God having raised up his Son Jesus Christ, sent him to bless you, in
turning every one of you from his iniquities.

4. It implicitly, or somewhat obscurely contained in it a Promise of Eternal
Life. I say, implicitly; For I do not find that Eternal Life was expressly
promised to Abraham. But yet that was expressly promised him, from which the
hope of Eternal Life might well be inferred: As first, Blessedness through his
Seed, the Messiah: And secondly, That God would be a God to him and his Seed.
For Blessedness is a Happiness that runs parallel with the duration of Man's
Immortal Soul. And God's Promise of being a God to Abraham, carried in it a
Promise of a Happiness worthy of God to bestow, such as Everlasting Life or
Happiness is. And therefore he was not ashamed to be called their God (meaning
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) because he had prepared for them a City; meaning
that in so doing, he had answered that title of relation of being their God,
and done like himself Heb. 11.16. And upon these and the like Revelations of
God's mind to him, Abraham looked for a City which has Foundations, whose
Builder and Maker is God, and a Heavenly Country, Heb. 11.10, 16. If Abraham
did but use his reason about these Promises, as he did about reconciling God's
Promise, that in Isaac his Seed should be called, with his command to Sacrifice
him, ( Heb. 11.17, 18, 19.) he might discern Eternal Life in them, though but
very obscurely, in comparison of what is now revealed in the Gospel, by which
Life and Immortality is brought to light, 2 Timothy 1.10. But how obscurely soever
a future Happiness was promised to Abraham, yet promised it was, for which we
have the testimony of St. Paul, Gal. 3.18. If the inheritance be of the Law, it
is no more of Promise: But God gave it to Abraham by Promise. He was here
proving against the Pharisaical Jews, and Judaizing Christians, that
Justification unto Life, was to be had by the Promise, and not by the Law; by
Faith, and not by Works of the Law; that the Just should live by Faith, as
verse. 12. And therefore by Inheritance here, which he says God gave to Abraham
by Promise, he doubtless means Eternal Life, which elsewhere he calls the
Promise of eternal Inheritance, Heb. 9.15.

Consider now, how God carried on his design of restoring Man by the promise of
those benefits. For if expressions of the greatest Grace and Love in God to
Men, is the way to beget in them a love to God again, and in begetting that, to
beget all the desirable effects of Love; (which are no less than a sincere
conformity in Man's Nature and Life to the Divine Law) and if the giving of
great and precious Promises, is the way of recovering Man again to a
participation of the Divine Nature, (as I have showed it is) then the Promise
of God to Abraham, which was expressive of the greatest Grace and Love, and
contained in it Promises, than which there are not materially greater, nor more
precious, was a wise and gracious contrivance of God, to recover Man to a
likeness to himself, wherein the glory and perfection of his Nature did first
consist.

Sect. 4
The next thing to be considered, is, the extent of the Promise of God to
Abraham. The greatness of God's Love and Good Will, was not expressed only in
the greatness of the benefits promised to Abraham, but also in the extent of
the Promise; reaching not only to the Jewish People and their Proselytes (to
which another Covenant was restrained) but even to all Nations of the Earth,
Genesis 12.3. and 22.18. Which shows it to be of the same nature with the general
Promise in the Gospel, though it was not so intelligible then, as it is since
made by the Gospel. But God, we see, so loved the world, as first to promise,
and after to give his only begotten Son, that whosoever should believe in him,
should not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3.16. Christ gave his life
for the life of the world, Joh. 6.8. He is the propitiation for the sins of the
whole world, 1 John 2.2. He gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. And
tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9.

Sect. 5.
Consider we in the next place, the Security given by God, for the performance
of his Promise to Abraham and his Seed. For because men knowing how ill they
have deserved from God, having made themselves Enemies to him, would be apt to
question whether there were indeed so much Love and Good Will in God to them as
the greatness of his Promise did import; therefore God, to remove all jealousy
of this nature, and to give them the greatest security and assurance he could,
of the reality of his intentions, and of his heart and good will toward them,
confirmed his Promise by an Oath, swearing by himself, because he could swear
by no greater. And this he did that they to whom the Promise did extend, might
have strong consolation from God, such as might work in them strong and
vigorous affections to him such as were in Abraham, through which he was
wrought to an entire resignation of himself to God, and to his will, and by
which he was denominated the Friend of God, Heb. 6.17, 28. Wherein God willing
more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise the Immutability of his
Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath: That by two immutable things, in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation, who have fled for
refuge, to lay hold of the hope set before us.

Sect. 6.
The next thing I have to show, is, That this Promise of God to Abraham, was
Conditional. If the Promise of sending Christ was Absolute, yet the actual
collation of the great benefit of Remission of Sin, and Eternal Life by him,
was not promised but upon condition of Faith and Repentance, as appears by the
Scriptures frequent explanation of the general Promise. Abraham believed in the
Lord, and it was counted unto him for righteousness, Genesis 15.6. If Abraham had
not believed God, he had not been justified notwithstanding the Promise. So
that this Justification depended as well upon his performing the condition of
the Promise, as upon the Promise it self. And when God said to Abraham, Walk
before me, and be thou upright, and I will make a Covenant with thee, Genesis
17.1. The Lord made Abraham's upright walking before him, the condition of his
keeping, as well as making Covenant with him. Besides, it is apparent that God
made Circumcision to be the Covenant to be kept on Abraham's and his Seed's
part, as the condition of what God had promised on his part, Genesis 17.4, 7, 10.
As for me, my Covenant is with thee, etc. Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore, thou and thy Seed after thee in their generations. And this is the
Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, every Man-child among you
shall be circumcised. By which is to be understood, not so much Circumcision in
the Flesh, as in the Spirit; as I shall show anon.

And the truth is, it would not suit with God's end and design in his Covenant,
of restoring Man to the rectitude of his Nature (mentioned before) to do it
without Man's endeavors in the use and exercise of his natural faculties, of
Understanding and Will, as he is a rational Creature and free Agent. For God
works that change in Man's nature, designed in his New Law or Covenant, not
merely Physically, but Morally also. 1. By proposing great and important Truths
to his Mind and Understanding, and in assisting this natural faculty, in
considering how his happiness is concerned in that which is proposed, in case
it should prove true, and in considering likewise what reason there is to
believe that it is true, and in discerning the truth of it upon consideration.
And, 2. By proposing Motives to the Will, to incline it to follow the dictates
of the enlightened mind, and by assisting the Will to be governed thereby. So
that Man himself is not wholly passive in this change, or what goes to the
making of it; but is so far active in it, as to denominate what he does by
God's assistance, to be his own act. So that the Man is said to Believe, to
Repent, to obey, when he does believe, repent, and Obey: For so he is every
where in Scripture said to do. God does not repent in Man, but Man repents
through his grace and assistance. And therefore God's grace, and Man's
endeavors in working this change are very con^istent. Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out
your own Salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God which works in you
both to will and to do of his good pleasure. If Man do but what he can do,
through the assistance of God's common Providence, (in whom we Live, and Move,
and have our Being) God is most ready, through his good Pleasure, or out of the
goodness of his will and pleasure, to work in him both to will and to do
savingly, to carry the work quite through. Otherwise, if there were nothing that
Man could do in a way of common Providence toward his Salvation, why should he
be exhorted and persuaded to do that, which yet will not be done to effect and
quite through, without the Assist^nce of God's Grace and good Spirit? The
Cooperation of God's grace with Man's endeavors, in this change in the nature
of Man, which is necessary to his Salvation, is a Doctrine that lies very fair
and plain in the Scriptures. And therefore Men are called upon to make
themselves new hearts, Ezekiel. 18.31. Make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit, for
why will ye dye, O house of Israel? And God is said to make them new hearts
also, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I
put within you. Men are called upon to circumcise their own hearts, Deuteronomy.
10.16. And God is said to circumcise the heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Men are required to
cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. And
they are also said to be washed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor.
6.11. Men are commanded to repent, Acts 17.30. And God is said to give them
repentance, 2 Timothy 2.35. Acts 5.31. It is by reason of this Cooperation of
God's assistance, and Man's endeavors, that St. Paul expresses himself as he
does once and again, Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I
live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me, 1 Cor. 15.10. I labored more
abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me He
does not by these last words so deny what he had said in the former, as if he
had not spoke true, for he speaks the same things in effect in another place,
without any such correcting himself, as here he uses, 1 Cor. 3.9. For we are
laborers together with God. And therefore by his so correcting himself,
saying, Not I, but the Grace of God which was with me, he only intends to
magnify God's Grace, as having the principal stroke in the work. It is a
phrase of like import with that, 2 Cor. 3.10. For even that which was made
glorious, had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excels.
So Man's endeavor though it be somewhat in it self considered, yet
comparatively, and in respect of the work of God's Grace by his Spirit which
excels it is nothing. Therefore, in fine, as Men are said through the Spirit to
mortify the deeds of the Body, Romans 8.13. So they may be said through the same
Spirit, to Believe, Repent, Obey; that is, through the assistance of the
Spirit, who is said to help our Infirmities, Romans 8.26.

Considering then that there is promise of divine assistance to Man using his
endeavors in doing what he may, and can do toward the performing the
condition of the Covenant, we may well conclude, that there is no Man under the
Gospel does perish, but through his own fault and neglect. It is true, God does
sometimes for special reasons meet with, and convert sinners with a high hand
of Grace, whilst they are pursuing their sins in a full career, and using no
endeavors at all toward their own Salvation, as he did Saul before he was
Paul. But such extraordinary instances are no Rules to us, by which to judge of
God's ordinary proceedings in converting Men: Nor has the Lord put Men in
expectation, by any promise of his, of their being converted after that manner,
and upon such terms. And therefore it will in no wise be safe for any Man to
expect to be converted by such extraordinary workings of Grace, and to neglect
to do what he can do, and what God requires he should do, toward his own
conversion.

There are many things which Men may, and can believe, and do, without any
Supernatural Grace, and by virtue of God's common Grace. It is no Supernatural
Act to believe the Being of God, and the Immortality of the Soul, or future
state: Or to know that we are sinners against God, and consequently that we
stand in need of his Mercy: Nor is it a Supernatural Act for a Man to desire
the future happiness of his own Nature or Being; or to hear the Word of God,
which directs the way to that happiness; no more than it is to hear any other
Doctrine, that only pretends to do so. Nor is it a Supernatural Act to consider
the Doctrine of the Scriptures with as much seriousness, as Men do, or may, the
contents of any other Books. Nor is it a Supernatural Act to consider how we
are concerned in the Doctrine of the Scriptures, in case it should prove true:
No more is it a Supernatural Act seriously to consider the strength and force
of those Reasons that tend to persuade Men to believe that Doctrine to be true:
Nor, under the natural desires which Men have to be happy in another world, is
it a Supernatural Act for them to pray to God to direct and assist them in the
use of means, that they may be happy. These I take to be no Supernatural Acts
in Men. For though the depraved Will of Man needs Special or Supernatural
Grace to do these so seriously and effectually, as is needful to true
Sanctification, yet in some sort and measure they may be done by common help.
And if Men would but go thus far (as they can) out of a real desire to be
happy, I should make no question but that the Spirit of God would yield them
his assistance to carry them quite through in the Work of Conversion. And
whither our Savior does not by the Hearers, resembled by the good Ground, mean
such Men as before their Conversion have some such Working of Heart about their
future state, as does incline them to hear and consider what with any fair
probability may be said about the way to be happy in that state, and not to
hear out of Curiosity, or for fashion-sake, or to carp, I submit to
consideration.

It is doubtless then Men's Inconsideration, Carelessness and Negligence in
those things which they do Believe, and which they can do, that undoes them. It
is because seeing, they see not, and hearing, they hear not; which is the
reason why more is not given, but rather that taken away from them which they
had. That is, The reason why God withholds his special Grace, and many times
with draws common Grace and Assistance from Men, is, because though they have
understanding and considering Faculties, which they could (if they would) use
and employ about their being happy in another World, as well as they do about
their happiness in this, yet they will not, though they are frequently called
upon, and excited thereto: Whereas, those that take heed or consider what they
hear, and how they are concerned in it; to them more shall be given: God will
come into such with Supernatural Aid, Mark 4.24. And therefore God, to put Men
upon a holy necessity of complying with his Grace, in acting diligently toward
the working out their own Salvation, has wisely made the obtaining of the
great Benefits of the Covenant, Remission of Sin, and Eternal Life,
Conditional; so that Men can have no farther assurance of pardon of Sin, and
Salvation, than they are sure they sincerely endeavor to perform the condition
on their part, upon which they are promised. Wherefore, we are greatly
concerned to be awakened by such Sayings as these; Strive to enter in at the
strait gate: So run, that ye may obtain: Use all diligence to make your calling
and election sure: Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling: Let us
therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his Rest, any of
you should seem to come short of it.

Sect. 7.
I come now in the next place to show, What the condition of the Promise to
Abraham was. In short it was a practical Faith. And under this Head, I shall
endeavor, 1. To give some account of the nature of Abraham's Faith in general.
2. To describe Faith. And, 3. To show reason, why Faith is made the condition
of the Covenant.

1. The condition of the Promise to Abraham, was Faith, and (as I shall after
show) a practical Faith. For that was it upon which the great Blessing of the
Covenant, Justification, was conferred upon him, with the consequent benefits.
In Genesis 15.6. it is said of Abraham, that he believed in the Lord, and he
counted it to him for righteousness. But St. Paul reciting this Scripture,
faith, Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for Righteousness, Romans
4.3. Gal. 3.6. If there be any difference between believing God, and believing
in God, it seems to be this. To believe God, is to believe him upon his Word,
to believe all that to be true, which he says when he has once spoken it. But
to believe in God, is first, to believe him to be such an One, of such a
Nature, as neither will, nor can at any time speak any thing but what is true:
It is to believe him to be a God that cannot lie. For all true Faith, as
Abraham's was, is founded in the Nature of God. Abraham did primarily believe
in God, and consequently believed his Sayings, of what nature soever they were.
And, secondly, To believe in God, is to believe that he can, and will perform
whatever he promised, how unlikely soever the thing in its own nature otherwise
be. And this was the nature of Abraham's Faith, as appears by St. Paul's
Comment upon it, Romans 4.20, 21. He staggered not at the Promise of God through
unbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving glory to God: and being fully
persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able also to perform. He gave to
God the glory of his Nature and Being, of his Truth and Faithfulness in his
Promises, and of his Power and Ability to perform what he had promised,
notwithstanding its utmost improbability in Nature. And therefore, or for this
reason, his Faith was imputed to him for righteousness, as we are told in ver.
22. of Romans 4. And so it should seem it is not the believing of any one
particular or single Promise, that is counted for Righteousness, otherwise than
as it is an instance of Faith in God in general, in reference to whatever he
does say, or shall declare. Which may be the reason why Faith is said to be
counted to Abraham for Righteousness, as well when he had not the Messiah in
the Promise as the immediate Object of his Faith, but somewhat else, as when he
had. The Promise, the believing of which was counted to Abraham for
righteousness, in Genesis 15.6. was a Promise of a numerous Issue, [So shall thy
Seed be] viz. as numberless as the Stars. But that which produced a Belief of
this particular Promise, would, and doubtless did, produce in him a belief of
the promise of the Messiah and of every other Promise and Word of God, and
declaration of his mind, so far as understood by him, and that was an habitual
belief of God's Truth, and Faithfulness, Wisdom, Power and Goodness; his fixed
belief in God. And so a believing God's Threatenings, so as to use means to
escape them, is (it should seem) counted to one for Righteousness, as well as
the belief of the Promises, as growing upon the same Root. Thus Noah's
Believing God's threatening to bring a Deluge upon the World, and his Obedience
to God's Command, in the preparing an Ark for the saving of his House, was
that, or at least one instance of that Faith, by which he became Heir of the
Righteousness which is by Faith, Heb. 11.7. It was this general Faith in God
that made Abraham so compliant with every intimation of his will and pleasure.
By it he forsook his own Country and Kindred at God's command, to go he knew
not whither, but depended on God's after-direction in that case, Heb. 11.8. By
it he was ready to offer his Son Isaac, in whom the Promises were made: And he
had such a firm Belief in God's Promise, That in Isaac his Seed should be
called, that he concluded that God would raise him from the Dead, when he had
Sacrificed him, rather than fail in the least of making good his Promise, Heb.
11.17, 18, 19. He had such a confidence in God; that is to say, in his Wisdom,
Goodness, Truth, and Power, as wrought him to an entire Resignation of himself
to God's will and pleasure. He believed God to be so Good and so Wise, as not
to put him upon any thing, but what should be for his good in the issue: And so
True and Powerful, as to promise nothing but, what he could, and would perform.
In a word; this his Belief in God, made him believe all his Promises, and obey
all his Precepts.

2. Come we next to some description of that Faith, which is the condition of
the Promise, or Covenant of Salvation: Wherein I shall have respect to the
nature of Saving Faith in general, in reference to all Ages of the Church, and
also to the Christian Evangelical Faith in special. Faith, strictly taken, is
an assent unto the truth of any Proposition, upon the credit of the Speaker.
But Saving Faith is of a more comprehensive nature, than is a mere assent unto
the Truth of any one Proposition. And although Saving Faith is sometimes
described by an assenting to the truth of one single Proposition, yet then it
implies the belief of many more, and such a belief as draws in the Will to act
according to the import and concernment of the thing believed. As for instance:
The Belief of this Proposition [That Christ Jesus is the Son of God] by which,
Faith is sometimes described, does include in it a belief of the truth of his
whole Doctrine, both concerning God's Grace, and Man's Duty, and the Will's
concurrence, as to its concernment in it. For, if he be the Son of God, then he
cannot lie or deceive in any thing he has said. And again, the belief of this
Proposition [That God raised Christ from the Dead] by which Faith is also
described, Romans 10.9. includes in it a belief, That all that Doctrine which he
taught, is undoubtedly true: For if it had not, God would never have wrought
such a Miracle, as to Raise Christ from the Dead, to confirm it. The belief
then of such single Propositions, include a belief of the whole Doctrine of the
Gospel, which is the proper Object of the Christian Faith, and for that cause
is frequently styled Faith, or the Faith, in the New Testament.

But if we respect the nature of Faith in general, as answering the different
degrees of God's Revelation of his Will in several Ages of the World, both
under the Gospel, and before; I do not know how better to define it, than thus:
Faith is such a hearty belief of God's Declaration, concerning his own Grace,
and Man's Duty, as does effectually cause a Man to expect from God, and to act
in a way of sincere Obedience, according to the Tenor and Import of such a
Declaration. Or, if you will take in the Belief of God's Threatenings against
sinners into the definition; then it will be thus: Faith is such a hearty
belief of God's Declaration concerning his own Grace and Displeasure, and Man's
Duty, as does effectually cause a Man to expect from God, and to act in a way
of sincere Obedience, according to the Tenor and Import of such a Declaration.
Faith thus defined, we have already seen exemplified in Abraham, who is the
great Exemplar of Believing, and the Father of Believers. And that it was his
belief of God's Promise, or Declaration of Grace and Favor to him, as it is
practical in producing Repentance, Self-denial, and sincear Obedience, by which
he was justified and made happy, appears farther, not only in that it is said by
St. James, That his Faith wrought with his Works, and was made perfect by them,
and that he was justified by Works, as well as by Faith, (of which more anon)
but also in that it is said, that he received the sign of Circumcision (which
was the Condition upon which God Covenanted with him to be his God, and upon
the same terms to be the God of his Seed) a Seal of the Righteousness of the
Faith which he had, while he was yet uncircumcised. For supposing (which is not
denied) Circumcision to be an outward Sign of inward Grace, of the Circumcision
of the Heart, consisting in Mortification, or a Penitential change of the
Heart, which is the effect of Faith, his Circumcision, as such, was a Seal of
confirmation to Abraham, that it was upon his former so believing God upon his
Promise, as thereby to be induced to leave the evil Customs of his Country, and
his Country it self, with his Kindred, and his Father's House; that God would
be his God indeed: In which Promise was implicitly promised, all that would
make him Eternally Happy. And God's farther design of giving to Abraham this
Covenant of Circumision, as a Seal to assure him the enjoyment of the benefit
wrapped up in that Promise upon the terms aforesaid, was, that he might be the
Father of all them that Believe, whether literally Circumcised, or not; that
is, that he might be a great Example and Pattern to all others, of obtaining
the same benefits, in the same way; and so might be a means of begetting others
to Believe in God, and to Obey him, as he had done; to be a great Instrument to
propagate the kind of New Creatures, of Men renewed to God, to the end they
might be Blessed, as he was. This, or somewhat to this effect, is doubtless the
meaning of Romans 4.11, 12. And he received the sign of Circumcision, a Seal of
the Rightousness of the Faith which he had, being yet uncircumcised: That he
might be the Father of all them that Believe, though they be not circumcised;
that Rightousness might be imputed to them also: And the Father of Circumcision
to them who are not of the Circumcision only, but also walk in the steps of
that Faith of our Father Abraham, which he had, being yet uncircumcised; and it
is not unlikely, but that as Heart-Circumcision, under the figure of
Literal-Circumcision, was, together with Faith, made the condition of the
Covenant then; so Spiritual Baptism, which is a Death unto sin, and a living
unto God, is under the Figure of Water Baptism, joined with Believing, as the
condition of the Promise of Salvation, now. Mark, 16.16. He that believes, and
is baptized, shall be saved. According to which St. Peter having spoken of
Noah's Ark, says, The like figure whereunto Baptism now saves us; not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21. Now, as it was in Abraham, such a belief of God's
Declaration of Grace and Favor, as did effectually induce him to Love and Obey
God, by which he was Justified, so (I shall show afterward) it was the very
same kind of Faith, working after the same manner, by which the Saints, under
the Law of Moses, were Saved.

But Faith, as Evangelical and Christian, is such a hearty assent and consent
unto God's Declaration in the Gospel by his Son, concerning Christ himself, and
his Grace and Favor toward Men by him, and concerning their own Duty, as
causes a Man to expect from God, and to act in a way of duty, according to the
Tenor of such a Declaration, and his own concerns in it. And Faith, thus
defined, is fully agreeable to the Tenor of the Gospel: Mark 16.15, 16. Go ye
into all the world, and Preach the Gospel to every Creature: He that Believes,
and is Baptized, shall be saved. He that believes What? Why, he that believes
that Gospel which was to be Pre^^hed to every Creature. Which Gospel contains a
Declaration of God's ^^^^e, and Man's Duty, and of his Wrath against all
Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men. For, 1. It declares from God that he
has given his Son Jesus Christ to be the Savior of the World, by being a
Propitiation for the sin o fit, in becoming a Sacrifice to expiate sin. 2. It
declares, That God, upon account of his Son's giving himself a Ransom for all,
has made, and does establish a New Covenant with the World, to Pardon, and
Eternally to Save as many as shall Believe in his Son, and Repent of their
sinfulness, in changing their Minds, and reforming their Lives, and becoming
New Men, in yielding sincere Obedience to the Precepts of the Gospel. 3. It
declares, That those that believe not, shall be damned; and such as repent not,
shall perish; and that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
This summarily is that which the Gospel declares concerning God's Grace and
Displeasure, and Man's Duty.

Now it is the practical belief of all this, that is the saving Faith. It is
not the bare belief that God has given his Son to be the Savior of the World,
and a Propitiation for the sin of it: Nor is it a bare belief that he will for
Christ's sake pardon and save as many as truly Repent and amend their lives,
and become New Creatures; unless they so believe all this, as seriously and
heartily to Repent themselves of their former folly, and to return to their
duty in new Evangelical Obedience. For otherwise, for a Man barely to believe
all this, and not act according to his own concerns in it, will be so far from
being a believing to the saving of the Soul, as that it will rather plunge him
the deeper in Destruction, for living and acting contrary to his own light and
belief, as holding the truth in unrighteousness; the wrath of God being
revealed from heaven against all such, Romans 1.18.

A Man of this practical Faith which I have described, eyes as well the
condition upon which the saving Benefits are promised through Christ, as the
Promise it self of those benefits; and expects the enjoyment of those benefits
upon God's Promise and Christ's Purchase, no otherwise, than as he, with the
assistance of God's Grace, is careful to perform the Condition. Which belief of
his, makes him as careful to perform the Condition in discharge of his own duty
therein, as ever he hopes to enjoy the promised Pardon and Salvation by Christ,
and to escape the Damnation threatened against those who perform not the
condition. So that a Man by this practical Faith, belives one part of God's
Declaration in the Gospel, as well as the other; and his own duty to be as well
necessary to his Justification, as the condition appointed by God, as the Grace
of God, through Christ, it self, is upon another account: And by this belief,
he is effectually moved, as well to act in a way of duty to God, as to expect
mercy from him; considering how his Happiness is concerned in both, when he
has the whole of God's Declaration in all the parts taken together, in
prospect, as the Object of his Faith.

When he hears, that God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life. When he hears, that God has set forth Christ to be a Propitiation
through Faith in his Blood: And when he hears again, that God was in Christ
reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; he
believes all this to be true, as coming from God that cannot lie; and
accordingly, is encouraged to hope in God's Mercy, and is comforted thereby.
But then when he hears again, that except we repent, we shall all perish; that
except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God: That without
holiness, no man shall see the Lord; and that the pure in heart shall see God:
That not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the will of the Father which is in Heaven: That the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angles in flaming
fire, to render vengeance to all those that know not God, and which obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: But that he is the Author of eternal
Salvation to all those that obey him. I say, when he hears all this, he as
verily believes this part of God's Declaration in the Gospel, to be the
faithful and true Sayings of God, as he acounted the other to be. And
accordingly, does as seriously, and sincerely set upon the Work of Repentance,
and as carefully uses God's appointed means for the changing of his Heart, and
renewing of his Nature, for the purifying of himself, as God is pure; and does
as carefully obey all the Precepts of the Gospel; as he hopes upon the account
of Christ's Sufferings, and God's Promise, to be Pardoned and Saved; as
beliving that those Benefits are neither promised, nor can be obtained, but in
this way of performing the Condition. And I doubt not to say, that this
practical Faith, as it respects God's Declaration, touching Man's duty, in
conjunction with his own Grace in Christ, is, where the Gospel comes, the only
saving justifying Faith.

3. Come we now to show Reason, why Faith is made the Condition of the Promise.

1. It is of Faith, that it might be of Grace, says the Apostle, Romans 4.16. It
is that the Grace of God to miserable Men, might the more show it self. For so
it does, not only in promising unspeakably great things through Christ to Man,
who is not only undeserving, but illdeserving also; but also, in that these are
promised upon such a possible, practical, easy Condition as Faith is,
considering the means and assistance promised by God to work it: And
considering also, that the Promise is made to the truth, unfeignedness and
sincerity, and not to perfection of Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience, in
their utmost degree. So that Christ might well say, my Yoke is easy, and my
Burden light, Matthew. 11.30. Whereas the old way of promising the Inheritance on
the Law-terms, would have been to have promised it upon impossible conditions,
as the case now is with fallen Man. And if God should have promised never so
great things to Man, in his impotent and miserable state, upon an impossible
condition, he would have been so far from manifesting abundance of Grace,
Compassion, and Love to him in that condition, as that he would rather have
seemed to insult over him in it. And therefore, if the Promise should have run
upon the Law-terms, and not of Faith, it would utterly have frustrated God's
design of manifesting his Grace to Man, and of recovering Man's Love and
Loyalty to him thereby. Romans 4.14. If they which are of the Law be Heirs, Faith
is made void, and the Promise made of none effect. But it is of Faith, that it
might be by Grace, to the end the Promise might be sure to all the Seed, not to
that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the Faith of
Abraham, ver. 16.

2. This may be another reason, why such a Faith, as I have described, is made
the condition of the Covenant of Salvation, viz. Because it, best answers God's
design in this Covenant, of renewing the Nature of Man in Holiness and
Righteousness, and by that means restoring it to Happiness. For, by Faith Men
are born of God, or made the Children of God. Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the
Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. Joh. 1.12, 13. As many as received
him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to those that
believe on his Name. Which are born, not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Now, to be born of God, or, which is
the same, to be made the Child of God, is to have ones Nature restored to the
likeness of God, in which Man was first made, and is the same thing with that
which is called Regeneration, and a being born again, and a new Creature. Which
new Creature, or the Nature of M^n renewed by Faith, is also called the new
Man, which after God, is created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians.
4.24. To be born again, is to have the Faculties of Man's Nature restored to a
rectitude in their motions and operations, in reference both to God and Man, to
be restored to their proper moral use for which they were made. It is, in a
word, that which is called a being made partakers of a Divine Nature. For those
which are begotten of God, are begotten in, or to his likeness. Men can adopt
those which are not their natural Children to inherit their Estates, but they
cannot adopt them to a participation of their Moral Endowments. But God adopts
his Children to a participation with him in the Inheritance, by adopting them
to a participation of the Moral Perfections of his Nature; that is, to a
consimilitude to him in them.

And this we say is done by Faith; that is, by Faith in God, and by Faith in
his Word. For, in order of Nature, God is first believed to be a God of Truth,
before his Word is believed to be the Word of Truth. And the creditableness of
his Word depends upon the knowledge or belief or the fidelity of his Nature.
And this Truth of God, and of his Word, is the immediate Object of Faith. By
Faith, a Man believes that to be true, which God reveals or declares as his
Mind and Will, let the Import of it be what it will. But then, this Faith
operates upon the Will and Affections, according to the Tenor and Import of
that which is Revealed. If it be matter of sad import, it works a hatred to him
that threatens it, and a fear of the thing threatened, if it be apprehended to
proceed from an enemy. And this is the effect of the Faith of Devils, who
believe, and hate God, who believe and tremble, Jam. 2.19. But if that which is
Revealed by God, and Believed by Man, betoken unspeakable love and good will in
God to Man, and matter of the greatest benefit to him, as a proof of such love,
then it works love to him that expresses such love, ( for Faith works by
Love, Gal. 5.6.) and a longing desire after the promised benefit. And as the
Soul grows more and more in love with God, because of his love; in love with
his Blessed Nature and Divine Perfections; such as are his Love and Goodness,
Truth and Faithfulness, Purity and Patience, Mercifulness, and readiness to
Forgive, which render him altogether lovely; so it contracts a likeness to God
in these upon the Soul, and so changes and renews the Moral habit and
constitution of the Soul, and consequently the whole Life. There is an aptness
and promptness in Men to imitate that in others (and so in God) for which they
love them. And frequent imitating Acts, beget Habits, Custom changing Nature.
And hence it is, that through Faith we are made partakers of a Divine Nature.
We all with open face, beholding as in a Glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord,
2. Cor. 3.18. This beholding the glory of the Lord, is by Faith, ( For we walk
by Faith, and not by sight, 2. Cor. 5.7. and by it Moses saw him who is
invisible, Heb. 11.27.) And the medium by which this Prospect is taken, is the
Gospel, by which the Lord in his lovely Perfections is now openly revealed: And
Faith being from time to time busied in beholding of, and conversing with these
Perfections, it transforms the Soul into the same Image or likeness, from glory
to glory, (that is gradually) as by the Spirit of the Lord; that is, through
the cooperation of God's Spirit with Man's Faith. To comprehend the breadth,
length, depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ which passes
knowledge, is the way to be filled with all the fullness of God, by
transcribing all his imitable Perfections upon the Soul, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.

And it is by virtue of their Relation to Christ, and being thus begotten and
born of God, and made partakers of a new Nature conformable to God's, that Men
can with confidence call God Father: This blessed effect of God's Spirit, is
the Spirit of Adoption, by which they cry, Abba, Father. And it is this new
Nature, that is the Spring and Fountain of a good Life, of all pious and
virtuous Actions. As it is said of God, Thou art good, and do good; so it is
true of all those that are born of him. A good Man, out of the good treasure of
his heart, (thus renewed) brings forth good fruit: The Tree being good, the
Fruit will be good. And as this new Creature grows up to strength and
maturity, so doing of good, and acting worthily, will become natural and
pleasant to him in whom it is. To such an one the Commandments of God are not
grievous, but he will be able in some good measure to say I delight to do thy
will, O God, yea thy Law is in my heart. And for sin, it being contrary to this
New Nature, there is a kind of Moral Impotency in him in whom it is, to commit
sin: He cannot sin, because he is born of God, 1 John 3.9. Or if such an one be
overtaken in a fault, it will work a disturbance in the Soul, just as that will
in the Stomach, which a Man has eaten, against which he has an antipathy in
Nature. But as for such as perform Religious Duties, and do things materially
good, only by the strength of extrinsecal Motives, and not from an inward
Principle of this New Nature, or love to the things themselves; to such, those
Actions, being unnatural, become grievous and burdensome, and will be continued
in no longer, than those Motives continue in their strength.

Sect. 8.
The last thing I proposed to consider about God's Promise to Abraham, is, What
we are to understand by God's counting Abraham's Faith to him for
Righteousness. And I take it to signify thus much: That God in a way of
special Grace, or by virtue of a New Law of Grace and Favor which was
established by God in Christ, ( Gal. 3.17.) that is, in reference to what
Christ was to do and suffer in time then to come, did reckon his Practical
Faith to him for Righteousness; that is, that which in the eye of the New Law
should pass in his estimation for Righteousness, subordinate to Christ's
Righteousness, which procured this Grant, or Law. For otherwise, Faith, neither
as it is the Condition of the Promise of Remission of Sin through Christ, nor
as it works Repentance for sins past, or sincere Obedience for time to come, is
Righteousness in the Eye of the Original Law. For that accounts no Man that
has, though but once, transgressed it, to be Righteous, either upon the
account of another suffering for his sin, or his own Repentance or sincere
imperfect Obedience; but Curses every Man that from first to last continues
not in all things which are contained in that Law. But it is, as I said, an Act
of God's special Favor, and by virtue of his New Law of Grace, and as it is
established in Christ, that such a Faith as I have described, comes to be
reckoned, or imputed to a Man for Righteousness, and through God's imputing it
for Righteousness to stand a Man in the same, if not in better stead, as to his
Eternal Concerns, as a perfect fulfilling of the Original Law from first to
last, would have done; Christ's Righteousness being presupposed the only
Meritorious Cause of this Grant or Covenant.

And thus indeed the Faith which I have described, is a Man's Righteousness in
the Eye of this New Law, because it is summarily all that is required of him
himself to make him capable of the Benefits promised by it; which, as it is now
revealed, is the Gospel. Justification is a Law-term: And no Man shall be
Justified in Judgment, or upon Trial, but he that is Just in the Eye of this
New Law of Grace, as every one that rightly Believes, Repents and sincerely
Obeys, is; because that is all that it requires of a Man himself to his
Justification and Salvation. And yet every Believer's Justification will be all
of Grace, because the Law by which they are Justified, is wholly of Grace, is
wholly a Law of Grace, and was Enacted in mere Grace and Favor to undone Man,
that was utterly undone by the Fall.

There are two things which I conceive do constitute and make up the
Righteousness of the Law of Grace; (presupposing all to be procured by the
Purchase which Christ has made) first, The Righteousness which consists in
the forgiveness of sins; and secondly, The Righteousness of sincere Obedience.
And in reference to both these, Faith is imputed for Righteousness, by virtue
of the Law of Grace.

First, Faith, as practical, is imputed to a Man for Righteousness, as it is
That, and all That which is required of him himself by the Law of Grace, to
entitle him to the Righteousness which consists in the Remission of sins
through Christ. Now, that remission of Sins is part of the Righteousness which
is by Faith, is evident from Romans 4.5, 6, 7, 8. Where the Apostle, to prove
that a Man's Faith in God who justifyeth the ungodly, is counted to him for
Righteousness, he cites a passage out of Psalm the 32d, Even as David also
(says he) describes the blessedness of the man to whom God imputes
Righteousness without Works, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord will
not impute sin. The Righteousness imputed in this sense, does consist in the
non-imputation of sin. Not to impute sin, is not to reckon a Man not to have
sinned; but it is to deal with him, not according to the demerit of his sin, it
is to pardon him, for Christ's sake, upon his penitential Faith, and not to
punish him for his sin; and this by virtue of a New Law or Act of Indemnity, or
Covenant of Grace. For although pardon of sin is obtained for Man by Christ's
Sufferings for sin, ( In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, Ephesians..1 7. and though God, for Christ's sake does forgive
us, Ephesians. 4.32.) yet the actual collation of this great Benefit, is not
promised, but upon condition of Man's Faith. Him has God set forth to be a
Propitiation; but it is through Faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. By him all that
believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by
the Law of Moses, Acts 13.39. and 10.43. Although Christ is the Propitiation
for the sins of the whole World, (1 John 2.2.) yet that saying of Christ must
and will take place; If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins,
Joh. 8.24. And that also, Mark 16.16. He that believes not, shall be damned.
So that Faith is imputed for Righteousness, partly as it is the Condition upon
which Pardon of sin is granted.

Secondly, That Faith is imputed for Righteousness, which is practical, or
productive of sincere Obedience, without which property it is not a fulfilling
of the Law of Grace as a Condition of the promised Benefits: and consequently,
cannot justify a Man in the Eye of that Law. For,

1st, Repentance, and likewise forgiving Men their Injuries (for instance) are
such Acts of Obedience, as without which a Man cannot be Pardoned; and if not
Pardoned, then not Justified. And therefore, Faith is not imputed for
Righteousness, unless it be productive of Obedience.

2dly, No Faith is available to Justification, but such as works by Love,
Gal. 5.6. Which to say, is all one as to say, no Faith is imputed for
Righteousness, but such as works by keeping the Commandments of God, and
fulfilling the Law; for that is the interpretation of Love, both to God and
Men, 1 John 5.3. Romans 13.10.

3dly, Abraham who was set forth by God for a Pattern of his justifying Men by
Faith, was Justified by such Works as were the fruits of his Faith; and not
only by his Faith, which was the Root of them: And therefore his Faith as
practical, was imputed to him for Righteousness: And such must be the Faith of
all others that shall obtain Justification upon their Believing as he did, Jam.
2.21, 22, 23. Was not Abraham our Father justified by Works, when he had
offered Isaac his Son upon the Altar? See thou how Faith wrought with his
Works; and by Works was Faith made perfect. And the Scripture was fulfilled,
which says, Abraham Believed God, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness.
Where note these four things. 1. That Abraham's Faith wrought with his Works
about the same End, as a Condition of obtaining it; to wit, his Justification.
2. That by his Works his Faith was made perfect; to wit, in its aptitude by
God's Institution, to justify him; without which, it would not have reached
that End. 3. Note, further, That it was his Faith, as it wrought with his
Works, and as it was completed and made perfect by them, that was imputed to
him for Righteousness. 4. Note, That in the Imputation of his Faith for
Righteousness, as it was thus accompanied with, and perfected by Works, was the
Scripture fulfilled, which says, Abraham Believed God, and it was imputed to
him for Righteousness. And if so, then the Justification by Works, together
with Faith, of which St. James speaks here, is a Justification before God, and
not before Men only, and to a Man's own Conscience: For of such a Justification
does the Scripture in Gen 15.6. speak, which is here cited by St. James.

Nor does this, that Faith accompanied with Obedience is imputed for
Righteousness, at all derogate from the Obedience and Sufferings of Christ, in
reference to the Ends for which they serve. Because the whole Covenant, and all
the parts and terms of it, both promises of Benefits, and the Condition on
which they are promised, are all founded in Christ his undertaking for us, and
all the Benefits of it accrue to us, upon our Believing and Obeying, upon his
account, and for his sake. We are in him, who of God is made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. For which cause
also he is called the Lord our Righteousness. Not as if his Personal Obedience
to the Law, was so formally imputed to us, as that we should be reckoned to
have kept the Law in his keeping of it, (which has been the Opinion of some)
for if that had been so, there would have been no more need that Christ should
have Suffered for us, than there was that he should have Suffered for himself,
who had no sin; for neither should we, if we had perfectly kept the Law in him,
or in his keeping of it.

CHAP. II. For what Ends the Law was added to the Promise.
I Now come to show, in the next place, for what end the Law of Moses was added
to the Promise. And before I do this in particular, I shall note only in
general, That it was not added to cross or confront the Promise, or God's
Design in it, but to be subservient to it, Gal. 3.21. Is the Law then against
the Promises? God forbid. For it is not to be thought that God would
prevaricate in his Design, so that when he had once made a New Law of Grace for
the Saving of fallen Man, he would yet afterward give any Law, but what should
one way or other subserve to the same End, if Men do not deprive themselves of
the intended Benefit, by perverting it. And therefore, to be sure, God did not
intend to revive the Old Covenant of Works made with Adam in Paradise, in the
after promulgation of the Law of Nature (which we call the Moral Law) already
broken. He did not therein come to demand his full Debt of Innocence in Man's
Broken and Bankrupt Condition, or to let him know, that he would, without any
other Condition than perfect Innocence, cast him into Prison, until he had paid
the utmost farthing. For if he had, then the Law indeed would have been against
the Promise, which declares quite otherwise. It is true, the Law of Nature, as
it is a perfect Rule of natural Righteousness, founded in God's Nature and
Man's Nature, does of it self require perfect Innocence, and can require no
less, being suited to the Nature of Man in its perfect State: But when God
brings this Law forth, and sets it before Men that are now fallen from that
state, as he does in the promulgation of it, it is to let them know indeed what
they once were, and from whence they are fallen, and how unhappy their
Condition now is, according to the Tenor and Terms of that Law; and that it
would have continued so for ever, if God had not made a New Law of Grace, to
overruled that Law; and to let all know that they shall still remain in that
Condition, that wilfully exclude themselves from the benefit of the Law of
Grace, by not performing the Condition of it: But not to let them know, they
should have no better terms from him than that Law affords them, nor to make
their perfect keeping of it the condition of their Justification. But the Law
of Moses, entirely taken in all its parts, was rather given as an Appendix to
the Promise, both as a Rule of the material part of that Obedience, which God
would now require of the Israelites in conjunction with their Faith in the
Promise, and as a Motive to that Obedience: This in general.

The Question is put, Gal. 3.19. Wherefore then serves the Law? And the Answer
there is, That it was added because of transgression, until the Seed should
come. And it was added because of transgression in more respects than one.

1. It was added to discover Sin, to make that known to be Sin, which was so of
it self, and in its own nature, before the promulgation of the Law. For by
reason of that grievous Wound which Man got in his Understanding by the Fall,
and by reason also of a progressive Degeneration in Mankind, the natural Sense
of Moral Good and Evil, was to a great degree worn out of the minds of Men. For
the repairing of which decay, a promulgate Law (the Ten Commandments)
answerable to the Law of pure Nature in the Spirituality of it, was set on foot
in the World. And by this Law came Sin and Duty to be more clearly known than
they were before. Romans 3.20. By the Law is the knowledge of Sin. Romans 7.7. I
had not known Sin, but by the Law: For I had not known Lust, except the Law had
said, Thou shall not Covet.

2. The Law was added, not only barely to make known that to be Sin, which was
so of it self before, but to set it out in its Colors, to make it known in the
horrid nature and consequence of it, that Men might be the more afraid to have
to do with it, The Law entered, that the offense might abound: That is, that by
that means it might be rendered the more Criminous and Demeritorious: That Sin
by the Commandment, might become exceeding sinful, Romans 5.20. and 7.13.

3. The Law as it discovered Sin, and made it more criminous, and the People
the more sensible of guilt, and more apprehensive of their obnoxiousness to
punishment, was given to set off so much the more, the Glory, Beauty, and
Desirableness of God's Grace in the Promise of Pardon and Salvation. Romans 5.20.
The Law entered that the offense might abound: But where Sin abounded, Grace
did much more abound. By how much the more Sin appeared Sin, and was enhanced,
and aggravated, and rendered manifestly mischievous by a Promulgate Law; by so
much the more Grace appeared to be Grace, in all its Glory, that brought
Deliverance from it. Romans 5.21. That like as Sin has reigned unto death, (viz.
by the Law, that being the strength of Sin, 1 Cor. 15.56.) Even so Grace might
reign through Righteousness unto eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
After Christ came, the Rest which he gave, was so much the more sweet to those
Jews who received him, by how much they had been weary and heavy-laden under a
Spirit of Bondage before.

4. The Law (says St. Paul) was our Schoolmaster, to bring ^s unto Christ,
that we might be justified by Faith, Gal. 3.24. That is, It was a lower sort of
Institution, accommodated to the weak and more imperfect state of the Church,
until afterward it should deliver them over to a more perfect Institution under
Christ. Parents first teach their Children to Speak, and after put them to
School to learn Letters, Syllables, Words, and Sentences; the use and design of
all which they do not understand while they are Children, as they do when they
come to be Men. In proportion to this has God dealt with his Church in the
World, beginning with a lower and more imperfect sort of Instruction, Precepts,
and Promises, and so proceeding to those that are higher and more perfect, and
so by certain gradations, to lead on, and build up his Church to a more perfect
Spiritual and complete state of Faith and Holiness; To all the riches of
fullness of understanding of the Mystery of God, of the Father, and of Christ,
Col. 2.2. And thus the Law, as Schoolmaster, had a double end and use: The one
respecting the time then present: The other that which was then future and to
come.

The then present use of it was twofold also.

1. To reclaim and restrain them from the Superstitious Customs of the Heathen,
to which they were addicted; in which respect also it was added because of
transgression. The Heathen-Worship, stood in diverse Superstitious Rites or
Ceremonies: And because the Israelites were addicted to a bodily Worship like
theirs, (for they said, Let us make us Gods to go before us, Exodus 32.1.) and
were in danger thereby of being drawn to Worship their Gods, therefore to
prevent this (as Parents put their Children to School, partly to keep them out
of harms way) the Lord by way of condescension to their childish humor, did
ordain a Worship consisting much in bodily Exercise, and Instituted diverse
Laws, which stood in Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings, and carnal
Ordinances, until the time of Reformation; till he should, by sending his Son,
appoint more excellent Laws for Reforming both them and the rest of the World.
Lev. 18.3, 4, 5. After the doings of the Land of Egypt wherein ye dwelt shall
ye not do; and after the doings of the Land of Canaan whither I bring you shall
ye not do; neither shall ye walk in their Ordinances. Ye shall therefore keep
my Statutes and my Judgments: Which if a Man do, he shall live in them, Ezekiel.
20.6, 11.

2. The Lord did Institute diverse Temporary Laws for trial and exercise of
their Obedience in those lesser things for a time, as being such as they were
as yet best capable to receive, thereby to lead them on to higher instances of
Obedience afterward. Those many Ceremonies which they were obliged to observe,
were not things of any natural or intrinsic Goodness, but only made use of by
God for a present turn, which when that was served, they (as to practice) were
of no value, but became beggarly Elements. But yet while they continued
commanded of God, their Obedience in the use of them, was Rewardable, as well
as their Obedience to any other Laws.

The other end and use of the Law, as it was a Schoolmaster, respected the time
then to come. For the High Priesthood, and Sacrifices of the Law, as they were
Types of what Christ should be, do, and suffer, as Mediator, were of great use
to the Jews after Christ had Suffered, and was Risen again, and Ascended into
Heaven, to facilitate both the knowledge and belief of the Mystery of
Redemption by Christ.

1. To facilitate the knowledge thereof, and to beget in them a right Notion of
those things in Christ, by which forgiveness of sins, and acceptance with God,
is obtained on our behalf. For those who had long seen and known the effect of
Legal Sacrifices, as how they did procure Legal Impunity for Offenses committed,
God accepting the Life of a Beast that had not sinned, instead of the life of a
Man that had, might soon come to understand, by parity of reason, that God
would much more accept of his own Sons offering himself in Sacrifice for us, so
as to excuse us from suffering Eternal Punishment for our sin. For if the blood
of Bulls, and of Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean,
sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the Blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God,
purge your Conscience from dead works, to serve the living God? Heb. 9.13, 14.
And so the High Priest's entering into the Holy of Holies in the behalf of the
People with the Blood of the Sacrifice, and burning Incense there, does greatly
assist the mind in understanding the nature of Christ's Intercession for us in
Heaven, in virtue of his Bloodshed for us on Earth, Heb. 9.

2. The Law, in the Typical nature of it, was of great use to the Jews, to
facilitate and strengthen their Belief in Christ; and so were the Predictions
of the Prophets in conjunction with it: For these and the accomplishment of
them in Christ, did so answer each other, as in Water, Face answers to Face,
that those who believed the Law and the Prophets, had a great advantage by
means thereof, to believe in Christ. And therefore our blessed Savior, when he
would satisfy his Disciples touching himself, that he was indeed the Christ,
and of the necessity of his Death, (which Death occasioned at first a
staggering in their Faith) beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he
expounded to them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself, Luke
24.27. And St. Paul, when he labored the Conversion of the Jews at Rome, to
Christianity, as the chiefest way to effect it; he expounded to them, and
testified the Kingdom of God, persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of the
Law of Moses, and of the Prophets, from morning to evening, Acts 28.23. Had ye
believed Moses (Says our Savior to them) ye would have believed me; for he
wrote of me: But if ye believe not his Writings, how shall ye believe my Words?
Joh. 5.46, 47. And thus in both the forementioned respects, the Law was a
Schoolmaster indeed, to bring them to Christ, that they might be Justified by
Faith.

5. The Law was given to the Jewish Nation, not only for their behoof and
benefit, but also for a general Good to the World: That the Nations round
about, hearing of such excellent Laws, and percieving how happy and prosperous
those People were, so long as they observed them; might thereby be invited to
quit their Idol Gods, and to take hold of the Covenant, and to join themselves
to the people of the God of Abraham, even as it came to pass in such as were
Proselited. And upon this account it seems to be, that the Psalmist prayed
thus: God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause thy Face to shine upon
us: That thy way may be known on Earth, thy saving health unto all Nations,
Psalm. 67.1, 2. and concludes ver. 7. That if God should so do, his fear would
be propagated through the World: God shall bless us, and all the ends of the
Earth shall fear him, Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7, 8. Keep therefore and do them, for this is
your Wisdom, and your Understanding in the sight of the Nations, who shall hear
all these Statutes, and say, surely this great Nation is a Wise and an
Understanding People. For what Nation is there so great, that has God so nigh
unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for? And
what Nation is there so great, that has Statutes and Judgments so Righteous,
as all this Law which I set before you this day? To them were committed the
Oracles of God, Romans 3.2. They were committed in trust to them as Feoffees for
the World, to communicate the knowledge of God and of his Laws to the Nations;
to carry on further the Reformation of the World, begun in their Father
Abraham, and which was promised to be more completely effected by the Messiah,
in that all Nations of the Earth should be Blessed in him. And as God's
Judgments on the Jews for breaking his Laws, was Admonitory to the Nations
about them, Deuteronomy. 29.24, -- 28. so his famous Deliverances wrought for them
upon their Repentance for breaking his Laws, made God known abroad to be a
great favourer of such as repent of their worshipping and serving other Gods,
and such a one as could and would Save, Deliver and Bless them, that turned to
him, to serve him only. Which seems to be his meaning, when he says, he will
be sanctified before the Heathen, when he should gather them from among the
people where they were Captives, and that the Heathen should know that he was
the the Lord, Ezekiel. 20.41. and 36, 23. And by this means he brought them to
fear and worship the God of Israel. Psalm. 102.13, 15. Thou shall arise and have
mercy upon Zion; So the Heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord; and all the
Kings of the Earth thy glory. When the Lord turned again the Captivity of Sion,
they said among the Heathen, The Lord has done great things for them, Psalm.
126.1, 2.

6. The whole Law was given to be a Political Instrument of Governing the
Israelites, (according to that state of their minority) as a peculiar
Republic, of which God himself was the Sovereign Legislator. But of this more
afterward.

CHAP. III. Showing by what Faith and Practice the Jews under the Law were
Saved.
I Come now to show by what Faith and Practice the Jews under the Law were
Saved.

And doubtless whatever it was, it became available to that end, upon the
account of what Christ was to suffer, when he should come. For, as I showed
before, that God's Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, (by virtue of which the
Faithful then were saved) was confirmed in Christ; was established with them in
reference to what he was to do, and suffer, as Mediator afterward, Gal. 3.17.
And by means of his Death, there was Redemption for the transgressions that
were under the first Testament, Heb. 9.15. And the Sacrifices and Priesthood,
were a Figure for the time then present, of what Christ should afterward do,
and suffer, and for what end.

But when I say so, I do not say that all that were Saved, did understand so
much. For we see the Apostles of Christ, though they did believe him to be the
Messiah, which the Jews expected, yet they did not understand or expect that he
should suffer Death as a Sacrifice, till he told them so: Nay, the thing was so
far from their thoughts, as that they did not understand him, when he plainly
foretold them of his Death, Luke 18.32. And if the Doctrine touching the
resemblance that is between the Priesthood of Melchizedech, and the Priesthood
of Christ, was not in the Apostles sense, Meat which Babes in Christianity
could well digest in their Understandings, but was Meat for strong Men, Heb.
5.10. -- 14. we may well guess by that, how little the Jews understood the
Typical and Spiritual sense of those Types about which they were frequently
conversant; and therefore it is said, that the least in the Kingdom of Heaven,
is greater than John the Baptist, though he was so great, that there was none
greater before him. Hence we may see, that one reason why those Jews were all
their lifetime under a Spirit of Bondage to fear, was the great Obscurity of
the Declaration of God's purpose of Grace to the World through Christ, and the
Way and Method of Salvation by him. Moses was but a servant for a Testimony of
those things, which were [after] to be spoken, and so declared afterward, as
that the Typical meaning of them might be understood, Heb. 3.5. In the mean
while, as touching those things, they were shut up unto the Faith which should
[afterwards] be revealed, Gal. 3.23. It is said of the Prophets, whereof Moses
was one, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the things
which are now reported unto us, by them that have preached the Gospel to us, 1
Pet. 1.12. Add we to all this, Heb. 9.8. where having spoken in ver. 7. of the
High Priests entering alone into the Holy of Holies with the Blood of the
Sacrifice in behalf of the People once every Year, he says, The Holy Ghost
this signifying, that the way into the Holiest of all, was not yet made
manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing. By the Holiest of
all, here, is meant Heaven, signified of old by the Holy of Holies, as appears,
ver. 12, 24. And the plain meaning seems to be this, That the peoples entering
into Heaven by the Sacrifice, and Blood, and Intercession of Christ, was not
made manifest, while the Tabernacle-worship continued. For Christ is our Way
into Heaven, (to the place within the Veil) by his Blood shed as a Sacrifice,
Heb. 10.19, 20. Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest
by the Blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he has consecrated for
us through the Veil, that is to say, his Flesh. But this Way, he tells us, was
not made manifest, while the first Tabernacle was standing.

But as obscure as this way was, as to what was to be done and suffered in
particular by the Messiah, yet they had some general grounds of Faith and Hope;
That upon their Faith, Repentance, and sedulous Endeavors to walk in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, they should obtain remission of their
sins, and a future Happiness in another World. Among which gounds these were
not the least:

1. They had the knowledge of the Promise of Blessedness to all Nations in
Abraham's Seed, and of the Promise of those other Benefits which were promised
to Abraham and his Seed.

2. They had an addition of several other Predictions concerning the Messiah,
both by Moses and other Prophets, that perhaps were somewhat more express, such
as in Deuteronomy. 18.16. Isa. 53. Dan. 9. and others. These Promises and Predictions,
put them in great expectations of Special Benefits by the Messiah, and wrought
in them a longing after his Day. Upon which account, our Savior said to his
Disciples: Blessed are your Eyes, for they see; and your Ears, for they hear.
For I say unto you, that many Prophets and Kings, and Righteous Men, have
desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear
those things which ye hear, and have not heard them, Mat. 13.16, 17. Luke
10.23, 24.

3. They had large significations from God of his special Favor to them above
all people, as in choosing them to be his peculiar People, and in declaring
himself to be their God; in giving visible signs of his Presence among them,
and excellent Laws and Promises to them, and sending his Prophets amongst them,
and working many Wonders for them, and casting out the Nations before them, to
make room for them, and the like, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. and 26.18, 19. Psalm. 147.19,
20. Romans 9.4, 5.

4. They had express Declaration from God of the Goodness of his Nature, and of
his Compassion toward Sinners, and of his readiness to Pardon such as should
Repent and return to their Duty, in loving him, and keeping his Commandments.
As for instance, Exodus 34.6, 7. The Lord passed before him, and proclaimed, The
Lord, The Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin. And when he delivered them his Law, with the greatest
terror and astonishment to them; yet even then he assured them, That he would
show Mercy to Thousands of them that love him, and keep his Commandments; as in
the Second Commandment. And in ease of their miscarriage to the drawing down of
God's Judgments upon them, he bespeaks them thus: When thou art in tribulation,
and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn
to the Lord thy God, and shall be obedient to his Voice, (for the Lord thy God
is a merciful God) he will not forsake thee, nor forget the Covenant of thy
Fathers, Deuteronomy. 4.31. and 30.1, 2, 3. Levit. 26.39, etc.

From all which grounds, the Faithful among them, had such a hope and
confidence of pardon of Sin, and of a future Happiness in another Life, upon
their Repentance and sincere Obedience, as did effectually induce them to have
good thoughts of God, to love him, and to endeavor to please him, by having
respect unto all his Commandments. This made him say, Psalm. 130.4. There is
forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. And under this hope and
confidence, the twelve Tribes did instantly serve God day and night, and
grounded this Hope of theirs upon the Promise made of God unto their Fathers,
as St. Paul tells us, Acts 26.6, 7.

And indeed, it was the unanimous Faith of the most eminent among them from Age
to Age, that God had both made, and would keep a Covenant to show Mercy to
those that love him, and keep his Commandments, or that walk before him with
all their Heart: For that they looked upon as the Condition of God's Promise of
showing Mercy. This we may see in Moses, David, Solomon, and in Daniel, and
Nehemiah, Deuteronomy. 7.9. Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the
faithful God, which keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that love him, and
keep his Commandments. So David, Psalm 103.17, 18. The mercy of the Lord is
from everlasting to everlasting to such as keep his Covenant, and to those that
remember his Commandments to do them. And thus Solomon, 1 Kings 8.23. And he
said, Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee, who keep Covenant and
Mercy with thy servants, that walk before thee with all their heart. So Daniel,
in his 9th Chap. 4th ver. O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the
Covenant and Mercy, to them that love him, and to them that keep his
Commandments. And Nehemiah likewise, Chap. 1.5. I beseech thee, O Lord God of
Heaven, the great and terrible God, that keeps Covenant and Mercy for them
that love him, and observe his Commandments. This we see was the serious and
constant Profession of the Faith of the Servants of God in those Times. And in
this Faith and Practice doubtless it was, that they lived, and died, and were
saved.

CHAP. IV. That the Law contained a Covenant different from that with Abraham.
IN the next place, I am to show, That the Law of Moses did contain a Covenant
distinct, and of a different nature from the Covenant which God made with
Abraham and his Spiritual Seed.

Besides the general Promise which God made to Abraham, respecting the
Gentiles, as well as the Jews, (In thee all Nations of the Earth shall be
blessed) he made a Special Covenant with him, as a Reward of his signal
Faithfulness, to give unto his Natural Seed the Land of Canaan: Nehem. 9.8.
Thou foundest his heart faithful before thee, and made a Covenant with him,
to give the Land of the Canaanites -- to his Seed. In order to the fulfilling
of which Promise, after he had brought them out of Egypt, he united them under
himself, as Head, in one Political Body, by a Political Covenant, Exodus 19.
etc. which is the Covenant I am now to discourse of. In which discourse I
would, 1. Show in what respect the Law of Moses is said to contain a Covenant
of a different nature from the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham. 2. Prove
that it did contain such a different Covenant. 3. For farther illustration,
consider it in its parts, and their relation one to another. 4. And in what
respect this Covenant is called the first Covenant, when as the Covenant of
Grace was made before it.

1. In what respect the Law of Moses is said to contain a Covenant of a
different nature from the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham. The Law of Moses
comes under a twofold consideration. 1. As in conjunction with the Promise to
Abraham, to which it was annexed, it made up one entire Law, by which the
Israelites were to be governed and directed in the way to Eternal Life: And in
this conjunction, the Promise was the Life and Soul as it were of the Body of
the Mosaic Law, properly taken. And in this sense, as the word Law signifies
the Pentateuch, or five Books of Moses, (which contain the Promise, as well as
the Law) it is sometimes used in the New Testament, Gal. 4.21, 22. 1 Cor.
14.34. Luke 16. And in this sense doubtless we are to understand the Law upon
which David bestowed so many glorious Encomiums as he did, saying, The Law of
the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul, etc. Psalm. 19.2. We are to consider
the Law of Moses, as given at Sinai, in a stricter sense, as it was an
Instrument or Rule of Government in the Commonwealth of Israel. The Law, in the
former sense of it, promised Eternal Life (though but obscurely) to those that
did believe its Promises, and sincerely obey its Precepts. In the latter sense,
it promised only temporal Blessings to those that strictly observed it in all
the parts of it; and threatened those with temporal Calamities that did not. The
same Laws materially of this Political Covenant, related to both the Covenants.
As Eternal Life was promised in the Covenant of Grace, upon condition of
sincere Obedience to those Laws, as an effect of Faith in the Promise; so those
Laws, in conjunction with the Promise, were, as I may so say, Evangelical. But
as temporal Benefits only were promised in that Covenant upon condition of
strict Obedience to those Laws; and as those Laws were enjoined under temporal
Penalties, as they were Commonwealth-Laws; so that Covenant, containing those
Laws, was Political, and in this Political respect, it was another Covenant. If
the Law of God, and the Law of Man command or forbid things materially the
same; yet if the one command or forbid them under pain of Damnation, and the
other only under temporal Penalties; these Laws are not formally the same. The
Commonwealth of Israel had no Commonwealth-Laws, but what God himself gave
them, the which Laws they also Covenanted with him to observe; by which
Covenant they were united under him as Head of that Political Body. And
therefore, when they would needs choose them a King like other Nations, God
told Samuel, saying, They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me,
that I should not Reign over them, 1 Samuel 8.7. Ye said unto me (said Samuel)
nay, but a King shall Reign over us, when the Lord your God was your King, 1 Samuel 12.12. I conclude then, that as the Law of Moses did serve to this
Political end; so it was a distinct Covenant, and different from the Covenant
of Grace.

2. Let us see how this may be proved to be a Covenant so distinct and
different, as I have said, from the Covenant of Grace declared to Abraham. And
to this purpose, these things are considerable.

First, They are called the two Covenants, by St. Paul, Gal. 4.24. And if they
are Two, then there is a real difference between them, else they would be but
one and the same.

Secondly, They bear distinct denominations; the one is called the first and
the Old Covenant; and the other, the second and the New, Heb. Chap. 8. and 9.

Thirdly, There were some sins pardonable by one of those Covenants, which were
not so by the other; and that shows that they were quite of a different nature.
The Murder and Adultery which David was guilty of, was not pardonable,
according to the terms of the Political Covenant, if there had been any
Superior Power on Earth to have executed that Commonwealth-Law; and yet,
according to the terms of the Covenant of Grace, they were pardonable upon
Repentance, and upon those terms were pardoned unto him. The like might be said
perhaps of Manasseh.

The unbelief of Moses and Aaron, in not Sanctifying God in the eyes of the
Children of Israel, was, according to the terms of the Covenant of Grace,
pardoned as to the Eternal Penalty, but yet was not wholly pardoned, according
to the terms of the Political Covenant, as to temporal Punishment. For the Lord
told them, that for that cause they should not bring the Children of Israel
into the Land of Canaan, Numb. 20.12. And in reference to this case, the
Psalmist says, Thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest
vengeance of their inventions, Psalm. 99.8.

Fourthly, The Covenant of Grace never cease, but it is of perpetual duration
throughout all Generations; and therefore is called the Everlasting Covenant,
Heb. 13.20. But this Mosaical Political Covenant is vanished long since, Heb.
8.13. by which also it appears to be a Covenant essentially different from the
other.

3. For a farther illustration of the nature of this Covenant, we will consider
it in its parts, and in the relation which those parts bear one toward
another. And in general, it did consist of two parts. 1. Of Laws; and, 2. Of
the Sanction of those Laws. The Laws likewise were of two sorts: 1. Laws of
Duty. 2. Laws of Indemnity.

1. Laws of Duty. And in them we may consider, 1. What those Laws were. 2. What
manner of Obedience to those Laws it was, which would free Men from the
Penalties of them, and entitle them to the promises of Reward annexed to them.

First, The Laws of Duty, of which this Covenant did in great part consist,
were those which pass under the various denomination of Moral, Ritual, or
Ceremonial, and Judicial. Some of which Laws, ( viz. the Decalogue especially
and almost wholly) for the matter of them, were natural; that is, such as were
founded in the Nature of Man, forbidding things which of themselves were Evil,
and commanding things which in their own nature were Good, and might be
discerned to be so, by Man in his pure Naturals, and in great part since the
Degeneration of his nature, whether they had been expressly forbidden, or
commanded, or no. But these Laws became part of the Political Covenant, only as
they were expressly and externally declared to the Jews by a Promulgate Law. For
if this had not been so, the Gentiles could not have been said to be without
the Law, as they were, Romans 2.14, 11. 1 Cor. 9.21. For they had the force and
effect of the Law in their hearts, and were in that respect a Law unto
themselves, Romans 2.14, 15. But because the Decalogue, as well as the other
Laws, was delivered to the Jews only, and to none else, from Mount Sinai,
therefore they only (and Proselytes that joined with them) were said to be
under the Law, and all the rest without Law. And therefore is the giving of the
Law reckoned to the Jews among their peculiar Privileges, Romans 9.4. Psalm.
147.19, 20. And in this sense only, as the Decalogue was a part of the
Political Law, can the Ministration engraven in Stones be said to be done away,
as it is, 2 Cor. 3.7, to ver. 11. For so much of it as was a Copy of the Law of
Nature, or is by Christ incorporated into his Laws, remains in force to all Men.

The other Laws of which this Covenant did consist, were Arbitrary; the force
of which did wholly depend upon Divine Institution: And such were the Laws
Ceremonial; and a great part of those we call Judicial.

Secondly, That Obedience which would be sufficient to secure a Man from the
penalty of the Political Law, and to entitle him to the promised Reward annexed
thereto, was no less than a strict Obedience to it in all the parts of it. For
it is written, Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law to do
them: And all the people shall say, Amen, Deuteronomy. 27.26. And this extended to
Heart-obedience, and Heart-sinning, as well as to the outward Act, commanding
Love to God, forbidding to Covet, as under the Heart-searching Political
Sovereign, who reserved to himself the final Judgment and Execution, even in
temporal respects, in many cases.

2. Laws of Indemnity (of which also this Covenant did consist) were partly
those which ordained Sacrifice and Offerings for the Expiation of many Sins
made pardonable by those Laws, so far as to exempt the delinquent Person from
the temporal Penalty threatened for breach of those other Laws, which for
distinction sake, I call Laws of Duty; for otherwise, these also were Laws of
Duty, as well as of Privilege. There were other Laws of Indemnity likewise for
the purification of Persons legally unclean; which being observed, the Persons
unclean became delivered from the penalties they suffered while their
uncleanness was upon them; such as was their Separation from the Congregation.

Consider we next the Sanction of these Laws; and that did consist in Promises
annexed to the observing of them, and in a Curse denounced against the
transgressors of them. And for our better understanding the nature of the
Promises of this Covenant, we will consider them Negatively, and Affirmatively.

1. Negatively; The Promises of this Political-Covenant, as such, were not
Promises of Eternal Life; And when I say so, I do not deny but that, first, the
Jews in Moses's time, and before, had Promises of Eternal Life employed in the
Covenant made with Abraham and his Seed. And accordingly, the faithful ones
among them, sought after the Heavenly Country, and looked for a City which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11.10, 14, 16. Nor secondly,
will I deny but that there are some passages in the Law of Moses, if you take
the Law of Moses in a large sense, which look somewhat like a renewal of the
ancient Covenant with Abraham to his Seed. As when, for instance, God made a
conditional Promise to the Israelites in Moses's time, to be their God, and
that they should be his People, as in Levit. 26.12. Deuteronomy. 29.13. Which form of
words is interpreted sometimes to imply a future Happiness in another World,
Heb. 11.16. Matthew. 21.31, 32. And I do not deny, but the Jews had by Moses, as
express a Promise of the Messiah, as Abraham had, Deuteronomy. 18.15. -- 19. But St.
Paul does not speak of the Law in this large sense, when he opposes the Law
and the Promise, the Law and Faith, one to another. But if we understand by the
Law of Moses, the Law as Political, the Law of the Commonwealth; so the
Promises of it were not Promises of Eternal Life; For Promises of this nature
did pertain to another Covenant, to wit, that made with Abraham, and his
Spiritual Seed as such.

First; Therefore St. Paul does downrightly deny that the Promise of the
Inheritance, (which in Heb. 9.15. is called the Eternal Inheritance) was by the
Law, which yet it would have been, if by Law he had meant the Law in that large
sense, in which the Law and Promise to Abraham are conjoined; and not in that
strict sense, by which he means the Political Law distinctly. And if the
Inheritance had been promised upon the same terms as temporal Blessings were in
the temporal Covenant, the Inheritance might have been obtained by the Law, as
well as temporal Blessings were. Romans 4.13. For the Promise that he should be
Heir of the World, was not through the Law, but through the Righteousness of
Faith.

Secondly, St. Paul evinceth the badness of that Opinion, to think that Eternal
Life was promised upon the Law-terms, from the absurd consequence of it;
showing that if it were, that then it would make void the Promise of God to
Abraham, and the way of saving Men by Faith in that Promise, of none effect:
Gal. 3.18. For if the inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of Promise: But
God gave it to Abraham by Promise. Romans 4.14. For if they which are of the Law
be Heirs, Faith is made void, and the Promise made of none effect. It was
altogether unreasonable to think that the Inheritance should be promised upon
such distant and inconsistent terms, as are Faith in the Promise, and by Works
of the Law.

Thirdly, The Law, says the Apostle, is not of Faith, but the man that does
them, shall live in them, Gal. 3.12. meaning, that what the Law promised, it
did not promise it upon condition of Believing, but upon condition of Doing.
And Eternal Life is not since the Fall promised upon condition of Doing,
without Faith, but upon condition of Believing; For the Just shall live by
Faith, Verse. 11. And therefore Eternal Life is promised by the Law.

Fourthly, Wherefore else are the Promises of that better Covenant, Heb. 8.6.
said to be better Promises? But because they are Promises of better things than
were promised in the first Covenant; which yet they could not be, if Eternal
Life had been promised in that Covenant, because that is the best of all
Promises.

To say they are better only in respect of Administration, and clearness of
Revelation, will not satisfy such as shall well consider, That if the
betterness of the Covenant and Promises lay only in that, the difference would
not be so great as to denominate them two Covenants, and two so vastly distant
as the Scripture represents them to be. The difference then would be but only
gradual, as that is, which is found in the same Covenant of Grace, in the
several Editions of it, to Adam, to Abraham, to David, and now to all Nations
since Christ's coming; and not Essential, as that between the two Covenants
seems to be, as it is represented in Gal. 4.24. Besides, St. Paul represents
the Administration of the two Covenants, to differ as much, as Righteousness
and Condemnation, Life and Death differ, which sure is more than a gradual
difference. The one is the Ministration of Death and Condemnation; the other,
the Ministration of Righteousness and Life, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8, 9. The Law made
nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, Heb. 7.19. By which
it appears again, that the hope of the Gospel in which the things hoped for
upon the Promises of the Gospel (are not the least) is better than what the Law
promised the observers of it. This is the Promise which he has promised us,
even Eternal Life, John. 2.25.

2. And Affirmatively; It was then a long and prosperous Life in the Land of
Canaan, that was promised in the first Covenant. Deuteronomy. 28.11. The Lord shall
make thee plenteous in Goods, in the fruit of thy Body. and in the fruit of thy
Cattle, and in the fruit of thy Ground, in the Land which the Lord swear unto
thy Fathers to give thee. Deuteronomy. 11.21. That your days may be multiplied, and
the days of your Children, as the days of Heaven upon Earth.

A great variety of outward Blessings is promised, as the Reward of keeping
that Covenant. And therefore Wisdom under that Dispensation is described, as
having length of days in her right hand, and in her left hand Riches and
Honor; whose ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace, Prove.
3.17. And as this Covenant was National, so there were Promises of National
Blessings; such as was the setting them on high, above all the Nations of the
Earth; making them the Head and not the Tail: The giving them victory over
enemies; multiplying the Nation, and bestowing on it, Health, Peace, and
Plenty, Deuteronomy. 28. Lev. 26.

When it is said once by Moses, thrice by Ezekiel, and twice by St. Paul, that
the Man that does them, shall live in them, (Lev. 18.5. Ezekiel. 20.11, 13, 21.
Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.12.) thereby Epitomizing the first Covenant; I conceive that
by Living, is meant a long and prosperous Life in this World. As on the
contrary, the condition of one greatly afflicted, is in Scripture-Dialect, a
kind of Death, and such an one said to be free among the Dead, Psalm. 88.^. And
that which inclines me so to think, is not only the reasons already given to
prove that no other Life was promised in the first Covenant, but also the
congruity of this sense with other passages in the Writings of Moses. As Deuteronomy.
30 15. See, I have set before you this day, Life and Good, Death and Evil. If
you would know what is meant by Life here, the next Verse will inform you: That
thou may live and multiply, and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in the
Land whither thou go to possess it. The contrary whereunto is the Death he
had set before them, saying, I denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely
perish, and that ye shall not prolong your days upon the Land, etc. Deuteronomy.
32.46, 47. Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this
day, for it is not a vain thing for you, because it is your life; and through
this thing ye shall prolong your days in the Land wherein ye go. The latter
words are exegetical of the former: Through this thing ye shall prolong your
days, is the interpretation of those; it is your Life. And it may be considered
also, whether this Particle [in] (which if a Man do, he shall even live [in]
them) may not determine the nature and kind of that Reward which was promised
in the first Covenant, as it was a present Reward, a Reward which was received
even while the Work was doing, according to that, Psalm. 19.11. In keeping them
there is great reward. And this is agreeable to what fell out in the event. The
Lord was with them, to prosper them, while they were with him; but when they
forsook him, presently Troubles overtook them. The pouring out of God's Fury on
them to consume them in the Wilderness, being put in Ezekiel. 20 13, 21. as the
direct contrary to those words, which if a Man do, he shall even live in them,
seems greatly to favor this Notion. But the house of Israel rebelled against
me in the Wilderness: They walked not in my Statutes, and they despised my
Judg^ents, which if a man do, he shall even live in them: Then I said, I would
^^ur out my fury upon them, to consume them in the Wilderness.

And indeed, one main difference between the two Covenants, (which I ^ould have
here observed) lies in this, to wit, the presentness of the R^ward promised in
the first, and the futurity of that promised in the se^ond. St. Paul in his
Allegorical description of the two Covenants, Ga^. 4.24, etc. represents those
that adhered to the first Covenant, by the Children of the Bond-servant, to
whom Abraham gave Gifts in pres^^t, and sent them away, as in Genesis 25.5. and
those that adhered to the second, by the Son of the freewoman, Isaac, who was
Abraham's Heir, ^o whom he gave the whole Inheritance at last And the Adoption
of Sons, as the Privilege of the New Covenant, is opposed to the condition of
Servants under the Old, Gal. 4.7. And what are they ad^pted to, but to an
Inheritance for the future? For by Adoption they are made Heirs: If a Son, then
an Heir of God through Christ: An Heir of what? of an Inheritance for the
future; an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and which fades not away,
reserved in Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.4. And therefore they are said to wait for the
Adoption, to wit, the redemption of their Bodies, at the Resurrection, Romans
8.23. Sons and Heirs serve their Father with a free and ingenuous Spirit,
though they have but little for the present, in confidence of what he will do
for them ^ereafter in another World, when they shall come to Age. But those
under the Old Covenant, were like Servants, who serve with a servile Spirit,
because they do it with expectation of present pay. The one walk by Faith,
which is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not
seen; the other were influenced in their Obedience, by the expectation of
present Reward, because that was it which the first Covenant promised to the
observers of it.

These Promises now insisted on, were promises of Reward to the observers of
this first Covenant: But besides these, there was another sort of Promises
exhibited in the first Covenant, and they were Promises of Pardon, in many
cases, when the Laws of that Covenant were broken. There were (as I have
showed) Laws of Indemnity, which made many of the breaches of the Laws of Duty,
pardonable upon certain conditions. And such were all Sins of Ignorance and
Inadvertency; and some of those also which were committed wittingly. But
presumptuous Sins, and such as carried in them a kind of contempt of the Law,
these were exempted from Pardon: Heb. 10.28. He that despised Moses's Law, died
without mercy, under two or three witnesses. But for the other, there were
promises of pardon upon certain conditions; which conditions were not always
the same. In some cases, the offering of a Sin-offering, or Trepass Offering,
was the condition. In other cases, that with confession of Sin, was the
condition. And in some other cases, Sacrificing, Restitution, and Satisfaction,
were the condition. And afflicting of the Soul, as well as the Sacrifice for
Atonement o^ the day of general Expiation, was always a condition of
forgiveness These things, in the particularities of them, you have in the 4, 5,
6, 1^ and 23d Chapters of Levit. And then the condition of the Promis^s of
Purgation of Legal Uncleanness, and the penal effects from the^, was the
observing the Rules prescribed for purifying the Uncle^n.

Now the forgiveness promised by these Laws of Indemnity, did ^ot free the
Conscience from all obligation to Eternal Punishment, but ^nly freed the Person
from suffering those temporal Evils, which ^ere threatened in this Covenant
against those which did not contin^^ in all things written in the Book of it.
Neither Sacrifices, nor ^egal Purifications, Sanctified, but unto the purifying
of the flesh, and to their temporal Concerns only, Heb. 9.9, 10, 13.

And here we may observe a five-fold difference in reference ^o Remission of
Sin, between the first Covenant, and the Covenant of Grace.

1. They differ in the nature of those Sacrifices by which Atonements were
made, and upon which Forgiveness was promised. The Blood of the Sacrifice of
the first Covenant was but the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the like, Heb.
10.4. But the Blood of the Sacrifice of the second Covenant, is the Blood of
Christ, the Eternal Son of God. So that the nature of the Sacrifices of the two
Covenants, upon which the Promise of the pardon of Sins was granted, does
differ as much as the Blood of Beasts and the Blood of the Son of God differ.

2. Those two sorts of Sacrifices pertaining to two kinds of Covenants, differ
in the proportion of Efficacy and Virtue to accomplish their respective Ends
and Effects. There is a greater Richness of proportion in the Blood of Christ
to free the Conscience from the guilt of Sin, or obligation to Eternal
Punishment, than there was in the Blood of Beasts to free the delinquent Person
from temporal Punishments. This is plainly intimated in Heb. 9.13, 14. For if
the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of an Heiser sprinkling the
unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh; [how much more] shall the
Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to
God, purge your Conscience from dead works, to serve the living God?

3. They differ in the nature of the pardon promised in each of the Covenants
respectively. The Redemption granted in the first Covenant, was but Temporal,
as the Covenant it self was; it was but from Evils temporal: But Christ Jesus,
by his Atonement, has obtained Eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 9.12.

4. They differ in respect of the Sins made pardonable by each Covenant
respectively. There were many sins for which the first Covenant granted no
Pardon, upon any terms whatsoever. They that despised Moses's Law, died without
mercy, Heb. 10.28. But the Covenant of Grace makes promise of the pardon of the
Greatest Sins upon Repentance. All manner of Sin and Blasphemy, except the
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, are pardonable upon Repentance. This
difference is set down, Acts 13.39. And by him all that believe are justified
from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses. We
may well suppose, that the first Covenant did finally Condemn some, which the
Covenant of Mercy Pardoned. David, in the matter of Vriah, did that which was
unpardonable by the first Covenant; it was a Fact to have been punished with
Death by the Law, but that there was none but God that could duly inflict it
upon him, in his capacity; and yet, upon his Repentance, it was pardoned as to
his Eternal Concerns, as well as Temporal, by virtue of God's Covenant of
Mercy. On the other hand, a Man probably might be so Righteous in the Eye of
the first Covenant, as not to be visibly blameable, and yet even then be
obnoxious to the Curse of the Everlasting Covenant. Paul, while he was Saul,
and in the state of Unbelief, was even then, as touching the righteousness
which is in the Law, blameless, as he himself says, Phil. 3.6. So different
were these two Covenants, that him whom the one Condemned, the other might
Justify; and likewise Justify him, whom the other Condemned.

5. They differed in respect of the condition to be performed on Man's part for
the obtaining of pardon. Pardon was promised in the first Covenant upon
condition of Doing only, without reference to Faith; but so are not the pardons
of the New Covenant. Gal. 3.11.12. But that no man is justified by the Law in
the sight of God, it is evident; for the Just shall live by Faith: And the Law
is not of Faith; but the man that does them shall live in them. So much
concerning the first Part of the Sanction of the first Covenant. Come we now to
the second.

The other part of the Sanction of this Covenant, did consist in the Curse of
it denounced against the breakers of it. Though it is true, that every Man is
under a Condemnation that would be Eternal, unless he comes to be absolved by
virtue of the Law of Grace; yet more than temporal Death was not expressly
threatened for breach of the Political Covenant, as such.

1. For first, a violent Death inflicted by the hand of the Magistrate, for
Capital Offenses, is called the Curse, Deuteronomy. 22.23. He that is hanged, is
accursed of God, or is the Curse of God.

2. Christ who did not suffer Eternal Punishment for Man's Sin, did yet suffer
the Curse of the Law, in that he was hanged on a Tree, Gal. 3.13. It is true
indeed, that by that temporary Sufferings of his, he redeemed us from Eternal
Punishment, which we were obnoxious to.

3. Those who Apostatize from Christ, and reject his Gospel, merit sorer
punishment than what was inflicted on them that despised Moses's Law; and yet
sorer Punishment (for kind) they cannot suffer, if Eternal punishment had been
the penalty of that Covenant, as such, Heb. 10.28, 29.

4. As the Promises of that Covenant, when particularly expressed, did appear
to be but temporal, so the Curses of it appear to be no other in the particular
enumeration of them. As for instance, a violent Death inflicted by the Hand of
the Magistrate, was the punishment threatened for many Capital Offenses; Such as
was Idolatry, Blasphemy, Witchcraft, Working on the Sabbath, invading the
Priests Office, and for being a false Prophet; and also for Murder, Adultery,
Sodomy, Buggery, Man-stealing, Cursing, or Smiting of Parents, or being
stubbornly Rebellious against them, and some other. And a cutting off from
among the People, (whither by God's hand immediately, or by Man's, I determine
not) was the penalty threatened for eating Leavened Bread within the time
prohibited; for not Purifying ones self, when Unclean; for profaning holy
things; for ones eating of the Sacrifice, with his Uncleanness upon him; for
offering Sacrifice any where but at the Tabernacle; for eating of Blood, and
for eating of the Fat of the Sacrifice; for neglecting to keep the Passover,
and for not afflicting the Soul in the Day of general Atonement; and for
several other Offenses. And those Offenses, for which cutting off from among
the People is threatened, being less criminous than the former, we have no
reason to think the penalty of cutting off from among the People, to signify
more (if so much) than the suffering of a temporal Death. We may observe how
the Israelites various Punishments are expressed for their manifold Crimes in the
Wilderness, by God's overthrowing them in the Wilderness, by Pestilence, and
otherwise, 1 Cor. 10.

In brief, The temporal Evils threatened in this Covenant, were either Personal,
Domestic, or National. The Personal and Domestic Evils, were no less, than
whatsoever tended to the infelicity of Man's Life, as Diseases in Body,
Perplexity of Mind, Unfruitfulness in Body, in Cattle, in Ground; Scarcity,
Poverty, Oppression, loss of Relations, fewness of Days, and an untimely
cutting off from the Promised Land. The National were wild Beasts, Pestilence,
Sword, Famine, Captivity, and such like. These were inflicted when the breach
of the Covenant became National in the generality of the People: But
especially, when those who had the management of Public Affairs, Civil and
Ecclesiastic, did not restrain the People by a due Execution of Laws; but
rather led them into sin by their Example, and sometimes by their Commands;
corrupting Religion, and perverting Justice, Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. And the Evils
threatened being National, as the Covenant it self was, they must needs be but
Temporal; because there is no Judging, Condemning, and Executing Nations, as
Nations, but in this World.

4. Come we now to show reason, why this Covenant is called the first Covenant,
since there were others made before it; as that with Adam in Paradise, and that
Covenant of Salvation with Adam after his Fall, and with Noah, and Abraham. And,

1. Negatively; It is not so called, as if it were the same for substance with
that which was first made with Adam in Paradise, as many have thought, or
because it was proposed upon the same terms. For,

First, That Covenant was established upon the terms or condition of perfect
Innocence; no provision being made in it for pardon, in case of failure, upon
any condition whatsoever. But it was otherwise in this Mosaic Covenant, as I
have showed, in that it contained several Laws of Indemnity for the Relief of
delinquent Persons, upon certain possible and practicable Conditions.

Secondly, If this and the Paradisical-Covenant had been of the same nature,
then it and the Promise made to Abraham, and his Spiritual Seed, would have
been inconsistent; the one promising Eternal Life upon Believing, the other
only upon condition of sinless Obedience. If this had been the case, the Law
would have been against the Promise, which God forbid it should, Gal. 3.21. and
the one would have excluded the other, according to St. Paul's reasoning. Romans
11.6. If by grace, then it is no more of works; otherwise grace is no more
grace. But if it be of works, then is it no more grace; otherwise work is no
more work. But,

2. Affirmatively. It is called the first Covenant, because it is the first of
the two under question and dispute between the Apostles and unbelieving Jews.
The Question and Controversy between them was, which of the two Covenants,
that by Moses, or that by Christ, was to be finally adhered to, as the way of
Salvation. In the handling of which Controversy, that by Moses is called the
first, and the Gospel Covenant established by Christ, as was Prophesied by
Jeremiah, is called the second: Even as the one is called the Old Covenant, not
because it was the oldest of all Covenants, but because opposed to that which
was Prophesied of under the name of a New Covenant. It is observable, that
where we meet with the first mention of the first Covenant under that
denomination, it is not styled [the] first Covenant absolutely, but [that]
first Covenant, as pointing at that under Dispute. Heb. 8.7. For if (that)
first Covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for
the second.

CHAP. V. The grand Mistakes of the Jews about the Law and Promise; and how St.
Paul counter-argues these Mistakes.
I Am now in the next place to show the fatal mistakes of the unbelieving Jews,
about God's Promise to Abraham, and the Law of Moses; and how St. Paul does
counter-argue these mistakes. A distinct understanding of which Errors, and of
St. Paul's arguings against them, sometimes severally, and sometimes
conjunctively, and in the gross, will be as a Key to open many passages in his
Epistles, which otherwise will be hard to be understood.

1. They held Circumcision in the Flesh to be the condition in special, upon
which all the Blessings of God's Covenant with Abraham were promised; but did
not understand that Spiritual Circumcision, viz. the Mortification of sinful
Affections and Lusts, was principally intended, when God made Circumcision the
condition of his Covenant. For they were it seems grossly ignorant of the
necessity of Regeneration, and so of the Spiritual design of Circumcision;
which was the reason why Nicodemus, though a Ruler among the Jews, answered
Christ so aukardly as he did, when he Preached to him the necessity of being
born again, Joh. 3. An Ignorance that some allowance possibly might have been
made for, had not the Circumcision of the Heart, and the making themselves a
new Heart, been expressly called for, as it was Deuteronomy. 10.16. Jer. 4.4. Ezekiel.
18.31. Now this Ignorance of theirs in the Doctrine of the Circumcision of the
Heart, and the sense they put upon God's making Circumcision to be the
condition of his Covenant of being their God, was doubtless the reason why they
placed so very much as they did in Literal Circumcision. For, although
Circumcision first given to Abraham by way of Covenant, was afterward
incorporated with the body of Moses's Law, yet it should seem these Jews
considered it not so much as it was a part of that Law, but chiefly as a
Condition of God's Covenant with them in Abraham, as they were his Seed. And
therefore, St. Paul where he reckons up his Jewish Privileges, whilst he was a
Pharisee, puts Circumcision in the head of them all, and as accounted by him
while a Pharisee a Privilege distinct from his being blameless, touching the
Righteousness which was in the Law, Phil. 3.5, 6. Whence also the Judaizers
said, it was needful to Circumcise them, and to command them to keep the Law of
Moses, Acts 15.5, 24. As if Circumcising did import something different from,
or at least something more, than keeping of the Law did, though otherwise it
was a part of the Law. Upon this account doubtless it was, that we find them
more zealous for Circumcision, than for any other Point of the Law besides.

Against this Erroneous Opinion of theirs, touching Literal Circumcisions being
the condition of the Spiritual Benefits of the Covenant, St. Saul argues
several ways. First, By maintaining that the Covenant did chiefly respect
Circumcision in the Spirit. Romans 2.28, 29. He is not a Jew, which is one
outwardly; neither is that Circumcision, which is outward in the flesh, (that
is, it was not that Circumcision which would savingly avail them, as they
thought it would) but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and Circumcision is
that of the Heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter; whose praise is not of
Men, but of God.

Again, by showing that Abraham could not have been Justified before
Circumcision, if the great Benefits of the Covenant (of which Ju^tification was
one) were suspended upon that as a necessary condition. And yet that he was
Justified, when not Circumcised, there is the express Authority of Scripture
for. This he asserts. Romans 4.9, 10. For we say that Faith was reckoned to
Abraham for Righteousness. How was it then reckoned? when he was in
Circumcision, or in Uncircumcision? Not in Circumcision, but in Uncircumcision.

Afterward, he proceeds to undeceive them in the apprehension they had, that
the Benefits of the Covenant were entailed upon Abraham's Natural Seed as such;
or at least as such, with the addition of a Literal observation of
Circumcision, and the Law, without respect to the Spiritual and New Birth: Romans
9.6, 7, 8. They are not all Israel, which are of Israel, (as they thought they
were) neither because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they all Children: But
in Isaac shall thy Seed be called: That is, those shall be called Abraham's
Seed, which are born as Isaac was, by Faith in the Promise, which are therefore
called Children of the Promise. For so the Apostle expounds it, saying, They
which are the Children of the flesh, these are not the Children of God; but the
Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed; to wit, such as are born
after the Spirit, as it is explained, Gal. 4.28, 29. And this agrees to what he
had said before, Romans 2.28. He is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, etc.
Against which corrupt Opinion, John the Baptist did oppose himself, when he
admonished the Pharisees, to bring forth fruit meet for Repentance, and think
not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father, Mat. 3.7, 8.

The Apostle labors to cure this grand Error about Literal Circumcision as
disjoined from Spiritual, in many other places; and shew^, how that
Circumcision avails nothing, but a New Creature, such as Spiritual
Circumcision makes a Man to be. Gal. 6.15. Not Circumcision, but Faith. Gal.
5.6. Not Circumcision, but keeping the Commandments, is that which would only
reach those great Ends which they sought after in Literal Circumcision, 1 Cor.
7.19. But I shall have occasion to improve these Scriptures further upon
another Head of this Discourse. And by the way, we may observe, that those who
build their hopes of future Happiness upon their having been Baptized, and
their being of the Church, without the inward Grace signified by Baptism, which
is the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, they are much
akin to those miserable mistaken Jews.

2. They not understanding the Typical and Spiritual use of the Legal
Sacrifices, as they did prefigure the Death and Suffering of Christ, and the
general Atonement which was to be made thereby, nor yet the Predictions of the
Prophets touching his Death, they ran into another gross Error, and that was,
That the promised Messiah should not, by suffering death, become a Sacrifice
for sin. And therefore they said to him, when he spoke to them of his Death; We
have heard out of the Law, that Christ abides for ever; and how say thou
the Son of Man must be lift up? Joh. 12.34. They did not dream of his Dying,
but of his Reigning visibly as a Mighty Monarch among them, and subduing all
Nations under them; Because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the
Prophets which are read every Sabbath Day, they have fulfilled them in
condemning him, Acts 13.27. Their Ignorance in the meaning of the Types and
Predictions touching the Death of the Messiah, would have been the more
excusable, if they had not wilfully and obstinately persisted in that Error
after those Types and Prophecies were fulfilled and explained to them.
Ignorance in this matter was found in Christ's own Disciples a great while; but
their slowness to believe those Types and Prophecies after they were fulfilled,
was a thing which our Savior rebuked them for, saying, O fools, and slow of
heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken. Ought not Christ to have
suffered these things, and to enter into his glory? Luke 24.25, 26. But the
unbelieving Jews were tenacious of this Opinion, after they had sufficient
means to have been convinced of their Error in it. In opposition to which
Opinion, the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, argues at large the
necessity of Christ's Suffering by Death. As first, he argues it from his
Priesthood. For having proved him, according to Prophecy, to be a Priest, not
after the Order of Aaron, but of Melchizedeck, and so a Priest of greater
Dignity, Chap. 5. and 7. He infers, Chap 8. that as a Priest, he must have
something to Offer in Sacrifice, and that of greater value than what was
Offered by Priests under the Law, that were but of an inferior Order; and that
he shows to have been Himself, and his own Blood, as the Antitype of all those
Legal Sacrifices, Chap. 9. Secondly, He proves his Death necessary for the
confirmation of the second and New Covenant, as he was Mediator of it. As the
first Testament was not dedicated without Blood, so neither is the second: For
where a Testament is (says he) there of necessity must also be the death of
the Testator, Chap. 9.15,-23. Thirdly, His Death was necessary for the
obtaining of Remission of Sins; a Benefit promised in the New Covenant: For
without shedding of Blood (says he) there is no Remission of Sin, Chap. 9.22.
with Chap. 10.5-18.

And indeed, it was a good part of the Apostle's work to beat down this
Opinion, that the Messiah was not to dye. Acts 17.3. St. Paul, as his manner
was, went into them; and three Sabbath Days reasoned with them out of the
Scriptures, opening and alleging that Christ must needs have suffered and
risen again from the dead. Yea, this Opinion had so generally obtained among
them in our Savior's time, that it seems the Apostles of Christ at first were
not free from it. For when our Savior told them, that at Jerusalem he should
be delivered to the Gentiles, and that they should scourge him, and put him to
death, and that the third day he should rise again; it is said, they understood
none of these things, and that this saying was hid from them, neither knew they
the things which were spoken: Though they were spoken plainly, and in no
Parable, Luke 18.32, 33, 34. Christ's being Crucified, became a stumbling block
to the Jews through this Error of theirs, and that which they insisted upon, as
a Reason why they would not receive him as the Christ of God, 1 Cor. 1.23.

3. They held another Error which probably was Mother or Daughter of the
former, and that was, That the Legal Sacrifices did expiate and take away Sin,
not only so as to free them from Legal Penalties and Temporal Punishments, as
in many cases they did; but so also as to free them from all obligation to
Eternal Punishment. And so they did attribute to those Sacrifices, the same
atoning Virtue and purging Efficacy, as is proper only to the Blood of Christ.
In opposition to this Opinion, it is maintained,

1. That those Legal Sacrifices, were but Figures of the great Sacrifice,
Christ Jesus, Heb. 9.10, 11, 12. and 10.1.

2. It was argued, that it was impossible that the blood of Bulls and of Goats
should take away Sin, because these were offered year after year, over and over
in the day of general Atonement for the same sins. And that if the former
Sacrifices which were first offered, had taken away sin, the latter could not
have been necessary to the same purpose, Heb. 10.1, 2, 3, 11. The often
repetition of Sacrifices for the same sins, argues that the Worshippers had a
secret sense in their Conscience, that those Sacrifices were not of a competent
Value, nor a sufficient Price to Redeem their Souls from Sin, as it exposes to
Eternal Punishment; however, they might sanctify as to the purifying of the
flesh, yet they could not make any perfect as pertaining to the Conscience,
Heb. 9.9. and 10.1, 2.

3. It was argued from a Prophetical passage in Psalm. 40. in which Christ is
brought in speaking thus; Sacrifice and Offering thou would not, but a Body
have thou prepared me: In burnt Offerings and Sacrifice for sin thou have had
no pleasure: Then said I, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. From whence he
infers, that the first sort of Sacrifices were taken away as insufficient, that
the second might be established. By the which will, says he, we are sanctified
through the offering of the Body of Jesus once for all, Heb. 10.5. -- 10.

This Opinion of theirs, that Legal Sacrifices did expiate all their Sins, did
keep up in them a hope of Impunity here and hereafter, under many Immoralities
and great Transgressions in the course of their Lives. Though they multiplied
Transgression, yet if they multiplied Sacrifices too, they thought they should
escape well enough. Amos 4.4, 5. Come to Bethel and transgress, at Gilgal
multiply transgression, and bring your Sacrifice every morning, and your Tithes
after three years, and offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with Leaven, and
proclaim and publish your free-Offerings, for this likes you, O Children of
Israel, says the Lord God. And much after this rate do carnal Christians bear
up themselves in hopes that all their sins are done away by the Sacrifice of
Christ the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World, though they live
from day to day in ungodliness. Only indeed they sin at a cheaper rate for the
present, than the wicked Jews did. The Jewish sinners were at the cost of many
a Sacrifice to stop the mouth of Conscience; but these are at cost only in
making provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, and depend upon
Christ to pay all their Scores.

4. Another of their Errors, as consequent upon the former, was this; That
without Circumcision and observing of the Law of Moses, the Gentiles could not
be saved. This Opinion the Judaizing Christians retained after their Conversion
to the Christian Profession. Acts 15.1, 5, 24. Certain men which came down from
Judea taught the brethren, saying, Except ye be Circumcised after the manner of
Moses, ye cannot be saved. There rose up certain of the Sect of the Pharisees
which believed, saying, that it was needful to Circumcise them and to command
them to keep the Law of Moses.

In opposition to which Opinion, St. Paul taught that the Righteousness of God
by Faith without the Law is manifested unto all, and upon all that believe,
whether Jews or Gentiles, and that there is no difference, Romans 3.21, 22. And
that a Man is justified by Faith without the deeds of the Law, though never
Circumcised: And that God is the God of the Gentiles, as well as of the Jews,
and that he does justify the Uncircumcision and the Circumcision; those that
had observed the Law of Moses, and those that had not, upon the same terms,
viz. of Evangelical Faith, Romans 3.28, 29, 30. Whereunto agrees the words of St.
Peter, Acts 15.9, 11. He put no difference between us and them, purifying their
hearts by Faith; i. e. us Jews, and they Gentiles: But we believe that through
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved even as they, and upon no
other terms, though we have observed the Law, and they have not, Gal. 2.15, 16.
Upon the same account St. Paul again affirms, Romans 4.5. That to him that
works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is
counted for Righteousness. That is, the Idolatrous Gentiles that never had
observed the Law, but lived without God in the World, should yet have their
practical belief of the Gospel imputed even to them for Righteousness. And he
further exemplifies this in Abraham, Ver. 9.10, 11, 12. whose Faith was
reckoned to him for Righteousness before he was Circumcised, that he might be
the Pattern and great Example of God's justifying the Heathen upon their
believing and obeying as Abraham did, in leaving his Idolatry and his Country
upon God's Promise and Command, though he never had been Circumcised. And upon
the like account he says again, Gal. 3.8, 9. That the Scripture foreseeing
that God would justify the Heathen through Faith, preached before the Gospel
unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed. And from thence he
concludes, that those Gentiles that be of Faith, that believe as Abraham did,
are blessed as Abraham was, are blessed with faithful Abraham.

5. Another Error which was held by some Judaizing Christians was this; That
Faith in Christ and Literal Circumcision, with a Literal observation of the Law
of Moses, jointly, were the Condition of Justification. Though they were such
as Believed, yet they taught, that except Men were Circumcised, and kept the
Law of Moses, they could not be saved, Acts 15.1, 5. They seem to have retained
the same false Opinion of Justification by the Law, as the unbelieving Jews
did, but held the Death of Christ necessary to be super-added.

To convince them of which Error, St. Paul sets before them the bad consequence
of it in two respects. 1. In that they hereby rendered the Death of Christ
needless in it self. Gal. 2.21. If Righteousness come by the Law, then Christ
is dead in vain: There would then have been no need of Christ's Death to
accomplish it, as the unbelieving Jews indeed did hold. 2. In that this Opinion
of theirs made Christ and his Death useless unto them, and cut them off from
receiving any benefit by him, Gal. 5.2, 4. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if
you be Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing: Christ is become of none
effect unto you: whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from
Grace, And hereto agrees that in Hebr. 13.10. We have an Altar whereof they
have no right to eat which serve the Tabernacle: Those Judaizers who stand for
the necessity of Mosaic Observations, have no right to, nor shall receive
benefit by Christ, who is the only Christian Altar to which we bring all our
Sacrifices.

6. They held the Law of Moses to be unalterable, and of perpetual obligation.
In opposition to which, the Author to the Hebrews improves to great purpose
that Prophecy, Jer. 31.31, 32. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I
will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah: Not
according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the day when I took
them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt, etc. For in that he
says, a new Covenant, he has (says he) made the first old. Now that which
decays and waxes old, is ready (says he) to vanish away. And St. Paul shows
how that the Legal Ministration, how glorious soever it was, was yet done away,
when that which was far more glorious did appear, 2 Cor. 3.7, 11. And again,
that we are become dead to the Law by the Body of Christ, and delivered from
the Law, Romans 7.4, 6.

7. The last of their Errors I shall insist on, was this: They held the first
Covenant as alone, or separated, to be the Covenant of Salvation, only taking
in with it the Covenant of Literal Circumcision, which also was made a part of
their Law. That first Covenant which I have already described as a Temporal
Covenant, and the Promises and the Threatenings of it but Temporal, they took to
be established for perpetuity, and the Promises of it to contain Promises of
Eternal Redemption, or Remission, as well as Temporal; and Eternal Life and
Felicity as well as Temporal: And such a Literal observation of the Laws of it
to be the condition of those Promises, as would render them inculpable in the
eye of the Magistracy; such a Righteousness sufficient to justify them before
God, as St. Paul says he had while he was a Pharisee, Phil. 3.6. As touching
the Righteousness which is in the Law blameless; which then he accounted to be
his gain.

Now that they did peremptorily adhere to this first Covenant, and the terms of
it, for Justification and Eternal Life, it does plainly appear by the mighty
opposition which the Apostle made against them in it. For they did still oppose
another Covenant, as the Covenant of Justification and Eternal Life, unto this
Mosaical Covenant; and Faith, as the Conditon of that, in opposition to Works
as the Condition of this, as will appear if we come to Instances.

1. St. Paul argues it with them, that the Promise of God to Abraham and his
Seed, was not through the Law, but through the righteousness of Faith, Romans
4.13. Not through the Law, that is, not upon the terms upon which the benefits
of the first Covenant were promised to the Nation of the Jews, but upon quite
other terms, expressed by the Righteousness of Faith.

2. He argues it farther with them, That God's way of accounting Men Righteous
by Faith, and their way of seeking Righteousness upon the terms of the first
Covenant, were utterly inconsistent, and the one destructive of the other, and
that but one of these ways could possibly stand. For if they which are of the
Law be Heirs, Faith is made void, and the Promise made of none effect, Romans
4.14. And again, If the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of Promise:
But God gave it to Abraham by Promise, Gal. 3.18. And if by Grace, then it is
no more of Works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace, etc. Romans 11.6.

3. And that the Law did not exclude the Promise to Abraham, he farther argues,
in that the Covenant with Abraham was confirmed, and unalterably settled and
established in the Messiah 430 Years before the Law by Moses was given, and
that therefore for them to go about to introduce the Law in the room of the
Promise to Abraham so confirmed, would be as unreasonable and unjust, as for
one Man to alter or make void another Covenant, after he has confirmed it.
Gal. 3.15, 17. Brethren, I speak after the manner of men: though it be but a
Man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no Man disannulleth or adds thereto.
And this I say, that the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ,
the Law which was 430 Years after, cannot disannul, that it should make the
Promise of none effect.

4. St. Paul argues it impossible in the nature of the thing, that they should
be justified by the Law, because one main end of God's promulging the Law of
Nature, (which yet was a great part of the first Covenant) was to convince Men
of their Guilt, and of their obnoxiousness to Wrath, and to stop their Mouths,
and to leave them without any plea of defense as from it. Romans 3.19, 20. Now we
know that what things soever the Law says, it says to them who are under the
Law: That every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before
God. Therefore by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified in
his sight: for by the Law is the knowledge of sin. And if the Law does convict
Men, it cannot justify them: For the same Law cannot both Condemn and Justify
the same person, in reference to the same Charge. If all are Cast and Condemned
by the Original Law, as they are, ( for he has concluded all under sin, that
he might have mercy upon all, Gal. 3.) then so many as come to be justified
after this, must needs be justified by another Law superceding that, and that
is none other than the Law of Grace. The Law of Nature Curses every one that
has broken it, though but once, and therefore it cannot justify them too: Out
of the same mouth (in this case) does not proceed Blessing and Cursing.

5. He argues this Opinion of theirs to be contrary to the Doctrine of the
Prophets many hundred years after, as well as contrary to the Promise to
Abraham long before the Law. That no man is justified by the Law in the sight
of God, it is evident: For the just shall live by Faith: and the Law is not of
Faith; but the man that does them, shall live in them, Gal. 3.11, 12. from Heb.
2.4. The Law is not of Faith, that is, it does not promise Pardon, or any other
Blessing upon Believing, but upon condition of Doing the things therein
required: the man that does them, shall live in them, Levit. 18.5.

6. The insufficiency of the first Covenant to make Men Eternally Happy, and
the necessity and validity of the second to that end, as further argued in Heb.
8. from another famous Prophecy in Jer. 31.31. etc. of God's making a New
Covenant with Israel and Judah in the latter days, not according to that he
made with their Fathers, when, he brought them out of Egypt. 1. It Is argued
that the first Covenant was but Temporary, and being old, was ready to vanish,
and to give place t^ a New and Everlasting Covenant, Chap. 8.13. 2. That the
first Covenant was faulty, or defective, or else there would have been no place
sought for a second, ver. 7. 3. That the Promises of that first Covenant were
not of such things as Men stand in need of, to make them everlastingly Happy,
as those better Promises of the second Covenant are, ver. 6. 4. And yet more
particularly, that in this New Covenant, there is promise of such a forgiveness
of sins, as that iniquity shall be remembered no more, ver. 12. whereas the
first Covenant did not promise any such Pardons: All that it promised, was a
forgiveness only as to the concerns of this Life, otherwise their sins were
still kept upon the File to be taken away (if ever taken away) by the Mediator
of the New Testament, by means of his Death, for the redemption of the
transgressions that were under the first Testament, Chap. 9.15. But in those
Sacrifices, (which were but the Sacrifices of the first Covenant) there was a
remembrance again made of sins every year, Heb. 10.3.

And now, by all these reasonings of the Apostle put together, it sufficiently
appears that the unbelieving Jews did expect Justification and Eternal Life,
only upon the terms of the first Covenant, and that they held that Covenant, as
comprehending the Covenant of Circumcision, to be the Covenant of Eternal Life.
And indeed, this last mentioned Error of theirs, in holding the first Covenant
to be the Covenant of Salvation, did in a manner contain in it all the rest
mentioned before, which did naturally grow out of it. For if that had been the
Covenant of Salvation, then it would have followed, that the Sacrifices of that
Covenant had been sufficient, and the Death of Christ needless; and that
Circumcision and keeping the Law of Moses would have been necessary to the
Salvation of the G^ntiles, etc.

And now after all this, considering what Erroneous Opinions the incredulous
Jews held about the Law, and about Circumcision; and considering in what sense
they asserted Justification by the Law, and by Circumcision, it will be no
difficult thing to understand exactly, in what sense the Apostle does every
where deny Justification to be by the Law, or by the Works of the Law.

For doubtless St. Paul's denial of Justification and Salvation to be by the
Law, or Works of the Law, is to be understood in the very same sense in which
the incredulous Jews, against whom he Disputed, did hold these to be attainable
thereby. For else, his Reasonings would have been beside the Question under
debate between them. And therefore we must take our measure of St. Paul's sense
in the Negative part of the Question, by his Adversaries sense of it in the
Affirmative. And if so, then in his denying Justification and Salvation to be
by the Law, or by Works of the Law, we must understand him to deny a freedom
from the Eternal Punishment to be attainable by Legal Sacrifices: And also to
deny that the, promise of Eternal Life was made upon condition of Literal
Circumcision, and a Literal observation of the Mosaical Law, without being by
Faith renewed in the inward frame and moral constitution of the Soul: and
likewise, to deny Eternal Life to be attainable by the terms of their Political
Covenant, the Promises whereof were not made upon condition of Believing, but
of Doing. The Law is not of Faith, but the man that does those things, shall
live in them, Gal. 3.12. For these and suchlike were the Opinions which those
Jews did hold, (as I have showed) and these were the things in which St. Paul
opposed them. They divided and separated Circumcision and the Law in the Letter
of them, from the Spirit of them both; claiming Justification by the Letter
alone. And they divided the Law from the Promise rightly understood, and looked
to be Justified by Works of the Law, without Faith in the Promise rightly
understood. They looked for the Messiah indeed, but not to become a
Propitiation for Sin, or to establish a New Covenant of Salvation, but to
further their Temporal and Eternal Felicity in the way of their Obedience to
the Political Law.

But then it does not in the least appear, that St. Paul in denying
Justification to be by the Law in the sense thus explained, does also thereby
deny Works of sincere Obedience to God, to concur with Faith in Man's
Justification in all respects.

And if any shall yet suppose, that St. Paul in denying Justification by Works,
in the Jews corrupt sense, does also, on the by, deny all Works of Evangelical
Obedience to bear any part of the Condition on which God promises to justify
Men through Christ; such a Supposition, if admitted, would make his Doctrine
herein inconsistent, not only with the Faith of the holy Men of Old, who were
wont to express the Condition of the Covenant of Mercy, by loving God, and
keeping his Commandments; but it would also make him inconsistent with himself
and his own Doctrine, and the Doctrine of other Apostles, as I doubt not but
plainly to make appear, before I have done with this Discourse.

There is one Character of Works given, by which you may certainly know what
Works they were which St. Paul denied Men were justified by; and they were such
Works which were apt to occasion boasting. Ephesians. 2.9. Not of Works, lest any
man should boast. Romans 4.2. For if Abraham were justified by Works, (to wit, in
the Jews sense, by Circumcision in the Flesh, to which St. Paul alludes, ver.
1.) he has whereof to glory, but not before God, but only before Men, who were
not Circumcised as he was. For the unbelieving Jews, who sought and expected
Justification by Circumcision, and other Legal Observations, did glory over the
poor Gentiles, that were destitute of those Works, which consisted in the
outward Privileges which the Jews had, and looked down upon them with contempt,
though some of them were much better than themselves, such as Cornelius, whom
they looked upon as unclean. This boasting humor of the Jews over the Gentiles,
is described and reproved, Romans 2. from ver. 17. to 29. Now the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith, of obtaining pardon by another Undertaking for us, to
wit, Christ Jesus, and of being accepted with God through him, upon our
sincere, though otherwise imperfect Obedience, (which sincere Obedience too, is
not performed without his special Grace and Assistance) takes away all occasion
of boasting, in reference both to God and Men, and laid the Jews as low as the
Gentiles, and made St. Peter a Jew to say, But we believe that through the
grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they, Acts 15.11. And
therefore when St. Paul had said, that now the righteousness of God without
the Law is manifested, even the righteousness of God which is by Faith of Jesus
Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe, for there is no difference;
meaning, betvveen Jews and Gentiles, Romans 3.21, 22. he thereupon demands, in
ver. 27. saying, Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what Law? Of Works?
Nay, but by the Law of Faith. Therefore we find the holy Men of old among the
Jews, who expected Acceptance with God upon other terms than the Pharisaical
Jews did, who placed their Confidence (called trusting in the flesh, Phil.
3.4.) in their External Privileges and Performances alone, were so far from
glorying in such a Righteousness as that, that they cried out in reference to
that, All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. Thus Regenerating
Grace made David so far from boasting, either of Privileges, or of his
Performances, that he said unto God, Who am I? and what is my people, that we
should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of
thee, and of thine own have we given thee, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. This made St. Paul
to say, We are not sufficient of our selves, as of our selves, to think any
thing, but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. And by the grace of God, I am
what I am, 1 Cor. 15.10. And of him are we in Christ Jesus, who of God is made
unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, that he that
gloriet h, may glory in the Lord, having nothing but what he has received
from: him gratis, and without all desert, yea contrary to his demerits, 1 Cor.
1.30, 31. The good Works which the Saints do, they do them by virtue of their
being created in Christ Jesus in order thereunto, Ephesians. 2.10. and all that is
good, is through Christ strengthening them, Phil. 4.13. From whence therefore
we may well conclude, that if the Works which St. Paul wholly excludes in the
matter of Justification, were only such as were apt to occasion boasting, that
then Acts of Evangesical Obedience were none of those Works.

According to the sense explained then, I presume we may well understand that
Text, Romans 3.28. which of all others seems in the Phrase and Expression to be
most Exclusive of Works in the point of Justification; the Words are these,
Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by Faith, without the deeds of
the Law. Which words (if you consider the context) seem to import no more but
this, viz. That a Man is justified in the Gospel-way, which in the verse before
is called the Law of Faith: And not by the deeds of the Law, or upon the terms
of the first Covenant, which in the verse before likewise is called the Law of
Works. Which two, the Gospel-terms, and the first Covenant-terms, are still
opposed to each other in the point of Justification. Now although the
conclusion here laid down is true, in reference to the Jews as well as to the
Gentiles, yet it seems to be written here with special reference to the
Gentiles. Intimating, that upon their Belief, they might be Justified, without
turning Proselytes to the Jewish way, as appears by that Interrogation in the
very next words following, ver. 29.30. Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he
not also of the Gentiles? yes, of the Gentiles also: Seeing it is one God which
shall justify the Circumcision by Faith, and Uncircumcision through Faith. And
the words in the 31, ver. do intimate that the words in the 28th ver. are to be
understood in such a limited sense, as I have assigned in my Explication, viz.
as excluding the deeds of the Law; in the act of Justification, only in the
Jews corrupt sense of the Law: because St. Paul therein affirms his foresaid
Doctrine of Justification by Faith, without the deeds of the Law, not to be at
all destructive of the Law, but contrariwise, tending to establish the Law, if
we take the Law not in that distorted sense in which those Jews held it, but as
it was appointed by God to promote Holiness in the World, which is the end and
scope of all his Laws. In which sense, the Apostle was so far from excluding
the Works of the Law from having any thing to do in the Justification of Men,
as that he had expressly affirmed before, That though the hearers of the Law
were not just before God, yet the doers of the Law should be justified, Romans
2.13. M^aning by doers, such as do sincerely obey that Law of God under which
they are, and not such as do perfectly fulfill it, as some would s^^^ to
understand it. For I have showed before, that God never made promise of
Justification upon naturally impossible Conditions, as ^^at would be, and they
are dishonorable thoughts of God to think he ^^ath; and therefore the Apostle
may not be understood to promise Justification to the doers of the Law upon any
such terms.

There is one vein of Texts more, wherein the opposition is made in such a form
of words betw^en the Jews way of seeking Justification by the Law, and the
Gospel-way of seeking it by Faith: That being a little opened, will both
illustrate and confirm what I have been representing to you: And they are such
in which the Jews erroneous way is called their own Righteousness; and the
true Christian way of Justification, the Righteousness of God by Faith, and the
Righteousness of God. Romans 10.3. For they being ignorant of God's
Righteousness, and going about to establish their own Righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the Righteousness of God. Phil. 3.9. And be found in
him, not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith This
Righteousness is called their own Righteousness, in opposition to the
Righteousness of God, upon a threefold account, as I understand it.

1. Because they sought the pardon of their sins by that only which was their
own; their own Sacrifices, Sacrifices which they themselves brought to be
offered. Whereas the Christian Justification is called the Righteousness of
God, because the Sacrifice by which pardon of sin, and acceptance with God
is obtained, was from God, and given by God, to wit, Christ Jesus, whom God
has set forth to be a propitiation, Romans 3.25. and Christ has given himself
an Offering and a Sacrifice for us, Ephesians. 5.2. And he is made unto us of God,
Wisdom, Righteousness, etc. 1 Cor. 1.30.

2. It was called their own Righteousness, because they did not think
Regeneration, or Supernatural Grace necessary to the obtaining of it, but a
Literal observation of the Law and Circumcision, such as passed for a
Righteousness among Men, and such as they, without Supernatural Aid, were
able to perform. As for those Precepts which commanded the loving of God with
all the Heart, and the Circumcising the Heart, because these were not enjoined
under express penalties, as those things were of which the Rulers were to
take cognizance, therefore the Pharisees counted them but Counsels only, and
not direct Precepts. But the Christians-Righteousness, which is by Faith, may
be said to be of God, because by Grace they are saved through Faith in Christ
Jesus, and that not of themselves, it is the gift of God: And we are his
Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.8, 10.

3. It was called their own Righteousness, because it was a way of seeking
to be justified of their own devising, and not of God's appointing. And on the
contrary, the Gospel-Method of Justification is called the Righteousness of God
through Faith, because it is of God's Institution and Appointment: It is the
substance of God's New Law or Covenant.

The result of all then is, That they were the Works of the Law, as exclusive
of Faith in Christ and his Death; which the Apostle denied any Man to be
justified by; and not those Works of the Law, which are the immediate effects
of Faith in Christ, in his Death, and in his Doctrine.

CHAP. VI. How St. Paul's Doctrine of Justification by Faith, and not by Works,
was then mistaken by some.
I Come in the next place to show how that St. Paul's Reasonings about Faith
and Works, in reference to Justification, were probably mistaken by such
Solifidians as St. James reasoned against. For he having taught that God did
justify the ungodly Gentiles upon their Believing, and without the deeds of
the Law, but denying Justification to as many of the Jews as did not Believe,
though they were observers of the Law; there were some who thereupon through
mistake, laid the whole stress of Salvation upon Believing, to the neglect of a
holy and virtuous Life. And St. Paul being sensible how apt some were to make a
bad use of his good Doctrine, and to draw bad Conclusions out of good Premises,
he frequently mentions such Inferences, on purpose to caution Men against them.
As for Instance: He having said in Romans 5.20. That where sin abounded, grace
did abound much more: In Chap. 6.1. he says, What shall we say then? shall we
continue in sin, that grace may abound? as some it seems were ready to infer;
God forbid, says he; how shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer
therein? You may consult to like purpose in general, Romans 3.5. 6, 7, 31. and
6.15. Gal. 2.17. and find that St. Paul and others were slanderously reported
to have said, Let us do evil, that good may come.

That there were such as did misrepresent St. Paul's Doctrine touching God's
Grace and Long-suffering, and wrest several passages in his Epistles, and other
Scriptures, to their own destruction, we are told by St. Peter also, 2 Pet.
3.15, 16. And account that the long-suffering of the Lord is Salvation; even as
our beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given him, has written
unto you; as also in all his Epistles, speaking in them of these things: In
which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and
unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures to their own destruction.

And after St. Paul in his 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5, verses, had by many black
Characters, described a sort of Christians that had a form of godliness, but
denied the power thereof: In ver. 8. he further describes them by that which
was the cause of the forementioned unsavory fruits of the Flesh, to wit, that
they were men of corrupt minds or understandings, and reprobate concerning the
Faith, or void of Judgment concerning the Faith, as the Margin has it. They
were Men of corrupt Principles, and injudicious concerning the Doctrine of
Faith: They did not discern Faith to be necessary in the operative and
practical nature of it: But as they did satisfy themselves with a form of
Godliness without the power: so they did likewise with a formal inefficacious
and liveless Faith, which made them so unsavory in their Lives.

And St. John, after he had in his first Epistle antidoted the Christians
against the pretentions of the Gnostics, who held a bad Life consistent with
Communion with God through illumination of mind, and the Christian Faith,
deceiving themselves, and laboring to deceive others, in thinking they might
be Righteous without doing Righteousness, 1 John 3.7. He toward the conclusion
of that Epistle, sums up his general scope in it in these words: These things
have I written unto you that believe in the Name of the Son of God; that ye may
know that ye have Eternal Life, and that ye may believe on the Name of the Son
of God, Chap. 5.13. His meaning is, as I conceive, that he wrote this Epistle,
first, to the end they might be the better assured of Salvation by Christ upon
their rightly Believing on him. And secondly, To the end they might not be
drawn into mistakes in the point of Believing, as if any Faith less than such
as is accompanied with a constant adherence to Christ's Doctrine and Example
touching a holy Life, would give them that Assurance. He wrote to them that did
Believe, that they might Believe; that is, that they might Believe yet more
understandingly, more groundedly, and so perseveringly against all temptations
to Apostasy from the profession of the Faith, or to looseness in the profession
of it.

St. Jude also, ver. 3, 4. stirred up the Christians to contend earnes^ly for
the Faith, the Doctrine of saving Sinners in the way of Believing; because, as
he told them, there were certain Men professing Faith, but of ungodly Lives,
that were among them, that turned the grace of God into lasciviousness; so
understanding the Law of Grace, the Gospel, as if it had been a Proclamation
from Heaven of a general Pardon for Christ's sake, and through Faith in him, of
as many sins as Men had a mind to commit. The which Error, led them into those
Monstrous Impieties charged upon them in that Epistle: By reason of which, the
way of Truth, the right Faith they pretended to, was evil-spoken of in the
World, (as St. Peter notes) they being indeed Spots and Blemishes to the
Christians and Christian-profession, so long as they were admitted to their
Feasts of Charity, as owned by them to be of their Number. This was indeed an
ungodly Faith: But the Faith which he exhorted them to contend for, and to
build up themselves upon, as on a sure Foundation, he calls their most holy
Faith, verse. 20. such a Faith as is an Operative Principle of a holy Life.

And they were such Christians as St. James in his Epistle did expostulate
with, that did lean so much upon a mere Believing, upon a mere Assent of the
mind unto the truth of certain Propositions, as that they were careless in the
subduing of their Passions, and bridling their Tongues, and regulating their
Actions; as if these had not been necessary to Salvation: But thought
themselves safe upon account of their barren Faith, though they were Proud and
Conceited of their Knowledge and Seize, Censorious and Contentious,
Unmercifull and Uncharitable. In a word, they were such as were injudicious
concerning the Faith that will Save, and under mistakes of the Apostles
Doctrine about it. All this will easily appear to any that shall but with a
competent measure of Understanding, view and consider the scope and contents of
that Epistle.

And thus you see how plainly it appears by the Epistles of the Apostles, that
the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, without Works, in the sense in which
the Apostles asserted it, was misunderstood by many Gnostics, carnal
Gospellers, or Solifidians. The sense in which the Apostles did assert it, was,
that Faith justifies without Works Antecedent to Believing, and without Works,
as the Works of a literal observation of Moses's Law, which was opposed by the
Jews to Faith, as having Christ Crucified for its Object, and Repentance,
Regeneration, and sincere Obedience in a holy Life, for its inseparable
Effects. But these deceived Souls, that deceived their own Hearts, seem to have
understood the Apostles, as if they had taught Justification by Faith,
considered only as having the Death of Christ and the Atonement made thereby,
for its Object, without respect to Regeneration and new Obedience, as any part
of the Condition.

And it had been much better for the Christian World, if those corrupt Notions
about the Doctrine of Faith as Justifying, had died with those Men, which in
the first Ages of the Christian-Church were infected with them. But alas, it is
too apparent, that the same, or much of the same dangerous and destructive
mistakes, have been transmitted to, or revived in these latter Ages of the
Church. For we find by experience in this present Age, that very many of those
who are called Christians, presume themselves to be Christians indeed, and such
as shall be saved by Christ, though their Lives declare them to be far from
being New Creatures, from being renewed in the Spirit of their Minds, Wills,
Affections, and Conversations, as those are that have been taught as the Truth
is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4.21, -- 24. For they are confident they Believe all the
Articles of their Creed; and in doing so, they are confident they shall be
Saved; and so they would, if that Belief of theirs were but so effectual and
operative as to produce such a change in Heart and Life, as would denominate
them New Creatures. But the mischief is, they deceive themselves in the nature
of their Faith; it being but an Opinionative, Inoperative and dead Assent to
the Truth of the Gospel, such as is only an Act of the Mind or Understanding,
and does not powerfully influence the Will, and so it is not a believing with
all the Heart, but is the act only of one such faculty of the Soul. A Belief
it is probable may be found in the Devil himself: And such a Belief was found in
some who were so convinced by the power of Christ's Miracles, in concurrence
with his Doctrine and Life, that they could not choose but believe him to be an
extraordinary Person sent from God; though their carnal Interest prevailed so
much in them, as that it would not suffer them to confess him openly, because
they loved the praise of Men, more than the praise of God, Joh. 12.42, 43. And
besides, these Men deceive themselves about their Faith in this also; that they
do not heartily Believe the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, but are partial in
their Faith. They in a sort believe Christ to be the Son of God, and that he
came into the World to save sinners, and that he Died for our sins, and the
like. But then they do not heartily believe his Doctrine, touching the
necessity of Repentance, of being born again; of denying all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and of living righteously, godly, and soberly in this present
world. Or else they frame such Notions of these things unto themselves, of
Repentance and Regeneration, as that they think they believe Christ's Doctrine
touching them, when they believe only the lying Imagination of their own Brains.

And there is too much ground to fear, that many Men's ill managing the Doctrine
of Justification by Faith, has not a little strengthened Men in this vain
confidence. For while Evangelical Obedience it self, under the Notion of those
Works to which Faith is opposed, has been decryed as Popish, when interessed
in Justification, and Justification asserted to be by Faith alone, in
opposition to all Works whatsoever, Inward and Outward, as well Evangelical as
Legal, as well those after Conversion, as those before, yea, and the
disposition thereunto; the Flesh and the Devil to help it, has got great
advantage thereby to persuade Men against the necessity of a holy Life, in such
a sense of a holy Life, as the Scripture makes absolutely necessary to
Salvation. For though it is true that good Works have been acknowledged and
pressed too as necessary to Salvation; yet when withal, they have been denied
to be necessary to Justification, and Men have been taught, that when once they
are Justified, they can never fall away from a State of Justification, they
have easily been drawn to believe, that good Works are not absolutely necessary
to Salvation, no more than to Justification, but Faith only. And upon
supposition that the other two Points of Doctrine are true, it would be but
rational for them so to believe. For if good Works be not necessary to
Justification at all: And if it is impossible but that those who are once
justified should be saved; how should Men choose but infer from hence, that good
Works are not absolutely necessary to Salvation? Unless it shall be said, that
Men are not put into an immediate capacity of Salvation by being justified:
Which to affirm, would be to say Men are not freed from Condemnation, by being
freed from Condemnation, which would be a contradiction in terms: For to be
justified, is to be freed from Condemnation, Romans 8.33, 34, and 5.16, 18. and
therefore Justification must needs put Men into an immediate capacity of being
saved.

And as there is great reason to think that the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith alone, in opposition to the Works of Evangelical Obedience, has been a
stumbling-stone unto many, and a back-friend to the power of Godliness; so
there is another which has been wont to be joined with it, that has rendered
it the more dangerous, and it self no good friend to holy Living; and that is
the Doctrine of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto Justification, in
that way in which it has been managed by very many: For otherwise, there is a
sense (as I have showed) in which it is a great and a comfortable Truth. For
when Men have been taught to esteem their own Righteousness but as filthy rags
(not only because of its utter insufficiency to justify instead of Christ, or
as he justifies, in which respect indeed it is no better; but also as any part
of a Condition of Justification, or of our acceptance with God:) And when they
have been taught also, that upon their Believing only, Christ's Righteousness
in fulfilling the Law for them, becomes imputed to them in it self, and not
only as the procuring cause of their Justification upon the terms of the
Gospel, so that they are looked upon as having themselves perfectly kept the
Law in him, it has doubtless infeebled their endeavors after an inherent
Righteousness, and proved a temptation to them, to think that so long as they
have such another Inherent Righteousness essentially in it self imputed to
them as Christ's is, they have no great need to find it in themselves;
considering also, that if they had it, they must rather loath themselves for
it, than take any comfort in it: But let no man deceive you, (says St. John)
he that does righteousness, is righteous, as he is righteous, 1 John 3.7.

I do acknowledge, that many of them have been worthy Men, who yet have
propagated these Opinions: But that makes the Opinions never the better, but
have done more hurt, in gaining thereby the more credit. It is true also, that
those worthy Men have zealously pressed the necessity of Repentance,
Regeneration, and a Holy Life: Which proved indeed an Antidote against the
Poison of the other Opinions, so that they did not become Mortal to many, as
otherwise they would have done. And indeed, they would have made mad work, if
they had not been yoaked with wholesomer Doctrine, as we see they did among
Antinomians, Ranters, and other carnal Christians that have followed the
Ducture of those Opinions, but have been shy of letting the Doctrines of
Mortification and strict Living, to have any power over them. But then if the
preaching of those sounder Doctrines of Repentance, Regeneration, and a holy
Life, have done much good, notwithstanding they have been clogged with Opinions
of another tendency; it is easy to imagine that they would have done much more
good, if they had not been checked by those unsound Principles.

But I shall say no more of this, (though more might be said) because I hope I
may say, that most of those who have formerly imbibed these Opinions, are now
come to deliver themselves with more caution than heretofore. And so I shall
proceed to the last thing I propounded to touch upon, and that is, to show,

CHAP. VII. That the Doctrine of St. Paul, and of St. James, about Faith and
Works, in reference to Justification, do not differ, but are wholly one.
IT is true indeed, though the Doctrine of St. PAVL, and St. JAMES, was in
nothing opposite the one to the other, yet the nature of the subject matter of
their Epistles, did differ, just as the Errors they engaged against, did
differ. The Errors of the unbelieving Jews consisting much in denying
Justification to be by Christ, and Faith in him, and in placing it in their own
Works of Circumcising, Sacrificing, and other Mosaical Observations. And St.
Paul, designing in some of his Epistles, to antidote the Christians against the
Infection of them, and to establish them in the saving Doctrine of the Gospel,
was led of course to bend his Discourse in great part against Justification by
Works of the Law; and on the contrary, to assert it to be by Faith in Christ,
in his Death, and in his Doctrine, without those Works. Whereas St. James
having to do in his Epistle, with such as professed the Christian Faith and
Justification by it, but erring dangerously about the nature of Faith, as
justifying, thinking that opinionative Faith would save them, though destitute
of a real change in the moral frame and constitution of their Souls, and of a
holy Life: Hereupon it became in a manner as necessary for him to plead the
Renovation of Man's Nature, and Evangelical Obedience to be some way necessary
unto Justification, as it was for St. Paul to contend for Justification by
Faith, without the deeds of the Law. And therefore, though their Doctrines in
this respect did in great part differ, yet they did not differ as Truth differs
from Error, nor as opposites, but only as one Truth differs from another. For
otherwise, when St. Paul had to do with the like Erroneous and Scandalous
Christians, as those were which St. James expostulated the matter with: When he
had to do with such as had a form of Godliness, but denied the power thereof,
he could, and did decry a reprobate Faith, and plead the necessity of a Faith
that is unfeighned, and of a holy Life, as well as St. James; as appears in
part by what was said in the former Chapter, and will, I doubt not, be made
sufficiently evident in this. In order whereto, I shall recommend to
consideration these ten things.

1. That Works of Evangelical Obedience, are never in Scripture opposed to
God's Grace.

2. That St. Paul, in speaking against Justification by Works, gives sufficient
Caution not to be understood thereby to speak any thing against Evangelical
Obedience in reference thereto.

3. That Regeneration, or the New Creature, as including Evangelical Obedience,
is opposed to Works in the business of Man's Justification, as well as Faith
is, and as well as the Grace of God it self is.

4. That Evangelical Obedience, as well as Faith, and together with Faith, is
opposed to the Works of the Law, in reference to Justification.

5. That Evangelical Obedience alone, is opposed to the Works of the Law.

6. Faith it self is an Act of Evangelical Obedience.

7. By Evangelical Obedience, Christians come to have a Right to Salvation.

8. The Promise of benefit by the Blood of Christ, is made to Evangelical
Obedience.

9. Repentance. And 10. Forgiving Injuries, are both Acts of Evangelical
Obedience, without which a Man cannot be justified. And if these things be made
out, they will (I think) amount to such a demonstration, as that we cannot well
desire a clearer or fuller proof, that St. Paul, together with others the
Apostles, taught Justification by Evangelical Obedience, as the effect of
Faith, as well as St. James.

1. The Works of Evangelical Obedience, as the effects of Faith, and
Regeneration by Faith, are never in St. Paul's Epistles, or any other the holy
Scriptures, opposed to God's Grace, in reference to Justification and
Salvation. Works and Grace indeed are opposed to each other: But then, by Works
we are to understand either Works antecedent to Conversion, or as they are
denied to merit at the hands of God: Or the Works of the Law of Moses, as
Erroneously contended for by the Jews: Or the Works of the Law, as Typical, and
as opposed to things Typify'd: Or the Works of the Law, as the Law is in its
rigor opposed to the milder Economy of the Gospel: But the Works of
Evangelical Obedience are never opposed to Grace, no more than Faith it self
is. And there is no reason why they should, because Evangelical Obedience is
the effect of Divine Grace, as well as Faith it self is, and tends to the
praise of it, and is accepted, and will be rewarded through Grace.

Contrary hereunto, those words in Titus 3.5. Not by works of Righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, are wont to be
alleged to prove that Works, after Conversion, as well as those before, are
opposed to the Mercy of God in the saving of Men. But whether this be duly
collected from these words, will best appear by opening the scope and meaning
of the words with the Context. The words in the 3, 4, and 5, Verses, are these;
For we our selves also were sometimes foolish, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another. But
after that the kindness and love of God our Savior toward Man appeared: Not
by Works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy he
saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. By
their being Saved here, is meant their being rescued and delivered from their
sinful state, mentioned verse. 3. In that this is said to be done, not by Works
of Righteousness which they had done, but according to God's Mercy: The plain
meaning (I doubt not) is, that this change of their condition, and deliverance
from their sinful state, was not effected, or so much as begun among them by
any Reformation of their own, till the Gospel came to work it, (which is meant
by the appearing of the Kindness and Love of God, verse. 4. and is of like
import with that Chap. 2.11, 12.) which God of his Mercy, and not of their
Desert, sent among them to that end. And if this be the meaning of the words,
the Apostle was far from intending by Works of Righteousness in this place,
Works after Conversion. I might rather well argue on the contrary from this
place: That Baptism, which is an act of Evangelical Obedience in the Person
Baptized; and Regeneration, which is Evangelical Obedience in the Root and
Principle, are, together with the Mercy of God, and, as subordinate to it,
opposed to the Works of Righteousness here mentioned, in the Work of Salvation.
For it is probable, that by the washing of Regeneration here, is meant Baptism,
as the Figure of Regeneration; and by the Renewing of the Holy Ghost,
Regeneration it self. By both which, as subordinate to God's Mercy therein,
they were said to be saved, and not by the Works of Righteousness, which they
had done before these. There is another place in 2 Timothy 2.9. which is wont to
be urged with this to Titus, to the same purpose: But it being of the same
nature with this, the same Answer may serve both with a little variation.

2. St. Paul, in speaking against Justification by Works, gives sufficient
caution not to be understood thereby to speak against Evangelical Obedience in
the case. When he had asserted Justification to be by Faith, without the deeds
of the Law, and that the Gentiles might be Justified by Believing, without ever
observing Moses's Law, Romans 3.28. lest he should be understood thereby to
favor Gentilism, or loose living in Men, provided they would but turn
Christians; he frames and answers on Objection thus verse. 31. Do we make void
the Law through Faith? God forbid: Yea, we establish the Law. And how did they
so? Certainly they did not thereby establish the Ceremonial Law in the Letter
of it, but in the Spirit of it they did, in as much as in Preaching
Justification in the Gospel-way, they Preached in plain Precepts the necessity
of that Spiritual purity unto Salvation, which was but darkly, and in a figure
taught by the Ceremonial Law: And this they did, in Preaching the necessity of
Mortification instead of Circumcision. And by the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith, they established the Moral Law, both in the Letter and spirit of it, in
teaching the necessity of Evangelical Obedience to it (...) more spiritual and
forcible manner than had been taught be^^^^. (...)in, when he had charged the
unbelieving Jews with a great Erro^, in going about to establish a
Righteousness of their own, in oppos^^i^^ to God's, in adhering to their Law
against the Gospel, Romans 10.3. to the end it might not be thought that he would
take them off their Law, that they might be Lawless, or less Religious, he
adds, verse. 4. that Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one
that believes. For so he is in his Doctrine, having therein taught that
Righteousness of living which the Law it self taught, but in a far more
excellent, spiritual, and effectual manner, than was taught by the Law. So that
all that he designed in taking them off from their Law, was but to put them
under a better conduct: To make them dead to the Law, that they might be
married to another, viz. to Christ by his Gospel, that they might bring forth
fruit unto God, as it is, Romans 7.4. And likewise in ver. 6. he says, We are
delivered from the Law, but not to be Lawless, but that we might serve in
newness of Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter; that is, according to
the Spirit, Scope, and Design of the Law, now expressed in plain Precepts, and
not in the oldness of the Letter and Ceremony. And so he says of himself, Gal.
2.19. I through the Law am dead to the Law, i, e, he through a better
understanding of God's design in the Law, became dead as to all his former
expectations of Justification by it. But then, if he were dead to the Law, it
was, as he says, that he might live unto God, live a life in the flesh through
the Faith in his Son, through believing his Gospel in its Precepts and
Promises; the one directing, and the other quickening unto a most excellent
Life, ver. 20.

And if St. Paul were thus careful in denying Justification by Works, to assert
the necessity of Evangelical Obedience, we may well conclude that he never
intended, under the notion of Works of the Law, to exclude Evangelical
Obedience from having any hand sooner or later in Justification.

3. Regeneration, or the New Creature, as including Evangelical Obedience, is
opposed to Works of the Law, in the business of Man's Justification, as well as
Faith is, and as well as the Grace of God it self is. Gal. 6.15. For in Christ
Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new
Creature. Circumcision is here as elsewhere by a Synecdoche, put for the Works
of the Law in general. For there were none that were for Circumcising, but who
were also for keeping the Law of Moses: Only Circumcision is mentioned
frequently instead of all the rest, because they held it to be not only a part
of the Law, but more; and because they laid the greatest stress upon it, as I
showed before, Chap. 5. Now in that which the Apostle denies Circumcision and
the Works of the Law to avail a Man, in that he affirms the becoming a New
Creature will avail him, and that was in the business of Justification and
Salvation: For in that sense the unbelieving Jews and Judaizers held
Circumcision and other Works of the Law available. And this New Creature thus
opposed to Works, and thus available to Justification, consists in a new
frame of Spirit, and the Vital Operations thereof, and which we can have no
right notion of, without Evangelical Obedience in will and resolution at least
(which are really inward acts of that Obedience, and are a conformity of the
renewed Will to the Divine Law).

4. Evangelical Obedience, as well as Faith, and together with Faith, is
opposed to the Works of the Law in reference to Justification and Salvation.
Gal. 5.6. For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but Faith which works by love. Here again Circumcision, by
the same Figure, and for the same reason as before, is put for the Works of
Moses's Law. And as these are denied to avail any Man to Justification and
Salvation, so on the other hand it is affirmed, that that Faith which works
by Love does avail to these great ends. For to say that Faith which works by
Love does so, is the same in sense, as to say, that Faith which works by
fulfilling the Law, and by keeping the Commandments, does so avail: For so Love
is said to be, Romans 13.10. 1 John 5.3. The Assemblies Annotations upon the
place give notice, that the Word here translated [Worketh] (Faith which works
by Love) being in the mean, or middle voice, may be taken either Actively or
Passively. And several other Learned Men (among whom Dr. Hammond is one) do
render and understand it passively; as if the Apostle should have said, Faith
which is wrought, or perfected, or consummate by Love, and so make it directly
parallel with that in St. James, Chap. 2.22. By Works was Faith made perfect.
So far is the Scripture we see from opposing acts of Evangelical Obedience to
Faith in the Works of Justification, as that it conjoyns them with Faith in the
title to it, and in opposition to false pretentions to it.

5. Evangelical Obedience alone is opposed to the Works of the Law in reference
to Justification; so far is it from being true, that where the Works of the Law
are excluded, there Evangelical Obedience is excluded from having any share in
the Work of Justification. 1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing, and
Uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments of God.
Circumcision is here again, as before, put for the whole Law: And indeed, he
that was Circumcised, was bound to keep the whole Law, as this Apostle notes
in Gal. 5.3. And when he says Circumcision is nothing, he means here
doubtless, as in those other places already opened, that it avails nothieg to
any Man's acceptance with God, or to his Justification and Salvation, as the
Judaizers of those Times thought it did. But then the keeping of the
Commandments of God will avail to these ends: For that I conceive was intended,
and ought to be understood by the opposition that is made between Circumcision
and keeping the Commandments.

6. Faith it self is an act of Evangelical Obedience; this as well as Love is
an act of Conformity to our Lord's Commands; and therefore a Man cannot be
justified by Faith, but in being so, he must be justified by Evangelical
Obedience. 1 John 3.23. This is his Commandments, that we should believe in the
Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us Commandment.
This by our Savior is called a work, Joh. 6.29. This is the work of God, that
ye believe on him whom he has sent. And there is so much of the nature of
Evangelical Obedience in Faith it self, as that to Believe and to Obey are
promiscuously put one for another; and so is Unbelief and Disobedience.
Accordingly you have in many places the one reading in the Text, and the other
in the Margin, as Acts 5.36. Romans 11.30, 31. Ephesians. 5.6. Heb. 4.11. and 11.31.
And Belief and Disobedience are in Scripture opposed to each other as direct
contraries, Romans 10.16. 1 Pet. 2.7. 2 These. 2.12.

So that since Faith is an act of Evangelical Obedience, it follows that to say
the Works of Evangelical Obedience do justify, does no more derogate from the
Grace of God, or the freeness of his Grace in justiying, than to say Faith
justifies. First, Because other acts of Evangelical Obedience are the effects
of God's Grace, and produced by it, as well as Faith. It is God that works in
you both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. And secondly,
Because it is merely of the Law of Grace, that Faith and other Acts of
Evangelical Obedience, are made the condition of the Promise of Salvation.
Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are ye saved, through Faith in Christ Jesus; and that not
of your selves, it is the gift of God. As Men do not Believe or Obey of
themselves without supernatural Assistance, so neither is it of themselves that
they are Justified or Saved upon their Believing, but both the one and the
other, is the Gift of God. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy. It is by virtue of God's New Covenant,
that a promise of Pardon is made to Repentance, or to Faith; for the primary
Law, the Law of Nature, promised no such thing upon Repentance. And it is by
virtue of the same Law of Grace, that a Promise of Justification and Reward is
made to sincere Obedience in other Acts of Obedience, as well as those of Faith
and Repentance.

That which has made many afraid of interessing Evangelical Obedience with
Faith, in justifying Men, has been an Opinion, that so to do would derogate
from God's Grace, and attribute too much to Man. But you see there is no ground
for such an Opinion. It Is true indeed, the proper merit of Works, and God's
Grace are inconsistent: And therefore are opposed to each other in Scripture.
But Evangelical Obedience, and Grace, are no more opposite or inconsistent,
than Cause and Effect, or than Causes principal and subordinate. And as it does
not follow, that because we are justified freely by God's Grace, that therefore
we are not justified by Faith: So neither does it follow, that because we are
justified by Faith, that therefore we are not justified by sincere Obedience.
For these and the Blood of Christ, do all concur in producing many of the same
Effects, though not in the same respect.

7. By Evangelical Obedience, Christians come to have a right to Salvation.
Revel. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have a
right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the gates into the City.
This is left on Record as a special Memorandum ^or Christians in closing up the
Canon of the New Testament; and therefore is to be taken special notice of.
This right to the Tree o^ Life, and of entering into this blessed City upon
keeping the Commandments, is from a New Covenant, or Law, Act, or Grant from
God: For otherwise Man that had transgressed the first Law h^ ^as put under,
would have been far from having any right to such Happiness upon the terms here
mentioned, viz. of sincere, though imperfect Obedience. But seeing that a Right
to Salvation does accrue to Men upon a sincere keeping of God's Commandments,
notwithstanding their forfeiture of their first Right by Man's first Fall, it
evidently follows, that Evangelical or Sincere Obedience, is part of the
condition of the Promise of Blessedness in the New Law or Covenant, and is here
put for the whole of it, as at other times Faith is put for the whole of the
Condition. And that Moses, David, Solomon, Nehemiah, and Daniel received it in
this sense, and understood all along that sincere Obedience flowing from Love,
was the condition of God's Covenant of Mercy when they styled him a God keeping
Covenant and Mercy with those that Love him, and keep his Commandments, Deuteronomy.
7.9. 1 Kings 8.23. Neh. 1.5. Dan. 9.4. I have before showed.

If it shall be here said, that sincere Obedience is indeed a condition of
Salvation, but not of Justification, and that it is so made here in this 22d of
the Revelation, I have I think sufficiently answered this Objection in the
former Chapter; but shall here add, That such as thus say, are more curious and
nice in distinguishing between Justification and Salvation, than St. Paul was.
For he calls Justification, the Justification of Life, Romans 5.18. Whom he
justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8.30. and proves that Men shall be
justified by Faith, because it is written that the Just shall live by Faith,
Gal. 3.11. Thus with him to be justified, and to be blessed are all one, Gal.
3.8, 9. Romans 4.7, 8, 9. And to confirm this Righteousness or Justification and
Life, are used by him as Synonimous terms, Gal. 3.21. For if there had been a
Law given which could have given life, verily Righteousness should have been by
the Law. And Justification and Condemnation are but in direct opposition to
each other, Romans 5.18. and 8.33, 34. And to be freed from Condemnation (which
is Justification) and to be Saved, are as much one, as not to Dye, is to Live.
In short, Salvation as well as Justification, is promised to Believing, Joh.
3.16. Act. 3.31. Heb. 10.39. And therefore Salvation, as well as Justification,
must needs be the immediate effect of Faith; if we take Salvation, as begun
here in this Life (as the Scripture represents it to be, Joh. 5.24. 1 John
3.14. and 5.12.) From all which we may conclude, That what is absolutely
necessary to Salvation, must needs also be necessary to Justification.

Add we hereto, that to be justified, and to be saved, is the same thing with
St. James, as well as it is with St. Paul, according to the tenor of his
Reasoning, Chap. 2. from ver. 14. to the end. What does it profit my brethren
(says he) though a man say he has Faith, and have not Works? Can Faith save
him? Verse. 14. This Interrogation implies an Emphatical Negation; and the
meaning is, that such a Faith can by no means save a Man; and he gives the
reason of it twice over in verse 17, 20. because Faith without Works is dead.
And then afterward argues the necessity of Works, together with Faith, unto
Justification, or unto Salvation (which was the thing he began with) by God's
justifying Abraham by Works, together with his Faith, who was the great Pattern
or Example of God's justifying all others. If then to be justified, and to be
saved, amounts to the same in St. James's Discourse here, then by the way, they
do not rightly understand St. James, who think he does not speak of a
Justification before God in this his Discourse about Justification by Works,
together with Faith, but of a Justification before Men, and to their own
Conscience only. Which supposition of theirs, does directly thwart the very
scope and design of his whole Discourse, which is to set forth what will, and
what will not avail a Christian-Professor in the sight of God, to the saving of
his Soul, as abundantly appears. So that the Scripture which says Abraham
believed God, and it was accounted to him for Righteousness; and which St.
James says was fulfilled in Abraham's being justified by Works as well as by
Faith, was not fulfilled in Abraham's being justified to others, and to his own
Conscience, but in his being justified before God; and so St. Paul understood
it, Romans 4.3. Gal. 3.6. But this was touched before in Chap. 1.

The result then of what has been argued in Answer to the Objection, is this,
viz. That all that are justified, are thereby put regularly into an immediate
capacity of Salvation; so that if they should dye the very next moment after
they are once justified, they would undoubtedly be saved. And therefore
Evangelical Obedience can be no more necessary to Salvation, than it is to
Justification; and it is as necessary to the one as to the other. And if to say
Evangelical Obedience is necessary to Justification, be injurious to Christ,
and to the Grace of God, as some would pretend, how comes it to pass then, that
to say Evangelical Obedience is necessary to Salvation, is not so too? For our
final Salvation is as much the effect of God's Grace, and of Christ's
Undertaking for us, as our Justification it self is, and of as much Value. And
therefore if the one be not injurious in this kind, neither is the other.

8. As the Promise of forgiveness of sins by the Blood of Christ, or the
Promise of an interest in his Blood to the pardon of Sin, is sometimes made
unto Believing; so sometimes again it is made unto Evangelical Obedience, or a
holy Life, as in 1 John 1.7. If we walk in the light, as he is in the light,
(that is, endeavoring to be holy, as God is holy) then have we fellowship one
with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin;
but otherwise, it does not. And so the Christians to whom St. Peter wrote, were
said to be elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood of
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.2. But they were not elect to the benefit of being
sprinkled with the Blood of Christ without Obedience. And therefore by this we
see also, that Evangelical Obedience is part of the Condition of the Promise of
Justification by the Blood of Christ.

9. To forgive Injuries is an act of Evangelical Obedience to that Precept of
our Lord, Mar. 11.25. And yet without this act of Obedience, Men that have been
injured, cannot be justified, because they cannot be pardoned, according to the
Word of our Lord, Mark 11.26. Mat. 6.15. and 18.35. Therefore Evangelical
Obedience must needs be part of the Condition of Justification.

10. Repentance is an eminent Act of Evangelical Obedience, Acts 17.30. and yet
pardon of sin, which is essential to Justification, is not to be obtained
without it, Luke 13.3, 5. Therefore again it follows, that Evangelical
Obedience is necessary to Justification, and part of the Condition of it.

And now by this time I suppose it fully appears to any unprejudiced Reader,
that the Doctrine of St. Paul, yea, and of St. Peter and John too, do fully
accord with the Doctrine of St. James, touching the necessity of Evangelical
Obedience unto Justification. The opposition then which some have made between
Faith and all Internal and External Works in reference to Justification, as
well Evangelical, as Mosaical, has not been only without Scripture-ground, but
against Scripture-evidence; and looks more like that which was made by the
Gnostics, or other Solisidians, opposed by St. James, (if it be not the very
same) than any the Scripture any where makes. And how much injury the
Christian Religion and the Souls of Men may have suffered thereby, is a thing
to be thought on, and sadly laid to Heart.

It is a pleasant Doctrine, and the worst of Men called Christians are glad to
hear that they may be justified by Christ, only upon their Believing in him,
without any Works of Righteousness or Self-denial of their own. And upon that
account (presuming verily that they do Believe) they are confident that they
are justified, though they are unsanctify'd. But those especially are in great
danger of deceiving their own Souls, by building their Confidence upon this
Doctrine, who, together with this Belief, have more of the form of Godliness
than the other have, and are found much more in the use and exercise of the
external Devotional part of Religion, and are zealous for this or that Opinion,
Party, or Way, which they think most Orthodox; though they be greatly destitute
of Love to the Nature of God, and of Humility, Charity, strict Justice,
Fidelity, Peaceableness, Sobriety, Temperance, Modesty, and Meekness, and of
that renewed frame of Soul which would make them like Christ Jesus, wherein the
power of Christianity does consist: The external Duties of Hearing, Reading,
Praying, and the rest, being in great part but means referring to the other as
the end. So that no Man is to account himself truly Religious, further than he
attains to these truly Christian Qualifications, by the use of the External
M^ans, and Internal Aids. Yea, the ^^^shly part even in M^n good in the main,
is very apt to make an advantage of such a Doctrine as aforesaid, to the
lessening of their Care, Dilience, and Zeal, in working out their Salvation, in
striving to enter in at the straight Gate, in governing their own Spirits and
Appetites, in cleansing themselves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and
in perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

And therefore there is great need for those that are Spiritual Guides to the
People, to insist much upon the necessity of Repentance, Regeneration, and a
holy Life, as well as Faith, in order to their being justified and saved by
Christ Jesus. For the People, yea, the better sort of them, stand most in need,
as of being well-grounded touching the Truth of the Christian Religion, so
especially of having the Doctrines of Morality inculcated upon them, the
Precepts of the Gospel being almost all of that Nature, (thought some speak
diminutively of moral Preaching) and tend to the perfecting of the Nature of
Man, in regulating the Internal Operations of the Soul, and the External
Actions of Life, in reference both to God and Man, our Selves and Others: The
recovering of Men to which, is God's great Design by the Gospel, in order to
their being made perfectly Happy at last, as I have showed in Chap. 1.

There is indeed an absolute necessity of Believing the Gospel in order to
Christian Practice: And therefore our blessed Savior did not only Preach the
necessity of Faith in him and his Doctrine, but also wrought abundance of
Miracles to beget this Faith in Men. And yet he knowing the great danger of
Men's miscarrying in point of Morality in the disposition of Soul and actions
of Life, insisted chiefly in his Preaching, upon Doctrines of that nature; as
you may see in his Sermon on the Mount, and elsewhere. He taught the necessity
of being born again: Of making the Tree good, that the Fruit might be good. And
to enforce this Doctrine of his, he was not wont to tell his Auditors that
every Man shall be Rewarded according to his Belief, but that when the Son of
Man shall come, every Man shall be rewarded according to his Works: That those
that have done good, shall come forth to the resurrection of life; and those
that have done evil, to the resurrection of damnation: That by their words they
shall be justified (which are no more Faith than Works are) and by Their words
they shall be condemned: That in the Great Day of the Trial of all Nations,
every Man shall be Acquitted or Condemned, according to the Good they have
done, or neglected to do, Mat. 25 And that then not every Man that had Faith
enough to Cry, Lord, Lord, or, to Prophecy, cast out Devils, or do wonders in
his Name, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but such and such only as
have done the will of his Father.

Great need there is therefore of Peoples examining themselves impartially, and
of being often admonished to take heed, lest they mistake and dec^ive
themselves in the nature of Religion, and in what is abs^lutely necessary to be
done on their part; because Men are very a^t to flatter and deceive themselves
in that, and to think that when their Faith is right in the object of it [as
when they ^elieve in the true God, and in his Son Jesus Christ, and expect
Salvation by him alone] that then they are true Believers, and such as shall be
saved; especially if therewith they join the frequenting of God's Ordinances,
and the paring off of some of the grosser Enormities of their Lives, though in
the mean while they make no Conscience of cleansing their Hearts, and governing
their Spirits, of subduing their Passions and inordinate Affections, and of
bridling the Tongue. For this cause it is that Christians are so often in
Scripture cautioned to take heed lest they should be deceived. Be not deceived,
God is not mocked: For whatsoever a Man sows, that also shall he reap, Gal.
6.7, 8. Little Children, let no Man deceive you: He that does Righteousness, is
Righteous, even as he is Righteous, 1 John 3.7. 1 Cor. 6.9. Ephesians. 5.6.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS Of The Discourse of the Nature, Ends, and Difference of the Two
Covenants.
INTRODUCTION.
THE Principal cause why the Jews rejected Christ and his Gospel. To Remove
which the Apostle St. Paul used various reasonings, wherein some things are
hard to be Understood, Which others mistaking ran into a Contrary extreme. The
method which the Author proposes to remove mistakes.
CHAP. I.
The Nature and Design of God's Promise to Abraham. What is necessary to open
the Nature of it.
Sect. 1.
That it is of the same Nature with the New Covenant, though they differ in the
Administration. For First, The Covenant delivered to Abraham, was confirmed by
Christ, as well as the Gospel. Secondly, the Gospel was Preached to Abraham.
Thirdly, he was Justified by Faith, and therefore by a New Covenant. Fourthly,
St. Paul Argues against the Jews, from Abraham's being Justified by Faith. That
Abraham had not a distinct Notion of all that was implied in the Promise. What
the New Covenant is, namely, a New Law by way of Remedy against the Rigor and
Extremity of the Law of Nature, under which Man was Created Page 1. 2. 3. This
proved and Reasons for it. p. 4.
Sect. 2.
God's design in the New Covenant or Promise made to Abraham next to his own
Glory, was the Recovery of Humane Nature, from its degenerate State, to a State
of Holiness, without which no Happiness. p. 4. and 5. This proved. p. 6.
Sect. 3.
The Benefits contained in the Promise made to Abraham; First of sending the
Messiah, and what a benefit this was. p. 7. and 8. Secondly, a Promise of
Remission of Sin to all who would Believe in him, Repent, and become sincerely
Obedient for the future. ibid. Thirdly, A Promise of Divine Assistance to Men
in their faithful endeavors, though tacitly. ibid. Fourthly, a Promise of
Eternal Life, though implicitly. ibid.
Sect. 4.
The Extent of God's Promise to Abraham. p. 9. That it did extend to all
Nations of the Earth. p. 10.
Sect. 5.
The Security given by God, for the Performance of the Promise made to Abraham
p. 10. The Reason why God gave such a Security. ibid.
Sect 6.
That the Promise made to Abraham was Conditional. ibid. That Repentance and
Faith were to be performed by Man as his part of the Covenant. p. 11. The
Reason of this. ibid. How God Works that change in Man's Nature designed in the
New Covenant. First by proposing important Truths to his Understanding.
Secondly, By proposing Motives to the Will, to incline it to follow the
Dictates of the Mind. p. 12.
Sect. 7.
That the Condition of the Promise made to Abraham was a practical Faith. p.
13. The Nature of Abraham's Faith. p. 14 The difference of believing God, and
believing in God. ibid. A Description of Faith in General. ibid. Faith Strictly
taken is an Assent unto the Truth of any proposiion upon the Credit of the
Speaker. ibid. Yet Saving Faith is of a more Comprehensive Nature. If God's
Threatenings against Sinners be taken in, the definition will be this. Faith is
such a hearty Belief of God's Declaration concerning his own Grace and
Displeasure, and Man's Duty, as does effectually cause a Man to expect from
God, and to act in a Way of Sincere Obedience, according to the Tenor and
Import of such a Declaration. p. 17. What Faith, as Evangelical and Christian
is? p. 17. The first reason why Faith is made the Condition of the Promise, is,
that the Grace of God to Man might the more show it self. The Second Reason,
because it best answers God's Design in this Covenant. p. 18. 19. 20.
Sect. 8.
What we are to understand by God's counting Abraham's Faith to him for
Righteousness. p. 21. Two things make up the Righteousness of the Law of Grace.
First the Righteousness which consists in the Forgiveness of Sins. Secondly,
the Righteousness of Sincere Obedience. p. 22. This cleared. p. 23.
CHAP. II.
For what ends the Law was added to the Promise; not to cross or confront it.
p. 24. A Question, wherefore then serves the Law. ibid. Answer, it was added
because of Transgression until the Seed should come; And that in many respects,
first to discover Sin that it might be known to be Sin. Secondly, to set it out
in its own Colors. Thirdly, to set off the Beauty and Glory of God's Grace in
the Promise of Salvation. Fourthly, because it serves as a School Master to
Lead us to Christ, and as a Schoolmaster has a double End, respecting the
present and future time. The present use twofold, First, to Reclaim, and
Restrain them from Heathenish superstitions, 2dly for Trial of Obedience in
lesser things, p. 25. The use of the Law for the time to come, was first to
facilitate the knowledge of the mystery of their Redemption by Christ. Secondly
to facilitate and Strengthen their Belief in Christ. Thirdly, the Law was given
to the Jews for the general Good of all the World. p. 27.
CHAP. III.
Wherein is showed by what Faith and Practice persons under the Law were saved.
That the Jews had not a clear and full Knowledge of all that was included in
the Promise made to Abraham, p. 28. and yet that they had the Promise of
Blessedness to all Nations in Abraham's Seed. They had the addition of several
other predictions concerning the Messiah. p. 30. They had large Significations
of God's special Favor above all People. ibid. They had expr^ss Declarations
from God of the Goodness of his Nature. By all which they were induced to Love
God, and to endeavor to please him. ibid.
CHAP. IV.
That the Law contained a Covenant different from that with Abraham. p. 31. In
what respect the Law of Moses is said to contain a Covenant of a different
nature from the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham. ibid. The Law of Moses
under a twofold consideration, first as in Conjunction with the Promise made to
Abraham, 2dly as given at Sinai in a stricter Sense as it was a Rule of
Government in the Commonwealth of Israel; In the former sense is obscurely
promised Eternal Life, in the Latter temporal Blessings. p. 32. This Covenant
consisted first of Laws, 2dly the Sanction of these Laws; The Laws were of two
sorts, 1st the Law of Duty, 2dly the Laws of Jndemnity. p. 33. Laws of Duty
what? p. 33. Laws of Jndemnity what? p. 34. The Sanction of these Laws
consisted in Promises made to the observing them, and a Curse denounced against
the Transgressors. ibid. The Promises considered negatively and Affirmatively.
p. 35. 36. 37. A five-fold difference in reference to remission of Sin between
the first Covenant and, the Covenant of Grace. p. 38. 39. That more than a
temporal Death was threatened for a Breach of the political Covenant as such. p.
39. The temporal Evils threatened for a Breach of this Covenant were Personal,
Domestic or National, whereof in particular. p. 39. and 41.
CHAP. V.
The Grand mistakes of the Jews about the Law and Promise; and how St. Paul
Counter-argues these Mistakes. p. 41. First, they held Circumcision of the
Flesh to be the special Condition upon which God's Covenant-Blessings with
Abraham did depend, never Understanding that Spiritual Circumcision which was
primarily intended. p 42. St. Paul's arguing against their Belief in this
point. p. 42. Secondly, That the Promised Messiah should not by suffering Death
become a Sacrifice for Sin. ibid. and yet his Death was necessary. how St. Paul
^onsutes their Belief in this point. p. 44. Thirdly, They held another Error,
that the Legal Sacrifices did expiate Sin. ibid. This Error opposed. p. 45
Fourthly, That without Circumcision and observing Moses's Law the Gentiles
could not be saved, ibid. This Error Refuted. ibid. Fifthly, they held that the
Law of Moses was unalterably perpetual, and this opposed. p. 47. Another Errror
of theirs was, That they held the First Covenant alone together with the
Covenant of Literal Circumcision, which they made a part of their Law, to be
the Covenant of Salvation. ibid. And to this they peremptorily adhered, ibid.
and disproved. ibid.
CHAP. VI.
How St. Paul's Doctrine of Justification by Faith and not by Works was then
Mistaken by some. The Mistake of those Jews, who laid the stress of their
Salvation upon Believing only without a virtuous and Holy Life. p. 53. Neither
did they discern Faith to be necessary in the operative and practical Nature of
it. p. 54. How the Doctrine of Justification by Faith without Works in the
sense wherein the Apostles asserted it, was understood. p. 55.
CHAP. VII.
That the Doctrine of St. Paul and St. James about Faith and Works in reference
to Justification do not differ, but are wholly one. p. 60. Ten Considerations
to prove this. p. 61. First, that Works of Evangelical Obedience are never in
Scripture opposed to God's Grace. ibid. Secondly, That St. Paul in speaking
against Justification by Works, gives Caution not to be Understood to speak
against Evangelical Obedience. p. 62. Thirdly, Regeneration or the New Creature
is opposed to Works of the Law as well as Faith. ibid. Fourthly, Evangelical
Obedience as well as Faith is opposed to Works of the Law in order to
Justification. p. 63. Fifthly, Evangelical Obedience alone is opposed to Works
of the Law in reference to Salvation. ibid. Sixthly, That Faith is an act of
Evangelical Obedience. ibid. Seventhly, That by Evangelical Obedience
Christians come to have a Right to Salvation. p. 64. Eighthly, That as the
promise of forgiveness is made sometimes to Believing, so it is to Obedience.
p. 66. Ninthly, That Evangelical Obedience is a part of the Condition of
Justification. p. 67. Tenthly, That Repentance is one Eminent Act of
Evangelical Obedience. ibid.
FINIS.
A DISCOURSE ON FAITH.
MEN's Eternal Estate of Weal or Woe in another World, and their Peace and
Comfort in this, being very much concerned in their right understanding, or
mistaking the nature and difference of that Faith which is Saving, and of that
which is not; I shall here state the nature and difference of those two kinds
of Faith, with what brevity and perspicuity I can. I cannot (I confess) think
that the nature of Faith, which is of absolute necessity to the Salvation of
the meanest Christian, is in it self hard to be understood, were it not that
the many Controversies about it, about its Object, and the Acts of the Soul
necessary to it, had puzzled Men's Minds, and distracted their Apprehensions
concerning it.

Things absolutely necessary to Salvation, as they are not many, so there are
hardly any Doctrines delivered with more plainness than they, that the Weak who
are as much concerned in them as the Strong, might competently understand them
as well as they.

Men may multiply Notions about Faith, as the Scripture uses various
expressions about it: But I doubt not but that the general sense of the
Scripture hereabout may be summarily expressed in this plain Proposition: That
saving Faith is such a Belief of Christ to be the Son of God, and of the truth
of his Doctrine, especially touching the virtue of his Death and Resurrection,
and the necessity of amendment of Life, for the obtaining Remission of Sin, and
Eternal Life, as causes a Man to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and
to Live a Godly, Righteous, and a Sober Life.

This is so plain in Scripture, as that there is no Christian so weak but may
easily come to understand it; and so evident, that none who acknowledge the
Truth of the Gospel, can deny it. That I may state the difference then between
Effectual and Ineffectual Faith, and matters relating to them, with all the
plainness I can, I shall very briefly endeavor these five things.

I. To open the comprehensive Nature of Faith. II. Show wherein the defect lies
of that Faith which is not saving. III. Show whence that defect proceeds. IV.
How, and after what manner, Faith in the Understanding, works savingly upon the
Will. V. Answer some few Objections.
CHAP. I. I. The Comprehensive Nature of saving Faith opened.
THat I may open the comprehensive Nature of Faith the better, I shall first
observe, how variously the Condition, upon which saving Benefits are promised,
is expressed in Scripture, and then what actings of the Soul are thereby
signified.

It is thus variously expressed in Scripture: Sometimes it is called a believing
God, Romans 4.3. Gal. 3.6. a believing in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. a believing on God,
Romans 4.24. a believing the Record which God has given of his Son, 1 John 5.10.
Sometimes it is called a believing on Christ, Joh. 3.16, 36. Acts 16.31. a
believing him to be the Christ the Son of God, Joh. 20.31. 1 John 5.5. It Is
called Faith in his Blood, Romans 3.25. a believing that God raised him from the
dead, Romans 10.9. Sometimes it is called a believing of the Gospel, Mar. 16.15,
16. a believing of the Truth, 2 These. 2.15. a believing the testimony of the
Apostles, 2 These. 1.10. Sometimes it is expressed under the Notion of
Repentance, Acts 2.38. and 3.19. and 11.18. 2 Cor. 7.10. and sometimes of
Obedience, 1 John 1.7. Pet. 1.2. Heb. 5.9.

The Condition of the Promise of saving Benefits being thus variously
expressed, can signify no less than a threefold Act of the Soul: The first,
being the Act of the Understanding: The second, of the Will: The third, of the
Understanding and Will conjunct.

1. Such expressions of the Condition of the Promise as is the believing in
God, the believing his Record, the believing the Gospel the believing Christ to
be the Son of God, do most properly signify the Act of the Mind or
Understanding, in Assenting to the truth of what God testifies, or promises.
Which assent is grounded upon a knowledge, or belief of God's Veracity, his
Truth, and Faithfulness, armed with All Sufficiency of Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness, to make good his Word to a tittle. And although such expressions as
aforesaid, do most properly signify the act of the Understanding, yet whenever
saving Benefits are promised, and the Condition expressed in such a form of
Words as does most properly and primarily signify the Assent of the Mind, even
then the act of the Will in Consenting to the Condition, is employed, and ought
to be understood; as I shall fully prove in the next Particular.

And the reason why the whole of the Promise relating to the Consent of the
Will, as well as the Assent of the Understanding, is frequently expressed in
such a form of words, as primarily and strictly signify the Assent of the
Mind, is, I conceive, because such Assent of the Mind, is the Principle from
which all concurrent acts of the Will necessary to Justification and Salvation
do proceed.

And it is of frequent use in Scripture, to denominate the whole of Religion,
by some one Principal part, which is a fruitful Principle of all the rest.

Thus the Knowledge of the true God, and of Jesus Christ whom-he has sent, is
said to be Eternal Life, Joh. 17.3. And thus some times the Fear of God, and
sometimes the Love of God, is put for the whole of Men's saving Religiousness,
and the same Promise of Blessedness made to one of these singly expressed, is to
be extended to the whole.

In like manner, the whole of Christianity, is frequently denominated by Faith,
and the Christians styled Believers, and the Household of Faith, and the like;
and all because that Christian Life of theirs, by which they differ from other
Men, flows from their Faith, which is the first active Principle of it.

2. Another act of the Soul essentially necessary to that Faith which is the
Condition of the Promise, is the Consent of the Will to Repent, to receive
Christ as Lord and King, to be governed by his Laws as well as to own him for a
Priest once Offering himself, and ever making Intercession for us.

For the Condition of the Promise of Pardon and Salvation, is expressed under
the notion of Repentance, and sometimes of Obedience, as I showed before: And
Repentance and Obedience are acts of the Will as renewed.

And that there is no Promise of saving Benefits upon mere Believing, without
observing that part of the Condition which consists in Repentance,
Regeneration, and Obedience, is most evident: Because they are expressly
excluded in Scripture from having any share in the saving Benefits of the
Covenant, Justification, or Salvation, who do not Repent, Luke 13.3. who are
not Regenerate, Joh. 3.5. who Love not the Lord Jesus Christ, and that above
any Worldly Enjoyment 1 Cor. 16.22. Matthew. 10.37. and who do not Obey him, Acts
3.22, 23. Luke 19.27. 2 These. 1.7. By all which we may certainly know, that
whenever there is Promise of Justification and Salvation made to Believing, it
is to be understood of such a Believing as does at that instant in which a Man
believes, savingly produce a sincere Consent of the Will to Repent, to Love
Christ, and to Obey him: For otherwise those Scriptures, and these would be
inconsistent.

For if Men cannot be Pardoned, nor delivered from the Curse, nor be safe from
Destruction, until they have Repented, are Regenerate, do love Christ, and Obey
the Gospel, as the forecited Scriptures do assure us they cannot; then no Faith
whatsoever is justifying, or can entitle them to Pardon and Salvation according
to the Tenor of God's Promise, until it has produced that Repentance,
Regeneration, Love, and Obedience: Which is a full and an undeniable proof of
the necessity of such a consent of the Will as aforesaid, to render Faith
justifying and saving.

Now this Consent and resolution of the Will to Repent and Obey Christ, and to
forsake all for him, is the Moral Change of the Soul, and the New Life in its
first beginning. And so a Man's first effectual Belief, is his whole Christian
Life in its beginning. And a Man's first Faith is perfected afterward by
Works, ( Jam. 2.22.) as a Child is perfected in his manly state, as he grows up
to manly actions; or as the Seed is perfected when it grows to a full Ear.

By this first Consent of the Will, we restipulate and strike Covenant with
God; and not only so, but we hereby begin also to keep and perform Covenant
with him on our part. When this Consent is first wrought in the Will, then the
Laws of the new Covenant are first put into the Mind and written in the Heart:
And by this we first begin to become savingly a People unto God, to Believe in
him, to Love and Serve him, as he by Covenant and Promise becomes a God unto
us, to make us Happy. Heb. 8.10. This is the Covenant that I will make, I will
put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts; and I will be to
them a God, and they shall be to me a People.

3. The other act of the Soul, which I call the act of the Understanding and of
the Will conjunct, is an Affiance in God through Christ; a trusting in him, or
a relying on him for the fulfilling of his Promise of saving Benefits, while we
continue sincerely to Consent, resolve and endeavor to perform the Condition
on our part.

This is that, or part of that, which is called a Believing on God, a Believing
on Christ, and a Trusting in him: Noting the Souls dependence upon Christ for
the saving Benefits which accrue to Men by his Mediation, Office, and
Undertaking, and on the Truth and Faithfulness, Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of
God, to perform all that he has promised them through his Son, and upon the
terms he has promised, and not otherwise.

For the Promise of saving Benefits being made but upon the Condition
beforementioned, a true Believer, or he that is Rational and Wise, considers
as well upon what terms the Benefits are promised, as who has promised them,
and what they are; and expects the one no otherwise than as he sincerely
resolves and endeavors to perform the other.

And therefore, if any shall Rely on God and Christ for those Benefits, in whom
yet the qualifying Condition of the Promise of them is not found; such a
Reliance is but a groundless Presumption, and not Faith or Affiance duly so
called. For such do not only rely on Christ for that for which they have no
promise, but for that which God has expressly declared they shall have no share
in whilst they remain destitute of that qualification, which is the Condition
upon which, and not without it, the promise of those Benefits is made.

These three acts of the Soul exercised on their Objects, do make up that Faith
which is justifying and saving. And when justifying Faith in the complete
nature of it is spoken of in Scripture, all these three acts of the Soul are to
be understood, and especially the two first; though perhaps they are many times
mentioned severally and apart; Faith being described sometimes by one of them,
and sometimes by another: As God himself is represented to us, sometimes by one
Attribute, sometimes by another.

CHAP. II. Wherein the Defect lies of that Faith which is not saving.
BY what has been discoursed touching the nature of that Faith which is
saving, it is easy to discern wherein the defect lies of that Faith which is
not so.

And the defect lies chiefly in the Will, in its not Consenting to perform the
Condition of the Promise, in Repenting, and in receiving Christ as Lord, to be
governed by his Laws.

I will not deny but the defect in part may be in the Understanding, when its
Assent unto the Truth of Divine Revelation is so weak, as that it can make but
a too weak and faint impression upon the Will, to procure its Consent unto the
Condition of the Promise.

But then that defect in the Assent of the Understanding, does usually, at
least in great part, proceed from the Will; as I shall show afterward. Now,
that the defect lies mainly in the Will's not Consenting to the Condition of
the Promise, appears by this; because unregenerate Men may assent unto the
truth of God's Testimony, and may trust that they shall be saved by Christ,
(which contain the other two acts of the Soul) but no Man truly consents to
perform the Condition of the Promise, but in doing so, he is Regenerate in the
first Act, and Justified.

1. Unregenerate Men may have the same Faith of Assent in the Understanding to
a degree, as the Regenerate may: They may believe God to be the Father
Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and Jesus Christ to be his only Son, and
the rest of the Articles of the Creed; and they may believe in great part that
to be their Duty both toward God, and Man, which is so indeed, and yet hold
that Truth in unrighteousness, which they do believe. Romans 1.18. Many of the
chief Rulers believed on Christ, who yet loved the Praise of Men, more than the
praise of God, and durst not confess him, Joh. 12.42, 43. As also did many
others when they saw his Maricles, who yet were such as Christ had no mind to
commit himself to, Joh. 2.23, 24. And Simon Magus believed, wondering, and
being astonished at the signs which were done by Philip, who yet remained in
the bond of iniquity, Acts 8. Such as are resembled by the stony Ground,
believed, who yet loved their ease, and worldly Interest more than Christ; and
those that St. James expostulates with, Chap. 2. were thus far Believers also.

2. Excepting the Consent of the Will to the Condition of the Promise,
Unregenerate Men may hope to be saved by Christ, and rely on him for Salvation
as well as the Regenerate: Only for want of their performing the Condition of
the Promise, their hopes and confidence are groundless, and will deceive them.
But otherwise, Men that are but carnal, and live in some known sin, may, and
oftentimes do persuade themselves that they shall be saved by Christ Jesus,
because they believe that he died for Sinners, and because they ask God
forgiveness, and perform some acts of Religion.

Our Savior says, Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, open unto
us: Have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils,
and done many wonderful works? We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and
thou have taught in our streets. To whom he will say for all that, Depart from
me, ye workers of iniquity, Matthew. 7.22, 23. Luke 13.25, 26. These had some
kind of Faith in Christ, by which they Prophesied in his Name, and cast out
Devils, and did many wonderful Works. They were such as were Hearers of his
Word and Preachers of it too, and had eaten and drunk in his Presence. And
because of this Faith, and these Works, they had a Hope and Confidence that
Christ would open unto them, and receive them into his Kingdom, and would not
be easily beaten off from this Confidence.

But the true reason why their Faith will stand them in no stead, nor their
Religious performances neither, is, because for all that, they were workers of
Iniquity; they never heartily consented to the Terms of the Promise of
Salvation by Christ in Repenting: They did not first heartily resolve, and
after sincerely endeavor to turn from every known Sin, unto every known Duty.
And in this very thing does the defect of that Faith lie which is short of
saving.

Which will yet farther appear, in that St. James, when he would state the
difference between that Faith which is saving, and that which is not, fixes it
here.

The dead Faith is denominated such by him, from its being alone without
Works, Jam. 2.17. Even so Faith, if it has not Works, is dead, being alone,
or by it self. And again, verse. 20. But will thou know, O vain Man, that Faith
without Works is dead. And again, ver. 26. For as the body without the Spirit
is dead, so Faith without Works is dead also. Meaning by its being dead, that
it avails a Man no more to his Justification and Salvation, than a dead Corpse
avails to the producing the useful and serviceable effects of a Living Man; or
than a Tree that is dead, avails to the bringing forth Fruit; or than a few
good words, Depart in peace, be ye filled and warmed, will avail poor people,
when nothing is given which is needful to the body, ver. 15, 16, 17.

In all this I do not deny, but that there may be in such as do not savingly
believe, some Consent of the Will to do something toward performing the
Condition of the Promise, in Repenting and Obeying. Such Men may Consent and
resolve to forsake some sins, and to do some, yea many Duties, who yet never
savingly consent, because they do not heartily consent and resolve to forsake
[All] known sin, and to do [All] known duties; in which the sincerity of
Repentance and Obedience does consist, to which the Promise is made. Such Men
may not be far from the Kingdom of God, but yet must go farther, if ever they
would have any good ground of hope to enter into it: But of this more
afterward.

CHAP. III. Whence this defect does proceed.
I Have showed before, that there is the Faith of assent in the Understanding
unto the truth of God's Testimony, in some unregenerate Men, as well as in the
regenerate. And in whomsoever the Faith of Consent in the Will to perform the
Condition of the Promise is found, it always proceeds from the Faith of Assent
in the Understanding. A Man always (in order of Nature at least) believes that
the promised Benefits shall be made good to him, in case he perform the
Condition, before he Consents to perform it; and does consent to perform the
Condition in hope and confidence of obtaining the promised Benefits.

Now then the Question is, whence is it, and what is the reason, that the Faith
of Assent in the Understanding does not always produce the same Consent in the
Will in one, as well as another; and as it always does, when it becomes
effectual to Justification and Salvation? Why does this Faith remain alone in
some, when as it is accompanied with Works in others?

I shall offer what I conceive to be the reason of this; First, in general, and
than more particularly.

The difference sometimes may proceed from the different measures and degrees
of the evidence upon which the same Truth is believed. One Man may have a
clearer discerning of the evidence than another, which causes a stronger
Assent in the discerning faculty, and that stronger Assent in the
Understanding, may well cause a stronger, Consent in the Will, and a firm and
lasting resolution. As on the contrary a weak and partial Consent and
resolution in the Will to the Condition, sometimes proceeds from a weak Assent
in the Mind, to the Truth of God's Testimony, or Promise, and that from the
weakness of the faculty in the discerning the evidence of that Truth which is
the object of Faith.

But the reason most commonly why the Assent in the Understanding unto the
Truth of God's Testimony does not work a Consent in the Will to the Condition
of the Promise, is to be taken, I conceive, from the opposition which the lower
faculties of the Soul, the Will and Affections, assisted and influenced by the
sensual Appetites, make against the superior Faculty, the Mind, or
Understanding; so that they do not hearken to its Notices, nor obey its
Dictates. The Will, which is the Spring of Action, is a middle Faculty, between
the Understanding and the sensitive Affections or Appetites, and is solicited
by both.

As the Understanding calls upon it to obey its rational Dictates in choosing
the means which tend to the best end, both which the Understanding represents
to it from the Word of God; so on the other hand, the sensitive Affections
solicit it to be on their side, and to be active in making provision for the
Flesh, in choosing such things as tend to satisfy its Cravings and Lusts. And
because the Will has usually been pre-ingaged to the Flesh, and had a share in
its Gratifications, it is not without much difficulty prevailed with to be
consenting to, and active in the crucifixion of those Affections and Lusts.
Which until the Will do, and herein obey the enlightened Understanding, the
Faith of Assent in the Understanding abides alone. The Will's obstinate
adherence then to Men's fleshly Lusts, and carnal Interests, in opposition to
that belief in the Understanding which puts it upon destroying them, as
absolutely necessary to the Man's Salvation, as believing God touching the
necessity of this as a means, as well as it does believe him touching the
blessedness of the end; this obstinate opposition in the Will, I say, is the
true reason why the Faith which is in some Men, is but a dead Faith. How can ye
believe (says our Savior) which seek honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes from God only? Joh. 5.44. Yes, some of them could, and did
believe so far as to Assent in their Minds, that Christ was no Impostor, but
one that came from God; and that therefore his Doctrine must needs be true; but
they did not believe so as to be converted in their Wills, to consent to part
with their carnal interest of Honor and Reputation, with their Party the
Pharisees, which they must have done as the case then stood, if they would have
confessed him openly; which to do, was necessary to make them capable of the
Promise of Salvation by him. Jo^. 12.42, 43. Among the chief Rulers, many
believed on him, but because o^ the Pharisees, they did not confess him, lest
they should be put out of the Synagogue, for they loved the praise of Men, more
than the praise of God. These had more understanding than the common People,
who, as they said, knew not the Law, ( John 7.) and yet not so many of them as
of the people believed on Christ, so as to confess and follow him, because
their worldly interest being greater, it held them faster and had the greater
power over their Wills. The unbelief then of Men where the Gospel comes, is
generally to be resolved into the obstinacy of their Wills, in opposition to
the convictions of their Understanding. John 5.40. Ye will not come to me that
ye might have life. How often would I have gathered you, and ye would not, Mat.
23.37. O that my people had hearkened to my counsel! But Israel would none of
me, Psalm. 81.11. They did not choose the fear of the Lord, Prove. 1.29. They
chose their own ways, their Souls delighted in their abominations, Isa. 6.3.
Thus much in general. But I would show yet more particularly how the Will does
obstruct the perfecting the work of Faith after it is begun in the
Understanding. And it does it as I conceive,

1. By calling off the Understanding from a frequent consideration of that
evidence by which it was first convinced of the Truth of God's Testimony
touching the Promised Benefits, and the Condition and Means of obtaining them,
and from a frequent application of it to the Will: And this the Will can do.

For, as the Understanding has a power over the Will, so far as to represent
its apprehensions to the Will in order to its acting thereupon according to a
Man's own concerns therein; so also the Will has a kind of power over the
Understanding, both to put it upon frequent consideration, to strengthen it
self in the belief of that which the Will would have to prove true and to be
believed; and also to call it off from so doing, when there is a great
reluctance in the VVil against having that prove true which the Understanding
represents as true. And if the Understanding be taken off, so that it has not
frequent recourse to that evidence which first procured its Assent unto the
Truth of God's Testimony in the Gospel, that it might be thereby nourished,
strengthened, and maintained; that Faith in the Understanding will languish and
grow weak, and so have no powerful operation upon the Will to change and renew
it, and to procure its effectual consent to perform the Condition of the
Promise, when the Will stands disinclined of it self, to the Verdict of the
Understanding. Besides, if the Understanding does not ply the Will, and
frequently inculcate upon it, its own apprehensions concerning God's Testimony,
and the consequence and concernment of it to a Man's own self, thereby to make
the Word believed to be an ingrafted Word, it will not work any Cure upon it,
or any thorough change in it.

The unwillingness in Men to have their Minds engaged in the consideration of
God's ways and their own, is the reason of their turning back from him. Job
34.27. They turned back from him, and would not consider any of his ways. As on
the contrary, the Scripture represents th conversion of a sinner as proceeding
from the consideration of the bad tendency of his evil ways. Ezekiel. 18.28.
Because he considers and turns away from all his transgressions which he
has committed, he shall surely live, he shall not dye. And our Savior seems
to cast men's profiting, or not profiting; their Belief, or not Belief, by
hearing God's Testimony in the Gospel, upon their considering, or not
considering of it. Mark 4.24. And he said unto them, Consider what you hear (so
Dr. Hammond reads it) for with what measure ye meet (viz. in considering, or
not considering) it shall be measured to you again, in profiting, or not
profiting; which is to be understood according to God's ordinary proceeding
with Men.

The reason why the Faith of those resembled by the stony ground, does not
abide, or come to perfection, is, because they have no Root in themselves, and
that comes to pass for want of much consideration, and a frequent working the
first conviction of the mind from the evidence of Truth, into the Will and
Affections, by a constant Consideration, and close Application of it. Acts
17.11. They searched the Scriptures [daily] whether those things were so; and
therefore they Believed.

2. When men hold fast their Lusts, out of their great love to them,
notwithstanding their conviction in their Understandings, and are not willing
to part with them upon any terms, the Fumes of those Lusts continually
ascending, will cloud and darken the Understanding as a thick Fogg does the
Sun, and by degrees make it less capable of discerning its Object, viz. saving
Truth, in its clear evidence, and proportionably hinder its operation upon the
Will. The cares of this World, and the deceitfulness of Riches, and the lusts
of other things, choke the Word, and it becomes unfruitful, Mar. 4.19. He that
hates his Brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not
whether he goes, because darkness has blinded his eyes, 1 John 2.11.

3. Sinful Men's Understandings are not so incorrupt, but that they are apt to
be bribed by their Wills, to cast about and devise how to evade the force and
edge of their own Notices and Dictates, and to attempt and baffle their former
apprehensions and convictions, to the end they may still retain their lusts
without any great disturbance from their Understandings. This when it is
yielded to, and put in practice, is that which in Scripture is called Men's
closing their eyes, lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear
with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and should be converted and
healed, Mat. 13.15. And when this takes place in Professors of Christianity,
that do believe that Faith, Repentance, and Obedience are necessary to
Salvation, as the Condition on which it is promised; the way by which they
usually deceive their own Hearts, is, by persuading themselves, that they do
perform the Condition of the Promise in these, when indeed they do not; but
frame to themselves Notions of saving Faith, Repentance and Obedience,
different from the Scripture Notions of them, as I shall show in each of them.

1. Many delude themselves, by taking up a wrong Notion of Saving Faith, and so
think they have it, when they have it not. They believe indeed Christ to be the
Son of God, and Savior of the World, and that those shall be saved that
believe in him, and those damned that do not, because the Scripture, which they
believe to be the Word of God, says so: And thus far they believe rightly
objectively. But then they deceive their own Souls, by persuading themselves
that a mere Assent of their minds to the Truth of these, and other Evangelical
Verities, is the Faith to which the promised Justification and Salvation is
made, though it has no such powerful operation upon their Wills, as to make
them new Creatures, to make any through change in the temper of their Hearts and
tenor of their Lives. And many doubtless have been greatly strengthened in this
delusive confidence, by having been taught that Faith justifies without any
Works at all. And these again persuade themselves, that they believe in Christ
to the saving of their Souls, because they rely on him alone for Salvation, and
upon what he has done, and suffered for them, though they love their sins, and
live in them still. Just like some Jews of old, who though they were very bad
in their Lives, yet leaned upon the Lord, and said, is not the Lord among us?
None evil can come upon us, Mich. 3.11. Isa. 48.1, 2 They leaned upon God's
Promise of being their God, as those do upon Christ's undertaking to be a
Savior, although they overlooked the Condition to be performed by them in
being a People unto him, in loving and serving him as those Christians I speak
of, also do. Though Christ alone is to be relied on for Salvation, as touching
all that is proper to the Mediatory Office and Work, yet no Man is to rely on
him, so as to think he should excuse him, if he do not Repent, or be not
Regenerate; or as if he did Repent, or were Regenerate for him. If they do;
they promise themselves from him, that which he never promised, or undertook,
but has told them plainly, That except they themselves Repent, they shall
Perish; and that except they themselves be Born again, they cannot see the
Kingdom of God.

2 They deceive their own Hearts also in the nature of Repentance; their Notion
of it being one thing, and the Scripture-Notion of it quite another: So that
tney persuade themselves they have Repented, when indeed they have not. They
know and believe perhaps Repentance to be necessary to Salvation, because
Christ has said, that except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish But then
they mistake, in persuading themselves that they do repent, because they are
frequently sorry for what they have done, though they cease not to do the same
again. Indeed, when the pleasure of Sin is over, and rebukes of Conscience come
in the room of them; these trouble their minds for what they have done, which
was the Repentance of Judas; and there is no peace to the wicked, who are like
the troubled Sea. Now this they count Repentance, though it work no effectual
and through change in Heart and Life; but when that sad fit is over, they appear
to be the same Men they were before, by returning to the same sins.

And herein the Romish Church has most unhappily laid a Snare, which, as is to
be feared, catches multitudes of Souls to their Destruction, in asserting
Contrition, yea, Attrition with Confession, to be Repentance sufficient to
Salvation. Whereas sorrow alone, though it be godly sorrow, is not Repentance,
but as St. Paul says, Godly sorrow works Repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10. But
Repentance it self, which is Saving, consists chiefly in a real change in
Men's apprehensions of, and affections to both Sin and Duty; and in ceasing to
do evil, and learning to do well.

Others again deceive themselves in taking a partial Reformation, for true
Repentance: Because they have left some sins which they could best spare, as
blemishing their Reputation, or impairing their Estates, or their Health: And
because they have done many things (which yet Herod also did, Mar. 6.) they
think they have Repented, and are Converted, though they retain others which
are more gainful, or yield them more pleasure. Whereas the sincerity of
Repentance can be nothing less then a hatred of, and turning from sin, as sin,
and so from all sin, by diligent and careful endeavors.

3. They deceive themselves by a false Notion of that Obedience which is
necessary to Salvation. They believe in the gross indeed, that Obedience to the
Commands of God, to the Rules and Precepts of the Gospel, is necessary to
Salvation, because the Scripture so plainly declares it to be so: But then
they deceive their own Hearts, in thinking and persuading themselves that they
have performed this part of the Condition of the Promise, when as they have not
performed one half of it. They have been, it may be, somewhat careful to be
found in acts of External Worship and Devotion, both public and private; and
to keep themselves from Idolatry, Swearing, Cursing, Sabbath-breaking, Murder,
Adultery, Stealing, False-witness-bearing, and the like, in the outward and
gross acts of them. But all the while have made no conscience of governing
their Thoughts, Affections, and Passions, nor their Tongues neither, as to many
things. And in all this, wherein do they exceed the Pharisees? whom if we
exceed not in Righteousness, Christ has told us (who best knows) that we shall
never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5.20. They were strict and
zealous in the observation of the Laws for Circumcision, Sacrifices, Sabbaths,
Tithes, and other positive Precepts, and that to a tittle: And Fasted often,
and made long Prayers, and gave Alms; and made Ostentation also that they were
not as others were; Extortioners, Unjust, Adutlerers, nor as the Publicans. And
why would not all this bring them to Heaven? Because all this notwithstanding
(as they had not Faith in Christ, so) they were Covetous, Proud, and Ambitious,
seeking Honor one of another, contemning, and despising others; they were
Envious and Malicious, Cruel and Ill-natured, Unmerciful, and Persecuting such
as faithfully reproved them. They made clean the outside of the Cup and
Platter; and so far as they did so they did well: But that for which Christ
denounced Woe to them, was, that their inward part was full of ravening and
wickedness, and for want of love to God, and of Judgment, Mercy, and Fidelity.

God is a Spirit, and the Service that is acceptable to him, as being most
agreeable to his Nature, is that which is done in Spirit and Truth. And
therefore his Precepts are given to govern the inward Man, as well as the
outward.

He that said, Thou shall not kill, has said also, Thou shall not hate thy
Brother in thy heart, nor be Angry with him without a cause, or bear a grudge
against him. He that said, Thou shall not commit Adultery, has said also, Thou
shall not lust after a Woman in thy heart. And he that said, Thou shall not
steal, has said also, Thou shall not covet, and the like. And therefore, they
that think themselves to be Obedient Children to God, upon account of their
abstaining from outward gross Sins, and of being outwardly Righteous, and do
not truly endeavor, and make a business of it to mortify and subdue their
Pride, Covetousness, love of the World, Envy, Hatred, Malice, thoughts of
Revenge, the unruliness of Passions, and all immoderate Affections; but indulge
themselves in these, or any of these, or the like; they deceive themselves,
whatever their External Conformity to Divine Precepts otherwise may be. They
are the pure in heart that shall see God. And they that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts.

God observes more what Men are inwardly, than what they are outwardly; and
judges of them accordingly. He is not a Jew, nor he a Christian, who is one
outwardly in the flesh, but he who is so inwardly in heart, whose praise is not
of Men, but of God, Romans 2.28, 29. And therefore St. James counted them but
Earthly, Sensual, and Devilish, in their Profession of Christianity, how high
soever they professed, and such as did lie against the Truth, that indulged
bitter envying and strife, though it were but in their hearts, Jam. 3.14, 15.
And if Lusts and Passions within shall break out in an unbridled Tongue, in
Slandering, Reviling, Backbiting, Evil-speaking, rash and uncharitable
Censuring, or the like; how Religious soever such a Man may otherwise seem to
himself, or others, yet St. James has plainly determined his case; such an one
has deceived his own heart, and his Religion is vain, Jam. 2.26. Mat. 5.22.

Men may go a great way in Religion, yea so far as until they are not far from
the Kingdom of God. Yea, many shall seek to enter in, by doing many things in
order thereto, and yet shall not be able, for want of striving to do all that
is necessary thereto. And for that very reason, and because of the great danger
of Christians falling short, though they have gone far, and done much, are they
so earnestly Exhorted to work out, or to work through their own Salvation with
Fear and Trembling; with a fear of falling short, Phil. 2.12. And not only so,
but to fear even a seeming to come short of the promised Rest. Heb. 4.1. Let us
therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his Rest, any of
you should seem to come short of it. The matter is of that huge consequence,
that every wise Man that does not despise his own Soul, should be afraid to do,
or omit to do, any thing that has but the least seeming show or apperance of
putting his Salvation into any hazard. And therefore [All] diligence is not too
much for the wisest Man living to use, to make his calling and election sure, 2
Pet. 1.10.

Thus when Men's Understandings are bribed by their corrupt Wills, they then
take up with a partial Faith, a partial Repentance, and a partial Obedience,
instead of that which is Evangelically complete, and hope it is a fulfilling of
the Condition of the Promise.

And when Men shut their own Eyes, and stop their own Ears against the evidence
of the Word of Salvation, that they may the more quietly enjoy the pleasures of
any sin, God many times in his Righteous Judgment, after much striving, and
long-suffering, withdraws the Assistance of his Grace and Spirit, and leaves
them to themselves, and their own Delusions, and to be practiced upon by the
Devil for their farther hardening; according to that dreadful Prophecy, in
Isa. 6.9, 10. mentioned no less than five or six times in the New Testament,
Mat. 13.14. Mar. 4.12. Luke 8.10. Joh. 12.40. Acts 28.26. Romans 11.8. Go tell
this people, hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye indeed, but
perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their Ears heavy, and
shut their Eyes, etc. When Men will not receive the love of the Truth, that
they might be saved, but have pleasure in Unrighteousness, God sometimes sends
them strong delusions to believe a lie, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. Whereas on the
contrary, the good-ground hearers are d^scribed by the honesty of the Heart,
into which they receive the Word: They study no tricks or shifts, nor use any
shuffling upon the account of any dishonest interest, to evade the plain Truth,
but are content that should take place, and all other things give place to it:
They suffer that Word which was received and assented to in the Judgment
before, in order of Nature, to sink down into their hearts, by which the Will
and Affections become changed.

CHAP. IV. How, and after what manner, Faith in the Understanding, works
savingly upon the Will.
THE Faith of Assent in the Understanding, works a Consent in the Will unto
the Condition of the Promise, by its operative and affecting influence upon the
Passions of Hope, Fear, and Love, the powerful Principles of Action in Man. For
though Faith in the Understanding, is the first Principle of Action as Christian,
yet not that, but the Will, as it is affected with Hope, Fear, or Love, is the
next and immediate Principle of Action. The Understanding, when it rightly
performs its Office, does not only assent unto the Truth of Divine Revelation,
upon competent Evidence that it is from God; but also considers and weighs, as
in a balance, the import of it, and how a Man is concerned in it; as whether it
betoken Good or Evil to him, and how much, and upon what terms, whether
Absolutely, or Conditionally; and what the Condition is: All which, when
brought down to the subordinate Faculties of the Soul, the Will and Affections,
is apt to affect them, and work upon them more or less, according as the things
believed are apprehended more or less to concern a Man.

And the things believed, Eternal Life, and Eternal Death, in another World,
being Invisible and absent things; it is a Man's Faith, touching the reality of
them, that supplies the room or absence of sense. For Faith is the substance of
things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. We neither
see nor feel the glorious things promised, nor the dreadful things threatened in
another World, otherwise than by Faith, which gives the Believer a prospect of
them. But a Man by his Faith in that Gospel by which they are revealed, has a
foresight of them, (as Abraham had of Christ's Day) and that fills the Soul
with Hope, and Fear, and a sense of God's love, in giving such an Hope. And
this Hope, Fear, and Love, puts Men upon, more or less, Care, Diligence, and
Industry, in doing what is necessary for the obtaining of the one, and escaping
the other, as they are more or less influenced by a Faith that is weaker or
stronger, or more or less active and exercised about these things. And hence
comes that change which is made in the Hearts and Lives of true Believers, who
walk by Faith, and not by Sight; that is, they govern their Lives by the belief
of invisible, and not sensible things, 2 Cor. 5.7. This in general. But more
particularly, the Faith of Assent in the Understanding, works the Faith of
Consent in the Will, by its operation upon those three Passions, or Affections
of the Will, Hope, Fear, and Love.

1. As a firm assenting to the Truth of God's Promise through Christ, of pardon
of Sin, and Eternal Life, upon Condition of Repentance and new Obedience,
together with his Faith, gives a Man hope and confidence of obtaining these
great benefits upon the terms on which they were promised.

The hope of this Happiness, causes a Man to be willing to comply with the
Condition upon which it is promised, in order to the obtaining the Happiness
itself.

There is a Principle of Self-love, planted by God in the Nature of every Man,
by which he does naturally desire and aspire after the happiness of his own
Being. And that will put a Man upon the use of such Means, and the performance
of such a Condition, without which, he believes, and is verily persuaded, he
cannot be happy. Now, every Man in whom there is the Faith of Assent unto the
Trut^ of God's Testimony in the Gospel, firmly fixed, being verily persuaded
that everlasting Happiness is not attainable without Repentance, Regeneration,
and sincere Obedience, because God has declared this as plainly as he has
done any thing: (And it is the nature of Faith to acquiesce in his Testimony.)
The love of the End, which is Man's own Happiness, makes him in love with the
Means, such as is Repenting, Mortifying, and Obeying, without which he cannot
attain his end in being Happy. This Principle of Self-love under the conduct of
a Man's Understanding and Reason enlightened, and regulated by a Declaration of
the Divine Will, and influenced by a firm belief of it, will work in a Man new
Apprehensions of, and new Affections to both Sin and Duty; and will cause him
to abandon the little pleasures of sin, which are but for a season, that he may
come to the fruition of that fullness of joy, and those Rivers of pleasure,
which are in the presence of God, at his right hand, for evermore; when once he
knows, and firmly believes that they cannot otherwise be obtained.

Thus by Faith is the victory over the world obtained, in all its Temptations,
from Honors, Profits, and Pleasures, 1 John 5.4. For by such a Faith a Man
well perceives that the World offers him to his unspeakable loss, though it
should offer him all of these that it is able to confer upon him, if it be upon
condition of doing, or omitting to do, that by which he shall certainly deprive
himself of that Glory, Honor, and Immortality, which he is well assured of,
through Faith in God's Promise, if he overcome.

We see Men are so commonly governed by a Principle of Self-love, in parting
with a lesser Good or Convenience for a greater, even in the things of this
Life, that they are worthily and deservedly counted Fools that do the contrary:
And therefore, those are guilty of so much the greater Folly and Madness, who
deprive themselves of the Happiness of Heaven, by a sinful seeking or
possessing of the Honors Profits, or Pleasures of this Life: As the Happiness
of Heaven exceeds the enjoyments of this World, in kind and height of
Satisfaction, and in continuance and duration; so Rational a thing it is to
live and walk by Faith of unseen things, and Unreasonable and Unmanly to be
governed by the sense of present things, in opposition thereunto, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.

2. The Faith of Assent in the Understanding, works a Consent in the Will to
the Condition of the Promise, as the passion of Fear is awakened by believing
God's Threatenings against such as do not observe and fulfill that Condition.
There is a Principle of Self-preservation planted by God in every Man's Nature,
by which he fears and abhors that which he knows, and verily believes, tends to
the infelicity and misery of his Being; and which puts him upon the avoiding of
that which he believes has such a tendency, in order to the declining the
Misery, or Destruction itself.

When a Man receives such sayings into his Understanding, as threaten, that,
if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; that, except ye repent, ye shall all
perish; that, without holiness, no Man shall see the Lord, and the like; and
does Assent unto them, as the true sayings of God, which Assent is his Faith;
the fear of the Misery threatened, and the Principle of Self-preservation, work
in him a desire and endeavor to have his sinful Inclinations and Appetites
Mortified, and a care to avoid the outward acts of sin, as really and truly as
he desires to escape Eternal Destruction itself; as believing and knowing they
tend thereto, and that he cannot escape the one, without a sincere desire and
endeavor to destroy and avoid the other.

And in this way, Faith is a Believer's Victory, by which he also overcomes the
World, when it tempts him to sin, by threatening him with Disgrace, loss of
Estate, or Liberty, or with enduring of corporal Punishment, or Death itself.
For he believes the Punishments in the other World to be of such a nature and
duration, as that the worst things which Man can inflict, are altogether
inconsiderable in comparison of them. By which Belief he is so far guided, that
he chooses to suffer the less, when his faithfulness to God, and his own best
interest does expose him to it, rather than to expose himself by unfaithfulness
to infinitely the greater, to avoid the less. And thus Faith purifies the Heart
of all inordinate Affection to Riches, Honor, Ease and Pleasures, Acts 15.9.

III. The Faith of Assent or Credence in the Understanding, touching the
exceeding greatness of God's Love to Mankind in the gift of Christ for their
Redemption, and in his great and precious Promises made in him, upon a very
gracious Condition, works in the Will a love to God, and so a love to please
him, in doing those things which he has made the Condition of his Promise.
When once the Understanding represents it to the Will, as a certain Truth, upon
clear Evidence, that notwithstanding Men's Apostasy from God, and Rebellion
against him, and the Condemnation they are under thereby; yet God is
Reconcilable to them, yea, willing, and so desirous to Reconcile them to
himself; that, as an Evidence and Proof of it, he has given his own Son Christ
Jesus, to become a Ransom for them; and that he has made a new Covenant,
declaring that upon account of his Son's undertaking for them, he is not only
abundantly willing to pardon all such as shall unfeignedly Repent of their
disloyalty, and sincerely return to their Duty; but that he will also
bountifully reward their future sincere Obedience, with perfect and perpetual
Happiness: I say, when all this is represented to the Will, as unquestionably
true, it will work in it a love to that God and Savior, that has been so
loving, if it be but kept close to it. A manifestation of such love and
goodness to Man, and that while yet in enmity against God, so ill deserving,
and so obnoxious to the power of his wrath; when he has no need of him, nor
can be profited by him, will create good thoughts of God, and reconcile Man's
Mind to him, and work melting Affections in him to God, when heartily believed.

What Rebel is there, or nature so bad, that would not be won to leave off
Rebelling against his Prince, and to love and please him upon undoubted
assurance, that by so doing he should not only be pardoned, and restored to
Favor, but also perferred to the greatest Honor and Happiness he is capable
of receiving from any Mortal? And yet how weak a motive is this in comparison
of what comes from God, to reduce Men to their love and loyalty to him? God's
love to Man, when perceived, and heartily believed, is the great motive, and
attractive of Man's Love to God. We love him, because he first loved us, 1 John
4.19. Love is an active and commanding Principle in Man, and procures
Thoughts, Cares, and Endeavors of pleasing God. If any Man love me, he will
keep my words, says our blessed Savior, Joh. 14.23. And after this manner,
Faith works by Love, Gal. 5.6.

Thus I have represented to you, how, and after what manner, Faith in the
Understanding works a saving Consent in the Will, unto the Condition of God's
Covenant of Salvation.

CHAP. V. Some few Objections answered.
I. SOME have thought Men may be Justified only by their Believing, even while
they are Ungodly in their Lives; and have thought that Scripture, Romans 4.5.
will hear them out in such a conceit, which says, He that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness. But they grossly mistake the Scripture, and deceive themselves.
For that Text speaks of God's Justifying the Gentiles upon their sincere
conversion to the Christian Faith and Life, though they had lived in Gentilism,
in all Ungodliness before, and until then, and though they should not work at
all, as the Judaizers would have had them, in turning Proselytes to the Jewish
way. But otherwise, it is flatly against the express Doctrine of the Gospel, and
current of the Scriptures, for Men to hope to be pardoned by any Believing
whatsoever, while they remain Impenitent; as every Man does while he remains
Ungodly. To justify the wicked, is an abomination to the Lord. It Is said that
Christ made the Blind to See, and the Deaf to Hear, and the Dumb to Speak; as
well as it is said, God Justifies the Ungodly. But is any Man so senseless as
to think that Christ made them to See, to Hear, and to Speak, while they
remained Blind, Deaf, and Dumb? And if not, but that they know the meaning is,
that Christ made those to See, to Hear, to Speak, which had been Blind, Deaf,
and Dumb, before those Cures were wrought upon them; they might as well know
also, that the meaning is, that God justifies those upon their believing,
which had been Ungodly until then, and not that he justifies them while they
remain Ungodly.

II. Some allege, that although the Faith which is alone, and without the
concomitant effects of it, Repentance, Regeneration, etc. does not justify;
yet that Faith alone which does produce such effects, does justify without the
concurrence of these in the justifying Act. Which they illustrate by this
Similitude. A Man sees with his Eye alone, though he does not see with his Eye
that is alone, or separated from his Body. In return to all which, let these
things be considered.

1. They that go thus far, do grant that which will secure the Notion of the
necessity of Repentance, Regeneration, and new Obedience unto Justification.
They grant we see such a necessity of these, as without which no Man can be
justified, no not by Faith. In granting which, though we suppose them to err in
their foresaid Notion, yet this makes their Error the less dangerous; because
the presence of Repentance, Regeneration, and Obedience, are no less necessary
to Justification, according to this account, than they esteem them to be, who
say they concur with Faith in the very act of Justification.

2. When they say, Faith alone is all that is necessary to the Justifying Act,
without the concurrence of any thing else done by us: By Justifying Act, they
mean either God's Act, or Man's Act. If Man's Act, that is nothing but Man's
performing the Condition upon which God has promised to Justify Men. If they
mean God's Act, it is his imputing Men's performing the Condition of the Promise
unto them for Righteousness. The only thing then in question will be, what it
is which is a fulfilling of the Condition of the Promise of Justification,
which God imputes for Righteousness? If they say, it is only the Assent of the
Understanding unto the Truth of God's Testimony in the Gospel; or this Assent,
together with a Reliance on Christ for Salvation: I have showed before, that
both these may be found in Men Unregenerate, and Unjustified: And that these
two of themselves, without Repentance and hearty Obedience to the Laws of
Christ, are not a fulfilling of the Condition of the Promise, and that
consequently Men, without these, cannot be justified by any Faith whatsoever;
and so not by Faith alone; unless they will call Repentance and
Heart-Obedience, in conjunction with the foresaid Assent of the Mind and
reliance of the Soul, by the name of Faith: Which if they will, we are agreed
as to the Thing at least, if not to the Name, that we are justified by such a
Faith alone. And yet I doubt not, that whenever Justification is promised to
Believing singly and alone expressed, but that there the foresaid effects are
comprehended under the name also, for the Reasons formerly given.

3. They which say, we are justified by Faith alone, but not by that Faith
which is alone, do distinguish, where the Scripture does not distinguish: The
Scripture no where says, we are justified by Faith alone, as
contradistinguished from Repentance, Evangelical Obedience, etc. The third
Chapter of Romans 28. and Tit. 3.5. are sometimes made use of to countenance
their Notion; but to how little purpose, has been showed already in the
Treatise, which needs not be here repeated.

4. The Scripture is not only silent in the case, not any where affirming we
are justified by Faith alone; but it expressly affirms the quite contrary. Jam.
2.24. Ye see then how that by Works a Man is justified, and not by Faith only.
That this is affirmed in reference to our Justification before God, had been
showed before.

5. Faith and Repentance are a joint Condition upon which Justification is
suspended, and are both constituted so by the same means, and that is by
promise of pardon to such as do Believe, to such as do Repent, and by
threatening the contrary to those that do not both. And if they are a joint
Condition of the Promise of Justification, then Justification proceeds not upon
either of them alone, but upon both together.

6. Whereas it is said in the Similitude, that a Man sees with his Eye alone,
though not with his Eye which is alone, or when it is alone. I doubt this is no
more true, than that which is intended to be illustrated by it. For Naturalists
will tell them the contrary, That it is not the Eye alone, by which a Man sees,
but that it is the Soul that sees by the Eye as its Organ. The Eye sees not
when the Soul is departed, though it be not then alone. I confess, I cannot
possibly conceive either how the Soul should not concur with the Eye, in the
Act of seeing, when the Eye cannot see without it; nor yet that Repentance
should not concur with Faith, in the Act of Justification, so long as Men
cannot be Justified by Faith it self without it, or in the absence of it, as
they themselves grant.

3. This lies in the way of some; they cannot conceive how Justification by
Evangelical Obedience, as well as Faith, should consist with the possibility of
somes being justified by Believing, who yet may not live so long after, as to
have an opportunity of doing good Works.

How rare Instances of this kind are, I shall not dispute: But doubtless,
whenever Men so believe God's Promise of pardon through Christ upon their
Repentance, and the necessity of their own Repentance for the obtaining of it,
as that they in Will, and a fixed and lasting Resolution, become new Men, then
they first believe unto Justification. And it is not impossible but that some
may so believe, that may never after they do so have opportunity to be much
active in External Acts of Obedience. But though this should so fall out, yet
such are not justified without Evangelical Obedience as well as Faith. For,

1. These Motions and Acts of the Will, are themselves Acts of present
Evangelical Obedience.

2. They are in the Root and Cause, Evangelical Obedience future, and to come.

First, They are in themselves Acts of present Evangelical Obedience. For by
these Motions and Acts of the Will, Men do, whenever they take place, turn
from Sin to God and their Duty, out of Hatred to that they turn from, and out
of Love to that they turn to. And these Acts of the Will, which consist in
Affection and Resolution, are proper effects and fruits of Faith in the
Understanding, and Acts of Heart-Obedience in the sight of God, and a
conformity of Soul to his declared Will and Commandment. And they may as well,
and as truly be called Works, as evil Acts of the Will may, such as are a
love to evil, and desires and resolutions of perpetrating it: Which evil Acts
of the Will, are yet in Scripture called Works, and a working of wickedness,
Psalm. 58.2. Ye work wickedness in your Hearts, Micah. 2.1. He that looks upon
a Woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her already in his
heart, Matthew. 5.28. And envy, wrath, and hatered, which are Internal Acts of
the Soul, are called Works of the Flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. And if such inward
fixed Resolutions in Men, of obeying God in external Acts, if ever they have
opportunity and a Call to it, did not pass in God's account for Obedience, and
were not accepted instead of the Deed, when opportunity for the Deed is
wanting, the best Man in the World could be no Disciple of Christ, who does not
actually forsake all that he has, and lay down his Life for him. Whosoever of
you forsakes not all that he has, cannot be my Disciple, says he, Luke
14.26, 33. Whereas Christ pronounces the Poor in Spirit, Blessed; many of whom
never became actually Poor for his sake, as not being called to it. But if they
are Poor in Spirit, if they firmly resolve to become Poor, in forsaking all for
Christ's sake, when called to it, these are capable of Blessedness in Christ's
account, as well as those that suffer the loss of all for Righteousness sake,
Matthew. 5.3.

Secondly, Those Acts of the Will, are, in the Root and Cause, Evangelical
Obedience future, and to come: Because those Resolutions against evil, and for
good, when they are of a fixed and lasting nature, (as they always are, when,
together with Faith, they make Men capable of Justification) will certainly
produce external Acts of sincere Obedience, as opportunity does occur.

When the Tree is made good, it will bring forth good Fruit in the season of
Fruit, if it be not cut down before. When the Heart is renewed in affection and
resolution, the course of a Man's Life will certainly be answerable to it, if
ever it have opportunity of showing it. A good Man, out of the good treasure of
his heart, brings forth good things, Mat. 12.35. And God who knows the Heart,
does judge of, and estimate Men according to what they are in the inward frame
of their Heart, and prevalent bent of their Wills. If there be first a willing
mind, it is accepted according to that a Man has, and not according to that he
has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. We judge of the Cause, by the Effects; of the goodness
of Men's Hearts by the goodness of their Lives; to us the Tree is known by its
Fruit: But God who is greater than our Hearts, and knows them better than we
do, judges of the Effect by the Cause, and knows what a Man's Life will be, by
what his Heart is, upon its first Conversion to him; and so confers on him the
benefit of Justification, when the Foundation of a good Life is laid in the
conversion and renewing of the Heart.

The Understanding of this Part of Discourse, will serve not only to satisfy
the foresaid Doubt, but also to inform us what Evangelical Obedience is
necessary to Justification in its beginning. Not but that actual Obedience in
Life is necessary to the continuance of Justification, where Life is continued.
And therefore we find that Abraham was justified by his after-believing, and
after-obedience, as well as by his first; and so was Noah before him. Noah was
a Righteous Man, and justified before he became heir of the Righteousness which
is by Faith, by his believing and obeying God, in preparing the Ark, Genesis 6.9.
Heb. 11.7. It was by Faith in God's Promise that Abraham left his Country to
obey God at the first, and by that he was first justified, Heb. 11.8. And yet
his believing God's Promise, so shall thy Seed be, which was not made till some
years after, was imputed to him also for Righteousness, Genesis 15.9. It was many
years after that again, that by Faith he offered his Son Isaac upon the Altar,
and yet by that he was justified as well as by his first Faith and Obedience,
Jam. 2.21. Pardon of sin, is our Justification from sin, Acts 13.39. And this
we are directed by the Lord's Prayer, to pray for daily all our days. And the
continuance of Justification is promised upon condition of continuance of Faith
and Obedience to the Gospel, Col. 1.21, 22, 23. and a discontinuance of it
threatened in case of disobedience, according to the Tenor of the Parable, Mat.
18. from ver. 23. to ver. 35. By all which we may see what need there is for
all Christians to work out, to work through their own Salvation with fear and
trembling, to which they are earnestly exhorted, Phil. 2.22. and to run so,
that they may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24.

IV. Some to evil affect their own and others Minds with prejudice against
Discourses of this nature, do suggest, That the laying so great a stress upon
Duty, as to esteem any thing of it necessary to Justification, save Believing
only, does derogate from the Glory of Christ's great Undertaking in the
business of Man's Salvation; and that it is a trusting in our own
Righteousness. But it will appear far otherwise, if they will but impartially
consider in what sense, and upon what account such stress is laid upon Duty;
which I shall open in two Particulars.

1. They that rightly understand themselves in this matter, do not look that
any of their Duties, of what nature soever, should of themselves, as such, be
available to their Justification or Salvation; but that it is for the sake of
Christ, and upon account of his Undertaking for us, that God accepts and
imputes for Righteousness to us, such Duty as Faith, Repentance, and Obedience
is, and that he does make promise of Justification upon Condition of these.

Since the Fall, we say, all our Duties that are acceptable to God, or
available to us, become so through Christ, and for his sake. And therefore, so
long as we attribute and ascribe the benefit we expect upon our Repentance, and
sincere Obedience, or Belief, unto Christ, and to his great and worthy
Undertaking for us; we are far from derogating from the Glory of it, and from
trusting in our own Righteousness, in that Notion in which Men's trusting in
their own Righteousness is condemned in Scripture, or any otherwise than as our
Duty is made a Condition, without which we shall have no part in Christ, nor be
qualified for Glory.

2. When we lay such stress upon Repentance, Obedience, etc. as a Condition, or
part of a Condition of the Promise of Justification and Salvation, as without
which we say, we cannot be Justified or Saved by Christ's Undertaking for us;
yet then, this stress is laid, and depends upon the Will and Appointment of
God, by which these Duties are thus made the Condition, and not on the
intrinsic worth or value of the Duties themselves simply considered, without
reference to God's Ordination, appointing them to that use. For if God had not
made a New Covenant, promising pardon for Christ's sake to such as do Repent,
and Acceptance and Reward to such as sincerely Obey him, they would have had no
sufficient ground to have been confident of Pardon, Acceptance, or Reward,
though they should have Repented, and so Obeyed. And the reason is, because Men
are not Justified in the Eye of the Natural or Moral Law, upon any such account
as that is. So that all the stress which is laid on Duty by them that rightly
understand their Duty in this matter, does terminate partly in Christ's
Undertaking for them, and partly in God's Institution, and Appointment, who
has made his Promise of Justifying us for Christ's sake so, as that he has
made our Duty of Repentance, and sincere Obedience, a necessary Condition of
it. And he that trusts to be Pardoned, Accepted, and Rewarded for Christ's
Sake upon his Repentance, and sincere Obedience, because God has promised that
he shall; trusts in God, and in the fidelity of his Word and Promise. And in
doing so, what more stress does he lay upon Duty in this kind, than they that
trust to be Justified and Saved upon their Believing? For their Believing is
matter of Duty, as well as their Repenting and Obeying: And their Believing
would no more have entitled them to the benefit without the Promise, which
gives them that Title, than other Acts of Duty would do. And other Acts of Duty
do entitle to the same benefits as fully as Faith itself does, where there is
promise of the same benefits annexed to them, as Faith has: And that they
have, I have showed before. So long then as the stress which is laid on Duty,
terminates in Christ, and in God's Will and Appointment in the New Covenant,
and is regulated by his Word and Promise, there is no danger of overcharging
Duty.

It Is true indeed, if we should expect that Duty should do that for us, which
is proper only to Christ, as to expiate our sin, or the like; we should
sinfully overcharge it, as the Pharisaical Jews did their Sacrifices and other
Legal Observances, in expecting remission of Sin by them, without Christ's
Atonement: Which Righteousness of theirs, is for that cause called their own
Righteousness, which was by the Law, as being no method of Justification of
God's appointment, but of their own devising, which in that respect, was indeed
but as filthy Rags, and loathsome to God. But this is not the case with
Protestant Christians, who lay no such stress upon Duty, no not upon Faith
itself; but do acknowledge that all the power and virtue it has to justify,
depends wholly upon, and is derived from the Will and Ordination of God in
Christ, Joh. 6.40. and 1.12. Ephesians. 2.8. And we say the same of Repentance, and
sincere Obedience also. And a confidence of being saved in a way of Duty upon
such terms, is represented in Scripture, as trusting in the Righteousness of
God through Faith, in opposition to ones trusting in his own Righteousness,
Phil. 3.9. so far is it from trusting in our own Righteousness, or from
derogating from Christ in the Glory of his Undertaking for us.

And now for a Conclusion: It would be considered, whether such as are educated
in Christianity, are not hardlier brought to live as becomes the Gospel in
point of Practice, than to believe that Christ Jesus came into the World to
save Sinners: and that he Died for them, and Rose again: And whether there is
not cause to fear, that very many more such do eternally miscarry through
neglect of the former, than for want of the latter: And if there be, as
doubtless there is, then Practical Discourses among such must needs be highly
necessary, however some of weak minds, thirst more after Discourses Consolatory
upon account of Believing only. Which may serve instead of an Apology for
writing this Discourse. Saint Paul charged Titus to affirm this [constantly]
that they which have Believed, be careful to maintain good Works, Tit. 3.8.

FINIS.
(...)On the Preliminary QUESTIONS and ANSWERS OF THE Church-Catechism.

Giving an Account of the whole Doctrine OF THE Covenant of Grace; And of the
Nature, Terms, and Conditions of the same: SHOWING ALSO, By whose Mediation it
was obtained for us, by what Assistance we shall be enabled to perform it, and
our Obligations thereunto.

The Third Edition.

By THOMAS BRAY, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. Brudenell, for William Haws, at the Rose in
Ludgate Street. 1703.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, WILLIAM, LORD BISHOP of Coventry and
Lichfield, Lord Almoner to the KING.
MY LORD,
HAving your Lordship's Commands for the Publication of these following
Discourses, I have reason to hope my Readers will prove candid and favorable
in their Censures, since they cannot but pay the greatest Deference to the
Judgment of a Prelate, whom all the Learned, both at home and abroad, do
Unanimously rank amongst the Greatest Divines, that this, or former Ages can
glory in. But that I may not too much lessen that Esteem, which the Judicious
part of Mankind, at least, do justly bear to your Lordship, as the nicest Judge
in Things of this Nature, by Proclaiming to the World that Encouragement you
have given to a Work, which no doubt will be found very defective: I am apt to
believe, and am forward to own it, that it might be more your Approbation of
the Design, than the Goodness of the Performance, that has made your Lordship
so exceedingly Kind to it, and its Author. And indeed if ever there were a
Necessity of attempting any thing to promote Catechetical Instruction, there is
now too sad an Occasion for it.

Some Years since we thought it sufficiently hard upon us, that we were put to
the trouble of Defending a Church, so excellently Constituted as ours is, by
susteining those slight Skirmishes made only upon its Outworks; namely, against
its Rites and Ceremonies (Solemnities I would rather call 'em) so wisely
ordered for the more grave and solemn Administration of Divine Worship, and for
the better Edification of the Souls of Men. But alas, the Enemy has now entered
through our Breaches into the very Heart of our City (as St. Austin calls the
Church of God.) And as if there were an Universal Conspiracy made at this time
against it, All the Grand and Fundamental Articles, both of Natural and
Revealed Religion, are now either most furiously Stormed by Atheists, Deists,
and Socinians on the one hand, or secretly and dangerously undermined by
Enthusiasts and Antinomians on the other. And if the next Generation should
grow worse in its Principles and Morals than the present, what Vengeance from
Heaven, even to the removing of our Candlestick, may we not fear? But
especially, what Indignation from God may not we of the Clergy dread, should we
suffer the Youth of our Nation to go abroad into the World, without having
first given 'em those Religious Impressions by good Principles, as will guard
'em from the Danger thereof; and, especially, without having first prepossessed
the Minds of such, with a deep Tincture of Divine Knowledge, as are likely t^
be the Leading Men in their Countries; and yet by a fatal Mistake in Education,
are generally brought up in those Undisciplined Societies, amongst whom the
Oracles of false and pretended Reason are more universally Read, and more
highly Applauded, than the Lively Oracles of Divine Revelation.

I know how deeply sensible your Lordship is of the growing Infidelity and
Heterodoxy of this Age; and how much it is your Opinion, that a constant Course
of Catechizing our Youth in the Fundamental Principles of Christianity, is the
only Means that can effectually obviate and cure those Great and Prevailing
Evils. And if what I have here offered to the Public, may be at all
Serviceable to any of my Brethren, in affording some useful Materials for their
own Composures of this kind, and in assisting any of 'em in their Method, I
have my End, and shall therein in some measure answer, I presume, your
Lordship's Design; who, out of a pious Zeal to have this Work of Catechizing
universally set forwards by every Individual Minister in your Diocese, would
have the way so plained, that we might all proceed therein without Interruption.

And sure where the Authoritative Injunctions of so Great a Father and
Governor of our Church, are joined with such an unparalled Industry in the
discharge of all the most important and difficult Duties of the Episcopal Care,
it is impossible for us, who are under the Influence of your Power and Example,
to be Remiss in that which is the very principal part of Ministerial
Instruction incumbent upon us. For if we no sooner saw your Lordship entering
upon that Diocese, to which you were Translated so Happily to us (though so
Disadvantageously to your own Fortunes) but we saw you apply your self with the
utmost Vigor to the Business of it, in Visiting not only your Clergy, but
Cathedral, Schools, and Hospitals. If in your Lordship's primary Visitation we
heard such a Learned Scriptural Proof of the JUS DIVINUM of the THREE DISTINCT
ORDERS, (and what Evidence of that Nature is not to be expected from One so
Mighty in the Holy Scriptures) as cannot but Silence all Adversaries, and all
the Learned of our Nation would be glad to see made public: If we also saw at
the same time that Venerable Ordinance of Confirmation (even amongst those vast
Crowds that came to it, and with so great a Fatigue to your self) Administered
with a particular Application of the Stipulatory part, to every Individual
Person, that was duly attested to be sufficiently Qualified; and with that
Order, Gravity, and Solemnity, which raised in all, who were present, that
Value for it, which is due to it: If against every EMBER we see those wise
Precautions used, with Reference to the Candidates for Holy Orders, as would
effectually prevent the Admission of Persons unworthy, upon the account of any
Immorality, or will wholly lay the Guilt at the Doors of those who are backward
to Inform their Church-Governors of the Miscarriages they know, in order to
their Correction and Remedy; and yet are most apt to raise their Outcries
against the Scandals of the Clergy: And if also in the Probation of those who
are permitted to stand Candidates, there is constantly such a Treasury of
Sacred Learning opened to 'em in your Explications of Holy Writ, as renders
those Examinations one of the most learned and useful Theological Exercises
that this Age does know; and is alone sufficient to render those in a good
measure Qualified with Scriptural Knowledge, who come not thereto altogether
prepared beforehand. And indeed, if agreeably to your Lordship's so useful
Examinations, those who have the Happiness to be Conversant with you in your
Studies, do always see you Searching the Scriptures, and do scarcely ever find
you without the Holy Bible before you; (though one would think the sacred Page
need be no more turned over by one, who seems to have it wholly by Heart
already, both in our own, and all the Learned Languages.) If farther yet we
have seen your Lordship, by a Method equally worthy to be admired and imitated,
in so short time, to have got such an exact Knowledge of a numerous Clergy,
that from the chiefest Rector to the meanest Curate, our Abilities, Lives, and
Ministerial Performances, seem not to be better known to our nearest
Neighbors, than to your Self; and our Miscarriages and Neglects of Duty in the
remotest Part of your Diocese, may almost as soon escape the Reproaches of our
own Consciences, as your Lordship's Notice and Animadversion: If in a word such
is your Lordship's Vigilance through all the Parts of a very large Diocese, as
is alone sufficient to Confute those Voluminous Libels which were wrote some
Years since against DIOCESAN EPISCOPACY, as if an exact Discipline were not
practicable therein: If I say, such an Authority will not awe us, nor such an
Example of Pastoral Care will not animate us to discharge, as all the other, so
especially such an indispensably necessary a part of our Ministerial Function
as Catechizing (particularly at this Juncture) undoubtedly is, this were enough
to provoke Heaven to snatch from us the vast Benefit of such a Paternal
Government: Which Blessing that God may however continue to this Church, as it
is heartily desired by all that know your Lordship, (and are good enough
themselves justly to value the Two best Things in the World, an unparalled
Degree of Learning, joined with an equal Measure of the most ardent Piety) so
particularly it is the most earnest and devout Prayers to God, of

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Obliged, Most Obedient, and Most Dutiful Son and
Servant, T. B.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAving a Design, if God permit, and if I shall find this present Performance
to be Heartily received, to Publish a Discourse upon the Nature and Extent of
Ministerial, more particularly of Catechetical Instruction, which in the Nature
of it, I think, would be the most proper Preface to this Work; but is a Porch
too large to be prefixed to one single Wing of the Building; I shall only at
present Advertise my Reader of Two Particulars, relating to this First Volume
of my Lectures; namely,

1. Whereas I proposed, Lecture the Fourth, in the Division of the
Subject Matter contained in these Preliminary Questions and Answers, to treat
both upon Divine Grace, and of Prayer, as they are the Means to enable us to
perform our Part of the Covenant; and also to explain the Doctrine, and to
justify the Thing it self of Infant Baptism, or the admitting of Persons into
Covenant in the time of Infancy; as also the Use of Godfathers and Godmothers
therein, I was advised by some Learned Men to refer those Four last Points, and
the Lectures upon them, rather to the latter end of the Catechism; the Two
former to be treated upon, when I come to the Lord's Prayer, and the Question
which leads to it; the Two latter when I shall come to the Doctrine of the
Sacraments, where my Discourses upon those Subjects will be founded upon
Questions and Answers more directly leading thereunto. And as to the Subject of
Renouncing the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, it was thought it might be of
good Use to enlarge upon that, there being nothing of vaster Concernment,
especially to Youth, than a plain and practical Discovery of those various
Temptations which will arise from all these our Spiritual Adversaries, and are
likely to assault them above others. And because this Condition in our Covenant
with God, of Renouncing the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, does not again
recurr in any part of the Catechism to be more particularly handled, as the
others of Faith and Obedience do; for these Reasons it is, that my Exposition
of that Point has run out into a length so much improportionable to the rest,
insomuch that that Part takes up half the Book.

2. That which in the next place I am to account for, is the 23d. Lecture;
which is an Epitome of a Book, styled, the Measures of Christian Obedience, a
Work, I presume, both well known and esteemed. That Reverend Author, had, in my
Opinion, given so full a state of the Condition of our Covenant, viz.
Evangelical Obedience, that I thought I should do an Injury to my Catechumen,
should I pass it by, and give him a worse, and more imperfect one of my own.
Whether it would have been easier to me to contract that Discourse, than to
make a new state of the Point, such as I might call my own, I cannot readily
guess; but if it was, I hope some allowance will be given for taking one such
Rest as this may appear to be, since in the whole Scheme of Doctrine upon these
Preliminary Questions and Answers, I have been forced to tread in something an
unbeaten Path.

And now with my earnest Prayers to God, that he would give his Blessing to
what is herein no otherwise than honestly designed, I shall only at present
entreat the candid Reader, to put a favorable Construction upon what has been
here offered him, by one who is too sensible of his own Insufficiencies, to be
pertinacious in Maintaining any thing against the sense of his Superiors; but
especially who is Religiously careful to advance nothing contrary to the
Doctrine of our Church: Which that I might not do, I have, and shall all along
endeavor to take in as much as I can, both of Matter and Expression from its
established Forms and Offices.

A CATECHISM: That is to say, An Instruction to be learned of every Person,
before he be brought to be Confirmed by the Bishop.
Quest. WHat is your Name?

Answ. N. or M.

Quest. Who gave you this Name?

Answ. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a Member
of Christ, the Child of God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Quest. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?

Answ. They did promise and vow three things in my Name. First, That I should
renounce the Devil, and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked
World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. Secondly, That I should believe
all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And Thirdly, That I should keep God's
holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my Life.

Quest. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe, and to do as they
have promised for thee?

Answ. Yes verily; and by God's help, so I will. And I heartily thank our
Heavenly Father, that he has called me to this State of Salvation, through
Jesus Christ our Savior. And I pray unto God to give me his Grace, that I may
continue in the same unto my Lives end.

THE First Lecture. A Catechism, that is to say, An Instruction to be Learned
of every Person, before he be brought to be Confirmed by the Bishop.
THIS is the Title of your Catechism, which you are now learning; and before I
proceed to discourse on the Catechism it self, I thought it proper, from these
Words, to define what a Catechism means, and to let you know the Benefit and
Use of Catechizing.

As for the Word (...), to Catechize, The Meaning of the Word Catechize.
it is often met with in the Holy Scriptures, particularly Luke 1.4. where it
is taken in the self-same sense we now use it, wherein it does import a more
General Instruction in those Christian Truths, which are afterward to be more
particularly and distinctly learnt by us; for so St. Luke Dedicating his Gospel
to Theophilus, tells him Chap. 1. ver. 3, 4. Sensus loci q. d. ut ea quae olim
Catechumenus viva voce didicisti nunc before ac certius cognoscas. Eras. in
Loc.
That it seemed good to him, having had perfect knowledge of all those things
from the very first, to write them in order to him, that he might know the
certainty, or have a more full and particular Understanding of those things
wherein he had been before Catechized, (for so it is in the very Letter of the
Greek) that is taught only in General to prepare him for Baptism.

Hesychius, a Learned Grammarian, does give the meaning of this word Catechize,
by another which signifies to Build; and this does intimate to us the Matter of
which a Catechism must consist, viz. Of the main and fundamental Points of
Religion, such as are fittest to build up a firm and unshaken Christian withal.

Lastly, It is derived from (...), which signifies an inculcating and sounding
often in the Ear of the Learner, the Principles to be imbibed and fixed in his
Mind and Memory. So the Heathens, and so the Christians used the word.

And this may suffice for the Importance of the Word, which I thought might not
be improper to Note, because it gives so much Light into the meaning of the
Thing, and the Nature of a Catechism, which I shall therefore Define as
follows, taking the Title now read, with some Explanatory Additions, for the
Text upon which I shall Comment.

A Catechism The Definition of a Catechism.
is a general Instruction in the Fundamental Principles of the Christian
Religion, necessary to be Learnt of every Person in order to his Confirmation;
or the solemn Renewing of his Baptismal Vow and Covenant with God, and the
Receiving Benefit by the Bishop's Blessing, Prayers, and Laying on of Hands. In
which Definition you are told,

First, As to the Matter of which a Catechism is to consist: It is a General
Instruction in the Fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion.

Secondly, As to the Persons to be so Instructed: It is necessary to be Learnt
of every Person.

Thirdly, As to the End of a Catechism: It is necessary to be Learnt of every
Person, In order to his Confirmation, or the solemn Renewing of his Baptismal
Covenant and Vow before the Bishop, and the Receiving Benefit by the Bishop's
Blessing, Prayers, and Laying on of Hands. Of all which Particulars I shall
Discourse to you in their Order.

And First, As to the Matter of which a Catechism is to consist: It is a
general Instruction in the Fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion.

Christian Religion, What?
Christian Religion is out of Christian Principles to live an Holy, Good Life;
and together therewith to depend upon the Mediation of Christ with the Father
for us, that our imperfect Righteousness may be graciously accepted to our
Justification.

I. A Moral good Life an essential Part of Christianity.
That Morality, or a good Life, is a necessary and essential Part of
Christianity, is expressly affirmed by St. James, 1.27. where he tells us, That
Pure Religion and undefiled, before God and the Father (or such as God the
Father will accept) is this, To visit the Fatherless and Widows in their
afflictions, and to keep one self unspotted from the world. Many seem to place
it in little less than Morality; but it is the Life and Soul of all Religion,
as in Respect of God, to Love, Honor, and to Obey him; to Trust in Him, and to
Resign one self to him; to Worship him, and to be Devoutly given: So in Respect
of our Neighbor, to be Just and Charitable; and particularly, and especially
to Relieve those that are in Distress: And Lastly, as to our selves, to govern
our Affections, to subdue our Passions, to mortify our Lusts, and to moderate
our Desires: In a word, To keep the Heart and Life clean from the Defilements
of Sin. In this, I say, consists One main Part of Religion, in abstaining from
all Sin and Wickedness, and in a constant and steady Performance of all the
Parts of Virtue and Holiness.

This, I am sure, is a main Part of the Christian Religion, the Religion that
our Savior came to Plant amongst Men, for this St. Paul assures us, Tit. 2.11,
12, 13, 14. The Grace of God that brings Salvation to all men has appeared,
teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world; looking for that blessed Hope, and
the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. He appeared teaching us to
deny all Ungodliness; and he gave himself for us to redeem us from all
Iniquity. Hitherto indeed tended all he said, all he did, and all he suffered.
This was the Design of his Excellent Sermons and Discourses, of his most
admirable Example and Life, and of his Death and Sufferings, to Root out of the
Lives of Men whatsoever is sinful and wicked, and to Implant in its stead all
the Parts of Virtue and Goodness.

But Secondly, It is not enough to make a Man a good Christian, II. To Act
Virtuously upon Christian Principles.
that he live a strict and unblamable Life; but it is moreover necessary to
render him such, that he act Virtuously upon Christian Principles: Both indeed
are necessary to the constituting a Man a true Christian. The most regular Life
that can be, except it be acted upon Christian Principles, is but mere Morality
at the best; as the most Orthodox Belief that is, if it be Barren in good
Works, is but a dead Faith. Thus Temperance may be observed because of our
Health, and plain and punctual Dealing by the Men of Trade, because of their
Interest. Men may Fast and Pray out of Hypocrisy, and to appear Good to others;
and may distribute large Alms to gain the Applause of Men, as you may see Mat.
6.2, 5. And indeed considering that Godliness is profitable for all things,
having the promise of the Life that now is, as well as of that which is to
come, 1 Timothy 4.8. And since of the Christian Religion it may be said, that Her
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace; Men may lead very
blameless Lives in all respects, because of the Advantage and Tranquillity of
Mind, that arises merely from a regular and orderly Conversation: But all this
will be accounted by God to fall far short of the Christian Religion, and will
entitle the Man to no Reward in Heaven, that acts upon no better Reasons nor
Motives than these: Verily I say unto you they have their Reward, says our
Savior, Mat. 6.2.

Nay, He that lives an orderly, good, moral Life upon the Belief only that
there is a God, that his Providence and Care is extended over us, that our
Souls shall never Dye, but are capable of, and shall receive Rewards, or
Punishments in another World, can be only said to be so far Religious, as the
good Moral Heathens were, who Believed and Acted upon the Principles of Natural
Religion only; and who having no other Law did by Nature the things contained
in the Law, Romans 2, 14. But to constitute a Man truly Religious, and to
denominate his Religion the Christian Religion, it is farther necessary, that
he moreover act upon Christian Principles, such as not the Light of Nature
only, but the Gospel of our Savior does reveal unto us, for In the day when he
shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, it will be, St. Paul tells us,
according to his Gospel, Romans 2.16. And so main a part in his Gospel were the
Principles of revealed Religion, that he told the Corinthians, he determined
not to know any thing amongst them save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified, 1 Cor.
2.2. that is, the Means and Methods of our Salvation by a Crucified Savior
(which can be known only by Revelation) he was resolved should be so much the
Subject of his Preaching amongst them, that they might almost conclude he
himself knew nothing else, and did not much care whether they did also. Thus
the Christian Religion, you see, is out of Christian Principles to lead an
holy, good Life.

Nor Thirdly, Is it enough to render the Religion of us Christians complete,
III. Dependence upon the Mediation of Christ, that our imperfect Righteousness
may be accepted, also necessary.
that by the force of good Christian Principles we lead good Lives; but
together therewith, we must depend upon the Mediation of Christ with the Father
for us, that our imperfect Righteousness may be graciously accepted to our
Justification. For alas! the best of us all must consider this, That when we
have done all that is commanded us, we are but Unprofitable servants, Luke
17.10. But alas! the best of us all do exceedingly fail in doing all that is
commanded us; for we have all sinned, and come short of the glory, or
Approbation of God, Romans 3.23. And therefore, as there is One Mediator between
God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. So we are strictly commanded,
Col. 3.17. that whatsoever we do in word or in deed, we should do all in the
Name of the Lord Jesus. And particularly as to that so considerable part of
Religion, Prayer, it is ordained, we are told Joh. 15.16. That whatsoever we
shall ask of the Father in his Name he will give it us: And also as to that
other great Duty of Christian Worship, Thanksgiving, we are solemnly enjoined
Ephesians. 5.17.20. As we will show our selves not to be unwise, but understanding
what the will of the Lord is, to give thanks always for all things unto God the
Father, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ: and In him we have boldness and
access with confidence by the Faith of him, Ephesians. 3.12. The meaning of which,
and innumerable other places, that might be produced to this purpose, is this,
That considering our own Vileness and Unworthiness, by reason of our Sins, we
should ground all our Hopes and Expectations of Favor and Acceptance, and
Reward, solely upon Christ: That we should offer all our Deeds to God, as
Sacrifices and Services unworthy of acceptance in themselves, and as proceeding
from us, but pleasing and acceptable to God, only for his sake.

Such Dependence the Distinguishing Character of a true Christian.
And now this I take to be the grand distinguishing Character of Christianity,
which ought therefore never to be omitted, when we pretend to give a full
Account thereof. As to a good Moral Life, some Pagans did arrive to great
degrees in Virtue (such as I wish may not rise in Judgment against us
Christians now adays:) and as for their acting this upon good Principles, I
can hardly imagine, that those who had such noble and worthy Thoughts of God,
and of their own Souls, and who placed their Happiness in Purity and
Uprightness, were so much wanting in that Ingredient also of Virtue, viz. The
acting it upon good Principles, as some do think. They seem to me only to have
wanted the Knowledge and Belief of some more and better Principles which we do
enjoy, to render their Virtue complete in that respect also. But that the best
of our Performances are so imperfect, that it was thought requisite in the
Divine Wisdom, that the Son of God should become a Sacrifice to expiate their
Guilt, and a Mediator with his Father to obtain their Acceptance, is what the
proud Hearts of natural Men never thought of, and no Religion but the Christian
ever taught: But on the contrary, when they had done well, they did proudly
overvalue it, and did arrogantly challenge the Reward, not as of Grace, but of
Debt.

Dependence upon Christ necessary to take down an arrogant Conceit of our own
Righteousness a Temper of Mind most displeasing to God.
And therefore to take down this proud and arrogant Presumption in us, so
natural to Man, and so dishonorable to God, together with his Design of making
us Holy, it was withal God's Intent by such a Dispensation of his Mercies, as
is given us in the Gospel, to create in us such a Reliance and Dependence upon
Christ for Salvation, as to expect it, not on the account of our own holy
Performance, but in the Virtue of his Mediation with the Father for us; for so
it is written 1 Cor. 1.29, 30, 31. That to the end that no flesh may glory in
God's presence, Jesus Christ is by him made to us Wisdom, and Righteousness,
and Sanctification, and Redemption, that so he that glories, might glory in
the Lord. And indeed it does exceedingly tend to the praise and glory of his
Grace, that he has made us accepted in the Beloved, as it is said in Ephesians. 1.6.
This does eminently set forth the exceeding Luster of his Mercy toward us in
the Gospel, that our imperfect, if sincere Obedience, shall be accepted through
the Mediation of Christ. It does utterly exclude Boasting, and all occasions of
proud Reflections on our Parts, as if so mean an Obedience as ours, could
deserve such infinite Rewards, as are made over to us in the Gospel; a Temper
of Mind, which as it is very apt to get Entertainment in our Souls, so ought of
all things to be suppressed within us. And thus I have given you a larger account
of the Nature of the Christian Religion, than otherwise I should have done,
that I might clear the way toward coming to the Knowledge of those Fundamental
Principles thereof; which I told you are the proper Matter of a Christian
Catechism.

And now answerably hereunto, The Nature of fundamental Principles.
the fundamental Principles of our Religion must be such Doctrines, as being
well understood, and thoroughly believed, do most powerfully and forcibly
persuade and move Men to be thus Religious; as to tend to destroy the Power of
Sin, to mortify our Lusts, and all wicked Inclinations within us, to render us
pious and devout toward God, just and charitable and peaceable Neighbors, and
sober, chaste and orderly Livers in this World: And which shall withal create in
us such an humble Opinion of our own Unworthiness, that when we have done all
that we can to deny our selves, and have proceeded never so far in our Zeal to
good Works, we shall nevertheless, confessing that we are but unprofitable
Servants, depend wholly on Christ's Merits and Mediation, and in the Virtue of
his Satisfaction and Intercession alone, expect Salvation.

And now such is the Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace, An Enumeration of
fundamental Principles.
particularly that part of it, the Vow in Baptism, wherein all do solemnly
promise and vow Repentance, Faith and Obedience; engaging to renounce the
World, the Flesh and the Devil. Whosoever considers this, sees what Obligations
lie upon him to deny himself the sinful Pleasures of the World, I. The general
Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace.
and to govern his whole Life and Conversation according to God's Commandments.
And whoever again understands the Constitution of this Covenant, knows that it
was obtained for him by the Mediation of Christ, who is therefore Styled, The
Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12.24. and therefore that on his Mediation
he must depend for the having those infinite Blessings made good to him, which
are promised therein to his Obedience.

And such fundamental Principles also in a prime Sense are the Belief of all
the Articles of our Christian Faith, as the Belief of God, II. The Articles of
our Christian Faith.
and of his Providence, that he is our Creator, Governor, and will Reward
every Man according to his Works. The Belief that Jesus Christ came into the
World, Died and Suffered to Atone for its Sins, and Preached the Gospel to
Reform it. The Belief that he gives his Spirit to sanctify us, and that he will
hereafter come in Person to Judge us. In a word, The Belief of all the Articles
of our Christian Faith. These are indeed the true Principles of our Religion,
for these are all of them (as I shall hereafter show) so many very powerful
Motives to reform our Lives, to forsake our Sins, and to follow Holiness, as
that without which we shall never see God. And these do most of them, influence
us, as to a Good Life, so, humbly to rely upon God's Mercies through Christ for
the acceptance of it.

III. The Laws of the Ten Commandments.
And such also are the Laws of the Ten Commandments, which contain the great
Instances of our Duty to God, our Neighbor, and our Selves; and to which all
others may probably be reduced. These Ten Commandments may properly enough be
styled the Principles of Religion; for as the Root is the Principle, as it
were, out of which all the Branches Stem forth, so out of these Commandments do
all the Duties of a Christian grow forth, like so many Branches; so that
whosoever shall well study and digest these Ten Summary Commands, shall
scarcely fail of growing up to be a Good Christian.

IV. The Doctrine of Prayer, and of the Sacraments.
And if to these we add the Doctrine of Prayer, and of the Sacraments, which are
the necessary Means, and appointed us by God, of our procuring and conveying
unto us his Assistance, to enable us to mortify and forsake our Sins, and to
become Holy: I do not know any other Principles that are Fundamentally
necessary, either to the promoting of a good Life here, or an happy One
hereafter; at leastwise so far, as to be the Matter of Catechetical
Instruction, and the Business of a Catechist to inform you of them.

And indeed as these Doctrines are every One of them necessary to be Known,
Believed, and Practiced by every Christian, that may have the Means of Knowing
them, and may be taught them, being no other than the Covenant of Grace it
self, or those particular Articles contained in it, and which are expressly
Enjoined upon us by the Word of God to be Believed and Practiced by us; so our
Church does account them the only Fundamental and Necessary Principles that are
to be the Matter of a Christian Catechism. There are, it must be confessed, many
other useful Truths contained in the Scriptures; and those, who having first
laid the Foundation in these already mentioned, would go on to Perfection,
should endeavor, by Reading the Bible and other good Books, and by Attending
to the Preaching of the Word, A Catechism ought not to be crowded with any thing
more, than what is purely Fundamental to a good life here, and Happiness
hereafter.
to gain the Knowledge of them: But a Catechism ought not to be crowded with
any thing more than what is purely Fundamental to a Good Life here, and
Happiness hereafter. And if other Churches have filled their Catechisms, either
with many Unscriptural Tenets, as the Church of Rome has hers, or with any
doubtful and nice Doctrines concerning God's Election and Reprobation, as many
others have done theirs, they have no reason to brag of their Abundance. It is
the Glory of our Church that she Imposes no other Doctrine, as necessary to be
Learnt by her Children, than those already mentioned, which are plainly
declared in Scripture to be Fundamental and Necessary Principles, whereon we
may securely build a Good Life, and the certain Hopes of eternal Happiness; and
which are so firm a Rock, that the Religion and Hopes of Happiness founded upon
it, will not easily be destroyed by the most violent and boistrous Temptations
that the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, shall Assault it withal, thereby to
Ruin it.

Thus have I Adventured in as few Words, as the Difficulty of the Argument
would give me leave, to show you the Nature of Fundamental Principles, and to
declare to you what Doctrines are to be accounted such, so far at least, as
they are the Matter of Catechetical Instruction, and the Business of a
Catechist to inform you of them.

I have done this Point when I have told you, A Catechism is a General
Instruction in the Fundamental Principles of Christianity.
That a Catechism is A General Instruction only, in the fundamental Principles
of Christianity. As a Catechism ought not to be crowded with any thing more
than what is purely Fundamental to a Good Life here, and Happiness hereafter;
so even those Fundamental Truths it ought to deliver in as short and
comprehensive a manner as possible; for a Catechism is an Instruction that must
be fitted to all, even the weakest Capacities, and therefore it ought to be
such a Form of sound Words, as all can retain: And the more explicit and
enlarged Knowledge of these things is to be sought for in the Expositions and
Comments that are given of them in Catechetical Discourses, of which Nature I
design, by God's Grace, to Present you with some, until I have gone through
your Catechism.

In a word, and to conclude this First Point: Such were the Ancient, and
Apostolical Catechisms.
Such a General Instruction in the Fundamental and most Necessary Points of
Religion, as we have given you an Account of, was the Matter of which the
ancient Catechisms did mostly consist, even in the time of the Apostles, and
such is the Catechism you are now Learning.

As to the ancient Catechizing in the Apostles times, as it is plain from the
Example of Theophilus, Luke 1.4. that the New Converts received their first
Notions of Religion by Catechizing, as was before observed: So Romans 6.17. we
read of a Form of Doctrine that was delivered to them, which the best
Interpreters suppose to have been a Summary of Christian Doctrine, or Body of
Catechetical Points: And what those Points were, which they first taught them,
we have expressly laid down Heb. 6.1, 2. from whence it appears, that those
First Principles of the Doctrine of Christ were, for the most part, the very
same I have now mentioned, viz. The Doctrines of Repentance, Faith, and of the
Sacraments: They are also called there the Foundation, which being laid, the
Apostle tells them, he will go on to perfect them by other Teaching.

And such a General Instruction also is the Catechism you are now Learning, and
which I am at present about to Expound to you. And such is our Church-Catechism.
You have therein indeed given you a Summary Doctrine of all the Fundamental
and necessary Articles of Christianity. And the Seed of these Catechetical
Points, if they be but received into well-dispos'd Hearts, will in time, by
God's Grace, produce a plentiful Crop of saving Knowledge: So that I may very
safely affirm it, That whosoever of you shall learn to understand thoroughly his
Church-Catechism, shall be sufficiently instructed to Salvation; and whosoever
shall live according to those Principles therein taught, need no more to render
him a good Christian in this World, and an happy Saint in the World to come.

And so much for the First Point in my Description of a Catechism, viz. The
Matter of which a Catechism is to consist; that it is a General Instruction in
the Fundamental and necessary Principles of the Christian Religion.

Secondly, The next, are the Persons that are to be Catechized, The Persons
that are to be Catechized, are every Person.
and in the Definition I have given of a Catechism, it is said to be An
Instruction necessary to be Learnt of every Person. It is very certain that
whoever would be skilful in any Art or Science whatsoever, he must endeavor
first to understand the Principles of it. This is every day's Experience: He
that would be a good Grammarian, or Latin Scholar must first learn to
understand his Grammar Rules; you know it is impossible to read at all before
you know your Letters, or to read well till you can spell or distinguish
between the Syllables. In like manner, He that would be a knowing, and withal a
stable Christian (as it is every Body's infinite Concern to be both) he must
make it his Care and Business to be come well instructed in the Principles
(those which we call the fundamental Points) of the Christian Doctrine: That
the way to Perfection in the Christian, as well as other Doctrines, is to begin
with the Principles of it, appears from that of the Apostle, Heb. 6.1. Leaving
the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on to perfection. Hereby
you see, that his Method in Teaching was first to begin with grounding in the
Principles of the Christian Religion, and then to proceed to higher things; and
the same Method the Apostle took in teaching of Religion, the same must the
Disciples be supposed to do in learning of it. If the Apostle began with
teaching of Principles, the Disciples must begin with the learning of them. And
the Wisdom of laying first a Foundation of good Principles, and building our
Religion upon them, and the Folly on the other side of not laying a good
Foundation of such, is sufficiently represented in that Parable of our Savior,
Mat. 7.24. The wise Man, he there tells us, Built his House upon a Rock, or a
Foundation of good Principles, and when the rain descended, and floods came,
and winds blew and beat upon that house, it fell not, for it was founded upon a
Rock. But the foolish man he built his house upon the Sand, upon none at all,
or a very sorry Foundation; and mark the Fate of that Man's Religion, when the
floods came, and the winds blew and beat upon that House, it sell, and great
was the fall of it. A Person well grounded in the Principles of Religion shall
be able to bear the Shock of the fiercest Temptations, but a Person of no
Principles shall not be able to withstand the least. This Parable does
excellently well set forth the Necessity of being well grounded in Religious
Principles, The necessity of every Persons being well grounded in Religious
Principles by Catechetical Instruction.
which can only be done, I have showed you, by learning of the Catechism.

I do not say that Persons should be always in their Catechism; but when they
have laid the Foundation there, so that they cannot only say, but understand
it, by having had it explained to them; my advice then with the Apostle to the
Heb. 6.1. is, That leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, they
proceed to perfection, and farther to improve their Knowledge in Divine Things:
But this I say, that every Christian must lay the Foundation of his Religion
here; and if this has not been yet done, it is better late than never.

The Contempt hereof is the effect of Pride and the cause of Ignorance.
Those who think themselves too Wise already, or too Good to submit themselves
to so mean an Instruction, as they ignorantly esteem Catechizing to be, I can
never promise my self much Good from them. Such indeed are generally
Self-conceited enough of their own Skill and Knowledge; but it is scarcely to
be imagined th^^ they should not remain very ignorant in all sober and
substantial Truth; nor can they but be subject to fall into the grossest
Heresies and Errors, being untaught in those Principles, which are the only
Foundations of all saving Knowledge and true Religion, and the Touchstone to
try false Opinions by.

True it is; The Seeds of Virtue and Principles of Religion can never be too
soon sown in Children's Hearts.
Children are the Persons that we do now commonly Instruct this way, and it is
requisite that even Children should be so Instructed; for the Seeds of Virtue,
and Principles of Religion, can never be too soon sown in their Hearts, that,
if possible, Religion may have the first Possession of their Souls, which is a
great Advantage, before that evil Examples, and bad Customs have corrupted
them: But in regard, Children, though they learn the Words, can understand but
little of the Meaning; and the Principles of our Religion, being for the most
part, deep Mysteries, hard to be understood; the fittest Persons to receive an
Exposition of these Things, must be Youth grown up to some Years of Discretion;
However, a clear Understanding of Catechetical Doctrines is attainable only by
Persons grown up to some Years of Discretion.
for even these first Principles, if we regard the more clear, distinct, and
satisfying Knowledge of them, and the more orderly Knowledge of their Method
and Dependence one upon another, and the Knowledge of their useful
Consequences, are strong meat, belonging to them who are of full Age, even
those who, by reason of use, have their Senses exercised to discern between
Good and Evil, as the Apostle's Expression is, Heb. 5.14.

The Matter without doubt of Catechetical Doctrines is fit to be applied to
Persons of any Age, that are as yet but Beginners in the School of Christ: And
therefore, as we find in Church History, not only the most Learned of the
Primitive Fathers, as Pantaenus, Clemens, Origin, did open Schools of
Catechizing, by which means several Countries within few Years received the
Gospel: It is not below Persons of any Age or Quality to lay the Foundation of
their Knowledge in Catechetical Instruction.
So we also find from the same Histories, that Persons of all Ages, and of all
Qualities, did submit themselves to be Instructed this way, till such time as
they were perfected in the Mysteries of Religion. We read of Emperors, that
have stood amongst the Catechumens, or Persons Catechized, and of some who have
been Advanced from being Catechumens to be Bishops, the Highest Degree in the
Church, as the other in the State. Nor is it designed by our Church for the
Instruction of Children only: But a Catechism is an Instruction necessary to be
learnt of every Person, indifferently, before he be brought to be Confirmed by
the Bishop, as appears by the Title and Description of your Catechism, on which
Words I am now Discoursing, which brings me to speak to what End Catechizing is
designed.

Thirdly, The End of Catechizing to prepare for Confirmation.
And it is designed to prepare you to be Confirmed by the Bishop. Confirmation
is an open Profession from the Mouth of One formerly Baptized, and now come to
Years of Discretion, made before the Bishop and the Congregation of Christ's
Church, of Consenting to, and Ratifying that Vow made in Baptism by his
Godfathers and Godmothers in his behalf, with a solemn Promise, Confirmation,
What?
that he will endeavor in his own Person, according as was Engaged for him, to
Renounce the World, the Flesh and the Devil, to Believe in God, and to Obey
him. This on the part of the Person Confirmed: And then on the Bishop's part,
It consists in his solemn Prayers to God, to enable the Party, by the Grace of
his Holy Spirit, to do the same; and in his Episcopal and Fatherly Benediction,
or Blessing of him, together with his Laying on of Hands, after the Example of
the Holy Apostles, to certify him of God's Favor and gracious Goodness toward
him. This is the Doctrine of Laying on of Hands, or Confirmation, entire and
unmaim'd in either of its essential Parts, according as it is delivered in our
Church, and is ordered to be Performed, both by those who come to this Holy
Institution, and by those who are Entrusted with the Administration of it: And
a Rite it is both greatly Necessary, and of singular Benefit in the Church of
Christ.

Confirmation necessary.
And First, It is greatly Necessary, if you consider it only, as that wherein
you do solemnly Ratify and Confirm your Covenant with God; for if when you come
to Years of Understanding, you refuse, or wilfully neglect to appear before the
chief Minister of Christ, I. As a solemn Ratification of the Covenant with God.
the Bishop, there solemnly to declare and profess, That you will stand to that
Covenant, your Sureties in your Infancy did make with God for you; you may be
reasonably deemed to have Renounced the Covenant of Grace, and to have Repented
it was ever made in your behalf; to have Renounced that Blessed Covenant, I
say, and all claim to the precious Promises and Privileges thereof, which puts
you above the Condition of Infidels and Heathens, which are without Christ, and
strangers from the Covenants and Promise, having no hope, and without God in
the world, which the Apostle mentions, as a most forlorn and desperate
Condition, Ephesians. 2.12. So that it is highly requisite therefore, as you will not
throw your selves back into the sad and comfortless Rank and State of Infidels,
that you should Ratify and Confirm your Covenant when you come to Age.

II. As it consists in the Episcopal Benediction, and Laying on of Hands.
Nor is it less necessary with respect also to that other solemn Part of it, the
Laying on of the Hands of the Bishop, together with his Prayers and Episcopal
Blessing. The whole Ordinance passes in the Scripture under this Title of
Laying on of Hands, that being so eminent a Part of it, and because of the many
Benefits that do accompany that Apostolical Right. And so highly necessary is
the Laying on of Hands in Confirmation to be retained in the Church, that Heb.
6.1, 2. it is reckoned amongst the First Principles of the Doctrine of Christ,
and together with Baptism, said to be one of the Foundation Doctrines of
Christianity. True it is, Laying on of Hands was used on other solemn Occasions
besides Confirmation, as particularly in the Ordination of Ministers, 1 Timothy
5.22. But however in this 6. Heb. 1, 2. By Laying on of Hands can be meant no
other than that used in Confirmation, it be mentioned immediately after
Baptism, which Confirmation is to follow, and numbered amongst those first
Doctrines of Christianity, which it belongs to all Christians indifferently to
be instructed in, whereas no other but that Laying on of Hands, used in
Confirmation, does Universally concern all sorts of People. So that
Confirmation, it appears, considered in both its Parts, is necessary to be used
in the Church of Christ.

Confirmation Beneficial.
Secondly, And as it is necessary, so it is an Ordinance of singular Benefit to
Men's Souls, if considered in its full Meaning and Extent. For why?

I. As the solemn Profession therein made imprints serious Thoughts and
religious Resolutions.
First, As to that solemn Profession therein made, Can any thing imprint upon
Men's Spirits serious Thoughts, and Religious Resolutions, if such a solemn
Declaration as this, will not? I do here (does every Person that is duly
Confirmed, say) in the presence of God and of this Congregation, Renew the
solemn Promise and Vow that was made in my Name at my Baptism, Ratifying and
Confirming it in my own Person, and acknowledging my self bound to Believe, and
to do all those things, which my Godfathers and Godmothers did then undertake
for me. And no Man that considers any thing, after so serious an Undertaking
upon himself, and in so Solemn a manner, can commit an ill Thing, but his
Conscience will afterward the more upbraid him for it, will rouse him up, and
awaken him to Repentance. Besides the Weight there is in the Profession it
self, the making it in so Solemn a manner, before so awful an Assembly, in the
presence of God, and before the Bishop, and the Church of Christ, must needs be
a very singular Means to fix you in your Religious Purposes; for as long as we
are Men, and carry about us outward Senses, the Solemnity, whereby Religious
Actions are performed, will be found to add great Advantages to the Well-doing
of them.

Nor again is Confirmation an Ordinance less Beneficial, II. As the Episcopal
Benediction, Prayers, and Laying on of Hands, have Spiritual Blessings
attending them.
considered in its other Part; in the Prayers, the Blessing, and in the Laying
on of the Hands of the Bishop. The Person to be Confirmed, having Renewed that
solemn Promise and Vow that was made in his Name at his Baptism, Ratifying and
Confirming the same in his own Person: The Bishop does then proceed to Beseech
God to Strengthen him with the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and daily to increase
in him his manifold Gifts of Grace, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the
Spirit of Counsel and Ghostly Strength, the Spirit of Knowledge and true
Godliness, and to fill him with the Spirit of his holy Fear: And does moreover
add his own Fatherly Benediction in these Words, Defend, O Lord, this thy
Servant with thy Heavenly Grace, that he may continue thine for ever, and daily
increase in thy Holy Spirit more and more, until he come to thine everlasting
Kingdom.

And now if the Effectual fervent Prayer of any Righteous man avails much.
Jam. 5.16. how much more may be expected from the Intercessions of One, who
has, not only on the account of his own Personal Righteousness, but by Virtue
of his Office also, an Interest in God, and the Privilege of an easier Access,
and of nearer Approaches to him in Divine Offices: And who is Commissioned to
Pray to God in the behalf of others, and is Authorized to Bless the People in
his Name? Why this is the Power and Privilege that the Priesthood had given
them under the Law and Gospel both: Under the Law, as you will see Numb. 6.24.
Joel. 2.17. and also under the more Spiritual Dispensation of the Gospel, as
may be seen Jam. 5.14. So that much Benefit may, without doubt, be expected
from the Devout Prayers and Paternal Benediction, or Blessing of a Father of
the Church, for God will ever have a particular Regard to his own Institutions,
and will Bless those Means of conveying his Grace, which he himself has
Appointed.

But then especially you may promise your selves a favorable Answer to the
Bishop's Prayers and Fatherly Benediction, when it is also accompanied with the
Solemnity of Laying on of Hands. This has in all Dispensations, before the Law,
under the Law, and under the Gospel, been Used both by Natural Parents, and by
the Spiritual Fathers of the Church, as a Solemn way of their Blessing. Thus
Jacob Blessed his Sons, Laying his Hands upon their Heads, Genesis 48.17. So Aaron
lifted up his Hands toward the People, and Blessed them, Lev. 9.22. And our
Savior also, When the little Children were brought unto him, he put his Hands
upon them and Blessed them. Mark 10. 16. No doubt those Great Persons did not
intend hereby a fruitless Ceremony, but they did design their Laying on of
Hands, together with their Blessing, should have a Spiritual Effect, or else
such Persons would not have used it. But to put us out of doubt concerning the
Graces, that will attend the Prayers and Benedictions, together with the Laying
on of Hands of the Fathers of the Church, we have a plain Instance thereof in
what Peter and John did, Act. 8.15.17. who when they came down to the lately
Baptized Converts of Samaria, They Prayed for them, that they might receive the
Holy Ghost, and then laid their Hands upon them, and they received the Holy
Ghost. And though the Gifts that then followed the Laying on of the Hands of the
Apostles, may be supposed to have been Extraordinary Gifts, because the Infant
State of the Church did then require such to raise and support it; yet the same
Laying on of Hands after the Example of the Holy Apostles, and that by the
Successors in the Church of Christ, the Bishops, may be expected to have still
such Graces accompanying it, as in this present State of the Church, will be
needful for you, and that thereupon the Fatherly Hand of God will ever be over
you, that his holy Spirit will ever be with you, and that he will so lead you
in the Knowledge and Obedience of his Word, that in the End you may attain
everlasting Life, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And thus I have at length
showed you what it is to be Confirmed by the Bishop, and withal how Necessary
and Beneficial it is to the Souls of Men, to be so Confirmed.

Catechizing necessary.
And now Catechizing, you are told in the Title and Description of that
Catechism which you are now Learning, is requisite in order to this your
Confirmation.

I. To the solemn Ratifying of our Covenant with God.
And First in order to your solemn Renewing therein of the Covenant and Vow made
with God in your Baptism, and that you may Ratify and Confirm the same in your
own Person. For why? In your Confirmation you do Voluntarily and of Choice take
upon you that Profession of Christianity, which before, in your Minority, was
done by others in your behalf. And it is necessary before you take upon your
selves so great and weighty a Business, as the Performance of the Conditions of
the Covenant of Grace, that you be first Instructed, so as to understand them
well, both what those Conditions of Repentance, Faith and Obedience are; and
what mighty Blessings God vouchsafes to make over to you in the same Covenant
that should be an Encouragement, and reasonable Consideration to you, to
undertake so great and weighty a Charge. Just as in the case of a Person under
Age, who, by reason of his Minority, being incapable of himself to Enter into
any Covenants, his Trustees may do it for him: But when he is come to Age, and
must Seal to, and Confirm such Covenants himself, it it requisite he have them
Read to him, and be made to understand what Advantages accrue to him thereby,
before he Confirm them in his own Person.

But why not this Instruction, rather before Baptism than Confirmation? It is
in Baptism that we Enter into Covenant with God, and Catechetical Instruction
should therefore properly go before that, you will say.

And in the beginning of Christianity indeed, when the Parties Baptized were,
for the most part, Persons grown up to Years of Understanding, who Abandoning
their Heathenish, or Jewish Principles and Practices, gave themselves up to be
Christ's Disciples, it was required that such, even before they were Baptized,
should be first Catechized in the Principles of Christianity, and be made to
understand the Conditions of that Covenant, which by their Baptism they were to
Enter into with God. And so it is still requisite, that all New Converts from
Paganism, or Judaism, or Mahometism, or any other contrary Religion, should be
likewise first Instructed before they be Admitted to Baptism, because such
being as well to Unlearn, as it were, their former false Religion, as to Learn
the true Christian Profession; they ought therefore to Understand both, e're
they can well Renounce that, or before they can Reasonably put on, or Embrace
this. But as to you, who are the Children of Christian Parents, your Case is
quite different, for having no false Religion to Unlearn and Renounce, and
having a kind of Right of Inheritance, by Virtue of your Christian Parentage,
to be Baptized, even in your Infancy, into the Profession of the True; It is
therefore sufficient that you be Instructed, after your Baptism, in the Nature
and Tenor of the Baptismal Covenant, provided that when so Instructed, you
afterward appear Solemnly to Confirm it before Christ's Ambassador, the
Bishop.

But then it is highly necessary you should be so Catechized and Instructed
before you Personally undertake a Matter of so great Importance, that so when
you come to make a solemn and Public Profession of such an Undertaking, you
may do it in a way and manner, that becomes reasonable and wise Persons to do
so great a thing in, who always know and consider the Weight and Consequence of
Matters of Moment, e're they will Solemnly make a Profession of them, or
Undertake them. So necessary is Catechizing in order to the Renewing and
Ratifying in Confirmation, that Covenant and Vow which was made in Baptism.

Nor Secondly, II. To the Receiving Benefit by the Episcopal Benediction,
Prayers, and Laying on of Hands.
Is it less necessary to your receiving Benefit by the Prayers, the Blessing,
and by the Laying on of Hands of the Bishop in Confirmation. As Beneficial as
these really are to all those, who shall come duly Prepared, yet it is certain,
that without some necessary Qualifications in such as come to be Confirmed
(amongst which, to understand the Nature, Terms and Conditions of the Covenant
of Grace, and seriously to Intend to Perform the same, are the first and chief)
none will be much the better for the Bishop's Prayers, Benediction, or
Imposition of Hands. These may be a Means indeed of obtaining the Graces of the
Holy Spirit, to Enable those, that understand their Baptismal Vows and Covenant
with God, to perform such their Engagements, but they are utterly unlikely to
have any Operation upon those, who understand not what a Covenant of Grace does
mean. And therefore Catechizing, which is the only proper Means to give you
such an Understanding, must needs be exceedingly necessary to your being
Benefited also by what the Bishop shall perform in your Confirmation.

And so much for the Nature, Necessity and End of Catechizing, so far as the
Title of your Catechism does give us occasion to discourse of it. And if we
consider it so far only, you have a great deal of reason to value Catechizing,
as a most necessary and useful Kind of Instruction, so as to need no great
Invitation to it. The Points you see therein taught, are the most substantial
and weighty Truths of Religion. The Persons to be so instructed, are
indifferently any Persons of whatever Age, Sex, or Quality, till they come to a
competent Understanding of those most necessary Points, as has been Practiced
in the Apostle's Times, and the Primitive Church. And the end thereof you see,
is no less than to render you capable to Confirm that Covenant with God,
wherein are contained the highest and most valuable Privileges in the World,
and which cost the most inestimable Price to purchase them for us, even the
Blood of h rist, and which except you shall secure your selves an Interest in,
you are desperate and undone Persons.

And now each of these Considerations are Reasons sufficient to bring you to be
Catechized, and to make you value it, as a great Happiness you may be so
instructed to your Soul's health. But that nothing may be left unsaid, to raise
in your Minds a due Esteem of Catechizing, and to persuade you to attend it; I
shall over and above what the Title of your Catechism directly leads me to say
concerning it, give you to understand several other good uses to which
Catechizing serves, as so many Arguments to invite you to it.

THE Second Lecture. A Catechism, that is to say, An Instruction to be Learned
of every Person, before he be brought to be Confirmed by the Bishop.
LAST Lord's Day taking these Words, which are the Title of your Catechism for
my Text (as I shall do the several Parts of the Catechism it self, till I have
gone through with it) and by Commenting upon them, I have given you an account
of the Nature, and End of Catechizing, and the Persons to be Catechized.

First, As to the Nature of a Catechism, It is a general Instruction I have
told you, in the Fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion. Secondly, As
to the proper Persons to be Catechized, I have showed you, that it belongs to
all new Beginners in the School of Christ to be so Instructed; and indeed that
every individual Person, of what Age, or Quality soever, ought to lay the
Foundation of his Christian Knowledge in Catechetical Instruction. And lastly,
The End thereof, I have showed you, is this, That you may be duly fitted and
prepared for Confirmation, both to Renew your Baptismal Vow before the Bishop,
and may be qualified to receive Benefit by the Bishop's Prayers, Benediction,
and by his Laying on of Hands upon you.

Well, but there are several other good Ends and Purposes to which Catechizing
serves, and because the Knowing of them may increase your Esteem thereof, and
cause you the better to attend it, I will bestow One other Discourse in showing
you what they are, before I proceed to Expound the Catechism it self. And

Secondly, As for Confirmation, Catechizing requisite to prepare Persons to be
worthy Communicants.
so it is also requisite to fit and prepare you that you may be Worthy
Communicants in the Lord's Supper. Just as in Confirmation, so in the Lord's
Supper, we do solemnly, though not so publicly Ratify and Renew our Covenant
with God; and for the same reason therefore, that Catechizing is requisite to
prepare you for Confirmation, it must be also necessary to fit you for worthy
Communicants, that you may Communicate with Knowledge, and as Persons that
understand what they do. And alas! To what is it but to their having been never
instructed in their Covenant by Catechizing, that so many come so Ignorantly,
or else not at all to the Lord's Supper. I say so Ignorantly, for as too many
of those that do now and then Communicate, The want thereof the Occasion of
People's Ignorance concerning the Sacrament, and consequently,
have but a slender Knowledge in the Nature and Conditions of their Covenant;
so too few do understand the Importance of the Blessed Sacrament, that It is
the New Covenant in Christ's Blood, 1 Cor. 11.25. that is, That it is the Seal
of that Covenant, which was Purchased by, and Ratified in his Blood: But such
as have been thoroughly Catechized, as they have been made to Understand the
Terms and Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, both the inestimable Privileges
made over to them on God's part, and those very reasonable Conditions to be
performed on their own; so they have been also taught, that One main End of
Communicating in the Lord's Supper, is to Ratify, and Confirm, and Seal this
Covenant of Grace between God and Us. And then those, that have been taught
this, cannot come Ignorantly to the Lord's Supper, nor consequently are in such
danger of coming Unworthily, I. Of Receiving Unworthily.
for Ignorance of the Nature and Consequence of that Blessed Ordinance, is
generally as much the cause, as any thing, that any do approach Unworthily to
it.

Nor if the People of our Nation had been ever thoroughly Catechized, II. Of not
Receiving at all.
would so many Abstain, as commonly do, from ever coming at all; for if all Men
were thoroughly instructed in the Nature, Terms and Conditions of their
Covenant, which it is the Business of Catechizing to do; as they would then
easily discern, that it is the highest and most inestimable Privilege in the
World, to be took into such a Covenant of Grace, wherein they have God Almighty
Engaging himself, and putting his Seal to it in the Sacrament, to make good to
them the most inestimable Blessings, Pardon, and Happiness, on the most
reasonable Conditions, Repentance, Faith, and Gospel Obedience: So, if they did
rightly understand this, they would then account it, as it really is, the
highest Privilege in the World, to be Confederates with God in so advantageous
a Covenant, and would think they could never often enough Partake at the Lord's
Table, whereby the oft'ner they come, they do more and more secure to
themselves those inestimable Benefits, made over to us by the Covenant of
Grace; and Engage, as themselves more closely to God, so God himself more
inviolably (as it were) to make good those Blessings to them. No surely, if all
Christians had been but Catechized in those Points, both what a mighty
Privilege it is to be in Covenant with God, and that Receiving of the
Sacrament is the Rite of God's own Appointment, of Confirming to our selves all
the Benefits of this Covenant, we should then have our People Daily crouding to
the Lord's Table, which they do now so profanely turn their Backs upon; we
should not then need so much to invite and entreat Persons to come, but they
would of their own accord Embrace all Opportunities of more and more Ensuring
to themselves these most invaluable Benefits, by often coming.

In a word, A Man is no more fit to partake of the Lord's Supper, that does not
well understand the Nature and Terms of that Covenant, which he does therein
Ratify and Seal with God; than he is fit to Seal to Covenants and Leases, whose
Conditions and Obligations he never had so much as Read over to him, nor does
he know them. But Catechizing is the appointed and most proper Means of gaining
a competent Measure of Understanding, in the Nature and Terms of the Covenant
of Grace: Without having been Catechized, therefore a Man cannot be well
expected to partake worthily of the Lord's Supper.

And this is the Second Use to which Catechizing does therefore serve, to
prepare you, that you may be sit and worthy Communicants at the Lord's Table.

Thirdly, III. Catechizing is Requisite to Persons being Edifyed by Preaching.
Catechizing is very useful to render you Capable to receive Edification by the
Preaching of the Word, and to your Profiting by Sermons. That is certainly the
true and only edifying Preaching, which does most plainly lay open before you,
the Meaning, the Reasons, and the Importance of any Article of your Faith,
whereby you may best know God, and the Necessity of serving him; and which does
most clearly Explain to you the Nature and true Extent of your Christian
Duties, whereby you may know what it is you have to do, and may be freed from
all causless Doubts and Scruples about the way of your Happiness: And lastly,
which does give you the most convincing Arguments and Reasons, to move and stir
you up faithfully to discharge your manifold Obligations to God, your
Neighbor, and your selves. Such as this is truly Edifying Preaching, because
this will, if you do duly attend to it, build you up perfect Christians in the
Knowledge and Practice of true Religion.

And now One that has been Catechized, so as to have a general Understanding in
the Nature of his Covenant; when such a One hears a Sermon upon any particular
Point of that Covenant, whereby he has more fully explained to him the Nature
and Attributes of God, and his Savior's Mediation, and of his own Duty, than
formerly in Catechizing could be done; and when he hears any good Reasons and
Motives given, whereby he should seriously apply himself to live so and so, as
becomes the Servant of such a God, and such a Savior, and one that professes
to pay him such Obedience: When a Catechized, Understanding Person hears such
Preaching is this, he finds his Understanding more enlightened with Heavenly
Truths, and his Will and Affections more bent upon doing as he has been
Instructed; and so (as in all reason he ought) he accounts such a Sermon truly
Edifying, and himself Edified thereby.

But the Ignorant and Uncatechized part of the World, when they hear a Sermon
(for want of Discretion to judge of its real Worth) such look only at some such
trifling Consideration, as the Vehemence and Noise of the Speaker; and if there
be but enough of that (as generally there is the greatest Show, where there is
the least of Substance) though they are made to know no more than they did before
of the Importance of any Article of their Faith, or of the Nature and Extent of
any Duty of Religion, they are however stunned into Admiration of they know not
what, utterly dis-regarding the most instructing and really edifying Preaching,
to the very great Prejudice of their Souls, and the utter hinderance of their
Improvement by our Ministry, in all useful and substantial Knowledge.

Besides, it is a mighty Help to the gaining Understanding in any Science
whatsoever, especially the Christian Religion, to have a general View given one
of the whole (which it is the Business of Catechizing to do) and to see how one
Point depends upon another, and do all sweetly agree together. For not to
mention other Advantages, by this a Man shall be able to judge the better of
the Usefulness and Weight of any Sermon, or Religious Discourse on any
particular Point, as whether it does thoroughly Explain it, or does not take in
what does more properly belong to some other Matter. And by this a Man shall be
able also to judge whether the Preacher Builds upon the Foundation, Gold,
Silver, precious Stone, or Wood, Hay and Stubble; and shall be able to
distinguish between, and separate the Refuse and Dross of a Sermon and
Discourse from the weighty and substantial Parts of it. A Skill, which as it is
of vast Consequence, so it is but little understood by the Generality of
People, for want of having been well Catechized and Instructed in the
Fundamentals of Christian Religion.

IV. Catechizing necessary to prevent being seduced into dangerous Errors.
Fourthly, Catechizing is also requisite to secure you from being at any time
mis-lead into dangerous Heresies and Errors, by the Sermons and Discourses of
Men, Crafty to deceive, to the infinite Peril of your immortal Souls. There
must be Heresies, the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 11.19. That they which are
approved may be made manifest. For God does permit them for our Trial, whether
we will stand steadfast to the Truth. And our Savior bids us Matthew. 24.45. Take
heed that no man deceive us, for many shall come in my Name, says he, that is,
will pretend to be Ministers of Christ, and shall deceive many. They will come
with all deceiveableness, the Apostle tells us, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. with so much
Artifice and Cunning, that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very
Elect, Mat. 24.24. particularly of this sort are they, St. Paul warns us, 2 Timothy 3.6. Which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with
Sins, led away with diverse Lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth. A Character, than which nothing can more exactly agree
to the Seducers of our Times, and the Persons, whom they do usually Practice
upon to draw aside, which are for the most part Ignorant Women, and the Effect
it has upon their Disciples and Followers, which is to make them great Talkers
and Pretenders to extraordinary Knowledge, but in reality not one Jott wiser in
the grand Points of the Christian Religion.

And now, if any of these cunning Deceivers shall come to any of you, and
endeavor to Pervert you, how is it possible you should escape their Wiles,
except you shall be well Principled, so as thoroughly to understand the
Foundation Articles of your Religion: But Holding fast that form of sound
words, 2 Timothy 1.13. Having well imbibed the Principles of Religion, which are
taught in your Catechism; by these, as by a certain Touchstone, you will be
able to discover, what are True, and what are Erroneous Doctrines. Those that
agree with this Analogy of Faith, you may be certain are sound, what do
contradict them, you may be sure are false Doctrines. Catechizing is an
excellent Means, says Mr. Gouge, to keep Persons from the Errors and the
Heresies of the Times: For Persons well Catechized and Instructed in the
Principles of Religion, are in a great measure Antidoted against the Poison of
seducing Doctrines. And observe who are they, as he goes on, that are easiest
seduced by false Teachers, who are they that have embraced their Erroneous
Tenets, and you shall find that they are such, who were never well Catechized,
nor grounded in the Principles of Religion. As therefore you would not be
poisoned with the Erroneous Doctrines of false Teachers, take care to be well
rooted and grounded by Catechizing in the Knowledge of the Truth.

Lastly, Lastly, Catechizing is exceedingly Necessary,
Catechizing is exceeding Useful to preserve Youth from falling into any gross
and wasting Sin, and especially any Ungodly Course of Living; Or if he has been
Seduced by evil Company, the having the Seed of good Principles sown in the
Heart, by a timely Catechizing, will be the most likely Means to recover such a
One out of the Snares of the Devil.

First, I. To preserve Youth from ever falling into an Ungodly way of Living.
It is exceeding Useful to preserve Youth from falling into any gross and
wasting Sin, and especially any Ungodly Course of Living. This was the Counsel
of the Wisest of mere Men, of Solomon, to Train up a Child in the way he should
go, and when he is Old he will not depart from it, Prove. 22.6. And that
excellent Moralist, Plutarch, in his rare Tract of Breeding of Youth, speaks to
the same purpose, that As soft Wax is apt to take the Stamp of the Seal, so are
the Minds of Children to receive in Instructions imprinted on them at that Age.
Let but your Youth be taught so much as they are capable to learn, concerning
the Nature of God, how that he is wonderfully Good to those that Love and Fear
him, and that he will be Terrible in Judgment toward those that Disobey him.
Let them be instructed how wonderfully Kind the Son of God was to them, as to
come down himself from Heaven, to call them forth out of the wicked World
(wholly given up to the Service of the Devil) to serve their God and Maker. Let
them be taught betimes, as much as they are capable to understand of this, and
of their Duty to God and Man, and what a solemn Vow, Promise and Profession
they have made in their Baptism, not willingly to offend so good and gracious a
Savior, but to serve and honor him for ever: Let but these Notions take the
first Possession of your Minds, and it will be hardly possible for any
Temptation to prevail over you, and to draw you into Sin; you will then Blush
to hear the lewd and foolish Talk of the Godless Crew of hardened Sinners, you
will then Tremble at their bold Oaths; and you will be out of Countenance to be
so much as Seen in the Company of Drunkards. If they shall endeavor to
persuade you to join with them in their lewd Courses, you will have That within
you will quickly answer, I cannot, I dare not do so ill a thing: I cannot be
guilty of so great a Piece of Ingratitude, as to offend so good a God, and
gracious a Savior as mine: I dare not be guilty of so high an Injustice, as to
violate my Covenant, Vow and Promise to him, for then he will eternally Punish
me: Away all ye workers of Iniquity, for I will keep the Commandments of my God.

But Youth untaught and unnurtured, quickly fly out into all manner of
Extravagances; for why? they know no better, they have received no good
Principles that should control them. Vanity, Youthful Lusts, and their wicked
Companions hurry them into such bold Villainies, as make us admire the Patience
of God, that forbears striking them quick into Hell, but on they go to provoke
him to the utmost; and how should it be otherwise, since they have no Notion of
the difference between Good and Evil: Nor any Principle within them, that
should in the least check them in the Pursuit of that which is Evil, and stir
them up to that which is Good.

True it is, it may too often happen, that One that has laid up in store a good
Foundation of Religious Principles, may be tempted, and much staggered in his
Constancy, and perhaps be overtaken in a Fault, so as wilfully to do an ill
Thing. But then observe the force of Religious Principles: Such a One will soon
bethink himself what he has done, his Conscience will quickly smite him, and he
will be immediately brought to Repentance (through the Power of good
Principles) and his Fall will but make him more careful of his ways hereafter.

Nay, It may sometimes happen, that a very towardly Youth (notwithstanding all
the care of his Parents and Christ's Ministers to bring him up in the Nurture
and Admonition of the Lord) when got too soon from under the Eye of his Parents
and wise Counselors, and falling into lewd Company (with which this Age does
too much abound) may at first be a little Laughed out of Countenance by them,
(as is their wont) for being too Precise, Reserved, and Melancholy; and after
that be drawn by degrees into one Compliance after another with them in their
Ungodly Revels: Nay, and at length be so drencht in Sin, as to deface the whole
Image of God, that was wrought upon his Soul, so as to be even past all hopes
of Recovery. This is very rare, but yet however too often, whenever it is.

II. To Recover out of it when fallen therein.
But even in this case, Secondly, The Power of those good Principles that were
early Sown, shall be wonderfully seen to the Glory of God, and the Praise of
good Education. Let Diseases, Distresses, Poverty, or any sore Affliction befall
a lewd and sorry Liver (as generally, sooner or later it does) either as the
Fruit of their Sin, or as a Chastisement from God to reclaim them. If the
Person afflicted has been One that was never Instructed in the fear of God, he
is never the better, nor shall you hear so much as a good Expression from him,
nor any the least Signs of Amendment; for why? He knows not what he is to do,
nor where he is to begin, nor does he distinctly know any good Reason wherefore
he ought to Amend; for Thanks to the Piety of his good Parents, he never had
any Principles of Good instilled into him; and therefore as all his Lifetime
he Lived like an Atheist, so he now doe^ Die like a Beast: He was ignorantly
brought up, and he Dies ignorant and wicked both.

But if it shall happen, that One who had received the Seed of good Principles
within him, be overtaken with some sore Affliction, and God be so gracious to
him, as not to cut him off quickly in the midst of his Sins, but affords him a
leisurely Chastisement; such a One shall begin to be serious and to bethink
himself. He will recall to Mind what he once knew of God, and of his Duty to
him. Those good Principles that have long lain Buried under a Load of Sin, will
begin to stir within him. He will water them sufficiently with Tears of
Repentance, and they will begin to work and revive within. And when he is once
come to himself, so as to think seriously of Matters, with the Prodigal Son he
will soon resolve to Arise and go to his Father, and to say unto him, Father I
have sinned against Heaven, and before Thee; and am no more worthy to be called
thy Son, make me as One of thy hired Servants, Luke 15.18, 19. The Seed of good
and religious Principles sown in your Hearts by Catechetical Instruction, may
well be compared to Seed, sown in the Ground by the Hand of the Husbandman. The
Husbandman's Seed may lie Buried in the Earth under many Clods, so as to be in
danger never to recover, but if the Rains shall descend from Heaven, so as to
melt and dissolve that burden of Earth, with which the Seed was overlaid, it
will then begin to work and revive, if it was good Seed, and may possibly bring
forth a very fruitful Crop. So here, if you do but take care to have the Seed
of good Principles sown in your Hearts, and should ye afterward almost
extinguish all good Motions within you, by laying on a continued Weight of
Guilt and Sin; and should God in Mercy hereafter, not pour down the Fury of his
Wrath, so as immediately to Destroy you, but Rain down upon you the gentle
Showers of Fatherly Chastisements, so as to melt you into Tears, and bring you
into a considering Temper; the good Principles that lay long Buried, may
possibly begin to stir, and to work in you a Repentance fruitful in good Works.

Nay, Such is the Force of good Principles, that even a serious Sermon, or but
the Discourse of a good Minister (especially of him, who first sowed them by
his Instructions) shall stir them up, and put them a working, to the Conversion
and Reformation of a Sinner.

In a word: Such is the Effect of good Principles, that by the Grace of God,
they are the likeliest way to preserve you in Innocence, and to prevent your
falling into any deadly Sin, and then you will be in a happy Condition; you
will then be of the Number of those happy Persons, of whom our Savior speaks,
that they need no Repentance, Luke 15.7. that is such a severe, and sorrowful,
and painful Repentance, as Backsliding Sinners, and all Men of loose and wicked
Lives must go through, or be forced to Endure infinitely worse: Or if you shall
unhappily fall into any grievous Sin, or a Course of Sin, such may be the Force
of pious Education, or good Principles, as by God's good Grace and Providence,
to recover you out of the Snares of the Devil. These good Principles taught you
in your Catechism, may not perhaps at present be thoroughly understood by you,
no more than Children do the use of Letters, nor Schoolboys the use of Grammar
Rules at first, but they will stick by you (as One said) and be remembered when
you are more capable of Improving them, insomuch that it will be uneasy to you,
if you take care to be well Principled in your Minority, to be Wicked and
Profane hereafter; or if you should prove so (which God forbid) there will yet
be some hopes of Reclaiming you, because these things will some time or other
revive and awaken your Consciences.

And this is the last of those good Uses and Ends, to which Catechism serves;
(viz.) to Instill into you such good Principles, as will either prevent your
falling into Sin, (which is much the Happier for you) or at least recover you
out of it by Repentance; and which I have therefore insisted on, that I might
persuade you to have a due Regard to so useful an Instruction, as Catechizing
is, and to give a due Attendance to it.

And thus, as last Lord's Day I showed you, that one good End to which
Catechizing serves, is to prepare you for that necessary Work, your
Confirmation, that you may Publicly, and with Understanding (as those that
know what they do) profess before the Bishop, That you will be Faithful to your
Baptismal Covenant: So Secondly, I have to Day showed you, That it is for the
same Reason requisite to prepare you for Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament,
both by instructing you in the Covenant of Grace, which in the Sacrament we
Seal, and in the Meaning of the Sacrament it self, that it is the Rite of
Sealing it. Thirdly, I have now showed you, that Catechizing is very useful to
render you understanding Hearers of the Word, when it is Preached, so as you may
receive Edification by it, and may be Profited by Sermons. Fourthly, That it is
requisite to secure you from being at any time misled into dangerous Heresies
and Errors, by the Sermons and Discourses of Men, crafty to Deceive, to the
Peril of your immortal Souls. And Lastly, I have now largely showed you, that
it is exceeding Useful to preserve you from falling into any gross and wasting
Sin, and especially any ungodly Course of Living; or if any of you shall
hereafter be Seduced (which God forbid) by evil Company, that the having the
Seed of good Principles sown in the Heart by a timely Catechizing, will be the
most likely Means to recover you out of the Snares of the Devil.

THE Third Lecture. What is your Name? And the Answer is made by the Christian
Name.
IN Two Discourses, on the Title of your Catechism, having given you to
understand what a Catechism means, and showed you also the Ends and Uses of
Catechizing; I shall now proceed by God's Assistance to Explain the Catechism
it self, and to give you the Meaning of its several Parts. And the first Thing
that offers it self to our Consideration, is the first Question in your
Catechism, (viz) What is your Name? And the Answer you are taught to make to
it, which is your Christian Name.

Now this Question is not so idle and insignificant, as some may imagine, but
is asked upon very good Reasons; insomuch that I do think, they may give me a
very fair Occasion, to discourse to you upon these Three Heads:

First, To show you, that the Reason wherefore your Catechism begins with
Asking you, What is your Christian Name? Is to put you in mind of your
Christian Profession, and of that strictness of Life, that is answerable
thereunto.

Secondly, They do give me occasion to re-mind you, that the bad Lives of such
who bear the Name of Christians, do an infinite Prejudice and Dis-honour to
Christianity.

And Thirdly, To exhort you therefore to stand upon the Dignity of your
Christian Name and Profession, by living such good Lives, as may be an Honor,
not a Disgrace unto it.

And these Three Heads of Discourse, as they do naturally arise from this
Question and Answer about your Christian Name, so I know not any thing can be
more properly and seasonably Discoursed upon in the Entrance upon your
Catechism, as tending to warn you beforehand to apply every thing you shall
hereafter hear, either in the Catechism it self, or in the Explication thereof,
to the Bettering of your Lives and Practices. To begin then,

First, I am to show you, that the Reason wherefore your Catechism begins with
Asking you, What is your Christian Name? Is to put you in mind of your
Christian Profession, and of that strictness of Life, that is answerable
thereunto.

It is thought sufficient to justify this Question and Answer about your
Christian Name (though there were no great Matter implied in its meaning) that it
is the beginning of a Dialogue, it being the usual manner of Dialogues, or
mutual Discourses, managed between several Persons, (be the Subject of them
never so grave and serious) not to fall immediately Point Blank upon the main
Matter intended, but in such, they usually usher in the more material Points,
by such familiar Questions as this.

But not to insist on this, and many other good Reasons, that might be given;
though there be great Familiarity and Condescension in the Question, yet it is
not without good Reason and Consideration, that in the Entrance of this
Instruction in your Christian Religion, you should be first asked your
Christian Name. The reason wherefore the Catechism begins with Asking the
Catechumen his Christian Name, is to put him in mind of his Christian
Profession.
And the great Reason is, That at the Mention thereof, you might be prompted to
call to Mind what Religion and Profession you are of. You had your Christian
Names given you, at the same time you took upon you the Christian Profession;
you are therefore in the first Entrance of your Catechism (which is an
Instruction of you in this your Christian Profession) Asked, What is your
Christian Name? That you might call to Mind that most excellent Religion you
received together with it, and under that Name solemnly Promised and Vowed, to
maintain and cleave unto.

Your Surname you have derived down unto you from your Ancestors, and you
received it from your Natural Parents: But your Christian Name you received
immediately from the Mouths of your Spiritual Parents, your Minister, and your
Godfathers, who as your Proxies, did at they same time, they gave you a
Christian Name, undertake for you, that you should live a Christian Life, Holy
and Unblamable, as becomes those, who bear so glorious a Title. You must
therefore consider what your Name is, and the Importance of it, that it is
Christian, and you must take care, that you Live not so, as to bring a Scandal
upon that Name, in any Sin and Wickedness; but so, as becomes those, who
profess Christianity, and wear the Name of Christians, In Holiness and
Righteousness all the Days of your Lives. And as he, who has called you, is
Holy, so be ye Holy in all manner of Conversation.

The Force there is in a Christian name to make a Man lead a Christian life as
under that Name having Listed himself.
And there is indeed the greatest Force in our very Christian Names, to render
us Conformable to the Christian Doctrine, and whereby we may be persuaded to
live Christian-like, otherwise the Apostle would not have laid so much stress
upon our very Name and Profession of Christians, as he does, to persuade us
from that very Reason to live Holy and Christian Lives. Let every one that
names the Name of Christ, or upon whom the Name of Christ is called, depart
from Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. For why? It is ever expected, that those, that
profess to be guided by the perfectest Doctrines, should answerably live the
most perfect Lives. The Heathens did therefore expect, I. A Disciple of a most
Holy and excellent Religion.
that their Philosophers, who gave the highest Principles and Rules of
Morality, should themselves exceed all others in a virtuous and orderly Course
of Life; and when they found any of their Philosophers a Tripping, and living
at the rate of other Men of looser Principles, how severely therefore would
they Reflect upon them for it? Now we Christians profess our selves the
Disciples of a Philosophy, that does infinitely exceed all others in the
Powerfulness of its Principles and Doctrines, and in the Holiness and
Strictness of its Commands. We have given up our Names, II. A Servant of a most
Holy and just God.
and Listed our selves to be the Soldiers and Servants, not of a Lewd Jupiter,
a Wanton Venus, a Fiery Mars, a Revengeful Juno, a Drunken Bacchus, and a
Thievish Mercury: Such were the Heathen Gods, and no wonder then, that they who
did worship them, should also imitate them. But we have given up our Names and
Listed our selves the Servants of A God, that has no pleasure in Wickedness,
neither shall any Evil dwell with him; in whose sight the Foolish shall not
stand, and who hates all the workers of Iniquity; who will destroy all men
that speak leasing (that are crafty to cheat and deceive) and will abhor the
blood-thirsty and deceitful man, Psalm. 5.4, 5, 6. Nay, who will rain upon the
Wicked, Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest; this shall be the
portion of their Cup, for the Righteous Lord loves Righteousness, his
Countenance does behold the Upright, Psalm. 11.6, 7. III. To fight against the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil.
Such is the God to whom we have given up our Names to serve: And we have
Listed our selves in our Baptism, under our several Christian Names, to fight
under his Banner against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, so as not to be
tempted or drawn off to commit any Injustice, or Unmercifulness, any
Intemperance, or Filthiness, any Act of Ungodliness, or Profaneness: In a word,
IV. Asunder that Name he professes to Believe such Articles as are the most
powerful Motives to deny all Ungodliness.
any Sin against him. We have engaged our selves under our several Names in the
strongest Covenants, in hopes of the most glorious Rewards, and out fear of the
sorest Punishments, to be Faithful in our Obedience to him. We have openly
Professed under our respective Christian Names, firmly to believe such a Set of
Articles (those of our Christian Faith) as are every one of them (as shall
hereafter be made appear) the most powerful Motives in the World, to make us
Deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present evil World. And under the same Christian Names we have
all of us professed, V. To obey the most Righteous Laws.
To be governed by such Laws and Commands of Virtue and Goodness, of Piety
toward God, of Righteousness to our Neighbors, and which lay down such
incomparable Rules concerning the Government of our selves, as the like are not
to be found in any other Philosophy. And Lastly, Lastly, as having under that
Name received Promises of most powerful Assistances to do all this.
We profess to have such Assistances derived to us from God, by Prayer and
Sacraments (those Means of his own Appointment to convey down his Aid and
Assistance to us, to Enable us to do these Things) as will make it not
extremely difficult to us, to live very excellent and good Lives.

Thus have we Christians under our several Christian Names (as under Hand and
Seal) professed our selves the Disciples of a Religion, that does infinitely
exceed all others in the Powerfulness of its Principles and Doctrines, and the
Holiness and Strictness of its Precepts and Rules: Of a Religion, that can
work, if its Dictates be followed, the greatest Miracles in the changing Men's
Natures and Tempers from worse to better; that can turn a ravenous Wolf into a
harmless Lamb, a furious Lion into a tender Kid; that is, the most savage and
violent Dispositions of Cruelty and Pride, into perfect Charity and Meekness.
And now, if we Christians should be found as Debauched and Evil Livers, as
Unconverted Heathens, as Lewd as Turks, as Griping as Jews, as Impious and
Profane as Atheists, how severely, and that deservedly, will the rest of the
Infidel World upbraid us? What Dishonor shall we thereby do to the true God,
and our most Holy Religion?

Which brings me to the Second Thing proposed, which was to remind you, that
the bad Lives of those who bear the Name of Christians, do an infinite
Prejudice and Dishonor to Christianity.

The bad lives of Nominal Christians do an infinite Prejudice and Dishonor to
Christianity.
And alas! What bitter Reproaches have the Unchristian Lives of Christian
Professors, put into the Mouths of our Enemies, making them to say, That if we
Christians, did but Believe our selves, those Promises in Scripture, of such
mighty Rewards to Holy, Honest and Good Living, we should sure our selves live
better Lives: And when any of our Christians would persuade them to forsake
their own Superstition and Idolatry, and to Embrace our most Holy Religion, our
unanswerable Lives have provoked them to return smartly enough upon us, Would
ye have us to believe the Truth of your Religion, which you do not seem to
believe your selves?

It hinders the Conversion of Infidels.
And alas! This is the main Thing, the very Unsuitable Lives of us Christians,
that so Prejudices the Infidel Part of the World, Pagans, Turks, and Jews
against our most Holy Religion, and hinders their Conversion. It is the
Cruelty, and Covetousness of our Christian Merchants in the Indies, that makes
the poor Indians even Abhor our Religion, and scornfully to say, That Gold, not
Jehovah, is our God. Thus Is the Name of God blasphemed amongst the Gentiles
through us, Romans 2.24. It is the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, which makes
Turks and Jews (both of them mortal Haters of Idols) to loath and despise the
Christian Worship.

It puts bitter Reproaches in the mouths of Atheists, especially when
Wickedness is committed under the disguise of Religion.
But not to Travel so far, as the Indies or Turkey, to find out how much our
Living so unbecoming our most Holy Profession, has scandalized Persons, so as
to Abhor it; Observe the Men of No Religion amongst our selves, our Atheists
and Libertines, and what bitter Scoffs and Jeers may we daily hear them cast
forth upon Religion it self, when they see some, that make great outward
Professions there, guilty of so much Hypocrisy, Cheating, Cruelty, and
Rebellion; making their very Religion, a Cloak for the carrying on the most
wicked Things, as if the least Religious, the most honest Man. And now, if
there were but the least spark of Love and Honor in our Hearts for God and our
most Holy Religion, this were enough to make us careful to lead innocent and
inoffensive Lives, if it were only that we might not dishonor God and Religion
thereby, and might not bring a Reproach upon our Christian Name. Every Man that
desires the Honor and Reputation of his Calling and Profession whatever it is,
will live answerable to his Character, and not so, as to be a Scandal to his
Place. Few men will endure their worldly Calling to be put at naught and
Reproacht.
And therefore, as we seldom see a Person of so abject and mean a Spirit, as to
endure with Patience, whatever Art, or Profession he is of, to be set at naught
and spoke against; so Men are generally, with respect to the Credit of their
worldly Professions, careful to act with that Decency and Becomingness, as
shall advance, the Reputation thereof. Hence the Lawyer, as he cannot
ordinarily endure (except he be a profligate Person) his Profession of the Law,
nor the Physician his, nor the Tradesman his, to be run down, Exposed and made
Ridiculous; so each of these will be, as much as possible, for maintaining in
their several Dealings a Reputation of Fairness and Honesty, as that alone
which will raise and Preserve an Esteem for them. And how then comes it about
that a Christian can endure to hear his Christian Profession reproached and
scorned by reason of his scandalous Living? Whence is it, but from the greater
Zeal Men generally have for the Honor of their worldly Callings and
Professions, than for the Honor of their Christian Religion, Profession and
Calling.

And now therefore Thirdly, Let me Exhort you, An Exhortation therefore to
Christians to stand upon the Dignity of their Christian Name and Profession.
to stand upon the Dignity of your Christian Name and Profession, by living
such good Lives, as may be an Honor, not a Disgrace unto it: Let me therefore
Admonish you from this very Name, wherewith you are Honored, to render your
selves wholly conformable to those Christian Principles and Doctrines to which
you have given up your Names to be governed by, and which being taught you in
your Catechism, I shall by God's leave, with all the Plainness, and in the most
useful manner I can explain unto you.

And pray let me Entreat you, my Dear Youth, seriously and diligently to
hearken to me your Spiritual Father, that studies no less the Eternal Interest
of your Souls, and to make you Heirs of Heaven, than your Natural Parents do
your Temporal Interest to gather you Riches, and to leave you Estates in this
World. You have been Asked, and you have Answered to your Christian Name; and
you see with what Title you are dignified, (viz.) with the Name of Christians.

And First, Wonder not at what I say, those Titles of Honor, I. As that which is
more considerable than Titles of Honor.
which we daily hear sounding in our Ears, and which are so much admired and
doted upon; I mean the Titles of Emperors, Kings, Dukes, Earls, Lords, ought to
be accounted as very inconsiderable in respect of our Christian Title. They are
but Earthly Glories, and will soon decay, and vanish away, but this is of a
Divine Original, which will never fade, but will Ennoble you to all Eternity. I
beseech you therefore seriously consider this, and let a due Honor and Regard
to so worthy a Name, continually admonish every one of you, that you never
commit in your whole Lives, any thing that does unbecome it.

I do also, Secondly, II. Because of that near Alliance there is between the
Christian Name, and Profession.
Entreat every One of you to consider the near Alliance there is betwixt your
Christian Names, and your Christian Profession, insomuch that they both began,
and will both end together. In your Baptism you put on both your Name and your
Profession of Christianity together, and if ever you should abjure your
Religion (which God forbid) you must also therewith abjure your Christian
Names, so near are they linkt one with another. And therefore let this ever
admonish you to Adorn your selves with Christian Graces, Temperance, Chastity,
Charity, Justice, Piety; and not to defile your selves with Heathenish, Brutish
Vices, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Cruelty, Infidelity.

Thirdly, III. Because the primitive Christians did in virtue of the Christian
Name resist the fiercest Temptations.
And is it Examples of this good Use of your Christian Name, that you want? Why
the Christians of old took Courage from this very Name, whereby they overcame
all their Enemies, both Bodily and Ghostly, the World, the Flesh and the Devil;
and encouraged themselves thereby to the Discharge of their Christian Duties.
In the Virtue of this Name they extinguished their Lusts, they overcame Tyrants,
they put to flight the Devil. Their Persecutors with Fire and Faggot, and all
manner of cruel Torments, would have forced them to Blaspheme Christ, to
sacrifice and burn Incense to Devils, to worship Idols. But they in the midst
of Flames and Torments would answer with Smiles on their Faces, We are
Christians, we cannot do these Things. Forbear your Assemblies and
Church-meetings, would the Heathen Persecutors say; We are Christians, and must
not therefore Forsake the Assembling our selves together, would they answer.
Such great things did the Primitive Christians perform under the Power of the
Christian Name. And let your very Christian Names likewise, my Christian Youth,
encourage you to all manner of Virtuous and Religious Practices, in imitation
of those Blessed Primitive Christians, and to the Examples of those, that shall
come after you.

IV. Because of the Indecency of Living unsuitable to the Christian Name and
Profession.
Nay Fourthly, Look upon it ever as a most monstrous piece of Wickedness, for
Christian Men, to live Antichristian Heathenish Lives, but on the contrary,
ever look upon your selves, as you are Christians, bound even in Decency to
Abstain from all Appearances of Evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. What shall you, that have
given up your Names to Christ, and are in Covenant with God, fight the Devil's
Battles? Know you not that your Bodies are the Members of Christ, and shall you
take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot? God forbid,
1 Cor. 6.15. Shall you that are Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, walk in
Darkness? Have you Renounced the Devil, the World and the Flesh, and shall you
for all that yield your selves slaves to the Devil, the World and the Flesh?
You Believe the Gospel, and all the Articles of your Christian Faith, and shall
any of you live as those, that neither know, nor fear God, nor dread the Devil?
You have vowed Obedience to God, and shall you trample under Foot all Laws
Divine and Humane? You have been dedicated to God, and have given up your Names
to him in your Baptism, and shall you live, as if you had been Listed in
Satan's Service? Nothing so contrary, so contradictory as these things.

V. That to quite other Purposes we gave up our Names to be Christians.
Alas! Consider, Fifthly, That you have given up your Names unto Christ for
other Reasons, than that you should fight under the Devil's Banner, and do the
works of the Flesh; Namely, that you might ever live to the Honor of God. You
have been called forth out of the World, not that you should add by your own,
to the Iniquities of the Times, but to nobler Purposes; that you might
re-establish the World now tottering, and ready to sink under the weight of
Wickedness, that you might re-establish it, I say, by the Practice of all
Christian Graces and Virtues. And for that reason it is, you must consider,
that you Christians are called the Salt of the Earth, Matthew. 5.13. the Light of
the World, ver. 14. A Candle put upon a Candlestick, that it might give Light
to all that are in the House, ver. 15. And therefore, Let your Light so shine
before Men, that others may see your good Works, and glorify your Father which
is in Heaven, is the Inference, the Command of Christ, the great Captain of our
Salvation, ver. 16.

And moreover, Sixthly, Every Christian has commonly that in his particular
Name, ^I. (...) Christ (...) James (...) some (...) of (...) which (...).
whereby he may be excited to some noble strain of Virtue. It seldom happens,
that any one has a Name given him, of which there has not been some One before
him, renowned in History, either in the Scripture, or elsewhere, for some noble
Exploit of Virtue, or other. And now, my Young Disciple, search the Scripture,
and other Histories, who, or what, He, or She was, and wherein thy Names-sake
did excel in any Goodness; Christians to an Imitation of those who were Eminent
under those Names.
and propose such a One for thy particular Example, to whose Eminency in the
like Virtue, do thou all thou can to arrive. Do thou John bethink thy self
often of that great Contempt of the World, that One of thy Name, (viz.) John
the Baptist did show, and of that burning Love to God and Men, which the other,
(viz.) the Apostle of that Name did express, and let the One excite thee
likewise to the like Contempt of the World, and the other to the like Love of
God and Men. A Peter should do well to call to Mind the ready Confession of
Christ, that the Apostle of that Name did make, and the speediness and
sorrowfulness of his Repentance, after he had Sinned, and let the Thoughts of
him make thee ready to give Testimony to the Truth and Faith of Christ, and put
thee upon a speedy Repentance, after every fall and backsliding into Sin.

Let every Anne call to Mind that Widow of her Name, mentioned Luke 2.37. Who
though a Widow of fourscore Years and four, departed not from the Temple, but
served God with Fasting and Prayers, night and day. And let the Example of this
devout and happy Woman of thy Name, call thee Anne to the first beginning of
Prayers, Sacraments, and Sermons. Let every Mary bethink her-self of those
Mary's Famous in the Gospel, the One for her chaste Virginity, the Other for
sitting so Attentive at JESUS's Feet, to whom the Lord gave this honorable
Testimony, that she had Chose the better part, and preferred her before her
Sister Martha, who disturbed her-self too much with worldly Business, Luke
10.40, 41. and from her Example, learn not to entangle thy self too much with
the Cares of this Life, but chiefly to take care of Heavenly things, and to
apply thy self to Hearing and Devotion.

Lastly, Let me give it in Charge to you, that are Parents, And therefore
Parents are Advised to choose for their Children, the Names of Persons Eminent
for Virtue, not Infamous for Vice.
not to give to your Children any other Names, but what are of Note for their
eminent and good Examples, that they may have always before their Eyes whom
they may imitate in their Virtue. Give them such Names, as if not Signalized in
Scripture, are at least in other Histories for some Good they have done: Or if
you give them the Names of any of your Ancestors, let it be of those, whose
Virtues have adorned, not whose Vices have disgrace'd the Age, they lived in:
Or of such who have left behind them a good Name to be Imitated, nothing Ill to
be Abominated by their Posterity, for those only are worthy to have their
Memory continued in the Names of their Posterity, but these are fit to be
Eternally forgot.

And thus, my Christian Disciples, having showed you the great, the very great
Obligation lying upon you, even from your Christian Names, to square your Lives
according to the Christian Rules, those Rules, that you have taught you, and
shall hereafter with God's Assistance, be explained to you in the Exposition, I
shall give you of your Catechism: And from several Considerations having
therefore urged you, to live with all the Care you can, according to that most
holy Religion, to which in your Baptism you have given up your Names, and under
your several Names have Listed your selves to maintain and cleave unto: What
then remains, my Christian Disciples, but that you apply your selves with the
greatest Diligence, in order to your living good Lives, to understand thoroughly
that Religion to which you have given up your Names? There shall be nothing
wanting, I do assure you, on my part, for I design, by God's assistance, to
Instruct you in all the Articles of the Covenant of Grace, and which are each
of them contained in your Church-Catechism. It lies on your parts to be
teachable Disciples, constantly to repair here to be Catechized and Instructed
by me, to have attentive Ears, open Hearts, and faithful Memories.

And Oh! That I might always find you such! What Satisfaction would then accrue
to my self! What Profit to you! And how great and eternal Rewards to us both?
And that it may thus succeed with all of us, Pray let it be our constant and
fervent Desires to God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE Fourth Lecture.
Quest. Who gave you that Name?

Answ. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a Member
of Christ, a Child of God, and an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Quest. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?

Answ. They did promise and vow three things in my Name, First, That I should
Renounce the Devil and-all his Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked
World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. Secondly, That I should Believe
all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And Thirdly, That I should keep God's
holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my Life.

Quest. Do thou not think that thou art bound to Believe and to do, as they
have promised for thee?

Answ. Yes verily, and by God's help so I will. And I heartily thank our
Heavenly Father, that he has called me to this State of Salvation, through
Jesus Christ our Savior. And I pray unto God to give me his Grace, that I may
continue in the same unto my Lives end.


AS the Compilers of the Catechism did very wisely begin with a Question and
Answer about your Christian Name, to the End, that at the mention thereof, you
might take occasion to consider the great Obligation, which lies upon you to
live according to that most Holy Religion, which under that Name you have
received; so in Commenting upon that Question and Answer about your Christian
Name, I have given you my self some preparatory Admonitions, accordingly to
make that good Use of those Instructions, shall be given you from your
Catechism, as to live suitably to them.

And being thus well prepared, I hope, to receive Benefit from what shall
hereafter be delivered; what remains, but that I proceed to instruct you in all
the material Parts of the Christian Religion, to the Belief and Practice of
which you have given up your Names? This, by the Assistance of God, I shall
endeavor to do, (and I beg your Prayers to obtain his Assistance) and in the
same Method your Catechism teaches you; Our Catechism gives an entire
Instruction in the Covenant of Grace, both generally and particularly.
and I am sure I cannot choose a better to do it in; since whatsoever is
necessary to be Believed and Practiced in order to Salvation, you have therein
taught you both generally, and particularly.

As to a more General Institution, you have the sum and substance of the
Christian Religion, and whatsoever is necessary to Salvation taught you that
way, in those Three Questions and Answers, which I have now read to you. The
sum and substance of Christian Religion, I. Generally in the 3 First Questions
and Answers.
and whatsoever is necessary to Salvation, is certainly contained within the
Covenant of Grace; for undoubtedly there can be nothing more of absolute
Necessity to Salvation, than what God himself has been pleased to Promise and
Ensure unto us, and we our selves have Engaged to perform. And now in these
Three Questions and Answers now read to you.

First, You have whatsoever pertains to the Nature of the Covenant of Grace
expressly delivered. I will Instance to you the particulars, which pertain to
the Nature of it, and will point to the Words wherein they are taught.

And in the first place you are Instructed, what are the Terms and Conditions
whereof it consists, both on God's Part, and on Ours, in these Words, Wherein I
was made a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an Inheritour of the Kingdom
of Heaven, which are the Mercies and Favors made over to us on God's Part of
the Covenant; and in these, First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all
his Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts
of the Flesh. Secondly, That I should Believe all the Articles of the Christian
Faith. And Thirdly, That I should keep God's Holy Will and Commandments, and
walk in the same all the days of my Life, which are the Conditions to be
performed on our Part of the Covenant.

Secondly, You have here taught you the Gracious Importance of this Covenant,
we are put thereby into A State of Salvation.

Thirdly, You have an Account of the Original of it, and by whose Mediation,
you obtained so Beneficial and Gracious a Covenant, taught you in these Words,
Through Jesus Christ our Savior. It was through the Mediation of Jesus Christ,
that we obtained the Benefit of so Gracious a Covenant.

Fourthly, You are Instructed by whom, and how you have been called into this
State of Salvation, by Means of the Covenant of Grace. It was your Heavenly
Father, who has called you to this State of Salvation through Jesus Christ our
Savior.

And Lastly, You are admonisht of the very great reason you have to thank God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ, for so exceeding great a Mercy, as his Calling
you into it. And I thank God our Heavenly Father, that he has called me to
this State of Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior. Thus far you are
instructed concerning what pertains to the Nature of the Covenant.

II. You have also declared unto you, by what Sacrament, or Solemnity you first
entered into it. It was in your Baptism, wherein you was made a Member of
Christ, etc.

III. You have then those vast Obligations lying upon you, Faithfully and
Conscientiously to discharge your part of the Covenant laid plainly before you.
This you own in your Answer to this Question, Do thou not think, that thou
art bound to Believe, and to Do as they have promised for thee? To which you
are taught to answer, Yes verily so I will.

IV. You have farther yet, the Means whereby you shall be enabled to perform
your part of the Covenant. The First, is the Grace, Help and Assistance of God.
And by God's Help so I will. The Second Means, both to obtain the Divine
Assistance, and to enable you thereby to discharge your Covenant, is Prayer
unto God. And I Pray unto God to give me his Grace, that I may continue in the
same unto my Lives end.

And Lastly, You have also Intimated herein, Two material Circumstances,
relating to the making of this Covenant betwixt God and You, viz. 1. The time
of Infancy, wherein you entered into it, implied in these Words, Wherein I was
made. 2. The Persons by whom, as Proxies, you were Initiated therein. My
Godfathers and Godmothers did promise and vow three Things in my Name.

I will endeavor to Explain all these Points unto you, in this First and
General Part, according as they are here taught you in these Questions and
Answers now read, as the Text, beginning

First, With what pertains to the Nature of the Covenant of Grace.

And in order to the Understanding hereof, it may not be amiss to premise
something concerning the more general Notion of such Covenants, as are usually
made betwixt Governors, and their Subjects. And such an One, if it be perfect
in all its Parts, and fully expressed, may be Defined to be,

An Agreement between the Two Parties, wherein there are Promises, The Notion
of a Covenant.
Rewards, or profitable Considerations made over on one Part, and certain
Conditions to be performed on the other. And wherein also, there is an
Obligation on the one side, of undergoing some certain Penalties, in case of
not performing those Conditions consented unto by him, and imposed on him by
the other.

A Covenant, I say, is a mutual Agreement between Two Parties; It is a mutual
Agreement.
for if it be not mutual, and both Parties are not consenting to the Terms, the
One to the making good the Promises, the Other to the performing the
Conditions, the Agreement is none at all, or it is not Perfected, nor is it
Obliging on either side. There may be indeed a Law given by one that is
Superior in Power and Authority, which the Inferior is bound to Obey, whether
he consent, or no, because he is placed by the Divine Ordinance, under the
Other's Command, and if he does refuse to Obey, he may be justly Punished; but
then such a Transaction is to be considered as the giving of a Law, not as the
making of a Covenant. Nor is this a slight Difference; for where a Superior has
given a Law, if the Inferior has also Covenanted, and consented upon good
Considerations, and upon the Expectation of promised Rewards to obey that Law;
such a Covenant does withal lay a farther Obligation on the Party, on whom the
Conditions ly to be performed, by virtue of his own Consent, to do it; so that
in the Violation of his Duty, in such a case, he shall be accounted, not barely
Disobedient, but a Covenant-breaker, which is added as a more aggravated Sin,
Romans 1.31. and therefore deserving a more severe Punishment.

As there are Conditions therein on our side, so express Promises on the other.
It was farther added in the Definition, that In a Covenant there are certain
Promises, Rewards, and profitable Considerations made over on one Part, on
certain Conditions to be performed on the other. And herein also, with respect
to these Promises, there seems to be another main Difference betwixt the
Imposing of the Law, and the Making of a Covenant. The Difference seems to be
in this, That in the Imposing of a Law, the Lawgiver does not necessarily
oblige himself to confer any Benefits, more than natural Equity does oblige him
to, and it is sufficient to the Validity of his Law to render it Obligatory, if
there be a threatening of Punishments, great enough to deter the Subject from
the Violation of that Law. But a Covenant does imply something more comfortable
in the Notion of it, and therein the Party Covenanting, though it be God himself,
does graciously Condescend to oblige and bind himself, by express Promises,
(and usually by some outward Solemnities, as visible Signs and Seals) to the
performance of such Promises. And here also is another very considerable
Difference betwixt the Obligations of a Law and a Covenant, that whereas one
performance of Obedience to the Laws of a Superior, the Subject upon such his
Obedience, can have only, by virtue of the Law, some general and faint Hopes of
Benefit, so far as is Equitable, and as those who do well, may expect to
receive well. But, by virtue of a Covenant, the Party promising has moreover
given to the other, a full assurance of certain Benefits to be made good to
him; insomuch that upon our Repentance and Confession of our Sins, God will
reckon himself in Justice and Faithfulness bound (since the giving of the New
Covenant) to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. So that in short, A Covenant lays a greater Obligation, than the mere
imposing of a Law does, upon both the Parties joined in Covenant; a greater
Obligation, I say, upon the One, to perform the Conditions, upon the other, to
make good the Promises. And let this suffice to have remarked upon the more
general Notion and Nature of a Covenant.

A View of the Covenant of Grace.
But for our better understanding the distinct Nature and Notion of the Covenant
of Grace in particular, we must take our Rise from the very Creation, and
consider the several Dispensations of God, by way of Covenant with Mankind. And
to begin with the Covenant made with Adam, and in him with all Mankind; the
whole Proceeding stands thus: God having made Man upright, and in a capacity
never to have violated his Covenant, did Engage him to a perfect, exact, and
unsinning Obedience.
God having made Man upright, and given him a great measure of Light to direct
him, and of Strength to enable him to do, as he should appoint; proceeded then
to make this very reasonable Covenant and Agreement with him. He agreed to
continue and increase that Light and Strength to him, and to reward his acting
according to it with immortal Life and Happiness, provided he making use of his
Understanding and Power, would persevere to obey his Maker's Commands, which if
he should not do, in every particular Instance of Duty, he threatened him with
Death, and eternal Misery. But then leaving him to act according to that
freedom of Will, wherewith as a reasonable Creature he had endowed him, Man did
violate it.
Man did by his own voluntary Disobedience, through the Cunning of Satan,
tempting him thereto, transgress the Law given him by his Maker, Genesis 2.17. and
did thereby cast himself into a State of Sin and Misery under the Bondage of
Satan, without any power, or possibility to recover himself out of that
wretched Condition. And thus he broke his Covenant with God, Sinned against his
Creator, and so forfeited all the Happiness, conveyed to him therein, both for
himself, and his Posterity.

And now was Man in a desperate and forlorn Condition: His own Sin had made him
liable to the severest Strokes of God's Displeasure; and the Divine Justice,
and Wisdom, The Divine Justice, Wisdom, and Holiness required satisfaction.
and Holiness would not permit the Almighty (however his Goodness inclined him
to Pity) to let his Sin go unpunisht, and to restore him to a capacity of
Happiness, without a valuable Satisfaction made to infinite Justice, such as
should show the Divine hatred of, and severity against Sin, for the security of
his Government in the World: And yet no Creature in the Heavens above, or in
the Earth beneath, was sufficient for so great an Undertaking, as to satisfy
for him, For There is no Man can Redeem his Brother, or pay God a Ransom for
him, for the Redemption of his Soul is precious, Psalm. 49.7. And what now shall
be done to rescue Mankind out of this miserable State? Why, Man being himself
incapable to make it, by less than suffering an everlasting Punishment.
when unhappy Man was in this desperate and forlorn Condition, past all hopes
of Remedy, or Recovery, then did God's unspeakable Goodness choose to appear;
for to the wonder of Men and Angels, he does himself find out this way, to
raise us out of the Abyss of Misery, into a State of Happiness again, that he
So loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life, Joh. 3.16.

So infinitely great, I say, were the Mercies of God to us, The Son of God
undertook.
and so admirable was his Wisdom in the Expression of 'em, that he himself
contrived (when no one else could) this Expedient for our Deliverance out of
this desperate and forlorn State: First, I. To satisfy for the Breach of the
First.
Because his Justice must be satisfied for the Breach of his Covenant, and yet
on the other side he would not have us eternally Punished, he therefore gave his
own Son to dye in our stead, and by the infinite Merit of his Sufferings, to
make Satisfaction to infinite Justice, which we could not, so 2 Cor. 5.21. He
made him to be Sin, or a Sin-offering for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be
made the Righteousness of God in him. And then Secondly, II. To Cancel it, and
in its stead to make a Covenant of Grace consisting of conditions performable
in our fallen State.
Because it was impossible to be Saved by the First Covenant, which required
Unsinning Obedience, which we in our fallen State could not perform; he gave
him therefore to Cancel the First Covenant, and by his Bloodshedding to
Purchase for us a Second, whose Terms and Conditions being more possible and
easy, we might be capable of obtaining Salvation under it. Hence is he styled,
The Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb. 8.6. And his Blood called, The Blood
of the New Covenant, or the Blood by which the New Covenant was purchased, and
which was shed for many, for the remission of sins, Matthew. 26.28.

And the Terms and Conditions of this Second Covenant, Wherein Repentance,
Faith, and a sincere Obedience is accepted, instead of a perfect, exact, and
unsinning Obedience.
being no more a perfect, exact and unsinning Obedience; Repentance is
henceforward to be admitted as a means of Reconciliation, and a sincere
Obedience, to the best of our Power, will be accepted; and Faith in God, and in
Jesus Christ, accompanied with Living like those, who Believe the Gospel, shall
be henceforward imputed to our Justification; so that we shall have our Sins
pardoned, and be received to Happiness: This in short was the Tenor both of
the first Covenant, made with Adam, and the Second, procured for us by the
Mediation of Jesus Christ. Not to speak here of the different Measures and
Degrees of its Promulgation; nor of that Legal Covenant whereof Moses was the
Mediator, and was made only with the People of Israel, and was annexed as an
Appendix and Codicil to this Covenant of Grace, for Reasons too many, and too
large now to be considered. For though to show how, that the whole Promulgation
of this gracious Covenant, was not made all at once, but that it seemed good to
the Divine Wisdom, that so stupendous and grand a Scene of Mercy, should not
be opened but by degrees; though to show this, I say, and the several Reasons of
adding this Legal Covenant to the Covenant of Grace, may be useful Points of
Divinity to be explained in their due time, yet I look upon 'em, as none of the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, but rather part of that Strong meat,
spoke of, Heb. 5.14. which belongs to them who are of full Age, and have been
already competently well instructed, and so to be no proper Matter of
Catechetical Doctrine.

To proceed therefore, and in a word, we may consider the Second Covenant, not
as such indeed, which is made betwixt a Master and his Servant, wherein the
Master engages to allow Meat, Drink, and Wages, on Condition the Servant will
perform unto him such and such Services, which are just and reasonable, and the
Servant is capable to perform, which expresses more the Nature of the Covenant
of Works, Do this and Live: But rather, (for this comes nearer to the Nature of
the Covenant of Grace, between God and us, which is full of advantageous and
profitable Considerations on our side) we may rather compare it, It resembles
Articles of Accommodation made through the Intercession of a Prince's Eldest Son,
betwixt him and his Rebellious Subjects.
I say, to an Accord, made betwixt a Gracious Prince, and his Rebellious
Subjects, as suppose some City, or State, wherein the Prince is graciously
pleased, through the Intercession of some great Favorite, to grant unto those
his Subjects, not only Pardon of their former Crimes; but moreover, certain
great Privileges and Freedoms, Protection, and several particular Favors,
Lands and Possessions, and the like; on Condition they will thence-forward
Renounce and Forsake all his Enemies, and place no farther Trust nor Confidence
in 'em; and will not Disobey him for the future in any of his just and
reasonable Commands, but pay him a true and faithful Obedience to all his Laws.

And much of the same Nature, I say, is the Covenant of Grace, made betwixt God
and all Christians, through the Mediation of his only Son, only with this
difference: That on God's Part, the Benefits and Advantages are of most
infinite Value, which are made over to us his Rebellious and Disobedient
Subjects; and this upon the most reasonable, just and easy Conditions,
considering the Assistance he affords us, by the virtue of the same Covenant,
to perform 'em. For Almighty God, in the first place, vouchsafes us in this
Covenant, to be made Members of Christ, Children of God, and Inheritours of the
Kingdom of Heaven, which are Mercies and Privileges of invaluable Benefit and
Advantage to us: And we on the other side, Engage, and Promise, but to Renounce
the Devil, and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and
all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh; to Believe all the Articles of the Christian
Faith; to Obey God's holy Will and Commandments, and to walk in the same all
the days of our Life; which, I say, are most reasonable, just, and easy
Conditions, considering the Assistance he will afford us, to enable us to
perform 'em.

This will very clearly appear, by that time I have Explained to you,
distinctly, and severally, the Terms and Articles of this Covenant; both the
Advantages made over to us on God's part, and the Conditions to be performed on
ours, as they are taught you in the Words, now read to you.

And it is a Subject, indeed, that does extremely concern you to be well
Instructed in, and to be considered by you. None of you shall be able to
perform a Bargain, except you know, what you have bargained and agreed to do.
No One can discharge a Bond, except he knows distinctly what he is obliged to
pay; no more can any of you be able to perform the Covenant of Grace, except
you do well understand the Nature, Terms, and Conditions of it.

And, indeed, Little more of universal Concernment to be known, but the
Articles of this Covenant.
there is perhaps but little necessary to be known in Religion, besides the
Articles of this Covenant. We may without Prejudice to our Salvation,
doubtless, be ignorant of many Points, that are Canvast with Heat enough, in
the Controversies of Men of all Persuasions; but to know what inestimable
Blessings God has Promised and Ensur'd to us, and what we are to perform to
make our selves Inheritours of those Blessings, is what every Body, who
believes a future State, and the Immortality of his Soul, and that it is worth
his while, to study the Salvation of his Soul, must think it necessary, except
he can imagine it safe to take his Journey to Heaven blindfold, when he cannot
think of getting, but to his short Home here on Earth, without his Eyes open.

A distinct and clear Understanding of the Nature, Terms, and Conditions, and
of all that pertains to the Covenant of Grace, is, without doubt, of all things
in the World, the most necessary. The Catechetical Method most useful to that
Purpose.
And there is no Method of Instruction, whereby it can be so distinctly and
clearly known, as the Catechetical way: For not to say, that Preaching, now
upon one Head, and immediately after upon another, without any dependence and
coherence of the several parts of Christianity together, is not so likely to
give Persons a clear understanding of the whole Nature and Design of
Christianity, as may be requisite: The Catechetical way, by treating orderly on
all the Parts of our most Holy Religion, and by giving thereby, a distinct View
of their natural Connection with, and Dependence one upon another, has this
Excellency in it, no doubt, that thereby Persons shall be better able to judge
of the beautiful Contexture, and admirable Contrivance of the whole; and shall
easily discern what End it is, that Christianity aims at, and how admirably
every Part of it, is fitted to carry on that great End.

It is, without all doubt, a most useful Method of Instruction, and it would
soon appear to be so, in its happy Effects, would all Persons but lay aside
their unhappy Prejudices against it, as if it were proper only for Children, to
be Hearers thereof: Whereas, indeed, it is no ways unbecoming the Eldest, and
most Knowing Persons, to hear the great and fundamental Doctrines of Religion,
explained, and handled distinctly and clearly, and separated from all
unnecessary Mixtures.

But where all the Means and Methods of Instruction are little enough, to give
Men a sufficient Understanding in all that is necessary to Salvation; instead
of comparing 'em one with another, we had better to make use of all, and to
Pray to God to give a Blessing to all his Ordinances, that every one may be
useful to the Edification, and Salvation of every Christian; which, that they
may all prove, may God Almighty grant of his infinite Goodness, through Jesus
Christ our Lord: To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and
Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

THE Fifth Lecture. Wherein I was made a Member of Christ.
THE Preliminary Questions and Answers of your Catechism, do give you a general
Account of all the Terms and Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, both of the
Privileges made over to us by God, and of the Conditions to be performed by
us. And these Words, Wherein I was made a Member of Christ, expressing the
First of those invaluable Privileges made over unto us, in this Covenant, on
God's Part; I shall therefore endeavor, as well as I can, to explain and open
to you, what they do import.

Christ is in Scripture often styled, The Head of the Church, as particularly
Col. 1.8. And he is the Head of the Body, the Church, it is there said; and we
are also styled, Members of this Body, the Church. Thus Ephesians. 5.30. We are
Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; so that to be a Member of
Christ, is to be a Member, A Member of Christ, is a Member of Christ's Church.
or Part of that Body, of which he is the Head, or to be a Member of Christ's
Church: And to make it appear to you, how happy a Thing it is to be a Member of
Christ's Church,

First, I will show you, What kind of Body the Church of Christ is.

Secondly, What it is to be a Member of it. And then

Thirdly, What exceeding great and invaluable Privileges do belong to a Member
of Christ's Church.

And First, let us see, What kind of Body that is which is called the Church of
Christ. And though it does not belong to this Part of your Catechism, to give you
a full account, of all that is necessary to be known, concerning Christ's
Church, which may more properly be referred to that Article of our Creed, I
believe the Holy Catholic Church: However, since the high Privilege and
Dignity of any Member, as a Member, cannot be sufficiently understood, nor
valued, without knowing the Nature and Excellency of that Body, of which it is
a Member; I do therefore think my self obliged, in order to let you into a
through Understanding of what is meant by A Member of Christ's Church, and of
the greatness of that Privilege, to speak something largely, in this Place,
concerning the Nature and Constitution of the Church it self; and I shall
therefore define it, and also Explain, and prove each Part of the Definition, I
shall give of it, as follows:

A Definition of Christ's Church.
The Church of Christ, is the universal Society of Christians, consisting both
of Lawful Governors and Pastors, and also of the People of God committed to
their Charge; and who are called forth out of the wicked World, by the
Preaching of the Gospel, to a holy Profession and Calling; Namely, To
Repentance from dead Works, to the Knowledge, Belief, and Service of the One
True God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and to the Enjoyment of those inestimable
Privileges of the Gospel, viz. Most reasonable and excellent Laws to Conduct
'em to Heaven, Divine Grace and Assistance to Enable 'em to obey those Laws,
Pardon of Sins, upon Repentance, for the Violation of 'em, and eternal Life and
Happiness upon sincere Obedience to 'em. And who, to the End of being
Incorporated into one Society, and of having God, to be their God, and they
themselves his People, have Entered into Covenant with him, at Baptism, and do
often Renew the same in the Lord's Supper, and are Incorporated thereby into
one Body, subdivided, indeed, into several particular Bodies, and Churches, for
the convenience of Government and Worship, but holding Communion with one
another, in One and the same necessary and fundamental Points of Christianity,
necessary to constitute the Church, under Jesus Christ, their supreme Head.

The Church of Christ a well-ordered Society, wherein some are Governors, some
Governed.
And First, The Church of Christ is the Society of Christians, consisting both
of Lawful Governors and Pastors, and of the People of God committed to their
Charge. The Church of Christ is not a Confused, an Undigested, Headless
Multitude, but a Regular and Well-ordered Society. Hence, it is so often in the
New Testament called, The Kingdom of God, as Matthew. 21.31. The Kingdom of
Christ, as Rev. 11.15. and The Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 11.12. and the Members
of it, Children of the Kingdom, Matthew. 13.38. And Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21. The
Members therefore are styled, Fellow-Citizens, Members of a Household, and Parts
of a Temple, all which Expressions speak the Church of Christ to be a Regular
Society of Men, combined and knit together by Laws, derived from some supreme
Head and Governor. A Society, I say, wherein some are Superiors, some are
Inferiors, some Governors, some Governed, and who altogether make up a
well-compacted Body of Men. This last cited place out of the Ephesians, speaks
the Thing out: Now therefore, says he to those, who are called into the
Church, ye are no more Strangers and Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens with the
Saints, and of the Household of God, and are built upon the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, that is, Governors and Teachers, Jesus Christ being the
chief Cornerstone, in whom all the Building, fitly framed together, grows up
into an Holy Temple in the Lord. Here, in this Description of the Church, you
have Jesus Christ the chief Cornerstone, or Head of the Building, and Body;
the Apostles and Prophets Foundation-stones, next unto him, and all the rest of
Christians Fellow-Citizens, depending upon Jesus Christ, their supreme Head,
and others his subordinate Governors, and Teachers, next under him, and the
Whole represented as a well-compacted Building. Or, to make it yet more clear
to you, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. it is said, that He gave some, Apostles: and some,
Prophets: and some, Evangelists: and some, Pastors and Teachers, for the work
of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of Christ. So that upon the whole
Matter, you see, that the Church of Christ is a well-ordered Society of Men.

And I do withal say, that in the Constitution of Christ's Church it is
required, that the Governors and Pastors thereof be Lawful Ones, that is, such
as Christ has Commissioned to those Offices, because if they usurp the sacred
Offices of the Church, without being lawfully Ordained to the same, by the
Successors of Christ and his Apostles, there will be very great danger of a
Nullity in all their Ministerial Acts and Offices. You must all needs
understand this, That those, who shall pretend to act in any Office, by the
King's Authority, without a true Commission, the King will be so far from
reckoning himself obliged, to Confirm what they shall pretend to do in his
Name, that he will punish the Presumption of such Officers, and those that
adhere to 'em. And what reason have those to expect better Treatment from the
King of Heaven, who shall either take upon themselves the Ministry, or receive
an Ordination to it from those Hands, who have no Power to confer it, or shall
Adhere to such Usurping Ministers? To put the case as Favorably, as possibly
we can, it does not appear, that God is under any Promise, or Engagement to
hear the Prayers, that such Ministers shall put for the People, to convey the
Graces of his Holy Spirit, by the Sacraments they shall Administer, or to
Ratify the Pardon of those Penitents, whom they shall Absolve; whereas he has
assured the Church, with respect to his lawful Ministers, that whatsoever of
this Nature they shall do on Earth, shall be Established in Heaven, Matthew.
16.19. And we are farther told by St. Paul, Heb. 5.4. That under the Old Law,
No man took the Honor of the Priesthood unto himself, but those who were
called of God, as was Aaron. And as to the Ministers of the Gospel, St. Paul
does sharply demand, Romans 10.15. How any shall Preach the Gospel, except they
be sent? So that it does extremely concern all Christian People, that the
Governors and Pastors of the Church be lawful Ones, such as are Sent,
Ordained, and Commissioned thereunto.

And now, if you would be well satisfied, who are certainly Sent, An Episcopal
Clergy undoubtedly such.
Ordained and Commissioned to Govern and Teach in the Church; it is beyond all
doubt, that Bishops are lawful Governors in the Church of Christ, and that
those, who are Ordained by their Hands, have Commission to Preach the Gospel,
and Administer the Sacraments, because they do undoubtedly derive their Power
by an uninterrupted Succession from Christ and his Apostles; for our Savior,
when he sent forth his Disciples into the World, to Preach the Gospel, and to
gather a Church, he told 'em, Mat. 28.20. He would be with them, or stand by
'em in giving Authority and Success to their Ministry, to the end of the world;
and yet for certain, for 1500 Years he did Authorize no other, than those
Episcopally Ordained, as the Histories of all Ages of the Church do testify; so
that it concerns you, who have not that Necessity to plead for not Enjoying
Bishops, and an Episcopal Clergy, as our Sister Churches Beyond Sea think they
have; It concerns you, I say, as you would be secure of being within the Pale
of a right Constituted Gospel Church, not to separate your selves from this,
wherein you are undoubtedly under a true Gospel Ministry. But to proceed

The Church is the universal Society of Christians, taking in men of all
Nations, as well of the Gentiles, as of the Jews.
Secondly, The Church of Christ is the Universal Society of Christians. The
Christian Church is not now confined to one particular Place, or Nation, as the
Jewish was; but is Catholic and Universal, spread over all the Face of the
Earth, and taking in all Nations of Men, as well those, who were Gentiles, as
those, who were Jews: For Christ is our Peace, and has made both One, and has
broken down the middle Wall of Partition between us, Ephesians. 2.14. The Synagogue
of the Jews consisted of one Nation, and the more solemn Parts of their public
Worship, were confined to one Place, as you will see, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6. So that it
was rightly said, Joh. 4.20. Though the Woman of Samaria did Schismatically
question it, That Jerusalem was the place wherein men ought to worship; For the
Temple was the only place in which the Sacrifices could be Offered, and wherein
the Priests could perform their daily Ministration; so that the Church, under
the Law, was an Enclosure divided from all the World besides. But our Savior,
at the opening of the Christian Church, assures the Woman, who demanded of him,
Whether in that Mountain, near to Samaria, whereon they both stood, or in
Jerusalem, were the place where men ought to worship, he assures her, The hour
comes when neither in that Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, they should worship
the Father; that is, not there only, nor any where in so carnal a manner, Joh
4.20, 21, 22, 23. But as St. Peter tells us, now under the Gospel, In every
Nation, he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him,
Act. 10.35. And therefore our Savior, when he sent forth his Disciples into
the World, to Preach the Gospel, and to gather a Church, he commanded them,
Mar. 16.15. saying, Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every
Creature. From whence we find them, in Revelations 5.9. Crying unto the Lamb,
Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us unto God by thy Blood, out of every
Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation. So, that whereas concerning the
Jewish Church it was, that God declared formerly, Exodus 19.5, 6. That in
keeping his Covenant, they should be a peculiar Treasure unto him, above all
People, a Kingdom of Priests, and a holy Nation. Now under the Gospel it is
declared, 1 Pet. 2.9. with respect to Persons of all Nations, who shall come
within the Christian Church, that they are a Chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that they should show forth the
Praises of him, who has called them out of Darkness, into his mavelous
Light: But then, I say, the Church of Christ, though it takes in Persons of all
Nations, yet it is still to be a Holy Nation, a peculiar People. For though it be
spread over all the World, yet

It consists of such, who are called out of the World, by the preaching of the
Gospel, to a holy Profession and Calling.
Thirdly, It consists only of such, who are Called forth out of the wicked
World, by the Preaching of the Gospel, to a Holy Profession and Calling. It is
not either Jews, or Gentiles, whilst they continue such, that are of the Church
of Christ; but it consists of those, who are Called out from amongst both. The
Church is a selected People, separated from the Profane part of the World, to
be a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a Peculiar People.
To understand which, you must know, that the World, at the time of our
Savior's coming into it, was grown to a sad pass, and was miserably Estranged
from God. The world, indeed, soon after the Creation, began to fall off from
God, and to take part with the Devil: But by the time that our Savior came
into the Flesh, the Apostle declares, Romans 3.11, 12. concerning as well Jews,
as Gentiles, that there was none that understood, there was none that sought
after God; that they were all gone out of the way, they were all become
unprofitable, that there was none that did good, no not one. Particularly, as
to the Gentiles, they were charged, Romans 11.23, 24.28, 29. to have Changed the
Glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible Man, and
to Birds, and four-footed Beasts, and creeping things; and were thereupon given
up to Uncleanness, and vile Affections; and as they did not like to retain God
in their Knowledge, they were given up to a reprobate Mind, being filled with
all Unrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness, etc. And as to the Jews, they had
in a manner wholly voided the Force of God's Laws, by their false
Interpretations, as you will see in our Savior's Sermon on the Mount, which
cost him so much Pains to clear the Text from their false Glosses, and to show
them the full Extent of their Duty, contained in the Law. This was the State of
both Jews and Gentiles, at that time: And therefore did Christ come to Call out
such, as would obey his Calls, to Call 'em out, I say, out of the wicked World,
to a holy Profession and Calling; for which reason he is said to have Saved us,
and called us with an holy Calling, 2 Timothy 1.9. and in a great many Places of
Scripture, Christians are therefore styled, the Called; and Joh. 17.6. they are
said to be such, whom the Father had given our Savior out of the world, and
though they are in the world, ver. 11. that is, Live in the World, yet they are
not of the world, ver. 16.

True it is, It is not every Member of the visible Church, that does
effectually obey this Holy Calling, and in his Life and Conversation, shows
himself not to be of the World; and therefore it is, that the Kingdom of
Heaven, that is, the Church, is liken'd Mat. 13.24. to a Field, in which Wheat
and Tares grow up together until the Harvest; and to a Net that was cast into
the Sea, and gathered of every Kind: But however, though too many of those, of
whom the Church is composed, are in their own Persons Ungodly, yet, I say,

Fourthly, They are Called, by the Preaching of the Gospel, to a Holy
Profession and Calling, as Namely, to Repentance from Dead Works; I. Repentance
from Dead Works.
for so our Savior says, He came to Call the sinners to Repentance, Matthew.
9.13. And thus also his Apostles Preached unto Men, that they should turn from
the Vanities of Idol-worship, unto the Living God, which made Heaven, and
Earth, and the Sea, and all things therein, Acts 14.15. which is an Instance of
Repentance, that the Gentile World were particularly Called to.

And then as to the Knowledge and Belief of the only True God, II. To the
Knowledge, Belief and Service of the One True God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
and Jesus Christ; the distinguishing Character given of the Church of Christ,
Joh. 17.2. is, that they are such, whom the Father has given him (or given him
out of the world, as it is ver. 6.) that they might have Eternal Life; and
this, he tells us, ver. 3. is Eternal Life; or the way by which we can only
come by Eternal Life, That we know the only True God, and Jesus Christ, whom he
has sent. The Gentiles they knew not the only True God, but Owned and
Worshipped many Gods, and did Sacrifice to Devils, 1 Cor. 10.20. And as for the
Jews, though they Believed, indeed, in the only True God, yet they Acknowledged
not his Son Jesus Christ, whom he had sent, to be also the True God, as he is
called, 1 John 5.20. And now both these Enemies to Truth, our Savior calls the
world, Joh. 17. and in Opposition to both tells us, ver. 3. that This is Life
Eternal, to know the only True God, and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent. So
that the Church of Christ are such, who are peculiarly Separated from the
World, to the Knowledge and Belief of the Only True God.

And they are such also, who have been Baptized into the Knowledge, Belief, and
Service of Three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in that One Godhead,
Mat. 28.19. And particularly they are such as are Baptized into the Name of
Jesus, Acts 19.5. that is, into the Belief, That Jesus is the Christ, or
Mediator between God and Man, for this is the great Fundamental Doctrine of
Christianity, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 3.11. assuring us, that Other
Foundation can no man lay, than that Jesus is the Christ. And he, that denies
that Jesus is the Christ, is the great Liar, and an Antichrist, 1 John 2.22.
But, whosoever believes, that Jesus is the Christ, is Born of God, 1 John 5.1.
that is, is Adopted into the Christian Church and Family.

III. To enjoy the Privileges of the Gospel.
Fifthly, And as Christians are a Society of Persons, called out of the World to
Repentance, Faith, and Gospel-Obedience; so to the Enjoyment of those
Inestimable Privileges of the Gospel, viz. 1. Most Reasonable and Excellent
Laws, given by a most Great and Gracious Governor, to Conduct 'em to Heaven,
Laws writ in their Minds, and in their Hearts, Heb. 8.10. that is, Laws, which
are for the most part, the very Dictates of natural Reason. 2. They are such,
as are Priviledg'd with having great Measures of Divine Grace, and Assistance
to enable 'em to Obey those Laws, for, whereas the Law was given by Moses,
Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17. and is the Privilege of the
Church of Christ under the Gospel. 3. They are such, who have Assurance of
Pardon of Sins, upon their Repentance for the Transgression of those Laws, for,
with respect to those of the Christian Church, God is pleased to say, Heb.
8.12. I will be merciful to their Unrighteousness, and their Sins and
Iniquities will I remember no more. And lastly, As to the Eternal Life and
Happiness, Christ does assure us, Joh 17.2. that The Father has given him power
over all Flesh, that he should give Eternal Life to as many as are given him,
or are given him out of the World, ver. 6. that is, that he has a Power of
conferring the Rewards in Heaven, to as many as come within the Pale of the
Church, if they do withal live in Obedience to its Laws and Constitutions. Thus
is the Church of Christ a Society of Men, called forth of the World, as to a
most Holy Profession and Calling, so to the Enjoyment of most singular
Privileges.

The Church are such, who to the End of being Incorporated into one Society,
and of having God to be their
Sixthly, And they are such, Who to the End of being Incorporated into One
Society, and of having God, to be their God, and they themselves his People,
have Entered into Covenant with him. It is the Royal Charter granted by the
King, to the Members of a Corporation, or City, whereby they have certain
Privileges granted them from the King, and wherein they are Tied to discharge
certain Duties to him, and to One another, that makes 'em, of a confused
Multitude, to become a Corporation, or regulated Society. And those who stand
out, and will not accept of those Privileges, nor oblige themselves to their
several Duties, shall not be reputed of that Corporation, nor receive any
Advantages from it. And so it is here with that Society, which is called the
Church of Christ. It is the Covenant of Grace, granted us by the King of
Heaven, wherein we have the most inestimable Privileges, those contained in
the Gospel, graciously Ensur'd unto us, and most reasonable Duties both to God
and Man, required of us, that do embody and join us into one Spiritual Society,
the Church; and those who will not Enter into such a Covenant with God, are
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers from the Covenants of
Promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. But those who
have joined themselves in Covenant with Him, are No more Strangers and
Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God,
ver. 19.

And as by being United in one Covenant, Christians are Incorporated into one
Society; so by the same Means it comes to pass also, that they have God to be
their God, peculiarly, and they become his People. Thus Heb. 8.10. This is the
Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, that is,
in the time of the Gospel, I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a
People. It is the Nature of all Covenants, to Unite the Parties Covenanting
together, and to give to each Party an Interest in the other. I entered into
Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16.8. So that by having
Entered into Covenant with God, we are Entitled to his particular Protection
and Care over us, and we give to him thereby a new and stronger Claim to our
Obedience.

Seventhly, I. In Baptism.
And Christians are thus Entered into Covenant with God, and thereby made
Members of Christ's Church in their Baptism: For as all the Members of a
Corporation, are not usually made Members of that Society, without some certain
Solemnities; so it pleased God, that no One should be Entered into Christ's
Church, and be made a Partaker of the Privileges of it, without that outward
Rite of Baptism; for so we find, that when our Savior sent his Apostles to
Found, and Build the Church, they received, as a Commission to call forth out
of the World, a Church, by the Preaching of the Gospel: So an Appointment to
Incorporate all Men therein, by Baptism; Go and teach all Nations, Baptizing
them in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Matthew.
28.19. And hence, 1 Cor. 12.13. it is said, That we are all Baptized into one
Body, or admitted by Baptism into one Church.

Eighthly, And they are appointed to Renew the same, II. To Renew it at the
Lord's Supper.
by Feasting often together at the Lord's Supper. This was anciently, and is
still the usual Method of Uniting more closely together the Members of any
Society or Corporation, their Feasting often together at one common Table; and
for this Reason, amongst others it is, that the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
is Appointed in the Church of Christ: So the 1 Cor. 10.17. it is said, That we
being many are one Bread, and one Body, for we are all Partakers of that one
Bread.

Ninthly, And now upon all these forementioned Accounts, The Church one Body.
the Church of Christ is One Body. Thus Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. There is one Body, and
one Spirit, even as ye are all called in one Hope of your Calling, one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in you all; where you see, that because all Christians are
called out of the World, into one Hope of their Calling, or to the Enjoyment of
the same Privileges, to one Faith, or to Believe one God, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, expressed here by one Spirit, one Lord, one God, and Father of all;
and because Incorporated by one Baptism, or by the Use of the same Sacraments,
that therefore they are one Body. The Covenant of Grace, that great Charter,
whereby we are Incorporated into one Society, is One and the same amongst all
Christians, containing the same Duties to be performed by all, and promising to
every one that performs those Conditions, the same Privileges. And all Men are
every where admitted and continued in it by the same Sacramental Solemnities,
and therefore the Church founded upon, and Incorporated by that Covenant, must
needs be One.

Tenthly, This one Body or Society, the Church, true it is, is Subdivided into
several particular Bodies, or Churches, Subdivided into several particular
Bodies and Churches.
both for the convenience of Discipline and Government, and also for the
convenience of Divine Worship. For the convenience of Government it was
anciently divided into Diocesan Churches, I. For the convenience of Government,
into Diocesan Churches.
wherein, because no one Man is able to Govern so vast a Body, as is the whole
Church of God, each Bishop had his particular Flock, arising out of one City,
and the Parts adjoining, to Oversee and to Govern. Hence we read, Rev. 2. and
3. chap. of the Church of Ephesus, the Church of Smyrna, the Church of
Pergamus, the Church of Thyatira, the Church of Sardis, the Church of
Philadelphia, and the Church of Laodicea, all which were so many Cities in the
Lesser Asia; and the Bishops of those Churches are styled, the Angels of those
Churches, in those Second and Third Chapters of Revelations. And the Elders, or
Bishops of these Churches, probably it was, that St. Paul sent for, to meet him
at Miletus, Act. 20.17. and to whom he gave that solemn Charge, ver. 21.28. To
take heed unto themselves, and to all the Flock, over the which the Holy Ghost
had made them Overseers, to feed the Church of God, that is, to Govern and
Teach the Church of Christ, which he had Purchased with his own Blood.

And as for the Convenience of Government, the Church of Christ was anciently
divided into Diocesan Churches, in which Constitution of the Church, each City
has its Bishop to govern and direct the Affairs of the Church: II. For the
convenience of Worship, into particular Congregations.
So for the Convenience of Divine Worship, and because all the Members of a
City, and the Parts adjoining, could not meet together in the same Place, was
each Bishop's See farther divided, into particular Congregations and
Assemblies, under the Care of its respective Pastors: Hence as to the Church of
Corinth we gather, that, as it was but one Church, in regard it had but one
Bishop, or Governor, for St. Paul directs his Epistle thus, Unto the Church of
God which is at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.2. yet in that one Episcopal Church, being
there were several Congregations met together, for the Worship of God, we read,
1 Cor. 14.34. of Churches in the Plural Number, and this particular Order of
the Apostle, about the Decency of Divine Service, in those particular Churches,
or Congregations; Namely, that Women should keep Silence in the Churches. Thus,
true it is, the Church, which is but one Body, is Subdivided into several
particular Bodies, or Churches; both for the convenience of Discipline and
Government, and also for the convenience of Divine Worship: But however those
several particular Churches were United into one Body, by one Covenant; But
however United, by one Covenant, into one Body.
for the Church of Corinth, the Church of Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. were are all
called to the same Holy Profession and Calling, to the same Faith in God, and
to the same Privileges of Grace, Pardon, and Happiness, as the whole Church,
and were admitted into that same Covenant, by the same Sacraments, as the whole
Catholic Church was; by which means They kept the unity of the Spirit, in the
bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.3. And each of those particular Congregations, also in
the Church of Corinth, for Instance, were United also to the Church of God, in
that City, by holding no other than the Doctrine Established in that Church:
And by being United thereby to that particular Part of Christ's Church, they
were United also to the whole Body of Christ, and made up but one Body, For as
the Body is one, and has many Members, and all the Members of that one Body
being many, are one Body; so also is Christ, or the Christian Church, for by
one Spirit, we are all Baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles,
whether we be Bond or Free; and have been all made to drink into one Spirit, 1
Cor. 12.12, 13. So that the Church of Christ, you see, though divided into many
Branches, or Members, is but one Body in the whole, because United in, and by
One and the same Covenant of Grace: And also in the

Eleventh Place, As also by holding Communion with each other, in hearing the
Word, in Common Prayers, Sacraments, and in affording to each other mutual
Assistances.
Because all the several particular Churches are to Hold Communion with each
other. Now as to that Communion, which the Members of Christ's Church held with
one another in the Apostle's Times; (and sure their's must be a Pattern of
Church Communion) we are told, Act. 2.42. that it consisted in this, That They
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking
of Bread, and in Prayers. They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine,
that is, they continued constantly, and also steddily, without swerving aside
by Separation, in Hearing the Apostles Teach. They continued also steadfastly in
Breaking of Bread, and in Prayers, that is, they Joined constantly and
frequently in the same Prayers and Sacraments. And lastly, They continued
steadfastly in the same Fellowship, by which is principally meant in the
Original, both here, and in several other Places of the Scripture, that
Communication of charitable Assistances, that all the Members did afford each
other, according to their several Wants and Necessities: For whether any
Sister-Church were under Persecutions, or any particular Christians did labor
with Want, the other Members of the Body did Communicate to the Relief of
either. And the Apostle did also appoint that to be done in the Christian
Assemblies, when they met together to Communicate in Hearing, Prayers, and
Sacraments, ordering, that The first day of the Week, which was the Day of
their Public Assemblies, every one should lay by him in store, as God had
prospered him, to this Purpose, 1 Cor. 16.2. So that if One Member suffered,
all the Members suffered with it, and there was no Schism in the Body, but the
Members had the same care one of another, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26.

In a word: Such was the Communion, which the Members of the Church held with
each other, in those Days, which made it one Church, that there was no such
thing as any separate Meetings, from those of the Apostles, and their lawful
Successors, the Bishops and Pastors of the Flock, set up under the Pretense of
better Edification, and for more pure Administrations of Ordinances. No, no
sooner did any attempt to make such a Schism, but he was accounted a Gangreen'd
Member, and cut off from the Body for so doing. And so much was mutual Kindness
and Charity to be the distinguishing Character of Christ's Church, that our
Savior declared, Joh. 13.35. That by this should all men know his Disciples,
that they had love one for another.

The Church United into one Body, under Jesus Christ its supreme Head.
And now Lastly, It only remains, to complete this my Explication of Christ's
Church, to show you, That this whole Society of Men, called forth out of the
World, to such Duties and Privileges, as has been spoke, is to be United into
one Body, as has been declared, under Jesus Christ its supreme Head. Every
Society of Men must have some supreme Head to keep it, both in Being, and
Order; and Christ is so much, to all Intents and Purposes, the Head of the
Church, that there is no respect, in which any thing is the Head of the Body,
in which Christ is not, in like manner, the Head of the Church. Christ a
Political Head of the Church.
And First, There is the Political Head in every Kingdom, which is the Prince,
that gives Laws to his People, and Heads and Protects them against their
Enemies. And such a Head is Christ in that Spiritual Kingdom, the Church of
God, Whom the Father having Raised from the Dead, did put all things under his
Feet, and gave him to be Head over all things to the Church, which is his Body,
Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. And therefore pursuant to this Power, which was Given
him in Heaven, and in Earth, to give Laws to Mankind, did he Commission his
Disciples, and send them forth into the World, to Proclaim his Laws, to Teach
all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever he had Commanded
them; assuring them withal, that Lo he would be with them always, even unto the
End of the World, Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. that is, That he would be ever with
'em, to Head and Protect 'em against their Adversaries.

Secondly, There is also a Domestic Head, viz. the Husband, in respect of the
Wife; and so likewise is Christ the Head of the Church, and he is the Savior
of the Body, Ephesians. 5.23. And, indeed, the Holy Spirit does love to Represent him
as such a Head, as also by the Title of a Shepherd over the Flock, to signify
the Gentleness of his Government, and the Sweetness, and Goodness of his Laws,
tending all for the Good of those he Governs.

And Thirdly, There is the Natural Head of the Body, which is the Fountain of
Life and Spirit, from whence it is derived into all the Parts of the Body, to
enable and enliven all the Members thereof, to discharge their several Offices
and Duties: And in Allusion to this, Christ the Mystical Head of the Church.
is Christ said to be the Mystical Head of the Church, from whom all the Body,
by Joints and Bands, having Nourishment ministered, increases with the Increase
of God, Col. 2.19.

And thus I have at length sufficiently, in order to my Design of Explaining
this Article, Wherein I was made a Member of Christ, showed you, What kind of
Body the Church of Christ is. And, by the By, from what has been said, it does
appear, That the Church of Christ is a Spiritual Kingdom, put up in the World
by God, The Church of Christ, a Spiritual Kingdom.
on purpose to reduce Man to his due Allegiance to his Maker, and to destroy
the Dominion of Satan, which he had so long Usurpt over Mankind. It is a
Kingdom, as it consists of inferior Governors and Subjects, combined together,
by special Laws of Allegiance, to the Sovereign King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, and by Privileges granted, by that Supreme Head and Governor, to such
his Subjects; and therefore it is so often, in the Scripture, called a Kingdom:
But you see withal, it is a Spiritual Kingdom, by the Nature and Design of
which, God is to Rule in the Hearts and Spirits of Men, and therefore it is,
all over the New Testament, called the Kingdom of God, the Kingdom of Christ;
For Christ does Reign and Rule therein by his Gospel, as the Laws of that
Kingdom, over the Spirits of Men; and those are the People, or Subjects of this
Kingdom, who own him for their King, and his Gospel for the Laws of this
Kingdom; and who do give themselves up wholly, both Body, Soul and Spirit to be
Governed by those Laws.

And the Church is also often called in the Holy Scripture, the Kingdom of
Heaven, for indeed it is not a Kingdom of this World, supported with outward
State, and armed Forces, in order to promote, and to secure from those who
would Invade 'em, our temporal Interests; If my Kingdom were of this World,
then would my Servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews, Joh.
18.36. but it is a Kingdom, or Society of Men, associated together, and Listed
to Fight under Christ, the Great Captain of our Salvation, against much more
formidable Enemies, than any Earthly Potentates; Even against Principalities
and Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, against spiritual
Wickedness in high Places, Ephesians. 6.12. that is, against the Devil, and his
wicked Angels, who would despoil us of our Heavenly Inheritance. Listed, I say,
to fight under Jesus Christ, the Great Captain of our Salvation, for so he is
called Heb. 2.10. and to our Comfort, who are to fight under him, he has
already Spoiled these Principalities and Powers, and has made a show of them
openly upon the Cross, triumphing over them in it, Col. 2.15. So that our Work
is in a great measure already done under his Conduct, for he himself has
divested the Devils of much of their Power, he has thrown 'em out of their
Temples, silenced their Oracles, and does daily, by his Assistances, enable us
to Foil 'em. So that the Church of Christ, you see, is a Spiritual Kingdom.

But yet notwithstanding, that this Society, the Church, But yet
notwithstanding a Visible Society.
is a Spiritual Kingdom, both as its Laws are Spiritual, reaching to the
Government of the Inward Man; and also, as it is a Body Listed under a
Spiritual King, to fight against Spiritual Enemies: Yet however, from what has
been said, it does appear, that the Church, or Kingdom of Christ, is a Visible
Society of Men, consisting of such who make an Outward and Visible Profession
of Allegiance to Christ, having visibly, by an Outward Sacrament, Entered into
Covenant with him, and being such as do visibly Communicate together in his
Holy Ordinances. And therefore it is not only of such who by an inward, real,
and true Faith are United to Christ, that the Church and Kingdom of God, in
this World, does consist, but of all those outward Professors of Christianity,
who, by the Sacrament of Baptism, have Entered into Covenant with God. Such
indeed as besides an outward Covenanting, (which is certainly necessary) are
Renewed withal to the Image of God in Knowledge, Righteousness, and true
Holiness, are the only Persons of which the Invisible Church, as it is called,
does consist in this World, these perhaps being meant by the Little Flock, Luke
12.32. and of such only will the whole Church, in the World to come, be made
up, being, of The many that are Called, the few that are Chosen, Matthew. 20.16.
But if we consider the Church of Christ in its fully Latitude, and in that
imperfect State wherein it now is, on this side Heaven; many Hypocrites and bad
Men, as well as truly sincere and good Christians, do belong to it, for the
Church of Christ, here on Earth, is compared, Matthew. 13.24, 25. to a Field,
which contains Wheat and Tares growing up together, and to a Net, ver. 47.
wherein there are Fish, both good and bad. Such you see is the Nature and
Temper of that Body of Christ, his Church; concerning which I thought it
requisite to give you a more than ordinary full account, even in this place,
before we come to the Article, I believe the Holy Catholic Church, because
that otherwise it cannot be so well apprehended.

What it is to be a Member of Christ's Church.
Secondly, What it is to be a Member of Christ's Church; which now the way being
so far cleared, I shall in few words show you. And from what has been said it
does easily now appear, that a true Member of the Church of Christ, is one who
belongs to that Society of Christians which consists of Lawful Governors and
Pastors, and of the People of God committed to their Charge, the one Ministering
in Holy Things, and the other Partaking thereof at their Hands. He is not a
Member of that narrow and enclosed Society of Worshipers, the Jewish Synagogue,
who by their peculiar Rites and Ways of Worship, were confined to one Nation
and Place, no more than he is one of the Gentile World at large; but he is One,
who either himself was called, or is descended of those who were called, from
out of the wicked World of Jews and Gentiles, to a Holy Profession and Calling,
viz. To the Belief of the One True God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost; as also to
Repentance from dead Works, to serve him the only Living and True God. And he
is called, as to Faith and Repentance, so to enjoy the Privileges of the
Gospel, and the Rewards of such Faith and Repentance; namely, Most Reasonable
and Excellent Laws and Ordinances, to conduct him to Heaven, with a plentiful
measure of Divine Grace and Assistance also, conveyed by those Ordinances, to
enable him to Obey those Laws; and he is One, who to the End of being of that
Society of Men, the Christian Church, and of having God a Friend to him, and he
himself a Servant of God's, has solemnly Entered into Covenant with God in his
Baptism, and continues often to Renew the same in the Lord's Supper, because
the Divine Goodness does in both Vouchsafe to make over and ensure to him those
exceeding Great and Invaluable Privileges, and most singular Benefits, as well
as he on the other side, does solemnly Engage to yield himself up to the
Service and Obedience of God. Farther yet, a Member of Christ's Church is one,
who is not only United to the Catholic Church in and by one Covenant, that is,
in the Profession of the same Faith and Repentance, and in the Enjoyment of the
same Privileges, and in the use of the same Sacraments. But also he maintains
this Union therewith, by Communicating with that particular Part of the
Catholic Church where he lives, and whereof he is a Member in particular; by
communicating, I say, therewith in Hearing, together with the rest of the Body,
the same Doctrine, in Joining in the same Common Prayers, and receiving the
same Holy Sacraments; and Lastly, in Receiving from, and Administering mutual
Assistances to the Members of that Body, wherever dispersed, or however
distressed over the Face of the whole World, as there shall be occasion. And
Lastly, a Member of Christ's Church is One, who belongs to that universal
Society of Men, called out of the World, to such Duties and Privileges, as has
been spoke, and is united into one Body, by the same means, as has been
declared, under Jesus Christ its supreme Head. And if you consider him as a
Member of the Kingdom of Christ, he is one who is Delivered by God from the
power of Darkness, and is translated into the Kingdom of his dear Son, Col.
1.13. that is, he is one of those, who is delivered by the Gospel, from under
the Tyranny of Satan, under which the whole World was held Captive, and is made
a Subject to the Gracious Government of the Son of God. From what has been
said, it does plainly appear, I think, that such, and such a One only, is a
true Member of Christ's Church.

And in the Sense of your Catechism, which teaches all to Answer, That in their
Baptism they are made Members of Christ; every Person who has been admitted
into the Church by Baptism, is a Member of Christ, and shall continue such till
he is cut off by the just Sentence of those Governors in the Church, who have
the Power of the Keys, to Receive in, or Shut out; or till he cuts off himself
from that mystical Body, by a causless Schism and Separation from any of its
sound Parts.

Every Baptized Person, I say, is a Member of the Visible Church. Every
Baptized Person is a Member of the Visible Church.
So the Apostle expressly speaks, Gal. 3.27. assuring us, that As many as have
been Baptized into Christ, that is, the Christian Church, have put on Christ,
or have put on that Relation to Christ that Members have to the Body. True it
is, amongst those, that are Incorporated by Baptism into the Church, many do
prove but very unsound and unfruitful Members; such as, though they are admitted
into that Holy Society, in order to their Edification, and through Conversion,
by the means of those Holy Ordinances, which Christ has appointed in his
Church, do yet continue to be very bad Men, both in their Principles and
Practices. Hence it is said, Matthew. 22.10. that of those who were called into
the Wedding, that is, the Church, by the Servants or Officers of the
Bridegroom, that is, Christ, there are as well Bad as Good. Yet as appears from
that, and many the like Parables of our Savior, concerning the Materials and
Constitution of his Church, even such bad Men, when once Baptized into it, are
Members of it.

And shall continue to be Members of it, And shall continue such, till cut of
by the just Sentence of those, who have the Power of the Keys, to Receive in,
or Shut out.
till such time as they are cut off by the just Sentence of those who have the
Power of the Keys, to Receive in, or Shut out. For this you are to know, that
Christ has given his Apostles, and their Successors in the Government of the
Church, a Church Authority, consisting in Receiving in, or Shutting out of the
Church. To Receive into the Church, is to Admit such as make a Profession of
Christianity; to Admit 'em, I say, by the Sacrament of Baptism, to all the
outward Acts of Communion. To shut, or cast out of the Church, is by
Excommunication to Exclude unworthy Persons from that Privilege of
Church Communion, to deny 'em the Liberty to Pray, or Receive the Sacrament, or
perform any Religious Office in the Public Assemblies of the Church. And now
accordingly has Christ appointed the Bishops and Governors of his Church, to
be as Shepherds to Oversee the Flock, as you will find, Act. 20.28. and has
given 'em The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 16.19. that is, Authority,
as to Admit into the Church, by Baptism, all who make a Profession of
Christianity; so to Expel out of it, by Excommunication, all those scabbed
Members thereof, who contrary to such their Holy Profession, either by their
pestilent Heresies, or by their scandalous Ill Lives, are Unworthy of it, and
in danger to Infect it. If they Preach, or any-wise propagate any pestilent
Heresy, contrary to the Fundamental Truths of Christianity, let their Persons
be never so acceptable, upon the account of some shining Virtues of Charity, or
their Doctrines never so Plausible, as pretending to Reason, they ought not to
be spared. Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you,
than that which we have preached unto you, let him be Accursed; that is,
Excommunicated, and cut off from Church Communion, Gal. 1.8. So far was this
Blessed Apostle, so Zealous for the Glory of his Savior, from sparing others,
that he would not have himself be suffered to continue in the Communion of the
Church, were it possible he should be guilty of propagating Heresy: And so
likewise is any Person, guilty of a notorious and scandalous Ill Life. Why then
also are the Governors of Christ's Church commanded, To put away from 'em that
wicked person, 1 Cor. 5.13? And all the Members of the mystical Body, are so
far bound to take notice of such an Excommunication, as to disown and discard
such a Person, and to have no Society with him, so 1 Corinthians, 5.11. If any
Man that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or
a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one, after
Excommunication, they were not to Eat. In such Cases as these, indeed, an Evil
Member becomes no Member, and is to be to the rest as a Heathen Man, and a
Publican, that is, One that is out of the Church, Matthew. 18.17.

And so likewise is he, who cuts himself off from that mystical Body the
Church, by a causless Schism, and Separation from any of its sound Parts. Or
till he cuts himself off, by a causless Schism and Separation, from any of its
sound Parts.
I say, any of its sound Parts, for wherever there is a true Church, if there
be nothing in its Doctrine nor Worship that is sinful, every Person is bound to
Continue steadfastly in the Doctrine, Prayers, and Sacraments, and Fellowship of
that Church, as in the Apostle's times they did, Act. 2.42. and to reject the
Communion of all other Parties and Sects of Christians, or otherwise he will
cut off himself from the Church, and will cease to be a real Member of it, as
the Finger ceases to be of the Body, when it is cut off from the Arm. Thus in
either of these Cases, indeed, shall a Person discontinue to be a Member of
Christ's Church; when either he is Cut off, by the just Sentence of those
Governors in the Church, who have the Power of the Keys, to Receive in, or
Shut out, or when he Cuts himself off by a causless Separation and Schism, from
any of its sound Parts.

But otherwise, all Persons who have Entered into Covenant with God, and have
been Admitted into it by Baptism, are Members of Christ's Church, (as has been
already sufficiently proved, and need not again be repeated:) And so shall
Partake of those exceeding great Privileges, which belong to the Members of
it; which what, and how great they are, I come next to declare unto you.

THE Sixth Lecture. Wherein I was made a Member of Christ.
BY the Church of Christ, as has been showed, is meant a Visible Society of
Men, called forth of the World, to the Knowledge, Belief and Service of the One
True God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and Professing the same in Opposition to
the Service of Satan, and all false Gods whatsoever, and also to all those
vicious and immoral Practices, which did so notoriously accompany the Pagan
Worship; and indeed professing an utter Hatred to all Sin, of any kind. And it
is a Society, as has been showed you, combined into one Covenant with God, by
outward Sacraments, and holding Communion with each other, under Jesus Christ
its Head.

And a Member of Christ's Church, you have also seen, is every One, who has
been Entered into this visible Society of Holy Men, and into this Covenant with
God, by Baptism, and who holds a constant Communion, without swerving aside
into separate Assemblies, with that Particular, True, and Orthodox Church,
whereof he is a Member, and in whose Verge he lives. Every such Person, I have
showed you, is a Member of Christ's Church, and will continue such, except his
Lawful Governors therein, should cut him off by a just Excommunication, or he
should cut off himself by a sinful and unnecessary Separation.

And now having sufficiently made it appear, in the former Discourse to this
purpose, First, what kind of Body that is, which is called the Church of
Christ, and also, Secondly, having showed you, what it is to be a Member of it;
it will be now requisite, that I should also Demonstrate to you, (in order to
make you sufficiently sensible of which, the Two former Points have been so
largely treated of) Thirdly, what vast and invaluable Privileges do
accordingly belong to every Member of Christ's visible Church. I say, to Every
Member of Christ's visible Church, for it is not my Business here to Enlarge on
the more peculiar Privileges of those, who are styled Members of the Invisible
Church, who are the sincere Part only of Christ's visible Church. Those
perhaps, I may also declare in few words by the By. But the Privileges, which
I am here concerned to Treat upon, and to Acquaint you with, are such as belong
to every Member of the Church I have been speaking of.

And these Privileges, The Privileges of our being Members of Christ's Church.
which do peculiarly belong to all the Members of Christ's Church, as they are
the Members of such a Body whereof he is the Head, are these Two: First, a most
reasonable and excellent Body of Religion and Laws, together with most
profitable and edifying Institutions and Ordinances, appointed by Him, our
supreme Head and Governor, to conduct us to Heaven. Secondly, a sufficient
measure of Divine Grace and Assistance, derived down upon us, from Him our
mystical Head, and conveyed by those his Ordinances, to Enable us to conform to
his Religion, and Obey those Laws.

And the first great Privilege, I. A most excellent Body of Religion, Laws,
and Ordinances.
which does peculiarly belong to all the Members of Christ's visible Church, as
they are the Members of such a Society, Is a most reasonable and excellent Body
of Religion and Laws, together with most profitable and edifying Institutions
and Ordinances, given and appointed us by him our supreme Head and Governor,
to Conduct us to Heaven.

We do enjoy, I say, thereby, The Christian Religion, and Laws, far exceed the
Pagan, Mohammedan, or Jewish.
The Privilege of a most reasonable and excellent Body of Religion and Laws,
far exceeding what any other People have ever enjoyed, to Conduct us to Heaven.
This is clearly to be seen, Heb. 8.8, 9, 10, 11. where God himself finding
Fault with the Jewish Covenant and Laws, as what could not make the Comers
thereunto perfect, says, Behold, the days come, when I will make a new
Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah; not according
to the Covenant, that I made with their Fathers, in the day when I took them by
the hand, to lead them out of the land of Egypt; for this is the Covenant that
I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord, I will
put my Laws into their Minds, and write them in their Hearts, and I will be to
them a God, and they shall be to me a People. And they shall not teach every
man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for all
shall know me from the least to the greatest; which remarkable Words, spoke
first by the Prophet Jeremy, as a Prophecy of the most happy State of the
Christian Church, by reason of the most excellent Covenant and Laws that would
be given it, beyond what was the State of the Jewish, do import, that even the
Jewish Covenant was not in it self Perfect, and such as could not be bettered
and improved, though it had God for its Author; (and sure then those
Superstitions, which derive themselves from no better Authors than the Devil,
and wicked Impostors, must be very bad) but that the Christian Covenant, and
Laws have such an inward, essential Goodness in them, that a Man's own Reason
would prompt him to approve 'em as Best, and most Excellent; there being none
of its Doctrines, but what are highly agreeable to the best Reason of Man, and
all its Precepts being no other, than the Law written in every Man's own Heart.

And indeed the Christian Religion, whether we consider it, as compared with
the Pagan, or Mohammedan Superstition, and Jewish Dispensation, or in its own
Nature, it is a most singular Institution, and Body of Laws, and such as we
ought to Esteem it our very great Happiness and Advantage, above other Men,
that we are under the Government of 'em.

And First, consider the whole Body of the Pagan Superstition, The Pagan
Superstition tended to nothing, but to defile humane Nature.
and what else did it tend to, but to debase Mankind infinitely below the
Dignity of their Nature, and to defile 'em much more than the very Brutes. The
Gods, which the Pagans worship, were at best the most Vile and Infamous of
Humane Race, viz. An Adulterous Jupiter, a Revengeful Juno, a Drunken Bacchus,
a Wanton Venus, a Thievish Mercury, and a Cruel Mars (not to mention how they
Bowed themselves before, and gave Divine Worship to the most poor and
contemptible, The Gods the Pagans worshipped, were, at best, the most infamous
Men and Women.
senseless Creatures.) And when they Worshipped Adulterers, and Whores, and
Thieves, and Drunkards, what can be expected but that the Rites whereby they
served 'em should be accompanied with the vilest Practices, such as were
answerable to the Nature and Temper of such Deities? Which was the occasion of
those Words of St. Peter, 1 Epist. 4.3. telling those, who had been lately
Converted from Paganism to Christianity, that The time past of their lives was
sufficient to have wrought the Will of the Gentiles, when they walked in
Lasciviousness, Lusts, Excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquetings, and abominable
Idolatries; wherein is more than intimated, that the Idolatries of the Heathens
were usually accompanied with such villainous Practices. And indeed from the
Pagan Authors themselves we know they were so.

Many times they worshipped the very Devils themselves.
But it was not only the vilest of Men and Women, but the Devils themselves,
whom the Pagans worshipped, and whom they were wont to serve, not only with
abominable Idolatries, accompanied with most lewd Practices (which however
hateful to right Reason, might be grateful to some sensual Spirits) but they
were forced to commit many times the greatest Violences possible to Humane
Nature in their Worship to those barbarous and cruel Devils, they Adored. And
that with lewd, barbarous, and cruel Rites.
Thus it was the manner of the Worshipers of Baal to cut themselves with
Knives, and Lancers till the Blood gushed out upon them, 1 King. 18.28. Nay,
The sacrificed their Sons and their Daughters unto Devils, and shed innocent
Blood, even the blood of their Sons and of their Daughters, whom they
sacrificed unto the Idols of Canaan, Psalm. 106.37, 38. Which was a Barbarity so
horrid to Humane Nature, that they were forced to make use of loud Instruments,
at the time of Sacrifice, to drown the Noise of the shrieking Infants. And at
this day the Idol Vitsiputsi amongst the Indians, is said to have many
Thousands slain in one of his solemn Processions, it being usual for his
Worshipers to throw themselves under the Wheels of his Massy Chariot, on
purpose to be crushed in Pieces, by the Weight thereof going over 'em. Such are
the lewd and barbarous Rites of the Pagan Religion, not to mention any thing of
those intolerable slavish Fears, which always possess Idolatrous and
Superstitious Religionists, who are always in dread, lest they should Incense
the angry and peevish Demon, by every little Accident, and are ever upon the
Rack, studying to please him by innumerable little insignificant Observances.

The Mohammedan Religion is a vile Imposture.
Nor Secondly, As to the Mohammedan Religion, is there any thing in it worthy of
God, whereby we should judge him to be its Author. First, it is a plain
Imposture and Cheat, pretending to be revealed by God, to his Prophet Mahomet,
after the Jewish and Christian Religion, as a more perfect Institution than
either, whereas, indeed, look into the whole Matter, and inward Frame thereof,
and we shall find nothing in it, as One observes, but A Mass of foolish
Opinions, odd Stories, uncouth Ceremonies, compounded chiefly of the Dregs of
Christian Heresies, together with some Ingredients of Judaism and Paganism,
confusedly jumbled, or unskilfully mixed one with the other. But as to that
great Principle of it, which promises in Paradise a Thousand Years
satisfaction, arising from sensual Pleasures, and the Enjoyment of Women, to
those, who shall slay the Unbelievers, that is, Christians; (for so they do
call us especially, because we believe not in their Mahomet.) This one
Principle of their Religion, I say, is enough to debauch Humane Nature to the
lowest Degree of Naughtiness, by giving Encouragement to the Two worst of Sins,
Lust, and Cruelty; Its Principles tend to Lust and Cruelty.
and accordingly the Effects of it are, That they give an unbounded Range to
their Lusts amongst themselves, and are Cruel and Blood-thirsty to all the
World besides, being Instigated by their very Religion, to fill the whole Earth
with War, Desolations and Misery; so that this is another Religion also, which
Tends, instead of Improving, to deprave Humane Nature, and to make it much
worse.

And Thirdly, As to the Jewish Religion, Judaism was an imperfect and unfinisht
Draught of Religion.
though that indeed was of a Divine Original, yet whether it were, that the
Infancy of the World was not ripe for a more deep and manly Instruction; or
whether that particular Nation however, to whose Disposition and Capacity those
Laws and Constitutions were suited, was unfit for the highest and hardest
Lessons; so it was, that St. Paul calls their Ordinances, Poor and Beggarly
Elements, Gal. 4.9.3. And indeed as to the Ritual Part of their Law, the
Ceremonies and Sacrifices thereof, were for the most part Types and Shadows of
good things to come, Heb. 10.1. And as to the Moral Part, Moses for the
hardness of their Hearts, was forced to Indulge 'em, what the Perfection and
Purity of the Christian Religion, will by no means allow of, as may be seen in
the Case of Putting away a Wife for every Cause, Luke 19.8. But above all, it
is to be considered, that universal Love and Charity to Enemies, to all
Mankind, of what Nation and Religion soever they be, which does so nearly
resemble us to God himself, Who makes his Sun to rise on the Evil, and on the
Good, Matthew. 5.45. was as it were a New Commandment to them, Joh. 13.34. And
yet such an unbounded Charity and Kindness, as this, is the great and necessary
Duty of Christianity. So that Judaism at the best, and before that it was
Corrupted by the false Interpretations put upon the Law, by the Scribes and
Pharisees, was but an imperfect Draught of Religion, begun by Moses, but left
to be finished by the more perfect Strokes of our Savior's Pencil afterward,
who is therefore said to have Come, not to destroy the Law or the Prophets, but
to fill 'em up, Matthew. 5.17. Thus Imperfect at best, was the Jewish Law. But
now consider

Fourthly, The whole Body of that Religion, Christianity a most excellent
Religion.
which Christ our supreme Head and Governor has given us, and under whose
Guidance we have the Happiness to be, as we are the Members of Christ's Church,
and nothing can represent God in more Noble Characters, and Glorious
Perfections; nothing can give a more Honorable and Rational Account of his
Proceedings with Man, both in his Creation and Redemption of him, than it does.
And as his Laws are infinitely beyond what the Wisdom of any Humane Lawgivers
did ever yet contrive for the good Order of Man in this World, and his real
Happiness both in this, and the World to come; so no Motives, nor Reasons can
possibly be more Powerful, than those which Christianity does give us, to Obey
those Laws.

It gives a most excellent Representation of God.
As to the Nature of God, Christianity does plainly represent him as a Being,
that has no manner of Imperfection in his Nature, but as One, that is adorned
with all the most glorious Attributes, and highest Perfections possible. It
represents him to us so infinitely Wise, Just and Holy, and yet so wonderfully
beyond all Comparison Good and Merciful; and to add to all this, so intimately
Present to all we say, or do, so Omniscient in discerning the very Thoughts and
Intents of our Hearts, and withal so absolutely Powerful in doing whatsoever he
pleases in Heaven, and in Earth, that Shall not this his Excellency make us
afraid? Job 13.11.

It gives an Honorable account of his Proceedings with Mankind, with reference
both to his Creation and Redemption of us.
And then as to his Proceedings with Man, both in his Creation and Redemption of
him. Christianity gives us the most plain and rational account thereof in the
World. It gives us to know how that God made man Upright, and being so, we were
at perfect Agreement with him; but that afterward we fell by Transgression
from him, and must have suffered the Doom of Rebels for so doing. It lets us
then know, That God taking Pity of us in this miserable Case, sent his own Son
to Preach Repentance, and to offer Terms of Reconciliation to us. And moreover,
because it was not consistent with God's Holiness, nor with his Wisdom and
Justice, as Governor of the World, to let Sin go unpunish't, or to accept of a
Sacrifice and Satisfaction less infinite in Value, than he was in Majesty, who
was Offended, that he therefore gave this his only Begotten Son also to Dye for
us, and accepted of his infinitely meritorious Sufferings here, instead of our
suffering Eternally hereafter; and as a sufficient Satisfaction to his injured
Justice, which we in our own Persons could not pay, without perishing
Everlastingly. Christianity does withal Reveal to us, that this our
High Priest, after having Offered himself for us here on Earth, a Sacrifice for
our Sins, he is now gone into Heaven, to Intercede with the Father, in the
merit thereof, that it may be accepted to the Pardon of 'em. And it also
informs us, that being ascended to his Father, which is in Heaven, in order
fully to reconcile him to Man, he has substituted his Holy Spirit here on
Earth, to perfect the Reconciliation and Conformity of our Natures to God, by
moving and moulding our Hearts to true Repentance, and Faith in him.

This is in short, that account which Christianity gives us, both of our
Creation, and of our Redemption. And so every way Rational it is in it self,
and so exceedingly agreeable to the wisest Methods of Government in the World,
that though it was beyond the reach of our Reasons, before this whole Mystery of
Redemption was revealed to us in the Gospel, to think of such an extraordinary
way for our Recovery out of a lost and undone Condition, and of Reconciliation
to God; yet now since it is revealed, all the reason of Mankind, whose
Understandings the God of this world has not blinded, must own, that there is
no method of Proceeding in such a Case, could be more worthy of the Holiness,
Justice, Mercy and Wisdom of God, nor so likely to work Repentance in Man, not
consequently more agreeable to the wise Governor of the World to take, than
this. So agreeable to the best improved Reason of Mankind, are the Doctrinal,
and even the most mysterious Parts of the Christian Religion; that Religion,
which it is our Happiness, as we are Members of Christ's Church, to be under
the direction of.

Nor can any thing be better contrived for the Happiness of Men, Its Laws are
excellently contrived for the good Order and Happiness of mankind.
with relation to themselves, or others, than what the Laws of our Savior do
directly tend to. As to our selves, they do so powerfully tend to mortify our
Lusts and Appetites, those Rebels to our own Reason; to moderate our Passions
and Affections, which so violently rack and disturb our own Breasts; and they
are excellently fitted also, to make us so Humble and Self-denying, so
Temperate and Sober, so Chaste and Pure, as Men on Earth would appear to be
Angels come from Heaven, were the Laws of Christ universally followed. And
lastly as to Others, such Justice and Uprightness, such Charity and Kindness,
such Quiet and Peaceableness, does Christianity incline men to, (upon which
account the State of the Gospel is represented, as that, In which nothing
should destroy, nor hurt in the holy Mountain, Isa. 11.9.) And let me also add,
such Prudent and Fatherly Care of Children, Servants and Dependants, do the
Laws of Christ prescribe, as would make a Heaven here upon Earth, were they
universally Obeyed. I say, were they universally Obeyed.

And yet to add to all this Excellency of Christ's Government and Laws over us;
already seen, And are enforced by most powerful Principles and Motives.
so powerfully is our Obedience to all these Laws Enforced by those mighty
Principles and Motives of Christianity, viz. The Articles of our Christian
Faith; I mean, so very Persuasive and Forcible are the Motives, which Christ
does give us to the Practice of these Virtues, beyond what was in any Reasons
and Motives, which the Philosophers, or even Moses did give, the Gentiles, or
the Jews, to be in any degree Virtuous, that this is another addition to our
Advantage, in having Christ for our Supreme Head and Lawgiver, and in being
Members of Christ's Church. In a word, so Honorable to God, so Perfective of
our own Natures, and so Beneficial to Mankind are the Laws of Christ, and so
well is our Obedience secured to 'em, by those Principles he has taught us,
that this very Thing does speak our exceeding Great Privilege, in being
Members of Christ, and under his Conduct and Government, as our supreme Head
and Lawgiver.

But especially this Advantage will appear to be very Great, Another Branch of
this first part of a a Christian's Privilege, are most edifying and
comfortable Institutions and Ordinances.
if we consider, How that together with those most excellent Laws, that he has
given us, he has also appointed us most Edifying and comfortable Ordinances, to
Conduct us to Heaven.

Now by Divine Institutions and Ordinances, I do mean those positive
Appointments and Observations, which he has given his Church, and all the
Members thereof, for their Improvement in the Knowledge and Practice of his
Holy Religion and Laws. And that which our Great Lawgiver has done of this
Nature, is this; He has Ordained solemn and set Days, viz. The Christian
Sabbaths, for his own Service; He has Ordered that Public Assemblies of all
Christians should be held upon those Days; he has Authorized and Commanded the
Publication and Preaching of his Laws at those Public Assemblies; He has
appointed that Common Prayers, Supplications and Thanksgivings, for Divine
Grace and Assistance, to enable us to perform these Laws then Preached, and for
other Mercies, should be jointly put up to him by all Christians on those
solemn Days, and public Assemblies; and Lastly, he has Enjoined therein the
use of Sacraments, as means of Conveying such Grace and Assistance, and also as
Oaths and Obligations upon us to be Obedient to those Laws. All which are the
Privileges that do belong to the Members of Christ's Visible Church. And if we
compare 'em with what others want of this Nature, they are indeed most singular
Favors, vouchsafed only to such as are Members thereof, and which Aliens and
Strangers have no Right, nor Admittance to. And considered in themselves, they
are most admirable Advantages toward the Observation of God's most Holy Laws,
and in order to a Holy and Good Life.

I. Public Ordinances, the Privilege of every Member of Christ's Church.
First, I say, All these forementioned Privileges do belong to the Members of
Christ's Church, to such as have been Baptized, and profess themselves to be
Christians. To understand which Rights and Privileges the better, you must
know, that as there are Two sorts of Members in the visible Church, so there
are Two kinds of Privileges that belong to each sort, as One rightly states
this Matter, each having those Privileges, which are proper and peculiar to
'em, according to the relation they bear to the Head, and their Fellow Members.

First, There are Members only by Foederal, or Covenant Holiness, such are only
Born of Water, when by Baptism they are United to Christ and the Church, and
take upon them the Profession and Practice of the Christian Religion. Now the
Privileges that do belong to these, are of the same make with their
Church Membership, Outward, and consist only in outward and public Communion
with the Church, in Word and Ordinances.

Secondly, There are Members by Real and Inherent Holiness, such as are, not
only Born of Water, but of the Spirit also, when by the inward Operation of the
Holy Ghost their Souls are Renewed after the Image of God, and made Partakers
of a Divine Nature. And the Privileges that do belong to these, are not only
the forementioned Ones, but together with them, others that are suitable to
their more spiritual Relations, Inward, and such as consist in the special and
particular Care and Protection of God, and in the more plentiful Measures of
his Grace, and in the more sensible Comforts of his Holy Spirit, according to
that of our Savior, Mat. 25.29. Unto every One that has, or Improveth those
Talents of Grace he has received, shall be given, and he shall have abundance.
So that these latter, and more peculiar Privileges indeed, do not belong to
every Member of the visible Church, but to those only, who are sincere in their
Profession of Christianity, and who, by their more than ordinary Piety, are
become Dear to God.

But then, as to Outward Privileges, it is not only the Duty, but it is the
Privilege, which of Right belongs to Every Member of Christ's Church, to
Observe the Lord's Day, to be Present in the Public Assemblies, to Join in the
Common Prayers, and even to Partake, when of Age, of the Lord's Supper, So we
find, Acts 2.41, 42. That the whole Three Thousand Souls, who received the
Word, and were Baptized, continued steadfastly in the Apostle's Doctrine and
Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.

True it is, such as that more than ordinary Regard, Scandalous Members to be
suspended from the Lord's Supper.
that the Church of Christ has for the Lord's Supper, that most solemn
Ordinance in the Christian Religion, that when any Member becomes Scandalous
for any Sin, he is to be Suspended from Communion in that, till he amends: So
it is ordered in the Rubric, before the Communion-Service, that if any be an
open and notorious Evil-Liver, so that the Congregation be thereby offended;
The Curate, having Knowledge thereof, shall Call him, and Advertise him, that
in any-wise he presume not to come to the Lord's Table, until he has openly
declared himself to have truly Repented, and Amended his former Naughty Life,
that the Congregation may thereby be satisfied, which before were Offended. And
the same Order shall the Curate use with those, betwixt whom he perceives
Malice and Hatred to reign, not suffering them to be Partakers at the Lord's
Table, till he Knows them to be Reconciled. But otherwise, till a Member become
Notorious and Scandalous for his Evil Principles, or Practices, he may claim
the Right to be admitted to the Lord's Supper; for even Judas himself, before
he Betrayed our Savior, did Partake with him at the first Institution of the
Supper, as you will find, Matthew. 26.25, 26. So that as to the Outward
Institutions and Ordinances of Christ, they are Privileges, you see, that do
belong to all the Members of Christ's Church, to all such as have been
Baptized, and Profess themselves to be Christians. And now

Secondly, I. Christian Ordinances are a singular favor, which Aliens and
Unbelievers do not, nor have any Right to enjoy.
If we compare but these outward Privileges of God's Holy Ordinances, with
what others do want of this Nature, they are indeed most singular Favors,
vouchsafed only to such as are Members of Christ's Church, and which Aliens and
Strangers have no Right, nor Admittance to. For alas! The Infidel Part of the
World, whether Jews, Turks, or Pagans, have none of these Divine Ordinances
amongst 'em. They neither Know the Lord's Day, nor Hold any Assemblies thereon
for the Instruction in his Laws; neither do they Profess Belief in, nor Pray to
the One True God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and they are utter Strangers to
our Holy Mysteries. And hence it comes to pass, that those miserable People
continue still in Blindness, Ignorance and Barbarity; remain perfect Slaves to
Satan, and their own Brutish Lusts, and for the most part of 'em, are
degenerated into such Inhumanity, Cruelty, and Brutality, that Tigers, Wolves,
and Vipers, the most Devouring and Venomous Creatures in the World, are not so
mischievous to Mankind, as that Part thereof, who either know not, or contemn
God's Holy Ordinances, are one to another: So true it is, what Solomon has
observed, Prove. 29.18. that Where there is no Vision, or no Word and Ordinances
of Divine Revelation, the People perish. Which brings me

Lastly, II. They are excellent Advantages considered in themselves.
To consider What excellent Privileges they are in themselves, And thas they
are upon Two Accounts. First, As being most admirable Advantages toward the
Observation of God's most Holy Laws. Secondly, As being exceedingly comfortable
to those, who Enjoy 'em.

I. As conducing much toward our Edification.
And First, Divine Ordinances are most Excellent Privileges, as being most
admirable Advantages toward the Observation of God's most Holy Laws, and in
order to a Holy and Good Life. For why? In these Holy Ordinances we have all
the Means both Outward, and Inward, afforded for our Conversion. As to the
Outward, you have the very Scriptures themselves, the Body of those Holy Laws,
publicly Proclaimed and Read out to you; the Scripture it self, I say, Which
was given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof,
for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. In these
Holy Ordinances again, you are not left to the Deceits and Whispers of a
private Spirit, but you have the Doctrine of the Church, collected into a Form
of sound words, and containing all that is necessary, whether as to Faith, or
that Love which is in Christ Jesus, or which is required in the Christian
Religion, 2 Timothy 1.13. You have this Collected, I say, partly by the Apostles
themselves, and partly by others, the wisest and best Divines, out of the Holy
Scriptures, and proposed to you as a Rule to walk by: And moreover you have the
Ministers of Christ, constantly applying both to your direction: The Ministers
of Christ, I say, who as his Ambassadors do Pray you in Christ's stead to be
Reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. Again, In these Holy Ordinances, you do not
wrestle with God for his Mercies, in the strength only of your own private
Prayers, but you have your Devotions mingled with the concurrent Prayers of all
God's People, and so by your joint Forces, after an humble, but powerful
manner, do Besiege Heaven; for the joint and united Prayers of Christians have,
above all others, the Promise of a Gracious Answer, Matthew. 18.20. Our Savior
assuring us there, that Where Two or Three are gathered together in his Name,
there he will be in the midst of them. And lastly, You receive herein, from the
Blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, that Food, which is
necessary to the Nourishment of the Soul, as Meat is to the Strength of the
Body, the same Blessed Savior of the World assuring us, as you will see, Joh.
6.55. and the 63. compared together, that His Flesh is Meat indeed, and that
his Blood is Drink indeed. And then as to the Inward Means of performing God's
Laws, viz. The Grace and Assistance of his Holy Spirit, this, as it is
absolutely necessary to enable our Weakness in this our fallen State; so it it
is no otherwise to be expected than in the Use and Ministry of Divine
Ordinances, as shall be presently seen.

In a word, The outward Ordinances, and Institutions of the Gospel, together
with the Holy Spirit accompanying them, are the only ordinary Means of
Conversion. Some may pretend to be above Ordinances, but Experience tells us,
that accordingly as Men do slight and neglect 'em, accordingly do they decay in
Grace and Virtue; and when once they begin wholly to lay them aside, they
become perfectly Graceless, and are given up to a Reprobate Mind, as is daily
seen in such as make nothing of Profaning the Lord's Day, and totally laying
aside Prayers and Sacraments.

As most comfortable to the Souls of those, who enjoy them.
Secondly, And they are not more Profitable and Edifying, than they are
Comfortable to the Spirits of all Pious Souls, who enjoy 'em. Holy David was a
most eminent Instance of this. My Soul thirsts for God, for the Living God,
when shall I come and appear before God, Psalm. 42.2. See what earnest Longings
he had for the public Service. And I was glad when they said unto me, Let us
go to the house of the Lord, Psalm. 122.1. And Psalm. 65.4. he expresses his
sense of this Matter, thus, Blessed is the man, whom thou choosest, and causest
to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts; he shall be satisfied
in the goodness of thy House, even of thy holy Temple.

Alas! They are seldom sufficiently valued, till most wanted.
the inestimable Privileges and Advantages of Divine Ordinances, as the
Benefit of the Heat and Light, and all other common Mercies, are never
sufficiently valued, till most wanted. In the abundance of 'em, we slight 'em,
but when deprived of 'em, we see we cannot live the Spiritual Life without 'em.
This is most significantly expressed, Amos 8.11, 12. Behold, the days come, says
the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor
a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord. And they shall wander
from Sea to Sea, and from the North even to the East, they shall run to and fro
to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. You see here, that the
Famine of Bread is nothing, in comparison with the Famine of the Word and
Ordinances. I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a
thirst of water, but of hearing the words of the Lord; which is a much sorer
Famine, for it is a Famine, which will starve the Soul. And when they are
deprived of the Word and Ordinances, then shall they wander from Sea to Sea,
and from the North even to the East, they shall run to and fro to seek the word
of the Lord, and shall not find it. And accordingly, we may always observe this
difference in Men's Esteem of those excellent Advantages. In the outward Peace
and Prosperity of the Church, when the Church Doors are always open, and
Prayers and Sacraments constantly Administered, then how many, that live near
the House of God, shall seldom come at it; and how will others Profanely pass
by it, even in time of Divine Service? And how do People, when it is Plentiful,
loath this Heavenly Manna? But when Persecution at any time arises, and the
Church Doors are shut up, and Divine Ordinances are forbid, upon Pain of Death,
how then shall you see those very same Persons go many Miles, and with the
utmost hazard of their Lives, Assemble themselves together, and take the
greatest Comfort imaginable in Enjoying 'em? This the Experience of all Ages
does Confirm; and God grant our present Neglect of his Holy Institutions and
Ordinances, may not provoke him to teach us also, how to Value and Esteem the
Privileges and Advantages of 'em, by depriving us thereof. And thus I have at
length showed you, how that the First Great Privilege, which does peculiarly
belong to all the Members of Christ's visible Church, as they are the Members
of such a Society, is a most Reasonable and Excellent Body of Religion and
Laws, together with most Profitable and Edifying Institutions and Ordinances,
given and appointed us by him, our supreme Head and Governor, to Conduct us to
Heaven. And now it is time to proceed, and to show you, how that

Secondly, The Second general Privilege belonging to the Members of Christ's
Church, is a sufficient measure of divine Grace and Assistance, derived from
him, the Head, and Conveyed by his Ordinances, to Enable us to Conform our
selves to his Religion, and to Obey his Laws.
We enjoy thereby a great Measure of Divine Grace and Assistance, derived down
from him our Head; and Conveyed by those his Ordinances, to Enable us to
Conform to his Religion, and to Obey his Laws. The mystical Body of Christ is
often compared in Scripture, to the natural Body of Man, and that as for many
others, so for this very good Reason, that as in the natural Body, every Part
partakes of Life, and Sense, and Motion, from the Head, so do we, by being
Baptized Members of Christ, derive Grace and Help from him our Head, From whom
all the Body, by Joints and Bands, have Nourishment ministered, Increases with
the Increase of God, Col. 2.19.

By the same Means that Christ is United to his Members, is Grace Conveyed down
from him, as Head, to those Members.
Now it is easy to conceive, how Christ, as a Political Head, should give Laws
to his Spiritual Kingdom, the Church, and how, as such, he should Head and
Protect it, and every Member thereof, against its Enemies. But the difficulty
with some, is to conceive, how, as from a Mystical Head, Divine Grace and
Assistance should be Conveyed down from him, to us his Members. But it is but
to consider what those Joints and Bands are, which Unite us to Christ as our
Head, and we may then easily conceive, how we shall have Nourishment ministered
unto us, till we Increase with the Increase of God. For whatever are the means
of Uniting us to him, the same are the means also of Conveying the Influences
of his Holy Spirit down upon us.

The first Medium of Union betwixt Christ, and his Members, must be each
Member's Union to the Catholic Church.
And the First great means of Uniting each Member to Christ, must be its Union
to the Catholic Church, the Body of Christ, not Cutting himself off from it,
either by Renouncing his Covenant with God, or by causlessly separating from
the Communion of that Sound, and Orthodox Part of the Church, whereof he is an
immediate Member; and by not giving just occasion to the Officers of Christ's
spiritual Kingdom, the Church, to Excommunicate, or Cut him off for so doing.
For it is Just with the Mystical Body, the Church, as it is with the natural
Body of Man. If a Leg or an Arm should be Cut off from the Body, by a Man's own
Hand, or by the King's Officers, it cannot receive Nourishment from the Head,
and for lack thereof must soon Dye. And so in the Church of Christ, a Heretic,
that for denying the Faith and Sacraments; and a Schismatic, who for breaking
the Communion, shall be Cut off from the Church, cannot ordinarily expect to
receive Supplies of Grace from Christ, the mystical Head, which by Keeping the
unity of the Spirit, in the bond of Peace, he might. But it is not sufficient,
in order to its deriving Life from the Head, that a Member be United to the
Body only, and to any of its Parts, but it is moreover particularly necessary,
that it should be United also to those principal Parts of the Body, where the
Blood and Spirits are formed, and from whence they are conveyed to every single
Member. And therefore

II. Its Union to the Lawful Governors and Teachers of the Church.
A Second means of Uniting each Member to Christ the Head, and so of Conveying
spiritual Supplies of Grace down from him to such a Member, is its Unity to
those Lawful Governors and Teachers, which Christ has appointed in the Church,
by Joining with 'em in the same Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, and by
holding Communion with 'em, in the same Holy Worship of God. The Lawful
Governors and Teachers in the Church of Christ, are the principal Parts in the
Mystical Body, as the Heart, the Liver, and the Brain, are in the Natural. For
as in the Natural, from these principal Parts, are sent forth that Portion of
Blood and Spirits, which give Life and Strength to every single Member; so from
Christ's Ministers is Communicated, to all the Members of the Mystical Body,
that Nourishment which maintains the spiritual Life in them. All this may be
fairly gathered from Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. He gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the
Body of Christ, till we all come into the unity of the Faith, and the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ. In which Words, the Ministers of Christ's Church, whether
Extraordinary, as Apostles and Evangelists, or Ordinary, as Pastors and
Teachers, are said to be (...), for the Holding and Knitting together the
Church, and that from them each Member does immediately receive that
Nourishment of sound Doctrine, whereby he grows up to be a Perfect Man in the
Knowledge, and Practice of true Religion. And indeed, the Graces of the Holy
Spirit are Conveyed by those Ordinances, which they only have power to
Administer, which brings me

Lastly, To show how, III. The use of Christ's Institutions and Ordinances.
that next to the being United to the Church, and its principal Parts, the
Ministers of Christ therein, the great Bonds of Union to the Head, and means of
Conveying his Grace to the Members, are the Sacraments, and other Holy Offices
and Ordinances appointed for that Purpose; and of which the Ministers of
Religion, are the only Dispensers. For just again, as in the Body Natural,
there are Nerves that Branch from the Head through the Body, conveying the
Animal Spirits to every Member thereof; so in the Mystical Body, the Church,
there are the Ordinances, of Sacraments, Preaching, Public and Common Prayers,
and such like Holy Offices, Administered by Persons set apart for that Purpose,
to be the Conveyances of those ordinary Supplies of his Holy Spirit, which he
thinks necessary to preserve that Member in Health and Vigor. So that thus at
length you see, how that in keeping in Union with the mystical Body of Christ,
his Church, and with its Lawful Governors and Teachers, and in the use of
Sacraments, and other Divine Ordinances, those Conduits and Conveyances of his
Holy Spirit to us, we shall have spiritual Life, and Strength, and Vigor,
derived down to us from Christ, our spiritual Head, in like manner, as in the
natural Body of Man, the Animal Life, and Strength, and Vigor, is derived down
to all the parts of the Body, from the natural Head.

And this is a most singular Privilege, if compared with that little, or
nothing of this Nature, which others, who are not Members of Christ's Church do
enjoy; and also it will appear to be a most exceeding great Advantage, if
considered in it self.

And First, If we compare our Happiness with Others, I. Divine Grace a most
singular Privilege, if compared with what others enjoy of this Nature.
we shall find it the peculiar Advantage of Christianity, which no other Law,
nor Doctrine so much as pretends to, that it not only clearly teaches us, and
strongly persuades us to so excellent a Way of Life, but provideth also Divine
Help and Assistance to Enable us to Practice it. If God would have Ordinarily,
and in the way of a Constant Dispensation, imparted so excellent a Gift to any,
to be sure it would have been to the Jewish Church; but we are told, Joh. 1.17.
That the Law was given by Moses, but that Grace came by Jesus Christ, that is,
the Graces and Gifts of His Holy Spirit, as well as other Mercies and Favors;
so that though Moses delivered Legal Precepts, it is by Jesus Christ we shall
have the Assistance, whereby we shall be Enabled to attain unto Holiness. And
as to that Measure of Grace, afforded to Holy Men under the Law, whatsoever it
were, it was through him, the Promised Messiah, and in Virtue of that Covenant
of Grace, Confirmed with Abraham before the Law; but the more constant
Influences of the Holy Spirit, and the fuller Measures thereof are derived from
him, down upon us now under the Gospel. And because of that more plentiful
Measure of Grace and Spirit, Communicated unto us from Christ under the Gospel,
does the Apostle call the Gospel, the Ministration of the Spirit, in Opposition
to the Law, which he styles the Ministration of Death, 2 Cor. 3.8, 9. And does
therefore so assuredly promise himself Success in his Ministry, ver. 5, 6. Such
trust have we in Christ to Godward, not that we are sufficient of our selves,
to think any thing, as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, who has
made us able Ministers of the New Testament, or Covenant, not of the Letter,
but of the Spirit; where the Gospel is styled the Spirit, as for other Reasons,
so for this, in the Judgment of the Learned Dr. Hammond, that Grace which is
the Gift of the Spirit, is now joined to the Gospel, which was not to the Law.
In a Word, and to speak in the Words of a Learned Author. Other Laws for want
of this, are in effect Ministeries of Condemnation; Racks of Conscience;
Parents of Guilt, and of Regret; Reading hard Lessons, but not assisting to do
after them; Imposing heavy Burdens, but not Enabling to bear them. But our Law
of the Gospel is not such, it is not a dead Letter, but has a quickening Spirit
accompanying it; it not only sounds through the Ear, but stampeth it self
upon the Heart of him, that sincerely does Embrace it; it always carries with
it a sure Guide to all Good, and a safe Guard from all Evil.

II. An exceeding Advantage considered in it self.
And this Advantage, as it is proper to our Religion, So it is exceeding
considerable in it self. The Advantage is, that every Member in Christ's Body,
in what Station soever he be, shall have sufficient Supplies of Grace derived
down from Christ, our Head, proportionable to his Necessities, by those means
of Conveying it, which Christ has appointed for that Purpose. All the Members
of Christ have Supplies proportionable to their Station in the Church.
I say, every Member in Christ's Body, in what Station soever he be: For As we
have many Members in one Body, and all Members have not the same Office, so we
being many, are one Body in Christ, and every one Members one of another, Romans
12.4, 5. that is, there are different Members in the Church of Christ, some are
to be Governors and Teachers of Others, and accordingly must be Endowed with a
Spirit of Government, and Gift of Teaching; and others are of a more private
Capacity in the Church of Christ, whatever they may in other Respects, and
their Business is to keep a Conscience void of Offense, both toward God and
Man, and faithfully to discharge their Duties to God, their Neighbor, and
Themselves. And whatever, I say, those several Duties are, which arise from
their several Stations in the Church, they shall have a competent measure of
Divine Grace, Enabling them to discharge 'em. They shall not have Gifts, that
are necessary to the Discharge of other's Offices, but be destitute of these of
their own; that is, a private Christian, called to no Office in the Church, is
not to expect, nor ought to pretend to have received Gifts of Government, and
Teaching in a public Ministerial way, For God is not the Author of Confusion,
but of Peace in all the Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33. But every Member
of the mystical Body, by keeping himself united to the Head, in such ways, as
has been showed, shall have such Graces and Assistances derived down to him
from Christ, who is that Head, as are necessary and proper for him.

And, that too, in such Measures and Proportions, as, according to the
different Times and Occasions in the Church, are wanting. And also in such
Measures as according to different Times and Occasions in the Church, are
wanting.
Thus in the first Plantation of the Gospel, when the Work was so
Extraordinary, that there was need of Miracles to convince the Jews of the
Insufficiency of Moses's Law, and the Gentiles of the Falsehood of the Pagan
Superstition, then did Christ bestow upon his Apostles diverse extraordinary
Gifts, viz. Of Miracles, Prophecy, discerning of Spirits, diverse kind of
Tongues, and the Interpretation of Tongues, 1 Cor. 12.10. And as to all
Christians in general, as the malice of Satan did then most violently rage
against the Church, Persecuting to the Death those, who would not Renounce
Christ, and his Religion; so all the Christians in those Times were very
extraordinarily Strengthened, no doubt, to resist such strong Temptations. But
now, that the Church is Established, and the Truth of Christianity already
Proved and Believed, God does assist the Ministers of Religion only, with the
ordinary Graces of his Spirit in the discharge of their Ministry. And as to Lay
Christians therefore, except it be when the Orthodox are called out in any Part
of the World (as sometimes they are to this Day) to suffer for the Truth, they
receive no other than ordinary Assistances. But this both Ministers and People
are sure to do, in the use of those means, that Christ has appointed in his
Church for that Purpose; so very considerable, on many accounts, are the
Privileges, that do belong to the Members of Christ's Church.

THE Seventh Lecture. Wherein I was made a Child of God.
THE Preliminary Questions and Answers of your Church-Catechism, as I have
already told you, do give you a general Account of the whole Covenant of Grace.
And these Words, Wherein I was made a Member of Christ, being the First of
those invaluable Privileges, made over to us in this Covenant, on God's Part,
I have already explained, and opened to you what they do Import.

The next of those Privileges, made over to us in the Covenant of Grace, is
expressed in these Words, Wherein I was made a Child of God, in order to make you
sensible of the Vastness of which Privilege also,

First, I will show you what is meant in Scripture, and here in your Catechism,
by a Child of God.

Secondly, What an inestimable Privilege accordingly it is, to be a Child of
God.

What is meant in the Catechism by a Child of God.
And first let us Enquire, What is meant both in Scripture, and here in your
Catechism, by a Child of God. To understand which, we must Enquire into the
several meanings of this Phrase, in the Holy Scriptures, and then, in which of
those Senses it is to be understood, here in your Catechism, when every
Catechumen is taught to Answer, that In his Baptism he was made a Child of God.
And as to the several Acceptations of this Phrase, in the Holy Scriptures.

I. Not the Son of God by an Eternal Generation.
First, In the highest, most natural, and most proper meaning of the Word, there
is He, who is the Son, or Child of God, by an Eternal Generation, viz. Our
Savior Jesus Christ, who being Begotten of God the Father, from all Eternity,
in a peculiar, inconceivable, and inexpressible manner, so as to be Coequal,
Coeternal with the Father himself, is called the Only Begotten Son of God,
Joh. 3.16. But then, being he is in so peculiar and high a manner, the Son of
God, as infinitely to exceed, that wherein any one else, whether Angels or Men,
can be called his Sons, he cannot, in any measure, be meant here by a Child of
God, which signifies a Privilege common to many, as will be presently showed.

Not every Son by Temporal Creation, which is a Sense too wide.
Secondly, There are those, who are the Sons of God by a Temporal Creation, and
such are Reasonable Creatures, both Angels and Men; both being called the Sons
of God, as you will see, Job 1.6. and Luke 3.38. And that, both upon the
account of the manner of their Production, which was by the immediate Power of
God, and because of their Spiritual and Immortal Natures, in which both do so
immediately resemble God. But this is an Acceptance too wide. That which is
meant here by a Child of God, is a Privilege, which all Men in the World do
not enjoy, but is the Favor, which is granted to a selected Body of Men, who
are separated from the rest of the World; Behold, what manner of Love the
Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God, 1 John
3.1.

Thirdly, There are those, III. Nor sachonly who are Children of God, by
spiritual Regeneration, which is a Sense too narrow.
who are the Children of God by Spiritual Regeneration, by being Renewed in the
Spirit of their Minds, and by being Created anew in Righteousness and true
Holiness. And these are such, Who have put off, concerning the former
Conversation, the Old Man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful Lusts;
and who have put on the New Man, which after God is created in Rightousness and
true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. They are such, who are Born, not only of
Water, but also of the Spirit, that is, who have not only been Baptized into
the Christian Church, but have been Sanctified by the Holy Spirit, and have
their whole Natures and Dispositions so altered for the Better, that, from
Vicious and Ungodly, they are changed to Virtuous and Holy Dispositions and
Inclinations.

And such a vast Change wrought in our Natures by the Word and Spirit of God,
may very justly give those, who Enjoy it, the Title of the Children of God; for
if in the way of Natural Generation, the Communicating of a Principle of Life,
and of suitable Operations, does found the Relation and Title of a Father,
there is as good Reason why in Regeneration, the deriving such Holy and
Heavenly Dispositions and Powers from the Word, and the Spirit of God to the
Soul, as give to a Man a Divine Nature, whereby he is a Partaker of the Life
and Likeness of God himself, should Entitle God to be also a Father, and such,
who are so Regenerated and Renewed, his Children. And accordingly in the Holy
Scripture we find, that such a Derivation of Strength and Grace from the Word
and Spirit of God, does Entitle those, who are Renewed thereby, to be Children
of God. St. Paul not only attributing to the Ministry of the Word, a Power of
Begetting in Christ, 1 Cor. 4.15: But withal expressly assuring us, that As many
as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God, Romans 8.14. So that he is
undoubtedly a Child of God, whoever giving himself up to the guidance of God's
Word and Spirit, is thereby Sanctified wholly in his own Spirit, Soul and Body,
1 Thessalonians. 5.23. so as to subdue and mortify every Lust, and every naughty,
inordinate and worldly Desire.

And indeed every truly Regenerate Child of God does do so; such a One does by
the Power of the Word, and in the use and strength of that Grace, that God does
afford him, subdue and mortify every Lust, and every naughty, inordinate and
worldly Desire. So we are expressly told, 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is Born of God,
does not commit Sin, for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because
he is born of God; that is, a sanctified Child of God, does really hate Sin,
the very Temper and Bent of his Soul is against it; and as to living in any
gross and wilful Sin, he cannot without much Reluctance force himself to it;
his renewed Nature is so much contrary thereto. Such, I say, is every
Regenerate Child of God; and such indeed in a peculiar manner, Such indeed are
in a peculiar manner, and in the highest sense, the Children of God.
and in the highest and strictest sense of the Word, that it can be applied to
a mere Man, is a Child of God.

But then all, who are the Children of God, either in the sense of Scripture,
or of your Catechism, are not actually thus Regenerate. As to the sense of
Scripture, it is plain, as will presently appear, that every One, who bears the
Relation of a Child to God, is not Dutiful to his Father, But every Child of
God is not actually Regenerate, either in the sense of Scripture:
which is in Heaven, no more than all Children are to their Natural Parents. It
is a monstrous Thing indeed, that any Child should be Undutiful to so good and
gracious a Father, but it is too true, that too many are so: Hear, O Heaven,
and give ear O Earth, for I the Lord have spoken; I have Nourished and brought
up Children, and they have rebelled against me, Isa. 1.2. And as to the meaning
of a Child of God, here in your Catechism, it is also plain, Or of your
Catechism.
that it is not only such as are renewed in the Spirit of their minds, and do
imitate God, that are there to be understood; for every One, who is Catechized,
is required to answer, that In his Baptism he was made a Child of God, whereas
many Catechumens are not actually as yet Renewed, and really Converted, and by
their own Fault, many will never be; so that a Child of God, by spiritual
Regeneration, and a God-like Imitation, expresses rather the Duty of every One,
what he ought to be, than the Notion and Nature of a Privilege, which many may
enjoy, who in the mean time are not over Dutiful. So that a Child of God by
spiritual Regeneration, or a God-like Imitation, is a meaning of the Word, as
much too narrow to be the sense of it, here in your Catechism, as a Child by
Creation was too wide. To proceed then,

But, Fourthly, a Child of God, as meant in the Catechism, is every one who is
so by virtue of a Covenant Relation.
Fourthly, There are the Children of God, by Virtue of a Covenant Relation, and
also by Adoption, who are neither all the Sons of God by Creation, nor yet on
the other side, such only as are Renewed in the Spirit of their Minds, and do
imitate God: But they are all those, who have been Baptized into the Covenant
of Grace, and have been Incorporated into Christ's Church, and who do profess
the true Religion, and themselves the Servants of the True God. Thus before the
Law, Genesis 6.2. the whole House and Posterity of Seth are called the Sons of
God, as on the contrary, the Posterity of Cain are called the Daughters of Men.
This was the Notion of a Child of God before the Law.
They are there called the Sons of God, because that in the Family of Seth, the
Worship of the True God was continued and established, from which the Posterity
of Cain had Revolted. And so likewise under the Law, the whole Body of the
Children of Israel are called the Children of God, Deuteronomy. 14.1. and that for
this reason, Under the Law.
as it follows, ver. 2. because they were a Holy people unto the Lord, and the
Lord had chosen them to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the
Nations that were upon the Earth. They were a Holy people unto the Lord, not
all of 'em by an inward and real Change in their Natures, but by a Foederal
Holiness, and by reason of their separation from the rest of the Idolatrous and
wicked World, by a Holy Covenant. Alas! as to their inward Holiness, this very
Body of Men, who were called the Children of God, are said Deuteronomy. 32.5. to have
Corrupted themselves, and to have not the spot of Children, but to be a very
froward Generation, Children in whom is no Faith, ver. 20. But their outward
Relation to God continued notwithstanding, and that whole Body of People being
in Covenant with God, were styled thereupon his Children.

And under the Gospel likewise, Under the Gospel.
all that are Members of the Church, and in Covenant with God, are styled his
Children. Thus 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. you will find, that with Relation to all
those, concerning whom God declared, He would be their God, and that they
should be his People, which are the express Terms of the Covenant betwixt God
and all Christians, as you will see, Heb. 8.10. and with Relation to all those,
whom he commanded to Come out from among the Gentiles, and to be separate, and
not to touch the unclean thing, that is, not to Partake in their Idolatry,
which is the very Description of the Members of Christ's Church; I say, with
Relation to all these, he declared he would be a Father unto them, and that
they should be his Sons and Daughters.

And such are called Sons by Adoption, concerning whom it is said, Also a Child
of God, as meant in the Catechism, is every One, who is so by virtue of
Adoption.
Gal. 4.4, 5. When the fullness of time was come, that God sent forth his Son,
made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law,
that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. Now this word Adoption, is much
used in the Epistles of St. Paul, to declare that filial Relation toward God,
which the Members of Christ's Church are taken into; and because the right
understanding of the Nature and meaning of such Adoption, will very much
contribute to a right and through Explication of what is meant by a Child of
God, I will

First, Show you the Nature and Meaning of Adoption, both amongst the Jews and
Gentiles, amongst both which different People it was in use.

Secondly, I will then show you, how we Christians, especially such of us, who
are descended from the Gentiles, are accordingly Adopted to be the Children of
God.

And as to the First: Adoption, What?
Adoption (a Thing so well known both amongst Jews and Gentiles) was the taking
in of a Stranger upon the want, or loss of natural Issue, into the Relation of
a Child, and into the Rights and Privileges of a Son by Nature. The use of it
amongst the Israelites, and the Privileges it gave them.
As to the use of it amongst the Israelites, we find Genesis 30. that Rachel upon
the want of Issue by her Husband Jacob, did Adopt, and take as her own Sons,
those of her Maid Bilhah, ver. 5.8. And so likewise did Leah, when she saw that
she had left Bearing, she Adopted, and took also, as her own Children, the Sons
of Zilpah. And several other the like Instances may be found in Scripture, as
in Jacob's Adopting Ephraim and Manasseh, the Sons of Joseph, to be his Sons,
Genesis 48.5. In all which cases it appears, that upon their Adoption, or being
took into that Relation of Sons to Jacob, Rachel, and Leah, they were instated
into equal Privileges with the true and genuine Issue of those Persons, and
were accounted amongst the Twelve Patriarchs of the Israelites, equally with
the rest.

And as to the like Custom of Adoption, amongst the Gentiles, The use of it
amongst the Gentiles, and the Rights it conferred upon them.
you will see, Act. 7.21. how that Moses, when he was cast out, Pharaoh's
Daughter took him up, and nourished him as her own Son, that is, Adopted him as
such. And by that Right of Adoption he would have Inherited the Crown of
Pharaoh, but that By Faith, when he was come to Years, he refused to be called
the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater Riches
than the Treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.24.26. Thus the Egyptians Adopted: And how
the same Custom did also prevail amongst both Greeks and Romans, is a Thing
well known to those, who read their Authors, but need not here be further
mentioned, the Scripture use of this Custom being what it does most concern you
to know. To hasten therefore,

How we Christians, especially such who are descended from the Gentiles, are
according, as has been spoke, the Adopted Children of God.
Secondly, I am now to show you, How we Christians, especially such of us, who
are descended from the Gentiles, are accordingly Adopted to be the Children of
God. I say, how we Christians, for to the Jews did once pertain the Adoption,
Romans 9.4. and that whole Church and Nation were once His Children, Deuteronomy. 14.1.
To understand which, you are to consider, that the whole World, who were the
Sons of God by Creation, having Revolted from God, to serve strange Gods, then
did God choose Abraham and his Posterity, to be a Holy Nation, a peculiar
People unto himself, and to that purpose did Enter into Covenant with him and
them, and so Adopted them to be his Children, instead of the rest of Mankind,
who had wholly forsaken him. To the Israelites did once pertain the Adoption.
And hence it is said, Romans 9.4. that To the Israelites did once pertain the
Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the
service of God, and the Promises. Thus the Jews alone were once the Adopted
Children of God.

And now the Question returns, How we Christians, especially such of us, who
are descended from the Gentiles, are according, as has been spoke, But that
Covenant, by entering into which they were his Children, was only Temporary.
Adopted to be the Children of God. And you must know, that the Covenant given
to the Jews, was but a Temporary Law, to last only till they should be fit for,
and till the Son of God should descend from Heaven to Institute a better, and
more perfect One. Just as Children in their Minority are brought up under the
Discipline of the Rod, and Ferula, and of certain outward Observances, till
such time as they shall be fit for a more Manly Government; so Before that
Faith, To last only till the Publication of the Gospel.
or the Gospel came, the Jews were kept under the Law, which was their
Schoolmaster, to bring them to Christ: But after that Faith, or the Gospel was
come, they were to be no longer under a Schoolmaster, but were to be the
Children of God, by Faith in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.23, 24, 25, 26. that is,
after they were sometime Trained up, After which they, and all Christians, were
to be Children of God by faith in Christ.
and exercised to Obedience, by that severe Dispensation given by Moses, God
did design to prescribe 'em, by his own Son, a more Reasonable Service, namely,
That contained in the Gospel; Ordering that That should thenceforward be the
Rule of Obedience, to all such as would be his Adopted Children: And
accordingly When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of
a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that they
might receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4.4, 5. that is, when that time was
come, wherein God saw it fit to lay that lower Discipline, the Law of Moses
aside, then God sent his own Son in Humane Flesh, who submitted to, and
performed the whole Law himself, to redeem 'em out of that Slavery of Mosaical
Performances, and to receive them into the Participation of his Promises, and
to be his Children, without those Legal Observances, by Faith in Christ, and
Obedience to his Gospel. But the Jews being still of a Childish Disposition,
and fond of their Chains, as People, long accustomed to Slavery, commonly are,
would not forego their Legal Observances for the more Manly Religion, and more
Reasonable Service of the Gospel of the Blessed Jesus. And thus refusing
Christ, But the Jews adhering to their Law, and refusing Christ, and his
Gospel, in whom God had predestined all to be his Sons, the Apostles turned
unto Gentiles, Preaching Christ, and Salvation to them, and to as many as
received him, to them gave he Power to be the Sons of God.
in whom God did predestinate us all into the Adoption of Children by himself,
according to the good Pleasure of his Will, Ephesians. 1.5. the Apostles by the
appointment of God, did thereupon turn to the Gentiles Acts 13.46, 47.
Preaching Christ and Salvation by him, unto them, and to as many as Received
him, to them gave he power, or the Right and Privilege, as it is in the
Original, to become the Sons of God, Joh. 1.12. This is a remarkable Text to
our Purpose. In the Two Verses immediately before, viz. The 10, and 11, it is
said, He was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew
him not; he came unto his own, and his own received him not, but as many as
received him, to them gave he Power, or the Right and Privilege, to be the
Sons of God, even to them, who Believe in his Name. So, that by this time, I
hope it does fully appear to you, what is meant by a Child of God, especially
in that sense, wherein it is to be understood here in your Catechism. And you
see, as he is not every Child by Creation, which is a sense too wide; so
neither on the other side, is he only One, who is so by Regeneration, which is
a sense as much too narrow; but every One is such, who has Entered into
Covenant with God, and whom the Heavenly Father, has thereupon Adopted into his
Family, to partake of the Privileges, which belong to his Adopted Sons, which,

Secondly, What are the Privileges, which do belong to the Children of God, as
such.
Brings me next to Enquire what a Vast Privilege it is, accordingly, to be
made the Children of God. And truly upon Enquiry it will be found to be in
general the very same Privilege in Kind, but infinitely greater in Degree, (as
Heavenly Things are always greater than Earthly) which the most Tender and
Indulgent Father, that is withal Wise, as well as Good, can be supposed to
allow his own Children, beyond what he will do to Strangers and Aliens. In
general, such as an indulgent, but wise Father, may be supposed to allow his
Children beyond Aliens and Strangers.
For is it natural to such a One more easily to Pardon the Offenses of his
Child, than of his Slave, more favorably to overlook his Infirmities, more
readily to hear his Requests, and to instate him in a surer Title to his
Possessions, than he will do others, that have no such Relation to him? Why
such are the Privileges our Heavenly Father will allow to us, who are his
Children by Adoption, above others, who stand in no such Relation to him. He
will be Just to all, but these are properly Fatherly Kindnesses, and he will
Indulge 'em to none therefore but those, who are his Children. But more
particularly, Particularly,


First, It is worthy our Consideration, I. Pardon of all Sins, upon hearty
Repentance.
that we shall have this inestimable Privilege, by being his Children, above
the rest of Mankind, namely, We shall have all our Sins Pardoned, upon our
hearty Repentance of 'em, upon Condition we forsake 'em, and return to God. The
unbelieving Jews and Gentiles, and all Persons remaining in a State of Nature,
who have not Embraced the Gospel, who have not been Baptized, nor have Entered
into Covenant with God, have no Assurance from him, that their Sins should be
ever Pardoned, though they should forsake 'em, because God never gave any Promise
of Pardon to any other but his Children, who are in Covenant with him.

And for want of their having any express Engagements and Promises from God, of
Mercies from him, does the Apostle therefore speak of the State of the
Gentiles, as exceedingly Uncomfortable, Ephesians. 2.11, 12. in these very remarkable
Words: Remember that ye being in times past Gentiles in the flesh, and at that
time ye were without Christ, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
Strangers from the Covenants and Promises, having no hopes of Pardon, and
without God in the world.

But we Christians, who have Entered into Covenant with God, and so are his
Children, have the utmost Assurance possible, grounded upon the most gracious
and express Promises, that upon laying down our Rebellious Arms, upon our
Renouncing of his, and our own most mortal Enemies, our Sins, and Coming over
to him, we shall have all our Sins Pardoned. Or rather as the Apostle himself
does express it in the following, viz. The 13, 14 ver. But now in Christ Jesus,
ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the Blood of Christ, for he is
our Peace.

And indeed, that this Pardon and Peace with the Father, does more peculiarly
belong to us under the Character of his Children, who had formerly strayed afar
off from him, by our Sins, but are now returned Home to him, by Repentance, we
have Exemplified to us in that famous Parable of the Prodigal Son, Luke 15.
That Person, we there read, after a most Lewd and Riotous Life, after he had
spent and squandered away all his Substance, that his Father gave him, yet upon
his deep Humiliation, for his Vile and Undutiful Behavior toward his Father,
and his hearty Desires to return Home, and to his Duty and Obedience to him,
was thereupon admitted to his former Interest in his Father's Affections; Yea,
and received with more than usual Joy. Why, the whole Design of that Parable is
to show us, how our Heavenly Father will graciously deal with us, his Undutiful
and Rebellious Children; and that after, even a very ill Life, upon our laying
down of our Sins, the forsaking the service of our Lusts, and Return to him, he
will graciously Pardon and Forgive us, his Children.

II. By being his Children, he will not be so severe, as to mark what is done
amiss, as to sins of Infirmity.
And, Secondly, being his Children, he will not be severe to mark what is done
amiss, though after our Return to him, through the Infirmity of our Flesh, we do
not altogether live up to the Rule, by an Unsinning Obedience, provided we
watch carefully against the common Infirmities of Humane Nature, and do not
wilfully Indulge our selves in any of 'em. The Rigor of the First Covenant
would admit of no less than a Perfect, Exact, Vnsinning Obedience, the never
Offending in any one Point. In the day thou do eat thereof thou shall surely
dye, Genesis 2.17. But here under the Second, our Father deals with us with the
Indulgence of a tender Parent, who does not throw off his Child, and withdraw
his Kindness upon the smallest Offenses, and such as through Ignorance,
Surprise, or the like, cannot in this our fallen and corrupt State be avoided:
But as a Father pitieth his own Children, even so the Lord pitieth them that
fear him, that is, Who do not willingly displease him, Psalm. 103.13.

In a word, As the Pardon of Sins, whether great, or small, is a Mercy held out
to us only in the Covenant of Grace, so it is granted us under this very
Notion, of being Children of God, as appears from Mal. 3.17. where the Prophet
foretells the Happy State of Christians, upon this very Score, in these words,
And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day, when I make up my
Jewels, and I will spare them, as a man spares his own Son, that serves him.
And more particularly yet, Ephesians. 1.3.5.7. Forgiveness of Sins is there
specified, as the distinct Privilege of Adopted Sons, in these words; God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, having predestined us unto the Adoption of
Children by Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his
Will; in him we have Redemption through his Blood, the Forgiveness of Sins,
according to the Riches of his Grace.

And, Thirdly, which is an Appendage to this same Privilege; III. To the
Children of God is granted an easier Access by Prayer, to the Throne of Grace,
for Pardon of Sins, and other Mercies.
A Child of God, upon the Score of such his Relation, is permitted to have an
easy Access to the Throne of Grace; and is admitted to Address himself in
Prayer to God, as for whatever other Mercies he stands in need of, so for
Pardon of Sins, when he has Transgrest, with a full Assurance of a gracious
Answer. The Gentiles, who served no Gods, but what their own Imaginations
created, did it after a Slavish manner; for how could they be sure the Offended
Deity was to be Entreated, when he had Revealed no such thing unto 'em? And so
did the Jews also, who served the True God, it was in a Servile manner too, for
when they had committed an Offense against the Law, they were to provide their
Sacrifice, and bring it to the Priest, and he was to Offer it for 'em, whilst
they stood at a distance. But now the Veil of the Sanctuary being broke, upon
the Death of our High Priest, We have therefore the Liberty to enter into the
Holiest, by the Blood of Jesus, by a New and Living way, which he has
Consecrated for us, through the Veil, that is to say, his Flesh: And having him
our High Priest over the House of God, we may hence-forward draw near with a
true Heart, in full Assurance of Faith, having our Hearts sprinkled from an
evil Conscience, Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22. that is, Every Christian, provided he
comes not with the guilt of any unrepented Sin upon his Conscience, may himself
now Offer up his own Prayers to God through Christ, without the Mediation of
any other Priest, or Sacrifice, and that with a full Assurance of being
graciously heard and answered.

And that this Faith and full Assurance, with which we may Approach unto God,
to Pray to him for the Forgiveness of Sins, is our Privilege only, as we are
the Sons of God by Adoption, is plain from St. Paul, Romans 8.15. Ye have not
received the Spirit of Bondage again unto fear, as under the Law, but ye have
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry unto God, Abba Father. And
again, Gal. 4.6. Because ye are thus made his Sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba Father.

And now Lastly, If there be any other very considerable Privilege, Lastly, A
Child of God is more surely instated in the Inheritance of Heaven, than others.
accruing to a Child of God, from such his Relation, it is, That God will more
surely Instate him in the Inheritance of Heaven, than he will do others, that
have no such Relation to him: And, indeed, if Children of God, then Heirs, we
are told, Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. But the
Vastness of this will be best considered by us, when we come to the Explication
of that Third, and the last of those Privileges made over to us, on God's
Part, in the Covenant of Grace; viz. What it is to be an Inheritor of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

The infinite reason we have to praise God for these Advantages.
And now, upon the Review of what has been said, in the Exposition of this
present Article, In what Admiration of God's Goodness may we all of us cry out
with St. John, 1 Epist. 3.1. Behold what manner of Love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God? And what infinite
Reason have we, with St. Paul, thankfully to Praise him for it, Ephesians. 1.3.5.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has Blessed us
Christians, with all Spiritual Blessings in, and concerning Heavenly Places,
and Concerns of the World to come, through Christ; having Predestined us to
the Adoption, and Privileges of Children, by Jesus Christ unto himself,
according to the good Pleasure of his Will.

He Adopted us to be his Children according to the good Pleasure of his Will.
This Privilege, that we should be his Children, is Attended with very rich
Advantages, all which have accru'd to us, not from any Merit and Desert of
ours, being supposed Enemies unto him; but only from his free Goodness toward
us, which was pleased so to determine it. And as it is both Great and Free, we
ought certainly, with all possible Acknowledgments, to Magnify and Extol, both
his infinite Condescension and Goodness, and our own unspeakable Privilege and
Dignity therein. Indeed, for God to be a Father by Creation and Providence (as
One observes) though it be a Mercy, yet it is no Privilege; for in that Sense he
is Parens rerum, the common Parent of all things: But, that God should be thy
Father by Adoption, that he should make thee his Son, through his only Begotten
Son, that he should rake up Dirt and Filth, as thou art, and lay it in his
Bosom; that he should take Aliens and Strangers near unto himself, and Adopt
Enemies and Rebels into his Family: Register their Names in the Book of Life,
make them Heirs of Glory, Coheirs with Jesus Christ, his Eternal Son, as the
Apostle does admiringly re-count it, Romans 8.17. This is Mercy and Miracle both.
It is, indeed, an invaluable Grace and Favor, that we should be Adopted his
Children, were it only for this, that he will be ready to Pardon our Sins and
Infirmities, and will Admit us favorably to Address our Selves, and Prayers to
him. But this Privilege of being his Children will farther appear, to be
beyond all Expression, Great, since, if Children, as the Apostle infers, Romans
8.17. then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with Christ; If a Child of God,
then, which Crowns all the rest of his Covenanted Mercies, Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven, which yet, it is said we shall be; But what, and how Great
that Third, and Last Privilege of the Covenant is, I am in the Explication of
the next Article to declare unto you.

THE Eighth Lecture. And an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven.
HAving hitherto spoke to the Two First Privileges, made over to us in the
Covenant of Grace, that thereby we are First made Members of Christ, and
Secondly, Children of God. Having both Explained to you the Meaning and
Importance of those Two Articles, and laid out to you the Vastness of those
Privileges and Advantages, contained therein; I come now in like manner, to
Explain to you the Third, which is, that we are made thereby Inheritours of the
Kingdom of Heaven. And indeed, this Last does necessarily follow from the
other: For as St. Paul speaks, Romans 8.17. If Children, then Heirs, Heirs of
God, and Joint-Heirs with Christ.

This is the Perfection of all God's Promises and Favors, vouchsafed in the
Second Covenant. It comes last, and Crowns all the rest. And it will be the
certain Reward of all those, that persevere to the end of their Lives in
well-doing, and in sincere Obedience (notwithstanding all Temptations to the
contrary) to God's most Righteous Commands. Be faithful unto Death, says our
Savior, and I will give thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. And that you may
thoroughly understand the vast greatness of this most extraordinary Privilege,
made over to you by Covenant, so as to be excited thereby to render your selves
worthy to be Partakers thereof; according to my usual Method I will Explain to
you,

First, What is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven.

Secondly, What it Imports to be an Inheritour of it.

And then Lastly, I will lay out before you, the Vastness of our Privilege, in
being made Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven.

And First, I am to Explain unto you, By the Kingdom of Heaven, is meant in
Scripture, either First, the Kingdom of Grace in this Life, or Secondly, the
Kingdom of Glory, in the Life to come.
what is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven. The Kingdom of Heaven is an Expression
we do meet with above Thirty times in the New Testament; and I think we may
safely say, That we are constantly to understand by it, either First, The
Kingdom of Grace in this Life, or Secondly, The Kingdom of Glory in the Life to
come.

By the Kingdom of Grace in this Life, I mean, that Happy and Blessed State of
us Christians, now under the Gospel, wherein we Enjoy the Happiness of Living
under a Government, wholly made up of manifold Graces and Favors; having a
most Gracious God, governing us by most Gracious and Reasonable Laws, The
Kingdom of Grace, the Gospel State.
affording us a plentiful Measure of Divine Grace and Assistance to perform
these Laws, and proposing to us most Encouraging Rewards in Heaven, to stir us
up to a diligent Observance of 'em.

It is this happy State of Things, under the Title of the Kingdom of Heaven,
whose near Approach John the Baptist foretold in the Wilderness, saying,
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, that is, the Kingdom of the
Messiah, or the State of the Gospel, whose Great, Fundamental, and Gracious
Law, is this, that all Sinners must Repent 'em of all their former Sins, and
upon their Repentance they shall have most Eminent Mercies, bestowed upon 'em.
And it was this State also, concerning the undue Entertainment of which by the
Scribes and Pharisees, our Savior complained, Matthew. 11.12. saying, that From
the days of John the Baptist, even till then, the Kingdom of Heaven suffered
Violence, so that the Violent took it by force; that is, the Publicans, and
Sinners, and Gentiles, who were looked upon by the Jews, as those, who had no
Right to the Messiah, and so as violent Persons, as Invaders and Intruders, did
crowd into the Church at the Preaching of the Gospel, whilst the Scribes and
Pharisees ungratefully and proudly stood off. So again, Matthew. 13.24. The
Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a man, which sowed good Seed in his Field;
that is, the State of the Gospel, or the Success of our Savior's Preaching in
the World, is so resembled. And so likewise in several other Parables of the
like Nature, by the Kingdom of Heaven is to be understood, the State of the
Gospel here on Earth; which sure does show the exceeding great Dignity, Worth
and Excellency of the Gospel State, far beyond any other Dispensation, either
Patriarchal, or Mosaical, which the World had ever received from Heaven before.

The reason why the Gospel State should be dignified with the Title of the
Kingdom of Heaven.
And indeed upon a near View of the Nature and Design of the Gospel
Dispensation, we shall see sufficient reason, why that State, above any other,
should be so Honorably Entitled the Kingdom of Heaven. And the reason is not
only because the same God governs us, and that by the same Laws of Eternal,
Unalterable Righteousness and Goodness, as in Heaven, but also because this
Blessed Government of God over us by the Laws of the Gospel, does directly tend
to render us so exactly like the Blessed Saints, those Inhabitants of Heaven;
viz. Because it so directly tends to render Men so exactly like the Blessed
Saints, the Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Heaven.
for where the Gospel of Christ does so far prevail upon Men, as through the
Grace of God to make them diligent and careful to Obey him, according as they
have Covenanted with him, it does bring in such an excellent State of Things,
as makes a kind of Heaven here upon Earth; for where the Gospel does so far
prevail, as to be sincerely Obeyed, it causes that The Wolf shall dwell with
the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calf, and the
young Lion and Fatling together, and a young Child shall lead them, and it
causes that they shall not hurt, nor destroy in all the holy Mountain, for the
Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea,
as was long time since Prophesied, Isa. 11.6, 7, 8, 9. concerning the State of
the Gospel; that is, it files off the roughness, and sweetens the cruel and
savage Humors of Men, so that instead of tearing and tormenting one another
like Beasts and Devils, it makes Men Gentle, and Kind, and good Natured, like
Angels, like Gods to one another. A State certainly which may very well deserve
the glorious Title of the Kingdom of Heaven, being so contrary to the Kingdom
of Darkness, and the State of Hell, where there is nothing but Malice, Rancour
and Rage do reign among those unhappy Beings, that do inhabit that Place. And
thus you see that in Scripture, by the Kingdom of Heaven is sometimes meant the
State of the Gospel, the same God governing us therein, and by the same
everlasting Laws of Goodness, as in Heaven, and so as to render us of like
Tempers and Dispositions with the Saints in Heaven. A State so nearly
resembling that of Heaven, that the Condition of the meanest Christian now
under the Gospel, is, for that reason, preferred before that of the greatest of
Prophets under the Law; Verily I say unto you, among them, who are born of
Women, there has not risen a greater than John the Baptist, notwithstanding he
that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the Gospel State, is greater
than he, Matthew. 11.11.

But though this be very frequently the meaning of the Kingdom of Heaven in the
New Testament; and for that reason, This is not the meaning of the Kingdom of
Heaven, here in the Catechism
I have took such particular Notice of it, that so you may know how to
understand that Metaphorical Expression in those many Scriptures, where you
will meet with it in that sense; yet it is not the proper and immediate Meaning
of the Word in Scripture, nor is it so to be understood here in your Catechism.

But Secondly, the Kingdom of Heaven does, if not most frequently, II. The
Kingdom of Heaven signifies the Kingdom of Glory.
at least most properly signify in the Scripture, the Kingdom of Glory; and
accordingly, here in your Catechism, it is solely to be understood of the
glorious and happy State of Angels and Saints with God in Heaven. For Instance,
In this sense it is to be understood, Mat. 5.3. where the Kingdom of Heaven is
promised as the Reward of the Poor in Spirit. And so ver. 20. where it is said,
that Except our Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, we shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; that is, into
the State of Glory. And in this sense only it can be understood, Mat. 7.21.
where our Savior declares, that Not every one that says unto him, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of the
Father, which is in Heaven; that is, not those, who barely profess
Christianity, but those, who sincerely Practice according to such a Belief and
Profession, shall be received into Glory. The Profession alone will gain
Admittance into the Visible Church here on Earth, but nothing less than a
Living up to it, will give an Entrance into the Kingdom and State of Glory,
with God and his Holy Angels, and Saints in the highest Heavens.

And a most Noble and Glorious State we may be sure this is, This, a most noble
and glorious State, as being dignified with so honorable and glorious a Title,
as the Kingdom of Heaven.
or else it would not be Dignified with so Honorable and Glorious a Title, as
the Kingdom of Heaven, a Kingdom being the Top and Height of all Earthly
Glories, as Heaven is a Place, which comprehends all future Excellencies. To
denote therefore that most exalted State of Bliss in Heaven, it is, that this
State is called the Kingdom of Heaven. And truly there is nothing in this
World, wherein we can imagine the greatest Glory and Happiness, as a Kingdom, a
Crown, a Throne, a Marriage, a Feast, but are set forth as Emblems to represent
to us the Joys and Glories of our future State. And yet, as if a Kingdom, a
Crown, a Throne were infinitely too short, to set forth the Joys and Glories of
Heaven, and those infinite Blessings, Hence all those things in this world,
wherein we conceive the highest Glory and Happiness, are used, as Emblems, to
set off our future Glory.
that do await the Sons of God, Saint John tells us, It does not yet appear
what we shall be, 1 John 3.2. Beloved, now we are the Sons of God, and it does
not yet appear what we shall be, only this we know, says he, that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Nay, and as if the
highest Contentments and Satisfactions of this Life were but mere Nothings, as
to any thing in 'em, whereby they may represent the Joys above, St. Paul tells
us, 1 Cor. 2.9. That Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has it entered into
the heart of man to conceive the things, which God has prepared for those that
love him; Nay, and though he was caught up to the Third Heaven, into Paradise,
and so did both see and hear the Glories and Triumphant Joys of that Place, All
which things come short of expressing it.
yet the Things, which he saw, and heard were unspeakable, he tells us, which
it is not possible for man to utter, for so it may be rendered, 2 Cor. 12.4. So
that in short, the Kingdom of Heaven does import a State of the most excessive
Glory and Happiness, that our Natures can be capable of receiving; A State so
unspeakably Honorable and Delightful, that though the choicest Things of this
World, those Things, that yield the vastest Contentments, are made use of in
Scripture to represent them to us, yet they are but the mere shadows of the
Glories and Joys in the Kingdom of Heaven; and after all, there is abundantly
more than can be Expressed, or Imagined by us. And therefore this must suffice
here, for the Explication of what is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven, the
particular Character of whose Joys, being what more properly belongs to that
Article of your Creed, The Life Everlasting, shall there be given you. And now,

An Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven, What?
Secondly, Let us next see, what it is to be an Inheritour of it. An Inheritour,
or Heir, both in Scripture, and in common Language, does import something of
Privilege more than ordinary: Thus Genesis 21.10. we find, that Sarah would not
endure, that the Son of the Bondwoman should enjoy the Privilege to be Heir
with her Son. And as to common Account every Body knows, that an Heir has a
considerable Privilege above the rest of the Children, and what it is, I shall
Define as follows;

An Heir is one, who has a legal Right and Title to a Possession made over to
him.
An Heir amongst Men is one, that receives from Parents, or Predecessors, either
by Nearness of Blood, or by Adoption, by Entail, or by Will; or whatever other
Method of Conveyance, a sure Right and Title to a Possession. And here perhaps
it might not be difficult to show, how that an Inheritour of the Kingdom of
Heaven is made such by something, that bears a near Resemblance, at leastwise,
to all these Ways and Methods, whereby Men become Heirs to Temporal
Possessions. But not to insist upon any nice Comparison in these Matters, it is
sufficient to Ensure unto us the Benefits of Heirship, even to the Kingdom of
Heaven, that those, who are in Covenant with God, are frequently in Scripture
styled Heirs; and particularly Heb. 1.14. Heirs of Salvation, and that they are
in like manner, and to all Intents and Purposes as much Heirs, Such who have
Entered into the Covenant of Grace, are in like manner
as Children are Heirs, for thus the Apostle argues, If Children, then Heirs,
Heirs of God, and Joint-heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. And if a Son, then an
Heir through Christ, Gal. 4.7. So that we may safely say, That as an Heir is
One, whose Estate is not precariously depending upon the mere Will and Pleasure
of another, but so settled and secured to him, Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven,
as Children are Heirs.
as to give him a Legal Claim and Title thereto, so long as he does not forfeit
his Title, by not performing the Condition on which his Title depends; so an
Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven is One, who does not depend merely upon the
Vncovenanted Goodness of God, for his hopes of Heaven and Happiness; but he is
One, to whom God through Christ, has vouchsafed to grant a Legal Claim and
Title thereto, by giving his solemn Promise, and engaging his Truth for the
Performance, that he will infallibly bestow upon him the most unspeakable Joys
of Heaven, provided he swerves not from his Allegiance and Obedience to him,
but Renouncing all God's Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, will
Believe in him, and Obey him truly and faithfully all the days of his Life.

I do say, (and pray mark it) That God, through Christ, It is through Christ
alone, not owing to the Merit of our Obedience, that we are Entitled to the
Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven.
has vouchsafed to grant us a Legal Claim and Title to this Inheritance; for so
it is said, that we are Heirs, through Christ, Gal. 4.7. And far be it from any
to imagine, that there is any thing of Merit, or Worth in our imperfect
Obedience, whereby of it self it should deserve such a precious Inheritance. It
would be an Arrogance and Presumption in the highest Saint, that ever lived,
and such as would render him more liable to be Punished for his Pride, than
rewarded for his Virtue, should he pretend to Claim Heaven, merely upon the
Score of his own Sanctity; or should he pretend a Claim and Title to the
Inheritance of Heaven at all, otherwise than through Christ, and because God
has promised it. However, since God has been pleased to Ensure it to us by
Covenant, we may safely call it a Right, which God, who is Faithful in all his
Promises, and Just in all his Dealings, will never debar us of; except by our
Disloyalty and Disobedience to him, we forfeit all Right and Title to it. Which
brings me to my

Third Proposal, which was to lay before you the Vastness of our Privilege, in
being made Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven. The Vastness of a Christian's
Privilege, in being made an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven.
And if we do but consider it, it will soon appear to be, both in it self very
great, and in Comparison of what the rest of the World enjoys, a very singular
Privilege, this, of being made Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven.

I say, In it self very Great. Indeed, what can be greater, than to have the
invaluable Possessions of Heaven, I. It is in it self a very Great Privilege,
to have the invaluable Possessions of Heaven, so settled and ensur'd, as to have
a legal Claim and Title thereto made over to One.
so settled and ensur'd to us, as to have a Legal Claim and Title thereto, made
over to us in Christ. We see, as to those Earthly Possessions, how an Heir does
value his Condition above the rest of the Children, not only on the account of
a greater share, commonly in the Estate, than the rest; but because of the
greater security he has of Enjoying those Earthly Possessions; An Inheritance
being an Estate, for which he does not so precariously depend, as has been
showed, upon the mere arbitrary and uncertain Will and Pleasure of another, but
a Right, which without Breach of Justice, cannot be detained from him. It is
the Privilege of an Heir, that he has all the Security, that the Engagements
of an Honest Person, and the Solemnities of a Covenant can give him, to make
him a Title; but when the Kingdom of Heaven is the Possession, and when he, who
cannot deceive, has solemnly settled this Inheritance upon us; this is a
Privilege so much beyond what Words can express, that it is far easier to be
Admired, than Uttered.

II. If compared with what others enjoy, it is a singular Privilege.
And as it is in it self exceeding Great, so it is, if compared with what Others
enjoy, a very singular Privilege, This, of being made Inheritours of the
Kingdom of Heaven. To be made Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven, I say, is a
very singular Privilege, which those, who are without Christ, and who are
Strangers to the Covenants and Promise, do not enjoy. True it is, a few of the
more Contemplative and Thinking amongst the Gentile Philosophers, did raise to
themselves some faint Hopes, The best amongst the Moral Heathens could have but
faint Hopes, built upon uncertain Conjectures, of a future Happiness.
and doubtful Expectations of a future Happiness after this Life. They
considered the noble Nature of the Soul of Man to be such, that nothing in this
Life is of that Excellency, as to give it a full Satisfaction; and as to the
Body, they looked upon it more, as the Prison of the Soul, than any Advantage
to it, and therefore they did hope to be delivered one Day from its
Incumberance; that the Soul might be at liberty to act freely, without such a
Clog of Flesh trashing it in all its noble Flights and Operations: But then all
this was in them but Conjecture, what possibly might be, not what certainly
would be their Happiness. And being but a faint Hope, And their Hopes being
faint, they could not in the Strength thereof overcome great Temptations. But
the Christian's Hopes are sure and steadfast, being sounded upon the express
Promises and Covenant of the God of Truth.
and uncertain Expectation, built upon doubtful Reasonings of their own, and
more their Wishes and Desires, than what they could certainly promise
themselves; they were not able to support their drooping Spirits, under any
great Difficulties, and to overcome in the Strength of such an Expectation, the
greater Temptations and Trials of their Virtue: But did generally shrink from
their Virtuous Professions, when to act honestly, was become dangerous. But the
Christian's Expectation of an Inheritance in Heaven, being founded upon the
Express Promises of the God of Truth; and those Promises given in Covenant, and
so Confirmed by an Oath, as it were, For God, willing more abundantly to show
to the Heirs of Promise, the Immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an
Oath, that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie,
we might have a strong Consolation: These things being so, the Christian has a
hope, which, as an Anchor of the Soul, is both sure and steadfast, Heb. 6.17,
18, 19. And his Hope being thus built, not upon uncertain Conjectures, but upon
the express Promises of God, who cannot lie; And being such, there is no
Temptation so alluring, nor Suffering so great, which he may not overcome.
there is no Temptation so alluring, nor Suffering so great, that such a Hope
will not be able overcome; But he, that has this Hope, purifieth himself, even
as God is pure, 1 John 3.3. And may with St. Paul be persuaded, That neither
Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor Height; nor Depth, nor any other Creature
shall be able to separate him from the Love of God, which is in Christ, Romans
8.38, 39. Thus certain are the Christian's Hopes of Heaven, it being instated
upon him, as an Inheritance. And having his Hopes so well grounded, there is no
difficulty in the way of Duty so great, which he may not overcome by the
Strength thereof: Whereas the best of the Moral Heathens had but uncertain
Conjectures to ground their Expectations of future Happiness upon; and their
Hopes thereof being so Weak, they presently yielded to the Assault of every
great Temptation.

But besides, whatever Certainty an honest Pagan, And whatever Certainty an
honest Pagan might have, that God would reward his Virtue, yet depending only
on the Vncovenanted Goodness of God, he could promise himself no greater a
measure of Happiness, than what his good Deeds did of themselves deserve, which
must fall vastly short of what is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven.
that lived up to the Light of Nature, and the Dictates of Right Reason (if any
of 'em can be supposed to have done so) might have, that the good God would
reward his Virtue: Yet having only the Equity and Vncovenanted goodness of God
to depend upon, he could promise himself no greater a Measure of Happiness,
than what his good Deeds did of themselves deserve; which considering the
Imperfection of the best Actions of the best of Men, whoever lived, how short
must that fall of what is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven. But a Christian, to
whom God has Covenanted, to make sure a Crown of Glory, may, without
Presumption, rely upon him, to make good the same.
But the Christian, whom God has Covenanted withal, and to whom he has
condescended to oblige himself to make sure a Crown of Glory, that fades not
away, 1 Pet. 5.4. may without Presumption rely upon God's both Truth and
Goodness, to make good to him the same, notwithstanding when he does all that
he can, considered in himself, he is but an Unprofitable Servant, as the best
are. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the
Faith, henceforth, says the Apostle, (and so may every good Christian say the
same) there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which God, the
righteous Judge, shall give me at that Day; and not to me only, but to all
them, who love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Such is the Christian's
Privilege, above a Pagan's, in being made an Inheritour of the Kingdom of
Heaven, in that being his Inheritance, he may assure himself of it, though his
imperfect Virtues considered in themselves, could never Entitle him to such an
eternal and exceeding weight of Glory.

In short, It is Jesus Christ alone, who has brought Life and Immortality to
light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. As Life and Immortality is brought to
light through the Gospel; so by embracing it, and by coming into Covenant
alone, Salvation can be expected.
And as he only has brought it to light, that is, made a clear Revelation of
that Life and immortal Happiness, laid up for Righteous Men in Heaven, which
was not before so plainly Revealed; so it is only through him, and by
Believing, and Embracing, and Coming into his Covenant, the Gospel, that
Salvation must now be hoped for by any; for thus we are assured, Acts 4.12.
that There is no other Name under Heaven given among Men, but Jesus only,
whereby we must be saved; so that this Invaluable Privilege, this exceeding
great Advantage, of being made Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven, is made
over, and certainly Ensur'd to such only, who are in the Covenant of Grace; and
is the Third and Last of those excellent Privileges and Advantages contained
and held forth therein. And to a sincere Christian, who is faithful in the
Covenant, the Heavenly Inheritance is certain.
But then the Kingdom of Heaven is the certain Inheritance of the sincere
Christian, who in the Exercise of Mercy, Meekness, Piety, and all other
Christian Virtues, which he has Covenanted with God to perform, does faithfully
discharge his Part of the Covenant; as is most solemnly declared, Matthew. 25.31,
32, 33, 34.46. with which I shall conclude this Point. Says our Blessed Savior
there, When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all the Holy Angels
with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his Glory. And before him shall
be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a
Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats, and he shall set the Sheep on his
right hand, but the Goats on the left. Then shall the King say unto them on his
right hand, to his Charitable, and Pious, and Faithful Servants, Come ye
Blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the World. And as the Wicked shall go into everlasting Punishment, so the
Righteous into Life Eternal.

And now to sum up those infinitely Gracious and Invaluable Privileges, made
over to us, on Uod's Part, in the Covenant of Grace; A sum of those invaluable
Privileges, made over to us, on God's Part, in the Covenant of Grace.
hereby we are made, First, Members of Christ, that is, are made Members of
that Body, of which Christ is the Head, viz. The Church; and so have, together
with a most excellent Body of Religion and Laws, all necessary Grace and
Assistance, Conveyed and Communicated to us Members, from Him, the Head, to
Enliven, Support and Enable us to go through all our Task of Religious Duties,
and Christian Performances, required at our Hands.

The Second Privilege is, That we are also hereby made Children of God, that
is, having Embraced Christianity, and being Incorporated into the Church of
Christ, we are thereby Adopted and Chosen out of the rest of the World by God,
to enjoy this grand Privilege of Sons, to have Pardon granted us, when with
the Prodigal Son, we return Home to Him, our Offended, but Gracious Father, by
Repentance: And we shall find him not over-severe, in respect of our lesser
Failings, and the unavoidable Infirmities of our Nature, but shall always have
him ready to hear our Prayers for Mercy, both in respect of our greater and
lesser Transgressions.

And Lastly, The Third Privilege, you have been now told, is this, that to
complete All, We are made Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, have
secured to us a Right and Title to the unspeakable Joys and Glories of Heaven.
A Privilege which, considered in it self, is exceeding Great, and as all the
rest, if compared with what Others enjoy, is a very singular One.

These now are the inestimable Privileges, made over to us in the Covenant of
Grace. Privileges, which as they are of infinite Advantage to us, so we shall
never fail of obtaining 'em, if we will but take care to perform the Conditions
required on our Parts; and so, First, Renounce the Devil, and all his Works,
the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh. Secondly, Believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And, Thirdly,
Obey God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of our
Lives. Which Conditions, and what they Import, I come next to declare unto you.

THE Ninth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his works,
the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked world, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh.
I Have already Expounded those infinitely Gracious and Invaluable Privileges,
made over to us, on God's Part, in the Covenant of Grace; having showed you,
what it is to be a Member of Christ, what it is to be a Child of God, and
lastly, what to be an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven; as also, what are
the vast Benefits contained in those several Articles; I am now come to Explain
to you likewise, the Conditions of the Covenant; those Conditions, without the
Performance of which, those Mercies will not be Conferred on us.

For this we must seriously consider, that the Benefits now mentioned to be
made over to us, as they are in themselves exceeding great, so as almost to
equal us with the Blessed Angels; and as they were purchased for us at no less
a Rate, than the precious Blood of the Son of God; so we must not expect, that
Benefits so infinitely great, and dearly purchased, should be Conferred upon us,
without any thing to be done on our Parts, to express our Value of them; much
less if we continue in Rebellion against God, and instead of him, serve under
his Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; or will be Infidels and
Unbelievers, and will remain Disobedient to all his most Just and Righteous
Commands. No, it is not to be imagined, that God will be so Easy, so fond of
Sinners, as would reflect upon the Wisdom and Discretion of a mere Man. But as
he does propose to us Invaluable Blessings, so he does require from us a
Reasonable Service, and the Performance of most Equitable Conditions; amongst
which, this is the First, that we should Renounce etc.

And as I have already Explained to you the Importance of those vast Favors on
God's Part; so I will proceed now to do the same, as to those Conditions on
ours, showing you

First, What it is to Renounce the Devil, and all his Works, Whereof the First
is, to Renounce the Devil, the World, and the Flesh.
the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh.

Here is as much Matter as can possibly be crowded into so few Words. A great
Part of the Christian Life is discharged in what these Words do mean: For our
Christian Race is represented in Scripture to be, for the most part, a Warfare
against several very powerful Enemies, both without and within us. And these
Words do Instruct you, both what those Enemies are, and how we must War against
them. Wherefore, if in the Explication of Words so very full of Meaning, and of
such vast Concernment to be understood by you, I shall be forced to run out
into some considerable Length, you must have Patience, and you must give good
heed to what I shall Discourse upon them, answerable to the Benefit, may accrue
to you from the through understanding thereof. That which I shall do toward
the Explication of them, shall be this;

First, I will show you who the Devil is, and what are his Works, what is meant
by Renouncing the Devil, and all his Works, and how absolutely necessary it is
we should do so.

Secondly, I will also show you what is meant by the Pomps and Vanity of this
wicked World, and how far you must Renounce the wicked World, with its Pomps
and Vanity.

Lastly, I will in like manner, open unto you, what is to be understood by the
sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and how far we must Renounce them.

And, First, I am to show you who the Devil is, what are his Works, what is
meant by Renouncing the Devil, and all his Works, and how absolutely necessary
it is we should do so.

The Devil, his Names, and their importance.
Whereof First, Let us enquire who the Devil is. And in Scripture he is called
by different Names, whereof some do import his Rank and Place, as Baalzebub,
signifying him to be a Prince of Devils; and some his Wickedness and Enmity, as
(...), signifying a Calumniator, or a false Accuser; Satan, an Adversary; from
his Fury and Murderous Temper, he is called a Roaring Lion; and from his Craft
and Lying Policies, an Old and subtle Serpent; and from both perhaps he is
called the Dragon. There are many Legions of 'em in Number, but One supreme in
Power; and He it is, who is Chief of all the Enemies, both of God and Man, that
presents himself at the Head of all the rest, He was once one of the highest
Angels, and is now that Arch-Rebel against God.
being that Arch-Rebel and Traitor against God. He was once, as may be gathered
from his Superiority to Michael the Archangel, who upon that account Durst not
bring a railing Accusation against him, Jude 8.9. The highest Angel, the most
glorious Spirit, and the First be-like of all the Angelical Orders: But not
content with that vast Power and Glory, that God had bestowed on him, but
envying that God, that gave it, and affecting, He, with many Legions of
inferior Angels, whom he drew into the same Conspiracy, is Banished Heaven.
perhaps, no less than a Sovereignty himself; He, with many Legions of the
lower Order of Angels, whom he drew into the same horrid and ungrateful
Conspiracy, Revolted from God, and set himself to Oppose his Government. But no
sooner did this wicked Apostate frame so horrid a Design, but the All-knowing
and infinitely Powerful God of Heaven and Earth, perceiving his Intentions,
immediately hurled him down, and all his wicked Crew of ungrateful
Conspirators, from the Battlements of Heaven, into those dark Mansions of
Sorrow, which we call Hell, there to be Reserved in everlasting Chains under
darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day, Jude 6. as the due Punishment of
his so black and ungrateful a Treason against his Sovereign and Bountiful
Creator. But so far was this hardened Rebel against God, from Repenting of his
Villainy, even under the sad Experience of the woeful Issue of it, That he is
eversince acted with the highest Spirit of Revenge against his God; Being acted
with a Spirit of Revenge against God, he afterward withdrew Mankind to join
with him in his Rebellion.
and because he finds it in vain to attempt any thing immediately against God
himself, he studies and endeavors all he can ever since, to wound him in his
Authority and Honor. For no sooner did the Almighty Create the lower World,
and place Man in the midst of it, as of a Temple, to set forth his Praises, and
to glorify his Creator's infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness in this so
stupendous a Work of the Creation; but this grand Enemy, Attacks him with all
the Subtilty and Policy of a Traitor, tempting him to dis-believe his Maker's
Goodness and kind Intentions toward him, to cast off his Authority, and
dis-obey his Laws, and rather to follow his pernicious Counsels. The Arch-Rebel
prevails, and the whole Representative World of Men, Adam and Eve, Revolted
from their God, and took part with the Devil. And though God condescending
himself to propose Terms of Accommodation in a Savior and Redeemer, which was
for to come, recovered a part of Mankind, both before and after the Flood, and
afterward selected the whole Nation of the Jews to be a peculiar People unto
him, set apart to serve him; yet through the Instigation of Satan, the greater
part of Mankind were absolutely the Devil's Vassals, And prevailed so far, till
God's Authority was almost utterly banished from amongst men.
serving him in abominable Idolatries, Sorceries, Witchcrafts; and giving
themselves up to all manner of Villainies, Vices, and Sins whatsoever, whereby
the Laws of God could be transgressed, or his Authority utterly Banished (as
far as lay in their power) from amongst the Sons of Men. And thus the Devil
usurpt an Authority over almost the whole World for many Thousand Years, till
such time, as our Savior came amongst us to Preach Repentance, Which
occasioned the Son of God's coming into the World, to recover Mankind.
and to recover us to the Knowledge, and the Service of the One True God, which
was the great Design of his Coming.

So that you see the Devil is that Arch-Rebel, who with his whole Legion of
Infernal Spirits, are continually mustering up all their Forces, against the
Authority of God, and drawing wretched sinful Men into the Conspiracy; and
whose Quarrel is for no less than Dominion and Empire, who shall be King, God,
or Satan. And thus you plainly see, who the Devil is.

Secondly, Let us enquire what are the Works of the Devil; The works of the
Devil in general are
and from what has been said, his Works in general do appear,

First, To be Sin.

And, Secondly, The tempting of us to Sin.

His first work was to Sin himself, by transgressing God's Laws, I. Sin.
and despising his Authority. His next work was to Tempt and Inveigle us
likewise into the same Violation and Contempt of the Divine Laws and Authority,
by committing of Sin.

And the first general Work of the Devil is Sin, for so it is expressly
affirmed, 1 John 3.8. The Devil sins from the beginning, and for this
purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
Devil; that is, Sin. By Sin God's Authority is thrown off, which is the Devil's
constant work.
By Sin the Laws of God are transgressed, his Authority thrown off, his
Government dis-own'd, and his Power defied; and as the Devil made himself what
he is, by thus sinning at first; so this is his continual Practice, his
constant Work ever since: And whosoever in imitation of him, does likewise at
any time Transgress, or walk contrary to the Laws, the Rules, the Ways that God
has set, (especially if knowingly and wilful) does thereby in like manner,
Whoever therefore does wilfully sin, does strike at God's Authority.
as the Devil did, throw off God's Authority, disown his Power, and defy his
Government, and so does do the Works of the Devil. Which one Consideration
should make you abominate even the least Sin, but especially it should make you
infinitely fearful of Sinning wilfully against your Maker. Most People, alas!
in these degenerate Times, make but a Mock of Sin, For which reason no Sin
ought to be the subject of any Man's Mirth.
and make it the Subject of their Mirth and Laughter, when committed by
themselves, or others, for want of seriously considering this to be its Nature.
But the Commission of the least wilful Sin, would be dreaded by you, and
frowned upon in others, if you would but consider how high it strikes, even at
God himself, and whom it Advances to his Right of Dominion over the World, even
the Devil.

Some Sins more particularly the works of the Devil.
But as there are some particular Sins, which are more directly levelled against
God's Authority, and express more of the natural Temper and Disposition of
Satan, and are more his own Practice than others; so of those we may say, that
they are more particularly and especially the Works of the Devil.

I. Such as are directly Levelled against God's Authority, viz. Idolatry.
And first as to those, which are more directly levelled against God's
Authority, and are therefore Sins of Satan's own Invention, to draw us off from
God; of this sort we are to reckon Idolatry, or the Worshipping of other Gods,
besides him the Only True God; whether it be that of the Barbarous Nations,
who worshipped the Devil himself; or whether that of the Gentiles in general, and
some Gentiliz'd Christians, as the Papists, who Worship the Creature, (...),
above, besides, or together with the Creator, as that place, Romans 1.25. may
indifferently be rendered. The Idolatry of either Kind, either the Worship of
Devils, Heroes, or of Saints departed, does more particularly bear upon it the
Character of a Work of the Devil, because it is more directly levelled against
God's Authority, giving his Honor to another. And

Sorcery, Charming, Witchcraft, and Conjuring, as also Resorting to such as
use those unlawful Arts.
Of the same sort is Sorcery, and Charming, and Witchcraft, and Conjuring, as
also the Sin of those wretchedly wicked Persons, who Resort to Conjurers, and
Charmers, and Witches, White, or Black (as some do foolishly distinguish them,
for both do deal with the Devil, by unlawful Arts) whoever, I say, do resort to
any such Persons, or such as are so reputed, to enquire out their lost Goods,
or what shall be hereafter their Fortune, or to receive Directions for Health,
or Thriving; or if they use themselves any Spells and Charms to these, or the
like Purposes; such do commit a principal Work of the Devil, because they hold
thereby a Commerce and Correspondence with Satan, who is God's most bitter
Enemy, and do put their Faith and Confidence in him for Help, making him, viz.
the Devil, instead of God, their Staff and Stay: And lastly, do commit that
Sin, which is the particular Invention of the Devil, and is therefore often in
the Holy Scriptures, as for Instance, Deuteronomy. 18. Detested as such an
Abomination, and Threatened with such heavy Penalties, as must argue those, who
can use such unlawful Means for Health, or for finding out lost Goods, to be
even utterly destitute of any Fear of God, and such, who wholly give themselves
up to fear, and serve only the Devil; and I hope therefore, as common as it is,
it will be Detested by you. But the Divine Indignation is so fully Expressed
against all the Sins of this Kind, in this 18th of Deuteronomy. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
that I must not forbear to give you the very Words themselves, as those, which
are most likely to Deter you from such high Provocations. There shall not be
found amongst you any one that uses Divination, or an Observer of Times, or an
Inchanter, or a Witch, or a Charmer, or a Consulter with familiar Spirits, or a
Wizard, or a Necromancer; for all that do these things are an Abomination unto
the Lord: and because of these Abominations, the Lord thy God does drive them
out from before thee. For these Nations, which thou shall possess, hearkened
unto Observers of Times, and unto Diviners.

A Second sort of those Diabolical Sins, II. Such as express more of the
Devil's Temper, than others, viz. Pride.
which may be more particularly styled the Works of the Devil, are those, which
Express more of the very Natural Temper and Disposition of Satan, than others:
And such are Pride, Envy, and Malice. That Pride is the very Temper of Satan,
may be gathered from 1 Timothy 3.6. He was Tempted by that Glorious Condition, in
which he was Created, to conceive highly of his own Dignity, and Greatness, and
Merits; and to have towering and ambitious Thoughts of Usurping to himself a
greater Power, and larger Province, perhaps, than God had given him; and for
this his Pride (and his Rebellion the Effect of it) he was cast out of Heaven,
and Excluded the Blessed Mansions of the Poor in Spirit, whose is the Kingdom
of Heaven, Matthew. 5.3. And it does therefore concern every One of you, to take
care of harboring in your Breasts the least Degrees of Pride and Vanity, and
of being Exalted in your own Minds, upon the account of any thing, you Enjoy
above others, whether a more flourishing Condition in the World, or greater
Success in your Affairs, or upon the account of your greater Skill and
Knowledge, Lest, being lifted up with Pride, you fall into the Condemnation of
the Devil, as it is in the now cited Place of Timothy. And indeed Pride, in
whatever ways it shows it self, ought most carefully to be Subdued and
Mortified, as a Sin most truly Diabolical; for it is to be considered, That
though the Devil be the first Author of all Sin, and instigates to every Kind,
yet there are many, which Satan himself cannot commit: As for Instance, He
cannot be Drunk, nor commit Lewdness, and the like, himself, because these are
committed only in, and by the Body, whereas he is a Spirit; but yet he is
Naturally Proud and Ambitious: And therefore, though those other, as being more
visible and sensible, are more Scandalous in the Eyes of Men; yet this more
Spiritual Wickedness, Pride and Ambition, and a Pharasaical Censoriousness, and
Thinking more Highly of One-self, and more Disrespectfully of Others, than is
meet, are more truly Diabolical, and have more in their Nature of the Devil's
Temper.

And as Pride, so Envy Envy.
is another of the Devil's Qualities. The Devil, through his Pride and
Rebellion, having lost that high Station and Dignity he once enjoyed in Heaven;
and seeing Man exalted to a Capacity of obtaining a Share in that Glory and
Happiness, from which he is excluded: He is possessed with the utmost Envy, both
toward God and Man; Envying God the Service of us his Creatures, and us both
the Happiness of serving so Good a Master, and those infinite Rewards, which
will be given us, for our faithful Service and Obedience to him.

And from this his Envy proceeds that Rancourous Malice Malice.
also, wherewith he is ever since Acted, so as to be continually Contriving how
to do us the greatest Mischief; from whence he is called our Adversary, the
Devil, 1 Pet. 5.8. Envy and Malice are indeed the very Natural Temper and
Disposition of Satan; so that he seems to be wholly made up thereof. 'Twas
Pride, as One said, made him Envious, his Envy, that made him Spiteful and
Malicious, all which together make him a Devil. And therefore, as you would not
appear to have something Diabolical in your very Natures, Let all Bitterness,
and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil-speaking be put away from you with
all Malice; and be Kind one to another, Forgiving one another, even as God, for
Christ's Sake, has Forgiven you, Ephesians. 4.31, 32.

III. Such as are more the practice of Satan himself, than other Sins, viz.
Murder.
Lastly, There are some Sins more the Devil's own Practice, than others, and do
therefore deserve to be more particularly Styled the Works of the Devil: And
there are these Three, Apostasy, Murder, and Lying, which are expressly
mentioned as his own Sins, in that One remarkable Place of Scripture, Joh.
8.44. The Devil was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth,
because there is no Truth in him: When he speaks a Lie, he speaks of his
own; for he is a Liar, and the Father of it. He was a Murderer from the
beginning. He delights in humane Gore; and no doubt the vast Slaughters of Men,
which have been made in Bloody Wars, have been through the Instigation of
Satan, stirring up Ambitious Princes unjustly to Invade their Neighbors
Countries, that he might Glut his Appetite with Blood: And for the same Reason
he Obliged the Pagans, his Worshipers, to offer Men in Sacrifice to him. And
there is no Duel fought, but he is first at the making of the Challenge, and
then at the Murderer's Elbow to direct the fatal Thrust. In these last sort of
Murders, he hopes to do Two Works at once, to destroy both Body and Soul in one
instant; and to be sure he will never fail being present, where he can, to all
Intents and Purposes, so effectually do the work of a Destroyer, as he is
styled, Revel. 9.11.

He abode not in the Truth. Hereby is denoted his Apostasy, Apostasy.
and Falling off from God, and his Service; another of Satan's principal Works
of Sin. And if any of you, who have given up your Names to Christ, to be his
Disciples and Followers, should hereafter, instead of Renouncing the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil, as you have solemnly Professed in your Baptism, give your
selves up to the Service of Satan, of Mammon, and of your filthy Lusts; why,
you will be reckoned amongst those, that are Apostates from God, and are turned
aside after Satan, 1 Timothy 5.15. Nay, and if you should fall off from the Truth
(as it is here Professed in this Church, of which you are Members) to any
Heretical Doctrines, you will Imitate Satan in his Apostasy, who abode not in
the Truth.

Lying, and especially Calumniating, and Evil-speaking.
When he speaks a Lie, he speaks of his own; for he is a Liar, and the
Father of it. A Lie was that whereby he deceived and ruined Man at first; ( Ye
shall not surely dye, said Satan, Genesis 3.4. So contrary to what God himself had
Threatened our First Parents, in case they should Eat of the forbidden Fruit):
And it is by erroneous and false Doctrines (which as Tares he sows in the Field
of the Church) whereby he has undone so many Souls ever since. You must
therefore Abhor a Lie, or Speaking that which you do not Know to be exactly
agreeable to the Truth of Things, as you will not make your Selves Children of
such a Father, the Devil. And especially you must beware of that sort of Lying,
whereby you will most nearly Resemble him, and that is in Slandering and falsely
Accusing of any One, to the Ruin of his good Name. Satan is particularly
Stigmatized in Scripture for this sort of Lying, and is therefore called The
Accuser, or Slanderer, of the Brethren, which accuses them before God, Day and
Night, Rev. 12.10. and it is observable, that 1 Timothy 3.11. where Women are
charged not to be Slanderers, nor false Accusers, the Word in the Original is
(...), not to be Devils, which should be a Warning to them, as they would dread
so Black a Character, to avoid Entertaining one another with Backbiting, and
speaking Evil of their Neighbors; which yet I am afraid is the most usual
Conversation, when that Sex do meet together. Indeed as the pernicious Lie,
uttered for the Hurt, or Disadvantage of our Neighbor, is the most truly
Diabolical; So all sorts of Lying whatsoever, renders such as are Notorious for
it, Contemptible and Vile amongst Men, and Odious to God: as does sufficiently
appear by the Place and Company, they are Ranked with, Rev. 22.15. Without,
that is, Hell, are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and
Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a Lie; which should make you of all
things in the World, my Dear Youth, to Beware of this Odious, Hellish Sin of
Lying; and I do the more earnestly press you to Hate and Abhor it, because
Youth are most apt to be Addicted to it. And so much for Sin, considered as a
Work of the Devil. And now,

Secondly, We should proceed to consider that other great Work of Satan, his
Tempting of us to Sin. But this, as it has been his great Employment ever since
the Creation of Mankind, and will be so, as long as there are Men on Earth to
be Tempted by him: And as his Methods of Temptation are very many, and very
subtle, and it does infinitely concern us, Lest Satan should get an Advantage
of us, that we should not be Ignorant of his Devices: For these Reasons, I do
think it may be profitable to you, if I make that great Work of his, his
Tempting us to Sin, the Subject of some particular Discourses by themselves, in
order to a more full and distinct State of that matter; as indeed it is very
requisite you should be thoroughly Informed, if possible, of the Temptations of
Satan, what they are. And therefore leaving that Part for the present, I shall
proceed to finish this Lecture with showing you,

Thirdly, What it is to Renounce the Devil, and all his Works of Sin, To
Renounce, a Word of various Importance, according to the Renounced.
already spoken of, and how necessary it is we should absolutely and entirely
do so. To Renounce, is a Word, that is applied in our Baptismal Vow to several
things, even all our Spiritual Enemies, that would draw us into Sin. The Devil,
and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the
sinful Lusts of the Flesh; they must all of them be Renounced by us. And as the
Word Renounce does carry in it a great deal of Meaning, and is of various
Significations, according to the Nature of the things to be Renounced: So what
it does particularly signify, with Reference to each of them, will best be
understood by considering its Importance, as applied to every One of those
things.

To Renounce the Devil, in the sense of the Ancient Church, was to disclaim
his Usurped Dominion and Authority over Mankind.
And agreeably therefore to the Explication now given of the Devil. To Renounce
the Devil, is, no doubt, to Disclaim his Usurpt Dominion and Authority; or to
leave off having any Communication, or Agreement with him, or having any Hand
in his base and ungrateful Rebellion against God.

This was, no doubt, what the Primitive Church understood by Renouncing the
Devil, (for they are Words of a very ancient Use in the Church of God.) The
Devil, at the first Rise of Christianity, especially, had obtained a Visible
Kingdom, and, in a manner, an Universal Monarchy over the World: Hence he is
called, The Prince of this World, Joh. 14.30. He had also his Temples, and his
Altars, and his Sacrifices. The things, which the Gentiles Sacrifice, they
Sacrifice unto Devils, and not unto God, 1 Cor. 10.20. As also many lewd and
bloody Plays, and pompous Processions were made in Honor of him, and he was
therefore in Effect, The God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. And now, when any were
Converted from Paganism to Christianity, the Primitive Christians did expressly
require, from all, that were admitted into that Kingdom of God, the Church of
Christ, a public and open Renunciation, or Abjuration of him, or an utter
Disowning and Abandoning the Devil's Authority; and the Paying any Homage,
Service, or Obedience to him, by Worshipping of him, or his wicked Angels, or by
going to those Plays and Processions Instituted in Honor of him. Thus does
Tertullian, an ancient Father, inform us in his Book De Corona, wherein
reciting the ancient Customs of the Church, he tells us, That just before any
were Baptized into the Christian Religion, Aquam adituri, ibidem, sed aliquanto
prius in Ecclesia, sub Antistitis manu contestamur nos Renuntiare Diabolo, and
Pompae, and Angelis ejus. Tertul. de Corona.
they made a solemn Profession, at their Entrance into the Water, as also they
had done, a little before, when under the Bishop's Hands, in the Church, That
they did Renounce the Devil, his wicked Angels, and Pomps; that is, those
solemn Processions of the Heathen Gods, and those Lewd and Cruel Plays, used
amongst the Pagans, which were the Ceremonies of State, as it were, in Satan's
Kingdom. All subjection to the Devil, and all usage of those Rights of his
Kingdom, they did utterly abandon and forsake. And this was what was meant in
the Primitive Times by Renouncing of the Devil.

To Renounce his Works of Sin, was in their Sense, to Abandon and Forsake every
Sin, as being the proper Service of the Devil.
And to Renounce his works of Sin, must accordingly signify in their Sense, to
disclaim, abandon, or forsake every Sin, as being the proper Service of the
Devil; and in the real Meaning of it, no less than a throwing off God's
Authority, and a disowning his Power. For if you will read over Romans 1. you
will find, that People upon their forsaking of the True God, to serve other
Gods, (which were many of 'em at least, no other than Devils) did thereupon
fall into all manner of Sin and Wickedness, as you will see largely described
in that Chapter. And if you will also look into the Sixth Chapter to the
Romans, ver. 11. you will see, that Christians by being Baptized, Were to
reckon themselves to be dead unto Sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. So that in the Original, and first meaning of the Words, as to
Renounce the Devil, was to abjure and disclaim the Power and Dominion of Satan,
and to leave off having any Communication, or Agreement with him, and any Hand
in his base and ungrateful Rebellion against God; so to Renounce his Works of
Sin, was to Disclaim, Abandon, or Forsake all, and every Sin, as being the
proper Service of the Devil; and in the real Meaning of it, no less than a
throwing off God's Authority, and a dis-owning of his Power. This, I say, was
the first Meaning of the Words, in the first Ages of the Church.

Nor are they to be Interpreted in a much different Sense at this Day. For
Satan has his Kingdom still in the World, The Words are to be understood in
much the same Sense at this day; Satan having his Kingdom still in the World,
and even amongst Christians, and the Laws of Sin, which are the Laws of his
Kingdom, being still Obeyed by the greatest Part of Mankind.
and the Laws of Sin, which are the Laws of that his Kingdom, are Obeyed by the
greatest Part of Mankind. The barbarous Nations amongst the Pagans, do directly
serve him at this Day; and it is many a Christian's Lot, who is cast amongst
'em, to be forced, either to Join with 'em in such Impious Service, or to
suffer Death with Torments, for refusing. And even in the Christian Pale, though
his Power is much weakened here, since the Coming of our Savior, to what it
was before, yet still, as Christ has his Church, so Satan has his Synagogue
amongst us; and too many there are, within the Limits of Christendom, who do
openly and avowedly Obey no other, than the Laws of his Kingdom. All your
Atheists and Deists, who Blaspheme God, and the Christian Religion; and all
your Profane Swearers and Cursers, whom you shall hear every Hour in the Day to
Dare God, as it were, by their horrid Oaths and Imprecations to Damn 'em, that
is, to send 'em to the Devil; and all those, who resort to Charmers, and
Conjurers, and Fortune Tellers (as many Thousands do in this Nation:) All
these, I say, are the open and professed Subjects of Satan's Kingdom. And how
many Lewd and Riotous Livers are there amongst us, who do little else but the
Works of the Devil, and Obey no other Laws, but those of Sin? So that as you
will Renounce the Devil, and all his Works, in that Sense, wherein the Church
does at present understand the Words, you are with all possible care to avoid
being of the Number of such Men.

And I know no more that need be said at present, This Renunciation for the
most Part the same with Repentance.
to explain the Importance of the words, Renounce the Devil, and all his Works,
except it be this; That if we consider such a Renunciation, as the Act of One,
who has been heretofore a Slave to Satan, and a Servant to Sin, then it
signifies to Forsake and Abandon the Service of Sin and the Devil, formerly
Lived in; and so being a Ceasing to do Evil, and a Learning to do well, is the
same with Repentance. But if it be the Act of one of those, who may be said to
need no Repentance, of which sort are Infants, who have never committed Actual
Sin, then to Renounce the Devil, and all his Works, does mean a firm
Resolution, never to side with him in his Rebellion against God; and as
carefully as he can, to avoid the committing of any Sin, as being that, whereby
God's Rightful Authority is cast off, and the Devil's Usurped Dominion submitted
to. And so much for the Meaning of Renouncing the Devil, and all his Works.

The Devil, and all his works of Sin must be absolutely and entirely Renounced,
because,
And now Lastly it remains, that I should show you, how that it is necessary, we
should Absolutely and Entirely Renounce the Devil, and all his Works. As to
those other Enemies to our Souls, the World, and our own Flesh, there is some
Temper to be used, being neither of 'em are Absolutely, and in themselves Evil,
but only by accident, when the World is too intensely Beloved, and our Flesh
too much Indulged, to the Prejudice and Hurt of the Soul; and therefore there
are some Degrees of Affection and Regard allowed to both them. But the Devil is
the Evil One, and he is by way of Eminence and Singularity styled, the wicked
One, in the Holy Scripture, as Matthew. 13.19. and 1 John 2.13.19. There is
nothing but Evil proceeds from Satan.
So that there is not the least Good, and nothing but Evil, proceeds from him;
and therefore no manner of Agreement is to be made with him; What Concord has
Christ with Belial, 2 Cor. 6.15. Nor are we to imagine we can divide our
Service betwixt God and him; We cannot serve God and Mammon, Matthew. 6.24. So
that the Devil is Absolutely and Entirely to be Renounced by us.

And Sin, whether we consider it in its Original Cause and Nature; or in its
sad Effects and Consequents, is the utmost Evil.
And so likewise must his Works of Sin. Sin as Sin, is entirely Evil: Consider
it in its Original Cause and Nature, and consider it in its Effects and
Consequents, and there is not a worse Evil in the World than Sin: View it in
its Original and first Cause, and it is a Brat of the Devil's, the Firstborn
of Hell. And view it again in its Nature, and it is a Choosing of quite other
Ends, than what the Wise and Good God has appointed us, and ordained us for;
and is a Going quite cross to those Laws and Rules, which he has given us. And
then consider it next in its sad Effects and Consequents, and there is no Evil
in the World to be compared to it. It is a Sin, says One, which turned glorious
Angels into hideous Devils, and tumbled them down from Heaven, to Hell: It is
Sin, that filled the World with Woes and Plagues, brought Death and Diseases,
and a vast and endless Sum of Miseries into it. It is Sin, that torments and
terrifies the Conscience, that kindles Hell Flames, Exposes the Soul to the
eternal and direful Revenges of the Great God: And in a word, Sin is so
perfectly and only Evil, that the worst of things here, were they free from the
Contagion and Evil of Sin, would be Excellent and Amiable. So that Sin also is
Absolutely and Entirely to be Renounced by us; and there is no one Sin, nothing
in the least of Sin, that may willingly be complied with.

Therefore no one Sin, nor any thing the least of Sin, must willingly be
complied with.
I say, No One Sin, nor any the least of Sin, for so Poisonous a thing it is in
spoiling of every thing, that is Good in Man, that if we shall allow our selves
but in One single Sin, it will utterly spoil all our other Righteousness. If a
man keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one Point, he is guilty of all, Jam.
2.10. And one such single Allowance will stop God's Ears against all our
Prayers: If I regard Iniquity in my heart the Lord will not hear me, Psalm.
66.18. Nay, so absolutely an Evil is Sin, and so Absolutely and Entirely it is
to be Renounced by us, that the least sinful Action is not to be committed in
order to attain the greatest Good. So little a Sin, as an Officious Lie, must
not be told, no not to save a Man's Life: Nor a Pious Fraud, nor a Holy Cheat
committed to promote the Good of the Church, and to secure and propagate what
we take to be the True Religion: For if the Truth of God has more Abounded
through my Lie unto his Glory; why yet am I judged as a Sinner? Whereas he who
tells such a Kind and Serviceable Lie, will certainly be Judged as such; and
as it follows, Whosoever shall say, Let us do Evil that Good may come of it,
his Damnation is just, Romans 3.7, 8. So that every Christian must Absolutely and
Entirely Renounce the Devil, and all his Works of Sin.

And indeed it is but to consider, And indeed if the Nature of Satan, and of
Sin, and the horrid Consequence of yielding to either, be well considered, it
is hardly possible, not absolutely and entirely to renounce both.
as well as know the Nature of Satan, and of Sin, and the horrid Consequence of
yielding to either of them; and it is impossible any should not absolutely and
entirely Renounce, that is, utterly detest, and avoid, and beware of them. As
for the Devil, why? Even the Perversest of People, the Israelites, when it was
solemnly put to their Reason and Consideration, who to serve, God, or the
Devil, could not without the utmost Detestation think of the latter. If it
seems Evil unto you, says Joshua to them, Josh. 24.15, 16. to serve the Lord,
choose you this day whom you will serve; whether the Gods of the Amorites, in
whose Land ye dwell, (and those Gods were no other than Devils) but as for me,
and my house, said he, we will serve the Lord. And the Result was, That the
people answered and said, God forbid, that we should forsake the Lord to serve
other Gods. God forbid: The very thoughts of such a Thing, when they came to
consider it, was Odious to them.

And if we did but consider the odious Nature of Sin, we should not more Abhor
the Devil himself, than Abandon every Sin: For why? He that commits Sin is
of the Devil, we are told, 1 John 3.8. Such a One is of the Devil's Party, he
is a sharer in the Devil's Rebellion against God, and in his wicked Designs to
destroy God's Authority: And though he be not a Devil himself, yet he is near
akin to him, and shall Partake with him, as in his Rebellion, so in his
Punishment: And who, that considers this, can stick Entirely to abandon and to
abhor so foul a thing as Sin is.

But however, whether People will consider it or no, However, this if we do not
do, we shall forfeit all Right and Title to those infinite Blessings held forth
in the Covenant of Grace.
so necessary it is, that every Christian should absolutely and entirely
Renounce the Devil, and all his Works of Sin; that this if you do not do, you
will forfeit all your Right and Title to those infinite Blessings, held forth
to you in the Covenant of Grace, and Purchased for you by the Blood of Christ.
If you do not utterly Renounce the Devil, by having nothing to do with him, in
his foul Rebellion against God, you will be accounted no Members of Christ's
Church, but of the Synagogue of Satan, as the Apostatizing Gnostics, those
great Enemies of God are called, Rev. 2.9. and that for their Halting betwixt
God and Satan. And except you do also utterly Renounce his Works of Sin, by
abandoning every known Sin, as that, whereby the Divine Authority is thrown
aside, and his Power dis-own'd, you will be so far from being the Children of
God, that you will be styled no better than Children of the Devil: For
whosoever is Born of God, does not commit Sin, it is said, 1 John 3.9. that is,
does keep himself strictly from all deliberate Sin: And in this the Children of
God are manifested, and the Children of the Devil; whosoever does not
Righteousness is not of God, as the same Apostle goes on, ver. 10. And who else
is it, think ye, but he, who Overcomes both the Devil, and all his Works of
Sin, that shall ever Inherit the Kingdom of Heaven? Why he, and none else,
shall Inherit so inestimable a Blessing, we are assured, Rev. 21.7, 8. He that
Overcomes shall Inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my
Son: But the Fearful and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Murderers, and
Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars shall have their part
in the Lake, that burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the Second Death.
So necessary upon these several Accounts it is, that, according as has been
Explained, you should Renounce, that is, Disclaim, Abhor and Abandon the Devil,
and all his Works of Sin: Which that you may all of you do, God Almighty grant
of his infinite Mercy, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE Tenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works.
I Have already showed you, First, who the Devil is, and Secondly in Part, what
are his Works. All Sin whatsoever, I have showed you, is a Work of the Devil;
but there are some particular Sins, which being more directly levelled against
God's Authority, and expressing more of the natural Temper and Disposition of
Satan, and being more his own Practice, than others, do more particularly
deserve the Title and Character of the Works of the Devil; and what they are I
have showed you.

Secondly, And as Sin, so his Tempting of us to Sin is another main and
principal Work of the Devil. And I have reserved this Subject of Satan's
Temptations, to be particularly handled in some set Discourses by themselves,
that so I might have more room to Expose 'em to you; there being no subject in
Practical Divinity of greater Consequence and Concernment to our Souls, than to
be thoroughly Informed in the Ways and Methods of Satan's Temptations.

Now to Tempt one, in the general Notion of the Word, To Tempt, is to make a
Trial of a Person.
does barely signify to make Trial of a Person, either by Words, or Signs, by
Promises, or Threats, whether or no he will do such a thing. And the Tempting
of a Person may be Morally Good, or Evil, according to the End, for which such
a Trial is made. If the Trial be of a Person's Virtue, To Tempt, a thing
morally Good or Evil, according to the End thereof.
only that Occasion may be afforded him to give an Experiment and Proof
thereof: that so if he do well, he may be Rewarded; if Ill, that his Hypocrisy,
and the Corruption of his Heart may be discovered, and he himself Humbled with
the Sight and Sense thereof to his Amendment, There is nothing may hinder a
Governor especially, thus to Tempt any one; and therefore to Tempt a Man to
this End, To Tempt a Person, in order to prove his Virtue, or discover his
Corruption, consistent with the Justice, Wisdom, and Goodness of a Governor;
and thus God does Tempt Men.
may very well consist with the Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness of God. And
accordingly we find in Scripture Two Eminent Instances of God's Tempting
Persons to both these Purposes.

And First we find, That God Tempted Abraham to try his Faith, and to Reward
him for it. And he did it to as high a degree, as was ever heard of, bidding
him to Take his Son, his only Son Isaac, whom he loved, and to get him into the
Land of Moriah, and to offer him there for a Burnt Offering, Genesis 22.12. The
Trial was severe enough; but God did put Abraham upon it with no other design,
but that he might have occasion given him to exercise his Faith in God. And by
giving such a Noble Demonstration thereof, as to Resign up his own Son to be
Sacrificed at God's Command, and with his own Hands too, I. Thus he Tempted
Abraham to try his Faith, and to Reward him for it.
he might thereby Testify both to God and Man, how much he Trusted in his
Maker; and thereupon might obtain the Honor upon Earth, to be accounted the
Father of the Faithful, among all Generations of Men; and in Heaven, to be the
Highest in the Ranks of all Humane Inhabitants, it being the Privilege of the
greatest Saints to be Lodged in Abraham's Bosom. And to the same Gracious
Purposes it is, that he does Tempt his Faithful Servants, when at any time he
lets loose the Enemies of the Church upon 'em, to persecute and destroy 'em: It
is to the Intent, that giving an extraordinary Proof of their Faith, and
Constancy, and Patience, and Love to him, he may extraordinarily Reward 'em.
Every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or
Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for his Names sake, being certain to
receive an Hundred Fold, and to Inherit Everlasting Life, Mat. 19.29.

II. Hezekiah, to discover his Hypocrisy, and to Humble him in the sight
thereof.
Secondly, We find, That God Tempted Hezekiah, in order to discover to him his
own Hypocrisy and Corruption, and the Pride of his own Heart, that he might be
humbled in the Sight and Sense thereof. For Hezekiah being lately Recovered
from a mortal Sickness, by the miraculous Providence of God: The Princes of
Babylon sent their Ambassadors unto him to enquire of the Wonder, that was done
in the Land, and God left him to try him, that he might Know all that was in
his Heart, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. that is, God did Providentially order the Coming of
those Foreign Ambassadors upon this Errand, to try Hezekiah, whether he would
take this occasion before those Idolaters, who put their Trust in those, which
were no Gods, to Glorify the True God of Israel, for so miraculously Recovering
of him. But he being more intent upon setting out his own Grandeur, than God's
Glory, took care only To show them all the House of his precious Things, the
Silver, and the Gold, and the Spices, and the precious Ointment, and all the
house of his Armor, and all the house of his Treasures, 2 King. 20.13. Upon
which God did severely Reprove and Humble him by the Mouth of his Prophet
Isaiah, ver. 17, 18, 19. for such his Ingratitude, Pride, and Vanity. And so it
is with every one of us. There is a great deal of Pride, and Vanity, and other
Corruptions and secret Hypocrisies, which lie lurking in our Hearts; and we our
selves are Ignorant thereof, and how we shall prove, till we are tried, and
some Providential Occasion draws it out: And then if God's Word, or Ministers,
or the Rebukes of our own Consciences make us sensible thereof, we are much
Bettered, and God has his Gracious Ends in our Amendment. So that thus you see
to what good Purposes God does Tempt us; namely, Either to prove our Virtue,
that he may Reward us the better for it, or to discover our Hypocrisy and
Insincerity, that we might be Humbled in the Sight and Sense thereof, and be
thereby amended.

These Temptations of God are therefore in no sense to be Renounced, but to be
Re-
Such Temptations therefore as these, are none of the Works of the Devil, nor in
any Sense to be Renounced by us. Nay rather We have reason to count it all Joy,
when we fall into these diverse Temptations of God's ordering, Knowing this,
that the Trying of our Faith works Patience, Jam. 1.2, 3. They give us an
Opportunity of Exercising the Noblest Virtues of Christianity, (...) bitually
committed, will cause in them such a Reprobate Mind, as will disable 'em at
length to know any difference between Good and Evil.

And by this very Wile, he to this day, By these Means he brings that Ignorance
in Divine Matters, which reigns in most Men's Minds.
spreads such an Ignorance over the Minds of Men, in matters of Religion, as
makes even Darkness it self seem to reign, where the Gospel has so long shined.
For by engaging some into nice Enquiries after a Thousand other things, he
draws 'em off from ever looking into their Bibles. And as to Others, by
decoying 'em into one Sin after another, he does at length improve their
Knowledge of Evil to that degree, that at last they come to know nothing of
Good; nay, to have so little a sense of it, such stupify'd Apprehensions
concerning it, as to Call Evil, Good; and Good, Evil.

And then having once Blindfolded the Reason of Man, And being spiritually
ignorant, Men are easily led into whatever Sin and Misery.
with the Ignorance of Divine Things, what Sin and Misery is there, that Satan
does not most easily lead Men into? For why? Good and Useful Knowledge, such as
the Knowledge of God, and of our selves, and of our Duty to him, is the Eye of
the Soul, whereby alone it can see its Way, and steer its Course safely toward
Heaven: Whereas on the other side, Ignorance of God and Religion, is the same
in the Mind, as Blindness in the Eye; and therefore as a Blind Man may with the
greatest Ease be drawn aside into Pits, and over Rocks, to his Downfall and
Destruction, and it is next to impossible he should ever get safe to his
Journeys End: so an Ignorant Man in Religious Matters, must needs be an easy
Prey to Satan and False Deceivers, and he cannot possibly tell how to steer his
Course safe toward Heaven, but must almost necessarily suffer Shipwreck of
Body and Soul in Hell. So that this Policy of the Devil, in Corrupting the
Understanding and Reason of Man, by putting him upon curious Enquiries, and a
sinful Experiment, in order as he pretended, to enlarge his Knowledge, but in
reallity with a design to draw over his Soul a thick Cloud of Ignorance, that
so he might lead him Blindfold into any Sin and Misery, is a Depth of Satan
that was, and still is most Fatal and Destructive to our Innocence, and to our
Happiness.

And this therefore is another Wile of Satan's, This therefore another Wile of
Satan's, which must be carefully avoided.
which you must also carefully avoid. You must above all things Beware of ever
making Experiments of the Pleasures of Sin, vainly deceiving your own Souls
with the Expectations, that having once known what is in 'em, you will the more
Abhor 'em for the future. Few of those, who do make such sinful Experiments do
afterward return to a sound, and sober Sense of things. Not that they find any
reason to stick to those Courses, but because the ways of Sin are mere Mazes,
which once Entered into, are hardly got out of; and because Sin often
committed, does at length sear the Conscience, and drives away the Holy Spirit,
and so the wretched Sinner becomes utterly Ignorant of God's Ways, and the
Happiness it would be to him to walk therein. And in this their Ignorance what
Pits of Destruction are there, which Satan cannot draw them into. You must
therefore, I say, above all things endeavor, as to Expel all Ignorance of
Divine Things out of your Minds: so the great Causes thereof, of Satan's
Contrivance, namely, Curiosity after vain and unprofitable Things, which will
divert you from what does infinitely more concern you, viz. The good State of
your Souls; and you must carefully beware of Experimentally knowing Sin, the
Commission and Acquaintance with which, will draw a thick Cloud of Ignorance
over your Minds, as has been spoke. And hereby you will also Renounce and
Defeat another considerable Temptation and Wile of Satan's, to draw us into a
Course of Sin.

III. By bribing the Affections with something nearest our Hearts, and rather
than disoblige and lose which, we will commit any thing that is Evil.
A Third of those First and more general Methods of Satan's Temptations, whereby
he did in the Beginning, and does to this Day Inveigle the greatest Part of
Mankind into many a sin, Is by bribing their Affections with something that is
nearest their Hearts, and rather than disoblige and lose which, they will
commit any thing that is Evil. Thus he did Tempt Adam to partake of the
forbidden Fruit, by the solicitations of his Wife Eve, Genesis 3.4.6. Adam must
needs have Loved his Wife Eve above all Things, and even equally with himself,
she being Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh, Genesis 2.23. And Satan
therefore if he could make sure to his Party such a Favorite, what might he
not obtain of him? He knew it, and therefore he Tempted Eve first, and by her
Importunity, gained the Consent of Adam, and so he also Transgrest.

And by whatever we most place our Affections upon, does he still inveigle us
to do what is Forbidden.
And the same is also still his method to ruin us. If there be any thing, which
we do particularly place our Affections upon, he will be sure to Inveigle us by
the Persuasions of that, to do the forbidden Thing. If Achan once begins to set
his Heart upon the Wedge of Gold, and the goodly Babylonish Garment, then, though
it be an Accursed Thing, he will put the Discovery of it to the Venture. If
Gehazi once begin to hanker after the Talent of Silver, and the Two Changes of
Raiment, that shall put him upon Lying and Cheating to obtain them; And the
love of Money is the root of all Evil, we are told, 1 Timothy 6.10. And the like
may be said of any thing else, whatever is our Darling, shall be his Instrument
to Tempt us. And therefore it does nearly concern us, as we will preserve our
selves free from the Danger of Satan, and all his snares, to have a Jealous Eye
upon what we do most love, that it do not Entice us into Sin by his Art in
managing of it. And therefore our Savior would have us bear that Indifferency
of Affection toward our nearest Relations, as to be able to Forsake them, and
their Interests, rather than God.
And therefore does our Savior Caution us, in such unusual Terms, against
Loving too much our very nearest Relations, telling us, That if any one come to
him, and Hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren
and Sisters, yea and his own Life also, he cannot be his Disciple, Luke 14.26.
that is, he would have us to take care, we bear that Indifferency of Affection
toward even our nearest Relations, as to be able to Forsake them, and their
Interests (which they and the World will count Hating of them) rather than
depart from God, and lose his Favor; for that otherwise, if we set our Hearts
too much upon them, they will prove a dangerous Snare to us, and a Man's
greatest Enemies, as to his real Injury and Hurt, will be those of his own
House and Family, because he does most love them. It is a very great Temptation
to be too warmly Affected toward any thing on this side Heaven; Satan will be
sure to Tempt us thereby, if he can, to Set our Affections, not on things
Above, but on things of the Earth, so contrary to what we are commanded, Col.
3.2. We must therefore cautiously beware lest he Attack us on that side.

Lastly, by exciting their Lusts and Appetites after the forbidden Fruit, by
proposing the fairest Objects, and most delicious Dainties to their Senses.
Fourthly, and Lastly, to complete the Rebellion of Man against God, and to
render the Apostasy of our First Parents such, as should Reflect the greatest
Dishonor upon our Maker, Satan did excite their Lusts and Appetites also,
after the forbidden Fruit, by proposing the fairest Objects, and the most
delicious Dainties to their Senses. And when the Woman saw that the Tree was
good for Food, and that it was pleasant to the Eye, she took of the Fruit
thereof, and did Eat, and gave also unto her Husband with her, and he did Eat,
Genesis 3.6. What could be more Dishonorable to God, than for Persons owing their
Life and Being, and all that they Enjoyed to God's Bounty; and living in the
midst of Paradise, and having all manner of Earthly Comforts flowing in upon
them, so little to Value God, and his Favors, as to Sacrifice all their
Interest in him, for the poor Enjoyments of One forbidden Fruit? Was not this
to Undervalue him to the lowest Degree? Why, this Satan did, by proposing to
their Senses such Objects, as being exceedingly Delightful, and extremely
Pleasant to Behold and Taste, might most easily prevail upon them, to Transgress
their Maker's Laws in obtaining of them.

And by the very same methods does he prevail to this Day, And by the same
methods does he prevail, to this day, upon the far greatest part of Mankind to
Rebel against God. For Man being made up very much of Sense, so that nothing
enters into the Soul but through the Doors of our Senses, we are easily prevailed
upon by what Gratifies our Senses.
upon the far greatest Part of Mankind to Rebel against God. He was so well
assured of the Efficacy and Power of this Temptation, that he endeavored to
Overthrow even our Blessed Savior by it. He takes him up into an exceeding
high Mountain, and showing him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of
them, he says unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall
down and worship me, Matthew. 4.8, 9. But the Second Adam being God, as well as
Man, could not be Foiled, though the First was so easily taken with sensible
Things. But it is not so Happy with the rest of Mankind, who being made up very
much of Sense, so that nothing enters into our Souls, but through the Doors of
our Senses, we are by nothing so generally prevailed upon, as by outward
Things, and such as please our Senses; and therefore the Devil does
particularly apply himself to Tempt us this way. He presents Riches, Honors
and Pleasures to our outward Senses, and dazles them with their Glory and
Beauty, and by that would Tempt us to purchase them at the Price of our
Innocence.

And indeed the far greatest part of Sinners are wrought upon to Rebel against
God, and are made Slaves to Satan's Kingdom, by this last method of his, In
Tempting our Lusts and Appetites by Sensible and Outward Things. They are but
few in Comparison, (some only of finer Parts and clearer Intellectuals) that
are Tempted to Offend God by a Curiosity of Knowing every thing, though useless
and sinful: But the far greatest Part of Mankind are gross in their
Understandings, and such Carnally-minded Men place their whole Happiness in the
Enjoyment of such things, as gratify the Bodily Part of their Natures; and
therefore by the Presentation of those things to their Senses, with all the
Advantage that Satan has Skill enough to put 'em off withal, their Lusts and
Appetites do wholly desire these things.

And as Satan does excite our Lusts and Appetites to covet Unlawful things, by
whatever pleases any of our Senses; Especially the Senses of Seeing and Tasting.
so especially by those Objects that do gratify the Senses of Seeing and
Tasting: Hence as to the Lusts of the Eye, How many look so long upon a Woman,
till they have committed Adultery with her already in their Hearts? And as to
our Appetites, How many Belly-Gods, with Esau, Sell their Inheritance for a
Mess of Pottage?

But our being taken only with outward things, is such an high Ingratitude to
God, who has provided so much better for us, and such an Abuse to our own
Souls, which are capable of relishing higher Enjoyments, as is not to be
endured.
But our being taken only with sensible and outward Things, is such an high
Ingratitude to God, and such an Abuse to our own Souls, as is not to be
endured. What can show more Ingratitude to God, than to despise those Noble
Enjoyments, which he has prepared for purified Souls in Heaven; and to choose
to feed upon the Husks of sensual Pleasures here below? And as to our own
Souls, Why should such excellent Beings, of such exquisite Faculties, capable
of relishing those Pure and Heavenly Joys above, be clogged and surfeited with
those cloying Vanities of this World? Which after they are once Tasted, are
sure to sit very Heavy, and are never well digested by the Mind and Conscience;
and the Soul can never be at Ease, till by Confession and other Acts of
Repentance, it has thrown 'em up again. But the Vileness of thus submitting the
Mind to drudge to our Senses, and to study only to please our Lusts and
Appetites, will be more properly Exposed, when we come to show you how far, and
in what sense you are to Renounce the sinful Lusts of the Flesh.

To sum up then what has been hitherto said concerning those Temptations, and
Means whereby at first Satan overthrew the whole Race of Mankind; and drew it
off from their Obedience to God, to do Service to him, and does still so
successfully Overcome so many: Whether it be by infusing into your Thoughts ill
Apprehensions of God, particularly of his Justice and Mercy; or by diverting of
your Minds by needless Curiosities, from improving of your Souls in Divine
Knowledge; and especially, as is his wont, by stupifying of your sense of
Divine Things, by trying what is in sinful Pleasures: Or whether he shall at
any time Tempt you to commit what is sinful, by the Inveiglements and
Enticements of what you do entirely love and affect: Or Lastly, By proposing to
your Lusts and Appetites, what is pleasing to your Senses. In which of these
ways soever it is, that he attempts you, you must stoutly resist him. And being
he was not successful in these ways of Temptation against our First Parents
alone, but has been also Versed in the same for many Thousand Years ever since;
and therefore must be supposed to have grown very skilful in the Management of
'em: It does therefore concern you, with more than ordinary Diligence to Guard
your selves against 'em. And in so doing you will go a great way toward
Renouncing that great Work of his, his Tempting us to Sin; concerning which,
what is farther to be spoke, must be deferred till the next Opportunity.

THE Eleventh Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works; the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
THAT Great Work of the Devil, his Tempting of us to Sin, being the Subject of
our present Consideration; and in order to the full Discovery of what so much
concerns you, having already showed you, First, By what Temptations and Means
he overthrew the whole Race of Mankind, and drew it off from Obedience to God,
to do Service to him: In pursuance of the same important Subject, concerning
the Temptations of the Devil, what they are, and in what Ways and Methods he
attempts our Ruin; I am

Secondly, To discover to you, What Temptations Satan levels against the Church
of Christ.
such as he Levels against the Church of Christ, the True Servants of God,
either utterly to destroy them from off the face of the Earth; or at leastwise
so to corrupt the Notions of God and Religion, that by their very Christianity
they may dishonor him.

Soon after that Satan had seduced the whole Race of Mankind into a most
unnatural and ungrateful Rebellion against their Maker; God recovers out of the
Fallen Race of Mankind a Body of Men, the Church, to his service, Listing 'em
under Jesus Christ to Fight against Satan.
did God of his infinite Compassion to the woeful State of Man, in slavery to so
base a Tyrant, as the Devil, appoint his own Son to be the Great Captain of our
Salvation, and gave him Power and Commission to List a Church Militant out of
the rest of the World; who being directed by his Word, and assisted by his Holy
Spirit, should continually fight under his Banner and Conduct, against this
wicked Spirit, the Devil; and discharging their Parts well in this Warfare,
should in another World be eternally Rewarded with Honor by him. But the Devil
Enraged, as a Bear bereaved of her Whelps, to have his Prey thus snatched away
out of his Teeth, The Devil Enraged to have his Prey snatched out of his Teeth,
continually Attacks it.
by One mightier than he, sets himself with the greatest Vigor to ruin this
Body of Men, who are Armed by God, on purpose to destroy his Kingdom; and does
therefore, both with the Fury of a Roaring Lion, and with the Cunning of a
Subtle Serpent, continually attack it; endeavoring all he can, either utterly
to Destroy the Church of Christ from off the Face of the Earth: Or at
leastwise, so to corrupt its Notions of God and Religion, that by Religion it
self it might dishonor him.

And his first and chief Endeavors were, His first and chief endeavors are
utterly to destroy it from off the Face of the Earth.
utterly to destroy the Church of Christ from off the Face of the Earth;
Toward the understanding of which, we must know, that God the Father gave
Commission to his Son to raise this Church Militant, immediately after the Fall
of Man; and the War between Satan and the Church was Proclaimed in these Words,
This he endeavored to do in the Person of Abel.
I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between her Seed and thy
Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel, Genesis 3.15. And
no sooner was this War Proclaimed, but this cruel Murderer, the Devil (for a
Murderer he is said to have been from the Beginning) thought to have cut it off
at one Blow in the Person of Abel, And when afterward Recruited in the Family
of Seth, yet he Reduced it again by the bloody Posterity of Cain, to Eight
Persons in the days of Noah
to slay whom he Instigated his own Brother Cain, that Cursed Servant of Hell.
And though God, in the Person and Family of Seth, did recruit the Church of
Christ; yet the Posterity of Cain, being a Barbarous and Bloody sort of Men,
did so far prevail and bear down all before 'em, that the True Servants of God
were reduced to the Number of Eight Persons, and were drove into a very narrow
Corner, even into the Compass of the Ark. Thus he prevailed over the Church of
God, so as almost to Extinguish it before the Flood.

Nor did his Fury burn less fiercely against it after: For when God giving a
Bill of Divorce to all the Nations of the Earth, When after the Flood, God
chose Abraham and his Posterity to be a special People unto himself, Satan
endeavored utterly to have extinguished that People by his Servant Pharaoh.
who had so Vilely played the Harlot in serving of Idols, that is, Devils, did
choose Abraham and his Posterity to be a Special People unto himself, above all
the People that were upon the face of the Earth, Deuteronomy. 7.6. Though One would have
thought, that Satan might have been contented with such large spoils, as all
the Kingdoms of the World besides; and that, as he had little reason to Envy
the Maker of all Things, the faithful Allegiance of such a handful of Men, as
were the People of the Jews, in comparison of the rest of the World: So he
would let God alone with 'em. Yet so it was, that from the first Infancy of the
Jewish Church (when by Pharaoh he endeavored utterly to have extinguished that
People, causing all their Male-Children to be slain by the Order of that Bloody
Tyrant) till the time of our Savior's coming into the Flesh; we find it to
have been his continual Exercise, to stir up the Potentates of the Earth
against it: And in all Periods till our Savior's coming, he stirred up the
Idolatrous Nations their Neighbors, especially the Four Monarchies to harrass
them.
And there is hardly a Period of Time to be found, but either he stirred up the
Neighboring Nations, especially the Four Monarchies of the World, mentioned
Dan. 2. to Molest, Harrass, and to Captivate 'em; or Instigated their own
Kings, to Persecute and destroy those, that would remain the Worshipers of the
One True God.

But above all did Satan then Exert his Malice, soon after that our Savior
came amongst us, and that Christianity began to take Footing in the World;
when, as God's Goodness to Mankind did most wonderfully appear in this their
Deliverance; so did Satan's Envy and Fury burn so much the fiercer against both
God, and Man. To his infinite sorrow he found himself dispossessed of a great
Part of Mankind, But soon after that Christ appeared in the World, did he most
Vigorously exert his Malice against it.
over which he had born before so absolute a sway. He saw his Altars thrown
down, his Superstitious Mysteries derided, his Magical Arts discovered, and the
Kingdom of Light shining through his Kingdom of Darkness, and Exposing it to the
public View and Scorn of the World; and this was a Hell to him, as bad, as
that to which he is to be for ever Chained, and he called it a Tormenting of
him before his time, Matthew. 8.29. No sooner therefore did God out of Pity to
the whole Race of Man, whom he beheld holden in miserable Bondage to Satan,
send his own Son To preach Deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of sight
to the Blind, to set at liberty them that are Bruised, to preach the acceptable
Year of the Lord, as it is, Luke 4.18, 19. No sooner was Satan aware of this,
but he endeavors to stifle the naked Infant of Christianity in the Cradle, as
it were: So that for the first 300 Years we hear of nothing but of bloody
Persecutions.
And for the first Three Hundred Years we hear of nothing but of bloody
Slaughters of poor innocent Christians, who were haled to the Devil's Altars,
and were Tempted, either to Blaspheme God and Christ, and to burn Incense to
the Cursed Idol, or were most miserably Tortured, were tore Limb from Limb,
thrown into Flames of Fire, exposed to the Fury of wild Beasts, and forced to
undergo the most studied Torments, that the Devil, and cruel Men could invent.

True it is, The Bloody-minded Emperors of Rome, The Emperors of Rome the
Instruments, but Satan the Instigator.
and the Governors of Provinces, were the immediate Instruments of inflicting
those Sufferings upon the poor Christians, but the Devil it was that did
Instigate, and set them on work; and accordingly throughout the Revelations we
find the Warfare described, as betwixt the Saints and the Dragon, (which, in
the Language of that Author, signifies the Devil,) so that he is to be looked
upon, as Chief in the Temptation.

And elsewhere to this Day, no sooner shall any Pious Persons, And wheresoever
any Attempt is made to Convert a Country from Paganism, he does Instigate the
Princes and People thereof to Persecute and Destroy the Preachers of the Gospel.
who are Zealous to propagate Christianity, enter into any Country, in order to
Convert it, by Preaching the Gospel unto them, but he immediately raises up his
Militia against 'em; and by Instigating the Princes and People of those
Countries to Persecute and Destroy 'em, he endeavors to beat 'em off from his
Quarters: Insomuch, that scarcely any Church has been yet Planted, in any Part
of the World, but the Blood of Martyrs has been its Seed. Such has been ever,
and is to this Day, the Violence of Satan, in Opposing and Hindering the Gospel
from once Entering his Usurped Dominions.

Nor is he on the other side less Industrious, in driving Christianity out of
those Countries, which it had once Possessed; and that he has done with such
great Success, that many Kingdoms, which were once Christian, are since
Revolted, either to Paganism, And he is no less Industrious to drive
Christianity out of those Countries, whereof it had once possession.
or Idolatry again, or to another Religion of Satan's Invention, I mean
Mahometism; insomuch, that if you divide the Earth into Thirty equal Parts,
Paganism does at this Day possess Nineteen, Mahometism Six, Whilst the
Christian's Share is but Five Parts: as those, who are best skilled in
Geography and History do inform us.

And moreover, as a Politic Prince will above all Endeavor to Bribe to his
Interests, a Party of Men within his Enemies Dominions, the more effectually to
Promote his own Kingdom, And he has an Anti Christian Party within the Bowels
of Christendom, most sadly weakening Christ's, and most effectually promoteing
the Interests of his own Kingdom.
and to Extend his Monarchy: In like manner has Satan, in all Ages of the
Church, had his Antichrist in the very Bowels of Christendom; that is, a
Succession of Heretics, who Having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power
thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5. under the Name and Profession of Christians, do sadly
weaken Christ's, and most effectually Promote the Interests of Satan's Kingdom:
And who have spilt more Blood, perhaps, in Establishing their Heresies, their
Idolatries and Superstitions, than was ever done by Heathen Rome, and all the
other Pagan Persecutions put together. So much you see it is the Endeavor of
Satan, utterly to destroy the Church of Christ from off the Face of the Earth.

And now all Christians are so far to Renounce Satan, with respect to those his
persecuteing Temptations, as to submit to the sorest Sufferings, which Satan
and his wicked Instruments can Inflict, rather than deny Christ, or his Truths.
And now the Question is, What it is, and how far we are to Renounce the Devil,
with respect to these his persecuting Temptations, and fiery Trials. And if it
should be the good Pleasure of God, for Ends best known to himself, to let
loose the Fury of the Dragon upon us, (as there is hardly any Age, from the
very Foundations of Christianity, down to our present Times, in which he has
not, and does not in some Part or other of the Church, exercise the Faith, and
Patience of the Saints;) Why then our Part must be, after the Example of those,
who have gone before us in the Fiery Trial, to submit to the sorest Sufferings,
which Satan and his wicked Instruments can Inflict upon us, rather than deny
Christ, or his Truths. Millions, I say, of Martyrs and Confessors, have gone
before us in this way of Renouncing the Devil, and his Persecuting Methods of
Tempting: And the time would fail me to tell, what Trials they had of cruel
Mockings and Scourgings, yea, moreover of Bonds and Imprisonments; how they
were Stoned, were Sawn asunder, were Tempted, were Slain with the Sword; how
they wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being Destitute, Afflicted,
Tormented, Heb. 11.36, 37. And all this they suffered, rather than they would
Deny the Faith, or in the least Comply with Idolatry, or Heresy, or with any
Sin and Wickedness, to which Satan and his Instruments would have forced 'em.
And so must we likewise, we must all of us in the same manner utterly Renounce
the Devil, and Resist unto Blood his Tempting us to Heresy, or Sin, if called
thereunto; our Blessed Savior having made it the indispensible Condition of
all his Followers so to do, Matthew. 16.24. If any man will come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me.

And indeed those are the Happy men, who are Persecuted for their Adherence to
Christ and true Religion, against Satan and his wicked Inventions. Blessed are
they which are Persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 5.10. Their Persecution tends in the End, both to their own
greater Reward, Great is their Reward in Heaven, ver 12. And to the farther
Increase and Propagation of Truth; when the Devil has done his worst, the True
Church of Christ, like the Palm Tree, being found to spread the wider for being
Oppressed. And therefore

II. When those bloody Methods fail, Satan then does endeavor so to corrupt
Men's Notions of God and Religion, that by their very Christianity they may
dishonor him.
Secondly, When those bloody Methods fail him, and instead of extinguishing
Christianity, the Blood of the Martyrs proves the Seed of the Church; then with
all the Art and close Contrivance possible, does he endeavor to corrupt Men's
Notions of God and Religion, so that by their very Christianity they may
Dishonor him.

The Dishonor of God, and the Debasing his Authority amongst Men, together
with the Subjection of Man to himself, and the Ruin of our Souls, is the thing
he aims at; and provided he compasses this End, he cares not by what means it
is, whether by Force, or by Fraud: And accordingly he has his Titles given him
in the Scripture from both, where he is called a Lion from his Fury, a Serpent
from his Subtilty. And indeed, if by the former he Has Slain his Thousands, by
these He has Destroyed his Ten Thousands: So that of all his methods to Ruin
us, it does infinitely concern us, That we be not Ignorant of these his Devices.

Now these Politic Methods of his, These Politic Methods of his, discovered
to us under the Parable of a malicious Enemy coming privately in the Night, and
sowing Tares where the Husbandman had before sown good Seed.
whereby he Endeavors To Corrupt Men's Notions of God and Religion, so that by
their very Religion they may dishonor him, are discovered to us in the Gospel,
under the Parable of some malicious Enemy, who coming privately in the Night,
sows Tares where the Husbandmen had before sown good Seed. The Parable runs
thus, Matthew. 13.24. The Kingdom of Heaven is liken'd unto a Man, which Sowed
good Seed in his Field; but while Men slept, his Enemy came and sowed Tares
among the Wheat, and went his way: But when the Blade was sprung up, and
brought forth Fruit, then appeared the Tares also. And in the 37, 38, 39, ver.
Our Savior himself gives us this Explication of it. He that sows the good
Seed is the Son of Man; the Field is the World; the good Seed are the Children
of the Kingdom, that is, the Ministers of Religion, and their good Doctrine:
The Tares are the Children of the wicked One, that is, Heretics and their Evil
Principles; The Enemy that sowed them is the Devil: From which Parable and
Explication of our Savior's we may observe, Like a skilful Husbandman he is
choice about the Nature of the Seed, the Temper and Preparedness of the Soil,
the Fitness of the Season, and the skilfulness of the Seeds-man.
That the most skilful Husbandman is not more curious about the Nature of his
Seed, the Temper and Preparedness of the Soil, and the Fitness of the Season,
and the Skilfulness of the Seeds-man, than Satan is choice and considerate
about the Nature of his Erroneous Doctrines, the Preparation of Men's Minds to
Receive 'em, about the most proper and seasonable Times of dispersing 'em, and
the Capacity and Qualities of those his Agents, whom he Imploys to sow them in
the Souls of Men.

And First, As to the Nature of the Seed, he takes care his Heretical Opinions
and Practices should bear some Resemblance of Divine Truth, in order to conceal
their Discovery.
First, I do take it to be infinitely worth your while to consider, That those
Heretical Principles and Opinions, which Satan does choose to Blend with
Christianity, Do generally bear some Resemblance of Divine Truths in order to
conceal their Discovery: So that as the Tares, which the Enemy sowed, were not
Distinguishable till the Wheat grew up, and bore Fruit: So the Heretical and
Impious Doctrines of Satan's infusing, can scarcely be Known, but by their
Fruits, to which way of Trying 'em our Savior does therefore direct us.

And thus he does usually Gild over his Errors, Thus especially he Gilds his
Errors, where the Light of the Gospel does most clearly shine, as here
with the Resemblance of Divine Truth, especially in those Churches and
Countries, where the Light of the Gospel does most clearly shine. And I think I
cannot do you better Service, than to Instance in some of those pernicious
Errors, both in Faith and Practice, of this Kind, which do at present Infest
this Church and Nation; that so you may be Cautioned against the Entertainment
of them.

And First, It is usual with Satan here amongst us, I. When under the plausible
Appearance of Advanceing God's Honor, in some of his Attributes, he renders
him Odious and Despised in Others
Under the plausible Appearance and Color of Advancing God's Honor, in some
of his Attributes, to render him Odious and Despised in other. Thus for
Instance, By infusing into Men's Hearts a Belief, that God has Created the far
greatest Part of the World, on purpose to manifest his Dominion, and Power, and
Justice, in Damning them afterward for their Sins; he Robs him of the Honor
of being a Gracious, Merciful and Good God, to the utter abolishing of all
Veneration toward him, and Love of him: Insomuch, that the very Atheist, who
denies there is a God, does not so much Affront him, (as even a sober Heathen
thought) as those, who think so Dishonourably of him.

II. When under the Color of Advancing Gospel truths, he propagates Heresies,
which do undermine Religion and the Necessity of a holy Life.
Secondly, Under the Color of Setting up, as the most precious Gospel Truths,
some Opinions, that seem to have a great Resemblance of Truth, he brings in
such Heresies into the Church, as do utterly undermine Religion, and the
necessity of a good Life. Thus by his Teaching, that Christ has so Paid the
whole Debt for our Sins, that the vilest Wretch that Lives, need no more but be
persuaded, that he is an Elected Person; and that the Promises belong to him,
on the Assurance of his particular Election; and that such a Faith as this will
save him: But by Virtue of such an Opinion (of Satan's infusing, no doubt) you
shall too often find, an Envious Malicious Viper, a Covetous Worldling, a
Rebel, and an Adulterer, even before his Sins are Repented of, talk of
Recumbing, and Leaning upon Christ, and Roling upon the Promises (as they are
pleased to express it) with more Assurance than the best and holiest Livers,
and the faithfullest Servants of Christ.

III. When he teaches to prefer some eminent Christian Duty, or some Part of a
Duty, or one Way of performing a Duty, to the disparagement of another.
Thirdly, A most fatal and mischievous Delusion of Satan, rise amongst us in
this Nation, at this Day, is his Teaching Men to prefer some Eminent Christian
Duty, or One Part of a Duty, or One way and manner of performing a Duty, to the
Disparagement of another. Thus you shall often see some careless, whether they
come to Prayers or not, so they can be but at the Sermon; and others on the
contrary, say, they care not whether they shall hear a Sermon in their Lives,
so they can have but Prayers. But the most notorious Cheat he puts upon Men, is
his infusing into their Hearts to Prefer One Part of a Duty, to the utter
Contempt of the other. Thus because in the Worship of God, in Prayers and
Praises, to perform this with an Hearty inward Devotion, is principally
required; and we are commanded, that since God is a Spirit, Christians must
Worship him in Spirit and in Truth. As to prefer Prayer to the neglect of
Preaching, or Sermons to the Contempt of Prayer.
Hence vast Numbers of Men do conclude, that Outward Reverence, by Kneeling,
lifting up the Eyes, and the like, is a mere Outward Ceremony, not at all
necessary under the Gospel; insomuch, that God is now most highly Dishonored,
even in our Public Assemblies, where we come to do him Honor, by the shameful
want of Reverence, appearing in most People, by sitting at their very Prayers.
So true it is what One said, That such a rude and slovenly Kind of Religion, As
also praying in Spirit, to the regard of Bodily Worship.
has made its way into the World, by this Policy of Satan, and such a shameful
Carelessness in Divine Worship; that should a Stranger to our Religion come
into our Assemblies, he could not by the Carriage of the Generality of People,
imagine what they were doing; and that they were Worshipping of the glorious
Majesty of Heaven, would perhaps be one of the last Things he could Conjecture.

And Extemporary Prayer to the utter Contempt of Forms of Prayer.
But the most fatal Error of this Kind, the most mischievous to the Church and
Nation, and to Men's Souls therein, Is the Preferring a way of performing a
Duty, that is Vnpracticable by the Generality of Christians, to the utter
Disparagement of another more easy, and no less acceptable way of discharging
it. This is eminently seen in Advancing Extemporary Prayer, as the only
Spiritual way of Worshipping, and in raising Prejudices in the Minds of
Christians against Forms of Prayer, as not Spiritual enough, if at all Lawful.
It is very certain, that the far greatest Part of Christians are utterly unable
to Conceive for themselves, much less before others, such Prayers, or Praises,
as are proper for their Occasions, and fit to be Offered in Decency and Honor
to so Great and Wise a Majesty, as God is. And this considered, if Prayers of
other Godly Men's; nay, of a whole Church's composing, must not be Used; does
it not necessarily follow, that this Principal of all Christian, of all Natural
Duties, must suffer, if not a total Neglect, at leastwise, that it must be
very indecently and rudely Performed, and in too familiar a manner with God, as
is too usual? Why, woeful Experience does plainly show us, that for this very
Reason it does. And therefore, By this latter Means, Satan has utterly Defeated
those excellent Helps we have in our Church, and brought in a great Neglect of
Public, Family, and private Devotion.
though no Church, through the Care of its Pious Bishops, and Pastors, did ever
Abound with more excellent Forms and Helps, and those better fitted for
Public, Family, and Private Devotion, than our Church does at this Day; yet
upon the account of Men's Prejudices, which they have been taught to Entertain
against Forms of Prayer, as not Lawful, or not Expedient, or not Spiritual
enough; never did Persons so sadly Profane the Worship and Service of God, so
heartlesly join in the Common Prayer, so scandalously throw aside Family
Religion, and so universally, I fear, neglect Private Devotion, as now they do.
I fear, that those who so zealously decry Forms of Prayer, and that on purpose
to Advance in its stead a more Spiritual way of Worship, as they think, will
take it ill, that their darling Opinion should be Entitled to the Policy of so
ill an Author; but, if considering the Mischief, together with the Cunning
there does appear upon Examination, to be in Satan's Contrivances to Ruin
Religion, and to draw us off from God; we may safely Conjecture any Doctrine,
that is Pernicious in its Effects, when Plausible in its Appearance, to be of
his Invention: surely that, which under the Color of Advancing a more
Spiritual Worship, does so fatally destroy all Religious Worship, has another
Spirit for its Author, than is commonly Pretended.

And thus you may perceive, by these few Instances, whereby you may be enabled
to make a happy Conjecture concerning the rest, how Cunningly Satan does Gild
over, and Disguise his Errors with something of a Resemblance to Divine Truth,
in order to prevent their Discovery: And this he does, especially in those
Countries and Churches, where Men do Thirst after Divine Knowledge, and to that
End do Search the Scriptures. The Devil's main and principal Care indeed, is to
keep out the Word of God from shining upon any People; and at first he bends
all his Forces to keep off the Preachers of it, that so the World being
detained in Ignorance, they may not know how to Repent and Return to God: But
when the Light of his Holy Gospel does once begin to shine upon any People,
then all his Endeavors are to Corrupt and Deprave it with false and forced
Explications, and to multiply Controversies and Contentions in Religious
Matters, to teach Men to Scruple every Thing, and out of a scrupulous Humor,
to divide and sub-divide into innumerable Sects and Parties, stirring up each
to Persecute and Destroy the other; that whilst the different Parties contend
so furiously with one another, he may securely Triumph over all, and bring the
Holy Scriptures at last into Contempt with Profane and Atheistical Men: As if
they were the Occasion of all those Wars and Confusions, that are occasioned in
the World by Religious Disputes; when alas! He alone, by managing the Lusts and
corrupt Humors of sinful Men, is the cause thereof. So St. Jude, ver. 19.
These be they who separate themselves, Sensual, having not the Spirit. They
have not the Holy Spirit of God, though no none make more confident Boasts
thereof, than Schismatics and Separatists usually do: But the Spirit, which
they have, is the Spirit of Satan, and of Sensuality, whatever Godliness and
Purity above other Men they pretend to.

II. As to the Temper and Preparation of the Soil, in Churches where
the-scriptures are locked up, and ignorance prevails, he imposes the grossest
Heresies, as Articles of Faith.
But, Secondly, Is the Soil better prepared to his Mind? I mean, Is there no
Prophecy, no Teaching? Are the Scriptures Locked up in an unknown Tongue, and is
a Cloud of Ignorance drawn over a whole Church? Why then he throws off the
Veil, and walks as at Noonday: And there is no Error and Heresy so gross, there
is no Doctrine so contrary to Truth, that he will not Impose as an Article of
their Belief. There is not that Ceremony so Absurd, Trifling, and Ridiculous,
which he will not Introduce into such People's Worship: And there is no
Immorality so bad in Practice, which he will not teach such People securely,
and without Fear of Damnation to commit.

And I do call such Souls, who know not the Scriptures, and are utterly
Ignorant of Divine Things, a Soil better prepared to his Mind; because he can,
with the greatest Ease, reduce such back to his Ancient Paganism and Idolatry,
Especially he introduces Idolatry and Superstition, whereby he is most
immediately and directly served.
or something like it, which above all things he desires; because by
Superstition and Idolatry he is more directly and immediately served. As a
Politic Prince, he will make great Advantages of the Divisions of another's
Subjects: But the Idolater is his immediate Slave, and therefore an ignorant
Soul, as being most proper to sow that Weed in, is the Soil he does most of all
like. But he has a wonderful skill in suiting his Seed to any Soil, so that
whatever People's Interests, or Lusts do incline 'em to Believe, he will never
fail to suggest such plausible Arguments, as will most probably take with 'em.

III. As to the fitness of the Season, he is dexterous in Accomodateing his
Counsels, his Actions, and his manner of acting to such Seasons, as are most
proper to his Purpose of seducing Mankind.
Nor, Thirdly, Is Satan less Subtle in Distinguishing, which are the most fit
and advantageous Seasons of sowing his Tares of corrupt Doctrines in the Field,
or Church of Christ. Indeed, his great Dexterity and Policy is eminently seen
in suiting his Counsels, his Actions, and his manner of Acting, to such
Seasons, as are most proper to his Purpose of seducing Mankind. And though it be
his constant and perpetual Endeavors, to Exercise his utmost Enmity against
the Seed of the Woman, and to Establish his Kingdom amongst Men: Yet to fit his
Counsels to proper Seasons, to suit 'em to the several Ages of the Church, to
the Studies, and Dispositions, and Occupations of Men, that so he may commit no
Blunder in his Politics, is his great and mighty Care and Cunning. Of which,
amongst other Instances that might be given, I will choose but One.

In the dark and ignorant Ages of the Church, which were from about the Ninth
Century, till toward the time of the Reformation, when Men's Studies and
Dispositions savored wholly of Superstition; we hear of nothing so much in the
Stories of those Times, as of the Apparitions and Visions, Hence in dark and
ignorant Ages, nothing so common as the Apparitions of Saints, as was pretended
to introduce the belief of Purgatory, Image Worship, and the like Superstitions.
that the Founders of their several Orders, and superstitious Doctrines did
receive: Insomuch, that no New Order of Monks and Friars, nor any New Doctrine
of Purgatory, Image Worship, Prayers to Saints, or any Pilgrimage to the Shrine
of some Saint departed, was to be Invented; but either the Virgin Mary, or some
other Saint, is said to have Appeared, and to have Appointed it. And as
Legendary and Fabulous, as were the Histories of those Times, I am apt to
Believe there were such Apparitions, as I am thoroughly persuaded, that Samuel
did Appear to Saul: But then, as it was not really Samuel himself, for his Body
was in the Grave, and his Soul in Paradise (and it was not in the Power of the
Witch of Endor, to Raise up the One from the Dust, much less to Recall the Other
out of Heaven;) but the Devil, who did assume Samuel's Shape: So it is more
than probable, he might appear in the Resemblance of the Blessed Virgin, and
Others, to seduce the superstitious People of those Times into Idolatrous
Practices, who throwing aside the Scriptures, Gave heed to Fables and Doctrines
of Devils. It was infinitely then the Interest of his Kingdom so to do.

But pray Observe his different Policies at this Day. And in learned and
Philosophical Ages he is as shy in appearing, lest he should destroy the
prevailing Sadducism.
Now we live in a Learned and Inquisitive Age, wherein Men are naturally very
suspicious, and not easy to believe what they do not see. And therefore partly
through such an incredulous Temper of Mind, and partly through a Spirit of
Atheism and Sadducism now Reigning, many, like the Sadducees of Old, will
Believe no Spirits. And therefore now we do very seldom hear of any Apparition,
and the Atheist cannot not obtain One, though he desires it, and would go many
Miles to see One. The Reason is plain. Should the Devil appear to him, it would
convince him there are those Invisible Powers, which now he denies; and
therefore Satan, who is so Politic, will be as backward to appear now, as he
was forward then: Because it is as much his Interest to detain Men in Atheism
and Sadducism in this, as in Superstition in former Ages.

Fourthly, IV. As to the skilfulness of the Seedsman, Satan is wonderfully
cunning in making choice of fit and proper Instruments, and in furnishing
those with the proper Arts of Deceiving, and with suitable Qualities, whom he
employs to sow the Seed of corrupt Doctrine in the Souls of men.
And that there may be nothing wanting to complete his Delusions, Satan is
wonderfully cunning in making choice of fit and proper Instruments, and in
furnishing those out, both with all the plausible Arts of Deceiving, and also
with suitable Qualities, whom he employs to sow the Tares of corrupt Doctrines
in the Souls of Men. This the Holy Spirit is particularly careful to Inform us
of, and to Forewarn us against 'em; especially 2 Cor. 11.14. where the Apostle
tells us, That As Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light (which he
is, when under the plausible Appearance and Color of Advancing God's Honor in
some of his Attributes, and of setting up Gospel Truths, as he would have 'em
taken to be, he does Introduce Heresies, and Vile Practices into the Church,
that do most effectually undermine God's Authority amongst Men, and wholly
Overthrow all Reverence to him:) So that those Teachers, his Agents, who do
Infuse any of his false Doctrines into Men's Hearts, Are deceitful Workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, ver. 13.

They are deceitful Workers, Teaching the Doctrines of Christianity by Halves,
sometimes Advancing Morality, and a Virtuous Life, with the Neglect, if not
with the Contempt of, and in opposition to an Orthodox and sound Faith;
sometimes on the other side, placing all Religion in Believing aright
concerning God and Christ, and decrying the Interest of Good Works in our
Justification before God. And to the End they may be the better fitted to
Deceive, he is not wanting to Furnish out his Instruments with all the most
plausible Arts of Deceiving. And their deceitful Working is usually in the very
same manner as the Devil's was. That wicked Spirit would have Tempted our
Savior desperately to throw himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple, and
to presume upon God's working of a Miracle to preserve him in so doing. And to
Encourage him therein, he quotes a Text of Scripture, which is in Psalm. 91.11,
12. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, and they shall bear thee up
in their hands, lest thou dash thy Foot against a Stone. In the Quotation of
which Place of Scripture, you may observe, he leaves out what makes against
him, which are these Words, To keep thee in all his ways. The Words entire are,
He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all his ways;
meaning, That so long as a Man keeps himself in the Ways of God, and in the Use
of those due Means, which he has prescribed; he will not fail to Preserve him.
And in the very same manner do most Heretical Deceivers delude the World. They
will pretend the highest Veneration and Respect for Scripture, and none are so
apt to quote it for every Thing they say, as they: But then if you observe
them, they either leave out such Expressions, as make against them, or consider
not the Scope and Meaning thereof, with reference to the Context and Meaning of
the foregoing and following words, or they put some forced and violent
Interpretation upon 'em, not at all agreeable to the meaning thereof in that
Place Thus they are Deceitful Workers.

And, They will Transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ, putting on
the Garb and outward Appearance of Apostolic Virtues and Graces, when they go
forth into the World to disperse these their Errors. Indeed Satan is careful to
furnish those, whom he sends out, with suitable and agreeable Qualities,
according to the Nature of those Errors they are to sow in the World. If their
Business is to undermine the Faith of Christians, to disparage the more
mysterious Doctrines of Christianity, of a Trinity of Persons in one Divine
Nature, Such as place all Religion in Morality, shall be adorned with Humanity.
and of the Divinity and Satisfaction of Christ, and to place the whole of the
Christian Religion in Morality, and a Good Life; why then he will adorn his
Agents with the fair and plausible Virtues of Humanity, and Courtesy, and
Civility of Manners, which are most taking amongst Persons of better Quality,
the likeliest Soil to sow Heterodox Opinions of that Nature in.

But on the other side, Is it his Design to starve that Part of Christianity,
which consists in the Practice of moral Virtues, and to Represent it all as
Mystery? Such as turn it all into Mystery, shall be Gifted with Canting.
Why then his Agents shall have the Gift of Uttering themselves in Canting
Phrases, and obscure and dark Forms of Expressions, that seem to have something
of Mysteriousness in them. And all they teach, it shall look as if it were
inspired, being poured forth with mighty Noise and Vehemence, accompanied
sometimes with Tremblings and Shakings, as if under some strong Impulse from a
Spirit within.

And yet to see the Crooked Windings of this Subtle Serpent, And yet sometimes
the Crooked Serpent by Men seeming Godly, will propagate Principles extremely
Immoral.
you shall observe (which is a wonderful Artifice of Satan) even those very
Persons, whose Doctrines do directly tend to render an Honest and Upright
Conversation very insignificant in Religion, to be notwithstanding themselves
very Demure, and in outward Appearance Sanctified Persons; no Swearers, nor
Riotous Livers, and free from those gross and scandalous Immoralities, which
some of the Professors of a much better Religion are perhaps notoriously Guilty
of; insomuch that the undiscerning Part of Men do often Embrace those very
Heresies, which naturally and directly tend to Encourage Sin, and Dishonesty,
and Unmercifulness: And in a word, To render Men secure in the Practice of any
Wickedness, merely for the sake of the appearing Holiness of those Men's Lives,
who teach those Principles tending to Immorality. And this is an extraordinary
Reach in Satan. That impure Spirit is sometimes content, that some of his
principal Agents should not be immorally Wicked; for by few such Men's seeming
Godliness, he Propagates those dangerous and destructive Principles, which will
make Multitudes become securely, and without Remorse of Conscience,
Villainously Wicked.

And now there is not a greater Difficulty perhaps in the whole Christian
Warfare, The most difficult Part of a Christian's Warfare is to preserve One
self untainted with Heretical Pravity, colored over with the Varnish of
Gospel Truth.

But yet by Trying it by proper Rules it may be done, viz.


than to preserve One-self untainted with Heresies, and the most poisonous
Errors, colored over with a mere Resemblance of Gospel Truth.

But however, as difficult as it is, no honest Mind, that will be careful to
weigh those Poisonous Doctrines, and the Persons who Propagate them in the
Balance of the Sanctuary; that is, by those Rules, which the Scripture has
given us: But may be able to discover the Lightness and Vanity of both, and so
to Renounce both one and the other. And that which every one is to do, that he
may Renounce them, is not to be too easy in Entertaining 'em, because Plausible
at first appearance; but impartially to Try and Examine, by a true and
infallible Touchstone, both their Doctrines, and those who Propagate them,
whether they Be of God. Thus we are directed, 1 John 4.5. Beloved, Believe not
every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of God, because many false
Prophets are gone out into the World.

And how shall you do this? Why the Scripture does give you Two most infallible
and plain Rules whereby to do it. The one Matthew. 7.16. The other the Verse
immediately following the now cited Place of St. John. That in Matthew is this,
I. By its Tendency to an Ill Life.
You shall know them by their Fruits. If their Doctrines are apt to infuse into
your Minds any unworthy and undue Thoughts of God, or any Seeds of Impiety,
Injustice, Uncleanness, Uncharitableness, Sedition, Rebellion, in a word, if
they do Countenance any Immorality, etc. II. By its Taking off from our
Dependence upon the Mediation of Christ, for the Acceptance of a good One.
Let their Pretenses and Carriage be never so fair and free from Scandal, to be
sure they are False Prophets, and the Devil's Agents. The Rule given us, 1 John
4.2, 3. whereby to discover the Doctrines of Satan's infusing, is this; Hereby
know ye the Spirit of God; every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ
is come into the Flesh, is not of God. By Jesus Christ being come in the Flesh,
is meant, that Jesus Christ took our Nature upon him, that he might be a
Mediator betwixt God and Us, to Reconcile the Father to us, by his
Satisfaction and Intercession for us. And whosoever shall teach contrary to
this, so as to take off our Dependence upon Christ, let him seem never so
Zealous for a Good Life, his Doctrine is of Satan's devising.

The whole Design of Christianity is, no doubt, as appears from these Two
former Rules, to make us Holy in this World; and yet withal to create in us
such a Dependence and Reliance on Christ for Salvation, as to expect it, not on
the account of our own Holy Performances, which are so imperfect, but in the
Virtue of Christ's Mediation with the Father for us. And whosoever will but
carefully Examine the several false Doctrines, so much Preached up at this Day
by our Enemies on either side, by these Two Rules, showing the Design of
Christianity, I am verily persuaded, will find most of them to thwart one Part,
or other of this Design; and that either they discourage Holiness, or if they
seem to stand upon the Necessity thereof, they decry the Necessity of our
Dependence upon Christ's Mediation for God's Acceptance of it to our
Justification; and so by one, or other of these Rules, we may discover them to
be Doctrines of Satan's infusing. Most of the Doctrines of the Church of Rome
do plainly tend to make Men secure in a Course of Sin; and those Antinomian
Tenets, wherewith some of our Dissenting Brethren are too much in Love, do also
tend to the same, causing us to depend so entirely on Christ's satisfaction, as
to make us neglect the Working out our own Salvation: On the contrary, the
Socinian, at the same time he pretends much for Morality, and a Good Life,
denies the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ, and that God the Father gave
him to be an Atonement for the Sins of Mankind, and in the Virtue of his
precious Blood, to intercede in Heaven for our Reconciliation; so that he
wholly takes off our Faith, or Dependence on Christ for Justification. Thus may
the most dangerous Errors, now in the Church of Christ, with a little
Watchfulness and Care to examine the Tendency of them, be discovered by you,
from whose Suggestions they proceed, and that they are Tares of the Enemies,
that is, the Devil's sowing, whilst the Husbandman was asleep.

But do you, I beseech you, carefully beware of such false Doctrines, and
deceitful Teachers; both which are Satan's Temptations to draw you unwittingly
to sin against, and dishonor God: And though his Agents seem never so Demure,
and appear never so Sanctified, who do teach Men such Doctrines; Beware of
those Wolves, who come to you in Sheeps clothing, you shall know them by their
Fruits. If they shall endeavor to instill into your Minds, any undue
Apprehensions of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, contrary to what you are
taught out of the Scripture, in the Doctrine of our Church; or any pernicious
Opinions, that in their Nature and Tendency shall render an Holy, Good Life
unnecessary to our Justification; assure your selves they are no Ministers of
Christ, but of Satan: And are set on work by him to destroy God's Authority,
amongst Men, and to set up his own Laws in their Hearts, the Thing he aims at.
And so much for this Time.

THE Twelfth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works; the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
THE Point that we are now upon, is to make as full a Discovery to you, as here
we can, of that Great Work of the Devil, his Tempting us to Sin: A Work so
eminently the Business and Employment of Satan, and so dangerous and
Destructive to Mankind, and also managed in such manifold and cunning Methods,
that it ought particularly to be considered by us. The Devil, says a Father,
has nothing else that he does, but Tempt us to Sin; He neither Eats, nor
Drinks, nor Sleeps, nor does he any thing else but Tempt, Deceive, and Subvert
us. This is his Meat, this is his Honor, this is his Joy. In this he is
Indefatigable, and if he could have his Will, he would never cease Tempting us,
but that he is restrained by the Power of God.

And now in order to the Countermining and Defeating this mischievous Work of
his: First, having showed you, by what Temptations and Means he Overthrew the
whole Race of Mankind, and drew it off from Obedience to God, to do Service to
him: And, Secondly, Having also laid before you, such Temptations as he Levels
against the Church of Christ, the true Servants of God, either utterly to
destroy 'em, or to Corrupt their Religion, that by that they might Dishonor
their Maker.

Thirdly, I am now to show you, III. Satan's great Industry is to gain over to
his Party, or to Tempt to some scandalous Enormity such Persons as are more
than ordinarily Eminent for their Rank, their Order, or their Piety in the
Church.
That next to his Destroying and Perverting of whole Churches, his great
Industry is to gain over to his Party, or to Tempt to some grievous and
scandalous Enormity, such Persons, as are more than ordinarily Eminent for
their Rank, or Quality, their Order, or their Piety in the Church of God.

And, First, Such as are most Eminent for their Station or Quality.
First, Such as are most Eminent for their Station, or Quality. Hence Elymas
the Sorcerer, that Child of the Devil, applied himself so diligently to Sergius
Paulus, a Deputy, and Great Man in his Country, to turn him from the Faith,
Acts 13.7, 8. And hence, as in that long Catalogue of the Kings of Judah and
Israel, how few were there, who were not Idolaters, and highly Infamous for
some high Abomination, or other? So, since the World became Christian, how many
Kings of the Earth are there, who have Committed Fornication, that is, Idolatry
with the Whore of Babylon, and lived Deliciously with her, and how will both
they, and the Merchants of the Earth, weep and mourn over her, when her
Calamities come upon her, Rev. 18.9.11. It is Astonishing to consider how, that
so many of the Honorable, and the Rich, who of all Men living are Obliged to
be Grateful to God, for so many extraordinary Favors and Blessings, which they
enjoy above other Men, should yet carry it so insolently against their Great
Benefactor, lifting up their Heads above the Heavens, Such Men's wickedness not
altogether from the Temptingness of Riches, but the Industry of Satan, to get
over such leading Men to his Party.
as it were, Trampling under Foot all Laws, both Divine and Humane; and both in
Word and Deed denying and disowning any Powers above 'em. Why, this is not
altogether from the Temptingness of Greatness and Riches, which it must be
confessed, are alone a very considerable Temptation; but also from Satan's more
than ordinary Industry to gain over to his Party and Interest, such Men above
all others. For why? These are Generals, and Great Officers, as it were, in the
Church Militant; and these therefore, if they can be but Prevailed upon to
Revolt from God, all the Herd of Mankind besides will in a manner follow of
Course.

Such Men's Examples, if bad, of malignant Influence, because Conspicuous.
There is indeed (Satan does very well know it) nothing that has a more
malignant Influence upon the Lives and Manners of Men, than the lewd and
profligate Courses of those, who are Eminent in Quality, or Power. Their
Examples are doubtless of vast importance. As in this World they live in a
Crowd all their Life: So they pass not into the other, without a Train of
Followers at their Heels. If their Examples are extraordinarily Good, they
bring many to Heaven along with 'em; if they have been Vicious and Naughty,
whole Troops follow to Hell after them; for Subjects, Children, Servants,
Dependants, all take after their Lord and Master, except it be very rarely: And
will bring upon 'em the Guilt, not only of their own, but of other Men's Sins,
because
So that those, who abound either in Wealth, or Honor, and do therefore think
they have a greater Privilege to Sin than others, because they have greater
Temptations to it, than other Men, are miserably mistaken; for as their Lives
being public and conspicuous, lie more open to the Observation and Imitation
of the World, and therefore do cause more to Sin: So they shall not have their
own only, but the Sins of others (so far as they have influenced 'em to) to
answer for.

And the Reason hereof is this: The Actions of Great Men have some Force of a
Precept with 'em, as well as of a Pattern; Their Actions have the force of a
Precept, as well as of a Pattern, which Inferiors are afraid to show their
dislike of.
For as One well observes, Those who are much Eyed, cannot sin singly, both
because Men of weaker Minds, and less Consideration, look upon them as the
great Masters of Knowledge, and Bravery, and therefore strive to imitate, and
be like them: And also, because they have many Dependants, that hope to receive
something from them, and to be some way Bettered by them; and this they cannot
hope to be, except they Copy out their Examples, and show their Love and
Honor, or rather Flattery to them, in endeavoring what they can to be like
them. And therefore we do commonly see the Generality, upon any Change, are
ready to take up with the Religion, or Transcribe the Pattern, and Ape the
Actions and Vices of their Prince, or other Governor; and their Faults, as
well as Habits, shall become the Fashion of their Country: So that an Unholy
Prince, shall seldom have a Religious People; a Debaucht Nobility and Gentry, a
Devout and Orderly Neighborhood and Family; a Wicked Father, Pious Children;
or an Evil Master, Good Servants: But their Actions have the Force, not only of
a Pattern, but also of a Rule and Law, which Inferiors and Dependants are
afraid to go against. So that it is not to be wondered, that the Devil should
be more than ordinarily industrious, to gain over to his Party, such as are
most Eminent for their Station and Quality. (One such tall Cedar sweeps away
with him in his Fall, all the lower Shrubs within the reach of its Branches.)

But then it does infinitely concern Persons of Quality, Great Men therefore
must, of all others, Renounce the Temptations of Satan.
of all Men Living, utterly to Renounce the Ways of Sin, because their ill
Examples are of such Bad and malignant Influence upon others. And they should
Renounce all the ways of Scandalous and Notorious ill Living, as they are
Influential upon others, not only for the sake of other Men, but also for their
own dear sakes. For alas! If a Man's own single Sins, unrepented of, will
Plunge him into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone; how Deep into the bottomless
Pit must they sink, who have, besides their own Personal Transgressions, the
Sins of many others pressing 'em Downwards, and loading 'em with all the Curses
of Hell for the ill Example, and other Motives to Wickedness, which they gave
'em? So that it concerns the Great Ones, of all others, to look to their Ways,
and vigourously to Renounce and Resist the Temptations of Satan to Sin and
Wickedness.

Secondly, The Devil is also wonderfully Industrious to Tempt into some
scandalous Sin, or wicked Course of Life; or at leastwise to Invent and
Propagate some scandalous Story, against such as are Eminent on the account of
their Order; viz. The Ministers of Religion. II. Such as are most Eminent on
the account of their Order, viz. the Ministers of Religion.


We of the Sacred Function are designed in a more Eminent manner, it must be
confessed, to be the Light of the World, to be Candles set, not under a Bushel,
but on a Candlestick, that we may give Light to all that are in the House: So
that if he can draw a thick Cloud of Ignorance over our Understandings, and
bring Immorality into our Practice, what he may do with the rest of Mankind,
who are to be Guided by us, he does Rationally enough Conclude. He is indeed
doubly Enraged against us, both because we are the Men, who in the very Nature
and Design of our Office, are to Destroy his Kingdom; and because the rest of
the World do altogether Eye us for their Pattern: He is doubly Enraged against
such, both because in the Nature and Design of their Office, they are to
destroy his Kingdom, and because the rest of the World do altogether Eye them
for their Pattern.

Hence no Temptation left untried, to withdraw such into some scandalous
Enormity.


Insomuch, that they are generally more influenced by our Lives, than by our
Doctrine; and are exceedingly scandalized, so as to think they may Sin with
Allowance and Excuse, if we our selves shall happen in the least to miscarry.
For these Reasons there are no Wiles, nor Artifices, nor prevailing
Temptations, left untried, whereby Satan does not Attempt to withdraw the
Ministers of Religion into some scandalous and enormous Crimes; so that when
any of the Holy Order happen to be overtaken in a Fault, it is not so much to
be wondered at, as having not only the same Natural Infirmities with other Men,
but far more furious Assaults made upon 'em, to Overcome 'em: That indeed there
are so many shining Lights, as this Church and Nation may justly Glory in
having at this Day, is because We are kept by the Power of God to Salvation, 1
Pet. 1.15. But that a Minister of Religion should sometimes Fall, as well
others, and that very foully too, is not to be Admired at, much less made a
matter of Reproach to the whole Order, as it commonly is; since our Savior
himself told Peter, Behold Satan has a Desire to have you, (you above all
Others) that he may sift you as Wheat, Luke 22.31. And he did sift that great
Apostle to the Purpose; insomuch, that he did wilfully. Deny his Master Thrice.

And indeed the more Eminently Industrious any Minister of Religion is found in
the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, the more Industrious is Satan to Overcome
him. And hence the more Industrious a Minister is, the more Industrious is
Satan to Overcome him.
Hence without doubt it was, that he singled out, as St. Peter you see before,
so St. Paul, sending his Messenger, One of his Black Angels, to Buffet him, as
you will see, 2 Cor. 12.7. True it is, God in his wise and good Providence did
order that Temptation of Satan's to a good End, and to the Advantage and
Security of that Apostle: For he Gave him a Thorn in the Flesh, and permitted
Satan's Messenger to Buffet him, lest he should be Exalted above measure, or to
keep him Humble. But Satan no doubt did intend thereby (however his Designs
were Overruled by the Divine Providence, as is most usual) to Overthrow St.
Paul, because he was in Labors more abundant, in Stripes above measure, in
Prisons more frequent, 2 Cor. 11.23. that is, more Industrious in Propagating
the Gospel than others, and came not a Whit Behind the very chiefest of the
Apostles, ver. 5.

And in the very way, that such are most Serviceable to the Church of God,
Satan does so order it, And in the very way wherein he is most serviceable to
the Church of God, Satan does endeavor to make him most Mischievous.
that they shall be Transported beyond the Bounds of Moderation and Sobriety,
(wherein, for the most part, the Virtue does lie) into such Excesses, as are
Sinful Enormities. Thus, is any One Zealous in the Cause of God against Sin and
Wickedness, the wicked One will over-heat this Zeal into Censoriousness and
Bitterness, into Fierceness and Cruelty, and very often into Faction and
Schism. Again does he find a Person more than ordinarily Mortified, and Devout
and Heavenly-minded; much given to Fasting and Prayer? Then will he be buisy to
let down into the Fancy of such a One, As by turning his Zeal into Faction.
deluding Imaginations, and will tempt him by the sweetness of those Incombs,
and Indwellings of the Spirit, as he thinks 'em, to lay aside the plain and
easy Rule of God's Holy Word, as a dead Letter, and not Spiritual enough; and
to give himself up to the Guidance of the Impulses of a Spirit within him, His
Spiritual Mindedness into Enthusiasm.
as if they were immediate Inspirations from God: By which sond Pretensions of
Men, deluded by Satan, infinite Prejudice is done to Christianity, and occasion
given to Profane Wits to deride real Prophecy, as Cheat and Imposture, of which
we have lately seen a most sad Instance.

If he cannot prevail over him by real Mis-carriages, he will render him
useless by forged Calumnies.
But if this subtle Adversary, with all his Wiles and Artifices, cannot prevail
over the Man of God, but that still he is Baffled in all his Attempts upon him;
then he sets his Agents, Slanderers, and Whisperers on work, (for that their
Tongues are set on Fire of Hell, the Scripture tells us, Jam. 3.6.) to invent
and propagate Scandals concerning him. And he does inspire the Calumniator to
raise those false and injurious Reports, either purely by inventing 'em,
without Ground, and thus even our Blessed Savior was accused as an Enemy to
Caesar, and a Sabbath-breaker, or by mis-interpreting of an innocent Behavior
and Action, as a scandalous Crime. And thus again was the Son of God himself,
and John the Baptist Traduced, and thus very frequently are the succeeding
Ministers of Religion injured to this Day. The Son of Man came Eating and
Drinking, that is, He affected nothing singular, nor differing from other Men
in indifferent things, and they say, Behold a man Gluttonous and a Wine-bibber,
a Friend of Publicans and Sinners, Matthew. 11.19. On the other side, John came
neither Eating, nor Drinking, used extraordinary Fastings above other Men, and
they say he has a Devil, ver. 18. And so it also fares with the succeeding
Ministers of Religion. Is any One of a free, cheerful and sociable Disposition,
and does not wholly abstain from appearing in Company? Then he is a Drunkard.
Is he Frugal, and not given to Profuse Living? Then he is Covetous. Is he
Conscientious in maintaining the Dues of his Church, and will not suffer 'em to
be Lost or Invaded by the Sacrilege of Covetous Worldlings? Then he is
Litigious and given to Law, he is Covetous, and what not? So exceeding
Industrious, are Satan and his Agents, to Blacken the Reputation of the
Ministers of True Religion, (I say of True Religion, for you may always observe
with what Industry the real Vices of those, who are Ministers in Heresy and
Schism, are kept secret.) And the only Reason thereof is this, to lessen the
Authority of their Precepts and Example in the World, that they should not do
that Good, that otherwise they might.

It does in Truth so exceedingly concern the Interest of Christianity, that the
Reputation of its Ministers should be preserved unfully'd; It wonderfully
Concerns the Interest of Religion, that the Reputation of its Ministers be kept
unfully'd.
and so injurious to Religion it self, are the Defamations of such Persons,
that St. Paul was careful to warn Timothy, that against an Elder, that is,
against a Minister, He should not receive an Accusation under Two, or Three
Witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19. Though a single Evidence that was Credible, was
sufficient against any other Person: But so much, on the contrary, it is to the
Advancement of Satan's Kingdom, Hence Satan and Satanical men so industrious to
blast it.
and so Satanically are the greatest Part of the World disposed, that a
vilifying Story, or a scandalous Report against them, is more readily invented,
more easily heard, and sooner believed, nay, without any Ground at all
surmis'd, than against any other Person whatsoever. But let me tell you, that
no good Christian, that desires the Destruction of Satan's, and the Advancement
of Christ's Kingdom in the World, will be forward to hear, much less to Believe
and Propagate Defamations of the Clergy; as knowing it is the Policy of Satan,
to put it into the Hearts of uncharitable Spirits to surmise, and raise, and
aggravate little vilifying Stories of those in Holy Orders, as of some
Indiscretion committed: This to make 'em cheap, and more scandalous, and false
Reports of Debauchery and Immorality, to render 'em Odious in the World; and
both on purpose to render their Labors and Endeavors useless and ineffectual,
to the Reformation and Amendment thereof.

In short: Satan matters it not so much, whether by real Sin, or by slanderous
Reports, he lessens the Authority and Influence of the Clergy, And slanderous
Reports lessen the Authority and Influence of the Clergy almost as much as real
Sin.
his Avowed Enemies, whose peculiar Business it is to destroy his Usurpt
Dominion, and to Propagate the Kingdom of God in the World. By real Sins
indeed, he would rather choose, if he could, and does therefore mainly
Endeavor to have the Clergy Blemished; but merely by raising the Scandal, be it
as well False, as True, he gains his End, according to Machiavel, his great
Secretary's Maxim, Fortiter accusare and aliquid adherebit: Throw Dirt upon a
Man, and the Stain will in some measure stick. Such is the Censorious Humor of
the World, as to think there must be something in it, when a Slander is
broacht; and so maliciously are wicked Men bent against the Ministers of
Religion especially, as greedily to swallow every thing, that tends to lessen
their Reputation. In a word, By both he gains his End, which is, to have
Religion it self wounded, through the sides of its Ministers. And whether any
of 'em shall really mis-carry, or be falsely Defamed for so doing, he knows, the
World upon either account will Abhor the Offerings of the Lord, and even a mere
Slander will be such a stumbling Block to many, As to make the Lord's people to
transgress.

It behooves the Clergy therefore so far to Renounce and Resist the Devil's
Temptations, as to take care, not only to be really Blameless, but also to
Abstain from all Appearance of Evil.
And this being so, since it is so much the Interest of the Devil's Kingdom, to
have us Ensnared by his Temptations, for which reason he does therefore Ply us
especially: And since the Generality of the World are so Satanically disposed,
as easily to receive the worst Impressions of us; it concerns us therefore, of
every Order, to follow these excellent Directions given by the Apostle more
immediately to the Higher, 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4.6, 7. And we must take heed
therefore, that we be Blameless, Vigilant, Sober, of good Behavior, apt to
Teach, not given to Wine, no Strikers, not greedy of filthy Lucre, but Patient,
not Brawlers, not Covetous; but such as rule well our own Houses, having our
Children in subjection with all Gravity; not Novices, lest being lifted up with
Pride, we fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. And moreover it concerns the
Interest of Christ's Kingdom, that we have A good Report of those, who are
without, lest we fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. And in a word, of all
Others, we must therefore take care not only to be really Blameless, but also
to Abstain from all appearance of Evil, 1 These. 5.22.

III Such as are of signal for their extraordinary Piety and Virtue.

Good Men, the Devil knows, will be scandalized at such a one's Fall.


Lastly, The Devil is most incessantly buisied to Tempt to the Commission of
some scandalous Enormity, any Person indifferently, who is more than ordinarily
Holy. Satan exactly knows the Temper of the World, that if such a Person chance
to fall at any time into some notorious Sin, though he suddenly rise again by
Repentance, those who are Good will be mightily Scandalized and Offended
thereat, and will be apt to despair of themselves, when they see one so much
beyond 'em in Piety, fall before 'em; that the less serious and looser sort of
People will rejoice to see a Good Man Trip, because this they think will
countenance them in their Impieties, and vicious Course of Living. And as for
the Atheistical and Debauched People of the World, And the Atheistical will
Triumph therein.

And withal the lapsed Person will be rendered almost incapable ever after, etc.


that they will Triumph in it, and cry down all Religion for Hypocrisy, when
they see its greatest Examples commit any thing that is ill. This the Devil
knows very well, and withal, that after such a Fall, the Lapsed Person shall be
rendered almost incapable ever after of Converting others by his Example, or
Exhortations. For as to his Example, though he Repent never so heartily, and
recover his former State with Advantage; yet it will be a continual Blot in his
Scutcheon, that he did so and so, like that, Excepting the matter of Vriah, was
in David's. And as for his Exhortations, let him be who he will, whether
Minister, Magistrate, Parent, or Master, that goes about to Reprove and
Admonish others; the Criminal, instead of being Convinced and Bettered thereby,
will presently Return upon him in Thought at leastwise, if not in Word, with a
Why did you do so your self? And now for these Reasons, I say, the Devil lays a
close Siege against a Person of Exemplary Piety and Goodness. As for those, who
are already Vicious, he reckons himself secure of them; so he does not so much
concern himself about them: He only throws a Temptation now and then into their
way, leaving 'em for the most part to follow the Bent of their own
Inclinations: But against this Bulwark of Religion, a Person of bright and
shining Graces, he draws up all his Artillery, Against this Bulwark of Religion
therefore the Devil draws up all his Artillery.
and levels all his Instruments of Battery. Thus he attackt Holy Job, when he
found that Prosperity would not corrupt him, he goes another way to work, and
with unheard of Afflictions, one following upon the heels of another, he
endeavored to force him to Blaspheme his Maker, and desperately to Curse God
and dye. He is a great Master of Politics, and therefore takes such Measures
as a Crafty General in the Conquest of an Enemies Country. A wise Commander
will always lie down the before Place of greatest Consequence, and upon the
Taking of which the rest will fall in of Course; so the Devil, his great
Attempt is to Foil an exemplary Pattern of Religion, whose Fall he thinks will
shrewdly stagger many others.

But the incessant Industry of Satan to overcome a more than ordinary Piety,
and the Pride he takes therein, The Pride and Pains he takes in overcoming such
a One, represented in a Parable.
I cannot better represent to you, than in the following Parable given us out
of Antiquity. Lucifer having sent forth his Officers to fill the World with
Death and Ruin, they all went on their several Errands: Upon their Return he
demands an account of their Proceedings, What Mischiefs they had done, what
Plagues they had scattered, and what Calamities they had sent amongst
affrighted Mortals. One of them more forward than the rest, Replies, He had
been a Fortnight wandering about, and at last had Over-turn'd some
Merchant-Ships at Sea, insomuch that both Men and Goods were lost. The Prince
of Darkness enraged at his Laziness, instead of a Reward, gave him an Hundred
Stripes, because he had done no more Hurt all that time. Another Spirit stands
forth, and Boasts, that he had been for a Month together Contriving how to set
such a City on Fire, and had at last Effected it; and he also was severely
Punished for his Idleness, and neglect of Accomplishing his Design sooner. At
last comes forth a Third, that had been Forty Years absent, and being asked
how he had Promoted the Interest of the Black-Empire, answered, Those Forty
Years have I been Tempting such a Religious Man to Fornication, and have at
last prevailed, and at this time he wallows securely in his Sin. Beelzebub
immediately rises from his Throne, hugs the mischievous Fiend, Embraces the
Child of Darkness, and with Rhetoric fetched from Hell, Commends him before all
the howling Crew, as having done a greater Exploit, after Forty Years Travel,
than the other did by Afflicting and Consuming so many Men, Ships, and Houses
in a few Days and Weeks. The Moral and Design of the Fable is no other than
this: That if he can make a sincere Believer, weary of his Heavenly Mindedness,
and burning Zeal to God's Glory, he values that Piece of Mischief more than if
he Tempted a great many of those, who are already Wicked, to greater Impieties.
And that not only, because of the Pride and Glory he takes in Conquering such a
Hero in Christianity, but because to make One, who by his Exemplary Piety and
Virtue, was an Eminent Instrument in the Advancement of God's Glory, to become,
by his Revolt from God, as great an Engine in promoting the Kingdom of
Darkness, is to his Credit and Interest both.

And this considered, the more Exemplarily Pious therefore any Man is, the more
it concerns him, to beware of the Devil, The more Exemplarily Pious therefore
any Man is, the more it concerns him to beware of the Devil, and all his
Temptations.
and not to think himself secure on this side Heaven, from Satan's Temptations;
but He that thinks he stands, should take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12.
And therefore I shall bespeak such in the words of St. Peter, 2 Epist. 3.17,
18. Ye therefore Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye
also being led away with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own
stedfastness, but grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

In a word, and to sum up in short what has been spoke on this Point; I have
at length showed you, that next to the Destroying and Perverting of whole
Churches, the Devil's great Industry is to gain over to his Party; or to Tempt
to the Commission of some grievous Sin, such Persons as are more than
ordinarily Eminent for their Rank, or Quality, their Order, or their Piety, in
the Church of God. And this being so; since such are the great Mark of Satan,
it concerns those excellent Persons, who are eminently Great, or Good, that
they do especially, and above all other Men absolutely, and entirely, and
utterly Renounce, and resist all and every the Temptations of Satan, so as not
to yield to any of 'em. Such are to look upon themselves as the great
Commanders in the Church Militant, who are to lead, and to go before others in
the Battles of the Lord, against Sin and Satan; but if any such should Cowardly
Give back in the day of Battle and Temptation, they put a stumbling Block, and
are an occasion to fall in their Brother's way, Romans 14.13. And what says our
Savior in such a Case? Matthew. 18.6, 7. Whosoever shall offend One of those little
Ones, which Believe in him, that is, discourage and drive from the Christian
Practice, by his scandalous Life, any the meanest of his Disciples, It were
better for him, that a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and he were
drowned in the Depth of the Sea. Woe unto the World because of Offenses; he
adds, It must needs be that Offenses come, but Woe to that Man by whom the
Offense comes. So much it concerns Persons Eminent in any Kind, that they be
Good, as well as Great.

THE Thirteenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works; the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
HAVING showed you, Who the Devil is, and What are his Works of Sin, and how we
must Absolutely Renounce both him and them. And as to that other great Work of
his, his Tempting of us to Sin; having showed you, First, By what Methods he
over-threw the whole Race of Mankind at first; and Secondly, How he does still
endeavor the Ruin of the Church of Christ; and especially Thirdly, Of those
who are most considerable for their Rank, or Order, or Piety therein.

I am now Lastly, Lastly, what Temptations Satan levels against all Persons
indifferently considered.
in order to a more full Display of that great Work of the Devil, his Tempting
us to Sin, to discover to you some of the more remarkable Temptations at
leastwise, whereby he applies himself to all Persons indifferently considered,
in the Church of Christ, be they High, or Low, to draw them into Sin.

In the former Attempts upon all Mankind, upon the Church of God, and upon
those considerable and leading Persons therein, whose Fall sweeps Multitudes
along with 'em into Sin and Ruin; Satan showed more of his Ambition and Pride,
as in setting up for a Dominion in direct Opposition to God's: So in waging a
War with the greatest Bodies of Men, and the most considerable Leaders in the
Church Militant. But in these his latter Attempts upon particular Persons,
whereby that Spirit appears not content to Foil greater Numbers, but moreover
pursues his Victory to the picking up here and there every particular Stragler;
he expresses more of his inveterate Malice, in that he is so wholly bent upon
Mischief and Destruction, as to stick at no Pains, and to leave no Methods
untried, whereby he may destroy every particular Soul amongst the the Sons of
Men.

And indeed the Devil's Temptations are the more dangerous, The Devil's
Temptations not easily known to be his, nor always distinguishable from those
of the World, and the Flesh, which are managed and directed by him.
in that they are not easily known when they are his, and cannot always be
distinguished from such as the World, and our own Flesh do give us; for which
Reason, at the motion of these two latter, we do those things without Fear,
which if we knew the Devil had a Hand in, we should tremble at the Thoughts of
Committing. And indeed it is but seldom, the Devil does immediately, by
himself, actuate any One to do Evil; but generally he makes use of the World,
and our own Flesh, as his immediate Instruments, to move us to it: Whilst he
himself stands behind the Curtain, managing and directing those, our other
Enemies, to take their Advantages against us. However, so far as the Scripture
does discover to us any Methods of Temptations to be his, Some of the most
considerable of his Methods of Tempting us discovered.
we may safely ascribe 'em unto him. And some of the more considerable and
dangerous of 'em, I will lay before you.

As First, The Devil does miserably delude People into his Power, by letting
'em alone to be Obedient to God in some Particulars, the better to detain 'em
perfect Slaves to himself in others. I. He permits, if not furthers some in a
partial Obedience to God in some Particulars, the better to detain them perfect
Slaves to himself in others.
This is called a Dividing between God and Mammon, Matthew. 6.24. And indeed
amongst the manifold Delusions of Satan, there is not a more fatal and
mischievous One to the Souls of Men, than the Hypocrisy of a partial and
Un-uniform Obedience, which the Devil does willingly enough allow us in. I say,
The Devil does willingly enough allow Persons to be partially, or in part
Obedient; for when this cunning Deceiver cannot prevail on some to be mere
Libertines, to throw off all the Bonds and Ties of Religion; to be as
Outrageous in Profaneness, Impieties, Villainies, Whoredoms, and all sorts of
Wickednesses, as some of his Black Disciples are; he is then willing to
Compound the matter with such, and so that they will be his a little, he will
contentedly allow 'em to be God's very much: Knowing very well, that if we hold
out one disloyal Fort against God, retain but one Rebel-Lust, and give not up
the whole Man unto Christ, it will as certainly Condemn us, though not to so
great Degrees of Punishment, as if we were wholly Devoted to Satan, and gave
our selves up to follow all our Brutish Lusts; the Word of God assuring us,
that Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one Point, he is
guilty of all, Jam. 2.10. And our Savior declaring to us, that he will not be
served by Halves, nor endure the Devil to share with him in his Kingdom over
us; Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Luke 16.13. Thus the Devil knows it is his
Interest to allow Men to be partially Obedient to God.

And, There is not a more fatal and mischievous Delusion of Satan than this is;
especially, when the partially Obedient exchanges some Sins of a scandalous
Name, for their contrary Virtues, but lives notwithstanding in other Impieties
of a higher Nature. This a most fatal Delusion, when some Sins only of a
scandalous Name, are exchanged for contrary Virtues, but with the Retention of
Impieties of a higher Nature.
I say, when he changes some particular Sins only of a scandalous Name, as his
former Debaucht and Lewd Course of Life, for a quite contrary One of Temperance
and Chastity. He now assures himself, it was by the motion of God's Holy Spirit
he is become a New Man, as he thinks, and that he is now infallibly safe. Thus
have I often known those of the Sect of Quakers, who have formerly been loose
and riotous Livers, Triumph very much in their present State, as certainly from
God; because they no sooner became of this way, but they ceased to be
Drunkards, and Swearers, and lewd Companions, and the like: Whereas, alas! The
deluded Wretch has but Exchanged some gross Sins of a more scandalous Name, for
other Impieties of a higher Nature. For now instead of the former more Carnal
Sins, he has received into his Heart the more Spiritual and Devilish Ones, of
Pride and Haughtiness, and Contempt of others; being so far from In Honor
preferring other Men, that he will not give the least Honor to whom Honor is
due. He now decries the inspired Writings of God, as a dead Letter, and
Blasphemously entitles every foolish and deceitful Imagination of his own
corrupt Heart, to the motion of the Holy Spirit; preferring the latter
infinitely before the former. Nay, he now denies all the great Principles of
Christianity; the Divinity, Sufferings, and Satisfaction of Christ, with the
Resurrection of the Body, as most of our present Quakers do, and so is turned
mere Deist at the best. And now who that considers this, can think otherwise,
but that the Unclean Spirit went out of that Man, only to return into the house
from whence he went out, and to take with himself seven other Spirits more
wicked than himself, that they entering in, and dwelling there, the last State
of that man might be worse than the first? Matthew. 12.43, 44, 45. This is
certain, Such the most Irreclaimable of all Sinners.
the most Irreclaimable of all Sinners are those, who have exchanged some ill
Practices, for others equally Wicked, and for impious Principles; for such do
fix themselves in a full Persuasion, That their present Way is of God, seeing
it is contrary to the former, which was undoubtedly the way of Satan: Whereas
in Truth, both their former ill Practices, and their present evil Temper and
Principles, are the Children of the same Father, though unlike to one another in
outward Features. So fatal a Delusion it is of the Devil's, to allow Sinners in
performing a kind of Partial Obedience to God; nay to further 'em perhaps in
the throwing off some sensual and grossly scandalous Courses, that he may more
securely detain 'em Servants and Slaves to himself, in the less discernible
sins of spiritual Wickedness.

Secondly, Another usual Policy of the Devil's, in corrupting of our Manners,
is to Put plausible Names upon the worst Sins, and under that disguise to cheat
Persons into a good Opinion of 'em, and then to commit 'em. II. By putting
plausible Names upon the worst of Sins, under that disguise he does cheat
Persons into a good Opinion of 'em, and then to commit 'em.
And he had the Impudence to Tempt even our Savior himself in this manner. He
would have had him to throw himself headlong from the Pinnacle of the Temple,
alleging that God would give his Angels charge concerning him, and in their
hands they should bear him up, Matthew. 4.6. And this no doubt he would have him
believe, was a Trusting in God.

And in like manner, by a Satanical Device, the Presumption of some, that they
are the Elect, is called their Faith, by which they shall be Justified. Rioting
and Drunkenness is called good Fellowship, and to be easily withdrawn into it,
the Effects of good Nature. Covetousness, Griping and Extortion, is termed a
providing for One's own, which he that does not do, is worse than an Infidel.
And on the contrary, to be Prodigal and Profuse, is to be Hospitable and
Charitable. Spite, Malice, and Revenge is called a Hating of other Men's Sins:
And the most bitter and fierce Contentions, nay the most cruel and bloody
Persecutions, a Zeal for God, and true Religion; and when that Temper is justly
exposed to Hatred and Abhorrence, then a Lukewarmness, and a mere Indifferency
in matters of Religion, whether Truth, or Heresy prevails; Gallio's caring for
none of those things, is styled the calm and sweet Temper and Spirit of the
Gospel. Thus does Sin pass in the World currantly under the mask of Virtue.
Vice appearing in its own Colors is so odious a thing, that no one but must be
ashamed to own it: Sin in that disguise gets Reputation amongst Men.
But being adorned by the Cunning of Satan with Titles of Respect, and in the
shows of Virtue, it is looked upon with no evil Eye; but gets Approbation and
Reputation amongst Men. But the Devil gets a Passport for several Sins into the
World, not only by giving 'em the Name of Virtues: But,

Thirdly, By changing the Nature of several Divine Graces and Virtues, so that
they degenerate into very great Sins. III. By changing the Nature of several
Divine Graces, so that they degenerateinto very great Sins.
It being much the Devil's Policy to Transport Persons out of that Moderation
wherein Virtue does for the most Part consist, into that Excess which much
resembles it, but is really exceedingly sinful and hurtful to Men's Souls. This
we gather to be the Devil's Policy from 2 Cor. 2.11. where the Apostle advises
the Corinthians to Forgive, at the last, that Incestuous Person amongst 'em,
whom they had deservedly Excommunicated, and to receive him to the Communion of
the Church, being he had Humbled himself, and Repented; and that Mercy he would
have 'em show him, lest Satan should get an Advantage over 'em: For we are not
ignorant of his Devices, says he, that is, lest the too long continuance of the
Punishments they inflicted upon the Penitent Offender, might be made use of by
Satan to the hurt and ruin of the Church, by hightning their Zeal against Sin
into an Irreconcilableness to the Sinner. And indeed there are many Sins and
Virtues so near in their Nature, that the Passage from one to the other is
hardly discernible; insomuch, that by the Art of Satan, we easily slide from
one to the other: As Obstinacy in standing out against all Conviction
concerning the Truth, is easily mistaken for Constancy in the Faith, and the
Love of Our-selves, for the Love of God. But especially, that Zeal for God's
Glory, now mentioned, a most Excellent Grace in it self, is often, and that
easily Transported into Cruelty, as we see it was in St. Paul, who out of a
Zeal for the Law, Beyond measure persecuted the Church of God, and wasted it,
Gal. 1.13. Thus by changing the Nature of several Divine Graces and Virtues, so
that they become very great sins, does Satan easily betray us into them.

And what is worse, Sin thus mistaken for Virtue is hardly ever afterward
Repented of; Sins thus mistaken are seldom Repented of.
for whereas Sin, when it appears barefaced, and in its own Colors, and is
known to be so, is an ugly Monster, and is no sooner Committed, but it scares
the Conscience into Grief, Anguish, and Repentance; when it is thus mistaken
for real and true Virtue, it is not only securely, and without the least
Reluctance and Remorse committed; but is confidently Glorified in, and the
Sinner grows Proud of those Villainous Practices, for which he ought to Humble
himself in Sackcloth and Ashes.

Fourthly, It is a most destructive Policy of Satan, To put New Beginners in
the Spiritual Life, upon greater Severities and Strictnesses in Religion, than
they are capable of, on purpose, that when they gro^ weary thereof, and cannot
go through with, they may, together with those their voluntary Severities,
throw all Religion aside, as too burdensome, and not at all practicable. IV.
By putting Novices upon undertaking Severities, greater than they can go through
with, on design that when they grow weary thereof, they may together with those
their voluntary Severities, throw all Religion aside, as too Burdensome, and not
at all Practicable.
This we gather to be a Policy of Satan's, from that Prudent Advice of St.
Paul's, 1 Cor. 7.5. which he gives to Married People; that Except it be with
consent for a time, that they might give themselves to Fasting and Prayer, they
should not prescribe to themselves too long Abstinences from one another, lest
Satan should Tempt them for their Incontinency, so we Translate it, but the
Word in the Original signifies, want of Ability to Contain, or Abstain* Which
Inability, or Weakness to go through any voluntary and undertaken Piece of
Discipline, is an occasion of Temptation, and will be an Advantage to the
Tempter; by which, when he does at any time Attempt such a Person, he may
probably enough Overcome.

Which Inability, or Weakness, I say, to go through any voluntary and
undertaken Piece of Discipline, as of long Fastings, and Watchings at such set
Hours of the Night, or the Performance of certain Vows, which some do lay upon
themselves; these, though they may be serviceable to promote a spiritual Life, if
discreetly and advisedly undertaken by a Person, and with a just Consideration
had to his own Ability and Circumstances: yet they are greater Severities than
what many can go through with, and when imposed upon themselves by such, they
give occasion to Satan to Tempt 'em to throw off those voluntary Services,
together with all Religion, as not Performable by Flesh and Blood, or by any
thing short of Angels. Whereas indeed, it is not the Substantials of Religion,
such as our Savior prescribed, whose Yoke is easy, and whose Burden is light,
Matthew. 11.30. that are so; but those Accessories and Appendages to it, which
some do indiscreetly, and without regard to their own Capacities and
Circumstances, lay upon themselves.

And here it may be useful to let you know, The difference between God's
Ordering, and the Devil's Management of Men in these Matters.
what a Great Master in the spiritual Life observes, Bona de Discretione
Spirituum, Cap. 6.
concerning the difference between God's Ordering, and the Devil's Management
of Men in these matters. God begins with us at low Degrees, and gently leads us
from an imperfect, to a perfect State. He has regard to Persons and their Age,
and imparts one degree of Wisdom to the Aged, another to Youth, one to
Beginners, another to the Perfect. But the Devil, on the contrary, observes no
Order, but darts into our Souls unseasonable Heats, and forthwith suggests
Excesses in Devotion. He persuades such immediately to undertake immoderate
Fastings and Watchings, and to mortify the Body by intolerable Penances. And
these Burdens, because they lay upon themselves without measure, they are not
able to bear; and then their Strength being broke, and the Vigor of their
Minds abated, they do at length backslide into mere Indifferency and Looseness.
And yet to see the crooked Windings of this wily Serpent, as much as he is for
screwing Persons up to Excesses in Religion.

Fifthly, Satan by Injecting of evil Thoughts into our Minds, to disorder and
disturb our Devotions, is very Industrious to Unhallow and Spoil those
Services, whereby we shall most really, and immediately, and directly Honor
and Glorify our Maker, and Benefit our own Souls. V. By injecting of Evil
Thoughts into our Minds at our Devotions, to unhallow those Services, whereby
we do really and most immediately glorify God, and benefit our own Souls.
The Devil being a Spirit, can find an Entrance into our Spirits by ways which
we are not sensible of. And being Divine Worship is the chief of all our
Services we pay to our Maker, as being that, wherein we do most immediately and
directly of all others, Glorify God, and derive down Blessings upon our own
Souls, if rightly performed; the Devil is therefore too too buisy about us,
when we are at our Devotions, to unhallow and spoil 'em. Thus we read, Job 1.6.
that when the Sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, Satan
came also amongst them. And so likewise Zechar. 3.1. we find, that when Joshua
the High Priest stood before the Angel of the Lord, Satan stood at his
Right Hand to Resist him. And the Best of Christians also, who upon other
Objects of far less Concern, and at other times, can fix their Minds steddily,
do often complain, that sometimes in their Prayers they are strangely broken,
and the Intention of their Minds frequently taken off by odd Thoughts, roving
Fancies, and far-fetcht Imaginations. This sure cannot happen, but by the
importunate Urgency of some malicious Spirit, who is marvellously Industrious
to let, and hinder us in nothing more, than in this most Glorious and
Beneficial Service, of our Prayers and Praises to Almighty God.

And thus he hinders the Efficacy of the Word.
And hence also in the Hearing of the Word, does he either bring a Drowsiness
upon the Hearers, so that even at the very instant, we the Ambassadors of
Christ are Proclaiming to sinful Men, those gracious Terms of Reconciliation
sent to them by us, from the infinite Majesty of Heaven: They will even sleep
all the time of its Delivery, or he will endeavor to possess their Minds with
such vain, wandering and worldly Thoughts, that the Seed sown, for want of their
Attention, can never take Root in their Hearts. And this not attending to, and
not considering what you are about, and what you hear, is expressly affirmed to
be from Satan, Matthew. 13.19. When any One hears the Word, and understands
it not, that is, lays it not to Heart, thinks not of it, nor considers it; for
so the Word Translated Understands it not, does import, then comes the
wicked One and catches away that which was sown in his Heart.

Sixthly, The Devil observes the outward Wants and Necessities of Persons, and
accordingly Tempts 'em to the use of unlawful and undue Means to remove those
Evils. VI. The Devil observing the outward Wants and Necessities of Persons, he
accordingly Tempts them by the use of unlawful Means to remove those Evils.
Thus he dealt with our Blessed Savior, Matthew. 4.2, 3. And when he had Fasted
Forty Days, and Forty Nights, and afterward was an hungered, then the Tempter
came to him and said, If Thou be the Son of God, command that these Stones be
made Bread; that is, he would have him, out of an Impatience of waiting the
ordinary Means of satisfying his Hunger, to Tempt God to Feed him
Super-naturally, and by way of Miracle. And if a Man be Sick, and want present
Help in lawful Means, then will the Devil Tempt such a One, to seek his Remedy
by Charms and Spells, as a more short, certain, and easy way of Curing, than by
Physical Medicines; and no doubt the Devil may sometims work extraordinary
Feats by these methods, the better to keep Mankind in Dependence upon himself:
But it is a certain sign of want of Grace, and of none, no not the least Fear
of God in them, who shall resort, in such Cases, to Persons suspected to hold
Correspondence with the Devil, and shall make use of those means of Cure
prescribed by 'em, concerning whose Operation of any such Cure, no Reason in
Nature can be given, nor the Appointment of God pretended, that such Words,
though they may be Words of Scripture, should work such Effects.

Seventhly, The Devil knowing every particular Persons inward Temper and
Disposition, both of Body and Mind, better many times, than he himself does; he
accordingly presents such Objects to the Fancy, as shall be likeliest to
prevail over such a Man to commit some grievous Sin. VII. Knowing every
particular Person's inward Dispositions, he accordingly presents such Objects
to the Fancy, as shall be likeliest to prevail over such a Man to commit some
grievous Sin.
Thus is a Person of a melancholy Disposition, to such a One he either
aggravates the matter of his Discontent, or he will present to the Fancy so
many frightful Objects, and will load his Mind with such a multitude of black
and dismal Apprehensions; that the melancholy Wretch shall be weary of
himself, and will sly from that worst of Tormentors, he thinks, his own Mind,
even to the Grave, and into Destruction it self for Refuge. And hence it is,
that so many miserable Wretches hang, stab, drown, or shoot themselves, being
thus Tempted thereto by Satan. And hence it is, that Persons of a melancholy
Temper of Mind are so apt, above others, to be troubled with Blasphemous
Thoughts, though Persons of great Piety, and such as have all along Feared God,
and kept his Commandments. Both these, and the former Apprehensions are some of
those Fiery Darts of the Devil, mentioned Ephesians. 6.16. cast into the Soul, at
such time, when they are least able to Repel 'em; and that on purpose to
disturb the poor melancholy Wretch to the highest degree, so as to do Violence
to his own Nature, and to destroy himself; or to force from him Expressions
most highly Dishonou^able to God, and Terrible to Christian Ears to hear. But,

Eighthly, The great Battery of the Devil, whereby he does storm the Innocence,
and shake the Constancy of the greatest Part of Mankind, Is his Representing to
the Fancy of Men, the Convenience of Riches, the Glory of Honors, and the
Sweetness of Pleasures, thereby to Bribe 'em to Rebel against God, and to Sin
against their own Souls. VIII. Above all by Representing to the Fancies of Men,
the Convenience of Riches, the Glory of Honors, and the Sweetness of
Pleasures, he does thereby Bribe 'em to Rebel against God, and to Sin against
their own Souls.


This I call his great Battery, and usually therefore he does Assault us
therewith, not till all others have failed him. In this manner he dealt with
our Savior. When all his other Temptations proved ineffectual, The Devil
takes him up into an exceeding high Mountain, and shows him all the Kingdoms
of the World, and the Glory of 'em. And says unto him, All these things will I
give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me, Matthew. 4.8, 9. But although the
Son of God was no more to be won upon by this, than by any of the former, to
comply in the least with the Designs of the wicked Tempter: Yet the Weakness of
the Generality of Men is such, that they are Bribed hereby, when nothing else
can prevail, to Apostatize from God, to do Injuries to Men, and to do the
greatest Abuses to their own Reason and Nature; and in short, to commit every
Kind of Sin, whereby God is Dishonored, and they themselves shall be finally
Ruined.

And the Manner and Cunning wherewith the Devil manages these Temptations, is
extremely well worth your Notice. When he makes any Representation to our Souls
of this World's Glory, he only shows us the fairest Outside of those Things,
to allure us thereby into Sin, industriously concealing all that is vain, and
vexatious, and stinging therein, which would deter us from it. In his
Representation of this World's Goods, he shows only the fair outside to allure
into Sin, industriously concealing all that is hurtful therein, and would deter
Men from it.
Thus he managed the matter with our Savior, and thus he does still with us.
In that World, and the Glory thereof, which he showed to our Blessed Lord,
there was a great mixture of Confusion, and Disorder, and Crosses, and
Vexations, and Troubles; but nothing of this did he represent to his View, when
he offered it to him as a Bribe; but only gave him to see the Plenty, the
Grandeur, the Beauty thereof, separated from the other ungrateful and
displeasing Part: And so he deals with us. He does very lively present to Men
the Advantage of Riches, how that Money commands all Things, and then stirs up
their Covetous Desires after it, so as to get it they care not how, by
Thieving, and Robbery, by Cozennage, and Extortion, and Sacrilege, or by any
unlawful Arts and Methods. He does dazzle their Eyes with the Splendour and Glory
of High Places, lets 'em see the Cap, and the Knee, and low Obeisances, and the
servile Flatteries made to the Grandees of this World, to stir up their
Ambition to wade through Seas of Blood, and to tread upon the Necks of
oppressed Provinces, in order to mount those Seats of Honor. And lastly, he
does very lively lay before their Eyes the Luxury and Wantonness, and seeming
Ease found in sensual Pleasures, and so inflames their Lusts and Appetites
after the Enjoyment of 'em: But he draws a dark shade over the deformed Part of
the World, that we may not perceive those manifold Troubles, and Vexations, and
Disappointments, and Punishments, attending these Things in the unlawful
getting of 'em; and the never-failing Remorses and Regrets of Conscience,
Amazing, and Distracting, and stinging, with a Venom more inflamed and furious
than that of Scorpions, the Souls who wickedly pursue and attain to those
Things. All this dark Part he reserves till this World's Goods are so unjustly
got, to work upon their Shame and Despair, in order to promote his farther
Designs upon 'em, as you will see in his following Temptations.

As, Ninthly, When any have been once prevailed upon by the Convenience, the
Beauty, the Honor, or the Pleasure of any of these Outward things, which the
Devil has presented to their Fancies, to commit Sin to obtain them: Then he
fails not to lay the Shame and Disgrace of their Sins before them, and will
persuade them to commit another horrid Wickedness, to hide from the Eyes of Men
the Shame of the former. IX. Having prevailed thereby upon Persons to commit
some grevious Sin to obtain them, he then lays the shame and Disgrace of their
Sins before 'em, persuading 'em to commit another horrid Wickedness, to hide
from the Eyes of Men the shame of the former.
Thus when he had Tempted David to commit Adultery with Bathsheba, the Wife of
Vriah, then must the Injured Husband be made Drunk, that his Lying with his
Wife might not be Discovered, when he returned from the Battle; but that he and
the World might think the Child Begotten was his own: And when that would not
make Vriah go in unto his Wife, then at last he must be Murdered, by being put
into the Front of the Battle, and then Treacherously left to be Cut off by the
Enemy, that she being freed of her former Husband, he might without Scandal to
the Eye of the world, Enjoy her as his own Wife. And how often do we see the
like Device to draw Men into Sin, acted over and over at this Day, and many
lewd, ungodly Persons, after they have committed Uncleanness, privately to
murder their own Offspring, to prevent the Shame and Disgrace that will
follow, the Fact being known. And when Children and Servants have done amiss,
how commonly are they prompted to tell a Lie, nay, and sometimes to Swear to
it, that it may not be discovered? The Devil well knows that Sin is like laying
a Train of Gunpowder, which if you fire but One Corn, it will presently give
Flame to all the rest: So one Sin committed, the shame of that will engage you
to commit another to hide the former. And therefore it is, I say, the usual
Policy of Satan, when he has Tempted any Person to commit a Wickedness, then to
lay the Shame and Disgrace thereof so sensibly before him, that he shall again
commit a worse, on purpose to cover the Knowledge of the former from the Eyes
of Men.

And then, Tenthly, When he has once Engaged a Person into many Sins, either he
will lull him into a fatal Security, X. Having once Engaged a Person into many
Sins, he either lulls him in security, or drives him into despair.
whereby he foolishly persuades himself, that God will deal more mercifully
with him, than he has declared in his Word; or else Satan will not fail to
present at last to such an enormous Sinner's Conscience, the infinite Guilt and
Horror of his Crimes, to make him despair if he can, that ever they will be
Forgiven, they are so many and Monstrous: That so he may never endeavor to
Repent, or so much as fly to God in Prayer, to have Mercy on him. At first he
presented to the Sinner's Fancy nothing but the Beauty, the Convenience, the
Pleasure, the Glory of the Things of this World; as of the Pleasures, Riches,
and the Honors of this Life, with all their Advantages, without any thing of
that Sting, and Remorse, and Trouble, that must necessarily attend them, if
unlawfully pursued and obtained. But when by this Means the Sinner has run on,
without the least stop or stay, into a vast Number of wasting Sins, (some of
them perhaps of such a Nature, that no Reparation or Restitution can be made
for them, as Adultery and Murder,) Then will he pour in all of a sudden, whole
Broad-sides, such an Horror, and such an amazing sense of Guilt, into the Soul
of such a Sinner, that thinking it to no purpose to Retreat, he shall push on
to commit the most outrageous Villainies, till at length when Death seizes him,
he goes down into Hell, desperately Cursing the Day he was Born, and
Blaspheming that God, who gave him a Being.

And now Lastly, I shall not mention any other way, wherein Satan tempts Men,
except it be when God in Punishment to some sort of Sinners, does abandon them
to the Devil, Lastly, there are those, whom God does in a great Measure give up
to the Delusion of Satan, Others whom he does wholly Abandon to the Power of
the Devil.
to be wholly in a manner Ordered and Acted by him. And there are Three sorts
of Sinners, that do seem to be thus abandoned by God, and given up, some in a
great measure, others wholly, to the Management of Satan.

First, Such ill-dispos'd Minds, as out of Hatred to the Ways of God, and out
of Love to their own Lusts, do endeavor to possess their Minds with such
Principles, and do seek such Teachers, as will make Sin easy to their
Consciences, and will reconcile the Hopes of Heaven, and a bad Life together.
And such are in danger of being justly left, in a great measure, to the
Delusion of the Devil. As to such Men, because They receive not the Love of the
Truth, that they might be Saved, God does threaten to send them strong
Delusions, that they should believe a Lie, 2 These. 2.10, 11. And because the
Generality of the World is so ill-dispos'd, that it cannot endure sound
Doctrine, which would discover, or hinder, or gall their Consciences in their
evil Practices; God does therefore most justly permit so many to be Deluded by
Satan, I. Such ill-dispos'd Minds, as out of love to their Lusts, seek after
such Principles and Teachers, as will make sin easy to their Consciences, are
justly left to the Delusions of Satan.
into the most vile Principles and Pr^ctices. Hence no doubt has the Church of
Rome in these latte^ ^ays, as 'twas foretold it would, 1 Timothy 4.1. Departed
from the Faith, giving heed to Seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils. And
hence also amongst our selves do so many particular Persons, When they will not
endure sound Doctrines, heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears, and
do turn away their Ears from the Truth, and are turned unto Fables, 2 Timothy 4.3,
4.

There are a Second sort of Sinners, who seemed to be wholly abandoned by God,
and yielded up to Satan, to be Tempted by him at his Pleasure; and they are
such, II. Such as by a long Course of many Damning Sins have laid wast the
Conscience, and have baffled all the Methods of God's Grace to Reclaim 'em,
these are sometimes, even in this Life, abandoned by God to be acted by the
Devil.
Who in a long Course of many damning Sins that lay wast the Conscience, have
baffled all the Methods of his Grace to reclaim them, and have resisted and
grieved his Holy Spirit so long, till Grace be wholly withdrawn from them: Such
are called Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. which in the Phrase of Scripture
does signify Persons extremely Disobedient; and of such it is said in the same
Verse, that the Evil Spirit works in them. He does act them as the Soul does
the Body, and does hurry them into such vicious Extravagancies, and to commit
such outrageous Impieties, that they seem to be Devils Incarnate. Thus did the
Devil enter into Judas, Luke 22.3. after he had formerly Baffled all the good
Admonitions of our Savior, to reclaim him from his Thievery, and other
Villainies, and at length spurred him on to commit the Blackest Crime, that ever
was heard of, even to Betray the Lord of Life into the Hands of his Enemies.
And there are many ungodly Wretches now adays, who do seem to sin with so much
Enmity and Despite against God, that it is hard to say, whether they are not
Devils in Humane Shapes. But it is the same thing; they have sinned themselves
to that Degree, that God has given them up, and the Devil seems to Animate them.

And lastly so are Witches, Magicians, and Conjurers, who have Covenanted away
both Body and Soul to the Devil, on Condition he will be for some time at their
Beck, to execute their vile and malicious Purposes.
A Third sort of Persons abandoned by God (and that utterly) to the Power and
Management of Satan, to actuate them as he pleases, Are Witches, and Magicians,
or Conjurers, such as was that Woman of whom we read, 1 Samuel 28. And these are
a sort of miserable Wretches, so far forsaken of Grace, and the Fear of God,
that they have expressly Covenanted away both Body and Soul to the Devil, on
Condition he will be at their Beck to Execute their vile and malicious
Purposes. For Envy, Malice, and Revenge seems to be the Soul, that animates
these Children of the Devil; or else the Pride and Vanity of doing Wonders, and
an insatiable Curiosity of knowing those secret Things to come, which belong to
God alone to know, has put 'em upon making such a Contract with Satan. And
these wretched Miscreants sure must be supposed to be utterly shut out from the
least Glimpse of God's Favor, and cast out of his Protection, and to be wholly
under the Power of the Devil. The thing is self-evident, so as not to need any
Pains to make it appear. And in all Probability, they have also their Eternal
Damnation sealed in this World, Even before they go hence, and be no more seen.

And thus I have at length showed you, as before, Who the Devil is, and what
are his Works of Sin, and how you are to Renounce both him and them: So I have
now laid open before you, as fully as I could (not indulging mere Conjecture,
but fetching my Discoveries from the Holy Scripture, from which alone we can
learn any thing of Certainty in such a dark Subject;) I say, I have fully laid
before you those manifold Methods of Temptation, whereby he did, and does still
Attempt, First, The whole Race of Mankind; Secondly, The Church of Christ;
Thirdly, The most Considerable and Leading Persons therein; and Lastly, Every
single and individual Person indifferently amongst us.

Upon the general View of the Works of the Devil, both of Sin and Temptation,
it does appear, his Drift is no less than to usurp God's Throne, and to draw
the whole Race of Mankind into the same Cursed Rebellion against the Majesty of
Heaven, with himself.
And upon the general View of what has been said it does appear, that the whole
Drift of that wicked Spirit, and of all his Works, both of Sin and Temptation,
is no less than to Usurp God's Throne, and to put up a Dominion in Opposition
to his, and to draw the whole Race of Mankind into the same Cursed Rebellion
against the Majesty of Heaven, owning him, the Devil, for their Lord and Master.

It Is indeed a thing almost incredible, that a Creature could possibly be
guilty of such impudent Pride and Ambition, as to justle God, as it were, out
of his Throne, and to Arrogate to himself the Homage of all the Creatures; but
yet it appears to be plainly so, by his Tempting even of the Son of God himself
to Worship and Adore him, and in his Plying him so diligently with one
Temptation after another, never letting him rest, till he saw there was no
Hopes. He perceived, that his Coming into the World was to destroy his Kingdom,
and therefore he first Attacks him in the Wilderness, thinking he had him at an
Advantage, after a long Fast of Forty Days, and that in his Hunger he would do
any thing to get Bread. And when our Savior alleged his sufficiency in God
alone, without material Bread, he then takes him up into the Holy City, and
sets him on the Pinnacle of the Temple; bidding him, if he were so confident
of God's Protection and Preservation of him, to cast himself down from thence,
and no doubt he would order his Holy Angels to receive him. And when in that
also he was Repulsed, Satan tried him farther yet, and taking him into an
exceeding high Mountain, where he gave him a Visionary View of all the Riches,
Glory and Splendour of the World, and proffered him, that if he would Fall down
and Worship him; that is, Desert the Service of the God of Heaven, and coming
over to him, would Propagate and Promote his Kingdom, and do Homage himself,
and cause all others to do the like to him: This, if he would do, Satan
Promised him all these things would he give him. Thus like a Politic Prince,
who would Bribe with Riches, and Honors, and Preferments, the General of
another's Army, to come over to him, and to Betray into his Power all his own
King's Subjects: So did the Devil Tempt our Savior, the great Captain of our
Salvation, to Revolt himself from God, and to bring over the whole Church along
with him. So infinitely bent is Satan upon the Dishonor of God, and our
Slavery and Ruin; which as it is enough to rouse us up to make a most diligent
Enquiry, till we fully discover all the Arts and Methods, whereby he would
accomplish it: So it will, I hope, sufficiently Justify my having been so long
in laying before you, Who the Devil is, and what are his Works, both of Sin and
Temptation.

Lastly, And now it remains only to show you, What it is, and how we must
renounce this great Work of the Devil, his Tempting of us to Sin.
and then I shall have done this Point, What it is, and how we must Renounce
this great Work of the Devil, his Tempting of us to Sin. The word Renounce, I
before told you, is a Word that bears various significations, according to the
Nature of the Thing to be Renounced by us. And as the Devil being that
Arch-Rebel against God, whose Quarrel with him is for no less, than Dominion
and Empire over the World, who shall be King thereof, God, or Satan; and who,
with all his Legions of Infernal Spirits are continually mustering up all their
Forces against the Authority of God, and drawing wretched sinful Men into the
Conspiracy. As the Devil being such, to Renounce the Devil, as I have told you,
is to disclaim, or leave off having any Hand with him in his base and
ungrateful Rebellion against God. And as to his Works of Sin: As by Sin God's
Laws are Transgrest, his Authority thrown off, his Government disowned, and his
Power defied: So to Renounce his works of Sin, must signify to disclaim, or
abandon every Sin, as a thing most dishonorable and provoking to God, because
it implies a throwing off his Authority, and a disowning his Power. As this is
to Renounce the Devil and all his works of Sin: So as to that other great Work
of his, his Temptations of us, those will properly be then only Renounced, when
they are Resisted by us; The Temptations of the Devil are then only properly
Renounced, when they are Resisted by us.
a thing which we are Commanded to do, Jam. 4.7. Resist the Devil; as also, 1
Pet. 5.9. Whom Resist steadfast in the Faith.

But how shall such weak and impotent Creatures as we are, be able to Resist
such a mighty Spirit, or rather such a powerful Host of Spirits, as the Devils
are? For are there not Multitudes of 'em surrounding of us, as appears by one
Man's having a whole Legion of 'em cast out of him? And did not the great
Fiend, the Ringleader of 'em own to God, that it was his Employment to Go to
and fro in the Earth, and to walk up and down in it, Job 1.7. to find out such,
whom with the greatest Probability of Success he may assault, and to see
against what weak part of 'em, either in Body or Mind, he may most
advantagiously raise his Batteries? Nay, and is it not said, 1 Pet. 8.9. That
as a roaring Lion, he continually walks about the Earth, seeking whom he may
devour: So that besides his Industry and Policy, he does with the greatest
Violence and Fury oftentimes set upon us? These things considered, Is it
possible for us to Resist him, or is it not then in vain for us to Endeavor
it? Or by what Means, you will say, shall be able to do it?

But notwithstanding all the Multitude, the Policy, nor the Fury of Devils, we
need not be Disheartened; for as we are Commanded in the forecited Place of
St. Jam. 4.7. To Resist him: So we have a Promise of being successful when we
do. That they may be successfully Resisted.
Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you: And you will be able effectually
to Resist his Temptations, these Three ways.

First, By keeping your Selves always Sober. Secondly, By Watchfulness, that
you may not be Ensnared by them. Thirdly, By Prayer to God to Protect you from
them.
I. We must keep our selves always Sober.
First, If you will effectually Resist Satan's Temptations, you must preserve
your selves always Sober, or else you will be deprived of Reason, and the Grace
of God, whereby alone you can Resist them. Thus 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Be Sober,
because your Adversary, the Devil, as a Roaring Lion, walks about seeking
whom he may devour, whom Resist steadfast in the Faith. And indeed Sobriety, as
it is contrary both to Drunkenness, and Passion, is a great and most necessary
Preservative against Satan's Temptations. I. Sobriety. As opposite to
Drunkenness, a necessary Preservative against Satan's Temptations.
Drunkenness is a thing does so Overwhelm all the Powers of the Soul, that
whilst Person is in that Condition, he has little, sometimes no use of his
Memory, Understanding and Judgment, so as to have any Thoughts of Good and
Evil, or to discern between what is Fit and Reasonable, and what is Hurtful and
Brutish. And only the Lusts and Appetites of a Man are then awake, ready to
hurry him to whatsoever Extravagancies he shall be Tempted. And do you think,
that the Devil, who is so Cunning in Timeing his Temptations, will then be
Idle, and not strike in with the Season, and at such an Opportunity present to
the Wretch, when deprived of Reason and Grace, such Baits as shall be likeliest
to take him? Why, this to be sure he will; and hence we hear of so many Brutish
Extravagancies, and sinful Frolicks, so much Lewdness, Swearing, Robberies and
Bloodshed, acted and committed in Drunkenness: such great Reason there is,
that as you would preserve your selves from Sin; so likewise must you preserve
your selves sober, and free from Drunkenness, otherwise you will be Overtaken
therewith.

And likewise Sober and free from Passion, II. As opposite te Passion.
in which case Persons are as much deprived of Reason, as in the other, and are
hurried on to the like Commissions; and the Devil will be alike ready, both to
influence the Passion, and to suggest Provocations, if Sobriety does not strike
in, and moderate. Hence is the Passionate and Violent Tongue, said to be Set on
fire of Hell.

Secondly, Watchfulness is another Means to Resist Temptations. II. Watchful
over those our weaknesses, especially where Satan will be likeliest to attempt
us.
Thus again, in order thereunto, in the same Place of St. Peter, 1 Ep. 5.8, 9.
It is said, Be Sober, be Vigilant. He is Vigilant for his Part to do you
Mischief, and watches all Advantages, to get you into his Power and Reach: And
it lies upon you to be as careful to Guard your selves against all his
Batteries, which he Plays against you. He surrounds the Soul, and views it on
all sides: And this great Enemy of Mankind, says a Father, does there lay his
Snares of Deceit, where there is the greatest Probability they will take us. He
knows to whom he may best apply the Heats of Lust, before whom he may spread
the Table of Gluttony, and to whose View he may display the Enchantments of all
sorts of Luxury. He considers the Temper of Men's Minds, and whom he can
disorder with Grief, and whom he may deceive with Joy, whom he can oppress with
Fear, and whom he may seduce with Admiration, and into whose Breast he can most
easily Infuse the Poison of Envy. He examines the Customs of Men, he considers
what are their Cares, and he searches which are our prevailing Affections. And
by that he takes occasion to do us the greatest hurt, to which he sees we are
most violently addicted, and about which he sees us most industriously
Employed. Like an Enemy, who Besieges a City, does always assault the weakest
part of the Walls: So does he attack the Soul, where he perceives its greatest
Infirmities. Such infinite Reason have we to consider our own Natures, and to
keep a particular Watch on that side, where we are most Blind, and to set our
selves with the greatest Vigor to Resist and Repel the Temptations, wherewith
he will assault us there. And this is the Second way given you in Scripture to
Resist Satan's Temptations, viz. Watchfulness and Diligence to know our selves,
and to discern his Temptations, that so you may not be Ensnared by them. The

Third, Is by Prayer to God to protect you from them. And Thirdly, we must be
constant and fervent in Prayer to God to protect us from them.
Thus Jam. 4.8. after we are commanded to Resist the Devil, and he will Fly
from us; as an effectual way so to do, we are bid to Draw nigh to God, and he
will draw nigh to us; that is, if we will make our humble Addresses to God by
Prayer, he will be ready to assist us against all his Temptations. And indeed
there is extraordinary Reason, you should diligently and earnestly Pray to God,
to Protect and Preserve you from Satan's Delusions. The Devil is a Spirit, and
therefore is naturally Endowed with a great deal of Knowledge, abundance more
than we Men are capable of attaining to. And moreover, by the Experience of
many Thousand Years, from the Creation of the World, unto this Day, he has
greatly Improved himself in all manner of mischievous Cunning and Subtlety; so
as not to be Ignorant of any way, whereby he may most successfully prevail over
us, to draw us into Sin. Both which things considered, we were not capable to
Cope with him, if left to our selves. But our Comfort is this, That the Devil
can go no farther than his Chain; and as the Divine Goodness will not permit
him to attempt whom, and how he pleases: (It was not before he had Leave, that
he could Tempt Job, 2.6.) so in reference to all sorts of Temptations
whatsoever, we have a most sure word of Promise, 1 Cor. 10.13. that God is
Faithful, who will not suffer you to be Tempted above that you are able, but
will with the Temptation also make a way to escape, that you may be able to
bear it. But then, if you would have him a Protector, always ready at Hand to
assist you, you must, as was said, Draw nigh to him, and he will draw nigh to
you.

What shall I say? Why, what farther Directions are necessary for Resisting of
Satan's Temptations, together with an earnest Exhortation so to do, are given
you in those most excellent Words of the Apostle to the Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12. with
which I shall conclude. Finally Brethren be strong in the Lord, and in the
Power of his might; Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to
stand against the Wiles of the Devil. For we wrestle not against Flesh and
Blood, but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high Places: Wherefore
take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand in the Evil
Day, and having done all to stand: And so goes on in several Verses, showing
with what Armor you must prepare your selves, wherewith to defend your
Innocence against the Assaults of Satan, viz. with Truth, or the Knowledge of
the Gospel, with Righteousness, Charity, Faith, the Hope of Salvation, and the
word of God: And then adds, as I before directed you, That you must Pray
always, with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto
with all Perseverance.

THE Fourteenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works; the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
HAVING already, in order to the Explication of these Words, showed you, Who
the Devil is, what are his Works, what is meant by Renouncing the Devil, and
all his Works, and how necessary it is we should absolutely do so; I come now,

Secondly, In like manner to Explain unto you, What is meant by the Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked World, and to show you in what Sense, and how far you
must Renounce the wicked World, with its Pomps and Vanity. What Is meant by the
Pomps and Vanity of the wicked World, and in what sense, and how far we must
Renounce the wicked world with its Pomps and Vanity. Three things here to be
explained, and accordingly Renounced: 1. The World; 2. The wicked World; and 3.
The Pomps and Vanity of this wicked world.


To Renounce the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World. There is not a word
here but will require some Explication. As to the word Renounce indeed it may
suffice, what I before told you, that it is of various Significations,
according to the Nature of the Thing to be Renounced by us: And there being
Three Things in these Words necessary to be Explained,

First, The World; Secondly, The wicked World; and Thirdly, The Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked World; I will Expound to you the Meaning of each, and
will withal show you in what sense, and how far you are to Renounce every One
of them.

And First, I am to show you, what is meant by the World, and in what Sense,
and how far you are to Renounce the World. The World in Scripture does
generally pass under a very bad Character, and for the most part is mentioned,
as what does directly oppose God's Glory, and our own Happiness. The World a
great Enemy to God's Glory, and our own Happiness.
Thus Jam. 4.4. Know ye not that the Friendship of the World is Enmity with
God, and whosoever therefore will be a Friend of the World, is an Enemy of God.
And on the contrary, Gal. 6.16. St. Paul gives this Character of himself, That
through the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, the World is Crucified unto him,
and he unto the World. And, 1 John 5.4. it is universally declared, that
Whosoever is born of God overcomes the World: And therefore in the Second
Chapter of the same Epist. 15, 16. we are commanded, Not to love the World,
neither the Things that are in the World, being assured, that If any man love
the World, the love of the Father is not in him. And indeed, if we shall search
throughout the whole Book of God, we shall find such frequent and earnest
Commands to Renounce this World, and to beware of its Temptations, that
nothing, except Satan the Ringleader of all our Adversaries, seems to be a
more Mortal Enemy to the Happiness and Salvation of Mankind, than this World.
And all this considered, as also, that it is made so material a Part of our
Baptismal Covenant to Renounce, as the Devil, so the World; I think it concerns
you to be well informed, what is meant both in Scripture, and your Catechism,
by that World, which you are so obliged to Renounce, and in what sense, and how
far you are to Renounce it.

And a more nice and critical Enquiry and State of this Matter is the rather
necessary, because the World, as hardly as it is spoke of, is not absolutely,
and in its own Nature Evil, as the Devil is; for, considered in it self, it is
the Creature of God, and consequently very Good, according to that Divine
Testimony given thereunto, Genesis 1.31. God saw every thing that he had made, and
behold it was very Good: And it is only Evil accidentally by our Abuse of it.
That therefore you may Err on neither side, neither despise the Workmanship of
God's Hands, to the Disparagement of God's Goodness, in giving us of his
Creatures for our Use and Convenience; nor too much Dote upon the Creature, to
the Neglect of the Creator, which is a Degree of Idolatry: I will, with what
Skill God shall enable me, state this whole matter to you, and show you, What
is meant by the World, and in what Sense, and how far you are to Renounce it.
And for the more full and complete Explication of this Point, I will do it,
both Generally and Particularly. It is to be considered both generally and
particularly.


And First, as to the World in General, it is visible what is meant by it, viz.
The whole Frame of Nature, which we behold, with whatever is contained therein.
True it is, the World is put many times in Scripture, as Joh. 7.7. and often
elsewhere, to signify Evil Men, because that the Wicked make up the greatest
Part of Men in this world. But this is an improper and figurative meaning of
the World, Evil Men being but a part of the World, and in this Sense will
better be considered by us under the next general Point to be spoken to, viz.
The wicked World. But Matthew. 4.8. and in innumerable other Places of the
Scriptures, by the World is meant, that whole Frame of Nature, which we behold,
and all that Variety of Creatures, which it contains, and is given us by the
Bounty and Goodness of God, for our Use and Benefit. I. By the world in general
is meant that whole Frame of Nature, which we behold, and all that variety of
Creatures, which it contains, and is given us by the Bounty and Goodness of
God, for our Use and Benefit.


And now the great Question will be, In what Sense, and how far we must
Renounce the World, in this Sense of the Word. And there are not ordinary
Mistakes about it; For some shall Cry out most grievously against this World,
as the Author of all their Sin and Misery; and therefore many have endeavored
to fly out of it, as it were into Deserts, living separate from Mankind, and
without the Conveniences of Life, as the Hermits of Old; and into Cloisters
and Monasteries, as the several Orders of Monks and Friars, at this Day, The
World in this Sense is not in it self Evil, but only accidentally, by Man's
abuse of himself, or it.
in the Church of Rome. But certainly the World does not deserve to be so
spitefully used, as the Words and Actions of Superstitious and mistaken Men do
import. For to use the words of a great Man,

The World is certainly in it self Good, and is not Evil, but accidentally by
Man's Abuse of himself, or it. It does contain a general supply of Objects,
answerable to the Desires of our sensible Nature, and the Exigencies and
Conveniences of it: It is a great Shop, full of all sorts of Wares, answerable
to our Wants, or Conditions. There is Wealth, and Places, and Delights for the
Senses; and it becomes an Enemy to us, by reason only of the Disorder and
Irregularity of those Lusts and Passions, that are within us, and by reason of
the Overvalue, that we are apt to put upon them. They are indeed Temptations,
but they are only Passive, as the Wedge of Gold did Passively Tempt Achan, but
it was his own Lust and Covetousness that did him the Harm. The Rock does not
strike the Ship, but the Ship strikes the Rock, and breaks it self.

Nay, this World, as it is not Evil in it self, Considered in it self it is
very Good, and convenient to us.
so most certainly it is full of Goodness and Benevolence to us: It supplies
our Wants, it is accommodate to the Exigencies and Conveniences of our Nature;
it furnishes us with various Objects, and Instances of the Divine Goodness,
Liberality, Bounty; of his Power, and Majesty, and Glory; of his Wisdom,
Providence, and Government which are so many Instructions to teach us to Know,
and Adm^^e, And as it is not absolutely in it self evil, so neither is it
entirely to be renounced; but being good in it self, it may in some measure be
desired and enjoyed by us.
and Magnify him; to walk Thankfully, Dutifully, and Obediently unto him; to
teach us Resignation, Contentedness, Submission, and Dependence upon him. A
good Heart will be made the better by it; and if there be Evil in it, it is
such as our own corrupt Natures occasions, or brings upon it, or upon our
selves by it; and it is a great Part of our Christian Warfare and Discipline to
teach us to use it, as it ought to be used, and to subdue those Lusts and
Corruptions that abuse it, and our selves by it.

So that the World you see is not absolutely, and in it self Evil, nor is it
consequently entirely to be Renounced by us: But it is in it self Good, and as
such it may in due measure be desired and enjoyed by us.

Nevertheless through our own Corruption, Nevertheless through our own
Corruption, whereby we abuse the good Things of the world, it becomes
accidentally the occasion of most of our Sins, and of our Estrangement from
God, our sovereign Good.
whereby we abuse these good Things of the World, which the Divine Bounty has
bestowed upon us for our Support, Comfort, and Convenience, the World becomes
Accidentally the occasion of most of our Sins, and of our Estrangement from
God, our sovereign Good. And how the World does accidentally become the
occasion of much Sin committed by us, and as such, how far it ought to be
Renounced, I take to be a Point that is very requisite you should be well
instructed in.

And the Case, you must know, betwixt us and the World stands thus: Man is a
Compound Being, made up of Two different and distinct Natures, a Body, and a
Soul; the one purely Material and Earthly, the other Spiritual and Heavenly;
the one Inferior, the other Superior in Worth and Dignity; the one Mortal and
Perishing, the other Immortal and Everlasting. Hence Man is by some called
(...), Akin to Two Worlds, the Knot, as it were, that ties 'em both together,
or the Button that fastens 'em one to another. How the World becomes so.
Now Man consisting of these Two Principles, according to One whereof, and that
the Principal, he is nearly allied to God, (for according to his Soul, he is
the very Image of God) it is very reasonably required of him, That he should
chiefly mind Heaven, and Heavenly Things, his near and chief Relations, (if I
may so say) which he is Everlastingly to enjoy; and that he should not much
concern himself with the Things of this world, which he must shortly leave
behind him, and then all Relation betwixt 'em will cease. But all the time of
his Pilgrimage here, Living and Conversing for the most part with the Things
below, he becomes sooner acquainted with them, and they with him, they have an
easier Access to him than Heavenly Things, and have therefore greater
Opportunities to court his Affections, and to win upon 'em: So that in the End
it too often falls out, that St. Paul's Rule is lived Counter to, and Men
generally Set their Affections on things below, and not on things above.

In what manner it does Captivate us, and draw us from God.
The manner how the world Captivates, and Enslaves, and Draws the whole Man in
Triumph after it, is this; It presents to the Senses, Riches, Honors and
Pleasures, and dazles 'em with their Glory and Beauty: Men's outward Senses
being so extremely taken with these, do easily bribe the Affections to love 'em
above all other, and cause 'em to Covet and Lust after 'em. The Affections
becoming hereby most eagerly desirous of 'em, do put a false Biass upon the
Judgment, so that our Understanding and Reason usually becom^ thereby so far
Corrupted, as to dictate to the Will, that these outward and sensible good
Things, are the Objects, which are above all others worthy of its Choice. And
hereupon the Will does immediately choose the present Objects of Sense, the
Riches, Honors and Pleasures of this World, preferring 'em far before
spiritual Things. And thus the whole Man, Body and Soul, is made a Slave to the
world, and neglects Heaven, and minds not to perform the Conditions of the
Covenant of Grace, the way thither.

So far therefore as it engages our Affections too closely to it, so as to make
us Inordinately, and Irregularly to mind it, and to neglect our great Concern,
the Business of Religion, it is to to be Renounced and Rejected by us.
So that upon the whole Matter, the World is so far only our Enemy, and to be
Renounced and Overcome by us, as it Engages our Affections too closely to it,
so as to make us Inordinately and Irregularly (that is, with an Affection to
it, or any Thing in it, beyond its due Desert,) to mind it, and too much to
neglect our great Concern, the Business of Religion, and the Performance of the
Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, our way to Heaven and Happiness. So long
as we wear these Earthly Bodies about us, we are permitted the Use and
Enjoyment of worldly Things, provided in Things lawful, and in Degrees
allowable.
So long as we live in this World, and are Parts of it our selves, and carry
these Bodies of Earthly Materials about us, there is no doubt but it is
necessary for us, and we are permitted to be concerned in it, and we may
without scruple gratify our selves with the Enjoyments of it, provided it be in
Things lawful, and in Degrees allowable, and that we suffer not our Hearts and
Affections to be too much fixed upon it. But in regard our Souls, the principal
Part of us by far, are the Natives of Heaven, and are only as Pilgrims and
Tenants here Below, to stay but for a short Time: (For As the Dust shall return
to the Earth, as it was, so the Spirit shall return to God, But being our
Souls, our principal part, are soon to remove to Heaven, we must chiefly set
our Affections on things above, and mainly endeavor to attain them.
who gave it, Eccl. 12.7.) we must therefore Set our Affections chiefly on
things above, on God, the Society, Interests, and Enjoyments of that
Ever-Blessed State, making it our main Business to Possess, to Attain, and
Enjoy them; and not on things below, the foolish Interests and Satisfactions of
this perishing and transitory State here on Earth, Col. 3.2. And so far as the
world, or any thing it inveigles our Hearts and Affections to fix upon it, and
seduces us to commit any Thing sinful, and hinders to mind the Business of
Religion, and the Performance of the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, our
way to Happiness, and everlasting Satisfaction, it is to be Renounced,
Rejected, and Overcome by us: It is the Matter of a Christian's Warfare, and
the subject of his Victory. And so far as this, Whatsoever is born of God
overcomes the World, 1 John 5.4. and in this sense St. Paul Professes, Gal.
6.14. that The world was Crucified unto him, and he unto the world. And thus
you see in General in what sense, and how far we are to Renounce the World.

But Secondly, II. Concerning the World, considered in its Particulars, and
those Temptations result both from the Good, and the Evils thereof.
For the more full and complete Explication of this Point of Renouncing the
world, it being a Matter wherein it concerns you to receive the most distinct
Directions, I will farther consider the Particulars of which this World is made
up, and will also show you in what sense, and how far you are to Renounce each
of 'em. And here it is observable, that when we come to take a nearer View of
the world in its Particulars, it does not then appear, as it does in the
General, to have nothing in it but Good, but to contain withal a great mixture
of Evil; and indeed to be in the present State thereof almost wholly made up of
Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. And both the Good and the Evil Things thereof do
give us considerable Temptations to Sin.

Now the Good Things of this world are summed up under these Heads, The Riches,
Honors, and the Pleasures it affords. The good things of this World, Riches,
Honors and Pleasures; the Evils, Poverty, Disgrace, and Afflictions. And
Things of a middle Nature are the different Callings, Conditions, and Cares of
this World.
And its Evils on the contrary may be reduced to Poverty, Disgrace, and those
Afflictions of all sorts, which in innumerable ways do assail us. And there are
also some Things therein of a middle Nature, as different Callings, Conditions,
or States of Life, and the Cares of this World, which are the Appurtenances to
it, and afford great matter of Temptation and Trial to us therein: And in what
Sense, and how far you are to Renounce it, with reference to each of these, I
will endeavor to show you.

And, First, As to the Riches of this World: These are not in themselves
Hurtful, I. As to Riches, these are not in themselves Hurtful, but Good, and
are bestowed upon us to good Ends and Purposes.
but Good, and are bestowed by the Divine Providence upon those that have 'em,
to very excellent Purposes and Uses, that they may do Good therewith, and that
not only in providing for their own Household, but also by Stewarding them out
to the Support and Advancement of Religion and Virtue, to the Relieving the
Poor and Distressed, to the Encouragement of Industry, and in many other ways
which the Laws of Piety and Charity do direct. And those who enjoy 'em, have
great Advantages of doing Good therewith, to others Comfort, and the Benefit of
their own Souls.
And those therefore on whom God has bestowed Wealth, have admirable Advantages
put into their Hands, to do Good therewith, to the Comfort of others, and to
lay up to themselves Treasures of Reward in Heaven by their good Works.

Nevertheless it was no hard Censure our Savior passed upon Riches, in saying,
That a Rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 19.23.
For both Scripture, and daily Experience tells us, Nevertheless Riches are a
mighty Temptation, whether we consider Men as Getting, Possessing, or as
Parting with or Losing of them.
that Riches are a very great Temptation to manifold Sins and Offenses against
God, and that whether we consider Men with respect to their Getting,
Possessing, or their Parting with, or Losing of them.

First, Consider Men in the State of getting Riches, and St. Paul tells us, 1 Timothy 6.9. That they, who would be Rich, fall into a Temptation and a Snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and
Perdition. And our own Experience also gives us to see, how many horrid and
black Crimes, and into what miserable Snares, so as never to be able to
disentangle themselves out of 'em, do Men run themselves into, by an over-eager
Pursuit of Riches. I. In the over-eager Pursuit of Riches men do run themselves
into many grievous Sins.
A dividing betwixt God, and Mammon, is the lowest Degree of Sin, that is
occasioned hereby, which yet God will not endure, as you will find, Matthew.
6.24. The Neglect of Religion, and Contempt of Heavenly Things is the next. And
it is not seldom we see, that Men, to raise themselves Estates in this world,
will not stick at Oppressing the Poor; at Cheating of Orphans and Widows; at
Corrupting of Witnesses and Juries, and Forging of Evidences; and to add
Impiety to Injustice, to get but a small Pittance of worldly Wealth, they will
Rob God in his Tithes and Offerings, by Sacrilegiously detaining those Dues,
which were allotted, both by the Laws of God, and Man, for the Maintenance of
the Worship of God, and his Ministers; a Sin compared by St. Paul with Idolatry
it self, Romans 2.22.

As also into many miserable Snares, so as to be hardly ever able to
disentangle themselves out of 'em.
And then, as to the Temptations and Snares, into which Men, by the unjust
acquiring of Riches, do often Entangle themselves, it is indeed Terrible to
consider, how they do frequently thereby run themselves into such a Condition,
that like a wild Beast entangled in a Net, they cannot get out. For when once
Riches are got by any methods of Wrong, or Robbery, there must be an entire
Restitution of all that has been unjustly gained, or ever the Man can be said
to Repent, or hope to Recover the Favor of God. And yet this Restitution,
after many and repeated Acts of Injustice, becomes almost Impossible to be
done: For why, the Love of Money is so near to the Miser's Heart, that he can
sooner spill the Blood thereof, than part with it. And if that, which he has
Ill-got, has not Thriven with him, as seldom it does, why then he has not
where-withal to Restore to every Man his own, without reducing Himself and
Family to extreme Beggary; which how hard a thing it is to bring himself to,
and in Practice how seldom heard of, I leave it to your own Observation to
Inform your selves. So that you see into what a miserable Temptation and Snare,
Men do Entangle themselves by grasping after unlawful Gain. For as Restitution
is nenecessary to Peace with God, so it is extremely difficult to be willing,
or able afterward to make it.
They have it not in their Will, or if their Will, not in their Power to make
Restitution, and yet without Restitution they can have no Peace with God; and
therefore such at length do usually fly for Refuge from their upbraiding
Consciences, if not into utter Atheism, as is usual with other great Sinners:
At leastwise they will shelter themselves under some lewd Antinomian Principles,
which teach Men to rely upon Christ, and to roll upon his Promises,
notwithstanding any Extortions, Oppressions, or other unrepented Sins, they may
be at the same time Guilty of; for which Reason perhaps your Dealers, and Men
of Business, are so apt to be found at the Feet of Fanatic Teachers. Such
Temptations to Sin are Men liable to in the Getting the Riches of this World.

Secondly, And no less also are those subject to, who do Possess them. II. And
no less Temptations are those subject to, who do possess 'em.
Experience tells us, that a great Estate, is a very great Temptation to
Idleness and Luxury, to Pride and Insolence, to Irreligion toward God, and a
Profane, Idolatrous Trust in Riches: And in a word, to commit the highest
Offenses toward God, their Neighbor, and themselves. I say, to Idleness and
Luxury, the former whereof is the Rust of the Mind, the latter is a Canker,
that devours and destroys the Body. And how great a Temptation to Idleness and
Luxury Riches are, is eminently seen in the Case of the Rich Man in the Gospel,
Luke 12.19. He had no sooner got his Barns and his Coffers full, but he sings a
Requiem to his Soul, Soul thou have much Good laid up for many Years, take
thine Ease, Eat, Drink, and be Merry. And so likewise, they are a strong
Temptation to Pride and Insolence, and that in Respect both to God, and Man. As
to his Behavior toward God, how apt is the Rich Man, in the midst of all his
Successes, to Sacrifice to his own Net, and to Burn Incense to his own Drag, as
the Prophet words it, Hab. 1.16. that is, to attribute all to his own Wit and
Policy, and Conduct, exclusive of God's Providence? And then, as to his
Carriage toward Men, how often do Riches make those, that have 'em, to carry
themselves with a most unreasonable Haughtiness and Disrespect toward Persons
of lower Fortunes, to look upon Men of little, or no Estates, as the Cattle
only, and Vermin of the World, and to treat 'em as their Slaves and Vassals, as
if they were not Creatures of the same Kind with themselves, and had not Souls,
as Precious in God's sight, as their own? And then, as to Irreligion, and
Insolence toward God: The impious Contempt of God, and of all that is Sacred,
which Men in the midst of their Abundance do cast upon that Bountiful
Benefactor, who Gave 'em all things Richly to Enjoy, cannot be more exactly
described than in the Case of the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 32.13, 14, 15. He made him
ride on the high Places of the Earth, that he might eat the Increase of the
Field; but Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked; thou art waxed fat, thou art grown
thick, thou art covered with fatness, then he forsook God which made him, and
lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation. But as to that Profane and
Idolatrous Trust in Riches, which is so Detestable before God, this is so much
the natural Effect of Wealth, that very Good Men will be apt to slide into that
very sinful Temper of Mind, if they do not take care. In my Prosperity I said,
In the Possession of Riches, men are Tempted to the highest Offenses against
God, their Neighbor, and themselves.
I shall never be removed, Holy David confesses it of himself, Ps. 30.6. So
great you see are the Temptations, which do also arise from the Possession of
Riches. They corrupt both Body and Mind, by Idleness and Luxury: They cause Men
to Insult over their poorer Neighbors, and sometimes even God himself too, by
Pride and Irreligion. And, in Confidence of their Riches, Men Idolatrously put
their Trust in their Wealth, instead of the All-sufficient God of Heaven.

But Lastly, The great Sins of all, which Men are in danger of committing, on
the account of their Riches, are those, which are occasioned by their Lothness
to part with, or their Fear of losing 'em. But Lastly, the great sins of all
are occasioned by a Lothness to part with, and a Fear of losing them. From a
lothness to part with Riches, arises Unmercifulness to Men.
By a Lothness to part with their Riches is all that Niggardliness, and want of
Charity and Good works occasioned, which many Rich are most guilty of, and
sometimes none more so, than those, who have most to spare, and who are to look
upon themselves, as indeed but Principal Stewards under God, the sovereign
Benefactor, and who must give an Account to him of their many Talents of
Riches, how they have distributed 'em, in doing Good therewith. This was that
Tenacious Temper of Mind, for which the Rich Dives will be for ever Infamous,
as long as the Gospel, that is, as long as the Sun and Moon endures; and for
which he is for ever irreversibly Doomed to Hell Torments. He would not spare
so much as the Crumbs which fell from his Table, to Relieve the poor Lazarus,
his Heart was so much set upon his Wealth.

From the fear of losing 'em, Apostasy from God.
But the great Sin of all, which the Rich are in most danger of committing, is
occasioned by their Fear of Losing their Rich^s, and is no less than an
Apostasy from the Faith, and a Denial of the Truth. Our Blessed Savior tells
us, that Whosoever he be, that forsakes not whatever he has for his sake, and
the Gospels, he cannot be his Disciple; and to leave Houses, Lands,
Possessions, and whatever worldly Enjoyments, if you will not Renounce the
Gospel it self, or those Truths contained therein, and will not embrace Errors
contrary to it, is always the hard Condition that Christians are put upon in
Times of Persecution. But how hard a thing is it for a Rich Man to do this? A
poor Wretch may be content to leave his uncomfortable Mansion, and to resign
this laborious tedious Life, in hopes of gaining Rest, and eternal Glory
thereby, rather than strain his Conscience: But for a Rich Man to take a
Farewell of his stately Houses, delightful Gardens, his silent Grots, and shady
Walks, his rich Furniture, goodly Farms, and his heaps of Silver; to leave
these, and fly into Banishment, endure Poverty, labor with Hunger, and starve
with Nakedness; all this to preserve a good Conscience: It is a hard Saying, a
shrewd Temptation! He will be apt to desire his Settlement may be on this side
Jordan, rather than he will pass over the Flood, into the Land of Canaan. He
will be very apt to build his Tabernacle on this side Heaven. The Temptation is
indeed Great, and many have fallen under the Power of it. Several have past
very shrewd Brushes in their way toward Heaven, and yet have not been able to
withstand the Shock of this Temptation. We have a famous Instance of this in
the Young Man in the Gospel, Matthew. 19. This Person came to our Savior, with a
mighty Desire to know, what he should do to Inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, and
reckoned up a many extraordinary Acts, that he had done already in order to it,
(insomuch that in another Gospel it is recorded, our Savior Loved him very
much) But the Holy Jesus told him, that if he would Be perfect, he must go and
sell what he had, and give to the Poor, and he should have Treasure in Heaven,
and that he must in Poverty and Affliction come and follow him; When the young
man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful, for he had great Possessions,
says the Text, ver. 22. And thus you see what Temptations Riches will give you,
whether you consider your selves as Getting, as Possessing; or as Parting with,
or Losing of them.

In what sense and how far Riches are to be renounced.
And now the great Question will be, In what sense, and how far you must
Renounce the Riches of this World in all these respects? And in the General I
can safely tell you, that Riches are not of that evil Nature in themselves,
that you must absolutely Renounce, or Reject them. We read of a peevish
Philosopher, In general, being they are not Evil in themselves, they are in
Cases only to be renounced by us, wherein we cannot without Sin, Pursue,
Possess, or retain them.
amongst the Grecians, One Crates, who threw all his Wealth into the Sea, he
would have nothing to do with it. And there are a sort of Men amongst the
Romanists, those whom they call Begging-Friars, who Vow Poverty, and place a
very great Part of their Religion in that very sinful Trade (if there be not a
very great Necessity for it) of Begging. But Riches are not of that Nature,
that they need be so absolutely Renounced and Rejected by us. They may be
Innocently enough, both Sought, Possessed and Retained. And it is only in such
cases wherein you cannot, without Sin, Pursue, Possess, and Retain 'em, that
you are obliged, by your Baptismal Vow, to Renounce and Reject 'em; and that is
in these Cases following.

And First as to the Getting of Riches, As First, Riches considered in the
getting, no Man must so put his Heart upon 'em, as to esteem 'em his chiefest
Good and Happiness.
you must not set your Heart upon 'em, so as to esteem 'em your chiefest Good
and Happiness; for this is an eternal and an unalterable Rule, both in Reason
and Religion, That the chiefest and most absolute Good deserves our chiefest
Esteem, and choicest Affections: And that lesser Goods to be less esteemed and
loved. And therefore God, and Heavenly Things being our chiefest Good, and the
Riches of this World being Good only by Derivation from him, and that in
infinitely lower Degrees, we must by no means suffer the Riches of this Life to
have an equal share in our Esteem and Affections with God, and Heavenly Things.
No: Mammon is too base a Competitor, that we should divide the Empire of our
Hearts betwixt God and him; No man can faithfully serve two Masters; for either
he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and
despise the other. Ye cannot serve God, and Mammon, says our Savior, Mat. 6.24.

And, You must by no means labor after the Riches of this World with
immoderate Care, Nor must he labor after 'em with immoderate Care, so as to
neglect the great Duties of Religion, and Devotion.
so as to neglect the great Duties of Religion and Devotion. Martha, you know,
was much troubled about her Household Affairs, at a Time and Opportunity given
her to hear our Savior's Heavenly Discourses, and Divine Instructions; and our
Savior rebuked her for it, telling her, that Mary had chosen the better Part,
in laying aside her worldly Business, to attend that more important Affair, the
Enriching of her Soul, Matthew. 10.41, 42. And you must take care, lest you also
Incurr that, and a worse Rebuke, by spending the Lord's Day, set apart by
Divine Appointment, wholly to the Service of God; lest you spend it, I say, in
worldly Business, and in Projects of Gain: Or indeed any Day in immoderate
Carkings, so as to omit either your Family, or Private Devotion. And must Seek
first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these other things
shall be added unto you, in such measures, as shall be needful for you; and you
must therefore, after lawful Endeavors, leaving the Success to God, Take no
further Thought for the Morrow, Matthew. 6.33, 34.

But above all, in your Pursuits after this world's Wealth, Especially he must
beware of Enriching himself by unjust Means.
You must beware of Enriching your selves by any unjust Means. This is called
by the Wiseman, A making have to be Rich, because that those, who are bent
upon unlawful Gain, think plain and honest Dealing too slow a way of increasing
their Substance: But he withal tells 'em, that They, who do so, shall not be
Innocent, Prove. 28.20. that is, shall involve themselves in great and terrible
Guilt, as has been showed you. And let me tell you withal, whenever you shall
come to cast up your Accounts between God, and your own Souls, a Thorn will not
prick your Flesh with half that Anguish, as the Reflection upon an Ill-gotten
Estate will pierce your Consciences: So that above all things it does concern
you to Renounce all false and deceitful ways of getting Riches, remembering how
the Prophet pronounces a fearful Woe to him who builds his House by
unrighteousness, and his Chambers by wrong, that uses his Neighbors service
without wages, and gives him not for his work, Jer. 22.13. And especially you
must beware of Getting, Particularly not by Sacrilege.
by defrauding those, who Minister about Holy Things. The Generality of the
World do now adays seem to value no Gain like this; but as it is declared by
the Prophet Malachi, 3.8. to be the worst sort of Robbery; so it is the certain
way to bring a Curse upon all a Man's Substance: As on the contrary, a very
free and liberal Payment of Tithes to the full Value, will bring a certain
Blessing. All which you have fully declared from the Eighth, to the Thirteenth
Verses. So that in a word, all unlawful Gain, whether by Robbing God, or Man,
you must take care of.

But if it has been your sad Misfortune to have brought such a Guilt upon your
Consciences, Whoever has unjustly gained any thing, must renounce it, by
making Restitution thereof.
you must then Renounce those Riches in the most proper and immediate Sense of
the Word, that is, by Restoring speedily to the full, and rather more than
less, to all those whom you have any ways Injured, as Good Zacheus did: Behold
Lord, if I have taken any thing from any man by false Accusation, that is,
Wrongfully, I here restore him Fourfold, Luke 19.8. Thus far you must Renounce
the Riches of this World, with respect to the Getting of them.

Secondly, Riches considered in the Possession, are to be renounced by paring
of those Superfluities, which tempt to Idleness and Luxury, to Pride and
Insolence, and an Idolatrous Trust in Riches; by paring of that
Super-abundance, I say, and bestowing it to Pious and Charitable uses. II.
Riches considered in the Possession, are to be renounced, by paring off those
superfluities, which tempt Idleness and Luxury, Pride and Insolence, and an
Idolatrous Trust in Riches; and by bestowing it to Pious and Charitable uses.
Idleness is a Life, for which no Man living can give an account to God, or
Man, there being no Man so Great, or so Rich, as that he can pretend to have
been Born to live Idly, and to be exempt from that Use and Service, which
every Person owes both to Church and State, as he is a Member of both those
Bodies. The Eye cannot say unto the Hand, I have no need of thee, nor again the
Head to the Feet, I have no need of you; God having so tempered the Body
together, that all the Members, both Comely and Uncomely, Honorable and
Dishonorable Parts, should have the same Care one of another, 1 Cor. 12.21.24,
25. And as Idleness, so is Luxury a Crying Sin, as will appear by considering
the fearful Doom pronounced by St. James to such Rich Ones, as wanton it in
nothing but Pleasure. Go to now ye Rich men, weep and howl for your miseries
that shall come upon you, ye have lived in pleasure on the Earth, and been
wanton; ye have nourished your Hearts as in a day of Slaughter, Jam. 5.1.5.

And as to Pride, For any Person, be he never so Wealthly, to be pufft up by
his Estate, to carry it Proudly and Insolently toward other Men of lower
Fortunes; (the usual Effect of Riches) this also is a thing severely threatened
in the now cited Place of St. James, viz. Chap. 5. ver. 1.5, 6.

But as to that Exalting themselves against God, in an utter Defiance of his
Laws, which so many Rich and Great Men are subject to, Who, when God has fed
them to the full, do then commit Adultery, and assemble themselves by Troops in
the Harlots houses, and are as fed Horses in the Morning, every One Neighing
after his Neighbor's Wife; Shall I not Visit for these things, says the Lord,
shall not my Soul be Avenged on such a People as this? Says God by his Prophet
Jeremy 5.7, 8, 9. Sure such an insolent Contempt of God's Laws, and haughty
Pride against him, will most terribly provoke his Indignation at the last. And
so,

Lastly, will a Profane and Idolatrous Trust in Riches, to which the wealthy
Ones are so extremely liable. God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, says
the Psalmist, Psalm. 52.5. He shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy
Dewlling Place, and root thee out of the Land of the Living. And who is this
that he will serve so? Lo the Man that made not God his Strength, but Trusted
in the Abundance of his Riches, and strengthened himself in his Substance, ver.
7. The Reason wherefore Men do so much Covet after, and so closely Hug their
Riches, is because they take 'em to be a sure Security against all Misfortunes
and Troubles, and will be a Refuge to 'em, they think, in the Days of Calamity.
But alas! There is nothing more Uncertain, and indeed more Dangerous to the
Owners thereof, than Riches. They can neither Fence off Death, nor Sufferings,
but do most usually bring on both, and that both from the Reason of the thing,
as they Excite the Envy, and are a Bait to the Covetousness of others to
Dispossess him, who Enjoys 'em; and by the just Judgment of God, when Men have
unlawfully got, or abused 'em.

And now all this considered, since Idleness and Luxury, Pride and Insolence,
and a Trust in Riches, are so highly Provoking to God; and since the Rich are
so extremely liable to these, of all others: The Possessors of great Estates
would do well and wisely too, so far to Renounce 'em, as to Pare of those
Superfluities in their Fortunes, and to bestow all that to Pious and Charitable
Uses, which Tempt 'em to such Pernicious Vices. Nor is this a more hard and
unreasonable Lesson, than what was given by our Savior in a like Case. Matthew.
5.29. says he, If thy right Eye offend thee pluck it out, and cast it from
thee, for it is profitable for thee that One of thy Members should perish, and
not that thy whole Body should be cast into Hell. And so we may say in this. If
Superfluity and Abundance, and more than is necessary, to provide a Person of
those Conveniences, which are requisite to that State and Condition, wherein
Providence has Placed him in the World, does directly tend to those Vices now
named; then it is much better, that with Crates he should even throw away that
Superfluity: For much better it is, that his worldly Wealth should sink into
the bottom of the Sea, than that it should sink him both Body and Soul, in
Hell. But there is no necessity for any Man to throw that away, which God has
bestowed upon him for better Uses. Take care to do Good therewith, and then it
will open unto you the Gates of Heaven. In so doing you will Renounce those
Superfluities of an Estate, as to your own proper Use, but however it will
return into your own Bosoms at last, with infinite Advantage and Interest.
Which brings me in the

And Lastly, by suffering the loss thereof, rather than Apostatize from the
Faith.
Last Place to show you, How far the Rich are to Renounce their Wealth, in
Parting with it in Works of Mercy, and in suffering the Loss thereof, rather
than Incur Apostasy. And to give you my Sense thereof in a few words. God, true
it is, does not always make it the Condition of a Disciple to Sell all that he
has, and to give it to the Poor, as he commanded him in the Gospel, upon an
extraordinary Occasion. Nor does he always put us upon the fiery Trial, either
to leave all, or preserve a good Conscience. But however, there is doubtless
required a better Use to be made of Riches, and larger Distributions of what
God has Blessed them withal, to Pious and Charitable Uses, than most of our Rich
Ones do commonly think. And it is also required, that though we are not always
put to the actual Trial, whether we will follow Christ in the Adherence to
Truth, and by renouncing of Error, or retain our Riches: Yet it is ever
required, that we should be readily disposed to Forsake all, and follow Christ,
suppose there were Occasion, which must be the Import of these words, Mat.
16.24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross and follow me. Every One is not actually called to take up the Cross, by
abandoning his worldly Possessions, or in any other way; but the meaning must
be, that every Disciple must let this World's Goods hang very loose about him,
so that he could easily put 'em off, when called to it. And God, who searches
the Heart, and tries the Reins, sees whether we are so disposed, or no. And,
though he puts us not to the actual Trial, he will however Judge us, accordingly
as he sees we are actually disposed. And let this suffice for the present,
whereby you have seen, how far we must Renounce the World in general, and also
in that particular Instance of its Goods, the Riches thereof. There are several
other Ingredients of which this World does consist, and in what Sense, and how
far you must Renounce them, shall also, God willing, be showed you. But of this
the next Opportunity.

THE Fifteenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works; the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
THE Point that we are now upon, is to lay before you the Strength of those
Temptations, which do arise from the World in General, and the several Things
therein contained in Particular, whether they be the Goods, or the Evils
thereof, or such as are of a middle Nature; and to show you in what Sense, and
how far you are to Renounce 'em. And as to such Considerations, which concern
the World in general, and also that first and principal of its Materials, the
Riches thereof, and which are necessary to be laid before you: This I have
already done, and now I am to pass on to the Consideration of

A Second of its Particulars, viz. The Honors thereof, and to show you what
they mean, and in what Sense, and how far you are to Renounce the Honors of
this World. What is meant by the Honors of this World, in what sense, and how
far they are to be Renounced.


Honor is accounted one of the Principal of this World's Goods; and though it be
much supported by Wealth and Riches, yet it is often, and sometimes deservedly,
preferred before 'em. And Honor properly and strictly does signify an inward
Esteem bore to a Person, upon the account of some worthy Accomplishments and
Advantages he is possessed of; and this inward Sense of his Worth, testified by
some outward and suitable Respects, expressed either by our Carriage toward him,
or by our Speeches to, or concerning him. This is what Honor does strictly
signify: What is meant by Honor properly and strictly.
But in the more general and usual Meaning of the Thing, both in Scripture,
What in the general meaning of the Word.
and common Language, by Honors are also meant the Advantages, or Qualities
themselves, upon the account of which Persons are so Honored, and Esteemed,
and Respected; and those outward Respects given 'em upon the account of those
Advantages.

And they may be reduced to these following, Nobility, or Gentility,
Pre-eminence, or Authority, and Dignities and Promotions, which are called
Posts of Honor: Also an High Esteem and Reputation amongst Judicious, Wise,
and Good Men, upon the account of a Person's Wisdom and Virtue, or some worthy
and glorious Action performed by him: Or, the Vulgar Applause of the Crowd of
Men, upon what they account Praiseworthy and Honorable: And lastly, the
Outward Expressions of Respect, either by Word, or Deed, usually given upon the
account of any of these. I shall consider all these Kinds of Honor apart, and
allowing to Persons, who any-wise deserve Honor, all that is consistent with
Innocence, I will show in what Sense, and how far they are to Renounce it, as
its Tempts 'em to Sin against God, and to Trample under Foot his Authority and
Laws.

And First, as to Nobility, or Gentility: I. Nobility, or Gentility.
This is an Honor derived down upon Persons from their Forefathers, who are
supposed to have Ennobled their Names and Families, by some excellent
Atchievments in Peace, or War, either in Learning, Arts, or Arms, or whatever
worthy Performances, whereby they have signally Benefited their Country; The
original Nature of Nobility, or Gentility.
and who, upon that account, have been distinguished by certain Badges and
Titles of Honor, from the Crowd of Men, whose Ancestors have not been so
eminently Famous and Deserving. And such Honor as this is highly agreeable
both to Scripture, and Reason. In the Scriptures we do not only find the
Princes of Israel, Heads of the Houses of their Fathers, who were the Princes
of the Tribes, and were over them, Numb. 7.2. but also that they bore several
Coats of Arms for Distinction, which what they were, you may see Genesis 49. And
in Reason there is as great a Necessity, that there should be a Distinction of
Members, more or less Honorable in the Body Politic, as in the Natural, and
therefore in both, Upon some Members we bestow more abundant Honor, 1 Cor.
12.23. And indeed such a Distinction of Persons upon the account of their
Merit, or Desert of their Families, does serve to raise the Emulation of Men,
to Atchieve some noble and worthy Enterprise, and to shake off that Sloth,
which would otherwise Enfeeble their Activity. And for this reason it is, that
God has Planted this Passion of Emulation in Persons Natures, to rouse 'em up
to Imitate the noble Virtues, and great Examples of Others, that they likewise
might Transmit a Name worthy to be Imitated in future Generations. Such is the
Original and Nature of True Nobility, and so Reasonable and Useful it is in it
self.

But as the best Things are liable to the worst Abuses; The Abuses it is
subject to, and in what Instances to be Renounced.
so it fares with this sort of Honor. And the Nobleman, or Gentleman is apt to
think himself Priviledg'd above others, to trample under Foot all Laws, both
Divine and Humane; and to reckon himself above Reproof or Punishment, when he
has done; to despise and oppress the rest of Mankind, as if they were but a
lower Rank of Creatures, and had not Souls as excellent in their Natures, and
as capable of Improvements; as precious in God's sight, and as much the Heirs
of Heaven, as his own: Such are apt to fly at the greatest Distance from those
worthy Virtues, which Ennobled their Ancestors; and indeed to despise Religion,
and its chiefest Virtues, as Qualities beneath 'em.

But, First, A Nobleman, or Gentleman, be he of what Rank or Quality soever,
must utterly Renounce all that Honor, which pretends to put him above the Laws
of God, or Man, and beyond Reproof or Punishment, when he has Violated either.
A Gentleman, be he of what Rank or Quality soever, must utterly renounce all
that Honor, which pretends to place him above the laws of God, or Man, and
beyond Reproof or Punishment, when he has Violated either.
For so far is One of an Eminent Quality, from being at liberty to be an
Atheist, or Libertine, a Licentious, and a lewd Liver, a breaker of the Laws of
his Country, and a despiser of the Discipline and Orders of the Church; and so
far is he from being above Punishment or Reproof for such like Violations, that
he is bound, above all other Men, to be a strict and orderly Liver; and upon
his Failure, is more open to Reproof, and more liable to be severely Punished:
Such a one is placed upon a higher Form than other Men, and consequently his
Deformities and Vices are more open to public View, and more easily discerned;
and the Multitude, which are always apt to observe the Faults of their
Superiors, will be sure to pass their usual Censure, How unbecoming is this
Man's Life to his Birth and Quality, and how does he disgrace himself and
Family? So Injurious is he to himself. He is moreover by the Eminence of his
Birth and Quality, as A Light put, not a under a Bushel, but on a Candlestick,
and so the World, who are always apt to imitate the Manners of their Superiors,
seeing his bad Example, will many of them Copy it out to their own Destruction;
so mischievous is such a One amongst Men. And lastly, he has received far
greater Talents from God, than other Men, to employ to his Glory, which if he
has abused to his Dishonor, he is ungrateful toward God. He has had the
Examples of more noble Progenitors before his Eyes, to raise his Emulation; he
has had the Advantages of a better Education, to improve his Knowledge; he has
more Time and Leisure to pursue it, more Riches to procure the Means of
attaining it; he has more Authority to support Religion, and the Church, and he
has a greater Stock of Reputation amongst Men, to Countenance both. And having
thus a greater share of Talents to employ to his Master's Honor,
proportionably a greater measure of improvement thereof, to the Advancement of
God's Glory and Religion amongst Men, will be required at his Hands; For unto
whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required, and to whom men have
committed much, of him they will ask the more, Luke 12.48. Such a One is bound
above others to be a strict and orderly Liver, and upon his Failure, is more
open to Reproof, and more liable to be severely Punished.
And now does any Man think when he has so much abused himself, and Family,
when his Example has been so mischievous and infectious to Mankind, and when he
has turned all the Artillery, which God has given him to fight against Sin, and
the Devil, when he has Treacherously turned it upon God himself, will his
Honor bear him out in this? Or does he think himself above the Reproof of
God's Ministers here, or the Punishment of an Incensed Deity hereafter? No: He
is the Man to whom Reproof does particularly belong, and accordingly Herod the
Tetrarch was reproved by John the Baptist, for Herodias, his Brother Philip's
Wife, and for the Evils, which Herod had done, Luke 3.19. And in the World to
come, such a One, above all Men, will be Beaten with many stripes, Luke 12.47.
So much is that Honor to be Renounced, which pretends to put a Man above the
Laws of God, or Man, or beyond Reproof or Punishment for the Violation of 'em.

Secondly, And so likewise is that to be Renounced and Detested, which exalts
Persons above their Brethren, to that degree, as to despise and oppress the
rest of Mankind, as if they were but a lower Rank of Creatures, and had not the
same God to their Father, Bodies formed out of the same Clay, and Souls as
excellent in their Natures, and as capable of Improvements; as precious in
God's sight, and as much the Heirs of Heaven, as their own. As also that which
exalts Persons above their Brethren to that degree, as to despise and oppress
the rest of Mankind, as if they were but a lower Rank of Creatures, and had not
the same God to their Father, Bodies Formed out of the same Clay, and Souls as
Excellent in their Natures, and as capable of Improvements; as precious in
God's Sight, and as much the Heirs of Heaven, as their own.
This is indeed observed to be, for the most part, the Property of those only
of Vpstart Quality; for whether it be, that such are Transported above
themselves, by a sudden Rise of Fortune, so as not to know their mean
Beginning; or whether it be, that their Fathers being raised to their
Greatness, merely by Virtue of their successful Fortunes in the World, not for
any noble and worthy Performances, these have not that Vein of Magnanimity,
Largeness of Soul, Generosity, Courtesy, and Liberality, running in the Blood,
as it were, of some Families, whose Nobility was founded in some noble Exploits
of Virtue: Whatever may be the reason, it is generally observed, that your New
Gentry are apt, above others, to carry it with an unreasonable Haughtiness and
Disrespect toward their poorer Brethren. But alas! There is no Ground in the
World for this Distance, nor that Slavery they put 'em to. Have we not one
Father, and has not one God made us, Mal. 2.10. And was it not out of the same
Lump of Clay, that he made one Vessel to Honor, and another to Dishonor? And
when this Earthly Tabernacle of ours shall be dissolved, who shall be able to
distinguish betwixt the Dust of Princes, and their meanest Vassals? And is not
the Soul of the poorest Indian Slave, as Spiritual and Immortal, as that of the
Richest Merchant in Europe? And had it but the Education, which our Europians
have, it is capable of receiving as clear Notions of God, and of Religion, and
of Virtue, as any of us all. And no doubt, were it adorned therewith, and so
had the Image of God consisting in these Graces, restored within it, it would
be as Precious and Dear to him, and be received into those Mansions of Bliss,
from which those proud Tyrants over their Fellow Creatures Liberty, will
certainly be Excluded, if they continue to treat 'em with such Distance and
Slavery. Sure I am, the Poor Lazarus is now in Abraham's Bosom, when the Rich
and Noble Dives, who treated him not with that Respect and Kindness, as he did
his Dogs, is scorching in the Flames of Hell. All which considered, it does
become the highest in Birth and Quality, to carry it with all due Humility and
Courtesy to the lowest, and to Renounce and Abandon those Thoughts of Honor
and Quality, which thrust away their Fellow Servants to the same God, so far
off 'em, though they may not have the Pretense of the Pharisee for so doing, nor
can say to 'em, Come not near me, I am Holier than thou.

But, Thirdly, Those Persons ought indeed, even to renounce all Pretensions to
Honor, who have degenerated from those worthy Qualities, which Ennobled their
Ancestors. Such ought even to Renounce all pretensions to Honor, who have
degenerated from those wo^thy Qualities, which Ennobled their Ancestors.
The true Nobility of those, who are really of Birth, or Quality, was founded,
as I have told you, in the Heroic and extraordinary Virtues of their
Ancestors; and therefore their Quality cannot be supposed to remain with 'em,
when those Virtues, which gave Being to it, are departed from 'em. But so it
is, that none are half so apt to Pride themselves in their Families, and to
talk so much of their Pedigree, as those who have the least of any true Worth
remaining in 'em: And sure, it is a sign they have but little of their own, who
do so much value themselves upon others Deservings; and seem to have nothing to
Brag of, but borrowed Titles. We have Abraham to our Father, was the constant
Cry of the Jews, when they had least of the Faith and Virtues of Abraham.
However, as apt as such are to assume this Honor to themselves, there is no
reason in the World, but what was purchased by the Merits of others, should be
forfeited by their ill Deserts, and that Vice should lose, what Virtue did
gain. This the Determination of our Savior, and his Apostles, in their Case.
And this our Savior and his Apostles did determine in the Case of those Jews;
Think not to say within your Hearts, we have Abraham to our Father, for I say
unto you, that God is able of these Stones, to raise up Children to Abraham,
Matthew. 3.9. that is, by having degenerated from Abraham, you have forfeited
your Title to the Name and Honor of being Abraham's Children, and the vile
Gentiles, as you account 'em, shall be taken into that Dignity and Relation:
For he is the Father of all them that Believe, though they be not of the
Circumcision. And accordingly in a true Estimation of Things, all those, and
those only are Honorable, who are Virtuous, though they cannot derive their
Pedigree from noble Ancestors. The Honor of my House begins with me, and
the Honor of thine ends with thee, said a worthy Commander, in Plutarch, to
a debaucht Wretch, who upbraided him with the Meanness of his Parentage.

Lastly, And such ought also, even to Renounce all Pretensions to Honor,
amongst Christians at leastwise, who despise Religion and its chiefest Virtues,
as Qualities beneath them. Lastly, and such ought to Renounce all Pretensions
to Honor, amongst Christians at leastwise, who despise Religion and its
chiefest Virtues, as Qualities beneath 'em.
And yet those are the Persons, who take themselves to be the only Men of
Honor, who can talk most Atheistically and Profanely, whose Life and
Conversation is made up of Lewdness and Debauchery; and as to those grand
distinguishing Graces of Christianity, Humility, Meekness, and a patient
Enduring of Injuries and Affronts, who count them a mere Jest, which Men of
Quality and Honor, it is impossible, should submit to. But be it so, only let
'em withal consider, that Not many mighty, not many Noble were called; but the
base things of the World, and things which are despised, has God chosen, yea
and things which are not, to bring to naught things which are, 1 Cor. 1.26.28.
And what then signifies their Honor, when God despises it?

But really it is not so, that your profligate and lewd Livers, be their Birth,
or Quality never so Great, are Honored and Respected amongst Men; for whilst
they continue in a mean and vile Slavery to their basest Lusts, they are not
only in truth and reallity miserable and wretched Caitiffs: But whatever they
think of themselves, they are indeed in the Eyes of others most Hateful and
Contemptible. True it is, the greatest Part of Men (and Pity it is, that so
many amongst Christians should still remain so Carnally-minded) do look upon
the Man, who will not revenge an Affront, to be mean Spirited, and scarcely a
Gentleman; and the desperate Duellist is the more Honorable and Heroic in the
Eye of the World: Yet those who are thoroughly seasoned with Religion, and
Wisdom's Dictates, have other Thoughts and Apprehensions of such a One, and
count him the only Person of true Courage, and of a great Soul, who can despise
the vain Opinions of the Crowd, in the Pursuit of real Virtue. And above all,
the Meek and Forgiving Christian, has this Honor, that he has an easy Access
to the Throne of God, can come into his Presence with Confidence and Assurance,
whilst the other, though the Greatest Man on Earth for Quality, dares not
Approach him, without Trembling and Horror. And yet if vain Men will give the
Honor here to those, who are most Contemptible in the sight of God, But if
such are accounted Honorable by vain Men, they are despicable in the Eyes both
of God, and of all Wise and Good Men.
(it is very unfit it should be so amongst Christians) however let the Humble
and Meek content himself with this, That here on Earth he has the Approbation
and Esteem of all Wise and Good Men, and shall receive in Heaven, from the
unerring Judgment of God, a Testimony before the whole Quire of Saints and
Angels, to his infinite and eternal Honor and Glory; a Testimony, I say, which
will far Exalt him above the Highest of Mortal Men, who consider their own
Quality, more than God's Glory, and prefer an empty Notion of Honor, before
the real and substantial Graces of God's Spirit.

The Sum how far Paternal Honor is to be Renounced.
In a word, and to sum up what has been spoke to this Point, Paternal Honor is
indeed in it self Useful and Valuable, as it puts before Men's Eyes the worthy
Deeds of their Ancestors, and as it inspires 'em to an Imitation of 'em in the
most excellent and noble Instances, and Strains of Virtue. But so far as Men's
Opinion of their Birth, or Quality, pretends to put 'em above the Laws of God,
or Man, and beyond Reproof, or Punishment, when they have violated either; and
when it Exalts 'em above their Brethren, to that Degree, as to despise and
oppress the rest of Mankind, as if in respect of themselves, they were no
better than Brute Creatures: These are no other than mere Paganish and
Heathenish Notions of Honor, and must be Renounced and Detested by every
Christian. And indeed those ought, even to Renounce all Pretensions to any
Honor, who have basely degenerated from those noble and virtuous Qualities,
which Ennobled their Ancestors, and did constitute them Honorable. But
especially such ought to Renounce all Pretensions to Honor, amongst Christians
at leastwise, who despise Religion, and its chiefest Virtues, as Qualities
beneath 'em. So that thus you have at length seen, in what Sense, and how far
Paternal Honor is to be Renounced, that Honor which is derived upon Persons,
from their Forefathers by Nature.

Secondly, And now I am in like manner to consider Civil Honor, II. In what
sense, and how far Civil Honor is to be Renounced; whether the Favor of
Princes, or the Effects of their Favor, Posts of Honor.
that which is derived upon Persons, from the Fathers of their Country, or
those who have the supreme Power and Authority in a Land, and are next under
God, the sole Fountain of this sort of Honor. And it is either that, which is
the Cause of farther Honors, viz. The Favor of Princes; or the Honors
themselves, which they Conferred upon Persons deserving their Favors, as
Pre-eminence and Authority, Dignities and Promotions, which are usually called
Posts of Honor: As also those Titles and Distinctions, which do commonly
accompany, and go along therewith, and are the Effect of Princes Favors.

Now as to both these, there is no doubt, but in themselves they are Good and
Useful, and may be very advantageous to the Purposes of Religion; for the more
a Man is in his Prince's Favor, and the greater is his Authority and Trust;
the more he is supported with Power and Pre-eminence, and the greater Figure he
makes in the World, the more capable he shall be of protecting true Religion,
of rewarding and encouraging Piety and Virtue, and of discountenancing and
casheering Wickedness and Vice, as was seen in the Favor of Hester and
Mordecai, with King Ahasuerus, Hest. 8. But then except the Mind be first well
seasoned with Principles of Religion and Virtue, and ballasted with Humility,
Princes Favors, High Places, Precedences and Titles give great Temptations to
several Sins, and that both in the Getting, Possessing, and Losing thereof.

These kind of Honors, and outward Glories, are dazzling and bewitching Things;
These kind of Honors and outward Glories are dazzling and bewitching Things
they draw the Eyes of whole Crowds upon 'em, gazing, and admiring, and almost
adoring those, who are Invested with 'em. They bring many humble Petitioners to
wait upon 'em; and these are the Men, who keep the World in subjection and awe
under 'em. And therefore in obtaining a Prince's Favor, many are tempted to
the grossest Flattery, in keeping it to the most servile and sinful
Compliances; and rather than lose it, to Sacrifice Innocence, and a good
Conscience. And as to the Honors themselves, the Glory thereof tempts some to
grasp after 'em, who have no Abilities, nor Skill to manage 'em; the Denial
often causes those, who have real Abilities, but know it too well, to turn
Malcontents and Mutineers, to the Shocking many times of Church and State.
And most Men are tempted to aspire after 'em, merely to serve their own Private
Ends, not the Public Good, by 'em* And lastly, to compass and purchase 'em by
most indirect and unlawful Means. In the Possession of 'em, Persons are apt to
grow Proud and Imperious, Unjust and Cruel, and at the best shall be much
diverted from minding the great Business of their Souls. And lastly, the hazard
of losing 'em are dangerous Temptations to many to Obey Man, rather than God,
that they may still Retain 'em.

But First, as to a Prince's Favor, though it is extremely Valuable when it can
be had without Sin; But First, a Prince's Favor, though extremely Valuable, when
it can be had without Sin, yet no Man must Gain, Possess, or retain it by
wicked Arts, or sinful Compliances.
and Princes ought to be Applied to, and Courted for the Favors Men expect
from 'em, and must be held in the greatest Veneration, as the Vicegerents of
God upon Earth by 'em; and no Wise, nor Good Man will forfeit, without
necessity, the Esteem of 'em: Yet no Man must wind himself into their
Affections, by flattering of their Vices, none must Obey their unlawful
Commands, as the Duty of his Place, nor must any for fear of incurring their
Displeasure, choose rather to displease God. There are several Instances in the
Scripture of Good and Wise Men, which show you how, and in what Case it is
necessary for Men, so far to deny themselves, as to Renounce their Favors,
amongst which, take that of John the Baptist, instead of many. This Just and
Holy man was much in the Esteem and Favor of Herod, who Observed him, and when
he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly, Mar. 6.20. Nevertheless
this Holy Man was so far from flattering of him, that he did not stick to
Reprove him for his Incest, and for all the Evils he had done, Luke 3.19. though
to the Loss of that Prince's Favor, and his own Life, Mar. 6.27.

Secondly, Proceed we next to consider, Nor Secondly the Effects of their
Favors, High Places, and Titles of Honor.
what is necessary to be done with respect to the Effect of Prince's Favors,
those Honorable Posts, the Pre-eminence and Authority, the Dignities and
Promotions, to which they do Advance those, whom they Favor; and those Titles
of Honor and Distinction, which do usually go along therewith. And in the
Obtaining of these Posts of Honor, and Places of Trust and Power;

First, There must be no Grasping at that, which is above a Man's Capacities
and Abilities to manage to the Public Good. I. In the obtaining of these, no
man must grasp at that, which is above his Capacities and Abilities to manage
to the Public Good.
For any Person, out of a vain Opinion he has conceived of his own Parts and
Abilities, to undertake Business he is not able to Perform, and to meddle in
things he does not understand, is a great Injury both to himself, and others;
to himself, in exposing his own Insufficiency, which in a lower Station would
have lain hid, and never been Censured, nor Reproached. He does injure others
thereby in perverting Judgment and Justice, through his Unskilfulness, in not
dispatching Men with quickness and dexterity in their lawful Occasions and
Business, and by keeping out those, who would discharge the Duties of such
Offices and Places, This mischievous to the State.
much more to the Benefit and Satisfaction of the Public.

But this Ambitious and Pragmatical Humor of Climbing where they are not
Called, is most of all mischievous to the Church, This mischievous to the
Church.
when Persons undertake to be Teachers of others, who have not Learnt
themselves; such were those of whom St. Paul speaks, Who desired to be Teachers
of the Law, when they understood neither what they said, nor whereof they
affirmed, 1 Timothy 1.7. And such were some great Pretenders to Illumination and
Knowledge in the Apostles Time, of whom St. Peter complains thus, These are
Wells without Water, Clouds carried by a Tempest, viz. From one dangerous Error
to another, by every Wind of Doctrine, as Clouds are from one place to another,
by a tempestuous Wind, 2 Pet. 2.17.

But the Psalmist was far from this pragmatical and meddling Temper, Psalm.
131.1. Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine Eyes lofty, neither do I
exercise my self in great matters, or things too high for me. Much less does it
become others to be so; but all must so far Renounce (as great as is the
Temptation) the most Honorable Posts, as to decline and refuse those they are
not able to manage to the Satisfaction of their own Consciences, and the
Public Weal. And it would be happy for the World if all would do so.

But above all, this Modesty in declining those Undertakings they are not
fitted for, becomes the Laity, with respect to their Teaching of others, whom
it does not become To think more highly of themselves, than they ought to think
(as they do who set up for Teachers, who had not an Education for that Purpose)
but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every Man the measure of
Faith, Romans 12.3.

Nor Secondly ought Persons of the best Capacities and greatest Abilities be
over-eager and importunate in their Suits and Applications to those, who bestow
them.
Secondly, And in the obtaining of these Posts of Honor and Power, Persons of
the best Capacities and Abilities, must not be over-eager and importunate in
their Suits and Applications to those, who bestow them; but having modestly
made their Court to their Superiors, must contentedly receive their Denial. It
is the Ambition of Great Men, striving with one another for the highest Places
of Trust and Power in the Commonwealth, that causes Factions, and Civil Wars,
to the Destruction of their Native Country. And it is the Pride of some, who
over-valuing their own Abilities and Parts, and thinking they are Injured, in
not being Preferred to the highest Dignities and Promotions in the Church, has
caused those Schisms and Separations in it; such choosing rather to be
Ringleaders of a Party, than Subject to, and Dependant on any. But though these
public Posts in Church, or State may be modestly sought by those, who are able
to weild 'em, and need not be renounced and declined by Men of Parts and
Abilities, when duly called thereto: Yet none of the greatest Capacities ought
violently to thrust themselves into 'em, to the Disturbance of Church, or
State, Lest they perish in the Gainsaying of Korah, who with his Companions,
Dathan and Abiram, unduly and factiously seeking the Priesthood, Numb. 16.10.
Provoked God in so fearful a manner, that The Earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their Houses, and all the men that appertained unto
Korah, and all their Goods, ver. 32. The Consequences and Effects of Faction
and Schism, are so very bad, that it is not to be wondered, God should so
remarkably Punish it, as he did, to the Example of others.

Wherefore a Person of the best Capacities and Abilities, if after some
reasonable Expectations, and a modest Importunity, he cannot yet hope to
prevail, he must submit to Authority and Order, acknowledge God's Providence in
it, possess his Soul in Patience, and think that for some secret Corruption in
himself, or for some other just Cause, God is pleased that he should not at
all, or not yet succeed in his Suit. So that thus you see, how in the Pursuit
of Civil Honor, as High Places, and Posts of Honor, and Authorities,
Dignities, and Promotions, that no Man must grasp at those, which he has not
Abilities, or Skill to manage; nor must Persons of greatest Abilities turn
Malcontents and Mutineers against the Government, in Church, or State, when
defeated in their Aims: But as they may modestly endeavor their own
Advancement, so they must contentedly receive a Denial, when for Reasons, best
known to their Superiors, they are put by their Pretensions. And this is all
that is proper for me to speak as to the Renouncing of this sort of Honor; it
being not my Business to Catechize my Governors, but rather to Instruct you,
that you may be obedient both to God, and Them. To proceed then,

Thirdly, There is another sort of Honor, consisting in the high Esteem and
Reputation, on which the wise and virtuous Part of Mankind have of a Person,
III. How far, and in what Sense, that Honor which consists in the high Esteem
and Reputation of the wise and virtuous part of Mankind is to be renounced.
occasioned by the excellent Qualities, and divine Graces shining in him, or
upon the account of some extraordinary Actions performed by him. And this
indeed is a Subject, which it concerns all of you to have well stated to you,
there being no Christian but has, or ought to have a good Reputation, for his
good and excellent Qualities. And by what measures he ought to Gain, to Enjoy,
or to Retain it; and when, how far, and in what Sense he is bound to deny
himself in, or to decline it, is what belongs therefore to every One to be
satisfied about.

Now this is that Honor, which the Wiseman calls a Good Name, This is what
the Wiseman calls a Good Name, and is more valuable than Riches, or precious
Ointments.
Prove. 22.1. and tells us, it is rather to be chosen, than great Riches, and
that loving Favor is better than Silver and Gold. And yet to give us a higher
Commendation of it, Eccl. 7.1. he tells us, that a Good Name is better than
precious Ointment. Now that he does compare and prefer it to precious Ointment,
the reason very likely is this, Because in the first place, precious Ointment
was a most valuable Treasure in the Eastern Nations, as appears by Hezekiah's
showing it in a vain Ostentatious manner amongst the rest of his choicest
Treasures, those in the House of his precious things, to the Babylonish
Ambassadors, 2 King. 20.13. Next it was what was used in the Consecration of
Persons to the highest Dignities and Employments, as to the Pre-eminence of a
King, and the Office of the High Priesthood, as you will see, Lev. 16.32. and
1 King. 19.16. It was what cast forth, far and near, a most fragrant and
delicious Scent to the Comfort of others, and of those, who were Anointed with
it; for no sooner had Mary anointed the Feet of Jesus, with her costly
Ointment, but the house was filled with the Odor of it, Joh. 12.3. Oils and
Ointments were what Wrestlers were formerly wont to use to prepare 'em for the
Combat; for being of a piercing Nature, when Chased in, they would supple the
Joints, and strengthen the Sinews very much, It shall enter like Oil into thy
Bones, Psalm. 109.18. and thereby greatly enable the Body for Action, make it
Nimble, and Vigorous, and fit for noble Exercises. And lastly, they were wont
anciently to Embalm the Bodies of their Dead therewith, as you may see, Joh.
19.14. to preserve 'em, even after Death, from Stench and Corruption.

It is a more peculiar Blessing than any the greatest Treasures, and procures
better Security to our Persons and Estates.
And now the Advantages of a Good Name have something therein resembling, but
indeed far exceeding each of these, so as to render it much better than
precious Ointment. For in the first place, an excellent Reputation and Fame for
extraordinary Perfections, Divine Graces, and virtuous Performances, is
infinitely more valuable than the most precious Treasures; for besides that, it
is a more peculiar Blessing, than large Manors and Possessions, Banks of Gold,
or Silver, than Indian Stones, and all things that are accounted precious by
Worldlings and Usurers; for these are things which are common to the worst, as
well as best of Men: Besides this, I say, an high Esteem and Reputation for
Goodness, is a better Security by far, than the greatest Wealth. Now the
Fundamental reason of some Men's amassing so much Wealth together, is because
they think they shall provide thereby against all the ill Events of Fortune,
and shall have wherewithal to send for themselves in times of difficulty and
scarcity of Friends. But whereas in Dearths, Famines, Persecutions, and
Invasions, the more Wealthy any Man is, the more he is the Object of Envy, and
subject to Rapine and Violence: The very Reputation of Uprightness and
Integrity, Goodness, Mercy, Charitableness, will be a safe Retreat and Shelter
against the Storm. And this alone has delivered many a One from Injuries, and
Barbarous Usage, whom bolted Doors, and barred Gates, and Armed Men to guard
'em, could not protect against the Insults of an Enraged Multitude, and the
Plunders of an Intruding Soldiery.

It is a necessary Qualification to the Episcopal Promotion.
Next a good Reputation, and an Honorable Esteem amongst Men for worthy
Qualities, is a necessary Qualification of those, who are to be Consecrated to
the Dignity of Bishops, and of the Priesthood, it being required that such
must have a good Report of those, who are without, 1 Timothy 3.1. Credit and
Reputation do yield an unspeakable Comfort to a Man's own self, It is
comfortable to a Man's own self.
when he has the Approbation of Wise and Good Men, giving the same Testimony as
his own Conscience to his worthy Designs and Performances. For which reason the
Wiseman tells us, Prove. 15.13. That a good Report makes the Bones fat,
whereas a Person laboring under the Infamy of scandalous Vices, has both his
own Conscience, and other men's Contempt of him, piercing him to the very Soul.
And with respect to others, A Good Name sends forth a Savor more sweet, And
smells sweet in the World.
than the most precious Ointments, to the Delight of all that are round about
him; whereas the very Name of an Unjust Oppressor and Exactor, of a Riotous and
Debaucht Liver, of a Knavish, or Perfidious Villain, is a Nuisance and Offense
to the Neighborhood he dwells in, and he is Hated farther than he was ever
seen.

What shall I say? A Good Name and Reputation in the World, It renders a Person
capable of doing Good in it.
renders a Person capable of doing Good amongst Men. It gives Weight to his
Counsels, Authority to his Reproofs: Nay, and not only his Presence, but the
very Imagination that he is Present, is enough to give a Check to any base and
unworthy Action, or wicked Design. Because I delivered the Poor that cried, and
the Fatherless, and him that had none to help him, unto me men gave Ear and
waited, and kept Silence at my Counsel, Job 29.12.21. Whereas if a Person of
known, or but suspected Vices, though Backed with the Power of a Master, of a
Parent, nay of a Magistrate, if such a One pretends to correct Sin, or to
enjoin the strict Observation of any Duty, that Part of Religion is thought the
worse of, and slighted the more for his concerning himself about it. And as a
Good Name renders a Man capable of doing much Good, so to have the Approbation
of others to his worthy Designs, puts Life and Vigor into his Contrivances for
the Public. And active in Promoting it.
It makes him Active and Zealous in the Prosecution of 'em, and gives
Refreshment to his tired Thoughts and Spirits, under the Fatigues of compassing
'em. And to Crown all, when such a One comes to Die, his Death is lamented as a
public Loss, or some Judgment befallen the Age, or Place, which was not worthy
of him. His Memory is sweet and precious, whereas that of the Infamous stinks
worse than his very Carcass; or as the Wiseman says, The Memory of the Just is
blessed, but the Name of the Wicked shall rot, Prove. 10.7. So Valuable in it
self, is that sort of Honor, which consists in the high Esteem and Reputation
of the Wise and Virtuous Part of Mankind, concerning a Person, occasioned by
the excellent Qualities and divine Graces shining in him, or upon the account
of some extraordinary Actions performed by him. And yet for your farther
Satisfaction, A desire of Reputation, and Credit, is a thing implanted in our
Natures by God.
that it is not only in it self a valuable Blessing, but may with due
Regulations be desired, enjoyed, and carefully retained by us, I am to tell
you, That God himself, who is not the Author of Sin, has implanted in the
Nature of every Man a love of his Credit, and a desire to have a Good Name
amongst Wise and Virtuous Persons; and this the Divine Wisdom has done, that
this desire of Credit and Reputation might be a Spur to excite us to Virtuous
Performances, and a Bridle to restrain us from lashing out into Sinful
Extravagances. Hence that of the Apostle, Will thou not be afraid of the Power?
Do that which is Good, and thou shall have Praise of the same, Romans 13.3.

And indeed, Lastly, It is a Duty incumbent upon all Christians, to preserve
their Reputation untainted, and, as much as possible, unsuspected of Evil. And
to preserve a Reputation untainted and unsuspected of Evil, is a Duty enjoined
us by his Laws.
So the Apostle, Phil. 2.15. Be blameless, ye Sons of God, without Rebuke, in
the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, amongst whom shine ye as Lights in
the world. And in the 1 These. 5.22. we are Enjoined to Abstain from all
Appearance of Evil. Some will pretend, so they can but Approve their
Consciences to God, they care not what Men say of 'em. But besides that, seldom
any grow shameless and regardless of their Credit, till they have lost all
sense of Conscience, as well as of their Honor: This is at best but a very
uncharitable Saying. It is every Man's Duty indeed, in the first place, to take
care of doing any thing, that is in it self Evil, and by which God is offended;
and if he cannot discharge his Conscience to him in a Good thing, without
incurring the Offense and and Censures of Men, he must in such Case be content
to approve his Actions to God only. But in Charity to other Men's Souls, we
must also with St. Paul, Act. 24.16. Exercise our selves to have always a
Conscience void of offense, as toward God, so toward men, by giving no
occasion to suspect us of Evil, and that because of giving no Offense, Lest our
liberty become a stumbling Block to them that are Weak, and an occasion of
falling in our Brother's way, which we are Cautioned against, Romans 14.13. and 1
Cor. 8.9. Besides, that if a Person be of ill Fame, though he may not deserve it,
all his Speeches and Actions shall be ill Interpreted, no Man regards what he
says, or does, his Proposals shall be suspected, his Counsels and Rebukes, though
wholesome and just, scorned and despised; the Man he speaks for, the side he
adheres to, the Cause he defends, and the Business he manages shall suffer
Prejudice, and speed the worse for the ill Opinion is held of him. So that as
the Father said, N^bis necessaria est Vita nostra, aliis Fama nostra. Augus. de
Bon. vid. Cap. 22.
"A Good Life is necessary to us, and a Good Name necessary to our Brethren.
And as we must labor to have a good Conscience toward God for our own sakes,
so also to have a good Report amongst Men for our Neighbors. So Valuable is a
good Esteem in it self, so desirable to be Attained, and so carefully to be
Preserved.

Nevertheless even a Good Name is in some measure to be Renounced by us, and
the Temptations it gives us.
Nevertheless, as useful as is the Honor and Esteem of Good Men, even this is
in some measure to be Renounced by us, and the Temptations also it gives us,
which are not inconsiderable. For the natural Desire of Honor and Credit
amongst Men, is apt to make us too eagerly to desire Praise, making our own
Glory the main End of the Good we do, or at leastwise to make us desire more
than is proportionable to our Deserts. When possessed of Reputation and Esteem,
we are apt to take it wholly to our selves, and not to refer it to God, to whom
the Glory of all that is Good in us, does properly belong; and to make it an
Instrument of our own Advancement only, neglecting to use the Authority, which
our Credit and Reputation in the World does give us, to discountenance
Irreligion, and to encourage Piety in the World. And sometimes Persons do so
much overvalue their Good Name and Reputation amongst Men, as to fly to undue
Means of preserving it; nay, to prefer the Esteem of Men more than the Honor,
that comes from God: In all which Cases there is great occasion for that
Renunciation and Self-denial, with respect to that Honor, which consists in an
High Esteem and Reputation amongst Men.

As First, we must so far Renounce the Honor that shall accrue to us from our
good Works, as not to make our own Glory the End and Reason of any Good we do.
And, First, It behooves us so far to Renounce and Reject the Honor and
Reputation, that shall accrue to us from our Pious or Good Works, as Not to
make our own Glory the End and Reason of any Good we do. We must Take heed that
we do not our Alms before Men, to be seen of them, otherwise we shall have no
Reward of our Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 6.1. But on the contrary, the
main and chief End of all we do, must be God's Glory; insomuch, that Whether we
eat, or drink, or whatever we do, we must do all to the Glory of God, 1 Cor.
10.13. And indeed so far should we be from affecting the Honors and Applauses
of Men, upon the account of any thing well done by us, that it becomes us
rather to walk as silently and retiredly in the ways of Virtue, as we can,
never endeavoring Ostentatiously to publish and proclaim our Pious and Good
Performances, declining Fame and Popularity, and modestly concealing our own
Praises and Excellencies: But when either the Glory of God, or the good of our
Brother is concerned and promoted in the Manifestation, Letting our Light shine
before Men, then, and to the End only, that others seeing our good Works, they
may glorify our Father, which is in Heaven, Matthew. 5.16. For as One well
observes, We are rather to affect those things, which deserve Fame, than the
obtaining of Fame it self; because Honor must be the Effect and Fruit of
Well-doing, and not the chief Motive, or final Cause: Or, as Senecae expresses
it, It is good to be Praised, but better to be Praiseworthy. But then if our
Reputation and Praise does come in here, it is desirable enough, and is very
seasonable, and comes in its due place, as being subordinate to God's Glory.
And indeed it is most successfully obtained, when least sought after; every one
despising the most worthy Performances, when they see a Man aim thereby at so
low a Mark, as Humane Praise and Glory.

Secondly, We must not Affect, but Renounce and Refuse those Praises, which are
beyond, or above our Deserts. II. We must not affect, but renounce those
Praises which are above our Deserts.
We may moderately desire to be well Esteemed, but it must be in proportion to
our Virtues. For as it is Unjust to assume to our selves Praises, of which we
are no ways Deserving: So it is Vanity and Vainglory, to expect more than we
deserve: And, We must not be desirous of Vainglory, Gal. 5.26. And to this End
must therefore take care of Self-love, which makes us to magnify our own Parts,
and to lessen those of our Neighbor.

Thirdly, Persons, who have a great Reputation and Esteem amongst Men, upon the
account of some worthy Performances, Must beware of taking the Honor thereof
wholly to themselves, and of not Transferring it to God, to whom the Glory of
all that is Good in us, or excellently performed by any of us, does properly
belong. III. We must beware of taking the Honor and Respects given us for any
worthy Performances, wholly to our selves, and of not transferring it to God,
to whom the Glory of all that is Good in us, does properly belong.
St. Paul, though He labored more abundantly in the saving of Men's Souls, than
all the rest of the Apostles, yet was so far from taking the Glory thereof to
himself, that he corrects it with a Not I, but the Grace of God, which was with
me, 1 Cor. 15.10. And so must all of us do, and instead of Glorying in our
selves, must Glory in the Lord, and say, Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy
Name be the Praise, Psalm. 115.1. And the reason thereof is, that the good
Temper of our Souls is wrought in us by the Grace of his Holy Spirit; and if we
shall accomplish any worthy Design, besides that, it is owing to his Grace
assisting us, it is owing also to his Providence, which orders all those lucky
Hits, and favorable Circumstances, and all those other Advantages, whereby we
do bring it to Perfection: For Every good and perfect Gift comes from above,
Jam. 1.17. And, What is it that we have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7. We are not
forbid to receive Honor, says the Pious and Learned Bishop Tailor, but to seek
it for Designs of Pride and Complacency, or to make it rest in our Hearts. But
when the Hand of Virtue receives the Honor, and transmits it to God from our
own Head, the Desires of Nature are sufficiently satisfied, and nothing of
Religion contradicted.

IV. We must abhor making a Reputation for Religion an Instrument only to our
own Advancement.
Fourthly, You must abhor that vain Hypocrisy of those, who make the Reputation
for Religion a mere Engine to screw themselves up into Places of Power, and an
Instrument to promote their Trade only; but must chiefly use that Authority,
which your Credit and Reputation for Religion may give you, to discountenance
Vice, and to encourage Virtue in the World.

You must Renounce and Abhor, I say, that profane Hypocrisy of those, who make
their Reputation for Religion a mere Engine to screw themselves up into places
of Power, and an Instrument to promote their Trade only. This is the known
Policy of a great many, who when they have a mind to usurp the Places of their
Governors, put up to be great Zealots for Reformation of Religion and Manners;
and when they have a design to Engross to themselves all the Trade of their
Neighbors, turn over to some Demure and Pharisaical Sect, that makes greater
Pretenses and outward Shows of Godliness, than their honest, but modest
Neighbors. But for any Person to presume to make so sacred and venerable a
Thing, as Religion really is, a mere Tool and Engine to mount themselves into
the highest Posts and Promotions, into Business and Trades, is so Sacrilegious,
so Profane an Impiety, such an Aggravated, such a provoking Pitch of
Wickedness, that if Hell be heated, as the Babylonian Furnace was, seven times
hotter than ordinary, for any sort of Sinners, surely it must be for those, who
do prostitute the Honor of God and Religion to such vile Purposes. And this
therefore is a Practice, which must of all things in the World be detested by
you. Certain it is, the mild JESUS was never known to utter Himself with so
much Indignation and Anger, as toward those sort of Men, who made the
Pretenses of Religion, a mere Instrument to serve their Ambition and
Covetousness, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye devour
Widows Houses, and for a pretense make long Prayers, therefore ye shall receive
the greater Damnation, Matthew. 23.14. So that far be it from any of you, to make
so Sacred and Venerable a thing, as Religion, an Instrument only of Ambition
and getting Wealth.

But must use the Authority our Credit gives us to discountenance Vice, and to
encourage Virtue in the world.
But you must use that Authority, which your Credit and Reputation for Religion
may give you, to discountenance Vice, and to encourage Virtue in the World. A
Person of approved Sincerity, and of known Piety, has upon that very account, a
very great Power over the Hearts and Minds of Men, as I have told you; so that
he can easily mould 'em into the like Temper with himself, if he will but
seriously apply himself to that Purpose. And to this purpose therefore you must
use that Credit, Reputation, and Authority you shall have with men, who think
well and honorably of you, namely, to pull 'em back from running headlong in a
Course of Sin, and as Allurements to entice 'em to follow your Example in those
Virtues and good Parts, for which you your selves shall be so Commendable. It
is a Talent God has committed to you, to Trade withal for his Glory, and if you
shall neglect to lay out any thing of that Nature to your Master's use, it will
be required at your Hands, as you will see Matthew. 25.

Fifthly, As valuable as is a Good Name and Reputation amongst Men, You must
Renounce all undue Means of preserving it; V. As valuable as is a Good Name and
Reputation amongst Men, we must Renounce all undue means of preserving it.
In which Rank I shall place, not only Duelling, that most Barbarous and
Unchristian Custom amongst the Great Ones: Such are Duelling upon the account
of slanders amongst the great Ones.
But also going to Law upon every Scandal, so common amongst the Ordinary sort
of People when the Slander one another. As to the former, That Person, who
Challenges his Slanderer to give him Satisfaction, as he calls it, in the way
of Duel, he seems to me to take the ready way to confirm the World in the
Opinion, that he was not Injured. The worst his Adversary could say of him, was
something which spoke him a very Ill Man; and herein he goes about to prove
himself the worst of Men, even a Murderer of his Neighbor, and a Felo de, and
consequently one that might not be unlikely to commit any other Wickedness. But
if it should take off the Scandal from him, in the Opinion of a foolish World,
what Comfort will that afford, when it is certain, that No Murderer has
eternal Life abiding in him, 1 John 3.15.

Nor is it so agreeable to that forbearing and forgiving Temper, Going to Law
thereupon usual amongst common People.
which should be in every Christian, to go to Law upon words of Slander. Now
therefore there is utterly a Fault amongst you, because ye go to Law one with
another; why do you not rather take Wrong? That is, in matters of Trespass and
Fraud, if the Loss may be supported, or in Cases of Slander, wherein generally
speaking, there is a much more effectual way of clearing an injured Innocence,
than by Impleading of the Slanderer before a Magistrate: Why in such Cases do
you not rather take Wrong? I say, in such Cases there is generally a much more
effectual way of clearing an injured Innocence, than by Impleading of the
Slanderer before a Magistrate. For besides that, this sort of Lawing seems in
most, a piece of Revenge in the Party traduced, upon his Accuser, for
discovering some secret Wickedness, which he was ashamed to have published,
rather than with any Design, or Hopes of clearing his Innocence; insomuch that
he who comes off Triumphantly from the Justice of Peace, is seldom the better
thought of in the Neighborhood, and still they will be apt to think it was a
Work of Darkness, and only wanted a sufficient Proof: Besides this, I say, an
open and plain Discovery before Neighbors, of the falsehood and malice of the
Slanderer in the most mild and Christian way; or if such a Discovery cannot be
made, a Circumspection and Care to live so Inoffensively and Innocently, as no
one will believe the Calumny, this will in time work all evil Surmises and
Suspicions out of the Minds of Men.

Lastly, And we must utterly renounce and forfeit the Esteem of Men, rather
than incur the Dis-favour of God. Lastly, we must utterly renounce and forfeit
the Esteem of men, rather than incur the dis-favour of God.
The best and wisest of Men are but Men still, and do often judge of other
Persons, and their Proceedings, not as they ought, or as God Judges. Thus we
see, When Jesus began to show unto his Disciples, how that he must go up unto
Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders, and Chief Priests, and
Scribes, and be killed; then Peter took him up, and began to rebuke him,
saying, Be it far from thee Lord, this shall not be unto thee, Matthew. 16.21,
22. that is, he endeavored earnestly to dissuade him from so hazardous an
Undertaking, and would have him be more careful of himself. And so it often
happens to his faithful Disciples, especially his Ministers. If any more than
ordinarily Zealous of their Master's Glory, or faithful in his Service, shall
attempt to Reprove a Great Man, or to oppose the Stream of Wickedness, or some
ungodly, but prevailing Customs, his Friends, too much savouring of worldly
Wisdom, shall violently dissuade him, not to be thus Righteous overmuch, as
they think.

But if it shall so happen, that in the Discharge of our Duty, we have not
their Approbation, be they never so Wise, or esteemed never so Virtuous, having
in the first place with all Sincerity considered what is necessary for us to
do, we must vigorously proceed in the Discharge of a good Conscience, let who
will condemn us of Rashness, or Imprudence.

And this is what the Apostle commands us, 2 Cor. 6.3, 4.8. He bids us Give no
offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not blamed; that is, he would have
us make it, in the first place, a special part of our Care, to Abstain strictly
from all things, that may give any just Offense, and Avert any from the Faith;
endeavoring to Approve our selves to all, that all Men may look on our
Behavior in the Gospel, with Reverence, and not with Censure: And so be
attracted to a Christian Life, not detered from it. But then he charges us
withal, In all things to approve our selves as the Ministers of God, in much
Patience, Affliction, by Honor and Dishonor, by evil Report, and good Report,
as deceivers, and yet true; that is, he would have us approve our Fidelity in
the Discharge of our Office by all proper Means, through the various Fates of
being reproachfully Treated by some, as well as respectfully by others, by
being Vilified, as well as Commended. So that thus at length you have seen, how
that that part of Honor, which consists in the Good Esteem and Reputation of
the wise and virtuous part of Mankind, though it is much to be valued in it self,
and may be lawfully Desired, comfortably Enjoyed, and ought carefully to be
Preserved: Yet there is great place for Renunciation, with respect both to the
Attainment and Enjoyment thereof; and particularly as to the Loss of it, that
we must so far Renounce it, as not to prefer the Esteem of Men before the
Honor, that comes from God.

Fourthly, And now I am to take into consideration the Honor, which is
conferred, not by the wise and virtuous part of Mankind, nor given always upon
the account of good Qualities, and worthy Performances; but the Esteem of
another sort of Men, and for the most part, for quite different Qualities and
Performances, viz. The Applauses of the Vulgar, and of the Crowd of Men, upon
the account of what they judge Praiseworthy and Glorious. IV. How far that
Honor is to be Renounced, which consists in the Applauses of the Vulgar, upon
what they do account Praiseworthy and Honorable.


Now by the Vulgar, and the Crowd of Men, I do not mean barely Mechanics, and
the lower Rank of Mankind; but also that mixed Multitude, or Herd of Men, as
well High, as Low, Rich, as well as Poor, all of what Rank, or Degree soever,
who have little, or no Principles of Religion, or Virtue, all whose
Apprehensions of Divine and Religious Matters are mean and low, and not lifted
above the common Pitch, and to those Heights and Improvements given us by true
Philosophy, and the Christian Doctrine. Truly all such are accounted the
Vulgar, and shall be Herded amongst the Crowd, for me, whether they be clad in
Silks, or Furs, and fare Deliciously every day; or whether they work at the
Anvil, or follow the Plow, or beg at our Doors.

And by their Applauses, I do mean, that Vogue and Suffrage, that Approbation,
and whatever other Expressions of good liking, which they do commonly give to
bad Actions, and sinful Practices, as Swearing, Drinking, Whoring, Fighting,
Duelling, and the like. And these Applauses of theirs, are as common and great
a Temptation to most of those Sins, which are committed, This sort of Honor
must be utterly and absolutely renounced.
as any thing whatsoever, and must therefore be utterly Renounced, Detested,
and Abhorred by us.

So that if ever it should so happen, that you shall unhappily commit any of
those scandalous Sins (which God avert) and any of those profane and unthinking
Creatures, who make a Mock, a mere Jest of Sin, shall applaud you for the same;
instead of being pleased thereat, you must take Shame to your self, and let 'em
know you are too much grieved and troubled at your having committed such Folly
and Madness, to be pleased at their Recital and Plaudits given it. No sure: A
Repentance consisting in Sorrow and Shame is what ought to follow Sin; but to
Glory in it, and to receive Applauses for it, is infinitely to aggravate it.
And know this for certain, that Except you Repent, ye shall all likewise
perish, as many other Sinners, triumphing like Madmen in their Impieties, have
done before you, Luke 13.3.

And now Lastly, it only remains that I lay before you, In what sense, and how
far you are bound to Renounce those outward Expressions and Significations of
Respect, either by Word or Deed, which are usually given upon the Account of
any of the forementioned Honors. Lastly, in what Sense, and how far we must
Renounce those outward Expressions of Respect, either by Word or Deed, which
are usually given upon the account of any of the forementioned honors.
Hitherto we have considered Honor in its internal Parts only, as Birth and
Quality, Authority and Dignity, Reputation and Esteem, either for good, or bad
Qualities and Performances; and have showed you in what Sense either of these
are to be Renounced. And now I am to do the like as to that outward part of
Honor, whereby is expressed and signified to the Senses, the Eyes and Ears of
Men, the Respect, which is born to Persons, upon the account of any of the
forementioned Honors.

And as to these outward significations of Honor, they are made either by
Word, or by Deed. By Word; and they are either Divine Expressions of our
Veneration and Honor, viz. Those Names and Attributes peculiarly belonging to
God, or Humane Ones, as Titles of Honor, when we call a Person Lord, most
Gracious, most Excellent, most Noble, or the like; or Titles of Respect, as
when we call a Person Father, Master, etc. Also as to the outward
significations of Honor by Deed; these are again either Divine, as Adoration,
or Religious Worship, Prostrating our selves on the ground before God, and such
other Significations of our most excessive Self-abasement in respect of him,
and our infinite Distance from him; or they are Humane, such as may be also
used to Men, as bowing of the Body, bending of the Knee, baring of the Head,
etc. all which are Lawful, Innocent, and Dutiful ways of expressing our
Respects; and are also necessary, according as they are applied to Persons, to
whom by the Laws of God, and right Reason they are due.

And now the Question will be, In what Sense, and how far any Person is bound
to Renounce these Honors and Respects when conferred upon 'em.

And, First, No Created Being, either Men, or Angels, must suffer those
Respects to be given them, whether by Word, or Deed, which are proper and
peculiar to signify our sense of God's Majesty and Perfections. I. No Created
Being, either Men, or Angels must suffer those Respects to be given them,
whether by word, or deed which are proper and peculiar to signify our sense of
God's Majesty and Perfections.
Thus you will see, when Paul and Barnabas had miraculously Healed A Creeple a
Lystra, who had never walked, the people would have done Sacrifice unto them,
as if they were Gods; but those Good Men no sooner perceived it, but in the
Abhorrency of the Blasphemy, Rent their Garments, and ran in upon them to
restrain them, crying out and saying, Sirs, Why do ye these things? We also are
Men of like Passions with your selves, and preach unto you, that you should
turn from these Vanities, to serve the living God, Act. 14.14, 15. And no
doubt, but as the Angel also refused the Worship which John offered him, Rev.
22.9. So both the Blessed Saints and Angels above, do now with the utmost
Indignation, Renounce that Divine Worship given 'em by their Superstitious
Votaries, the Papists.

Nor must any Humane Creature forbear to Renounce, so as to express the utmost
Detestation and Abhorrence thereof, when any of the Divine Attributes and
Perfections are ascribed to 'em by the Flattery of sinful Men; for the want of
which Renunciation Herod you will see, Act. 12.21, 22, 23. was the most signally
punished by the Hand of God. It happened that upon a set Day Herod arrayed in
Royal Apparel, sat upon his Throne, and made an Oration unto the People; And
they gave a shout, saying, It is the voice of a God, and not of a Man; and
immediately the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the Glory,
and he was eaten up of Worms, and gave up the Ghost; that is, because he
disclaimed not that Blasphemous Flattery of the People, God Executed that
remarkable Vengeance upon him. And this ought to be a Warning to those vain and
inconsiderate Women, Women therefore must with Detestation renounce those
Blasphemous Complements, wherein Divine Perfections are usually ascribed to
them.
who in the Courtships that are paid 'em, and the Complements, which are
usually made 'em, do suffer even Divine Attributes and Perfections to be
ascribed to 'em. Nay, and these they receive, not only without rebuking those
that presume to offer 'em, but with all the Complacence and Satisfaction in
'em. But surely this will be required, not only at their Hands, who do so
Blasphemously Complement 'em, but at theirs also, who do patiently suffer God
to be so much Blasphemed in their Praises; and the same Vengeance, which
overtook Herod, will not fall short of them also, if they Renounce and Refuse
not, with the utmost Detestation, such Impiety. And it is indeed so common a
strain of Wickedness, that I thought it very requisite to advertise you of it,
and seriously to warn you against admitting it.

Secondly, Every Man must renounce and refuse those Titles, and Respects, and
Precedencies, which are not his due, but belong to Persons above him. II. Every
man must renounce and refuse those Titles and Respects, and Precedences which
are not his due, but belong to Persons above him.
A Distinction of Titles and Respects is necessary to keep up Order and
Distinction of Men, and their Merits; and it is a great Disorder and Confusion,
when Persons either Take, or Receive such, as do not belong to 'em: So that one
cannot know who is High in Rank, or Reputation, or who is Low in the World in
respect of either. This is what the Wiseman complains of, Eccl. 10.5, 6, 7. as
a great Evil, and such as it concerns the Magistrate to restrain by Law. There
is an Evil, which I have seen under the Sun, as an Error, which proceeds from
the Ruler; Folly is set in great dignity, and the Rich sit in low place; I have
seen Servants upon Horses, and Princes walking as Servants upon the Earth.

Nay, Lastly, So far must any One be from Assuming any thing of this Nature
above him, that It becomes every Person out of Modesty, Humility, and good
Manners, to decline his due in this kind: And must ever Renounce the Entitling
and Placing of himself, and leave it to others. Lastly, And must in Modesty,
Humility, and good Manners, decline his due in this kind; and must renounce the
Entitleing of himself, and permit that to others.
This our Savior prescribes, Luke 14.8, 9, 10, 11. When thou art bid to a
Wedding, sit not down in the highest Room, lest a more honorable than thou be
bidden of him; but sit down in the lowest Room, that when he that bade thee
comes, he may say unto thee, Friend go up higher: Then shall thou have Worship
in the presence of them, who are at meat with thee. And the reason of this
Appointment of our Savior's, in so seemingly trivial a Case, was not only to
pull down our Ambition and Pride, but to promote Courtesy, and Civility, and
good Manners, which are very considerable Virtues in Society, and therefore to
be sure of good account in Christianity.

But the Contrary to both these last Instances, of Renouncing outward Respects
and Honors, is one of the great Vanities of the World, which shall be more
fully spoke to under another Head. But yet I must not dismiss this without
answering an Objection, or Two.

It is usual amongst other Titles of Princes, Objections against receiving
Titles of Honor, Respect and Precedence, Answered.
to ascribe to 'em the Attributes of most Gracious, most Religious, most
Excellent, and the like; which may seem to savor too much of that Flattery,
for admitting of which Herod was Punished: And the Absurdity seems to be the
greater, if those Princes happen to be Vicious and Ungodly. But here it is to
be considered, that Princes, and great Magistrates, as they are in an Exalted
Condition above the rest of Men; so those Titles must be given 'em, which shall
raise and maintain a due Veneration toward them, and their Office. And even
when the Persons Invested with those Dignities happen to be Cruel and Wicked;
yet such Titles, as most Gracious, most Religious, are not un-befitting their
Office, though they may not so well suit their Personal Character; and it is upon
the account of that, that they are given 'em: As it was upon the Score of his
Office, that St. Paul styled Festus, a Heathen Magistrate, most Noble, Act.
26.25.

Next it is urged against Receiving Titles of Respect, those words of our
Savior, Be ye not called Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ, Matthew.
23.10. But in order to clear this, you must consider, that this is an Hebrew
Idiom, or manner of Expressing, in which Calling and Being, are all one, as
They shall call his Name Emanuel, signifies, he shall be Emanuel, or God with
us. So here, Be ye not called Masters, is a forbidding of Men to be Masters one
to another. And in what Sense is this to be understood? Why, amongst the Jews,
you must know, those who took upon 'em to be Leaders and Teachers, did
challenge a blind Obedience from their Disciples and Followers, and required
'em to give up their Faith, to be absolutely swayed by 'em: But our Savior
would have no mere Man pretend to be so much a Master over Men's Faith, as if
he were Infallible; in which Sense to be a Master, was our Savior's Right. But
otherwise, the Title of Master, as it signifies no more than a Humane Respect,
is no more to be refused, than that of Father: Which yet, as amongst the Jews
it was used to mean such a Principal of the School of the Prophets, as no Man
ought to contradict, was also forbid, Matthew. 23.9.

Lastly, It is objected against Persons of Quality being Placed or Seated
higher than others in Religious Assemblies, from those words of St. James, 2.2,
3, 4. If there come into your Assembly a man with a gold Ring, in goodly
Apparel, and there come also a poor man, in vile Raiment; and ye have respect
unto him that wears the gay Clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a
good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou there, or sit under my footstool,
Are ye not then partial in your selves, and become Judges of evil Thoughts? But
this Objection will be taken off, and this difficult Place cleared, if you
consider what is here meant by Assembly, and upon what account Respect of
Persons is forbid to be had to any one in them. Now by Assembly is here to be
understood a Court of Judicature, where Lawsuits are tried, for so not only
the word translated, Assembly, does elsewhere, as Matthew. 10.17. signify; but
there are several Expressions in this place, which do determine it here to this
Sense; as particularly when those, that ordered the Rich to sit in a more
Honorable Place, and the Poor in a less Honorable, are said to have a
Footstool, which did belong to Tribunals; and to be Judges of evil Thoughts,
that is, Partial in their Judgments, Men that thought more of the Persons, than
their Causes.

And the reason why that sort of Respect of Persons in their judicial
Assemblies, the Placing of the Man of Quality in a higher, the Poorer in a
lower Place, which seems not to have been so material, was notwithstanding
forbid; was because this would have been looked upon, according to the then
Apprehensions of the Jews, as a Token of Partiality in the Judge: For as the
Learned Hammond upon the Place does observe, It was provided by a Canon of the
Jews, that when a Rich Man, and a Poor have a Suit together before their
Consistories, either both must sit, or both stand in the same Rank, to avoid
all marks of Partiality. So that this place forbids not Precedence and Place to
be given, or taken, by Persons that are in Quality, or Authority, above others,
either in Church Assemblies, or in other Meetings; but only in the Judicial
Meetings of those times, and not then, but because that in the then
Apprehensions of Men, such Precedence would signify Partiality in the Judge,
that suffered it. So that it remains, that Titles of Honor, Respects and
Precedence may be received, when duly given. And I thought it requisite to take
off these Objections, both to clear these mistaken Places of Scripture, and
that you might not refuse To pay Honor to whom Honor is due, which is a Duty
upon all Men, Romans 13.7. And which a foolish Sect amongst us do deny, chiefly
grounding the Rudeness of their Behavior toward their Betters, upon the now
mentioned places of Scripture, which they wrest, as they do the other, to their
own Destruction. Thus much upon this Occasion.

THE Sixteenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works; the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
HAving undertook to give you a particular and distinct account, not only of
those Temptations, which arise from the World in general, but also from all the
particular things, whether Good, or Evil, therein contained: And having already
surveyed the Riches and Honors thereof, and distinctly showed you in what
Sense, and how far you are to Renounce each of them, and every Particular
included in them. I come now to consider,

Thirdly, The Pleasures thereof, and to show you in what Sense, What Is meant by
the Pleasures of this World, in what Sense, and how far they are to be
Renounced.
and how far you are also to Renounce the Pleasures of this World.

Now all Pleasure, of what Kind soever it be, does arise from the Agreeableness
of the Object with some Faculty that can perceive it. And therefore Pleasure in
general, Is that Satisfaction and Delight, which any part of our Nature
perceives, when its Appetites are gratified with what it desires. And as both
Soul and Body have their several perceptive Faculties and Appetites; so the
Gratification and Satisfaction, which is given to both, do cause different
kinds of Pleasure. And accordingly they may all of 'em, I do think, be reduced
to these Four, Rational, Sensitive, Sensual, and Recreative Pleasures.

And, First, As to Rational Pleasure: I. Rational Pleasure is very Excellent,
and Allowable.
This is that noble Satisfaction and sweet Delight, which the Soul perceives,
when it finds it self Improve in Knowledge, or in Virtue; or when it reflects
upon the Good it has done. As to Knowledge, the most delicious Dainties are not
so truly satisfactory to the Bodily Appetite, as real and useful Knowledge is
to the Rational; nor is Light more grateful to the Eye, than Knowledge is to
the Understanding. And all useful Knowledge, especially Divine, ought to be
sought after with all the Study and Industry possible, and we cannot too much
indulge the Appetite, which craves it: Insomuch that St. Paul did not cease to
pray for the Collossians, and to desire that they might be filled with the
Knowledge of God's will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, Col. 1.9.
And to increase in Virtue, to get the victory over of our Passions, to subdue
our Appetites, and the like, yields so great and pure a Satisfaction, that
Happiness it self is defined to be that Pleasure, which the Mind takes in from
a sense of Virtue, and a conscience of Well-doing; and of conforming all things
to the Rules of both. And then as to that sense of Joy and Comfort, which
Virtuous and Heavenly Minds do feel in doing Good; this is exceedingly more
Excellent and Exalted, than all worldly and wicked Pleasures, as is exemplified
in our Savior, who counted it His meat and drink to do the Will of him that
sent him, and to finish his work, Joh. 4.34. which was To go about doing Good,
Act. 10.28. So excellent a thing is Rational Pleasure, and so much it is our
Duty, as well as Interest, to gratify our selves therewith. But yet as
Excellent and Heavenly a Pleasure as this is, there is room for Renunciation,
even with respect to this. And,

But First, no Man must make mere Pleasure the End of his Knowledge.
First, No Man must make the end of his Knowledge to be the mere Pleasure of
Knowing, that is, we must not seek after Knowledge, merely for Knowledge sake,
and not for the Use and Instruction of our selves and others. The true End of
Knowledge is to direct our selves and others thereby to Happiness, both in
this, and the other World. And indeed such a Greediness, as is seen in some
Men, of swallowing up all sorts of Learning, and not letting others to partake
of it, and to be Benefited by it, is but a better sort of Sensuality and
Voluptuousness, and ought therefore to be Renounced by every Christian. The
greatest Goods are ever common: They were designed by God to be so, and by good
Christians they are made so. And Knowledge then being a principal Good, every
good Man is free in Communicating of that, and of Edifying others therewith;
and therefore it is required of a Bishop, whose Knowledge is supposed to exceed
other Men's, that He be apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3.2.

Nor Secondly, must that Satisfaction and Delight, which arises from the sense
and Conscience of good and worthy Deeds, be so much, because we are admired and
applauded for it, as because they are really in themselves Virtuous.
Secondly, And as to that Pleasure, which arises from the Sense and Conscience
of good and worthy Deeds, as much as we may be permitted to relish and enjoy
it, yet we must take care, that our Satisfaction and Delight be more, because
we are really Virtuous, and that we do Good, than that we be admired and
applauded for it; for We must take heed that we do not our Alms, or whatever
other Good, before men to be seen of them; otherwise we have no reward of our
Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 6.1. But to proceed,

Secondly, There is a Sensitive Pleasure, and that is when the Animal Life, or
the Bodily Senses are gratified with those Objects, which are agreeable to 'em.
All Pleasure, as was said, arises from the suitableness and agreeableness
between the perceptive Faculties, and the Objects that affect them. II.
Sensitive Pleasure, which results from the suitableness between the perceptive
Faculties, and the Objects that affect them, is lawful.
And our Bountiful Maker, as he has given the Animal Life many perceptive
Faculties, the Senses of Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, and Feeling; so he
has provided suitable Objects for all those several Faculties, and does allow
us to gratify our selves therewith: For it is good and comely for one to Eat
and to Drink, and to enjoy the Good of all his labor that he takes under the
Sun, all the days of his Life which God gives him; for it is his portion,
Eccl. 5.18. Nay, it is very necessary, that we should take Pleasure in
gratifying the sensible Cravings of our Nature, for if our Palates do not
relish our Meat, or if our Stomachs refuse it, we should starve. And indeed the
Comforts and Enjoyments of this Life, which we receive from the bountiful Hand
of God, is a great Subject of our Praises and Thanksgivings to him. Thou
preparest a Table for me in the presence of mine Enemies; thou anointest my
Head with Oil, my Cup runs over, said Holy David, in a great sense of God's
bountiful Goodness toward him, in bestowing upon him so many worldly Comforts.
Thus these Sensitive Pleasures may be lawfully Enjoyed by us, and they are only
then, and so far to be Renounced, when they become,

Thirdly, Sensual, which when they do, These Pleasures unlawful only when they
become, Thirdly, Sensual.
they are indeed the greatest Temptations the World has to draw us into Sin;
and many Thousands there are, whom when nothing else could Corrupt, have been
miserably foiled by the Power of sensual Pleasures: Which what they are, and
how far to be Renounced, I come now to declare unto you.

And it is then, that these Sensitive Pleasures, which otherwise would be for
the Preservation and Comfort of our Nature, and the Matter of our Praises to
God: It is then, I say, that they become Sensual, and so are to be Renounced,
when they gratify only our corrupt and depraved Natures. As the sensitive
Nature craves such things as are suitable to it, and are necessary to its
Preservation and Comfort in this Life; and sensitive Pleasures are such as
arise from such allowable Gratifications: So the Sensual and Corrupted Nature
of Man craves these sensitive Pleasures beyond Bounds and Moderation: It
prefers 'em before Rational and Divine Pleasures. It appears to relish no
Enjoyments like those of Sense; it gluts it self with sensitive Pleasures, so
as to surfeit on these Sweets. Nay, and lastly, the Sensual Man does load and
burden his Nature therewith, so as to render it unfit for the Duties of his
Calling and Religion. These are the inordinate Cravings of the sensual Nature;
and when we gratify this corrupted Nature of ours, to this immoderate Degree,
with Sensitive Pleasures; then those Pleasures which were in themselves
allowable, become Sensual, and such as must be utterly Renounced by every
Christian. And as we will accordingly Renounce Sensual Pleasures.

First, We must not prefer Sensitive Ones in our Judgments, or Desires, either
before our spiritual Joy in God, or the eternal Joys of his Kingdom; As, First,
when we prefer 'em in our Judgments or Desires, either before our spiritual Joy
in God, or the eternal Joys of his Kingdom.
which is what the Carnal Man does do; Which is, I say, what the Carnal Man
does do: For while the Flesh is the prevailing Ingredient in any Man, he only
relishes the satisfaction of the Senses: He cannot enjoy God, he cannot delight
in doing his Will, no more than a Swine can in clean Pasture, whose natural
Property inclines him only to wallow in the Mire. But when the Soul is
clarified and purged by the great Refiner, how sublime and satisfying a
Pleasure does it feel in the Love of God, and in his Service! As in natural
Feeding, when the Palate is in due Temper, our Taste commends our proper Food to
the Appetite, and the Appetite to the Stomach; but a foul Stomach dis-affects
the Appetite, spoils the Palate, and the most savoury and wholesome Meat is
loathsome, when the Disease is the Taster. Thus if the Soul be in its due
Temper, the Doing the will of God would be our Meat and Drink, mixed with a
sweeter Pleasure than those natural Operations are; but the Soul in the
unregenerate Man is so Corrupt and Carnaliz'd, that it has no taste of the pure
Delights of Blessed Spirits in Communion with God: Like the Israelites, who
despised the Bread of Angels, and impatiently longed for the Onions and
Garlic, and Fleshpots of Egypt. But this must not be our Temper, but with the
Holy Psalmist, we must be able experimentally to say; The fear of the Lord is
clean, enduring for ever; the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous
altogether; more to be desired are they than Gold, yea than much fine Gold,
sweeter also than Honey, and the Honeycomb, Psalm. 19.9, 10.

Secondly, And we must Renounce it as a great sign of a sensual Spirit, which
relishes no Enjoyments like those of Sense, II. When a Man relishes no
Enjoyments like those of sense.
When a Person is observed to be wholly in a manner purveying for the Belly,
Cooking, or Ordering his Dishes, always commending, or rather quarrelling with
every thing he eats or drinks: No, the Discourses of Philosophical, wise, and
virtuous Minds, is even at the very Table of other-guess Matters, than of the
Excellency of that Dish, the Poynancy of such a Sauce, or the Flavor of such
and such Liquors. And with these Epicures we may justly Expostulate in the
words of our Savior: Are ye yet without understanding? Do ye not yet
understand that whatever enters into the mouth goes into the belly, and is
cast out into the Draught, Matthew. 15.17. And it is sure a sign of an
Understanding below the Excellency of the Soul of Man, to concern it self so
much about what in few Hours will go down into the Guts, the Sink, and the
vilest part of the Body.

Thirdly, It must be Renounced as a high and sinful Sensuality to glut our
Senses, so as to surfeit on these Sweets. III. When he gluts himself, so as to
surfeit on these Sweets.
There is nothing which does more decay Nature, which brings upon us more
desperate and incurable Diseases, and does more precipitate and hasten a sudden
Death, than Excess in the Gratifications of Men's Lusts and Appetites. But this
is grossly to abuse the Creatures of God, which were allowed us only for our
Use; It is to make but an ungrateful Return to him, for all his Bounties: And
is unnaturally to destroy our selves for the sake of a paultry Pleasure, which
vanishes in the very Enjoyment; of a Pleasure, which is mixed with more bitter
Ingredients than Gall and Wormwood: For even in their Laughter the heart of
those sensual Men is sorrowful, and the end of their mirth is heaviness, Prove.
14.13.

Lastly, The Deliciousness of those Pleasures must not cause any one to load
and burden his Nature therewith, to that Degree, as to render him unfit for
the Duties of his Calling and Religion; And lastly, when the Deliciousness of
these Pleasures causes him to load and burden his Nature therewith, so as to
render him unfit for the Duties of his Calling, and Religion.
in which respect those do Offend, who do so immoderately indulge the Appetites
in Eating and Drinking, that they are drowsy and sleepy even under the Messages
sent them from the King of Heaven, and delivered them by his Ambassadors, the
Preachers of his Word. No, the End of all Pleasure, as well as of Recreations,
is to render us not less, but more vigorous and lively in the Service of God,
and the proper Business of our Calling: Which brings me,

Lastly, To consider Recreative Pleasures, and to show you what they are, in
what Sense, and how far we are to Renounce those sort of Pleasures. Now these
are merely of a middle, and of an indifferent Nature. Recreative Pleasures of a
middle and indifferent Nature.
They are neither wholly Mental, nor altogether Bodily Pleasures, but may be
either. And they are neither necessarily Good, nor Evil, but either one, or
other, according as they are used: For when the Mind has been long intent upon
Study and Meditation, it may be very convenient to Unbend it, by giving our
selves some Bodily Diversion, as Walking, Riding, or other innocent Recreation.
And when the Body has been long fatigued and wearied with Labor, it is
requisite to give it Ease; and it is no wise hurtful, either to Soul or Body,
to fall into a cheerful, provided it be an innocent Conversation. And indeed
the moderate use of innocent Pleasures and Recreations is both useful and
necessary. It enlivens Nature, brisks up our Spirits, and renders us more able
to set again about serious Business and Employment. For to intermix no
Gratifications, nor Diversions with our more serious Affairs, makes the Mind
unactive, dull, and useless.

But Recreations, the most innocent of 'em, are to be moderately and sparingly
used by every Christian; The most Innocent thereof are to be sparingly used.
for he that shall much indulge himself in the allowed Pleasures of the World,
shall quickly bring himself into a Frame of Spirit, that will not easily endure
Patience, Self-denial, and Mortification, and other the more difficult and
considerable Parts of Religion. Ease and Diversions soften the Sinews, dissolve
the Nerves, and are apt to render us Nice, and Delicate, and Effeminate, a
Temper the most unsuitable for any Soldier, because it will utterly indispose
him for Military Severities. Ease and Pleasure therefore must be warily
Indulged to, by the Soldier of JESUS, in whose Warfare there are both
Conflicts and Severities, far surpassing the hardest, which other Wars engage
us in.

No, If you will become Excellent in Religion, nay, keep but within the Bounds
of Innocence, you must innure your selves much to Christian Severity and
Reservedness; and the most harmless of this World's Delights are to be more
rarely used, than is commonly thought of. He that constantly eats a full Meal,
will not endure a Day of Fasting; and he that does not sometimes deny himself
in lawful Enjoyments, will be hardly able to Resist a Temptation to immoderate
Gratifications. But however, no Man should make Sports his Business, nor
Pastimes his Employment, no more than Cordials his Drink, nor Sauces his Meat.
To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under Heaven;
there is a time to weep, as well as a time to laugh; a time to mourn, as well
as a time to dance, Eccl. 3.1.4. And therefore such, who think they have
nothing else to do with their Time, must consider, that they have that precious
Talent given 'em to greater Ends, than to wast it in Divertisments.

Nay, and those whose ample Fortunes in the World put them above the common
Condition of Mankind, and are not to eat of their Bread in the sweat of their
Brows, need not live by a Profession, and a Calling, would do well to consider,
that the greatest part of their Time ought to be laid out in doing Good in the
World; in being Useful and Beneficial to the Society whereof they are Parts and
Members. In enquiring into the Necessities of their poorer Brethren; in
contriving Ways and Means, both to Employ and Relieve 'em. And above all, in
promoting Religion, and the Honor of God amongst Men, so far at least, as
their own Authority and Power reaches, whether in their Families, or amongst
their Tenants, Neighbors and Dependants. And these are Employments, which will
yield both Satisfaction here, and will be rewarded with eternal Joys hereafter.
These are Employments and Pleasures both, and (which Pleasures seldom do) will
turn to good Account hereafter. And thus I have at length finished all that I
think necessary to say to you, concerning Renouncing either the World in
general, or those particular Good things, into which it is divided, viz. The
Riches, Honors, and the Pleasures of it. There was great variety of useful
Matter to be considered under these several Heads, and therefore I have been
the longer upon 'em: I shall be more short upon the rest. The next of which are,

Secondly, The Evils of the World, viz. Poverty, Disgrace, and Afflictions: The
Evils of the World, are Poverty, Disgrace, and Affliction.
These are opposite to the other Goods, and they are Instruments, whereby
Satan, our great Adversary, does attack us, when the other fail him, as is
eminently seen in the Case of Job, Chap. 1, 2.

But these are not so successful to Ruin us, as those, which are called the
Good things of the World, commonly are. There is less Variety in the ways
wherein these do tempt us. And we do not open the Gates of our Souls to these,
as we do to the Enjoyments of this World: But do rather fortify our selves
against them. However there are Temptations in these also, and I will consider
'em as briefly as I can, and how they are to be Resisted by us. To proceed then,

First, As to Poverty and Afflictions; (for I shall not consider these Two
altogether apart, the Temptations that either give us, being much the same)
These indeed instead of Temptations to Sin, and Hindrances to Virtue, do very
often prove Mortifiers of Vice, and the great occasions of a Holy Life. Poverty
and Afflictions, instead of Temptations to Sin, and Hindrances to Virtue, do
very often prove Mortifiers of Vice, and the great occasions of a holy Life.
For besides that in a State of Adversity and Want, we are not so subject to
Pride, Insolence, and a Contempt of Religion; nor so liable to Luxury,
Ambition, and Covetousness, and many other Sins, which are too often the
Effects of a prosperous and flourishing Condition: The diverse sorts of
Afflictions and Adversities, as Sickness, Loss of Goods, and of Friends,
Poverty and Want, and the like, are naturally Advantageous, and do mightily
tend to the Increase of many the most precious Graces in the sight of God, as
might be easily made appear. These wean us from the World, and instead of
Setting our affections on things below, they do cause us to put our affections
on things above. Seeing the Vanity, Emptiness, Transitoriness, and great
Inconstancy of this World's Enjoyments, we are apt to thirst after those
Permanent, Certain, and Everlasting Joys, prepared in Heaven for us. When
Afflictions, and Want, and all other Hopes and Expectations fail us, we do then
usually betake our selves to God, for Comfort and Support. And thus drawing
nigh unto God we become acquainted with him, and he then vouchsafes us some
Tastes of spiritual Delights and Pleasures. And then having Experienced the
ineffable Satisfactions, communicated to Pious and Humble Souls in their
Devotions, and Religious Exercises, we become Heavenly-Minded, weary of this
World, And desirous to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of
all. Thus, I say, Afflictions and Adversities, are many times, next under God's
Grace, great Helps to Piety and Devotion.

Nevertheless they are also very often great Temptations to many Sins and
Impieties, Nevertheless they are often great Temptations to many Sins and
Impieties.
and as such Satan does use 'em. They are apt to breed in us Impatience and
Discontent, and Envy at the outward Felicity of the Wicked. And Poverty in
particular, when it meets with Minds ill-dispos'd, and not seasoned with
Principles of Virtue and Honesty, Tempts 'em to Fraud and Theft. And generally
when Persons labor under Necessities and Wants, they think they have enough to
do to provide Necessaries for Themselves and Families; that they may therefore
dispense with the Exercises of Religion, and that it is enough for the Rich
Ones to frequent the public Worship and Sacraments. But in the

First Place, it behooves such, who labor under Poverty, or any Kind of
Affliction, to beware they be not Tempted to Impatience and Discontent. I. It
behooves those, who labor under Poverty, or any kind of Affliction, to beware
of Impatience and Discontent.
And there is little Reason we should be Tempted thereby into these Sins; for,
in good Truth, these Kind of Sufferings, in most Men's Cases, are Tokens of
God's Fatherly Love and Kindness, and of his Ordering all things for our Good.
So the Apostle, Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges
every Son whom he receives. This is as great a Paradox to Flesh and Blood, as
it is to a Child to be under the Discipline of the Rod and Ferula; to either of
which, No Chastening for the present seems to be Joyous, but Grievous:
Nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness to
them, which are exercised thereby, ver. 11. These afflicting Providence tend
to mortify our Vanity, and to take of our Confidences in worldly Things, which
the Soul of Man in Affluence and Abundance is extremely subject to, and than
which there is scarcely a more sinful Temper of Mind: Such Reason had David
Thankfully to Acknowledge God's Goodness in 'em: I know O Lord, that thy
Judgments are right, and that thou in Faithfulness have afflicted me, Psalm.
119.75. And ver. 67. he professes, That before he was afflicted he went astray;
but now, says he, I have kept thy word.

Secondly, Those in the worst of Circumstances, must not Envy the outward
Felicity of the Wicked. II. Those, in the worst of Circumstances, must not envy
the outward Felicity of the Wicked.
The Psalmist declares, Ps. 73.2, 3.5. That his Feet had almost gone, and that
his Steps had well nigh slipped, upon this occasion; For I was Envious, says he,
at the Foolish, when I saw the Prosperity of the Wicked, that they were not in
Trouble, neither were they Plagued like other Men. But what was the Consequence
of this their Prosperity, and Freedom from Afflictions? Why that Pride
compassed them as a Chain, and that Violence covered them as a Garment; they
set their Mouth against the Heavens, and their Tongue walked through the Earth;
that is, they became horridly Wicked and Profane upon it, ver. 6.9. And are
these Men to be Envied then? No, Go into the Sanctuary, as this Psalmist did,
that is, consult Religion, and you will understand their End, that surely they
are set in slippery Places; and that God will cast them down into Destruction,
ver. 17, 18. Wherefore fret not thy self, because of Evildoers, neither be
thou Envious against the workers of Iniquity, Psalm. 37.1.

Thirdly, In case of Poverty in particular, You must be infinitely careful,
least to rescue your self out of it, you be Tempted to Fraud, and especially to
Stealing and Purloyning. III. A Person that is Poor, must be infinitely careful
least to Rescue himself out of it, he be tempted to Fraud, especially to
stealing and Purloyning.
Poverty is indeed an Evil in it self, and it may be Avoided by us, provided it
be by lawful Means. And it is a Man's Duty indeed, by all honest ways, to
rescue himself out of such an ill Condition; as by Labor and Industry in an
honest Calling, to Relieve One from Want, and Cold, and Nakedness; and to
suffer any Hardships, rather than to run into Debt, and to prevent
Imprisonment. But however, whatever Distresses you shall fall into, you must
Resolve with Job thus, 27.2, 3.6, 7. As God lives, who has taken away my
Judgment, and the Almighty, who has vexed my Soul; All the while my Breath is
in me, and the Spirit of God is in my Nostrils, I will not remove my Integrity
from me; My Righteousness I will hold fast, and will not let it go; my Heart
shall not Reproach me so long as I live.

Lastly, Nor must any think, that because they are Poor, they are e're the more
disengaged from the Service of God, and their Attendance upon him in all the
Parts of Divine Worship, Nor Lastly, must any think that because they are Poor,
they are e're the more dis-engaged from the Service of God, and their
Attendance upon him in all the Parts of Divine Worship.
Prayers, Sacraments, and the Hearing of the Word. But rather, because of their
Poverty, they may be expected, in reason, to be more Frequent, and more Devout
in Holy Exercises; for the less they have of outward Comforts, the more reason
they have to provide themselves of Spiritual Consolations, that they may not be
Miserable in both Worlds: And since this World Frowns upon 'em, to secure to
themselves those infinitely more Valuable Treasures in Heaven, to which the
meanest Cottager stands as fair a Candidate, as the greatest Nobleman. And,
indeed, such is the Regard our Savior has to 'em, that he made it a peculiar
Mark of his being the Messiah, that The Poor had the Gospel Preached unto them,
Matthew. 11.5. And so much for Poverty and Affliction, those Evils, which are
Opposed to Riches and Pleasures.

In what sense, and how far we must Renounce Disgrace, and the Temptations it
gives us.
The Last of the World's Evils is Disgrace, and this is Opposite to the Honors
of it. Now Disgrace is a thing, which Humane Nature is extremely sensible of:
And if it be generally a matter of Disgrace, to profess true and serious
Religion, it is wonderful how Men will shrink from it, who in their own Minds
have strong Convictions of it, and good Affections toward it. It was the Fear
of this Disgrace, which made Nicodemus come to our Savior by Night, Joh. 7.50.
And though Many of the chief Rulers also Believed on him, yet, because of the
Pharisees, they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the
Synagogue, for they loved the Praise of Men, more than the Praise of God, Joh.
12.42, 43. that is, They valued their Reputation with Men, and their Places and
Posts of Honor, more than the Testimony of, and Reputation with, God himself.

But as the True Religion is here openly Professed amongst us; and generally it
receives no Disgrace heartily to Espouse it, and to Live up to it; but is
indeed a matter of Disgrace to do the contrary, except it be with some
profligate Debauchees of our Age: If it happen that you should Fall into their
Company and Acquaintance (which God preserve you from:) So the Temptations of
this Nature, which they will give you, to cool you toward the serious
Profession, and Practice of Religion, will be Considered hereafter, when I come
to speak of the wicked World, and the Temptations, which Arise from thence:

And thus I have considered, and laid before you, as the World in General, and
the Good Things thereof in Particular, viz. Riches, Honors, and Pleasures: So
on the contrary, the Opposite Evils of it, Poverty, Disgrace, and Afflictions;
and have Discovered to you, the various Temptations each of 'em do give you,
and how you are to Renounce and Resist 'em. And now it only remains,

Lastly, That I do the like, concerning some Things therein of a middle Nature,
viz. The Callings, Conditions of Life, and the Cares of this World, which are
the Appurtenances of it, and afford great matter of Temptation and Trial to us
therein: And in what Sense, and how far you are also to Renounce each of these,
I will endeavor to show you.

And, First, Let us consider the Callings of the World, I. The Callings of the
world, and how the Temptations they give, are to be Renounced.
and what Temptations they give us, in what Sense, and how far we must Renounce
and Resist them. Now a Calling is some settled Course of Life, wherein a Person
employs himself in some Business, such as Providence has fitted him with
Abilities for, and which he is Called and Appointed unto, to employ himself
therein to the Honor of God, and to his own, and the public Good. And there
is no Man, nor Woman, if not utterly disabled in Body and Mind, who ought not
to be of some such Calling: That is,

In the first place, every Man ought in a settled Course of Life to betake
himself to some Business. Every Man is to betake himself to some Business.
Adam, even in the State of Innocence was Enjoined to Dress and keep the
Garden, or e're he could Freely eat of every Tree thereof, Genesis 2.15, 16. And
since his Fall, it is as well the Duty, as it is the Curse of all his
Posterity, that In the sweat of our Brows we must eat of our Bread, Genesis 3.19.
So that every Child of Adam must now with great Industry and Application Employ
himself, in order to obtain the Necessaries or Conveniences of this Life. It
was indeed from the very Beginning, and even in Paradise it self, our Duty to
be Employed; but it is now both our Duty and Punishment, that we must Employ
our selves, even to the taking of Pains, every Man in his proper Calling.

And that Calling, which every Man is to Employ his Time in, must be such, as
Providence has fitted him with Abilities for, It must be such as Providence has
fitted him with Abilities for.
As God has distributed to every Man, as the Lord has Called every one, so
let him walk, 1 Cor. 7.17. God has distributed to every Man some proper Gift
or other; and therefore every Man must Glorify God in some peculiar Calling, or
other.

And to whatsoever particular Calling any Man's peculiar Abilities do fit him,
to that he is to look upon himself, And such he is preparatively Called and
appointed to by God, with due Abilities.
as preparatively Called, or Appointed by God; and lawful Authority in Church,
or State is to determine his Call. God does not ordinarily himself Point out
any Person by an express Designation, as he Called Bazaleel and Aholiab by
Name, to do the Work of the Tabernacle, Exodus 31.2. But he distributes his
Talents variously to all Persons, on some he bestows the Gifts of Honors and
Fortunes, as to Magistrates and Gentlemen; to some the Gifts of Good Parts and
Learning, as to Scholars, of whatsoever Profession; and to some Skill in Trade,
and in Arts, as to Dealers and Artificers; and to the Inferior and Poorer sort
of Men, he gives Health and Limbs, and whatever fits 'em for Toil and Labor.
And to some he gives the whole Ten Talents to Trade withal to their Master's
Use, that is, Authority, Riches, Learning, Skill in Business, and Strength of
Body and Mind; and accordingly of all he will require an Account how they have
Employed their Talents: For unto whom much is given, of him shall much be
required, Luke 12.48. And the unprofitable Servant shall be cast into outer
Darkness, Matthew. 25.30.

To whatsoever Calling he is appointed, he must employ himself therein to God's
Glory, and his own, and the public Good.
Lastly, whatever Calling any Person is appointed to by the Divine Providence,
he must Employ himself therein to the Glory of God, and to his own, and the
Public Good. In the first place to the Glory of God, for that is to be the
main End of whatever we do, 1 Cor. 10.31. and also to his own, and his Families
Good; For he that provides not for his own, especially for those of his own
House, he has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. And
also, as every Man is a Member of the Body Politic, he is bound to employ his
Time, and Parts, and Pains for its Welfare; for God requires, that As every Man
has received the Gift, that accordingly they should minister the same one to
another, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. And no
Member of Church, or State, of what Rank or Quality soever he be, but must
Employ, or Interest himself for the Public Good; For God has so tempered the
Body, or Humane Societies, together, that the Members should have the same care
one of another; and whether one Member suffers, he would have all the Members
suffer with it, as in the Natural Body; or one Member be Honored, he would
have all the Members rejoice with it. 1 Cor. 12.24, 25, 26. So that it is
necessary you see, that every Person should betake himself to some Calling, or
Business.

And now the Question will be, What is to be Renounced, with respect to the
Callings of this World.

And, First, It behooves all Persons utterly to Renounce such Callings and
Professions of Men in the World, as are directly sinful and wicked: I. All
Persons must renounce such Callings and Professions as are directly sinful and
wicked.
Such are Bawds, Pimps, Juglers, Conjurers, and the like Impious ways of
living, whereby some Wretches do so notoriously Minister to the Devil's
Kingdom, and so directly promote the Ruin of Souls, that to Name 'em, is to
Condemn 'em; and there need be no more said to render 'em odious to all those,
who have any the least degrees of virtuous Principles remaining in their Souls.
I shall only tell you, that the Guilt contracted by these is so exceeding
Great, and a sufficient Repentance for Crimes so very Black, so near to
impossible, that you must so far Renounce 'em, as to Detest the very Thoughts
of Embarking your selves ever in these, or any other Callings, whereby Sin is
immediately and necessarily served, and the Damnation of those Souls, for whom
Christ Died, so directly procured.

Secondly, It concerns all Persons to Renounce all such Callings, as tend to
the Hurt, not the Good of the Public. II. Such as tend to the Hurt, not the
Good of the Public.
The Public Good is the great End of all the diverse Callings of Men, as you
will see 1 Cor. 12. And consequently nothing ought to be took up, as a Calling,
which Impoverishes, or Corrupts the Manners of a People. And upon this Account
therefore I shall not doubt to Arraign, and I wish the Magistrate would
Universally Condemn the Calling of such, who keep Tipling-houses merely to
harbor Vagabonds and loose People; and to draw Men into Riot and Excess, to
the great Impoverishing of many Families, and the Creating of scandalous
Breaches betwixt Husbands and their Wives. An Innkeeper, whose House is well
situated for the Entertainment of the Traveller, upon his lawful Occasions, is
of great use in the Commonwealth. And though there be more of Temptation in his
Calling than most others, yet if he takes care to prevent, as much as possible,
all Swearing and Drunkenness within his Doors, all Lewdness and Wantonness
amongst his Servants; and will do all he can to discourage Rioting to
unseasonable Hours, he will thereby do good Service to God, as well as his
Country, by such his Calling, and so Conscientiously managed. But your mere
Ale-house-keeping, where the whole Trade is to inveigle Persons into
Ill-husbandry, to the Expense of their Time and Money, and with all the Shifts
and Contrivances to detain 'em, when they are got in, is so great a Pest to
this Nation; occasions so much Immorality and Licentiousness; so much Swearing
and Profaness, Lewdness and Wantonness; such miserable Poverty amongst the
lower Rank of Housekeepers; such Brawls and Contentions betwixt Husbands and
Wives; and yields so much Harbor, and gives so much Encouragement to Thieves
and Robbers; that this Calling can hardly be supposed taken up in unnecessary
Places, by Virtuous and Honest Persons, but is generally the last Reserve of
loose and idle Livers, who would never endure to labor in an honest
Employment. And therefore I would not have you, though you should be brought into
the sorest Want, and be pincht with extreme Necessity, ever take up so
dangerous a Calling: I do say very moderately, so dangerous a Calling; for at
best, there is the utmost danger of Ruin to your Innocence therein, and no One
sure, who has the least tender Regard for his Soul, will take up such a
Calling, where there is but the least Possibility left of escaping the Loss
thereof. And in this Rank also, as extremely Destructive to Religion and
Morality, I think I may safely place the Calling of Players. I know how Touchy
many will be on such Persons account. I shall therefore choose to express my
Opinion, concerning their Calling, in the Words of a very Learned, and
Judicious Bishop of our own Church; who does acknowledge, That should they be
Tried by the Bench of Fathers, and Councils of Old; or would have it put to
most Voices amongst later Divines, both Popish and Reformed, they would be
utterly Cast and Condemned: most holding, not the Calling only, but the very
Practice and Thing it self Unlawful and Damnable: And how Pernicious they are
to Religion and Manners, I shall have occasion to show hereafter.

Thirldly, Christians must Renounce all those wicked Arts, whereby some do
Abuse the most worthy and useful Callings, III. All sinful Arts in the most
useful Callings.
to serve their worldly Ends. And indeed there is no Calling, though never so
good in it self, but has its Temptations attending it, and Persons of ill
Principles and dishonest Minds, will sadly comply therewith. Thus even in the
Ministry, the most excellent and useful Calling in the World, since such
Multitudes will not endure sound Doctrine, and few of the Greater sort
especially, will without the utmost Indignation brook a Reproof; many are
therefore Tempted to Temper their Doctrines to the Humor of their Party; and
others to wink at the most scandalous Offenses and Immoralities, those great
Reproaches of Christianity. But if we should be wholly in telling you your
Privileges in Christ, which the most Carnal Minds will love to hear of, but
little in Instructing you in the Duties of Religion, which are so necessary to
the gaining of an Interest in him (which some sort of People will call a Legal
Preaching) we might perhaps thereby make our selves Dear to a Party, but we
should be Unfaithful to Christ. So again, should we forbear to Reprove the
Envy, the Malice, Pride, Censoriousness, and Covetousness under the Mask of
Religion, of the Hypocrite on the one side, or the open and scandalous
Profaness and Debaucheries of the Libertine (who calls himself of our Church)
on the other, we should be reckoned amongst those wicked Prophets, Ezekiel. 13.
who humored and flattered the Opinions and Vices of God's People, and must
expect that heavy Doom pronounced against such in that Chapter.

And indeed as every other Calling has its particular Temptations belonging to
it: So what is worse, most Men think they may Honestly enough comply therewith,
and to think it indeed a necessary part of their Profession so to do. Thus the
Lawyer (a very worthy and useful Profession in a Commonwealth, as being that
whereby Property, and Right, and Peaceableness should be maintained amongst
Men) may be Tempted perhaps, to think it a part of his Profession to encourage
Strife, and foment Differences; and that the Malice and Revenge, the Wrath and
Bitterness; the Slanders and Evil-speakings; the Strife and Contentions, which
are other Men's Sins, must be his Livelihood: And that he must make himself
acquainted by Drinking hard, with the worst sort of People, that he may gain an
Interest himself in 'em, and get into Business. So likewise the Tradesman will
plead, that the Importunity of Customers, who will certainly beat down the
Price of his Commodities, as low as they can, does make it necessary by
Protestations, and Equivocations, and Lies, to set off his Wares to the best
advantage. And how few are there of our Country-Dealers, who do not think it
necessary (or they cannot pay a hard Rent, and maintain a Family) to take
advantage of the Ignorance, or Necessity of their Neighbors; and not only to
conceal the Defects, but by plain downright Lying and Avouching, that their
Beast is upright and sound, put it off for more than it is worth. Thus some
Men, of all Professions, will think they must do, or else they cannot live. And
indeed, if Men could not get a Livelihood, but in a way and trade of Sinning,
Persons of Callings, and Professions, and Dealers in in the World, would lie
under a shrewd Temptation.

But tell me, must Men sell their Souls to the Devil for ever, for the Gains
here, we know not how soon we must leave? We count Esau a foolish, as well as
profane Person, who in Extremity of Hunger, sold his Birthright for a Mess of
Pottage, Genesis 25.33, 34. And what is that Christian, who shall sell his Eternal
Inheritance for a Thing, in comparison, of no Value?

But I can see no necessity of foregoing a Livelihood, or of yielding to the
Temptations of a Calling. Indeed, if by a Livelihood men did not mean living in
Superfluity, Vanity, Luxury, which neither God, nor Nature has made necessary
to any Man's Being, nor indeed Wel-being in the World: If they meant no more
than getting an honest, and moderate Provision, suitable to the Station and
Condition Providence has placed 'em in, I do not know, but generally Men do
better provide for themselves, by plain and honest Dealing, than by serving
their Interests, by any sinful Art, or Cunning whatsoever. I do believe it is a
true Proverb, generally speaking, that Honesty is the best Policy; and Men
Thrive, though but slowly by it, yet better and surer than by Cheating and
Overreaching. And it is almost every One's Observation, That a little
Substance honestly got is a Comfort to the Owners, whilst the Estate that is
ill got wastes like Butter in the Sun, and derives down a Curse upon those on
whom it descends.

But however, though it be not so, that Honesty is the best way to Thrive, and
though your Temptations should be never so great, and your Wants never so
pressing, you must suffer that Want, or suffer worse. And you would do well to
consider, that those who will rather suffer Want here, than by sinful Ways
provide a Relief, shall be sure not to want the Love, and Mercies of God
hereafter, and that will abundantly Recompense for all defect of Advantages in
this World.

Fourthly, You must Renounce all Levity, and Desultory Skipping from one
Calling to another. IV. All Levity and Desultory Skipping from one Calling to
another.
This may seem rather a Politic, than Religious Precept, because in common
Observation it is seldom seen, that the Man of several Trades and Callings does
Thrive, and that the Rolling Stone never gathers Moss. But it is an
Instruction, which is also of a Religious Importance, for 1 Cor. 7.20. Every
Man is commanded to Abide in the same Calling, wherein he was called. And though
it may be Lawful to lay down One, and to take up another Profession, or Trade,
when either absolute Necessity enforces it, or lawful Authority enjoineth it;
or a Concurrence of weighty Circumstances faithfully, and discreetly, and
soberly laid together, seems to require it; as the Judicious Bishop Sanderson
Stateth this Case: Yet this must be done, as he says, with all due Caution; as
First, not out of Lightness, and Unsettledness; nor Secondly, out of the
Greediness of a Covetous, or Ambitious Lust; nor Thirdly, out of Sullenness, or
Discontentedness at our present Condition; nor Lastly, out of Envy against our
Neighbor, that lives by us.

But above all, that Change of Callings is to be Renounced, as the highest
Profaneness, when Laymen and Tradesmen, nay, Women (as amongst the Quakers, so
expressly contrary to the Commands of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.34.) do
Sacrilegiously usurp the sacred Office of the Ministry, and set up for Teachers
without a lawful Call, or Ordination thereunto. Nor is there any Force in what
they will pretend from Rev. 1.6. where it is said of all Christians in general,
That Christ has made them Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father; for the
same is spoke, Exodus 10.6. of the whole Jewish Nation, that They should be a
Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation. And yet we find that the Priesthood was
so much a separated Office amongst them, and so dangerous to be Usurpt, that
Korah and his Company paid dearly for Attempting it, Numb. 16. as also Vzziah,
as you will see 2 Chronicles. 26.16. etc. The reason of that high Expression, Rev.
1.6. wherein Christians in general are called Priests, is the same as in Exodus
For as the whole Jewish Nation were there styled a Kingdom of Priests, and a
Holy Nation, with respect to the Pagan World, from whom they were to be as much
separated by a peculiar Holiness, as the Priesthood amongst 'em was from the
People. So we Christians, such is our Holy Calling, are to be as much separated
and distinguished from Jews and Gentiles both, by our Holy Living, as the Gospel
Ministry are by a sacred Character, from the rest of Christian People.

No certainly, all those of the Laity, who usurp the Office of the Ministry,
should learn Sobriety, and to keep themselves within the proper Bounds and
Limits of their Callings, considering that equally now, as in the Jewish
Church, The Priest's lips should keep Knowledge, and that they should seek the
Law at his mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 27.

V. Any Calling whatsoever is to be declined for which a Person is not
Qualified, both by Education, Abilities, and Inclinations.
Fifthly, And that you may not lightly, and with a worse Imputation than that of
Inconstancy, change your Calling; Decline that Calling whatever, how
Creditable, or how Profitable soever it be, for which you are not Qualified
both by Education, Abilities, and Inclination. The great Fault in this respect
is commonly the Parents, who Predestinate, as it were, their Children to such
Callings, as they please themselves, without consulting those other Requisites
now named, to make them Excellent and Useful to themselves, or others therein;
and this is the reason, that so many mis-carry in their Callings, to their own
Ruin and Disgrace, and the Disappointment and Damage of others in the Business
they undertake.

Especially Callings of great Importance, such as the Ministry.
And according, as is the Importance of any Calling, accordingly does it the
more concern Persons, both for their own sakes, and the World's, that they
decline such as they are not fitted for by a suitable Education, by competent
Abilities, and Gifts, and by a strong Inclination thereunto. Now the Ministry
is a Calling of the vastest Consequence in the World, even the Salvation of
many Souls, depending upon a Man's being duly Qualified thereto. There ought in
the first place to be a suitable Education, in those Schools of the Prophets,
our Universities, given to such as are Candidates for it, that they may be
prepared thereto by the Knowledge of those learned Languages, wherein the
Inspired Writers did Pen the Holy Scriptures, and by many other Arts and
Sciences, which are Handmaids to Divinity, and can there only be sufficiently
attained to. There ought next to be great Abilities and Gifts, both Natural
Parts, and Divine Graces, and a good share of all sorts of Learning acquired by
much Study, and great Industry, to make an useful Divine; there being no one
Profession in the World, which requires to its Perfection, such an universal
Knowledge, as Theology does. And to all these there must be added strong
Inclinations to the Holy Office; Inclinations to it, not upon the account of
the Preferments, and Dignities that attend it, but for the Works sake;
Inclinations indeed to be an Instrument of God's Glory, and of the Salvation of
Men's Souls therein. And now, if a Person of no good Abilities, or Gifts should
be determined to the Ministry, it is a Sacrilegious Profaneness of equal Guilt,
as it is Impiety in some Parents, who think such of the most promising Parts
amongst their Children, an Offering too good for the Lord. Or if a Person of a
suitable Education, and of great Abilities, that fit him for it, should enter
into it with an unwilling Mind, it is often too great a sign of unsanctify'd
Affections, that would be for greater Liberty and Gaiety, than the Gravity and
Seriousness of his Profession will allow him; and the Fop should be counted
unworthy of it. Or, lastly, if there be never so strong Inclinations to be a
Teacher, without the Preparations of an University-Education, and learned
Abilities, as well as Divine Graces, it shows the Person to be One of those,
who Desiring to be Teachers of the Law, understood neither what they said, nor
whereof they affirmed, 1 Timothy 1.7.

And indeed in any Calling whatsoever, there must be a joint concurrence of
every one of these forementioned Qualifications; for if any one of 'em be
wanting, that Person will be unsuccessful in his Calling; insomuch that if
there be never so suitable an Education and good Abilities, if there be wanting
that one other Requisite of strong Inclinations to such a Course of Life, the
Business of it will be carried on with Sloth and Negligence, which is the

Sixth Thing, that must be Renounced, as to any Calling. VI. Idleness in any
Calling is to be renounced.
Idleness has the same Effect in any other Calling, as Solomon observed it had
in the Husband-man's, concerning whom he tells us, That going by the Field of
the Slothful, and by the Vineyard of the man void of Understanding, lo it was
all grown over with Thorns, and Nettles had covered the face thereof, Prove.
24.30, 31. Thereby the Understanding of the Scholar is overspread with
Ignorance; the Manners of the Gentleman with Barbarity and Savageness; and
Poverty and Nakedness do enter, through Sloth, the Houses of Tradesmen. But on
the other side, how comfortable are the Fruits of Industry, either in Man, or
Woman? Particularly as to the Woman's Industry, there is such an Account given
thereof, Prove. 31. from the 10 ver. to the End of that Chap. as shows the
mighty Happiness to Husband, Children, and Servants, where such a One is the
Mistress of the Family; and her Character ought to be got by Heart, by every
Person of her Sex. And therefore the Effects of Sloth being so dismal and
miserable; but the Fruits of Industry so very advantageous and comfortable,
according as the Wiseman advises, Eccl. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to
do, do it with all thy might.

Well, but it is enough you will say, for those to be Industrious, Idleness not
allowable, no not in Gentlemen.
who are to Live by their Calling: But as for such, who enjoy a sufficiency and
plenty of the Necessaries, Conveniences, and Superfluities of this World; what
occasion is there that they should be Industrious: For as it is commonly said,
What is a Gentleman, but his Pleasures?

But give me leave to answer in the words of an excellent Person, that if this
be true, If a Gentleman be nothing else but this, then truly he is a sad Piece,
the most inconsiderable, the most despicable, the most pitiful and wretched
Creature in the World. If it be his Privilege to do nothing, then it is his
Privilege to be good for nothing, to be a mere Weight and Burden upon the
Earth; nay the Pest and Plague of Mankind, since the Soul of Man is that active
Power, that if it does not actuate and employ a Man in doing Good, it will
certainly in doing Mischief: So that to say thus of the Gentleman, or Man of
Fortunes, is highly to Reproach him. But the Contrary is most certain.

And no Man, be he in never so flourishing a State and Condition, must give
himself up to Idleness, as being one of the greatest Temptations in the World
to Sin, and in it self a Life very displeasing to God.

It is one of the greatest Temptations in the World to Sin.
Idleness, I say, is one of the greatest Temptations in the World to Sin. So
great a Temptation indeed it is, that the idle Person Tempts the Devil to come
and Tempt him. That wicked Spirit Continually walks about the Earth, seeking
whom he may devour; and spying a Person to be Idle, he infallibly lies down
before him. He musters up all his Forces to beleaguer that Man, sends for the
like idle and licentious Persons as himself, and those with all possible
Allurements inveigle him to join with 'em in their wicked Courses. And his Mind
being taken up with no honest Cares, the Devil throws into his Soul a Thousand
ill Thoughts, and base Designs, and lewd Imaginations to corrupt him, and make
him yield. And the greatest of Men and Saints, have been overcome merely by
being found Idle, as we have an eminent Instance in David, 2 Samuel 11.2. Who
walking on the roof of his House, his Mind then roving, and being untackt from
honest Cares, that Temptation seized on him, whereby he was plunged into that
woeful Miscarriage, in the Matter of Vriah, which did create him so much Sorrow,
did make such a Spot in his Life, as was never washed off, no not with his Tears
of Repentance: So excellent was the Advice of the Father; Be always doing
something, that the Devil may never find thee Idle.

And is it self a very great Sin.
Nor is the Idleness of Persons in a plentiful and flourishing Condition, in it
self less a Sin, than it is a Temptation to other Sins. These are the Persons,
who have Talents given 'em, and their Idleness is expressed by Hiding their
Talents in the Earth, Mat. 25.25. which how great a Sin it is, is evident from
our Savior's severe Menaces thereupon, calling such an idle Person a Wicked
and slothful Servant, and commanding him to be cast, because an unprofitable
Servant, into outer darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth,
ver. 30. It is remarkable, that here the wicked Servant is so severely Doomed,
not for mis-employing, but for being Idle, and not employing his Talent: So
that no Man's Condition, be it never so Plentiful, will excuse him in Idleness.

Lastly, no man must live above his Calling.
The last Thing to be Renounced, with reference to a Calling, is the Living
above it. This is what the Vanity and Pride of many, both Gentlemen, Tradesmen,
and others, do tempt 'em to; but the issue thereof is in a short time to be
Needy and Borrowing, and consequently Contemptible, and to meet with Scorn
instead of that Respect they seek, by making an outward Appearance and
Flourish. But the worst of it is, when Men are of this Humor, to live above
their Calling, in order to maintain their Port and Pride, they are forced, if
Gentlemen, to oppress their Tenants; if Tradesmen, to cheat and overreach their
Customers, and to use all the evil Arts of Getting. And as to the latter, when
they so far scorn the meanness of their Profession, as to throw it aside, it is
not seldom, that in the End they take to the Highway, as the only means of
maintaining themselves. In short therefore to prevent the fatal Effects of both
these last Evils, Idleness, and living beyond a Man's Calling, my Advice to
young Persons is to be Industrious, till such time at least, as they have laid
up a Stock, whereby they may afford to live more at ease, and not to throw off
the meanest Calling, till they are able to live Creditably without it. And so
much for the Callings of the World, and what is to be Renounced with Relation
to them.

Secondly, Let us consider amongst those Things of the World of a middle
Nature, the different Conditions and States of Men therein. II. Amongst those
things of the World of a middle Nature, the different Conditions and States of
men therein are to be considered.
And the greatest Part are in the State, either of Masters, or of Servants. And
the whole World are either Single, or Married Persons.

And First, as to the State and Condition of a Master, there are very great
Advantages and Opportunities, which the Head of a Family has of doing Good
amongst those of his Household; insomuch that if he keep up an orderly and
religious Discipline in his Family, it will be no hard matter for him, so to
form the Principles and Practices of his Servants and Dependants, as to be able
to undertake with Joshua, 24.15. that he, and his House, shall serve the Lord.
I. A Master has great advantages of doing Good.


But yet this, as all other Conditions of Men in this World, is liable to be
abused to great degrees of Dishonor to God, and Injury to the Souls of Men, as
namely when those, who are Masters do so far exceed in their Commands, as to
give no leisure to their Servants to provide for the Good of their own Souls.

But such a Dominion as this must be utterly Renounced, But all that Dominion
is to be utterly renounced amongst Christians, which treats Servants no better
than Slaves and Brutes.
and it should be a Thing never heard of amongst Christians, that a Servant
should be such a Slave, as to be treated no better than a Brute: And as Pasture
is the only thing provided for the latter, so bodily Necessaries should be the
only thing took care of for the former. No, every one that will expect
Abraham's Blessing and Favor with God, must have Abraham's pious Care of the
religious Education and Government both of his Children and Servants;
concerning whom it is Recorded, that God did impart unto him a very great
Secret, under the Notion of a singular Favor, upon this very Account, That He
knew he would command his Children, and his Household after him, that they
should keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, Genesis 18.19. So
that when any of you shall grow up, or arrive to that Condition, to be the
Heads of a Family, this must be also your Care, and you must utterly Renounce
the Treating your Servants at that Distance, as if they were not
Fellow Servants with you to the same God.

Secondly, The next Condition, The State of Servants not in it self unhappy.
or State of Life in this World to be considered of, is that of Servants. Now a
Servant amongst Christians, if he be not Barbarously and Un-christianly used,
is not the most unhappy State: Though he has not his Master's Liberty, yet if he
has less of his Licentiousness, he is the happier Man. But yet if it falls out
so, that the Master and Family, he happens into, be Disorderly, Debauched, and
Wicked, he is in a State of mighty Temptation, and in great danger of being
Corrupted: And therefore

First, It concerns every Person, who is to live by a Service, I. It concerns
every Person who is to live by a Service, to avoid such where there is neither
the means of Religion, nor restraints upon Sin.
to Renounce and Refuse those (if extreme Necessity, and want of better, do not
compel him to accept of such) where a great deal of Wickedness is practiced
without Control, and little of the Fear of God is to be seen amongst Masters,
or Servants. We do daily pray to God, Not to lead us into Temptation, and those
who are sincere in their Prayers, will not voluntarily throw themselves into
such a dangerous place of Temptation, as is a wicked Family; where not only the
ordinary Means of Grace, the reading of the Word of God, and daily Prayers are
wanting: but the Examples of both Head and Members to influence to an imitation
in Lewdness, Drunkenness, Injustice, Cursing, Swearing, and all Impiety; and
where Profaneness does so far prevail, as to instigate, 'em to break their
Jests upon Religion and Virtue. Alas! it is a very difficult thing for Youth to
be thoroughly seasoned with Principles of Virtue, even by all the Instruction
and Care of Ministers, Parents, and Masters. How then must it be next to a
Miracle, if they fly not out into all manner of Licentiousness, when the
Corruption within is heightened with the Examples and Encouragements of all
about 'em, and those too, Persons upon whose Favor they depend.

II. In the most Irreligious Families a Servant shall happen into, he must put
on a steadfast resolution to preserve his Innocence.
Secondly, But since Idleness and want of Employment does expose a Person to
Temptation, even more than such Services; and if Necessity shall force you into
those, where little of spiritual Improvement, but all manner of Temptations to
Sin, is to be expected: why then with Joseph in the House of Potiphar, Genesis
39.8. you must put on the most steadfast Resolutions to preserve your Innocence,
and must make a Covenant with your Eyes, Ears, and all your Senses, that they
do not Offend. And when Divine Providence has disposed you there, Divine Grace
will not be wanting to your own honest Endeavors, to preserve you from Evil.

III. The State of Celibacy advantageous to Devotion, and in times Distress.
Thirdly, The next State, and that wherein the greatest part of Mankind in this
World are found, is the State of Celibacy, or the single Life; and St. Paul,
speaking to those which are Unmarried, tells 'em, It is good for them if they
abide so, 1 Cor. 7.8. and that upon Two Accounts: First at all Times, because
of the greater Freedom and Vacancy for Meditation, and Divine Employments
therein; He that is Unmarried cares for the things of the Lord, how he may
please the Lord: Secondly, and more especially in Times of Persecution, or the
Approach of Sufferings coming upon the Church of God, and because of the
present, or impendent Distress, ver. 26. But yet this State is the most subject
to unchaste Desires, and lewd Practices, if not powerfully restrained by rooted
Principles of Virtue. And therefore

This must be renounced, when Persons cannot Contain.
Even the State of Celibacy it self must be Renounced and Forsaken, by those
who cannot contain, according to the Advice of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.9. They
who cannot contain let them Marry, for it is better to Marry than to Burn: For
alas! when Persons Morals are once Corrupted in this Kind, it is very rare that
either Man, or Woman, returns to that just Abomination and Abhorrence, which
all Christians ought to have of the very Thoughts and Expressions of
Uncleanness, according to that of St. Paul, But Fornication, and all
Uncleanness, let it not be once named amongst you, as becomes Saints; neither
Filthiness, nor foolish Talking, nor Jestings, which are not convenient, Ephesians.
5.3, 4.

Lastly, the married state has its advantages.
The last State of Persons I shall here mention, is that of the Married, a State
Ordained by God, Matthew. 19.4. and the more to be liked, that besides the mutual
Supports and Comforts afforded to each other therein, many, both Husbands and
Wives, do owe their Conversion to Christianity; and from a wicked, to a good
Life, to the prudent and discreet Instruction of one, or other, of the married
Couple, 1 Cor. 7.16. Nevertheless there is Danger in this, as well as in other
States. In Times of Distress, they are apt to be Tempters to one another, to
sinful Compliances; and at all times are plunged into worldly Cares, and He
that is Married cares for the things that are of the World, 1 Cor. 7.33. and
that too often to the great hindrance of Religion. And therefore

I. All Solicitations from either of the married Couple must be Renounced,
which would Persuade (...) sinful Com^^^ances in ^^^es of Distress.
First, All Solicitations from either Husband, or Wife, must be utterly
Renounced, when out of worldly Regards, either He, or She, would dissuade from
a Conscientious Discharge of Duty, and a Faithful Confession of any part of
Christianity, in which case, we must even Hate Wife and Children, etc. Luke
14.26. as has been already spoke.

Secondly, And even in the Married State, all those worldly Cares, which choke
up, or disturb Religion, must be utterly laid aside, as will be fully showed
you under the Next, and

Last of those things pertaining to this World, which afford great matter of
Temptation to us, viz. The Cares thereof. Now as to the Cares of this World,
true it is, we have many worldly Interests and Engagements to mind, we have the
Necessities, II. And Engage too much in worldly Cares
both of our own Persons, and of those who belong to us, to serve. Nor is any
thing prepared for us without Industry and Endeavor; so that by the Necessity
of our Condition we are, every One of us, more or less, some in one way, some
in another, engaged in worldly Affairs. Hence it is, Lastly, the Cares of this
World, the last of those Things pertaining to it, in some measure necessary.
that some Care about the Things of this World is allowed us; nay, and indeed
we are commanded to continue in the Calling, wherein God has set us, 1 Cor.
7.20, and we are warned, that we be not slothful in Business, Romans 12.11.

But the great Unhappiness and Sin of many in this difficult case, is this;
That a moderate Concern for the Things of this World being Allowable, they are
apt to Overwhelm themselves in a multiplicity of Cares: As also to let the
Cares of this world to Alienate their Affections from God, and Heavenly Things;
and to withdraw their Attention from him, in those Divine Services, they are
bound to Pay him. And few, who are far engaged in Temporal Designs and Cares,
know when to Retire from the world, and to throw them off; so as to give
themselves a sufficient Time to prepare for a better Life. But as necessary as
worldly Cares are in most Men's Circumstances; yet

First, It becomes Christians to Renounce that Multiplicity of Cares, I. It
becomes Christians to renounce a multiplicity of Cares.
which distracts their Thoughts, and shows 'em to have no other Aims, but at
this World. And yet so it is, that some Men fill their Heads with innumerable
Projects, and do so Overwhelm themselves with Variety of Business, that they do
scarcely allow themselves time to Eat and Sleep. But to be in a perpetual Hurry
after this World's Goods, and to be so over-solicitous for our future Provision
in it, is an Argument of Men's Discontent with that Condition, wherein
Providence has placed 'em; and of an anxious Fear, they shall not be
sufficiently Provided for by God's Blessing, concurring with an honest Industry
in their Affairs: And is such a Care, as however it might become Pagans, who
knew little of the Doctrine of God's Providence in this Life, and of his
Treasures of Bliss, provided for us in another; Yet is infinitely unbecoming
Christians, who are thoroughly Instructed in the Divine Providence and Care over
us, and his future Provisions for us; and is therefore so strictly forbid us,
Matthew. 6. from the 24th Verse, to the End.

Secondly, It behooves us Christians so far to Renounce any Worldly Care, as it
does Alienate our Affections from God, and Heavenly Things; II. Every worldly
Care, so far as it does alienate our Affections from God, and Heavenly Things.
and withdraw our Attention from him, in the Services we are bound to Pay him,
as is too often. I say, as is too often. For hence it is, that so many do
neglect Holy Duties, both Public and Private, and that they Perform either
with so little Devotion. Hence it is, that many come so seldom to Church; or
when they do, that they carry themselves in the Performance of Prayer, Praises,
and at the Hearing of the Word, with so much Coldness, Laziness, and want of
Attention. And hence also it is, that at Home there is so seldom any
Family-Prayers, and Reading of the Scriptures, and good Books. And I wish, That
rising up early, and sitting up late, and eating the Bread of Carefulness, may
not hinder some from Paying any Devotion to God, as much as Privately by
themselves, every Morning and Evening. And yet this is the least that can be
implied in those Precepts of Luke 18.1. Men ought always to Pray, and 1 These.
5.17. where we are enjoined to Pray without ceasing. And to be Negligent, or
Inattentive, through the Encumbrance of worldly Cares, at the Hearing of the
Word, was the Thing for which our Savior Reproved Martha, who was Cumbring her
self with much Serving, when she ought to have Listened to our Savior's Divine
Instructions, as Mary did, for which He Commended her, Luke 10.40, 41, 42. And
therefore it behooves every Christian, when he enters into the House of God, or
into his own Closet, wholly to lay aside all worldly Cares for that Time, and
to say to 'em, as Christ to his Disciples, Stay you here, whilst I go and Pray
yonder.

Lastly, All manner of worldly Care, when Advanced in Years.
Lastly, All Persons, whether more, or less engaged in worldly Cares, when grown
in Years, should wholly in a manner throw them off, and Retiring as much as may
be from the World, should employ the remainder of their Time in clearing their
Accounts with God and Man, and in preparing themselves for the Great Trial. And
yet it is commonly observed, that the farther Men advance in Years, the more
Covetous and Worldly they grow; but this is the most unreasonable and absurd
Thing that can be: For what means the Cares of this World, but to provide for
our selves, or Posterity? Now as to our selves, the nearer Life draws to an
End, the less of temporal Provisions are necessary. And as to Posterity, the
best Provision that can be made for them, is what may be enough to be a
Foundation for their Industry, and not so much as will dis-engage 'em from
Business and Employment; for to leave 'em great Estates, is but to expose 'em
to the Temptations of Idleness, Luxury, and the worst of Sins: To which, as all
Men in great Possessions are liable, so none more than such, who have been
suddenly raised by the Covetousness of a worldly Miser. As therefore those Men
of Business, who would be counted the only Wise, will not show themselves in
the End the greatest Fools, when they have Advanced far in Years, at
leastwise, they should look upon that Advice of the Prophet, as particularly
directed to them, Set thy house in order, for thou shall surely dye, and not
live: Such Men have received more Talents than others, and therefore they ought
to take more time to State their Accounts, that they may come off at the Great
Audit, with the Approbation of having been good and faithful Servants.

In a Word, and to Conclude this Head, The Consideration of the World, upon
which we have been so long, you would do well to bear those Scriptural
Instructions always in Mind, To set your Affection on things above, and not on
things on the Earth, Col. 3.2. Not to Love the World, 1 John 3.15. To be
Careful for Nothing, Phil. 4.6. And to take no Thought for to Morrow, Matthew.
6.34. The Meaning of which Expressions is, That we should Love God, and
Heavenly Things in the first Place, and Abandon all immoderate Cares concerning
Worldly Things. That we must bestow much more of our Care, how we may serve God
acceptably, and provide for the Immortal Happiness of our Souls, than how to
Attain this World's Goods. And in an honest Industry and Endeavor, to Attain a
Sufficiency thereof, to carry us through this Vale of Misery, we must commit the
Success of all our Labors to God, and trust him with the Event, who will take
care, That all things shall work together for Good, for them who Fear him, Romans
8.20.

THE Seventeenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works; the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
THE Point that we are now upon, being to lay before you the Strength of those
Temptations, which do arise, First, From the World, Secondly, From the wicked
World, and Thirdly, From the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World: And as to
the First, First, Having sufficiently discovered what Temptations to Sin we
shall meet with, both from the World in General, and the several Things therein
contained, in Particular, I come now,

Secondly, To give you a Survey likewise of the wicked World, and to show you
also in what Sense, and how far you are to Renounce the wicked World. II.
What Is meant by the wicked World, and how far, and in what sense we are to
renounce it.
And by the wicked World can be properly meant no other than wicked Men, there
being no Creature on Earth, besides Man, that is capable of doing any thing
morally Good, or Evil, so as to be styled from the latter, Wicked.

And if you would be farther satisfied, who these are, who may be so styled; it
seems to me, that it is not every Sinner however, that either in the Language
of the Scripture, or in common Account, Thereby is meant such as make it their
Business, like that wicked One, the Devil, to Tempt others to Sin.
is called a wicked Man: But it must be some One of a more than ordinary
Impiety, so as to approach something near Satan himself in Sin and Wickedness,
that can deserve so Black a Character. Now the Devil is often termed in
Scripture, The wicked One; and particularly Matthew. 13.19. he is so styled on
the account of his Tempting others to Sin. His catching away the Word which is
sown in Men's Hearts, or his injecting of vain Thoughts into the Minds of the
Hearers, that they may not be Converted by the Preaching of the Gospel: (one of
his ways of Tempting us to Sin, as was before showed) It is this that gave him
that Character of the wicked One. And on the very same account of his Tempting
the World to Sin, is his great Agent, Antichrist, called also, 2 These. 2.8.
That wicked One. He is termed in the 4 ver. He that opposes God, and here in
this 8 ver. he is styled The wicked One, because of his Coming after the
working of Satan with all deceivableness of Unrighteousness, as it follows,
ver. 9, 10. that is, because he imitates the Devil by his cunning Tempting of
others into Sin, and by Deceiving 'em into Unrighteous, Irreligious Courses, he
is therefore called the wicked One. And upon the same account therefore, as
those only are properly wicked Men, who are guilty of some notorious Crime
themselves; so especially such, who make it any part of their Business to
Corrupt and Tempt others to Sin, are the wicked Men of the World.

And according to those Degrees of Tempting, of which Men are guilty, are they
to be esteemed more, or less Wicked, and Diabolically so. Some Men's
Temptations are less Extensive, and reach no farther than the Neighborhood,
where they are known, and the Company they converse with. But others there are,
whose Temptations may reach even unto the utmost Parts of the Earth; such are
those, who propagate and promote by their Writings, or Discourses, Atheistical
and Heretical Principles: And such are most of our Modern Writers of
Play-Books, and Songs, whose Plays and Poetry seem designed to nourish
Profaneness and Immorality. Now such Temptations as these will extend to all
Parts, where things of that Nature shall reach, and will be Temptations in all
Ages, so long as there will be found wicked Men like themselves, to propagate
and promote the same. The former sort may be compared to an Inferior Rank of
Evil Spirits, whose Province of doing Mischief is more narrow and confined: But
the latter are, as it were, Master Devils; Like roaring Lions, they are
continually walking about the Earth, seeking whom they may devour.

And now you must heartily Renounce, and Refuse to Conform your selves to those
wicked Men, either First, By becoming Tempters your selves of other People: Or,
Secondly, By yielding of your selves to be overcome by others Temptations.

First, You must Renounce that Diabolical Wickedness of becoming Tempters your
selves of other Persons. I. We must renounce that Diabolical Wickedness of
becoming Tempters our selves of other Persons.
Renounce, do I say? You must Abhor, Abominate, and Detest this their
Wickedness of Corrupting others, and of Tempting 'em to Sin, as being a
Practice, that of all others will render you likest to the Devil. And I am sure
you would of all things in the World detest this Piece of Villainy, if you would
but attentively consider that one remarkable Place of Scripture, showing you
the high Impiety of such a Wickedness. It is Acts 13.8, 9, 10. Elymas the
Sorcerer withstood Barnabas and Paul, seeking to turn away the Deputy from the
Faith: Then Paul filled with the Holy Ghost, set his Eyes on him, and said, O
full of Subtilty and all Mischief, thou Child of the Devil, thou Enemy of all
Righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? Do
you see here with what unusual Indignation, and in what severe Language the
Apostle does bespeak this Wretch, merely upon his Endeavoring to Tempt the
Deputy from the right way of the Lord.

And surely not without Reason; for certainly it must be a terrible
Consideration to any One, that he has been the Instrument and Cause of
another's Damnation. It is a terrible thing to have been an Instrument of
another's Damnation.
For should such a One ever hereafter return to a right Mind (and he will be
infinitely miserable, if he does not) as his Repentance, if it be sincere, will
make him a Lover, not only of his own, but of other Men's Souls: So what
Anguish will it give him, to think, that it is to be feared, there are now those
in Hell Flames, whom his ill Example, or vicious Conversation, or base and
corrupting Flatteries in wicked Courses, or Discouragements to Virtue, or
Encouragements to Sin, have sent there, never to be Retrieved.

It is an Injury to men's Souls, in some Cases hardly ever, in others
impossible to be Repaired. It is an Injury to Men's Souls, in some Cases hardly
ever, in others impossible to be Repaired.
If his Temptations have been of that sort, as to reach no farthar than he was
Known, or was Conversant, a very Eminent, and very signal Repentance may, in
some measure, put a stop to the Contagion thereof; so that they spread no
farther (though not that altogether, for some perhaps, whom he has Corrupted,
will never be Reclaimed, though he be never so great a Penitent, and Labor
himself never so much their Conversion:) But if his Temptations have been of
that more spreading and lasting Kind, now spoke, and he has been One, that has
Wrote Ill Books, been a Broacher of Pestilent Heresies, an Author of lewd
Plays, or wanton and profane Verse, the Mischief and Poison of such
Temptations do fly beyond his Recalling; and though he may Burn 'em with his own
Hands, yet others will Rake 'em out of the Ashes. And it is the Opinion of some
of the Ancients, that such Temptations as these, will affect his Happiness even
in Heaven it self; insomuch that according as the Mischief thereof does daily
spread, and more do continue to be Damned thereby, proportionably such a One
will still fall thereupon lower, and lower in Glory. I know nothing in Reason,
or Religion, that contradicts this Opinion. However it be, certainly it is the
highest Misfortune can befall any One, that he is, or ever has been amongst that
Rank of Sinners, whom the Scripture does so peculiarly Style the Wicked, and
that because of their so near Resemblance to the Tempter himself. These are the
Persons by whom Offenses come, and it is a terrible Threatening, that of our
Savior's, Matthew. 18.6. to such, Who so shall offend one of these little Ones,
which believe in me, that is, any-wise Tempt, Gall, Discourage, drive from the
Faith and Practice of a Christian, any the meanest Person that comes to me;
whosoever shall do this, It were better for him, that a Millstone were hanged
about his Neck, and he were cast into the midst of the Sea: So that of all
things in the World, it concerns you, to take care, ye never become Tempters of
others to Sin, and either to omit that, which is Good, or to commit that, which
is Evil.

Secondly, Nor does it less concern you to refuse Conforming your selves to
wicked Men, when they shall Tempt you; II. We must refuse to Conform our selves
to wicked Men, when they shall Tempt us, viz.
which they will do, when either First, by their ill Examples, they shall
Influence you; or Secondly, by falling into their Company, they shall Entice
you; or Thirdly, by their Flatteries they shall Corrupt you; or Fourthly, by
their Discouragements to Virtue, and Encouragements to Sin they shall Engage
you; or Fifthly, by their Persuasions they would Prevail upon you; or Lastly,
by their Customs would Constrain you to Sin. And I will show you, how by all
means you must Renounce, or Refuse to Conform your selves unto their evil Ways,
in any of these Cases.

And, First, That you must renounce, I. By their evil Examples.
or refuse to Conform your selves to the evil Examples of wicked Men, which
would Influence you to Sin.

It has been ever observed, that Examples have a much greater Influence than
Precepts, Examples have the greatest Influence upon us; especially
and that most are readier to do what they see, than what they hear. More
particularly, there is a great Inclination in us to follow the Examples of Sin;
especially if many, if the Examples of those, for whom we have an high Esteem,
and of whom we do stand in great Awe.

And, First, We are especially inclined to follow the Examples of Sin; I. If
Examples of Sin.
For Sin is what our Corrupt Nature is of it self disposed to; and if moreover
Examples do come in to help us forward, these will highten our Desires, and
silence our Consciences, and give us some plausible Pretense to Sin. It looks
like some Act of Modesty, and Self-denial, to deny our own private Judgment,
and to go along with the Crowd; when our Flesh is craving, and our Lusts are
up, it is a strange Encouragement to us to Sin in Company, and fulfill 'em. This
heartens us against our Fears, and abates the Dread of Punishment, which would
follow the Satisfaction of our Lusts. Now if we are punished for 'em, it will
not be we alone, and it is a Comfort to have Fellows in Miseries, and a Man
dares both do, and suffer many things in Company, which he would have been
dis-hearten'd to have ventured on singly.

But, Secondly, We are still more hearten'd to Sin, if the Examples thereof are
Common, and Many. II. If common, and many.
For why? Besides that there is a great deal of Proneness and Propension in all
our Natures to Vice and Wickedness, the only Restraint upon our Inclinations,
that we break not out suddenly into all Exorbitancy of Ungodliness, is as
inwardly from the Innate Turpitude and Baseness of Sin: So outwardly from the
burning and shining Lights, and glorious Examples of Virtue, that are abroad in
the World. Now our inward sense of the Filthiness of Sin soon ceases, when we
see it Practiced by the most, and those as shrewd, and as wise Persons as our
selves; and from without, there can be no upbraiding and ill Report, in giving
swing to our naughty Desires, if Vice has once got its Multitudes of Followers,
and the Generality of Men of its side.

Thirdly, But farther yet, Examples of Sin are very Contagious, if they are the
Examples of such, for whom we have a great Esteem. III. If of such, for whom we
have a great Esteem.
Persons of all Sects and Parties in Religion fix upon some in their own way,
as very excellent Persons, and exact Patterns, fit to be imitated in all they
do, (as if Men were not Men still, and the Best were not subject to Mistake and
Failing) whatever Duty of Christianity these Men, whom they particularly
Admire, seem to have but a small regard to, they do not think it at all
necessary, because such a Good Man, would not, if it were, be wanting in it,
they think. And so as to any sinful Practice on the other side: Why should I
scruple to do so and so, thou will say, when such a One, and I am sure he
understands what he does, sticks not to do the like. He is a wise Man, a good
Man, nay, and a Scholar, and yet does so and so, nor does he fear going to
Heaven for all that.

Fourthly, But above all, the Examples of Sin are the most prevalent, when they
are backed with the Authority of those, whom we stand in awe of. IV. If of those
of whom we stand in awe.
These are the Men who will expect, not only to be Obeyed, but Honored. And if
we Ape and Imitate 'em in all their Ways, we may hope thereby to obtain their
Favor. If we show a dislike of their Courses, we may have reason to fear their
Displeasure. And what is it that Two such active Springs in our Nature, as our
Hopes and Fears are, will not force us to, or drive us from? So powerful you
see are the Examples of Sin, when they are backed with all these Advantages.

And now the Examples of Sin have all these Advantages in 'em, to influence you
to Conform your selves unto 'em. Ever since the unhappy Fall of Man, there is
in every Child of Adam a great deal of Proneness to Sin, rather than to Virtue.
Alas! We carry a Principle about us, which is not only buisy and ready to close
with the Temptations of others Examples, but is forward to betray us to Sin,
though we had few Examples for it. Nay, evil Inclinations, and corrupt Desires
are so powerful within us, that even the best Instructions, and the most pious
Examples, and all other good Means and Helps, are daily found too weak and
unable to Overcome 'em. And yet as if all this were little enough, there are
far more Examples abroad in the World of Wickedness, than of Goodness; insomuch
that by the World in Scripture, simply taken, is often meant no other, than
wicked Men, they make up so great a Part thereof. And not only too many Great
Men, whom you have an Awe of, do give most abominable Examples of Profaneness,
Lewdness, Drunkenness, etc. to their Inferiors; but to come nearer Home to
you, too few of your Parents and Masters, I am afraid, are Examples to you of
Religion, and of the Fear of God. Nay, and perhaps some that you have an Esteem
for, and you may take for Good Men, may be Examples of Schism and Separation,
and of breaking the Unity of the Church, and Despisers of the Sacrament, or in
one Kind, or other, not so Good as they should be, not entirely and uniformly
Good.

And now what must you do in this Case? Why by all means you must Renounce and
Refuse Conformity to such bad Examples. We must by all Means renounce and
refuse Conformity to such bad Examples: For
You must by no means follow the Examples of Sin, be they who, or what they
will. Let them be never so many, you must not follow a Multitude to do Evil,
Exodus 23.2. It will not afford the least Ease to the Torments of the Damned,
that they are the many, and that they Saved are the few. Nor must the Examples
of the Greatest, no, nor of those you count Good Men, be a Rule to you, when
they vary from the Laws of God. There is no Man so Great, Wise, or Good, that
he can dispense with God's Laws, and absolve you from your Allegiance to the
Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth. This Great Man, or that Parent, or Master,
to flatter and please whom, you do follow their Examples in Sinning against
God, and your own Soul, cannot afford you Protection from God's Wrath, nor
Rescue you from under the Stroke of Divine Vengeance: No, but he shall be as
liable to it himself, as the poorest Slave.

No, First, a Christian, a Soldier of Jesus Christ, is called out to Combat
against the wicked Examples of the World, as much as against any one sort of
Enemy in his Christian Warfare; I. A Christian is called out to Combat against
the wicked Examples of the World, as much as against anyone sort of Enemy in
his Christian Warfare.
and be they never so many, never so mighty, he must not be overborn by 'em,
so as to Conform himself unto 'em, and either Renounce his Faith, or commit any
Sin by the Influence of such numerous and mighty Examples. We read the 2d of
Kings, that in the Days of wicked Ahab, the whole People of Israel were so
Apostatized from the true Religion, that Elisha thought there was but himself
left alone, who had not through the Influence of so many Idolatrous Examples,
and the Power of that wicked Prince (together with the Corruption of their own
Hearts, so prone to Idolatry) he thought there was Not one man left in Israel,
who had not bowed his knee to Baal. But he was never the more staggered for all
that, but preserved himself notwithstanding, a true Worshiper of the True God.
And for the Encouragement of you, who are Children and Servants, if it has been
your Misfortune to be Born of wicked Parents, and Bred up in ungodly Families,
consider that There was found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel,
for which God had a Regard to him, even in Abijah the Son of wicked Jeroboam,
who made Israel to sin, 1 King. 14.13. And Obadiah preserved himself a good
Man, even in the House of wicked Ahab, Chap. 18.13. And so must you likewise,
as you will approve your selves faithful Soldiers of Jesus Christ, be wrought
upon by no Examples to comply with Sin.

Nay, secondly, to Confront their bad Examples with an excellent One of his own.
Nay, Secondly, So far must a Christian be from Conforming himself to the
Examples of wicked Men, which would influence him to Sin, that he is called
forth do more, Namely, to confront their bad Ones, with an extraordinary good
One of his own; and in the midst of an Evil and Adulterous Generation, he must
show himself an excellent Example of Religion and Virtue. Hence it is, that in
the Fifth of St. Matthew. of us Christians it is said, that we must be the Salt
of the Earth, ver. 13. that we must be the Light of the World, and a City set
on a Hill, that cannot be hid, and a Candle, not put under a Bushel, but on a
Candlestick, ver. 14, 15. And lastly, we are there commanded, ver. 16. To let
our Light so shine before Men, that they may see our good Works, and glorify
our Father which is in Heaven. It is therefore, that we are thus Represented,
because, that by the Excellency of our Examples, we must be as Salt to a
corrupted World, to season and recover it from its Corruption; that by the
Eminency of all Christian Virtues and Graces, shining in our Conversations, we
must Enlighten the dark World; and lead 'em, by the Brightness of our good
Examples, into Holiness and Purity of Living. So much it lies upon you, not to
Conform your selves to evil Examples, that would lead you into Sin, that by the
Goodness of your own, you must draw others off from it.

II. When they shall Tempt and Entice us by their evil Company.
Secondly, You must refuse to Conform your selves, as to the Examples, so to the
Company of wicked Men, when falling amongst 'em they would entice you to join
with 'em in Sin. As there are a great many more of bad Examples abroad in the
World, than good Ones: So the Infection thereof is a great deal more taking,
when a many of those bad Men are met together in Company, than when they remain
asunder from one another. And so much Charm there is to Bewitch, The Company of
the Wicked extremely infections.
or Power in ill Company to Enforce others to sinful Compliances, that even
sober and good Men, when it is their misfortune to fall amongst such, shall
hardly preserve their Integrity, and come from amongst 'em with as much
Innocence, as they went in; but either through the Noisiness of their Companions,
forgetting that Guard they have at other times over their Thoughts, Words, and
Deeds; or for fear of being Reproacht as morose, dull, or ill-natured, shall
too far many times comply with the rest of the Company, both in speaking, and
acting, what is not very consistent with the Duty and Reservedness of a
Christian. But as for the young, ignorant, and inconsiderate Part of Mankind,
Good God! What Mischiefs are such drawn into, through the Enticements of Evil
Company. Your lewd Companions indeed, as they are usually very buisy in doing
Mischief, and corrupting others; and will wonderfully Triumph and Rejoice, when
they have Perverted a Sober Person, and made him as bad as themselves: So they
are above all Industrious, to Corrupt and Ensnare Youth, that they may
Propagate a Generation, as Wicked as they have been. And how will they Hug
themselves, when they have Debaucht an innocent Young Person, and made him at
any time Drunk, or betrayed him into Lewdness, or any other Wickedness;
especially if of promising Hopes, and of ingenious Parts; and how many Wiles
shall be used to Ensnare him again? Their Mouth is full of Deceit and Fraud,
under their Tongue is Ungodliness and Vanity, they lie lurking in the Thievish
corners of the Streets, to wait for the Innocent, to draw him into their Net,
Psalm. 10.7, 8, 9.

If you look into the particular Miscarriages of Men in the World, Most of the
Miscarriages of Men owing thereunto.
what a lamentable thing it is to consider, How many hopeful Youth have woefully
Mis-carry'd through wicked Company? How many have we known go abroad into the
World, the Hopes of their Families, the Expectations of their Country, and the
most Promising Persons of the Nation, but falling into ill Company, have proved
the most outrageous Fiends on this side Hell? And what Vices, what Villainies
are there, that Evil Company has not drawn 'em into?

What shall I say? It is Evil Company, This makes Men Atheists
that makes the Youth an Atheist. Alas! the unwary Stripling no sooner goes
into the World, but these Factors for the Devil lay hold on him; and with all
the wily Insinuations, and cunning Artifices, with Arguments best suited to the
Temper of the Young Man, they persuade him to join with 'em in their lewd
Courses. They do usually Enter him at first in your Taverns, and those Places
of Public Entertainment, that are something more remote from, and lie, as it
were, only on the Highway to Sin. They next carry him from thence into the
very Suburbs of Hell, those Houses, I mean, where such Scenes of Lewdness are
seen and acted, as would Profane the Place we are in, to mention, as are not
fit to be spoke to Chaste Ears, nor indeed can enter your Thoughts, without
leaving behind some base Defilement. And now if he has that Talent, which they
call Wit, such a share at least, as will enable him to talk Profanely, to break
Jests upon Scripture, and, Oh Brutish Stupidity! Oh Desperate Madness! To
Blaspheme, and fly into the Face of God Almighty; they feed his Vanity with
loud Applauses, and cry up to the Skies his Wit, and Parts. And by this he
thinks himself sufficiently furnished, to be an Apostle of Satan's also himself;
and henceforwards you shall see him, to be Intent wholly upon this very thing,
to draw all others into the same Damnation also along with him.

Alas! It is nothing but Evil Company, Libertines.
that Emboldens the Young Man for lewd Pranks. At first he is ashamed to have
his Name up amongst lewd Companions, and his Natural Modesty will not let him
look an Harlot in the Face; but they soon Laugh him out of that Clownish
Shamefacedness, so that he can at length Sin with Impudence enough, can Glory
in his Shame, and Brag of more mad Exploits, than he was ever guilty of
Committing; and is with the greatest Ease drawn aside to his Destruction, by
every lewd Harlot, that lies in wait for him; as Solomon most excellently
observes, Prove. 7.

Thieves, and Robbers.
It is Evil Company, that draws so many into the sad Trade of Thievery and
Robbery. They entice and inveigle others to join with 'em in those desperate
Undertakings, in which so many miscarry, that not One in a Hundred, that being
once Engaged, can rid himself of 'em, or comes not at last to some End of
Shame, or Sorrow. And there are few of those, who are Condemned for Theft, or
Murder, when they come to Die, but woefully complain in their Confessions, That
it was Evil Company, that brought them to it. Come say they, with those in the
Prove. 1.11, 12, 13. Let us lay wait for Blood, let us swallow them up as the
Grave, and whole as those, that go down into the Pit, we shall find all
precious Substance, fill our Houses with Spoil, cast in thy Lot amongst us, let
us all have one Purse.

Drunkards.
It is Evil Company, that makes Men Drunkards and Sots. There is not One at
first however, that loves Drinking for Drinking sake: It Is the Witchery of good
Fellowship, as they falsely call it, that first Enters 'em, and afterward holds
'em in that Course of Living, to the Ruin of their Families, their Estates,
their Health, their Bodies, their Souls; and all that is Precious in this, or
the other World.

Withdraws from the worship of God.
It is Evil Company, that often keeps some from Church, and the Worship of God,
that persuades some to idle at Home, others to wander in the Streets and
Fields, whilst they should be a serving of God in his House. What shall I say?
It is Evil Company, that discourages from all Good, and hardens Men in all
manner of Sin and Wickedness.

The fairest Vessels have split upon this Rock, the most promising Hopes and
Expectations of Families, of their Countries, have been Ship-wrackt, have been
lost in this Sea.

Evil Company therefore of all things to be abhorred.
But let me add the Wise-man's Advice, Prove. 1.10, 11, etc. My Son if Sinners
entice thee, consent thou not; nay, my Son walk not in the way with them,
refrain thy foot from their path. No, go not into their Company, Evil
Communications corrupt good Manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. It Is dangerous even to Talk
with 'em, but Associate thy self to 'em upon no account. There is Contagion and
Infection wherever they are. Thou may enter a House infected with the
Plague, tread upon the Adder's Nest, put thine Hand into a Lion's Den; but on
no Hand enter the Society of those Sons of Belial, who seem to defy Heaven with
Oaths and Blasphemies, strive to load themselves with so much of that Hellish
Guilt, as if they feared they should not sink deep enough into the bottomless
Pit. Beware of 'em; their Houses are the way to Hell, going down to the
Chambers of Death.

I. Young women must shun the corrupt Conversation of young Men.
And, First, Particularly you that are Young Women, let me warn you to shun the
Company of those Young Men, be they who they will, who shall offer to talk
loosely, and lewdly, and wantonly before you. I am afraid that Filthy
Communication, and foolish Jesting, which are not convenient, are too much the
subject of Conversation, when the Youth of both Sexes meet together, especially
amongst such of lower Rank, and who have not been blessed with the best Education
and Breeding. But as to offer at Filthiness and foolish Talking before you, is
the greatest Affront any can give you, as signifying no good Opinion they have
of you; so Young Men will not have the Confidence to Entertain you so
Indecently and Rudely, if at the very first Offers of that Nature, you shall
appear to conceive that Anger and Indignation, as infinitely becomes the
modesty of your Sex to put on. And I am sure you would, both heartily detest
such Conversation, and not fail to show your Detestation thereof, if you would
seriously consider what the Apostle says of it, Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5. Fornication and
Uncleanness, let it not be once Named amongst you, as becomes Saints: Neither
Filthiness, nor foolish Talking, nor Jesting, which are not convenient; For
this know, that no Whoremongers, nor unclean Person, has any Inheritance in
the Kingdom of God, and of Christ. Let no man deceive you, for because of these
words comes the wrath of God upon the Children of Disobedience. Pray observe
this whole Passage of St. Paul. Wanton and lascivious Discourse is as
infectious as the very Plague, and kindles such a Fire of Lust, as without
Repentance will certainly bring you to the Fire of Hell: Therefore fail not to
express your utmost Abhorrence thereof; and if you cannot stop it, fly from
those that utter it, as from Persons infected with a Plague Sore, having such
an Air of Anger, and Indignation, and Abhorrence, as you go off, as no Man dare
thereafter disturb you with the like.

And indeed, Secondly, II. All Persons of either Sex, both Young, and Old, as
they will prevent the Infection of evil Company, must take all possible Care to
avoid it.
it concerns all sort of Persons of either Sex, both Young and Old, as they
would prevent Infection of Evil Company, and considering how dangerous it is to
be taken therewith: And how the Tincture of their Manners and Customs, with
whom we do frequently Converse, is observed to slide insensibly into our
Imitation, so as to be hardly ever after wore off: All these things considered,
It concerns you, I say, to take all possible care to avoid the Company of bad
Men. I say, to avoid it, if it be possible; for it is not always, nay it is
very rarely in this State of the World, that it can be done: For if ye must not
Company with the Fornicators of this World, or with the Covetous, or
Extortioners, or with Idolaters; then must ye needs go out of the world, said
St. Paul, 1 Cor. 5.10.

The Truth of it is, your Employment and necessary Occasions, as to most of
you, is, or will be such, that you will unavoidably be drawn forth into the
World; and the World we know is full of Atheistical and Profane Persons, and
common Swearers, of Drunkards, and riotous Livers, of debauched and lewd
Companions; and lastly, of the Contemners of God, and Religion; and I am afraid
it is the general Conversation now adays, of those Companions, to break Jests,
and laugh at one another upon these their Dishonours done to God, and Religion,
whereby they Do not only do ill things themselves, but have pleasure in them
that do them, which St. Paul does add, Romans 1.32. as the highest Aggravation of
all Impiety. To speak freely, and not to flatter the present State of the
World: I am afraid you shall seldom go into Promiscuous Company, but some such
you shall meet withal. And now the great Enquiry will be, What shall be done in
this Case?

Why, Thirdly, Truly when it thus happens to you, that your Employment, and
necessary Occasions draw you forth into the World, that which you have then to
do, is to refuse to Conform your selves to the Manners of such Company. But,
Thirdly, when Employment and necessary Occasions draw Men forth into the World,
they must refuse to Conform themselves to the Manners of ill Company.
First, By Discountenancing their Profaneness and Riot.
But, First, you must with all Wariness and Circumspection watch, lest framing
your selves to the Humors of profane Persons, you countenance and encourage
'em in what is sinful and wicked, and so partake with them in their Sins, and
make their Guilt your own. Nay, but on the contrary, you must at leastwise by
a pious and discreet Behavior, and by showing a dislike and uneasiness at
their Hellish Talk, discountenance the Folly of those that do thus Offend.

II. By diverting 'em by useful Discourse from both.
Secondly, You must not fail, to do what you can, to divert the Company you
happen amongst, from Riot and Excess, and from vicious and filthy Talk, by
drawing 'em, with what Dexterity possible, into more Manly Discourse, and into
a more Christian, sober, rational Conversation.

III. If all Methods fail, by openly Reproving them.
But, Thirdly, if after all, if all these wise and modest Methods will not do,
but on they will go, and good Sense must give way to such unsavory
Entertainment: Why then there is no help, but you must boldly and bravely
Rebuke their impudent Folly, and openly Reprove it.

To do this Service to God we are particularly Listed in our Baptism.
For why? You must consider, that you have Listed your selves in your Baptism,
the Soldiers of Jesus Christ, and no faithful Soldier will patiently hear his
General abused, his Honor trampled upon, his Commands slighted and scorned,
but will stoutly stand up in Vindication of him, and his Orders. As you will
not therefore be accounted in the Day of Judgment, such as have Deserted the
Great Captain of our Salvation, Jesus Christ, you must not stand by, and tamely
suffer profane Wretches to Dishonor God's Holy Name and Word, by their
unsavory Oaths and Speeches, and you must not Cowardly permit 'em to Brag of
their Contemptuous breaking of his sacred Laws, without Rebuking their
Wickedness, and stoutly standing up in Defense of him, and them.

We shall be much discouraged from this by Men.
You must expect, I will own it, to meet with but rude Entertainment, for such
your Fidelity to your great Master. You shall be sure to be accounted Fools,
Mad and Rude for your Pains. And it is odds, but you shall be reproacht as
Hypocrites, that would fain seem Better than others, but can privately be as
Bad as they.

But have infinite Encouragements to such Fidelity from God.
But consider, the more you suffer for the Honor of your Lord, the more like
good Soldiers you behave your selves, and the better he will reward you.
Consider what a glorious Thing it is to be Evil-spoken of for Well-doing:
Blessed are ye when Men shall Revile you, and say all manner of Evil against
you, falsely for my sake; Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your
Reward in Heaven, Matthew. 5.11, 12. Consider your Savior and Leader, who
suffered worse Reproaches, and The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the
Servant his Lord, if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how
much more shall they call them of his Household, Matthew. 10.24, 25. Consider that
a Christian must not fear the Face of any Man, but must suffer Martyrdom, it
self, in the Cause of Christ, if called out to it: Fear not them which kill the
Body, but are not able to kill the Soul, but fear him who is able to destroy
both Body and Soul in Hell, ver. 28. Nay, consider lastly, that this Standing
up resolutely for the Honor of God and Religion, is the next Degree to
Martyrdom, and will be rewarded like it. It is called a Confessing of God
before Men, and on the other side, a fearing and forbearing to appear in His
behalf, a Denying of him; and consider what our Savior declares concerning
such, who do so Confess, or Deny him: Whosoever shall Confess me before Men,
him will I Confess before my Father which is in Heaven; but whosoever shall
Deny me before Men, him will I also Deny before my Father which is in Heaven,
Matthew. 10.32, 33. So much it concerns you to refuse Conformity to the Evil
Company of the World: And so much for this time.

THE Eighteenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works; the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
THAT which I am now upon is, to Forwarn you against the Temptations of the
wicked World, by showing you the dangerous Ones you shall meet withal, from the
Wicked Men of the World, and in what Sense, and how far you must Renounce both
them, and their wicked ways of Tempting others to Sin. This I have already
done, as to their Evil Examples, and Evil Company, and have delivered these
Instructions to you, that by God's Help may, I hope, be sufficient to prevent
your being infected by the Poison of either. But the wicked Men of the World,
have other ways of Tempting Men to Sin, and what they are, and how bravely you
must Resist them, I am next to declare unto you.

III. Flattery a great Temptation to Sin.
Thirdly, Then, amongst the greatest Temptations proceeding from Evil Men, we
may deservedly reckon their Flatteries. Now the Flatterer is One, who observing
the general Self-love and Pride of Mankind, who cannot endure Reproof, or any
thing that shows a Dislike of what they say, or do, does compose himself to
Admire and Extol, or at leastwise to Approve, as Well-done, very bad Actions,
or at best such, as if Good in themselves, are but indifferently Performed.

The Ground thereof our own immoderate Self-love
The Ground of his Flattery, I say, is That immoderate Self-love he observes
Natural to most Men, whereby they do extravagantly esteem and admire their own
Performances, and can see no Defects therein: And therefore, whoever shall
endeavor to discover their Faults, though in never so Prudent a manner, to any
of these Self-admirers, he is presently looked upon as One, that either envies
his Abilities and good Qualities, or as St. Paul was to the foolish Galatians:
He is therefore become his Enemy, because he tells him the Truth, Gal. 4.16.

And now the Flatterer observing this predominant Humor in him, puts on the
Vizard of a Friend, And composes himself to Admire and Extol, or at leastwise
to Approve, as Well-done, his very bad Actions, or at best such, as if Good in
themselves, are very indifferently Performed. The Flatterer's care is to
Please, not to Profit him, to whom he pretends to be a Friend, to make a Prey
of the besotted Self-admirer, and therefore sooths him up in his Vices; he
calls his Profaneness, Wit; she that is Superstitious, Devout; the Prodigal and
Profuse, he styles Bountiful and Liberal; and the Covetous Worldling; from whom
he expects an Estate, or Legacy, he Extolls to his Face, for his Prudence in
managing his Affairs: The Oaths and Curses, the Riot and Debaucheries of the
wicked Crew he happens amongst, he laughs at, as brave Exploits, and applauds
them as the Standards of Wit and Bravery. And as to such things, which are
tolerably well Performed, but might be Bettered, for fear of mortifying the
Vanity of the Creature, whereby he might possibly displease him, he discovers
nothing of that, but All is well, and admirably Performed.

And now this Flattery to the Vices and Imperfections of Men is of mischievous
Consequence to 'em. So Prove. 26.28. This Flattery keeping Men ignorant of the
good or ill Qualities in 'em; thereupon
A flattering mouth works Ruin; and 29.5. A man that flattereth spreads a
Net. For why? The Flatterer, as Plutarch observes, endeavors to make every Man
his own Cheat, by keeping him ignorant of the good and ill Qualities, which are
in him, whereupon the Good never come to Perfection, and the Ill grow
Incorrigible.

By this means, I say, The Good never come at Perfection. The Good never come
to Perfection.
There is many a Person of a Generous Temper, who delights to do Good to
Mankind, whose Head is working for the Public, and loves to relieve the Needy;
but all this it is visible he does too much out of Ostentation, and to get the
Praise of Men, and so loses his Reward from God: But now if he had but a
faithful Monitor, that would fairly represent to him the Vanity and
Affectation, that appears in the Good he does, and which others can see, though
he himself is not sensible of. And that it is but to direct it to a right End,
and then he will obtain a Reward in Heaven, and moreover merit the Praises of
Men too: A little of this Sincerity and Freedom would make that Man an
excellent Person, whom now his Vanity and Braging of the Good he does, renders
Troublesome and Hateful even to those, whom he most Obliges. There is also many
a One, who in his Projects concerning his own Advantage, and that of the
Public, out of an over-fond Conceit of his own Methods, disdaining to ask
Counsel; or if he did, they flattering every thing, and not sincerely giving
their Advice; the Design it self therefore, and the measures of obtaining it,
though Good in the main, has for that very reason alone mis-carry'd: So much does
the Self-flattery of our own Hearts, joined with the Flatteries of other
Persons, hinder our Good from arriving to Perfection.

And the Ill that is in Men does thereby grow Incorrigible. And the Ill that is
in Men does thereby grow Incorrigible.
Thus there is not a greater Cause at this Day of that Profaneness and
Impudence in Sin and Debauchery, than the Assentations, Smiles, and other
Tokens of Approbation given by base Flattery, to horrid Wickednesses; whereas
would every Christian, as he is infinitely bound to do, express his Dislike,
his Abhorrence, his Scorn of the Debauchees, and their Debaucheries, when they
are openly Committed, or impudently Bragged of, the impious Sinners of this Age
would then endeavor to be Private however, not Affect, as they do, to be
Public in their Villainies. This base Flattery, of which there are but few, who
are not Guilty, in not putting a Frown at leastwise, instead of a Smile, upon
Impious Doings, has tended extremely to harden the Young Reprobates of our Age
to their own, and the Nation's Ruin; for indeed, as the excellent Plutarch
expresses it, When Vice is extolled, so that a Man is induced to Sin, not only
without Regret, but with Joy and Triumph, and is hardened beyond the modesty of
a Blush for his Enormities: This sort of Flattery has been fatal to whole
Kingdoms. And though indeed the Great Ones are most subject to it, because they
of all Men, will not endure Reproof; yet there are not any so mean, we see,
whose Vices are not applauded amongst their Companions, rather than
Reprehended, and who are not therefore hardened thereby into all manner of
Wickedness. In a word, It is this sort of Flattery, which among all Ranks and
Degrees of Men, Has strengthened the hands of the Wicked, that he should not
return from his wicked way, Ezekiel. 13.22. So mischievous a Temptation, you see,
is Flattery; it hinders all sorts of Persons from improving their Virtues, and
encourages 'em to the highest Pitch of wickedness. And now what must be done in
this Case, that you may Effectually Renounce it, and avoid the ill Effects of
it? And in order thereunto,

I. In order to renounce flattery we must Cashire every vain Opinion of our own
selves.
First, Let me advise you, with the excellent Philosopher now mentioned, that We
Cashire every vain Opinion of our selves, whose Inbred Flattery only disposes
and prepares us to a more favorable Reception of that from without: For he who
loves to be Flattered, is doubtless sufficiently fond of himself; and through
abundance of Complaisance to his own Person, not only wishes, but thinks
himself Master of all those Perfections, which may recommend him to others. But
did we reflect upon our own Nature and Education, and consider what gross
Imperfections and Failures are mixed with our Words, Actions and Affections, we
should not lie so open to the Attempts of every Flatterer, who designs upon us;
and we should be well prepared to Renounce and Reject all his deceitful
Flatteries, which must be done: for

II. We must so far Renounce the Flatteries of Men, as to take it kindly to be
Reproved.
Secondly, Having thus dis-possest your Breasts of an immoderate Self-love, you
must So far renounce and reject the Flatteries of Men, as to take it kindly,
when you are Reproved. And indeed you are to Esteem and Love him, as your
truest Friend, who deals so Ingeniously with you, as frankly to discover to you
your Imperfections and Failings of any Kind, and freely to Reprove you for your
Faults. David desired such a Friend, who would thus Reprove him, Psalm. 141.5.
Let the Righteous smite me, and it shall be a Kindness, and let him Reprove me,
and it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not break my Head; intimating,
that the Flatteries of wicked Men, which in the other Translation are called
precious Balms, would mortally wound him. And Solomon, who best knew what
Wisdom was, and the methods of Attaining it, does most frequently speak of
Reproof, as a most excellent One, The Ear that hears the Reproof of Life,
abides among the Wise; He that refuses Instruction, despises his own Soul;
but he that fears Reproof, gets Understanding, Prove. 15.31, 32. But on the
contrary, to hate Reproof, is in his account the Highway to Error, Ruin and
Destruction. Thus Prove. 10.17. He that refuses Reproof erreth. and 15.10. He
that hates Reproof shall dye. and 29.1. A man of Reproof, that hardneth his
Neck, shall be destroyed. This indeed, as any other Discipline is distastful to
Flesh and Blood, but it is in it self the most profitable sort of Correction,
for A Reproof enters more into a Wise man than Stripes, Prove. 17.10.

And as you must bring your self to that humble and low Opinion of your own
Perfections, and to that sense of your Faults, Especially the Reproofs of God's
Ministers are to be kindly received and regarded.
as to take kindly the Reproof of a Friend, and to amend upon it; so especially
you are to receive, with all Reverence, and Respect, and Kindness the Reproofs
of God's Ministers, tending either to better, or reform you. Of all Men living
it must not be expected from us, to favor you in any thing amiss, to smile
upon your Extravagancies, to speak only Comforts and Consolations to you, when
we come to deal with your Consciences, which ought to be searched to the Bottom
by us, and the Corruption let out. This was that Flattery which Jeremiah
reprehends, and severely threatens in the Prophets and Priests of his Time,
6.13, 14, 15. But our Business is by Preaching, Catechizing, and all the
Methods of Instruction, to give you a through Understanding of all the Terms
and Conditions of that Covenant, wherein you stand Engaged to God; to be
Watchmen over your Souls, in order to discover your Errors and Failures
therein; to direct you for your better Improvement in those Graces, whereunto
you have already attained; and you must expect it from us, to frown upon your
Follies, and boldly to Reprove you, when we perceive you to Transgress our
Great Master's Laws. And you must receive all this at our Hands, not only as a
necessary Discharge of our Duty, but what you must apply to your own
Improvement and Reformation. And this if you should not do, your Ruin will be
imputed to it. Hence Solomon warns the Young Man to beware of sinful
Extravagancies, Lest he be brought to Mourn at the last, when his Flesh and his
Bones are consumed, and to own as the cause of all this, That he hated
Instruction, and that his Heart despised Reproof, that he obeyed not the Voice
of his Teachers, nor inclined his Ear to them, that Instructed him, Prove. 5.11,
12, 13. So far therefore is the Flattery of wicked Men to be Renounced, that
Reproof on the contrary is to be Kindly received. But

Fourthly, Wicked Men will proceed farther to Tempt others to Sin, even By
their false and fallacious Argueings against the Necessity of a Holy Life. IV.
Wicked Men Tempt others to Sin by their false and fallacious Argueings against
the Necessity of a Holy Life.
One would think there should be none professing Christianity, that should
openly Plead for Sin; but yet such Factors and Agents Satan has amongst us, as
will openly Avow his Cause, and will endeavor to Persuade you, that you are
not Obliged to that Strictness of Living, which we Preachers are continually
sounding in Men's Ears.

And to this Purpose you shall hear them Argue so hotly, that God no doubt is a
Merciful Being, and will not surely for the Sins of a short Life, Condemn the
Guilty to an Eternity of Woe and Misery. And as to the Duties of Religion, you
shall hear 'em argue, that they are hard Sayings, and who can bear 'em. And as
to themselves, you shall hear these Men often Pleading, that they are made of
Flesh and Blood, and therefore sure God will not require Men, upon the Hazard
of Salvation, to mortify the Flesh; and that they are set in a World full of
Temptations, and abounding in Delights and Pleasures; and that therefore God,
who has Placed 'em in it, will not command 'em upon Pain of Damnation, to
Overcome these strong Temptations, and to deny these Pleasures of the World.

These are the common, and pernicious, and licentious Argueings of Men, to
persuade both themselves and others into such easy Notions of God and Religion,
that they may Sin with more Security, and less Fear. And this has been a
powerful Art in all times; and such Arguments as these Men are most ready to
Believe, because they love the Thing they Plead for, because they favor their
Lusts, and grant 'em so much Liberty in what they long for, the satisfying the
Flesh, and enjoying the World.

All which wicked Reasonings we must fortify our selves against; as when they
Plead,
But do you beware, and fortify your selves well against those false Argueings
of Sinful men, in Behalf of their Lusts, and against the Strictness of
Religion, whereby they would Persuade you, as well as themselves, into a sinful
Security, and withdraw you from, or slacken you in your Duty. They are false
and fallacious Arguments, that would persuade us to Comply in the least with
Sin, for there is nothing more plain in Scripture, than that Sin must with all
possible Care be avoided. It tells us positively, That we must deny all
Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present World, Tim. 2.12. And that all that name the Name of Christ, must
depart from Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. And that all true Christians must be
Cleansed from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and perfect Holiness in the
fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. And in order to Perfection, that they must Cut off
right Hands, and put out right Eyes, when they offend 'em; that is, any Lusts
that are so dear and useful to you, as these Members are, Matthew. 29.30. What
shall I say? It tells us, that the Friendship of the world is Enmity against
God, and that whosoever will be a Friend of the world, is an Enemy of God, Jam.
4.4. And then as for the Punishment of Sin, there is not One but has the
Penalty of Eternal Death and Misery, if Unrepented of, affixt to it.
Particularly, Rev. 21.8. it is said, that the Fearful, or those who Apostatize
from the Faith out of fear, and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Murderers,
and Whore-mongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have
their part in the Lake, which burns with Fire and Brimstone; which is the
second death. This the Word of God does assure us, and then for Men to raise to
themselves Hopes of Impunity, so contrary to the express Declarations of
Scripture, when if they shall be mistaken, and find after all, God's
Threatenings to prove real, (as there is infinite Reason to believe they shall)
this is certainly the most desperate Presumption in the World.

But if you consider these Arguments asunder, there is no strength in 'em,
wherefore any should venture to rely upon 'em. For in the first place, it is in
no wise Inconsistent with God's Mercy, for the Sins of a short Life, to Condemn
the Guilty to an Eternity of Woe and Misery. I. That it is inconsistent with
God's Mercy for the Sins of a short life to Condemn the Guilty to an Eternity
of Woe and Misery.
His Mercy is sufficiently satisfied in laying no Tyrannical Impositions upon
us, as Satan and all false Gods have done upon their superstitious Votaries. It
is yet a farther Demonstration of his Mercy, that our virtuous Performances,
though they are their own Reward here, yet they shall be also abundantly
Recompensed hereafter. He does moreover let us see his Mercy in his long
Forbearance of us, notwithstanding, that by our numberless Provocations, we do
Grieve his Holy Spirit. But he has given us the greatest Discoveries of his
Mercy, beyond what could ever enter into the Hearts of Men to expect, when he
gave his own Son to be an Atonement and Expiation for our Sins, that his
Justice might not proceed against us; and when he sent him to us with a
Covenant of Grace, as an Act of Pardon, proposing to us, not only a perfect
Reconciliation with our offended God, but infinite Rewards in Heaven, if we
would return to our due Obedience, and Pay him no other but a reasonable
Service. I think this is sufficient for Mercy to do; and if such immensurable
Mercies will not win upon us, it is time that as severe a Justice should then
take place; for we are to consider God as the supreme Governor of Men, and
Justice is as necessary an Attribute in Government, as Mercy.

Nor is his Severity, in Punishing the Sins of a short Life, with an Eternity
of Woe and Misery, but what is agreeable to his Justice and Wisdom, as supreme
Governor of the World. It is necessary in all Governments, that the Laws
thereof should be enforced with such Penalties, as shall be sufficient to deter
People from the Transgression of those Laws. And therefore the Penalties being
future, it is necessary they should be vastly Great, to Over-balance the
Profits, or Pleasures of Sin, which are present. It may seem hard indeed at
first sight, in Humane Governments, that a Person for Clipping a Piece of
Silver, which bears the Image and Superscription of Caesar, or for Stealing it
from another, should forfeit not only his Good and Chattels, but also his Life
it self; but yet since upon the Temptations of present Profit, bad Men will
adventure to commit such Facts, and the Authority of Laws cannot otherwise be
kept up, nor Men's Rights and Properties preserved: It is not thought by the
Honest Part of Mankind, Inconsistent with the Wisdom and Justice of Governors,
to inflict even such Punishments, as extend to the loss of Life. It is these
alone are sufficient to Outweigh the present Consideration of Profit to the
Offender, and effectually to move him to live in Obedience to Government; and
therefore these, as great as they be, are esteemed but Just and Equal. So here
in the Government of God over us: The Pleasures and Profits of Sin, to compass
which, Men will Transgress the Laws of Heaven, are but short, true it is; but
yet being present, and the Punishments Threatened to 'em being apprehended, by
most Sinners, to be at a great distance, they are therefore generally
prevailing, and Men for that Reason do venture to Transgress the Laws of God,
(a Thing of worse Consequence than the Violation of Humane Ordinances;) and
therefore it is no other, than what can be expected from the Justice and Wisdom
of the supreme Governor of the World, to inflict such infinite and eternal
Punishments. In short, Divine Vengeance, as well as Humane, must be such as
will Over-balance the Reasons and Motives to Sin. And the Pleasures and Profits
of Sin being present, and the Divine Punishments not taking place but in
another World, according to the Fundamental Rules and Reasons of Government,
they must be Infinite and Eternal, and all little enough, or otherwise they
will not be sufficient to secure our Obedience to the Laws of Heaven. So that
there is no Strength in this Argument of Sinful Men, against the Justice of
Eternal Torments, in the behalf of their Lusts, whereby they would persuade
you, as well as themselves, into a most dangerous Security, and withdraw you
from, or slacken you in your Duty.

Secondly, Nor are the Duties of our Religion hard Sayings, which no Man can
bear, II. That the Duties of Religion are hard sayings which no Man can bear.
as they will likewise plead. All the Duties enjoined us in the Gospel, respect
either God, our Neighbor, or our Selves. Those to God, as we find 'em laid
down in pure and undefiled Christianity (undefiled, I say, with the Inventions
of Men) are no superstitious, senseless, and uncouth Observances, so much the
matter of all other Worships besides the Christian; but are all of 'em indeed,
a most Reasonable Service. Those which respect our Neighbor, are no other than
Acts of Justice, Peace, and Charity, the contrary of which would destroy Humane
Society, or make us Beasts of Prey one to another. And as to those Duties we
owe to our selves, why, they are no other than, that we should truly and justly
value our selves, neither overmuch by Pride, nor too little by letting base
Lusts to reign over us, or the inferior part of our Nature, to Domineer it
over our Reason and Understanding, the Superior, and in all Equity the
Governing Part of us. And what is there hard in all this that we should quarrel
with our Duty, except we count it hard, that God, who has made us reasonable
Creatures, would not suffer us to Transform our selves into unreasonable Brutes.

Thirdly, And this is a sufficient Answer also, to that other Pleading of
sinful Men, That they are made of Flesh and Blood, and therefore sure God will
not require Men, upon the Forfeiture of Salvation, if they do not, to mortify
the Flesh. III. That they are made of Flesh and Blood, and that therefore sure
God will not require Men, upon the forfeiture of Salvation, if they do not, to
mortify the flesh.
For these Men, who Plead thus, ought to consider, that they consist of Soul
and Spirit, as well as of Flesh and Blood; and as the Soul is Superior, and
the Governing Part within us; so it is highly reasonable it should have the
Obedience of the Other: And this is all the Mortification, which Religion puts
the Flesh to. It would keep it in Subjection to the Dictates of Right Reason,
and that is all. And though this Mortification of the Flesh is to be exercised,
by Imposing some Severities sometimes upon the Body, as by Fasting and
Watching, etc. Yet this is no more to be complained of, than that Refractory
Children, and Servants, and Subjects must be sometimes kept up under
Discipline, as there shall be occasion.

Nay, but Lastly, say these Men, God has set us in a World full of Temptations,
and abounding with sensual Delights and Pleasures; and he therefore, who has
Placed us in it, sure will not command us upon Pain of Damnation, to Overcome
those strong Temptations, and to Deny these Pleasures of the World. Lastly,
that God has set us in a World full of Temptations, and abounding with sensual
Delights and Pleasures; and that he therefore who has placed us in it, will not
command us, upon Pain of Damnation, to overcome those strong Temptations, and
to deny these Pleasures of the World.
And we'll grant it, that he has Placed us in a State of Probation and Trial,
where we have sensual Pleasures and Delights, and many other Temptations,
besetting us on the one side, as well as the Rewards of Heaven, awaiting us on
the other; and where were the Virtue, and what Place would there be for Reward,
if there were not those Difficulties to overcome? But in short, there is not
any thing Unreasonable, nor a Hardship unsupportable in any thing, that God has
Enjoined us; for the same Almighty Goodness, which gives us the Command to do
these things, gives us also the Will and Power to Obey, and besides proposes to
us Enjoyments infinitely surpassing those Worldly Pleasures, as the Rewards of
such Obedience. And so I have given you sufficient Answers to those false and
fallacious Argueings of sinful Men, against the Necessity of a Holy Life, I
know 'em to be too common in the Discourses of such Persons, who love their
Lusts, and therefore I thought it requisite to fortify you against them.

But to proceed, Fifthly, Wicked Men will not be content by the secret
Influence of their Examples and Company only, nor by their false and fallacious
Arguments to Tempt you to Sin, but Will moreover sometimes add Kindnesses and
Promises to oblige you to do ill Things, and on the contrary will much
discourage you, nay sometimes Threaten you, to forbear your Duty. V. Wicked Men
will add Kindnesses and Promises to Oblige us to do ill Things, and on the
contrary will much discourage us, nay sometimes Threaten us to forbear our Duty.


The Kindnesses of Friendship are of all things the most Engageing, and if your
Choice of a Friend has not been so discreetly and happily made, but he happens
to be a wicked Man, who upon the Score of former Obligations laid upon you,
will require in Return, that some ill Thing should be done by you to serve his
Interest, you will be drawn thereby into a very great Snare; for besides that,
there is in very many, whom we call Good-natured Men, such an Easiness of Mind,
that they can hardly deny any thing to those, who have once Obliged 'em; but
are ready to Pleasure and Comply with 'em, though in things most directly
contrary to their own Minds and Inclination. Besides this, if you should refuse
to Gratify in any thing, One that has done you former Kindnesses, the World
will be ready to call you Ungrateful, the most odious Reproach, that can be
cast on any One.

Nay, and wicked Men will not sometimes stick to Bribe you also with Promises
and Proposals of Profit and Advantages, if you will serve 'em in their ill
Designs. This One would think not so dangerous a Temptation to Sin, because
more open, and not so Insinuating a way as the former; but God knows, too many
do knowingly and wilfully barter away their poor Souls, and plainly sell 'em to
the Devil, contracting to commit this, or that Sin; as for Instance, to take a
false Oath, to forge Writings, to make a Lie in another's behalf, upon the
Promise, or Intimation of some Reward for so doing. Thus will wicked Men, some
by Kindnesses, some by Promises, Oblige you, if they can, to serve 'em by your
Sins.

And some on the other hand will be no less Industrious by Discouragements, nay
Threatenings to hinder you in the discharging your Duty, and a good Conscience.
Religion will sometimes put you upon doing those things, that will Prejudice
your worldly Interests, and stir up the Wrath of those, that are Superior to
you. And indeed in this Case, a Man's worst Enemies shall be those of his own
House; and when either you must Sin, or Suffer, none will be so forward to
Tempt you to Sin, rather than to Suffer, as your nearest Relations and
Acquaintance: And what must Wife, and Children, and Family do, if you should
talk of Forsaking all, and of following Christ in the Preservation of a good
Conscience, will be the Argument, that the Friend of your own Bosom will
strongly urge you withal.

But the more common Temptation discouraging Men in the Discharge of their
Duty, especially such as are of a low Rank and Condition in the World, are the
Frowns and Threats of those, that are above 'em. Hence a Minister in low
Circumstances, shall venture hard, if he offers to Reprove a Great Man, though a
Great Sinner. And you shall scarcely ever know an Officer, though never so
strictly obliged thereunto by his Oath, present, in order to Punishment, the
Man of Power and Interest in his Parish, for his Oaths, his Riots, and the most
outrageous Immoralities, which he so scandalously commits.

I. Kindnesses must not corrupt us to Sin.
And now what shall be done, with reference to these manifold Encouragemetns to
Sin, and Discouragements to Virtue, which you shall meet withal from wicked
Men? Why, in the first Place, have a special Care you be not Inveigled by the
pretended Kindness of any Person, be he who, or what he will. Let not the
Obligations of your Friend, or Acquaintance cause you to strain Truth, when you
are called to give Testimony in his Cause. Take care you be not then wrought
upon by any Sense of Kindness to Perjure your selves for him, by declaring
either more than Truth, or by speaking not the whole Truth, when it would make
against him. Consider what Kindness has been done you, if you must sin against
God, and your own Soul, to Pleasure your Friend in Return for it; It was but a
Bait to take you, a Snare to Entrap you, and a pleasant Poison given to destroy
you. You ought indeed, as an honest Pagan says excellently well, to be
assistant to him in his honest Endeavors, but not in his Knaveries; in his
Counsels, not in his Tricks; in appearing as Evidence for him, but not in a
Cheat; and you must bear a Share in the misfortunes of your Friend, but not in
his Acts of Injustice.

II. Promises must not bribe us.
Secondly, As to any Promises, wherewith wicked Men may so Tempt you, as to Hire
you to Sin, God forbid, there should be a Necessity to bid you Reject and
Detest them. But if there be any need to Fortify any here against such a
Temptation, the mere Foolishness of the Bargain you will make, will
sufficiently move you to spurn at them; for if it be an unprofitable, a very
unprofitable Bargain, though a Man should Gain the whole World, and lose his own
Soul, as it is said, Mark 8.36. Oh! What ill Husbandry, what Stupidity is it,
for a Trifle of worldly Wealth, or Advantage, to barter it away?

III. Discouragements must not hinder us from discharging our Duty.
And Thirdly, As for those who shall hereafter discourage you from suffering for
Righteousness sake, when called thereunto, by laying before you the Ruin you
will thereby bring upon your selves and Families; why you must consider, that
in such Case, our Savior tells us, that a Man must even Hate Father and
Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea, and his own Life
also, or he cannot be his Disciple; and that whosoever does not bear his Cross,
and come after him, shall not be his Disciple, Luke 14.26, 27.

Nor, Fourthly, must Threatenings, or Frowns fright us from it.
Nor Lastly must a Soldier of Jesus Christ be frighted out of the way of his
Duty, or awed into any sinful, or slavish Compliance, by the Threats and Frowns
of any Man living: Shrink not from the Exercise of Religion and Uprightness,
because many about you, and they perhaps Above, or Richer than you, are profane
and lewd, and utterly regardless of any thing that is Good, and moreover do
Discourage and Affront it. For this if you should, you will most certainly
offend your Great Lord and Master, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and who has
called upon you, not to fear a mortal Man; no, though he could Kill the Body, but
to be afraid of displeasing him rather, who is able to destroy both Body and
Soul in Hell; Yea, I say unto you, fear him, Luke 12.4.

And now, Lastly, I cannot call to Mind any other Temptations, Lastly, the evil
Customs which have prevailed in the World, are a powerful Temptation to Sin.
usual amongst wicked Men, to Tempt others to Sin, besides some Evil Customs so
rife amongst many. That the Heathen Idolatries, and those filthy Practices,
committed in 'em, were so universally Complied with, by all sorts of Men in the
Pagan World, was, because they were Commended and Established by Public
Custom. Many of their wisest Men and Philosophers, had other Conceptions of
God, than to think it was fit, to Change the Glory of God into the Similitude
of an Ox, that eats Grass; and thought also, he ought to be Worshipped, not by
Fooleries and Impurities, but with a chaste Mind and a clean Heart. And yet even
those Men submitted to Common Custom, and whatever they thought, or spoke
Privately amongst themselves, they acted and spoke in Public, as the rest did.
And it was to the Prevalency of Custom, that the Apostle imputed those
Enormities of the Ephesians, before their Conversion, telling 'em, that In time
past they walked according to the Course of this World, Ephesians. 2.2. And indeed so
great is the Power of Evil Custom, that it does still, amongst Christians,
constrain Persons to do many ill Things, even contrary to their Natures and
Inclinations, as well as Religion. And when grown prevalent and common, it does
strangely take off the sense and fear of Hurt, in the most Unchristian
Practices.

Custom, I say, does still amongst Christians, constrain Persons to do many ill
Things, even contrary to their Nature and Inclinations, as well as Religion.
Hence among the Men of Honor, as they would be thought, shall many become even
Self-murderers, merely in Compliance with Custom; insomuch, that those Persons,
who of all Men living, have most reason to preserve their Lives, having all
their good Things they can ever expect, in this World, yet desperately spill
one another's Blood in your cursed Duels. It is no Inclination in these Men, I
dare say, to be so Prodigal of their dear Lives, that makes 'em so desperately
throw 'em away; but merely out of a Cowardly Fear, they should be branded with
Disgrace, for not complying with so common a Custom, amongst Persons of their
own Character. So again, among Persons of all Ranks, you shall have Men of no
manner of Inclinations to intemperate Drinking, yet when they come to any Great
Man's House, where it is the Barbarous and Brutish Custom of Drinking Men hard:
Yet at such times they will not scruple to Exceed very far. It is the Custom of
the Place, they will say, and they were forced to it, they could not help it.

And Custom also, when grown prevalent and common among Societies of Men, will
strangely take off the Sense and Fear of Hurt in the most Unchristian
Practices. Custom takes off the Sense and Fear of Hurt in the most Unchristian
Practices.
Hence, amongst Seamen and Soldiers, the most outrageous Whoredoms and
Adulteries, and the most execrable Oaths and Curses, are hardly accounted
amongst the number of Sins. And all the Arts of Cheating and Overreaching, nay
of downright Lying, and Swearing to the Soundness and Goodness of bad
Commodities, is little scrupled amongst some sort of Dealers, the thing is
grown so common. And Custom it is, which is so commonly Pleaded for the
Omission of most necessary Duties, as well as the Commission of most horrid
Sins. Hence do Multitudes make not the least scruple of Absenting, their whole
Lives, from the Blessed Sacrament, because it is so common amongst many to do
so. Thus powerful, you see, are the Evil Customs of the World, so as almost to
force Men, whether they will or no, to do many ill things; and what is worse,
to sear their Consciences in the Commission of the worst Sins, and in the
Omission of the chiefest Duties.

A Christian must courageously and vigorously renounce and withstand the Force
of all sinful Customs whatsoever.
And now, what must a Christian do in this Case? Custom we know is a Second
Nature, and when it has been of a long Date, Time out of Mind, as the Phrase
is, it pleads Prescription, and obtains the Force of a Law amongst Men. So that
be a Custom never so contrary to Honesty, Sobriety, to common Sense and Reason,
or any the Laws of Christianity, an old Custom must not be broken; it is the
Custom of the Place, and must be kept up: Such are the Sentiments of the Vulgar
in this matter. But you must resolve with all Courage and Stedfastness, like
true Soldiers of Jesus Christ, to Renounce and Withstand the Force of all
sinful Customs whatsoever, and not to suffer your selves to be overborn
thereby into any sinful Compliances.

When Christianity was first Preached amongst Men, such barbarous and brutish
Customs had of a long time prevailed over the greatest Part of the Heathen
World, that many Practices which the mere Light of Nature would teach Men to
Abandon, as Sins and Wounds of Conscience, Were, as the Learned Dr. Hammond
observes, Embraced by whole Nations at once, and continued in without any
Check, as innocent, sinless Qualities, Nature and Reason being so early
engaged, and silenced by popular Custom, and vicious Education, that many knew
it not to be a Sin to Steal, or Rob, if they were so cunning, as not to be
taken; others to Kill, and Eat their Aged Parents (conceiving that by this
means they gave 'em a more Honorable Burial;) others to throw themselves
murderously into the Flames, to accompany their Dead Princes out of the World.
Many the like irrational Sins, through some local Customs got the Reputation,
not only of sinless and lawful, but of laudable also. But all who Embraced
Christianity, as they were obliged by their Baptismal Vow, to forsake those and
the like Heathenish Customs, (for to such this Vow did particularly relate) so
they did presently beat them down wherever the Christian Religion prevailed,
insomuch that in few Ages, there were not the least Footsteps thereof
remaining. And so must you likewise vigorously withstand all Customs that are
Immoral, wherever, and by whomsoever, and how long soever they have obtained.

Such only as are Immoral are to be Renounced.
I do say, All Customs that are Immoral: For I do not mean, that a Christian
must turn Cynick, a dogged and sower Lump of Earth, surly, and uncivil, and
quarrelling with the innocent Modes of Humane Society. That is as much a Fault
on the other side, to think that Christianity, the calmest and the sweetest
Religion in the World, does oblige Men to ill Manners. But those Customs, the
Force of whose Temptations I would have you all to Resist, and utterly to
Renounce, are such as I before mentioned, and which are apparently sinful and
wicked, either tending to lessen the Guilt of Sin, or to make it none at all.

I am sensible there is something of Difficulty in this Part of our Warfare
above any other. Barely to refuse Compliance with, but much more to oppose Evil
Men in their sinful Customs and and Practices, will mightily provoke their
Indignation. He sails against the Wind that does so, and swims against the
Stream. He shall have Multitudes will thwart him, and will load him with hard
Reproaches; will call him singular and precise Fool for his Pains, and what
not? He must have a great deal of Courage that opposes a Multitude in doing
Evil, or will not comply with 'em in it. But such must the Soldier of Jesus
Christ be, One that dares Incur the greatest Displeasure, rather than shrink
from his Duty; and One that will not be afraid to show his Dislike of any
vicious Customs, when there is just Occasion for it.

And this indeed is true Courage, The greatest Courage required to this Part of
a Christian's Warfare.
to despise all Opposition in the way of Duty, and he that can Unconcernedly
pass through a Multitude, Reproaching and Vilifying him for his Pains, in
Pursuit of Virtue, is more Heroic and Brave, than he that with his Sword in
his Hand cuts open a way to the Taking of a Fort. He that Reproves a Sin, or
Renounces an Ungodly Custom, may have more of true Fortitude, than he that
Pushes on through drawn Swords, for it is a sign he fears not those Weapons
which wound deepest, an embitter'd and envenomed Tongue.

It is plain beyond all Contradiction, I do think, Cowardice the Cause of
Complying with the Custom of Duelling, or any other Custom of Sinning.
that when Men in Opposition to their Inclination, and Reason, and Religion
dictating the contrary, do comply with others in Drinking of Healths to Excess,
in profane or loose Talk, or the like: It is plain, I say, that it is out of
fear of Reproaches, and for want of Courage, that Men do thus Sin. Nay, I dare
be bold to affirm, however like a Paradox it may appear to some, That it is out
of Fear, and for want of true Courage, that Men fight Duels, when they are
Provokt, or Affronted. They are afraid, that if in Compliance to our Savior's
Doctrines of Meekness, Patience and Forbearance, they should put up Affronts,
they would be Reproacht and Scorned by the Multitude, and be termed Cowards,
and therefore do desperately (but enough against their secret Inclinations, I
dare say) betake themselves to this Barbarous and Foolhardy way of showing
themselves Men of Honor.

But true Courage and Bravery, Philosophy, and Religion, and the sober Reason
of all wise Men tell us, will despise the vain Opinions of the Unthinking and
Impious Crowd, which, for the most part, are in the wrong; and will steddily
pursue what is Virtuous, and Fit, and Reasonable, and Religious,
notwithstanding the foolish Reproaches of the Many. So that to retain One's
Integrity and Virtue, and an unpolluted Conscience, in the midst of common and
prevailing Customs of Sin and Vice, I dare be bold to assert, the Noblest and
most Heroic piece of Courage.

And accordingly it will be Rewarded with a Noble Testimony by our Blessed
Savior, when to have his Testimony will be beyond the Applauses of the whole
World. To Renounce and Oppose the Irreligious and Profane Customs of wicked
Men, is an eminent Piece of Christian Confession, and He who Confesses him
before Men, the same will the Son of Man Confess, Own as his faithful Servant,
and Applaud as a Noble Confessor, before the Angels of God, Luke 12.8.

And let this suffice, to have spoken concerning the wicked Men of the World,
that you must so far Renounce both them, and their wicked ways, as Never to
become Tempters your selves of others to Sin, nor to yield your selves a Prey
to other Men's Temptations, but must utterly refuse Conformity to them, and all
their ways, whereby they would have you Offend God, and Violate your Covenant
with him, and your Vows in Baptism, and thereby forfeit all your Title, and
Hopes of Happiness.

THE Nineteenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works; the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
HAVING fully Surveyed the World, and all therein contained, that is fit to be
Renounced by every Christian: And having also Represented to you those
Temptations, which are given by the wicked World, and how we must Resist them;
I come now to explain unto you, what is to be understood by the Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked World, and to show you, how much it behooves Christians to
Renounce, and to Despise them. And

First, We will consider the Pomps. And

Secondly, The Vanity of this wicked World.

And, First, As to Pomps, these as they were part of the Pagan Idolatries: So
they were what the Primitive Christians were more particularly concerned to
Renounce. But however, since the same Renunciation of the Pomps of this World,
is still retained in our Church, though the very same things, which were at first
meant thereby, are perhaps become Obsolete, and out of Use in Christendom: And
yet it is not to be supposed, but that our Church had respect to something
still in Use in the Christian World, as fit to be Renounced, under that Title,
by every Disciple of JESUS: I shall therefore, together with a short Account of
the Meaning of Pomps, in the Sense they were Renounced by the Primitive
Christians, take care, especially to show you, what amongst us is most
Analogous to the ancient Heathenish Pomps, and bears such a near Resemblance to
'em, as to render these, our modern Pomps, fit also to be Renounced by every
Christian.

And, First, I. Thereby were anciently meant those pompous Spectacles, Plays,
and Scenical Representations exhibited in the Roman Theaters.
By Pomps were anciently meant (in the Opinion of our Learned and Excellent Dr.
Hammond) those Pompous Shows and Spectacles exhibited by the Emperors, and
Great Men of Rome, in the Roman Theaters, wherein Multitudes of Captive
Wretches were put to slay one another in their Sword-Plays, for the Diversion
of the People. And indeed it is not unlikely, that thereby may be meant, not
only those Bloody Sword-Plays, but all those Scenical Representations and Plays
whatever, acted in Memory of their false Gods, upon their Great Festivals,
which were sometimes so very Lewd and Impious, (for Instance, those which were
acted in Honor of Flora) that the People of Rome were ashamed to proceed in
'em, Valor. Maxim. Lib. 2. Cap. 8.
whilst Cato, a Person of Renowned Virtue amongst 'em, was present in the
Theater. They were also wonderfully Pompous and the Scenes Magnificent, the
greatest Grandees of Rome appearing at 'em, and having their proper Seats, or
Boxes, appropriated to each Order and Rank of Great Men, according to their
Degrees and Qualities. And here also very likely it was, that the Lewd Crew of
both Sexes met together to make their Assignations; for near to the Circus and
Theater, there were those Stews, where they withdrew to act their vile
Abominations.

Our Modern Plays no less Inferior to 'em in Impiety, than in Pompousness.
And now, that which Approaches in these our Days, nearest to those sort of
Heathenish Pomps, and which in Pompousness and Magnificence of Scene, are not
much Inferior to them, are those Profane and Lewd Plays, Acted in our Public
Play Houses, where, for ought I know, more Souls are now Murdered, than in the
former were Bodies; more Profaneness uttered, and more Lewd Assignations made,
than at the Pagan Theaters: And how infinitely unfit then is it, that those
kind of Diversions should be suffered in a Christian State, or that Persons,
professing Christianity, should be permitted to go near 'em? The Primitive
Fathers looked upon the Theaters and Play Houses, as no other than the Devil's
Territories, insomuch, that it happening once, that when a Christian being
prompted by Curiosity, to be present at the Spectacles therein, was possessed by
the Devil, the Father was not at all Startle'd at it, but readily owned, that
Satan had a Right to take that Person Captive, whom he found within his own
Precincts. And if those, who frequent our Modern Play Houses, Est nihil omnino
damnosius, quam Spectaculis essidere, quando per Voluptatem facilius and
proclivlus obrepant vitia. Quid me existimas dicere? Avarior, Ambitiosior,
Luxuriosior, imo vero Crudelior, and Inhumanior redeo. Coel. Rhodi. Ant. Lib.
Octa. c. 7.
do generally return thence possessed with a Spirit of Profaneness, Lust, or
Vanity, it is but what may reasonably be expected, for though all Evil
Conversation is Infectious; yet Vice does then most easily Insinuate it self
into our Dispositions, and Flies to the very Heart, when the Poison is mixed
with Pleasure, Wit, and Smartness of Conceit.

And having such a malignant Influence upon Faith, and Manners, ought never to
be frequented by Christians.
And now, since it is Universally agreed amongst all serious Persons, that a
more Irreligious Spirit did never Reign upon any Theater, than has in this last
Age in our Modern Play Houses: Since (as is the general Complaint) in these
Houses Piety is so strangely Ridiculed, the Holy and Reverend Name of God
Profaned, and his Glory and Interest rendered so Contemptible and Vile: Since
the Youth especially of our Nation, are so allured hereby into the Love of, and
Delight in Idleness, excessive Vanity, Revelings, Luxury, Wantonness,
Lasciviousness, Whoredoms, and such Debaucheries by Oaths, Looseness of
Conversation, and corrupt Atheistical Principles: Since our Gentlemen are here
taught to Deride Religion, to Dissolve in Luxury, to Abandon themselves to
their Pleasures, to be Debauchers of Women, to be Profuse and Extravagant in
their Expenses, and to be entirely Libertines: Since the Young Ladies of our
Nation, are here thoroughly Instructed in Intrigues and Assignations, to Scoff
at the prudent Reservedness and Modesty of the best of their Sex, to despise
the wise Instructions of their Parents and Guardians, to be Disobedient to
their Authority, and at last, without their Knowledge, or Consent, to Marry
themselves to some loose, or lewd Libertine: And indeed since the Minds and
Manners of the Great Ones especially, of both Sexes, are thereby so foully
Corrupted, and their Affections so sadly alienated from the Love of God and
Goodness: All these things considered, 'twere greatly to be wished, our
Play Houses were totally suppressed. However, in the mean time, I think it
concerns all, that will be secure from ever Apostatizing from the Faith of
Christ, and a Religious Life, so far to Reject these our modern Pomps, as never
to Enter within those Houses, where these Plays are acted.

Secondly, By Pomps, II. By Pomps in the Sense of the Ancients were meant, the
solemn Processions of the Heathens in Honor of their Gods.
in the Sense of the Ancients (as some do think) are meant the Solemn
Processions of the Heathens, wherein they carried the Images of their Gods,
through the Streets of the City, in a most Pompous manner, all the Priests,
Magistrates, and People of Rome, as Tertullian does represent it, Attending and
Paying their Veneration toward them.

And answerably to these, without the least straining of the meaning, in the
present State of the Church, may be understood, those Idolatrous Processions
amongst the Papists; where sometimes the Images of the Saints, sometimes the
Host, The Idolatrous Processions of the Papists, in honor of the Saints,
answerable to these;
is carried in the same Solemn manner, as among the Pagans, were the Images of
their Gods: And the like Adoration and Worship required from all, who
accompany, or accidentally fall amongst 'em, out of Curiosity to observe their
Vanities. And as amongst the Ancients, those were Censured as Partakers with
the Heathen in their Idolatry, who went along with them, or were public
Spectators of 'em, as thereby signifying to the Eyes of Men, their Allowance
and Approbation thereof, and of the Idolatry they contained; and were certain
to be cast out of the Communion of the Church for the same: And must not
therefore be joined in.
So those Protestant Gentlemen, who Traveling into Foreign Countries, out of
Curiosity to observe the Popish Vanities, shall Voluntarily appear amongst the
Train accompanying them, cannot be thought more Favorably of. And if through
Force they are Compelled to join in the Adoration of those Images, and shall
rather comply, than suffer, they are wanting in Discharging that great Duty of
Confessing of Christ, which is so strictly required at our Hands, as ever we
expect to have him Confess us before God, and his Holy Angels.

Thirdly, By Pomps may be meant reductively, III. By Pomps Reductively, may be
meant the Revels and Drunken Riots of our Youth at Wakes and Festivals.
all those Revels and Riotous Meetings of Youth, whereby our Great Festivals
Piously instituted by the Church, to be kept with Joyful Thanksgivings to God,
for his singular Favors vouchsafed to the World, as at such Times, are so
sadly Profaned by Drunkenness, lewd Songs and Ballads, profane and wanton
Discourse, and the like. The Generality of our common People, seem to apprehend
nothing Spiritual in the Great Feasts of Christmas, Easter, and Whitsuntide.
And a Holyday is with them, the Profanest Day in the Year. But I will be bold
to assert, with the Learned Dr. Hammond, that besides these other Senses of the
Word Pomps; All the sinful Courses that are used by Men in their Times of
Jollity and Festivity, the Luxury, and Riot, and unlawful Gaming; and all Kind
of Excesses (which are but a Copying out the Heathen Bacchanals) are Pomps to
be Renounced by every Christian. All Riot and Excess, lewd and wanton Actions,
and Discourses are Sins, and that far greater, and more punishable in
Christians, than in Others; particularly than in Jews, whose Promises of an
Earthly Plenty are not so contrary and irreconcilable with Corporal Excesses,
as are the spiritual Joys, that are the Christian's eminent Portion under
Promise. And therefore these are turned out of the World by Christ, and by him
transformed and changed into spiritual Celebrations, blessing and praising God,
into Feasts of Charity, and sober Hospitality, and Bounty to the Poor, instead
of those outward, costly vain Pomps, which the Eye of the World is so pleased
with.

These to be Abstained from.
And therefore, as I would advise you to be little fond of Wakes, and such like
Meetings of Promiscuous Company, where little Good, Quacunque ex causa fuerint
producti Primo, nil est perniciosius morum Integritati. Quippe turba omnis
utique animo gravis and noxia; nec enim quos extulisti mores unquam refers;
nemo non rubiginis aliquid aut imprimit, aut Nescientibus allinit, Coel.
Rhodgi. Lib. Octav. c. 7.
and a great deal of Ill is commonly learnt: So especially, let me Entreat you,
never to take into your Hands, much less to learn those wanton Ballads by
Heart, which do insensibly convey the Poison of ill Morals into the Soul, and
such a dis-relish to spiritual Thoughts and Exercises, as can many times be
never wore off. And so much for the Pomps of the World.

Secondly, And as the Pomps, so you are also to Renounce and Reject the Vanity
of this World. Vanity of the World, What?
And what indeed that does mean, it is not so hard to guess, for we have it
every Day before our Eyes. And that which I do suppose is chiefly thereby
meant, are all Affectation of Grandeur and Greatness in sumptuous Houses, rich
Furniture, uppermost Places, Titles of Respect, and costly Apparel. True it is,
these things are not in themselves purely and absolutely Unlawful, but may be
enjoyed without Sin, by those who are lawfully possessed of 'em. Nevertheless
these have an Aptness in them, more than most other things of the World, to
corrupt Men's Minds, and to Alienate their Affections from the Love of God, and
Goodness: However the Affectation of 'em is undoubtedly a Sinful Vanity to be
Renounced by every Christian. And such vain Affectation does appear in these
Cases following:

I. When Persons out-goe their Ability, in Building and Furniture.
First, As to sumptuous Houses, and rich Furniture, when Persons out-goe their
Ability in compassing those things, to the Ruin, or great Prejudice of their
Families and Posterity; and do Build and Buy, not paying the Labourer, and the
Tradesman; and when with all their Care to Beautify and Adorn their own Houses,
they care not how Ruinous and Indecent the Houses of God do lie. Thus to affect
Sumptuousness, I say, is a sinful Vanity. Thus the Prophet Jeremy, 22.13, 14.
pronounces a Woe unto him that builds his House by Unrighteousness, and his
Chambers by Wrong, that uses his Neighbors Service without Wages, and gives
him not for his Work; that says, I will build me a wide House, and large
Chambers, and cutteth him out Windows, and it is cieled with Cedar, and painted
with Vermilion. And as for those who build, and deck, and trim up their own
Houses, and suffer God's House to be in Ruin and Decay, to lie uncomely and
nastily, they had best to consider how ill God will take it, as appears from
that of Hag. 1.4. Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in the cieled Houses, and
this House lie wast? And in the Verses following, he denounces a Consumption
on all they have, for such Impiety. So sinful a thing is the vain Affectation
of sumptuous Houses, and rich Furniture, when joined to the Prejudice of
others, and the Contempt of God, and so fit therefore to be Renounced by every
Christian.

Secondly, II. It appears in striving for Precedence.
And so likewise is he vain Affectation of the Uppermost Places. This is a
Vanity, that is perhaps more usual amongst the lowest Rank of People, (which
One would least expect) than those of Birth and Quality, though it is in none so
unseemly as in them. I have with Admiration beheld Farmers, nay, poor Tenants,
nay, Labourer's Wives, swell till they almost burst with Envy, at their
Neighbor's Stepping before, or Sitting above 'em; and even in the House of
God, so expressly contrary to our Savior's Rule, Not to seek the chief Seats in
the Synagogues: I have known 'em strive for the uppermost Places, and to be
whole Months, nay, Years afterward out of Charity, and that almost beyond
Reconciliation, merely upon the account of Precedence: A thing so unseemly, and
so odious a piece of Vanity, especially in those of lower Rank, that I can
hardly forbear to express my self with Indignation concerning it; but I shall
only advise you in the Words of our Savior, Mark 12.38, 39. to beware of
imitating the Scribes and Pharisees (the worst Patterns you can follow) Who
love the chief Seats in the Synagogues, and the uppermost Rooms at Feasts. It
is a Pride and Vanity fit only for Scribes and Pharisees, the Proudest Men on
Earth, but infinitely unbecoming the Disciples of the Meek and Humble JESUS,
who when they strive for Place, it must be, not to take, but to give it, In
Honor preferring one another, Romans 12.10.

Thirdly, Again of like Nature to this last Piece of Vanity, III. In affecting
Titles above ones Quality, and to be esteemed Virtuous above ones Desert.
is the Ambition, and vain Affectation of Titles of Respect and Honor above
ones Quality and Degree; and the Desire to be esteemed by others more Virtuous
and Good, than we really are in our selves. The meanest Persons that are now
adays, will take it ill, if they have not those Titles of Respect given them,
which do not at all belong to them, and for Distinction sake, are due to those
above 'em. And even Good Men, who can heartily own, and sorrowfully bewail in
their Confessions to God, that they are vile Sinners, will hardly endure that
others should say so, or think so ill of 'em. But so far should we be from
affecting such Respects, as are above our Merit, that we should not
over-eagerly desire those that are deserved, and due to us; nor must we Plume
and Pride our selves when we have 'em. To do otherwise proceeds from an
Ambition, which ill-becomes the Disciple of Him, that was so exceeding Lowly,
Who, though he was Lord of all, yet came here into the World, not to be Ministered
unto, but to Minister, Matthew. 20.28. And we should not be angry with others,
that do think, or speak ill of us, but at our selves, that we deserve to be so
thought, or spoke of. And herein also we have our Blessed Savior for our
Example, who though He did no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth, when he
was Reviled, Reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2.22, 23.

Fourthly, IV. In the vain Affectation of costly Apparel and Ornaments: As
The last Instance of sinful Vanity does appear in the Affectation of costly
Apparel and Ornaments, when Persons exceed what becomes their Rank and Degree
in what they wear; when they are proud of their Clothes and Ornaments; when
they Adorn themselves to undue Ends and Purposes; and lastly, when they spend
too much Time, and at unfitting Seasons therein.

I. When Persons exceed what becomes their Rank, and Degree, in what they wear.
First, As for the use of costly Ornaments, for Distinction sake, it seems to be
intimated by our Savior, when he says, that Those who wear soft Raiment, are
in Kings Houses, Matthew. 11.8. And no doubt, as Honor is to be paid to whom
Honor is due, so a Distinction in Habits, according to the Dignity and Quality
of Persons is allowable and useful; but this Distinction is quite lost, when
Persons of lower Rank do strive to be seen as early in a new Dress, and as Rich
in their Attire, as those that are above 'em.

II. When they are proud of their Ornaments.
Secondly, And the Vanity is Intolerable, when Persons of either Sex, of what
Rank or Quality soever they be, grow proud of their Dress, so as to be pufft up
in their own Minds on so mean an account; and Insolent, so as to despise
others, for want of the like; as if outward Ornaments can add any thing to real
and inward Worth: When alas! we every Day behold many an ignorant, empty,
stupid Wretch; and many a vicious Beast, flutter in a gaudy Garb, when those
Minds, that are best adorned with Wisdom and Virtue, choose but plain and mean
Apparel. But such vain Self-admirers would do well to consider, how ill it
fared with Herod, when Arrayed in his Royal Apparel, and receiving the profane
Applauses of the gazing Crowd, he forgot himself, And gave not the Glory to
God, as you may see, Acts 12.21, 22, 23. He was eaten up with Worms; and if
those Worms were Lice, it was a Punishment exactly suited to his Pride.

III. When they Adorn themselves to undue Ends and Purposes.
Thirdly, But the Vanity of those is most odious in the sight both of God, and
Man, who Deck themselves to inflame Lust in the Beholders, and like Her
mentioned, Prove. 7.10. Meet men in the Attire of an Harlot. It is a kind of
Adultery, says the Excellent Hammond, in that Woman, who not only Exposes and
Prostitutes her self to the Eyes of Men, but so Dresses, and sets her self out
to that End she may be thus Looked upon, and call to her self the Eyes of all
Men. If she strike not, wound not others, she shall yet be Punished; for she
has mixed the Potion, prepared the Poison, though she has not given the Cup to
Drink: Yes, and has done that too, though none be found, that will Drink of it.
It seems, there is a piece of Christian Chastity required of Women in this
Kind, that is not generally thought on, but would be carefully practiced, if
all of the Female Sex would seriously read over, and consider that admirable
Place in Isaiah 3. describing the Vanity and Wickedness of Women in this
respect, and the anger of God toward 'em for it. It is a Character of Women's
Vanity too long here to give you, but begins at the 16th Verse of the 3d
Chapter, ending at the 25th. and you had best read it at your Leisure, and you
cannot too often meditate upon it. Our Church is pleased to Condescend in one
of her Homilies, to consider the Excuses that such make, who paint their Faces,
and deck themselves in Gay Apparel, and Dress immodestly, That it is to please
their Husbands, to delight his Eyes, and retain his Love toward them; but she
plainly tells them, That thereby they go about to please others, rather than
their Husbands; that it is to provoke others to Tempt 'em, to deceive their
Souls, by the Bait of such Pomp and Pride, and that they make of the indecent
Apparel of the Body, the Devil's Net, to catch the Souls of them, which behold
'em.

But Fourthly, and Lastly, Lastly, when they spend too much Time, and at
unfitting Seasons therein.
the Pride and Vanity of those is Sacrilegious, who spend so much of their Time
in this weighty Business every Morning, that they have not room to say their
Prayers; nay, who are so long and critical in Decking themselves on the Lord's
Day, that the Service of God is almost over before they can force themselves
from their Glass: Such, I say, are plainly Sacrilegious in Robbing God of his
Portion of Time, and employing that in setting forth their own Glory, which
should be wholly spent to his Honor. And they are most injurious to their own
Souls in Decking their Carcasses with outward Ornaments, when they should be
Adorning their Souls with inward and Divine Graces. But alas! they that are
much occupied, says our Homily, in caring for things pertaining to the Body,
are most commonly negligent and careless in matters that concern the Soul.

Well: But after all I am sensible, I have fallen upon as Nice a Subject as any
can be Handled, there being Nothing wherein the World will, with so much
Uneasiness bear a Contradiction, as in this Point of its Vanities, and
especially in the matter of Apparel: For whilst some are so strait-lac'd, as to
Censure every thing, that is ornamental in our way of living; and so many
others, on the contrary, are so strangely Profuse to a high degree of Vanity,
it is hard to determine this case, so as not incur the Prejudice of one, or
other. I will therefore choose to give, in the Words of the Learned Dr.
Hammond, the true State of this matter, showing what Allowances, without
imputation of Vanity, may be granted in the Use of Ornamentals; and how far, on
the other side, they are to be Renounced by you.

And herein this Great Father of our Church gives this prudent Advice,

That none go above what the Soberer and Graver sort of his Quality and
Condition do use; that they Abstain, as much as may be, from the frequent
Changing and Inventing of Fashions, from the being earliest in every New Dress,
or from Singularity of Apparel, used on purpose, and on that Affectation,
because it is Singular; for all these seem so far to Betray the sinful
Principle, that though it is not reasonable, for one Man to judge another, for
every thing of this nature; yet it will be fit for all, that do thus, to
examine and charge it upon themselves, and if they cannot perfectly clear
themselves from that evil Principle, or worse End, then to remember, that this
is it, which they Renounced in their Baptism.

The short is this, Decency is that, he says, Decency according to what is
suitable to Age, Sex, or Quality, the Rule in this Case.
which must give Limits to Attires: This Decency is to be taken from that,
which is Usual and Customary amongst those, with whom we Live, and is often
varied by Change of Times, and of the Condition of the Age, or Dignity of each
Person (that being Comely for one Age, and Sex, and Quality of Persons, which
is not for another:) And He, or She, that rests contented with those ways of
Adorning themselves, which are most usual among the more Sober and Grave of
their Age and Quality, are not to be judged guilty of the Breach of this Vow;
though there are perhaps some Things in their Attire, Gold, Jewels, and the like,
which might be thought to own this Title of Pomps and Vanities, as those words
signify Bravery and Superfluity.

Nevertheless the Truth is, (as he goes on) it were to be wished, that Men and
Women of the highest Quality, would choose to Distinguish themselves from
others, rather by that Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit (commended to the
weaker Sex, by St. Peter, as a far more amiable Ornament, than that of
Apparel;) and make show of their Wealth, by those more profitable, beneficial
Expenses, for the supply of the Wants of others. And no doubt, this would
contribute more to their own Ends, (if they be the Aims of Christians) and
would set them out more in the Opinion of all wise and good Persons. But this
being affirmed, will not conclude the Use of any of those Ornaments, which are
agreeable to Time, and Place, and Callings, to be Sinful, or of the Number of
those Vanities, that are to be Renounced in our Baptism.

THE XX. Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works;
the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh.
IN the Explication of these Words, I have fully laid before you the Stratagems
and Wiles of Satan, and the various Temptations also wherewith the World does
assault us, to withdraw us from God, and to make us break our Covenant with
him. And it only remains to complete this Account of our Spiritual Warfare, to
consider the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and to know in what Sense, and how far
we are also to Renounce and Resist them.

And indeed this is a most Material and Important Part of Christian Knowledge.
To Know our selves, To know our selves, especially our natural Imperfection, a
most useful part of Knowledge.
is next in Dignity and Usefulness to the Knowledge of God himself. And if we
did but distinctly Know the Imperfection and Weaknesses of our Corrupted
Nature, and of all the Powers and Faculties within us; neither the whole World
with all its formidable Host of Temptations, nor Satan himself Marshalling and
managing of 'em against us, with all the Malice and Cunning he is Master of,
would be in much danger of doing us hurt. For though our Case is that of a
Besieged Fort, to take which there are not only a numerous Army, under the
Conduct of a wary General, who narrowly views every part of us, and orders the
Attack where he finds us weakest; but what is worse, the whole Fabric of our
Corrupted Nature is extremely decayed; and all the Faculties and Powers
thereof, are but so many Traitors within us, ready to deliver us up to our
Enemies. Yet however in knowing the Weakness of our Nature, we may be able to
repair its Decays; and by knowing also the Treachery of all its Faculties, we
shall successfully prevent their delivering of us up to our Adversaries: And
therefore, for the more full Discovery of so useful and important a Subject to
you,

1. I will show you what is meant by the Flesh.

2. What by the sinful Lusts of the Flesh.

3. What by ALL the sinful Lusts of the Flesh; and, together with each of
these, will also declare unto you in what Sense, and how far we are to Renounce
the Flesh, and its sinful Lusts. And,

The Flesh variously expressed.
First, Let us enquire what is meant by the Flesh, and in what sense, and how
far we are to Renounce the Flesh. And in order to this, we are to consider,
that as the Knowledge of things does much depend upon understanding those
Phrases whereby they are usually expressed; so there are very many Words in the
Holy Writings, of like Meaning and Importance with this of the Flesh. And
indeed there is not any one thing so variously expressed in the Holy Scriptures,
as this is. It is called the Old Man, as to denote the Antiquity of this
Corruption, and from whom it descended, even from Adam, the first Father of us
all; so to signify that it has universally infected the whole Race of Mankind.
It is called the Natural Man, both because this Corruption over-spreadeth the
whole Nature, and because it is become Natural to Men in this Corrupt State to
Sin. It is called the Flesh, because the very Soul in a Man, and all its
Faculties, are Carnal and Sensual. And Lastly, it is termed Evil Concupiscence,
because this Fleshly Nature of ours Lusts after Evil Things. And so much for
the meaning of the Word Flesh, and its synonimous Phrases.

What Is meant by the Flesh.
And now, by the help of what has been said, we may form this account of the
Flesh, That it is the whole Unregenerate Nature of Man, as spoiled as to its
Original Frame and Constitution, and despoiled of that Image of God, consisting
in the Perfection, Order, and Purity of all his Faculties, whereby he was
Originally making toward GOD, his Chief End and Happiness. And it is that
Corruption of this his Nature and Faculties, whereby he is inordinately
Converted in all the Tendencies of Soul and Body, and of all the Faculties and
Powers thereof toward the Creature.

1. I say by the Flesh, is meant the whole Unregenerate Nature of Man; not only
the Body, I. The whole Unregenerate Nature of Man, Soul and Body.
but also the Soul; not only the Inferior Powers, as the Affections, Lusts and
Appetites; but also the Superior Faculties, as the Understanding, Conscience,
and the Will. For it is not only said, Tit. 1.15. That the Mind and Conscience
is defiled; but the Mind, as well as the Body, is said to be Fleshly, Col.
2.18. and Carnal, Romans 8.7. and, Gal. 5.20. we find Hatred, Variance,
Emulations, Wrath, Seditions, Heresies, reckoned amongst the Works of the
Flesh, though they are Sins that have their residence in the Mind only: So that
the whole Man, as he is by Nature, and all the Faculties of his Soul as well as
Body, as they are unregenerate, and till they are sanctified by the Spirit and
Grace of God, come under this one Title of the Flesh. But,

2. The Flesh is the whole Man; not as he was Created by God, but as he is now
in the State of Corrupted Nature. II. The whole Man not as Created by God, but
as he is now in the State of Corrupted Nature.
No, Humane Nature, as it came out of God's Hands, was of another Frame and
Constitution to what it appears to be now in its Natural State and Condition.
God made Man upright, but he sought out many Inventions, Eccl. 7.24. He has
found out many ways to crook and bend down toward the Earth that Upright
Nature which God once gave him.

3. Then the Flesh is the whole Unregenerate Nature of Man, as it is spoiled as
to its Original Frame and Constitution, and as it is inordinately converted in
all the Tendencies of Soul and Body, and of all the Faculties and Powers
thereof, toward the Creature. III. As spoiled in his Original Frame and
Constitution, as despoiled of the Image of God, and as inordinately tending
toward the Creature.
In order to the more perfect Understanding of which Matter, we must in the
first place enquire what was the Original Frame and Constitution of Man: In
what the Image of God, wherein he was created at first, consisted; and how that
in all the Faculties and Powers of Soul and Body, his whole Bent and
Inclinations were originally Heavenward; for by thus comparing the upright
Nature of Man, as it was at first Created, with what it now is in this State of
Corruption, we shall be able clearly to apprehend what is meant by the Flesh,
the important Subject of our present Enquiry.

And now as to the Original Frame and Constitution of our Nature wherein God
made us, it seems, to have been this. The Original Frame and Constitution, of
Humane Nature, what.
He gave Man a Faculty of Understanding, whereby he could Contemplate upon, and
Know in an Extraordinary measure, the wonderful Nature and Perfections of his
Creator! His amazing Works of Creation! His surprising Works of Providence! and
thereby was able to discover the Good and Evil in any Objects that were
presented to him. Next, he placed in his Bosom another wonderful Faculty,
called Conscience; which is the practical Judgment in every Man, whereby his
own Mind, out of that vast Treasure of useful Knowledge, did dictate to him
what was Good, and to be chosen; what was Evil, and to be refused by him; and
upon which Choice of Good, and Rejecting of Evil, its Office was to give its
Testimony of Well-done, to the Good and Faithful Servant, to his unspeakable
Comfort and Satisfaction. Next, in the Upright Nature of Man, as it bore upon
it the Image and Likeness of God, there was placed a Will, which of it self is
a blind Faculty, and chooses and refuses, according to the Information of
others. And in the State of Innocence, it was entirely complying with the
Dictates of Reason and Conscience. And to descend from the Rational to the
Inferior and Bodily Powers: It was the Divine Goodness did implant in our
Natures those, which we call the Passions and Affections in a Man; which are
principally these, Admiration, Love, and Hatred. And it was to very excellent
Purposes that these were given us. The use of Admiration was, as to things
which should offer themselves to our Approbation; if Good, that we might put a
true value upon them according to their Worth; if Bad, that we might despise
'em, according to the Vanity and Evil we should find in 'em. And as to the two
other principal Passions of Love and Hatred, God's design in implanting in our
Hearts the former, was to move and stir us up with Vigor and Activity, to
pursue whatever we should find good and convenient to us. And the Passion of
Hatred was put into our Natures, that we might avoid on the contrary whatever
might be found hurtful and offensive. And it was no other than the Divine
Goodness, which in the Nature of Man did place certain Appetites and Lusts.
Every particular Man had, even at his first Creation, Appetites to Food and
Sustenance, in order to preserve his own Being in Life and Health. And
Cupidity, or the Inclinations of the Sex to each other, was in order to the
Multiplication of Mankind.

This now was the Original Frame and Constitution of Man. The Image of God,
wherein Man was at first Created, what.
And in the Perfection, Order, and Purity of all the Faculties and Powers of
Soul and Body, according to this Original Frame and Constitution, did the Image
of God, in which he was at first Created, consist. So long as the whole Nature
of Man was perfect in all parts, the Understanding quick in discerning
momentous and weighty Truths, the Conscience faithful in Dictating Right ways,
the Will entirely Obedient to the Directions of Conscience and Reason, so long
as the Affections were only placed upon worthy Objects, and the Lusts and
Appetites were always under the Power and Government of Right Reason; so long
as Man remained in this State, the Image of God continued unsullied.

The Bent and Inclination of the Soul toward God, what.
And so long as he continued thus, it is plain also, that the whole Bent and
Inclination of the Soul was toward God, that to him it did point in all its
Motions, and did fix upon him as the End of all its Actions; and did love him
with the intensest degrees of Affection. And that even the Bodily Part was
perfectly compliant with the Soul in serving it entirely and solely to that
End. So that thus you see what was the Original Frame and Constitution of Man:
In what the Image of God, wherein he was created at first, consisted: And that
in all the Faculties and Powers of Soul and Body, his whole Bent and
Inclinations were Heavenward.

But now in the Unregenerate Nature all this Excellent Frame and Constitution
is broken: This Image of God is defaced; and all the Faculties and Powers of
Soul and Body, instead of inclining toward, and Centring upon God and Heavenly
Things, tend downwards toward the Creature.

1. In the Unregenerate Nature, I say; That Excellent Frame and Constitution,
wherein Man was Originally Created, is now broken: I. In the Unregenerate
Nature of the Original Frame and Constitution of Man, wherein he was Created,
is broken.
So that instead of that Harmonious Subordination of the inferior Faculties to
the Superior; instead of the Will's being subject to the Dictates of the
Understanding, and the Affections being subject to the Commands and Sovereignty
of the Will, and the Lusts and Appetites being Obedient to Right Reason, and a
well-inform'd Conscience; instead of this, the whole Order and Frame of Humane
Nature is now turned upside down: The Affections, Lusts and Appetites do now
Reign, and Reason and Conscience are dragged after them in miserable Slavery.
And as to the Will of an Unregenerate Man, the most that it can do, is not
without Reluctance and Regret, to comply with the Temptations of the Senses;
like him in St. Paul, I know that in me, that is, in my Flesh, dwells no good
thing; for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good, I
find not; for the Good that I would, I do not; but the Evil which I would not,
that I do, Romans 7.18, 19. The best that can be supposed of the Unregenerate Man
is this, that after the Preaching of the Laws of God to him, and a Divine Light
has been let thereby into his Understanding, he does approve in his own Mind of
the Ways of God as most excellent. Such was he, in St. Paul, Romans 7.22. I
delight in the Law of God after the inward Man; that is, according to the
Understanding or Superior Faculty, contrary to the carnal or bodily part of
him; such a one does approve of what the Laws of God do prescribe. But then
alas he must own, that he sees another Law in his Members, warring against the
Law of his Mind, and bringing him into Captivity to the Law of Sin, which is in
his Members, v. 23. So that the State of an Unregenerate Man is a State of mere
Confusion, Disorder, and Rebellion, the Affections, Lusts and Appetites, rising
up in Opposition to the Dictates of the Mind and Conscience: And it is a State
of mere Impotency and Weakness, the Mind and Conscience being so far unable to
govern the Affections, Lusts and Appetites, that these latter get the better of
the day, carry the Mind and Reason captive, and force it slavishly to do what
the Flesh requires to have done by it, so exceedingly spoiled, and broken in
the Unregenerate Nature, is all that excellent Frame and Constitution wherein
Man was at first created.

2. And consequently then, the Image of God, wherein Man was at first Created,
must needs be miserably defaced II. The Image of God, wherein he was first
Created, defaced.
in a State of Unregeneracy. For why? In that excellent Perfection and Order,
which appeared in the Frame and Constitution of Humane Nature it was, that
those lively Strokes of the Divine Power, Wisdom and Goodness, were plainly
visible. But as a misshapen and monstrous Picture, in which there is nothing of
Regularity and good Feature, cannot without Injury be said to Resemble some
Excellent and Goodly Personage; so neither can the defaced and deformed Nature
of an Unregenerate Man be said to be made after the Likeness of God. Some faint
and remote Resemblances, true it is, do still remain under all those
Defacements; even as in the Ruins of a stately Palace, there may appear
something of admirable Architecture. There is still remaining in the most
Corrupt Nature; True it is; that part of the Image of God which consisted in
those things which are Essential to Man, as Man, that is, the Soul, and all its
Faculties of Understanding, Will, and Affections, these do still remain the
same for Substance as they were before. But the Image of God as it consists in
our Moral Perfections; viz. in the Order and good Harmony of the several
Faculties of humane Nature, with respect one to another, and in that Perfection
which did Originally belong to each single Faculty; The Image of God, I say in
this respect, is miserably defaced in the Natural Man.

As to the good Harmony of the several Faculties and Powers of Humane Nature,
you have already seen how that is spoiled. And as to the Perfection which
should be in every one of these several Faculties, that in an Unregenerate Man
is very little. Alas in his Understanding, what is there now but Blindness and
Darkness? What in his Will, but Stubborness and Perverseness? What in his
Affections, but Violence and Disorder? And what in his Lusts and Appetites, but
Sensuality and Irregularity? So sadly is the whole Nature of the Unregenerate
Man Corrupted, so that little or nothing of the Image of God does now remain in
him.

But, Lastly, above all, Man in his Unregenerate Nature is now miserably
altered from what he was; in that all the Faculties and Powers of Soul and
Body, instead of inclining toward, and Centring upon God and Heavenly Things,
tend downwards toward the Creature. Lastly, the Tendency of all the Faculties,
both of Soul and Body, are toward the Creature.
As to the Appetites and Desires in the Unregenerate, they are in a manner
wholly sensual, and are hardly ever to be satisfied with what gratifies the
Senses. The Affections also are wholly set upon worldly Enjoyments, and the
Will does also prefer and choose such far before Spiritual Consolations. And
what is more, in the Unregenerate Man, the very Mind and Conscience is defiled,
Tit. 1.15. And they who are after the Flesh, do mind the things of the Flesh,
Romans 8.5. do mind Earthly Things, Phil. 3.14. Their whole Thoughts and
Contrivances, their Meditations and Purposes are wholly upon those poor and
paltry Vanities of this World, and are altogether taken up in making Provisions
for the Flesh, and their Hearts and Affections cling closely and solely to the
Earth. Hence it is said of such, that they live after the Flesh, Romans 8.13. and
that they walk after the Flesh, 2 Pet. 2.10. they are so wholly addicted to
Fleshly and Worldly Things. And thus you see what is meant by the Flesh.

And now it is time to consider in what Sense, and how far we must Renounce the
Flesh. And, 1. The Flesh must be Renounced by our being Renewed in the whole
Frame and Constitution of our Nature after the Image of God. I. To Renounce the
Flesh, is to be renewed in the whole Frame and Constitution of our Nature after
the Image of God.
Thus we are commanded, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. to put off, concerning the former
Conversation, the Old Man, which is corrupt, according to the deceitful Lusts,
and to be Renewed in the Spirit of our Minds; and to put on that New Man, which
after God is Created in Righteousness and true Holiness. So that the whole
Corrupt Nature must be Restored, as near as it can, to its first Constitution,
and that Divine Likeness wherewith it was then stamped; That is, the Mind, which
is now covered with Darkness and Ignorance, must be Enlightened with true and
practical Knowledge: Ye have put on the New Man, which is Renewed in Knowledge,
after the Image of him that Created him, Col. 3.10. The Will, which is now
obstinately bent against the Ways of Righteousness, must be made compliant with
God's Will: The Affections, which are now set upon Worldly Things, must be
called off from these Earthly Vanities, and fixed upon Spiritual and Heavenly
Objects. And Lastly, the Lusts and Appetites, which in the State of Nature are
continually Rebelling against the Mind, must be Reduced to their Original
Subjection to Right Reason, which is called Crucifying of the Flesh with its
Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5.24. and mortifying our Earthly Members, Col. 3.5.
Thus must the whole Corrupt Nature be Restored, as near as it can, to its first
Constitution, and that Divine Likeness wherewith it was at first stamped.

The Image of God must be Restored as far as it can in this corrupt State.
Thus, I say, it must be Restored, as near as it can; for as long as we are in
this Mortal State, some Relics of Sin and Corruption will still remain within
us; so that even in the Regenerate Nature, The Flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are contrary the one to the
other, so that we cannot do the things that we would, Gal. 5.17. that is, we
cannot without the Resistance and Opposition of our Fleshly Nature, act in
Obedience to the Spiritual and Renewed Nature, so long as we are here on this
side the Grave; but the most Holy Persons that are, have their Graces allayed
with a mixture of Sin and Corruption. The most Universal Knowledge is not free
from Ignorance and Error; the Will, which is most complying with the Commands
of God, has sometimes its contrary Velleities, or Wouldings; the Affections
which are most Refined are sometimes Inordinate and Earthly; so that every
Faculty of our Nature, and every Action we do, have some mixture of Sin and
Frailty. In a word, we cannot attain whilst here on Earth, to these degrees of
Perfection wherein we were first Created.

It must be Renewed to a perfection of Parts, though not Degrees.
But the Image of God, which is restored to us in our Regeneration, though it have
not the Perfection of Degrees, yet it must indispensably have the Perfection of
Parts, as Divines do distinguish; that is, we must have an Universal
Inclination to all that is Holy, Just and Good, and an Universal Aversion from
all Sin. And we must have our selves actually adorned with all Divine Graces,
and Holy Dispositions; and we must actually forsake every known Sin: And then
though something of Humane Frailty will mix it self in the Exercise of all our
Virtues, yet through the Mercies of God the Father, in Christ his Son, it will
be graciously dispensed withal: So that thus you see, when the whole Nature of
Man in every part and faculty thereof is Changed, Repaired, and Renewed,
according to the Happy Constitution and Subordination of the several Faculties,
one to another, wherein Man was at first Created; and consequently when the
Divine Image, which is now defaced, is in some good measure restored; when thus
we shall have Put on the New Man, Ephesians. 4.24. Partake of the Divine Nature, 2
Pet. and Be conformed to the Image of his Son, Romans 8.29. then can we be truly
said to Renounce the Flesh.

2. To Renounce the Flesh, is to be Converted in the whole Bent and Inclination
of the Soul toward God. II. To Renounce the Flesh, is to be Converted in the
whole Bent and Inclination of the Soul toward God. Smith 's Select Disc. p.
374. 430.
This is the true Property of the Regenerate Nature to be exalted above all
Worldly Things, and to be carried out in Love and Affection toward God. The
Soul (says a Learned and Pious Author) is a more vigorous and puissant thing
when it is once Restored to the possession of its own Being, than to be bounded
within a narrow Prison of Sensual and Bodily Delights; but it will break forth
with the greatest Vehemence, and Ascend upwards toward Immortality. For it is
only true Religion that teaches and enables Men to die to this World, and to
all Earthly Things, and to rise above the Sphere of Sensual and Earthly
Pleasures, which darken the Mind and blind it, that it cannot enjoy the
brightness of Divine Light; so that whereas the Fleshly Mind never minds any
thing but Flesh, and never rises above the Outward Matter, but always creeps up
and down like Shadows upon the Surface of the Earth; and if it begin at any
time to make any faint Essays upwards, it presently finds it self laden with a
weight of Sensuality, which draws it down again; Holy and Religious Souls being
touched with an Inward Sense of the Divine Goodness and Beauty, are moved
swiftly after God, and as the Apostle expresses himself, forgetting those
things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before,
they press toward the Mark for the Prize of the high Calling of God in Christ
Jesus; that so they may attain to the Resurrection of the De^d.

In short therefore, whereas there is now a continual Conflict betwixt the
Flesh and the Spirit, the Flesh Lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the Flesh, we must never cease Mortifying and Subduing all the Motions
of Corrupt Nature tending downward toward the Creature, till they be brought
in Subjection to the Power and Influence of God's Holy Spirit, which alone can
lift up our Hearts and Affections to God and Heavenly Things.

THE XXI. Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works,
the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh.
IN order to the full Explication of these Words, the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh, The sinful Lusts of the Flesh, what.
Having already showed you, First, what is meant by the Flesh, and in what
Sense, and how far we must Renounce the Flesh.

2. I am now to give you in like manner the full Meaning and Importance of the
sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and to show you in what sense, and how far we are to
Renounce them.

And as by the Flesh is meant the whole Unregenerate Nature of Man, Soul as
well as Body in its State of Corruption, and as it acts contrary to the Holy
Will and Spirit of God; so proportionably by the sinful Lusts of the Flesh,
must be understood all the Faculties and Powers of this corrupted Nature, as
they carry us out to commit Sin, as well the Faculties of the Soul, the
Understanding and Will, as the Bodily Powers; viz. the Affections, Lusts and
Appetites.

These are all of 'em, in their own Nature, the Effects of God's Workmanship,
and were Pure as they came forth of his Hands: But ever since the Fall of Adam
they are woefully Corrupted, and there is none of these Faculties, or Powers,
either of Soul, or Body, but may be called a sinful Lust of the Flesh. Every
Faculty and Power of Soul and Body is properly enough termed a Lust, as it
Craves and Desires its Object. And they are all of 'em sinful Lusts of the
Flesh, just as the whole Unregenerate Nature was said to be Flesh; that is,
either First, as those several Faculties of the Soul do move downwards from God
and Heavenly Things, Immediately and Inordinately toward the Creatures: Or,
Secondly, as the Inferior and Bodily Powers, the Affections, Lusts, and
Appetites, do disorderly Rebel against the Superior Faculty of the
Understanding and Reason, and do carry the Will into Slavery to 'em. I will
take the whole Frame of this our depraved Nature in Pieces, that so viewing
that Corruption, which residing in every of the Faculties and Powers thereof,
renders all of 'em so many sinful Lusts of the Flesh, we may be better able to
Renounce each of those sinful and fleshly Lusts.

And First, The Sinful Lusts of the Fleshly Mind what.
Let us consider that Corruption which Resides in the Mind, and renders it
Fleshly, and consequently the Motions even of the Intellectual part of our
Nature, no better than Sinful Lusts of the Flesh. And our Understanding, alas,
which should be full of Divine Knowledge, such as may be a Lamp unto our Feet,
and a Light unto our Paths, is in the Unregenerate Man full of Vanity,
Ignorance of, and Prejudice against Divine Truths. The Unregenerate Man neither
understands nor seeks after God, Romans 3.11. He likes not to Retain God in his
Knowledge, or to consider any thing concerning him, but is vain in his
Imaginations, having his foolish heart darkened, Romans 1.21.28. Nay, the best
Habits of the Mind in the Unregenerate Man are Corrupt, having the
Understanding darkened, being Alienated from the Life of God, through the
Ignorance that is in them, Ephesians. 4.18. And hence it comes to pass, that whereas
the great and proper Appetite of the Mind is after Knowledge, an Appetite which
God has put into the Soul of Man, and so a thing Beautiful and Good: This very
desire of Knowledge becomes a sinful Lust of the Fleshly Mind in several Cases,
particularly in these following; viz. when either we misplace our Desires of
Knowledge upon wrong Objects, or when we do immoderately study to be
exquisitely skilled in Humane, though Lawful Arts and Sciences, to the Neglect
and Contempt of Divine Knowledge. And lastly, when out of Pride, Prejudice and
Contradiction to all sacred Truths, we set up our own Fleshly Imaginations and
Reasonings against the Spiritual Notions that are dictated to us. And
accordingly such our Appetites or Desires, even of Knowledge it self, must be
Renounced, as so many sinful Lusts of a Fleshly Mind.

And first we must Renounce the Desires of Knowing wrong Objects; that is, we
must not Gratify, but Mortify our Desires of Knowing such things, which are
either Hurtful to be known, I. When we are curious to to know things which are
either Hurtful to be Known,
or are not proper for Man to know. Now as to this we are to consider, that
there is a certain Distemper of Mind, called Curiosity, which as it is of like
Nature, so it is of full as hurtful and mischievous Effects to the Mind, as
that Distemper is to the Body, which stirs up Persons to eat Chalk, or Coals,
or Trash, or whatever affords either none at all, or a very ill Nourishment:
Such is the Curiosity of Knowing Evil, which was the thing that ruined our
first Parents, and afterward Solomon, and since him, many other Persons: Such
are they who have a great desire to taste those Pleasures which are in Sin, and
by tasting of 'em their Minds are defiled, and their Morals corrupted, and it
is seldom that they do ever after return to have a right Judgment of Good or
Evil. Thus hurtful is the Knowledge of some things, so that it is much better
to be Ignorant thereof, than to Know 'em.

Again there are others, whose Curiosity gives 'em a strange Itch to know
Hidden Things, such as are not proper for Man to know, Or not proper for Man to
know.
as the Decrees of Predestination, and the Counsels of God's Will, which is the
Ark that no mortal Eye ought to look into. And many are wonderfully Inquisitive
to learn the future Events of Kingdoms and States, and of their own and others
private Fortunes. And therefore it is, that they are so apt to give heed to
every pretended Prophecy; and though few are so very wicked, as to Consult Evil
Spirits themselves by Magical Arts, yet Multitudes will make no scruple to
Resort to Fortunetellers and Conjurers; and those that do consult 'em, or are
reputed to do, though it be an Impiety so severely threatened, Deuteronomy. 18.11, 12.
But all Curious Enquiries whatever into the Secrets of God's Providence are to
be Renounced by us Christians, as being the Gratifications only of a sinful
Curiosity. Secret things belong unto the Lord our God; but those things which
are Revealed, unto us and our Children for ever, that we may do all the words
of his Law, Deuteronomy. 29.29.

II. When we do immoderately study to be Exquisitely Skilled in whatever humane
Arts and Sciences, to the Neglect or Contempt of Divine Knowledge.
2. We must Renounce that as a sinful Lust of the Fleshly Mind, which
improportionably to the true worth of things, is more desirous to furnish it
self with the Knowledge of what concerns only this Mortal Life, than with the
Knowledge of those Divine Truths, which direct us to Life Everlasting. Now this
is Life Eternal, or that Knowledge which leads and directs us to Life
Eternal, That we know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent,
Joh. 17.3. But alas, such is the Folly of the Carnally and Worldly wise, that
most Persons do neglect the Knowledge of God, and the Christian Religion, as if
it were little worth, when certainly in the End there is nothing will stand us
in that stead as this sort of Knowledge. Some there are whose whole search is
for the Causes and Cures of Bodily Distempers, and yet alas all is but Guess
and Conjecture, and an ordinary Malady, not very seldom, baffles the most
Learned Physician, and he sits down heavy in Disgrace and Disappointment. But
the Knowledge of God and Religion, if duly applied, never fails to cure the
Soul of all its Infirmities, nor will it fail to fill the Mind with the
sweetest Comforts and Satisfactions. Others you shall have who desire and care
for nothing more than good Skill in the Laws of their Country, whereby they may
raise themselves good Estates in this World; but alas, such Knowledge can only
serve a present Interest; but by the Knowledge of our Christianity we may be
able to provide our selves Bags that wax not old, Eternal in the Heavens. Some
are wholly bent upon Merchandise and Trade, but when the most Skilful Pilot
shall split upon the Rocks, or be foundred in the Sands, he who has Heaven in
his Eye may steer his Course without danger through the roughest Billows of
Adverse Fortune. And others there are who seem to aim at no higher Knowledge,
than how to Till their Land, and feed their Cattle, and when after all the Crop
fails the most painful Husbandman, he who knows the Laws of Christianity need
not fear a joyful and a plentiful Harvest; so excellent and useful is Divine
Knowledge above all other Arts and Sciences. The Knowledge of our Christian
Religion, as it serves to nobler Purposes, so ought it to be preferred to any
other.
Not that I would cast a Disparagement upon them; they are the Gift of God, and
useful in their kind; but the Knowledge of our Christian Religion, as it serves
to nobler and better Purposes, so ought it to be preferred to any other, and
most studied by every Christian. And hence therefore does St. Paul, when he
comes at any time to speak of Divine Knowledge, not only barely enjoin the
Attainment of it, as of other Virtues, but does moreover add Prayers and
Supplications to God to endow 'em therewith, and to increase 'em therein. We do
not cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the
Knowledge of his Will in all Wisdom and Spiritual Understanding, that ye might
walk worthy of the Lord in all pleasing, being fruitful in every good Work, and
increasing in the Knowledge of God, Col. 1.9, 10. And again, I cease not, says
he, making mention of you always in my Prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation in the Knowledge of him, Ephesians. 1.16, 17. So that though to be
excellently well skilled in any Art or Science whatsoever, which terminates
only in the Conveniences of this Life, be not only Lawful, but Commendable,
yet it is a Profaneness fit to be Renounced by every Christian, to prefer such
to Divine Knowledge, and to apply your Mind wholly to the attaining of such
Skill, to the Neglect of those Great and Important Truths, the Knowledge of
which is indispensably necessary to our Everlasting Happiness. And therefore
let your Profession and Calling be what it will, you must make it your first
Care and Study to know the Nature and Design of the Christian Religion, The
necessary Points of Christian Knowledge.
how that it is a Body of the most Excellent Principles and Laws, all of 'em
tending wholly to render you Holy and Good Livers, and then to make you to
depend upon the Mediation of Christ with his Father, for his Acceptance thereof
to your Justification. You must also next make it more your Study to understand
thoroughly the Covenant of Grace, than the Nature and Obligation of any Humane
Covenants or Contracts, whatsoever. And since we must build our Hopes upon the
performance of particular Articles, and as exactly as possible square our Lives
according to each single Condition of the Covenant of Grace, there can be
nothing of more concernment to every Christian, Lay as well as Clergy, than
thoroughly to understand, both the Meaning and Importance of every Doctrine of
Faith, and the Nature and Extent of every Christian Duty. And lastly, since a
good End can never be obtained without the Knowledge and Use of due and proper
means, the Nature therefore and Use of Prayer, and the Nature and End of
Sacraments must be a most necessary part of Christian Knowledge. So much must
our Appetites after Knowledge in the most Excellent of Humane Arts and Science
be Renounced, in comparison of our Desires after a competent Measure of Divine
Knowledge.

But Lastly, III. When out of Pride, Prejudice, and contradiction to all Sacred
Truths, we set up our own Carnal Imaginations, and Fleshly Reasonings against
those Spiritual Notions, and those Mysterious Articles of our Faith, which are
delivered to us in Scripture.
Above all we must Renounce that prevailing Appetite in such as are of most
Depraved and Corrupt Minds, viz. The setting up their own Imaginations and
Fleshly Reasonings against those Spiritual Notions, and those more Mysterious
Articles of Faith, which are delivered to us in the Scripture. In the more
depraved Nature of some Men, there is a great deal of Untowardness and
Difficulty to submit to the sacred Truths Revealed to us by Christ in the
Gospel, as to Matters of Faith, or such Articles as are necessary to be
believed: One that is conceited of his own Wisdom, strength of Parts, or
Improvement in Knowledge, will not submit his Reason to entertain Notions which
he cannot Comprehend and Penetrate. The Carnal Mind which is Enmity against
God, Romans 8.7. will disdain to have his Understanding baffled or puzzled with
sublime Mysteries of Faith, he will quarrel at any thing too high for his Wit
to reach, or too Knotty for him to unloose. How can these things be? What
Reason can there be for this? I cannot see how this can be true. This Point is
not intelligible; And perhaps he finds fault with the whole Body of the
Scriptures, either because some things are obscure to him, or the Phrase is not
queint and fine enough. Thus the Carnal Mind treats the Dictates of Faith,
and the Word of God.

But far be it from Christians thus to indulge their own Carnal Reasonings, and
Self-Conceits, in opposition to what God has Revealed to us, as necessary to be
Believed by us. For certainly the Infinite Wisdom both knows what is fittest to
be taught and revealed to us, and in what Manner and Method he had best to
express himself. Those that did thus proudly despise the Wisdom of God,
measuring it according to their own Talent of Wit and Understanding, did at
first, and do to this Day most fatally miscarry; for it is written, 1 Cor.
1.19. I will destroy the Wisdom of the Wise, and will bring to nothing the
Understanding of the Prudent. But our Duty is to submit our Understanding to
Almighty God, to be Inlighten'd by his infinite Wisdom, Casting down
Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge
of God, and bringing into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10.5. There is a great deal of Virtue and Grace in an Obedient
Understanding, and therefore to the Disciples who were so disposed, To them it
was given, as our Savior tells us, Matthew. 13.11. To understand the Mysteries
of the Kingdom of Heaven; but to them who are not prepared with an humble Mind,
it is not given.

Nor is this an hard Imposition upon Mankind, to oblige 'em to believe what is
above our Reason to Comprehend. It is sufficient that the Holy Scriptures which
do deliver such Articles of Faith, as necessary to be Believed, are
sufficiently witnessed to be Divine Revelations; and that there is nothing
contained in the Articles or Mysteries themselves, which is contrary or
contradictory to that Reason which God has given to Man. But that there should
be any thing in an Article of Faith, which, though it be above our Reason to
Comprehend, (especially in this its State of weakness) must yet be Believed,
will not seem hard, if we consider, that there are many Appearances, even in
Nature it self, which no Man has been yet found who could give a tolerable
account for; and yet the truth of their being so and so, cannot be called in
question.

This Humor of opposing Reason to Revelation proceeds from mere Pride.
In short, this Humor of opposing our own Fleshly Reasonings, against those
Divine Revelations, which we cannot now in this State of Imperfection so fully
Comprehend, proceeds merely from the Pride of those Men, who disdaining to own
the Decays of our Reason, as well as of other the Powers of the Soul, ever
since the Fall, (which every modest Man's Experience does make him too sensible
of in a Thousand Instances) do overvalue their Talent of Wit, far beyond what
they ought: And this therefore being such a proud Luciferian Temper, it ought
to be Renounced, as the most Impious of all the Sinful Lusts of the Fleshly
Mind. And let this suffice to be spoke concerning our Renouncing of the Sinful
Lusts of that sort.

The Corrupt Will, what, and how to be Renounced.
2. Let us next consider the WILL, and the Innate Corruption which Residing in
that Faculty renders it Fleshly, and tending in all its Choices toward the
Creature, and so the proper Matter of the Christian's Renunciation. And as to
this Faculty we are to consider, how that God gave to Man a Righteous Law,
which was to be the Rule of his Will; and while it was conformable to this, it
was conformable to the Will of God, and consequently Beautiful and Regular; but
instead thereof, there is now a Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8.2. And this Law
subdues the Law of the Mind, and brings the Soul into Captivity to the Law of
Sin, Romans 7.23. And the Will being thus Captivated, is made Carnal, and filled
with Enmity against God, and that Law which he once planted in us to be the
Rule of our Will; so that it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed
can be, whilst we remain Unregenerate, Romans 8.7. But in its corrupt State being
always Averse to the Directions of God's Laws and Right Reason, it perversely
chooses those things which please only the Senses, and so becomes, in the most
proper and immediate Sense of the Word, a Sinful and Fleshly Lust.

But as obstinately bent, as the Corrupt Will is found to be, against complying
with the Laws of God, which would guide our Souls upwards, we must bring our
selves to that Habit of Self-denial, so as readily to submit our Wills to God's
Laws, to be Governed by 'em; the reason is, we are not our own, and therefore
our own depraved Wills ought not to bear Rule in us, but we are God's
Creatures, and his Subjects and Servants, and therefore his All-wise Will and
Pleasure should be the Rule and Measure of, and preside over all our Actions.
And this it must do in the most difficult Cases, when his Laws seem most to
thwart our Reason, and his Dispensations seem most hard and severe. Thus did
Abraham the Father of the Faithful, when God commanded him even to Slay his
only Son Isaac, he readily obeyed, he did not stand to dispute the Case, Genesis
22.10. And thus did Job in reference to the Dispensations of God's Providence,
when he was stripped naked of his vast Possessions, and even of his dear
Children; he even then blessed God for it, (kissing as it were the Rod that
stroke him.) The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, Blessed be the Name
of the Lord, Job 1.21.

III. III. The Affections, what, and how to be renounced.
The Affections in the Carnal Man do sadly degenerate into what may too
properly be called the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. Our Passions and Affections
are indeed in themselves of singular use to the perfecting of our Natures. They
are the Wings of the Soul to carry it forth with eagerness in the pursuit of
that which is Good, and with Aversation and Flight from that which is Evil.
They are variously numbered up, but the Master Affections are Love and Hatred,
which when they are rightly governed, all the rest are so too; but when they
are misplaced and out of order, so in the same proportion are all the others.
And accordingly, whereas then it is, that our Love is rightly fixed; 1. When we
place it upon a proper Object: And, 2. When we steer toward the Thing we love,
with Desires proportionable to the Good that is in the Object, that is, When
the best and greatest Things are pursued with our chiefest Passions, middle
Things with a less, and the lowest with the least; So it is, that so long as a
Person remains Unregenerate, he either first places his Love upon that which he
should Hate, which is the wrong Object, as upon sinful Profits and Pleasures;
or secondly he loves Things of an Indifferent Nature, such as are Earthly
Things, with an over Intense Affection, beyond their true Worth and Value. And
so on the contrary, as to Hatred, the Carnal Mind hates that which he should
love, viz. God and Virtue, The Carnal Mind is Enmity against God, nor is it
subject to the Law of God, Romans 8.7. Or else he hates some Things as the
chiefest of all Evils, viz. Sufferings and Afflictions, when indeed they are of
that Nature, that upon due Consideration a Man shall be able to say, That it is
good for him, that he has been Afflicted. And accordingly when our Affections
of either kind, are either misplaced upon wrong Objects, or are
disproportionate to the true worth and Evil that is in those Objects, toward
which it is lawful to be well or evilly affected in Moderate Degrees. In either
of these Cases, I say, our Affections shall become sinful Lusts of the Flesh,
and are necessary to be Renounced by us.

And 1. Those Affections of Love and Hatred must be utterly Renounced, which we
shall find our selves to have mis-plac'd upon wrong Objects; I. As they are
mis-plac'd upon wrong Objects.
that is, instead of Loving, we must utterly Hate and Abhor all Sin and sinful
Pleasures: So the Psalmist, Psalm. 97.10. Ye that Love the Lord, hate Evil. Now
Sin is the greatest Evil in the World, as being most directly contrary to the
Holy Nature and Will of God; and it is the Cause of all the Evils which befall
us, and therefore to take pleasure in Sin is so perverse a thing, that so long
as any Person remains thus wickedly Disposed, he is an Enemy of God, and no
better than a Child of the Devil, 1 John 3.10. Thus must we not misplace our
Love upon that greatest of all Evils, which is Sin.

And so 2. Instead of Hating God and Virtue, against whom the Carnal and
Unregenerate are at Enmity, we must Entirely and Affectionately Love both,
which is so plain and palpable a Truth, as needs neither Proof nor Enlargement.
And thus we are to Renounce the Affections of Love and Hatred, whenever they
are mis-plac'd upon undue Objects.

2. And we must so far Renounce 'em, as they are Disproportionate to the true
Worth and Evil that is in those Objects, toward which it is lawful to be well
or evilly Affected in Moderate Degrees. II. As they are disproportionate to the
Love, Worth, and Evil that is in those Objects, toward which it is lawful to
be well or evilly affected in moderate Degrees.
That is,

1st. We must not Love God with an inferior Degree of Affection, and Worldly
Things with a Superior; but as God is the Supreme Good in himself, and the
Author of all the Good we Enjoy, we must therefore Love him accordingly with
the Intensest Degree of Affection that we shall be able; so Matthew. 22.37. Thou
shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with
all thy Mind. We must so Love him, as cheerfully to Renounce and Sacrifice all
our Profits and Pleasures when called thereto; that is, We must deny our
selves, take up our Cross and follow him in Afflictions, Distresses, and
Persecutions, whenever the Cross shall be laid upon us, Matthew. 18.24. Nay, and
we must so Love him, as even to Hate all others, the Nearest and Dearest
Relations in comparison of him, Luke 14.26. So far must we Renounce our
Affections of Love, as it is any wise disproportionate to the thing Beloved, as
it is too violently set upon perishing and worldly Goods, and too cold toward
God and Heavenly Things.

2. And on the contrary we must also Renounce that other Affection of Hatred,
as it is Disproportionate to the Evil, which is to be Hated. There may be just
occasion of Anger toward a Person, and of Hatred of his ways, but we must not
let those Passions so far exceed their due Bounds, as to degenerate into Wrath
and Malice. Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor be put away
from you, with all Malice; And be ye Kind one to another, Tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Ephesians.
4.31, 32.

3. The Last of those Powers of our Corrupted Nature, which are here to be
Renounced, are our Lusts and Appetites, III. The Lusts and Appetites are such
Sinful Lusts of the Flesh as are to be Renounced.
which in a State of Unregeneracy are indeed most directly and immediately no
other than so many Sinful Lusts of the Flesh. These were designed by the God of
Nature for our Preservation. Our Appetites after Meat and Drink were Implanted
in our Nature in order to preserve our own selves in Being; and Cupidity or
Lust for the Propagation and Preservation of a Posterity to succeed us. But
when either our Appetites or Lusts do desire, 1. Undue Objects: Or, 2. That
which in it self is Lawful and Allowable, in Undue Measures, they do then
degenerate into Sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and must be Renounced by us.

And, First, I. As they do desire Undue Objects.
as to the Indulgence of a fleshly Appetite with such Meats and Drinks, as are
Unlawful in respect of their Quality; It does infinitely become Christians
utterly to Renounce that sinful Epicurism, which seems to study nothing so
much, as by new invented Dishes to Fare deliciously every Day. Christians
should relish better things than these, and are not therefore thus to make
Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof, Romans 13.14.

Nor, Secondly, II. As they desire 'em in Immoderate Measures.
must we Christians gratify the Cravings of our Appetites in Eating and
Drinking, but we must indeed take heed to our selves, least at any time our
Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and so the Day come upon
us unawares, Luke 21.34. But above all,

Lastly, It behooves Christians to Renounce those which are peculiarly called
the Lusts of the Flesh, whether it be, 1. The Lusting after strange Women, the
Neighing after the Neighbor's Wife, as the Prophet expresses it: Or, 2. Even
that Immoderation practiced by many in the Married State, there being a
Chastity and Modesty which ought to be preserved, even in Wedlock it self,
which the Carnal part of Mankind may perhaps but little think of.

And indeed this Renouncing of these Fleshly Lusts of Concupiscence, is perhaps
what the Composers of our Catechism (as taking the Form of Renunciation from
the Ancient Baptismal Vow) did particularly intend; for as the Gentiles did
scarcely make any account of Fornication, nor think it an Irregularity and
Vice, so the Scripture, and the first Christians, did particularly lay it upon
all that should take upon 'em the Christian Name and Profession, to Renounce
those kind of Sinful Lusts. But Fornication and all Uncleanness, let it not be
once named amongst you, as becomes Saints; for this know you, that no
Whoremonger, nor Unclean Person has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ,
and of God, Ephesians. 5.4, 5. And thus I have fully considered these several
Faculties and Powers both of Soul and Body, as they are so many Sinful Lusts of
the Flesh moving downwards from God and Heavenly Things, Immoderately toward
the Creature.

II. And now I come to consider some of 'em, viz. The Affections, Lastly, The
Inferior and Bodily Powers, viz. The Affections, Lusts and Appetites to be
Renounced, as they Rebel against Right Reason.
Lusts, and Appetites, as so many Sinful Lusts of the Flesh, under another
Notion, and that is, as they do disorderly Rebel against the Superior Faculty
of the Understanding and Reason, and do carry the Will into Slavery to 'em; and
to show how they must be Renounced upon that account also. What the Frame and
Constitution of Humane Nature originally was, and how it is now broken, I have
already showed you, as also how that instead of the Harmonious Subordination of
the Inferior Faculties, to the Superior, that the Affections, Lusts and
Appetites do absolutely Reign, and that Reason and Conscience are in the
Unregenerate dragged into miserable Slavery.

And now I am only to show you, that it is the proper Business and Employment
of Religion, to Reduce Man, as far as is possible, in this State of Weakness
and Infirmity, to his Primitive State of Innocence and Integrity, The Business
of Religion is to reduce Man as near as possible, to his primitive State of
Innocence and Integrity.
to rescue him out of Slavery, to restore him to himself, to put Right Reason
and Religion again into the Throne, and to subject his Affections and Passions,
his Lusts and Appetites, and every inordinate Inclination within him, to the
Dictates and Laws thereof, refusing to Gratify any of those in any thing that
is Sinful and Unlawful.

This is to wrestle against Flesh and Blood: And thus we must wrestle, till we
overcome, and bring it under, into an Entire Subjection to Right Reason, as
ever we expect to be Friends of God, or ever hope to be Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven. There is nothing more plain in Scripture, than the utter
Inconsistency of a carnal Temper and Disposition to a State of Grace and
Reconciliation with God. The Carnal Mind is Enmity against God; for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; so that to be carnally minded
is Death, but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace, Romans 8.6, 7. and
therefore let me add with the same Apostle, ver. 12, 13, 14. Brethren we are
Debtors, not to the Flesh, to live after the Flesh; for if ye live after the
Flesh, ye shall die; but if you through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the
Body, ye shall live; for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
Sons of God, and so Heirs of Eternal Life; so necessary it is, as ever we
expect the Favor of God, and future Happiness, to subdue the Flesh, and all
its Lusts and Appetites, its Passions and Affections, all our fond and foolish
Imaginations, and false Prejudices, and whatever else within us which savours
of Carnality, to the Power and Conduct of Right Reason, enlightened by the Word
and Spirit of God.

To this purpose of keeping under our fleshly Lusts, it was that our Reason was
given us.
And to this purpose it is, that our Reason was given us. That Excellent and
Divine Faculty was not certainly bestowed upon us, to such Vile and Base
Purposes, as to purvey for a filthy Carcass, which shall consume e're long in
Stench and Rottenness; but to nobler and better Purposes you may be sure, viz.
to Govern and Manage the Animal part of us, our Flesh, and to render it
serviceable and useful to Reason and Religion. The best Philosophers amongst
the Heathens, the Platonists, do call the Mind, that Divine Part of us, (...),
The Charioteer, and compare it to a Rider, and the Body, or Flesh, and all its
Troop of Affections or Passions, of Lusts and Appetites, they compare to so
many rude and wild Horses, that must be Managed and Tamed, and kept in good
order, and rendered Serviceable and Useful to the Mind and Reason.

Now so it is, as a Well-ordered and Managed Horse may sometimes stumble, and
start aside, though his Rider keep a very strait Rein, and a wary hand upon him;
So in this corrupt and depraved State of our Natures, our Fleshly Lusts will
sometimes at leastwise, even in the most Regenerate, have some small
Tendencies, some imperfect Velleities, and Wouldings toward Evil Things. But
if we shall take due care to keep so watchful an Eye, and wary an Hand over
'em, as presently, so soon as we perceive any evil Motion and Tendency, to curb
and restrain it, and not willingly, nor wilfully to indulge any Evil
Inclination, we shall by the Gracious Acceptance and Favor of God be accounted
good Managers of that hard Province, the Renouncing or Subduing of our Fleshly
Lusts. If in the general course of our Lives, we act like Men endowed with
Reason and Grace, we shall be pardoned all our Unwilling and Unavoidable
Infirmities.

III. And Lastly, I shall have done this Point when I have showed you, what is
meant by Renouncing ALL the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, III. To Renounce ALL the
sinful Lusts of the Flesh, what.
and in what Sense, and how far we must Renounce 'em ALL. And by Renouncing ALL
the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh, can be understood no less, than that we must
Indulge no part, nor Faculty of our Corrupt Nature in the Transgression of any
of God's Commandments. All Men are not alike Addicted to Sin; but according as
their Temper and Inclinations do differ, accordingly are they more or less
given, some to one Vice, some to another. Thus some are Naturally Highminded,
and these disdaining to Think in the common Road, or to submit their Judgments
to commonly received Opinions, are always starting new Notions, and broaching
New Heresies. Some again will be Orthodox enough in their Opinions; but being
Persons of warm Constitutions, and Sanguine Complections, they cannot help it
they will say, their being overcome by the Pleasures of Sense. The whole Herd of
Unregenerate Sinners are not made up of such as are all over wicked. But some
are more particularly in their own Nature addicted to be Covetous, some to
Revenge, and others to Lust, and the like. And then when these their Natural
Dispositions are strengthened (as is usual) by long Accustomed Habits of
Indulgence to some such Complectional Vices; it becomes a very difficult Work
utterly to Renounce such Sinful Lusts of the Flesh.

But however difficult it is, there must be no Indulgence to any one Fleshly
Lust, nor must there be any Vicious Inclination suffered to Reign in us; There
must be no one fleshly Lust suffered to reign in us.
for the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men, Romans 1.18. And whosoever shall keep the whole Law, says
St. James, and yet offend in one point, that is, shall allow himself in the
Indulgence of any one Sinful Lust, he is guilty of all, Jam. 2.10. shall be as
surely punished, as he who had lived in a Breach of all.

And indeed our Business is particularly to set our selves in Opposition to
those Lusts, which arise from our particular Temper and Constitution, Our
Business is particularly to oppose Lusts of Temper and Constitution.
and to subdue them: And also to break off those Habits whereby these Natural
Inclinations and Proneness to some particular Sins have grown strong upon us.
And this is that which is called, Matthew. 5.29, 30. A Cutting off the Right
Hand, and a plucking out of the Right Eye; which Divorcing of our selves from
our beloved Lusts, because it is so difficult to go about, and so few have the
Courage to do it effectually; it is therefore said, That the Gate of Heaven is
strait, and that many of those who shall seek to enter in, shall not be able,
Luke 13.24.

Now this is hard Doctrine to the Carnal Man, This because it is a hard
Doctrine to the Carnal Man, is much Evaded.
who is Wedded to his Lusts, and has no mind to part with 'em. Such therefore
are for it finding out all the Evasions possible to shift off the Necessity of
such a sorrowful Separation, as dreadful almost to 'em, as that of Soul and
Body. And because they find St. Paul himself, (a Regenerate Person no doubt)
owning that he found a Law, that when he would do good, evil was present with
him, and that he delighted in the Law of God after the Inward Man; but that he
saw another Law in his Members, warring against the Law of his Mind, and
bringing him into Captivity to the Law of Sin which was in his Members; so that
with the Mind he did serve the Law of God, but with the Flesh the Law of Sin,
Romans 7.21, 22, 23.25. Because, I say, they find even St. Paul expressing
himself, as they think, as unable to Resist the Temptations of Fleshly Lusts;
and that all that he was able to do, was in his Mind and Conscience to
disapprove of that which the prevailing power of Lust within him, forced him to
commit; They do therefore conclude, that provided it be with Reluctance, and
some Counter-Strivings against their Lusts, that they do yield thereto; that
they are in a Regenerate State, however, though in the Issue they do comply
therewith; and consequently that it is not of such necessity to Renounce ALL,
but that the inferior Appetites may be Indulged, what the Mind and Reason do
squeamishly Refuse.

The Objection from Romans 7. cleared.
But that you may not make Shipwreck of a good Conscience, by falling into the
usual Mistakes about the Sense of this place, you are to know, that St. Paul's
design in this 7th to the Romans being to Represent the Ill Condition of the
Jews, as under the Law of Moses, which only Enlightened their Minds so far as
to Convince 'em of many things to be Sins, which otherwise they could not have
known to be such; but gave no Power to 'em to overcome those Lusts; because the
Jews could not bear such a Charge against themselves and their Law, he does
suppose himself in the case of a mere Jew, and Personating such a One, does
accordingly Argue as from Experience, against the Converting Power of the mere
Law of Moses, which was destitute of those Assistances afforded in the Gospel.
And this is a Scheme and Figure of Speech usual with this Apostle in many other
places. Thus for their sakes he did transfer in a Figure those things to
himself, which could not be Personally spoken of him, 1 Cor. 4.6. And nothing
is more usual than the same way of speaking amongst Men, especially in Reproofs
and such Cases, as would be ill Resented, to be downright charged withal; but
when we say, We do so, and so, under this disguise it is usual with more
Success, and less Offense, to disparage and Correct very ill Practices.

But that St. Paul should speak it of himself, when he tells 'em, That he saw
another Law in his Members, warring against the Law of his Mind, and bringing
him into Captivity to the Law of Sin, which was in his Members; and that with
the Mind he did serve the Law of God, but with the Flesh, the Law of Sin, is
contrary both to what he affirms elsewhere of himself, and of those who are
truly Regenerate. For of himself he affirms, Romans 8.2. That the Law of the
Spirit of Life, had made him free from the Law of Sin and Death. We must
Renounce the Flesh, and all its Sinful Lusts, so as to have an Aversion, and an
Antipathy in our Hearts thereunto.
And ver. 1. he says of those who are in Christ Jesus, and to whom Condemnation
does not belong, and who are consequently Regenerate, that they walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit. And Gal. 5.24. it is said, that they who are
Christ's, have Crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts.

In short therefore, and to draw toward a Conclusion, we must not content our
selves in this great Work of Renouncing ALL the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, that
we have our Minds enlightened, so as to know what we ought to do, whilst our
Affections and Bodily Powers do remain Rebellious against the Dictates of our
Minds and Consciences. But we must have our whole Natures possessed with an
Aversion, an Antipathy from the very Heart, against all Sin; and we must have
both the Mind, Will and Affections, nay, the very Lusts and Appetites fully
bent against it. And we must have, on the contrary, a hearty Love and
Disposition to all Virtue, wrought in all the same Faculties both of Soul and
Body. We must be Renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, and put on the New Man,
which after God is Created in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.23, 24.

And when a Person is thus inwardly Changed throughout, in all the Faculties
and Powers of Soul and Body, it is then only that he can be truly said to be a
New Creature, a New Man.

And this, indeed, This the hard Part.
to become thus Renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, so as to have the Heart and
Affections set against Sin and sinful Pleasures, as well as the Mind convinced
of the Evil of 'em, is the hard Work. This is certain, that it is not possible
for any Man to work so great a Change in his Nature, of himself, but it is the
Spirit of God that must assist wonderfully in the doing of it. And, indeed,

That we may be said sincerely and thoroughly to Renounce the Flesh, and ALL its
sinful Lusts; that Renovation of our Corrupted Nature, wherein this
Renunciation does consist, must be such as is wrought in us by the Spirit and
Grace of God. This I say, because it is very possible for a Man to be Changed
from some sensual Courses to an utter Hatred thereof, and yet remain in God's
Eyes a Carnal and Unregenerate Man; and the reason is, because his Change
proceeds not from any Inward Vital Principle of Virtue, but from some
prudential Methods in the management of his Pleasures, as some the most sensual
Epicures, that live, shall become at length temperate and sober, because their
Constitutions will not bear a Debauch; but as the Spirit of God had nothing to
do in the Change, so in their Hearts and Minds they remain still to be sensual.
And others again you shall meet, who have a full Conviction in their Minds and
Consciences, through the Preaching of the Word, of the Evil of Sin, and yet in
their Affections they Love it, and their Lusts and Appetites Rebelling against
the Reason of their Mind, will have it, and their Wills do finally choose it; so
that these Persons with the Mind do serve the Law of God, but with the Flesh
the Law of Sin; as St. Paul, in that much mistaken Chapter, Romans 7.25. does
represent, (as was now showed you) the Case of the Carnal Jew, abiding only
under the Conviction of the Law. But where the Spirit of God works the Change,
that Person is Sanctified wholly, and the whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body will
be preserved Blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5.23.
So that such a Person shall effectually Renounce the Flesh, and all its sinful
Lusts, both of the Inward, and of the Outward Man.

And accordingly, as we will draw nigh to God, and have him draw nigh to us, we
must cleanse our hands, and purify our hearts, and not be double-minded, Jam.
4.8. We must, through the Help of his Grace, Cleanse our selves from all
Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God, 2 Cor.
7.1. We must be always, I say, in the perfecting of (one Degree after another)
our Holiness, and that Image of God which we lost by our Fall; for the subduing
of All our Lusts, must be the Work of Time; and it is not of a sudden, that we
can get an entire Conquest over 'em ALL. But if in our Strivings against 'em,
we find our selves still more and more to get ground upon 'em, we are in a
hopeful Condition. In a Word therefore, Brethren, we are Debtors, not to the
Flesh, to live after the Flesh; for if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die;
but if through the Spirit ye do Mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live;
for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, Romans
12.13, 14.

The Reason of having enlargd so much upon this one Article of Renouncing the
Devil, etc.
And so I have at length done with this no less Important, than Copious Subject,
the Renouncing of the Devil, the World, and the Flesh. It may seem indeed, as
if I have been too long upon the Explication of one single Article of our
Covenant, viz. the Renouncing the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanity
of this wicked World, and All the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh. But if it be
considered, that half the Business of our Christian Religion is performed in
Resisting the Enemies of our Salvation, it will not be a Matter of Blame that I
have been so long upon this Point, especially in Instructing of Youth about it,
who ought to be very well fore-arm'd in order to their coming off Conquerors.
The truth of it is, this Renouncing of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil;
that is, the Resisting, and Overcoming of all their Numerous Host of
Temptations, is the Christian's Warfare and great Work. For as the Holy
Scriptures do, in a multitude of Texts, Represent our State as a State of
Warfare: ( Fight the good Fight of Faith, lay hold on Eternal Life; for
hereunto ye have been called before many Witnesses, 1 Timothy 6.12. That is, we
Listed our selves in this Warfare at our Baptism, in the Presence of the Church
of Christ) As our State, I say, is a State of Warfare against all these
Spiritual Enemies; so it does infinitely concern all of us to know, as far as
is possible, All their Arts and Stratagems to deceive us; and this, I hope,
will be a sufficient Apology, that I have been so improportionably long, to
what I have, and shall be upon other Heads, in showing you what it is, and how
far you must Renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this
wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh.

THE XXII. Lecture. Secondly, That I should Believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith.
HAVING largely Explained the first Condition of Life and Happiness, and showed
you, what I conceive is meant by Renouncing the Devil and all his Works, the
Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh; I
come now to do the like, as to the Second Condition upon which we are to expect
to be Justified, to have our Sins Pardoned, and Eternal Life and Happiness
conferred upon us; and which we have also Covenanted with God to do, and that
is, that We Believe all the Articles of our Christian Faith. In order to the
Explication of which Point,

1. I will declare to you the General Nature of those ARTICLES, or Christian
Truths, which are to be Believed.

2. I will show you, What it is to BELIEVE those Articles, or Christian Truths,
so as to make us capable of Life and Happiness. And,

3. I will show you how we must Believe ALL the Articles of the Christian Faith.

And, First, I am to declare to you something in General, Articles of Christian
Faith, of what Nature.

The whole Bible the Object of a Christian's Faith, both


concerning the Nature of those ARTICLES, or Christian Truths, which are to be
Believed.

The whole Bible, both Old and New Testament, is the proper Object of a
Christian's Faith; and whatever we find therein Recorded, or delivered down to
us, we are to believe, as a Divine, Certain, and Infallible Truth, because all
things therein contained, are the Word of Him who will not, who cannot Lie, who
neither can be deceived himself, nor will he deceive others.

As to the Old Testament and the Writings of the Prophets, the Old Testament,
and the
Jehosophat, in a solemn Assembly of the whole People, upon a solemn Fast Day,
2 Chronicles. 20.20. Proclaimed unto them, stood up and said, Hear me O Judah, and
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be
Established; believe his Prophets, so shall ye Prosper. And let the
Declarations of God Recorded therein be of what Nature they will, the Truth of
them is by no means to be called in doubt; If you will not Believe, surely ye
shall not be Established, Isa. 7.9.

And so likewise as to the New Testament; New.
Our Savior upon his Entrance to preach the Gospel, did in the first place
require of all Men to Believe it. Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the Gospel
of the Kingdom of God, and saying, The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of
God is at hand; Repent ye and Believe the Gospel, Mark 1.14, 15. And when he
was also leaving the World, and Commissioned his Disciples to go into all the
World, and to preach the Gospel to every Creature. He declared, that he that
Believes shall be Saved, but he that Believes not shall be Damned, Mark
16.15, 16. So that both the Old and New Testament, and every part and parcel of
Scripture therein contained, is firmly to be Believed, as the Divine, Certain,
and Infallible Truth of God.

And the reason thereof, as to the Old Testament, is Because Prophecy came not
in Old time by the Will of Man; but Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. And we are also firmly to believe all the parts
both of Old and New indifferently, because all Scripture is given by
Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, 2 Timothy 3.16. All the parts of
it are the Dictates and Word of God himself, and are more or less Useful to our
Edification and Improvement in Divine Knowledge, Faith, and Practice. And
therefore all Ranks and Degrees of Men, and of every Age, Young as well as Old,
ought diligently to Study, and firmly to Believe the Holy Scriptures. The
Bereans did so, and they were accounted the more Honorable for so doing. The
Bereans were more Noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they Received, or
Believed the Word with all readiness of Mind, and searched the Scriptures
daily, Act. 17.11. And it is Recorded to the Immortal Honor of Timothy, 2
Epist. 3.15. that from a Child he had known the Scriptures, which were able to
make him wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus.

Some Truths Revealed in Scripture of greater Importance and Concernment to us,
than others.
Well, but though all Scripture, as being the Infallible Word of him, who neither
can be deceived himself, nor will deceive others, does Challenge the Belief of
every Christian; yet among the great multitude of Truths of various Kinds
delivered in the Scriptures, some are of far greater Importance and Concernment
to us than others, because they do more immediately and directly tend to give
us due and worthy Apprehensions of God, and to Instruct us in the only sure
Method of Salvation by Jesus Christ. There are some Principal Doctrines of
Christianity, which are in their own Nature apt to have a greater Influence
upon our Lives, and more powerfully to restrain us from a Course of Sin, and to
unite us to the Practice of Virtue and Holiness, than others; and when they
have done this, to send us to God the Father to seek for Acceptance merely
through Christ his Son. And upon these, and the like accounts, therefore such
Truths as these are more particularly necessary to be Believed by us, in order
to our Justification before God, and to our Salvation in the other World; And
must therefore be distinctly Known, and explicitly Believed
and are therefore called the Articles of our Christian Faith, being a Summary
and Collection of such Doctrines out of the Holy Scriptures, as are of a more
Concerning Nature than the rest.

All those other Truths, of what Nature soever, contained in the Holy
Scriptures, are indeed necessary also to be Believed, at leastwise
Implicitly; that is, we are to be possessed with a General Persuasion that they
are all certainly true, because God has Revealed them as such. But these
latter, which we call the Articles of our Christian Faith, must be positively
and Explicitly Believed, that is, we must thoroughly understand 'em, and be
assuredly and distinctly persuaded of each single Truth contained in 'em, as
without which understanding and persuasion, a Good and Christian Life will not
be wrought in us, nor a reliance on God's Merits in Christ for the acceptance
thereof, Created in our Souls.

Such, for instance, is the Belief that there is a God; Some Instances of such
Truths.
for this is the very first Principle of all Religion, and must necessarily
make us stand in awe, and fear of offending him, if we thoroughly believe and
consider it: Such is the Belief, that he is our Father who Created us and all
the World; for this will make us love him who gave us our Being. And such again
is the Belief, that he Exercises a just and wise Providence in the Government
of the World; for this will make us submit our selves to all his Dispensations,
as being the Appointments of One, who knows better than our selves what is Best
for us.

And to instance also in some which are the Truths purely of Revealed Religion:
Such is the Belief, that the Son of God came down from Heaven to suffer Death
for us, to Redeem us from the Punishments of Hell; for this, as it shows us how
Odious a thing Sin is, when nothing less could satisfy God's Justice against
it, than the precious Blood of the Son of God; and consequently, does extremely
tend to create in our Hearts an utter Hatred to all Sin: So hereby we are
taught, that Christ has made a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice and
Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World. And such, lastly, is the Belief
(for I need not now stand to mention every Artiticle) that all our Bodies shall
rise again at the General Resurrection; that then we must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, to Receive a Just Sentence for whatever we have done
in the Body, whether it be good or bad; for this will make us careful how to
lead our Lives so in this World, that we may not be Condemned in the next.

These now are some of those Articles of our Christian Faith, and are such
Divine Truths, as are more particularly necessary to be Believed by us, as
containing in them the greatest reason in the World to restrain us from all
manner of Sin, and to encourage us in the Practice of all Religious Duties. And
yet are Doctrines withal of extraordinary force, to remove all Conceit out of
our Minds concerning our own Merits, and to make us rely solely upon God's
Mercies in Christ, for the Acceptance of our most Holy Performances. And let
this suffice, as to the first Thing proposed, which was to declare unto you
something in general, of the Nature of the Objects, or of those Truths to be
Believed the Articles of our Christian Faith. And now,

Secondly, I will also show you what it is to BELIEVE these Truths, so as to
make us capable of Life and Happiness.

And if it be asked how we must Believe these things, What it is to Believe
those Truths, so as to make us capable of Life and Happiness.
why we must be so thoroughly and firmly persuaded of their undoubted Truth, as
to be accordingly Influenced (as I have now said) by the Belief thereof, to the
Practice of Good Works, and then to betake our selves to Jesus Christ to
Intercede with the Father, for their Gracious Acceptance.

Our Belief thereof must be Operative and Practical.
I say, our Faith must be such, as does Influence us to a Good Life; for such is
the Faith that St. Paul tells us is now required in the Christian Religion in
order to Salvation, Gal. 5.6. In Jesus Christ, says he, neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love: Some
render the words, and that more rightly, Faith that is perfected by Love; which
does more expressly signify the Apostle's meaning, that that Faith which will
save us, must be such as is perfected by the addition of those Duties which we
owe to God and our Neighbor. And St. James does with great Industry show, that
the Christian Faith, which has the Promise of Justification and Salvation, is a
Powerful, Practical Belief, and that none other has any Promise. What, says St.
James, 2.14. does it profit my Brethren, though a Man says, he has Faith, and
has not Works, can Faith save him? Faith, if it have not Works, is dead being
alone, ver. 17. and is no more than what the Devils have; for the Devils
believe and tremble, ver. 19.

Such was the Faith of Abraham, and of all the Saints.
And the Faith, indeed, for which the Holy Patriarchs and Saints were Renowned
of Old, and are now so highly Rewarded in Heaven, was a Powerful, Practical,
and Working Faith indeed, which excited them to the highest and the hardest
Acts of Obedience, that it was possible for Men to perform. Thus, Heb. 11.17,
18. we read, that by Faith, Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac; and
he that had received the Promises offered up his only begotten Son, and he a
Son too in whom God had promised him great Blessings: And yet, at God's
Command, he readily Obeyed, believing that God would be as good as his Promise
to him, though it was by Raising him again from the Dead. By Faith, Moses, when
he was come to Years, refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh 's Daughter,
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of Sin for a season, esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches
than the treasures of Egypt; for he had respect to the recompense of reward,
ver. 24, 25, 26. It was a great Temptation to Moses to be made a Prince, if he
pleased, in which Estate he might enjoy the highest Pleasures this World could
afford; but he Believing, that God would infinitely reward him for his
Self-denial, in refusing such Worldly Honors and Pleasures, chose rather to be
one of those mean Persecuted People, the Children of Israel. By Faith,
Thousands of Blessed Saints before us, endured trials of cruel Mockings and
Scourgings, yea, moreover, of Bonds and Imprisonments; they were Stoned, they
were Sawn asunder, were Tempted, were Slain with the Sword, they wandered about
in Sheepskins, and in Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, (of
whom the world was not worthy) they wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and
in Dens, and in Caves of the Earth, Heb. 11.35, 36, 37, 38. They were terrible
Sufferings which the Servants of God in former times have been put to undergo;
but as dreadful as they were, being supported with a firm Belief, that they
should be infinitely recompensed for their Sufferings and Losses, they
thereupon cheerfully underwent the severest, that the Wit or Malice of Men or
Devils could invent or inflict upon 'em. Such a powerful, practical, working
Faith indeed, was that for which the Holy Patriarchs and Saints were of Old
Renowned, and are now Rewarded in Heaven: A Faith, I say, which excited them to
the highest and hardest Acts of Obedience, that it was possible for Men to
perform. And such a Powerful, Practical, Active and Working Principle is Faith,
And such an Operative and Practical Principle is Faith, whenever the Things
believed are of great Importance or Concernment to us.
whenever the things Believed are of great Importance or Concernment to us.
Some things indeed, as an Excellent Person does well observe, are of such a
Nature, that the Belief or Knowledge of 'em goes no farther, but rests in it
self, as the Knowledge or Belief of bare Speculative Truths, that do not at all
Concern us; but some things again are of such a Nature, as being once firmly
and truly believed, and known, carry a Man out to Action. Thus, for Example; If
you should hear another threatened, that he should certainly be Killed if he
stir out of his House to morrow, it would not hinder you from going Abroad,
though you firmly believe the Threatening, because it is a Truth in which you are
not Concerned: But the Person so threatened, if he does thoroughly believe the
danger, will certainly not stir out of his House that Day, because it is a
Truth that he is very much Concerned in. On the other side, If you shall hear
of a Promise made to another Person of a Thousand Pound, if he will be at the
Pains to go but to such a Place, it will not make you go there, because it is a
Promise that you are not Concerned in; but the other Person, if he be certainly
persuaded the Promise will be made good to him, will certainly go to the
appointed Place, because it is a Promise that he is Concerned in.

And so likewise, as to the Case in hand; That a sure Promise of the Pardon of
our Sins, and Eternal Happiness, is made over to us in the Second Covenant, on
Condition we will forsake the Service of Satan and of Sin, that we will Repent
heartily, Believe practically, and Obey sincerely, is a Truth that the Devils
(to their great Grief) are fully persuaded of; for they believe and tremble,
St. James tells us: But this Faith of theirs, does not put them upon Repentance
and Amendment, because those gracious Promises do not Concern them, and they
have no Promise of Salvation, though they should Repent and Amend. But as to us,
whom they do Concern, and to whom they are made, if we are really persuaded,
that if we amend, we shall be certainly Saved, we shall immediately, upon such
Persuasion, seriously Repent of what has been done amiss heretofore, and take
care to Obey God for the future; For every Man that has this Hope in God,
purifieth himself even as he is pure, 1 John 3.3.

In short, the Articles of our Christian Faith are every one of 'em so many
Motives, and those the most powerful ones in the World, to stir us up to a
diligent Reformation of our Hearts and Lives. They are in themselves the most
obliging Arguments to it, and with respect to us, they are the most Concerning
and Important Truths that can be, containing in the meaning of 'em, either
Threatenings to scare us out of Sin, or Promises to allure us to Obedience:
Either such Considerations as are apt to excite our Fears when we are in a
Course of Impiety, or are Grounds whereon we may build the vastest Hopes in the
Performance of our Duty. And if any One does not live accordingly, a Godly,
Righteous, and a Sober Life, I dare be bold to say, it is owing to some spice
of Infidelity lurking in his Heart, whereby he is not thoroughly persuaded of,
or does not actually consider these Truths; But he that does thoroughly Believe
and Consider them, can hardly fail of being a Good Liver. Thus necessary, you
see it is, that our Belief of all the Articles of our Christian Faith be such,
as does Influence us to good Works; And then, after all,

II. To Believe savingly, we must apply our selves to Jesus Christ, to
intercede with God the Father for our Gracious Acceptance.
II. It must be a Belief, that causes us to betake our selves to Jesus Christ,
to Intercede with God the Father for their Gracious Acceptance. This I have
formerly, in the beginning of my Exposition, insisted upon; yet such is the
growing Infidelity of the World with respect to this, which is the most
Essential part of Christian Faith, that it would not be unseasonable, should I
again show you that we must depend upon the Mediation of Christ with the
Father, for us, that our imperfect Righteousness may be graciously accepted to
our Justification. This is that Act of Faith which is called in Scripture
Believing in Christ; and to such a Believing as this it is, that our
Justification is Attributed by St. Paul, Gal. 2.16. Know this, that a Man is
not Justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ; even
we have Believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be Justified by the Faith of
Christ, and not by the Works of the Law, for by the Works of the Law shall no
Flesh be Justified. And as this Act of Faith, the Relying upon God's Mercies in
Christ, does wonderfully exalt the Divine Justice and Mercy, so it leaves no
place to the Creature to Attribute any part of its Happiness to it self, but
does utterly exclude all occasions of Boasting. God has set forth Jesus Christ
his Son to be a Propitiation, through Faith in his blood, to declare his
Righteousness for the Remission of Sins, that are past, through the forbearance
of God. Where is Boasting then? it is excluded. By what Law, of Works? nay, but
by the Law of Faith, Romans 2.25.27. So that it is not enough that we Believe
punctually, but it is moreover necessary that we rely also on God's Mercies in
Christ, that our imperfect Holiness may be accepted; or otherwise, even our
Assent to all the Articles of the Christian Faith will not avail us to our
Justification and Salvation; which brings me,

Lastly, To show you what it is to Believe ALL the Articles of our Christian
Faith. What to Believe All the Articles of the Christian Faith.
And,

1. To Believe them All does Import, that we must Assent to all and every one
of those great Articles of Christian Doctrine contained in the Apostle's Creed.
1. To Believe ALL these Articles does Import, that we must Assent with a
through Persuasion of their undoubted Truth, and of their Divine Authority, to
all and every one of those great Articles of Christian Doctrine contained in
the Apostle's Creed. This Collection, or Summary of Christian Doctrine, is
called by St. Paul, Romans 6.17. That Form of Doctrine which was delivered to the
Christians; that is, that Summary of Christian Doctrine, to the Belief and
Practice of which they were delivered up, and solemnly Consecrated in their
Baptism. And the same is called, 2 Timothy 1.13. The Form of sound words which was
heard of the Apostle himself; and we are commanded to hold it fast; that is, to
take care not to depart from it in any part thereof.

And as we must not shrink from the Confession and Belief of any one of those
Articles, which have been Handed down to us from the Apostles, in that Summary,
or Form of sound words, which makes up the Body of our Christian Faith; so we
must content our selves with the Belief of All those saving Truths, and must
not think there is any thing more to be Believed by our selves, or others, as
necessary to Salvation.

But especially, Such as tend to destroy a good Life, and send us to other
Mediators than Christ, to Intercede with the Father for its Acceptance, no
Articles of Christian Faith.
we must take care of possessing our Minds with a Persuasion of the Truth of
such Articles, as do tend to destroy what the true Genuine Doctrines of
Christianity, viz. All the Articles of our Christian Faith, do Build; as do
all, or most at leastwise, of the New Articles imposed upon the Belief of
Christians in the Romish Church. Some of those Articles in the Romish Creed, do
plainly take away the necessity of a Good Life, as might be easily made appear,
were it proper here to enlarge on that Point. And other Doctrines of that
Church, do as apparently take Men off from depending solely upon the Mediation
of Christ with his Father, that he would graciously accept and pass by the
Imperfection of the Good they do, teaching 'em to apply themselves to the
Blessed Virgin, and other Saints, as Mediators with God for 'em. Nay, and some
of their Doctrines, as that of Merits, and of Works of Super-errogation, do
teach 'em proudly to overvalue their own Performances, and to boast themselves
in their Merit. And therefore so far must we be from suffering our selves to be
persuaded of the Truth of All these, and the like Doctrines, as Articles of our
Christian Faith, that we must utterly dissent from them all, as unjust and
unreasonable Impositions on the Belief of Christians. In a word; as we must
strengthen our selves in the Belief of all those True and Genuine Articles of
the Christian Faith, so to Believe all these, as necessary to Salvation, is
enough. But to Believe more, under the Character of Articles of a Christian's
Faith, especially if they be such Doctrines as do take off the Fears of
Sinning, and send us to other Mediators betwixt God and Man, besides the Man
Christ Jesus; this is indeed a Belief, not only superfluous, as being a Belief
of more than All the necessary Articles of a Christian's Faith, but is a very
sinful, and criminal, and superstitious Persuasion.

2. To Believe ALL the Articles of the Christian Faith, is not only to assent
to All, and every of those Articles in the Gross, but to be fully persuaded of
all and every of those single Truths contained in each of those Articles. 2. To
Believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, is to be fully persuaded of
all, and of every of those single Truths contained in each of those Articles.
Every one of the Articles of our Christian Faith is full of a great deal of
Meaning, and many of them do contain Truths of various Kinds and Importance.
Thus, for Instance, To believe that Jesus Christ was Crucified, Dead, and
Buried, does import this Comfortable, as well as Fundamental Doctrine of
Christianity, That the Only Son of God suffered Death upon the Cross for our
Redemption, and that he made there by that one Oblation of himself once
offered, a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction
for the Sins of the whole World. And accordingly it is said, 1 Pet. 3.18. That
Christ once suffered for Sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us
to God. And 21.24. it is said, That he himself did bear our Sins in his own
Body on the Tree.

But then this is not the whole that is meant in that Grand Article, but also
this other Doctrine, That he suffered to Redeem us from all Iniquity; that is,
he suffered on the Cross the Punishment of our Sins, that we seeing how odious
a Thing Sin is, which could not be Atton'd for by a Sacrifice less valuable
than the Blood of the Son of God, might therefore abhor it, and forsake it. And
this is also taught us in the very place now cited from St. Peter, viz. 1
Epist. 2.24. He his own self bear our Sins in his own Body upon the Tree, that
we being dead to Sin, should live unto Righteousness.

A Heretic must be such by Believing only of one of those Truths contained in
the Article.
And now a Person may become Guilty of Heresy, by believing only One of those
Truths contained in the Articles. And accordingly there are Two opposite
Heresies, which do at this day most grievously afflict the Church of Christ
amongst us, and they do divide these two great Doctrines, contained in this one
Article, betwixt 'em. And they are therefore Heresies, because they do so
divide 'em, and do not each of 'em Believe both these important Doctrines. The
Antinomians do Believe indeed, that Christ did satisfy the Divine Justice for
our Sins, but so as to leave no Conditions to be performed by them. And the
Socinians, on the other side, owning that he came to draw us off from Sin, deny
that he made any Satisfaction for us: So that both do fundamentally Err in the
Faith, though they Believe the Article in the gross, that Christ was Crucified,
Dead and Buried, because neither of them Believe the whole Truth contained in
that Article. And therefore, as you must Believe All the Articles, so All those
Divine and Necessary Truths which are contained in every Article of your
Christian Faith, according to the full Explication and Meaning thereof, given
us in the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds. These Creeds do not contain more, or
different Articles of Faith, than the Apostle's Creed does; but in these
Creeds, many Articles of our Christian Faith are expressed in the full Sense and
Importance of 'em, in opposition to those Heresies which did, and do still
pervert, or restrain the Meaning of those Articles. And thus you also see, how
you are to Believe All the Articles of your Christian Faith; that you are not
only to Believe every One of 'em, but all that Divine Truth which is contained
in each.

And so, as I have before laid before you, how you are to Renounce the Devil,
the World, and the Flesh, so now, what it is to Believe all the Articles of
your Christian Faith. And so it only remains (and then I shall have fully
Explained to you all the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace) that I show you
next, what it is to Obey God's Holy Will and Commandments, and to walk in the
same all the days of our Life.

THE XXIII. Lecture. Thirdly, That I should obey God's holy Will and
Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my Life.
I Hope I have sufficiently Explained unto you, the Two first Conditions bound
upon you in your Baptismal Covenant, as indispensibly necessary to your
obtaining the Benefits of it; which Conditions are, First, that you should
Renounce the Devil, etc. Secondly, That you should Believe, etc. And now I come
to the Third; which is, That you should Obey, etc.

And that I may fully, and to the purpose, Explain this to you, I will,

First, Lay before you, what it is to Obey God's Holy Will and Commandments; or
how far you must be Obedient to the Holy Will and Commandments of God, as ever
you will hope to obtain Salvation, or to be Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Secondly, I will show you, what it is to Walk in the same all the Days of your
Life; or how long you must persevere in such Obedience, which must be to the
End of your Lives. And,

Thirdly, I will clear the Doctrine of Evangelical Obedience, as so stated,
from those Doubts that may be raised against it.

And, First, I. What it is to obey God's Holy Will and Commandments.
Because nothing can be more necessary for you to be Instructed in, than the
Measures of that Obedience, now under the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace; upon
the performance of less than which, you cannot expect to be made Inheritors of
the Kingdom of Heaven; I will, with what clearness I can, show you, How far we
must be Obedient to God's Holy Will and Commandments, as ever we'll hope to
obtain Salvation, or to be Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.

And that Evangelical, or Gospel-Obedience, The Nature and Measures of
Christian Obedience.
which now under the Covenant of Grace, is the indispensible Condition of Man's
Salvation, (to give it you according as it is most exactly stated by the
Learned Author of The Measures of Christian Obedience; for it is impossible, I
do think, for any one to do it more exactly; therefore I shall give you an
Abstract of that whole Work:) Is a sincere and entire Obedience to all the Laws
of the Gospel: Sincere it must be, by being a true and undissembled Service of
God, (opposite to all Hypocrisy, or a false and feigned Pretense of obeying
Him, when in reality we only serve our own Selves, or our own Lusts and
Interests.) Entire it must be, by being the Obedience of the whole Man, to the
whole Will of God, and that at all times; with this abatement of Rigor, That
all our unwilling and involuntary Failings, which, through Ignorance and
Frailty, we commit, shall, upon our Prayers to God, and Charity to our
Neighbor, be forgiven us; and even our wilful Transgressions, when we repent
and forsake 'em, through the Mediation of Christ, and the Grace of the Gospel,
shall not be imputed to our Condemnation. Such is the Obedience which every one
of you must carefully pay to the Holy Will and Commandments of God, as ever you
hope to be Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. But for your better
understanding the Nature and Extent of your Christian Obedience, I will a
little farther unfold each Part of this Description of it. And,

I. Our Obedience must be sincere, by being a true and undissembled Service of
God, opposite to all Hypocrisy, or a false and feigned Pretense of obeying Him,
when in truth we serve our own selves.
I. Our Obedience to all the Laws of the Gospel must be sincere, by being a true
and undissembled Service of God, opposite to all Hypocrisy, or a false and
feigned Pretense of obeying Him, when in reality we only serve our own selves.
This is a certain Truth, That our Gracious God, for the most part, has made
such Things the Matter of His Laws, and of our Duty, as really make for our own
Interest, Reputation, or Profit to perform; for so it really is to be
Temperate, and Chaste, and Contented, and Humble; to be Upright, and
Charitable, and Peaceable, etc. But then our Obedience is sincere, and done as
unto God, when we observe His Laws for His sake, and because He commands it;
for otherwise we do not observe God's Will, but our own: His Commands had no
share in what we did, because it had been done although He had said nothing.
And thus sincere must our Obedience be unto God (as ever we expect that God
should Judge us at the last Day to have obeyed Him:) I say, it must be done as
unto God; and sincerely from our Hearts to please Him, and not only our selves.
And this is plainly expressed in the very words of the Gospel, for it accepts
not an heartless Service, nor accounts it self obeyed by what was never
intended for it: The Lord thy God requires of thee to serve him with all thy
Heart, and with all thy Soul, Matthew. 22.36, 37. And therefore St. Paul does
pray, that the Philippians may be sincere in their Profession, being filled
with the Fruits of Righteousness, or Good Works, to the Praise and Glory of
God, not themselves, Phil. 1.10, 11.

God does not forbid us all intending our Advantage in the performance of his
Commandments.
God indeed has not forbidden us all intending and designing of our own
Advantage in the performance of his Commandments. When He requires us to obey
Him, He does not forbid us all Love of our Selves, and Regard to our own
Self-interests: For why? He does propose to us in Scripture the greatest
Rewards possible, as Motives to us, to persuade us to obey. And the Blessed
Saints in the Scripture, so Eminent for their Service to God, are said to have
had an Eye at the Recompense of Reward. But then our Intention of our own
Advantage in God's Service is forbidden, and renders our obedient Performances
corrupt and insincere, when together with our Intention of serving God, we
either join, first, another Intention of serving Sin: Or, secondly, when we
design some temporal Ends, as much, or more, than we design God's Service.

First, I say, That Man's Obedience is insincere, But 1st. that Man's Obedience
is insincere, who together with his Intention of serving God, joins another
Intention of serving Sin.
who together with his Intentions of serving God, joins another Intention of
serving Sin; as if a Man (as our Savior tells us the Pharisees did) make long
Prayers, and other Professions of Religion, to enable him the better, and
without suspicion, to devour Widows Houses, as well as serve God. Where his
obedient Performances slow from such a mixture of Design as this, they will in
no wise be owned as an obedient, but punished as a sinful Service.

Secondly, Again, Men's Obedience is insincere, When they design some temporal
Ends in the Practice of Virtue, as much or more than they design God's Service;
as when a Man is temperate, II. When he designs some temporal Ends in the
practice of Virtue as much, or more than he intends God's Service.
and will not drink, which is his Duty indeed, but yet only because he cannot
without making himself sick. But when, in the Performance of any Virtue, a Man
has a regard as much, if not more, to his Profit or Ease, than to the Commands
of God, in that case this Obedience is also insincere, and will be far from
entitling him to be an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven: For thus to have as
much regard to our worldly Profit or Pleasure, in the Performance of any Duty,
as to please God, is a degrading of Him; it is a setting up the World for His
Rival: And to bring other Things in Competition with Him, is plainly to
Renounce him. In respect of our Love to God, we must even hate Father and
Mother, Wife and Children, the dearest Interests and Concerns we have in the
World. He will be served and respected above all; for He is jealous of the
Pre-eminence of His Service above all Things, as an Husband is of his Wife's
Love to him above other Men: I the Lord, says he, am a jealous God, Exodus
20.5. And so much for that Sincerity which is required of us, as the first
Qualification of an acceptable Obedience.

II. That Evangelical or Gospel-Obedience, which now, 2dly, Evangelical
Obedience must be entire, viz.
under the Covenant of Grace, is the indispensible Condition of every Man's
Salvation, must be an entire Obedience to all the Laws of the Gospel. Now this
Integrity of our Obedience is such a Perfection and Compleatness of it, as
excludes all Maimedness and Defects; and this in another Word is ordinarily
expressed in Scripture by Vprightness, or walking uprightly. And to be upright in
God's Ways, is not to stumble and fall by Sin or Disobedience; but to be
perfect and entire, or wanting nothing in obedient Performances.

And that our Obedience may be thus entire and upright, it must be, First, The
Obedience of the whole Man: Secondly, To the whole Law: And, Thirdly, performed
at all times.

First, That our Obedience to the Laws of the Gospel may be entire, I. The
Obedience of the whole Man; that is,
and so avail us to Life and Happiness, it must be the Obedience of the whole
Man; that is, we must take care to obey, with all the Powers and Faculties of
our Nature: We must have our Understandings, our Wills, our Affections, and our
Bodily Powers, obedient to God's Laws. And for this, the very Letter of the Law
is express; for when the Lawyer asked our Savior, What shall I do to inherit
eternal Life, Luke 10.25. our Savior asked, how it is written in the Law; who
answering that it is written, Thou shall love (that is, serve, as it is Deuteronomy.
11.13.) the Lord thy God with all thine Heart, or Will, with all thy Soul, or
Affections, with all thy Strength, or Bodily Powers, and with all thy Mind, or
Understanding, verse. 26, 27. When the Lawyer answered him, That thus indeed it
was written in the Law (as it was Deuteronomy. 11.) our Savior told him, he answered
right; and bid him do this, and he should live. Obedience, with all the Powers
and with the whole Nature, is the Means of Life, and the indispensible
Condition of our eternal Happiness. And,

In the first place, of the Mind and Understanding.
First, We must keep all God's Commandments with our Mind, or Understanding;
that is, all the Thoughts and Imaginations, all the Contrivances and Counsels
of our Hearts, must be governed by, and kept in Obedience to the Laws of the
Gospel; so that we must not indulge our selves, nor entertain in our Hearts
evil Thoughts; wanton and vain Thoughts; nor must we purpose and contrive
wicked and unjust Things, no more than we must outwardly act them. Thus the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.4. tells us, That the Weapons of a Christian's Warfare, must
be mighty through God, to the pulling down Strongholds; to the casting down
Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge
of God, and to the bringing into captivity every Thought to the Obedience of
Christ. This Text forbids all Thoughts and Contrivances of Sin.

Secondly, of the Will.
Secondly, As ever we hope to have our Obedience avail us to Life and
Happiness; as we must keep our Minds and Understandings, so likewise our Wills,
in Obedience to God's Commands. The Choice, as well as the Practice of our
Duty, is plainly necessary to render it available to our Salvation; but, on the
other side, he that would sin, if he could conveniently and opportunely; if he
choose Sin, although he miss of opportunity to act it; the bare Choice, without
the Practice, is sufficiently to his Condemnation. Thus our Lord Himself has
determined it, Whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after her, or so long till
his Heart eonsent to commit Lewdness with her if he could, though he never meet
with an Opportunity to act it, has committed Adultery with her already in his
Heart, Matthew. 5.28. This Text shows us, that we may disobey in Willing, as well
as Doing; and that we shall be condemned for a wicked Choice, as well as a
wicked Practice.

Thirdly, of the Affections
Thirdly, As we will render to God the Obedience of the whole Man, an entire
Obedience, such as will avail us to Salvation; we must regulate our Souls and
Affections, conforming them wholly to what God Commands: That is, we must love
our Duty, as well as do it; and not to do it merely out of Fear, but out of
Love. To pretend Obedience to God, and yet to love what he forbids; to make a
show of his Service, and yet in our very Hearts to hanker after his vilest
Enemies, our Sins, whom above all Things his Soul hates; this surely is not
honestly to Serve, but grossly to Collogue, and flatly to Dissemble with Him.
And we must not do our Duty merely out of Fear, I say, but out of Love; for
thus to serve God against our Wills, is to submit to him, as a Slave does to a
Tyrannous Lord; not through any Kindness for him, but through a hateful Fear of
him. But this is such a hateful way of performing Obedience, as God will never
endure, nor accept of; for He scorns to be served by a slavish Fear, and an
unwilling Mind. No Man (as our Savior says, Matthew. 6.24.) can serve two
Masters; for if he loves the one, he will hate the other: Ye cannot serve God
and Mammon. By this he lets us know, that our Love and Obedience must go
together, and be paid both to one God.

Lastly, As we will give God the Service and Obedience of the whole Man, an
Entire Obedience, such as he will accept of to our Salvation, we must Obey him
with all our Strength and bodily Powers: That is, we must not only Inwardly
Approve of God's Commands as good in our Minds and Judgments, bear a Love to
'em with our Affections, and choose 'em with our Wills; but we must proceed
Outwardly to Act, and do the Will of God in the Outward and Constant Practice
of our Lives; we must put to our Strength and bodily Powers, and work the Will
of God in our Lives and Actions. Little Children, says St. John, 1 Epist. 3.7.
let no Man deceive you; he that does Righteousness, is righteous: That is, you
will be deceived, if you suffer others to persuade you, or vainly flatter your
selves, that there is any thing less than doing and acting virtuously and
righteously, for which you shall be rewarded as virtuous and religious Persons.
These Texts, besides many others, show you the necessity, that our Inward good
Motions, proceed to Outward good Operations; that you must go on to do good
Deeds, before you are fit for the Great Reward; that we must work, as well as
desire, and not only will and like, but do our Duty; because on nothing less
than that we shall at the last Day be accepted.

This indeed is the severe Service, and the distasteful Part This the
distasteful part;
of our Duty. A secret Wish, or a sudden Desire of Obedience, may start up in
our Souls unawares; and there is not much opposition made to it, because our
Lusts receive no great hurt from it: And therefore they will allow us to think
of Good, to spend a faint Wish, a sudden Inclination, or fruitless Desire upon
it; but if once we would go on to do our Duty, and to begin Obedience, then
begins the Conflict; our Lusts then bestir themselves with might and main, and
set every Faculty on work to resist and defeat it; for our Thoughts then begin
to argue and to pick Quarrels with our Duty, our Wills then begin to be averse,
and our Affections to cool toward it.

And because in this Obedience of our Works and Actions, And therefore
endeavored to be shifted off.
there is so much of difficulty, therefore are most People so desirous to shift
it off, and so forward to take up with any thing which will save them the
labor of it: They persuade themselves, that God will admit of easier Terms;
and build their Hopes on cheaper Services; as particularly, that it will be
sufficient to Salvation, that they Believe the Gospel, and that Jesus Christ
died for them; that God will accept of the Will for the Deed; that God will
excuse their Disobedience, because when they fall, it is by reason of strong
and violent Temptations: And, lastly, that it is not without Reluctance and
great Unwillingness that they disobey. But all these are deceitful
Imaginations; for howsoever we are against Sin in our Thoughts, and Minds, and
Desires, the working Wickedness will make us, in God's account, Sons of Sin and
Disobedience, and will be sure to render such Children of Wrath and
Destruction. If you live after the Flesh, says St. Paul, you shall die, Romans
8.13. And whatever Men think in their Minds, or desire in their Hearts, or
profess in their Words to the contrary; if for all that they continue to commit
Sin in their Actions, Christ has told them plainly, That he will pronounce
(when he comes to sit as Judge) Depart from me, all ye that work Iniquity,
Matthew. 7.23.

And thus you see what is, in the first place, necessary to make up an Entire
Obedience; that our Obedience might be that of the whole Man; and that it may
be such, we must have our Minds, our Wills, our Affections, and, lastly, our
outward Actions, in Obedience to the Laws of the Gospel; that all these several
Powers must unite in God's Service, before it will be Upright and Complete,
such as at present his Law requires, and such as at the last Day he will accept
of, and reward us for.

II. It must be an Obedience to to the whole Law.
Secondly, As it is necessary to the Integrity of our Obedience, that we Obey
his Holy Will and Commandments with our whole Man, with our Minds, our Souls,
our Wills, and our Strength; so that we Obey his whole Law, and Conform our
selves to every of his Commandments. We must not think to pick and choose in the
doing of our Duty; for if we do not Obey all, we Obey not right in any; because
all the Laws of God are bound upon us by the same Power, and enjoined by the
same Authority: So that if we fulfill any one upon this account of his having
required it; the same reason holds for the fulfilling of all the rest.

This indeed is very hardly believed, because it is so hard to practice; for
almost every Man has some Sin or other, which he can as well Die as part with:
It has got his Heart, and is become the Master of his Affections; and since he
loves it so dearly, he hopes God will bear with it too.

And when Men are thus desirous to Obey God by halves, and would hope that this
might serve the turn, they take to themselves false Grounds and Confidences,
under which they shelter themselves, in the allowance or indulgence of such
Sins, as they are resolved to practice; and when they do wilfully continue in
the practice of any Sin, they usually plead one or more of these Things in
excuse:

This endeavored to be evaded by Excuses;
First, That they Sinned for the Preservation of their Religion and themselves,
in times of Danger and Persecution: Or, secondly, for the supply of their
Necessities by sinful Arts, Compliances, and Services, and in times of Want and
Indigency: Or, thirdly, for the satisfaction of their Flesh, in Sins of Temper,
Age, or Way of Life.

But in vain.
But whosoever would Obey God's Laws, to the Salvation of his Soul, must Obey in
every Instance, and continue wilfully to transgress in none; he must never hope
to please God in nothing, but what he lists himself: For the Obedience of the
Covenant, whereinto Christ commissioned his Apostles to Baptize Converts, is
nothing below an Entire Obedience: Go, says he, Baptize all Nations, teaching
them to observe all Things whatsoever I have commanded you, Matthew. 28.19, 20.
And threatens, Matthew. 5.19. That he who breaks the least of these Commandments,
shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven, or none at all, which is the
sense of the Hebrew Phrase. So that the Obedience upon which alone we must
expect to be Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven, must be a Faithful and Entire
Obedience to all the Laws and Commands of the Gospel. Thus we must Obey all
God's Holy Will and Commandments; which brings me,

III. To my general Proposal; which was, to show you, What it is to Walk in the
same all the Days of our Lives; III. What it is to Walk in the same all the
Days of our Lives.
we must continue in such a Sincere and Entire Obedience, even to the End of
our Lives. We must not think to please God by an Obedience, that comes and goes
by Fits; or by serving him only at such times as we are in Humor, and have no
Temptation to the contrary; but our Service of Him must be Constant and
Uniform; we must obey him in all things, and wilfully transgress in none.

Some indeed there are, who parcel out their time, and divide it betwixt God
and their Sins; they observe a constant Course of Transgressing and Repenting,
of Sin and Sorrow; for they are always won when they are tempted, and they are
always sorrowful when they have done: And others there are, who wholly fall off
at last, and sin against God for altogether.

But now as for such a broken Service as this is, God will not endure a
constant Revolution of Sin and Repentance.
God will by no means accept of it: For when Christ comes to Judgment, he will
pass Sentence upon Men according to what they are then, and not according to
what they have been formerly. If the righteous Man turn away from his
Righteousness, and commit Iniquity, and do according to all that the wicked Man
does; Shall he live? No, by no means: For all his Righteousness that he has
done formerly, shall not be mentioned; but in his Trespass that he has since
trespassed, and in his Sin that he has since sinned, in them shall he die,
Ezekiel. 18.24. And it is they, which by patient continuing in Well-doing, seek
for Glory and Immortality, that shall inherit eternal Life, Romans 2.6, 7.

But as for all those who fall off from a good Course, and turn Apostates from
Obedience, their Case is desperate, and their Condition extremely Damnable: For
if after Men have once escaped the Pollution of the World, through the
Knowledge of Christ's Gospel, they are again entangled therein, and overcome;
then is the latter End worse with them than the Beginning, 2 Pet. 2.20. So that
the Obedience which God will accept, and which will render us Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven, must be, as of our whole Man, and to all the Laws of the
Gospel; so it must be performed to 'em at all times: We must persevere in it
through all Seasons, and take care both to live and die in it; for our Reward
will be dispensed unto us, according to the Nature of our Service, at the time
of Payment, and He only, as our Savior says, that endures to the End, shall
be saved, Matthew. 10.22.

And thus I have showed you, first, What it is to Obey God's Holy Will and
Commandments, or how far you must be Obedient to the Holy Will and Commandments
of God, as ever you will hope to obtain Salvation, or to be Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven: And, secondly, I have also showed you, What it is to Walk in
the same all the Days of your Life, or how long you must persevere in such
Obedience, even to the End of your Lives. In short, I have also showed you,
That the Obedience which is the Condition of our Salvation, even now under the
Gospel, must be a Sincere and Entire Observance of all the Laws of
Christianity. Sincere it must be, as I have showed you, by being a true and
undissembled Service, opposite to all Hypocrisy, or a false and feigned
Pretense of Obeying him, when in reality we only serve our own selves, our own
Lusts and Interests. And Entire it must be, by being the Obedience of the whole
Man, to the whole Law; and not for some short, but for our whole Time, and to
the End of our Lives.

Covenant of Grace, is required, as the indispensible Condition of our being
made Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven; wherein lies the difference between
this, and the First Covenant, or Covenant of Works, which Christ came to
purchase our Freedom from, and to establish this in its room? The Condition of
the First (as I have told you) was no less than a Perfect, Exact, Vnsinning
Obedience, the never offending in any one Point; and if our Obedience now must
be so Sincere and Entire an Obedience of the whole Man, to all the Laws of the
Gospel, and this to be performed at all times (as has been now described)
wherein does this come short, you will say, of that Perfect Obedience, required
of us in our State of Innocence, or that Legal Obedience required under the
Covenant of Works?

Evangelical Obedience, as thus stated from any such Doubt, The difference
between Evangelical and a Legal Obedience.
as if there were no difference betwixt the Covenants in matter of Rigor; I
shall show that there is a very material Difference, and such as makes this we
are now under, deservedly be styled a Covenant of Grace. And the difference is
this, That whereas under the First, the Obedience was to be so perfect, that
there was no Mercy upon the least Transgression; but the Offender became
immediately liable to the threatened Punishment. Now under the Second, as
Sincere and Entire as our Obedience must be; yet no more is required at our
Hands, than what by God's Grace, and our own honest Endeavors, we shall be
enabled to perform. And therefore since the Weakness of our Nature is such,
that we cannot continue in an unsinning Obedience; though all our wilful and
chosen Sins indeed, if persisted in, will still put a Bar to our Salvation;
yet all our unavoidable Infirmities, and involuntary Transgressions, shall be
constantly forgiven us; and even our Wilful and more Heinous Sins, when by
Repentance we bewail and forsake 'em, and take better care to avoid 'em for the
future, they also, through the Mediation of Christ, according to the Terms he
has obtained for us in the Covenant of Grace, shall be forgiven us, and not
prejudice our being Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.

This difference not so great, but that our wilful and cbosen Sins will put a
Bar to our Salvation.
True it is, the difference betwixt the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of
Grace, is not so great, but our Wilful Chosen Sins, if still persisted in, will
put a Bar to our Salvation. A wilful Sin is when we see and consider of the
Sinfulness of any Action, which we are tempted to, and after that choose to Act
and Perform it. Every Sin against Knowledge and Conscience, is a wilful Sin,
when our own Heart rebukes and checks us at the time of Sinning, telling us,
that God has forbidden that which we are about to do; notwithstanding which,
we presume to do it. And as for them, they are all of an heinous Guilt, and of
a crying Nature; such Sins are a despising of God's Law, and therefore are
called Presumptuous Sins, and are said to be acted through a Rebellious Pride,
and with an high Hand, Numb. 15.30.

And those who have committed such, are said, Heb. 10.29. to have done despite
to the Spirit of Grace, because as well the Spirit of God, as their own Reason
have resisted 'em in the commiting of such Sins, which Resistance
notwithstanding they have violently broke through. And as to such Sins
therefore, they will make us the Children of Wrath, and subject us to
Punishment, as well now, as under the Law, as is evident from that place, Heb.
10.28, 29. now mentioned: He that despised Moses 's Law, died without Mercy; of
how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the Blood of the Covenant
an unholy Thing, (which they do who do wholly Apostatize) and has done despite
to the Spirit of Grace? which they do who do sin wilfully.

And this they will be accounted to do, whether such Sins be Directly and
Expressly wilful Some Sins are directly and expressly wilful.
and chosen, or only Indirectly so, and by Interpretation. Sometimes Men eye
and view the Sin they are about to commit, before they choose or act; they pause
and deliberate, doubt and demurr about it; they have a Conflict and Dispute in
their own Minds, whether they should commit, or keep off from it: And when
notwithstanding this they commit it, that Sin is then directly and expressly
chosen and wilful, and done in despite of the Spirit of Grace, and is therefore
of a very heinous and damning Nature.

But besides these, Some indirectly and interpretatively.
there are other sinful Actions which are not chosen directly and expressly, but
only indirectly, and by Interpretation; that is, when Men expressly choose such a
state of Things, as make some sinful Action after that, to be no longer a
matter of free Choice, but almost necessary and unavoidable. Thus he that
wilfully drinks till he is Drunk, and then in his Drink commits Murder and
Uncleanness, or any other mad Frolicks, or sinful Extravagances, without any
deliberation or consideration at all, shall nevertheless be judged to have
wilfully committed those Sins, because he did deliberately and wilfully fall
into that Sin of Drunkenness, which when he was in (by depriving himself of his
Reason) made those, or any other Sins, unavoidable at that time. So again, he
that watches not over, but indulges and gives way to his Passions, and in his
Anger kills a Man; and he that accustoms himself to a Sin so often, that he
knows not when he commits it, as to swear, in either of these Cases also, he
shall be judged wilfully in God's account to have committed Murder, and to have
swore; because any Man may choose to indulge and humor his Passions, or to
accustom himself to that Sin, which makes his falling into other Sins so
unavoidable. And, lastly, he that wilfully neglects the means of attaining to
any Grace or Virtue, will be judged wilfully to have omitted his Duty, which in
the use of due Means he might have done acceptably. Thus in either of these
Cases, when Men fall into any Sin, either by Drunkenness, or by indulging, and
not watching over their Passions; or by reason of having long accustomed
themselves to such Sins; or, lastly, by neglecting the Means of attaining to
any Grace or Virtue: In any of these Cases, he that commits a Sin, his Sin will
be accounted as indirectly, and interpretatively chosen and voluntary, because
he did willingly do those things which brought and betrayed him into such Sin;
or wilfully neglected those Means which would have preserved him from them. And
so his Sin will be condemned, as a chosen and wilful Sin, and a Transgression
of God's Law, and he punished as a wilfully Disobedient Person. So that the
difference between the Law and the Gospel is not such, as that wilful Sins
shall be now unpunished. But the difference is, 1st. that those who sincerely
and entirely obey, shall not be called to an account for unchosen and
involuntary Sins.
But here the difference is very great and comfortable; and it is this, That,

First, As to our unchosen and involuntary Sins, which, through the Weakness
and Frailty of our Nature, we cannot always avoid, through the Mediation of
Christ, now under the Covenant of Grace; those who sincerely and entirely Obey
the Laws of the Gospel, shall not be called to an account for such.

And such unchosen and involuntary Sins, are those which we commit either
through Ignorance, because we did not understand our Duty; or through
Inconsideration, because we did not think of it. And unless our Ignorance and
Inconsideration be themselves wilful, we shall not be condemned for the
Failings we have committed through either of 'em.

The first cause of an innocent Involuntariness, Ignorance of our Duty.
The first cause of an innocent and pardonable Involuntariness, is Ignorance of
our Duty, when we do what God forbids, because we do not know that He has
forbid it; for such Failings as we ignorantly commit, we shall not be condemned
under the Covenant of Grace; for Christ, who is our High Priest, as St. Paul
assures us, will have compassion on the Ignorant, and them that are out of the
way, Heb. 5.2.

Provided it be not wilful.
True it is, there are those that are wilfully ignorant; for either they shut
their Eyes, and will not see their Duty, or they are idle and careless, and
will not enquire after it: So that if they do not know their Duty, it is
because they do not desire the Knowledge of it, or will be at no pains for it;
they neither read the Word, nor come to hear it, nor to be Catechized; and if
they do come, neither think nor consider afterward upon what they have heard;
nor pray to God to make all those Means of Knowledge effectual to their
Salvation. And in the neglect of these Means of Knowledge, they make themselves
wilfully ignorant; and so their Ignorance will not be their Excuse, but their
condemning Sin, because it was wilful and chosen. But if you have an honest
Heart, desirous to be taught, that you may know and do your Duty; and use an
honest Industry, by Reading, coming to be Catechized, by constantly Hearing of
the Word. If thus you do all that lies upon you to be informed what you ought
to do, and yet afterward, if through Misunderstanding, you fail, then through
the Grace of the Gospel, and the Mediation of our Savior, what you have been
wanting in, will not be imputed to your Condemnation. Nor,

2d. Inconsideration.
Secondly, What you do unwillingly commit through Inconsideration. We sometimes
do things we do not think nor consider the Evil of 'em when we commit 'em; and
so their Sinfulness being unseen, is also unchosen; and these Slips do so steal
from us, without our Consideration and thinking of 'em, several ways; either,
first, by Surprise, and a sudden Temptation. Inconsideration excuses, 1. when
through surprise.
And thus St. Paul, upon an unexpected occasion, was surprised into a sudden
Anger, and into an unadvised Irreverence toward the High Priest, Acts 23.1, 2,
3. And the beginnings of a single Passion, whether of Anger or Envy, and the
unadvised Slips of the Tongue, generally enter this way. Or, secondly, we
venture upon several Actions without thinking of their sinfulness, through our
natural Weariness, and the length and constancy of a Temptation. Thus in times
of Affliction, or Sickness, 2. When through natural weariness, and the length and
strength of a Temptation.
by the uneasiness of the Flesh, and the hardness of a Man's Condition, a
Person is sometimes tempted to fret and murmur, and to be peevish and repining:
And so we find it was with Job, who though a Man patient to a Proverb, and one
to whom, by the Testimony of God Himself, there was none Equal in the whole
Earth, a perfect and an upright Man, one who feared God, and eschewed Evil,
Job. 1.8. Yet this Man, I say, of admirable Constancy and Patience, was wearied
out of his Watchfulness, by a tedious trial of Afflictions; and in that time of
his Unadvisedness, uttered many things impatient with his Lips, as appears from
his whole History. And, lastly, Lastly, When by the violent discomposure of our
Thinking Powers, our Minds are so disturbed, that we cannot think what we do.
we sometimes inconsiderately and unadvisedly do an ill Thing, by reason of the
violent Discomposure and Disturbance of our thinking Powers, when our Mind is
so disturbed, that on a sudden we cannot think what we do; as upon a sudden
Grief, Anger, or Fear. And thus Samuel, who was a Person so dear to God, that
if he could be entreated by any Man, he tells us it would be by him, or Moses,
standing to intercede before him; did yet in an instance that would have drawn
him into the hazard of his Life, dispute God's Command, when he should have
performed it, and question where in Duty it became him to Obey; for when God
did bid him go and Anoint David King, which Service was sure to draw upon him
the implacable Hatred of Saul; through the sudden force of that frightful
Thought, instead of Obeying, he answers again, saying, How can I go? for if
Saul hear of it, he will kill me, 1 Samuel 16.1, 2. So that as for those Slips,
which we do unwillingly commit, through either of these Causes of
Inconsideration, they are a matter of God's Mercy, and will be graciously born
with, and forgiven now under the Gospel and Covenant of Grace; for all those
Persons now mentioned, as guilty of the like, St. Paul, Job, and Samuel, were
in a State of Grace, and the dear Children of God; I say therefore, they will
be graciously born with, and forgiven.

Provided, first, we never be guilty of 'em, Ignorance and Inconsideration
excuse not these Sins, 1. Which we have time to understand and observe; nor, 2.
Crying Sins; nor, 3. Those we do not endeavor against; nor, lastly, Which we
are not sorry for.
when we have understanding of, and time to observe 'em, nor, secondly, in any
great and crying Sin, as Murder, Adultery, etc. for no Man can pretend he did
unwittingly commit such things, as a Man's Conscience will presently start at:
Provided, thirdly, we do endeavor and strive, and watch against'em: And,
lastly, after we find that we have fallen into'em, provided we be sorry, and
earnestly beg God's Pardon for 'em. Provided thus, such Slips and Infirmities,
as we do commit unadvisedly and inconsiderately, shall not be laid to our
Charge.

And thus you see, that our unavoidable Infirmities, and our unwilling
Transgressions, which through an unaffected Ignorance, and an involuntary
Inconsideration, we do commit, shall not be imputed to our Condemnation now
under the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace. And this is the first great Difference
between the First Covenant, wherein the least Sin was unpardonable, and this
Second Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace, wherein, through the Mediation of
CHRIST, all our unwilling, involuntary Infirmities, shall be graciously passed
by.

The 2d. Difference betwixt Legal and Evangelical Obedience, That our wilful
and more heinous Sins when repented of, through the Mediation of Christ,
according to the Terms he has obtained for us in the Covenant of Grace, shall
be forgiven us.
The Second great Difference is, That even our wilful and more heinous Sins,
when by our Repentance we bewail and forsake 'em, and take better care to avoid
'em for the future; they also, through the Mediation of Christ, according to
the Terms he has obtained for us in the Covenant of Grace, shall be forgiven
us, and not prejudice our being Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Among the Jews, according to the strictness of Moses's Law, the Punishment
took place upon the first wilful Breach: He that despised Moses 's Law, says
the Apostle, if it were in an instance where the Law threatened Death, died
without Mercy, Heb. 10.28. A Man that had committed Adultery, or Murder, or any
other Crime, whereof Death was the established Punishment, was to Die without
Remedy; for no Sacrifice would be accepted for him, nor would the Law admit of
any Favor or Dispensation.

But when Christ came into the World, his Business was to abrogate all the
Rigor of Moses's Law, as well as that of the First Covenant, and to Preach an
Universal Pardon upon Repentance. Now under the Covenant of Grace, God does not
cast us off upon the Commission of every Sin, but as he is heartily desirous
that we should repent of it, according to that of Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says
the Lord, I do not delight in the death of a Sinner, but rather that he return,
and live. So when we repent, he has obliged Himself, by his Truth and
Faithfulness, to forgive it, according to that of St. John, Epist. 1.9. If we
confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins.

Remission of Sins upon Repentance, the great Doctrine of the Gospel.
This is the great Doctrine of the Gospel, which is a Covenant of Remission of
Sins upon our Repentance; and therefore our Savior, when he began himself to
Preach it, he said, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Matthew. 4.17.
And when he left the World, he commanded his Disciples, that they should
declare to the World the Pardon of Sins upon their Repentance; for so St. Luke
tells us, Chapter 24.47. that he gave 'em in Charge, That Repentance and Remission
of Sins should be preached in his Name to all Nations.

Thus has God provided us of Means, which will most certainly restore us to his
Favor. He has not left us in a forsaken State, but has prescribed us this
Method of Repentance to recover us out of it, Repentance will be accepted to
our pardon, for our known or secret Sins, whether wilfully or unwillingly
committed, but now forgot, though generally repented of.
and to be the great Instrument of our Pardon and Reconciliation. And our
Repentance, through the Mediation of Christ, will be accepted for our Pardon,
whatever our Sins have been, whether known or unknown; whether they have been
wilful or involuntary Sins.

First, Our unknown, or secret Sins, which whether wilfully or unwillingly we
have committed, but now we have forgot, shall be forgiven us upon our hearty,
though general Prayer to God to forgive us; such as was that of David, O
cleanse me from my secret Faults, Psalm 19.12. and upon our diligent care
hereafter, not knowingly and wilfully to transgress any of God's Laws. And,

Secondly, Our most unknown and wilful Sins, even they shall also be forgiven
us, if for every particular Sin we know our selves to have committed, 2. For
our most known and wilful Sins, if particularly repented of.
we particularly repent of it by confessing it to God, and by taking care to
amend and forsake it for the future.

'Till we are reclaimed indeed from our former Sins, and are become God's
dutiful Sons and faithful Servants for the present, and for the future; it is
not consistent with the Honor of his Justice and Holiness, with the Authority
of his Laws, and with the Wisdom of his Government, to receive us into his
Favor: But as soon as ever we are conscientiously reformed from our Sins, he
will be reconciled to us, if we are heartily sorry for what has been past, and
amended for the future; and in case of Injury or Wrong done to God or Man, we
undo, as much as in us lies, what has been done amiss, by making amends, and
reparation for what we have injured either.

We cannot be said to repent of a Sin, unless we undo, And in case of Injury to
Man, if Restitution be made.
as much as in us lies, what has been done amiss: Therefore if any one has
offended his Neighbor, and given him just cause of Anger against him; he that
will truly repent, and expect that God will hear his Prayers for his Pardon,
must go and acknowledge his Offense, endeavor to appease his Neighbor, and be
reconciled to him; for so our Savior has ordered, Matthew. 5.23. before he offer
his Prayer to God. And he that has injured his Neighbor, either by taking away
his good Name by Slander, or his Goods by wrong Dealing, must take off the
Slander, and restore what he has unjustly got; and so did good Zacheus, upon
his Repentance, we find, Luke 19.8. when he embraced the Gospel.

And so likewise toward the Reparation of God's Honor, Of high Dishonor to
God and Religion, if that be not repaired by an eminent Repentance.
I must needs add, as a necessary part of Repentance, that he who has formerly
lived a very notorious and scandalously ill Life, to the great Dishonor of God
and Religion, must now, toward the Reparation of God's Honor, be as famous
for his eminent and exemplary Piety, that his Repentance may be accepted, a
private Sorrow for public Scandals falling vastly short of undoing what has
been done amiss, in which consists the restitutive part of Repentance. The
necessity of this, we have exemplified in the case of the Woman who washed our
Savior's Feet with her Tears, and wiped them with the Hair of her Head, Luke
7.44. She had formerly, it seems, been a very vile Woman; but the reason why
her Sins, which were many, were forgiven, is said by our Savior to have been,
because she loved much, verse. 47. And thus if we do repent, our Sins shall not
be imputed to us; but through the Merits of Christ's Death, and the Grace of
the Gospel, they shall be looked upon as if they had never been.

And thus I have showed you, that other great Difference betwixt that Obedience
required now under the Covenant of Grace, and the Obedience required by the
First Covenant; That whereas the Obedience required by the First, was a
Perfect, Exact, Vnsinning Obedience, the never Offending at all. Now not only
our involuntary Sins and Infirmities; but also our most voluntary and wilful
Transgressions, when by Repentance we bewail and forsake 'em, and take better
care to avoid 'em for the future; they also, through the Mediation of Christ,
according to the Terms he has obtained for us in the Covenant of Grace, shall
be forgiven us, and not prejudice our being Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.

And upon the whole, I have now showed you, The sum of Evangelical Obedience.
as to all that Obedience required now under the Gospel, to make us Inheritors
of the Kingdom of Heaven; that there is not required indeed, a Perfect, Exact,
Unsinning Obedience, the never offending in any one part, which was the
indispensible Condition of the First Covenant; but there must be a Sincere and
Entire Obedience paid to all the Laws of the Gospel: Sincere it must be, by
being a true and undissembled Service, Obeying 'em not only because most for
our Health and Interest, as generally the Laws of Religion are; but even where
they are contrary to our Inclinations and Interest, because God commands us.
And Entire it must be, by being the Obedience of the whole Man, of our
Understanding, our Wills, our Affections, and our Actions, to the whole Law of
God, and that at all times. And this if we endeavor the best we can to do,
that our unwilling and involuntary Failings, which through Ignorance and
Frailty we commit, shall, upon our Prayers to God, be forgiven us; and that our
wilful Transgressions, when we repent of, and forsake 'em, through the
Mediation of Christ, and the Grace of the Gospel, shall not be imputed to our
Condemnation.

The sum also thereof, according to Dr. Hammond.
In a word: That Obedience (to speak also in the Words of the Learned Dr.
Hammond) which is the Condition of the Second Covenant, and of our being made
Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven: Negatively it is not a Perfect, Exact,
Unsinning Obedience, the never offending at all in any kind of Sin, (this is
the Condition of the First Covenant.) Nor, secondly, is it never to have
committed any deliberate Sin in the former Course of our Lives. Nor, thirdly,
never to have gone on, or continued in any habitual or customary Sin for the
time past: But it is positively the New Creature, or Renewed, Sincere, Honest,
Faithful Obedience to the whole Gospel, giving up the whole Heart unto Christ,
the performing of that which God enables us to perform, and bewailing our
Infirmities, and Frailties, and Sins, both of the past and present Life, and
beseeching God's Pardon in Christ for all such, and sincerely laboring to
Mortify every Sin, and to perform an uniform Obedience to God, and from every
Fall rising again by Repentance. And thus, if we Obey God's Holy Will and
Commandments, and Walk in the same all the Days of our Life, we shall not fail
to be Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.

And thus I have fully Explained to you all the Conditions of the Covenant of
Grace, both on God's Part, and on ours; both what it is to be a Member, etc.
which are the Mercies and Favors made over to us therein on God's Part, and
what it is to Renounce the Devil, etc. which are the Conditions to be performed
on ours.

My next Task must be, (and then I shall give you a full account of all that
pertains to the Nature and Substance of the Covenant of Grace) to show you,
what a happy State of Salvation this is, to be in such a Gracious Covenant with
GOD; By whose Mediation we obtained it; By whom and how we are called into it:
And, lastly, what infinite Thanks we owe to God for Calling us into this State
of Salvation: All which Points we have taught us in these Words: And I thank
God our Heavenly Father, that he has called me to this State of Salvation,
through Jesus Christ our Savior.

THE XXIV. Lecture. And I heartily thank our Heavenly Father, that he has
called me to this State of Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior.
I Have already, in order to a full Explication of all that pertains to the
Nature of the Covenant of Grace, given you an account of the Terms and
Conditions of it, both on God's part and on ours, as they are laid down and
taught you in your Church-Catechism.

The invaluable Privileges on God's part, made over to you therein, as you are
taught in your Catechism, and I have explained 'em to you are, first, That you
are therein made Members of Christ; secondly, Children of God; and, thirdly,
Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. And those Conditions to be performed by
us, our part of the Covenant, are, That we should, first, Renounce the Devil
and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the
sinful Lusts of the Flesh. Secondly, That we should believe all the Articles of
the Christian Faith. And, Thirdly, That we should keep God's Holy Will and
Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of our Life. And what each
several Article in this your gracious Covenant does mean and import, I have
hitherto (according to the best of my Skill) been explaining to you.

And now, if there be any thing farther necessary to a full and complete
Explication of the Nature of this Covenant, it must be this, in the second
place, to show you, How that thereby you are restored to a state of Salvation:
Thirdly, By whose Mediation you obtained so gracious a Covenant, and are put
thereby into a state of Salvation; It was through Jesus Christ our Savior.
Fourthly, By whom and how we have been Called to this state of Salvation; It
was our Heavenly Father, who has called us to this state of Salvation, through
Jesus Christ our Savior. And, lastly, What infinite reason you have heartily
to thank Almighty God our Heavenly Father, that he has Called you to this
state of Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior.

And I heartily thank our Heavenly Father, that he has Called me to this
State, etc.

And as all these Points are fairly taught you in these Words of your
Catechism; so in commenting upon these, I will, by God's Assistance, open and
explain these several Points to you. To proceed therefore, in order to a more
complete understanding of the whole Nature of the Covenant of Grace, let us see,

Secondly, How this Covenant, whose Terms and Conditions I have been explaining
to you, does restore us to a State of Salvation. That in the Covenant of Grace,
we are restored to a State of Salvation.
Salvation does import a Deliverance from Danger or Misery; and a State of
Salvation does import the being put into a Condition of Safety, where one may
be safe and secure from Danger and Misery, if he please. For our understanding
therefore, how this Covenant of Grace is a means of restoring us to a State of
Salvation, we must look back and consider, how we brought our selves into a
State of Danger and Misery before; and how by the Covenant of Grace we are put
again into a State of Safety and Security, if we please.

How we brought our selves into a state of Misery before.
And to this purpose we must know, That God Almighty created Man at first in
such a state of Perfection, with such an enlightened Mind, such a regular Will
to the Laws of right Reason, and with such obedient Appetites and Affections,
that he might, if he would, have continued in perfect Innocence: And now making
him thus upright, and capable to perform such an Obedience, God did very
reasonably make this Covenant with Man, That he should perform a Perfect,
Exact, Vnsinning Obedience, and live for ever: But upon the least Sin, the
eating of the Fruit of one Forbidden Tree, he should surely Die. The Event of
which Proceeding was, that Man harkening to the Suggestions of the Devil, did
thereby Rebel against his Maker, take part with Satan, and so did forfeit all
his Right and Hopes of Happiness; which upon the faithful Performance of his
Covenant he would have had, was shut out of Paradise, and condemned to Death,
as you will see largely described in the Third Chapter of Genesis. Thus did
Man, by the breach of his Covenant with God, bring himself into a state of
Danger and extreme Misery.

How by the Covenant of Grace we are put into a state of Security, if we please.
And now here it comes in for us to consider the Second Covenant, as that which
restores us to a State of Salvation. Had the First remained uncancelled, and in
full force, we must have all perished without remedy, upon a double account: It
required an unsinning Obedience, and we had sinned: It allowed no place for
Repentance after Sin, and yet we had brought our selves into that State, that
except we should repent, and our Repentance be accepted, we must all
undoubtedly have perished. We were unavoidably therefore bound up by that First
Covenant, as the case then stood with us, to Death and Misery; and it was not
possible for the Wit of Man to contrive any way to escape it.

And now when we were in this irrepairable State, was God of his own Goodness
graciously pleased to cancel the First Covenant, blotting out the Handwriting
of Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of
the way, nailing it to the Cross of Christ, Col. 2.14. By which place is more
immediately meant, I must confess, his cancelling and making void, as to any
condemning Power in it, the Covenant of Works made with the Israelites by the
hand of Moses; but not so as to exclude his cancelling all former Covenants
that were too rigorous and impossible for Man in his fallen State to perform. I
conclude therefore, that God was graciously pleased to cancel and make void the
First Covenant, under which Man was created, and which he was incapable of
performing and receiving Benefit by, having forfeited that perfect Light, and
perfect Strength, which should enable him to perform it, and become very
defective and weak both in Knowledge and Ability of performing his Duty toward
his Creator. And he was pleased to grant unto us, and to establish with us a
Second, by way of Remedy against the Rigor and Extremity of the First; wherein
God, as it were, descending from his Majesty and Glory, does oblige himself to
make good to such, as shall enter into it, and continue faithful therein, those
inestimable Favors and Benefits which do vastly exceed those of the former.
For, in the first place, whereas the First Covenant did not (as far as I can
find in Scripture) any where Expressly promise Eternal Life in Heaven, to those
that were faithful in it: The Covenant of Grace, whereunto you are called,
does, in innumerable places, propose immortal Life and Happiness, to all those
that do Believe its Doctrines and Articles, and do sincerely Obey its Precepts,
as has been showed you; for it is Jesus Christ who has brought Life and
Immortality to light, through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. And then, secondly,
whereas under the First, there was no place for Repentance; but nothing less
than an Exact and Unsinning Obedience, was the Condition of this Life and
Happiness: And upon the first and least Offense, all was become forfeit and
lost. Herein we have this relaxation of Rigor, and exceeding Favor, That even
the greatest Sinners, upon their Repentance and Return to God, should be saved;
and our Savior therefore left Commission with his Disciples, That Pardon and
Remission of Sins should be preached in his Name, amongst all Nations, Luke
24.47. Thus, in the Covenant of Grace, is Repentance, like a Plank thrown out,
which if Shipwrack'd Sinners lay hold on, they may save themselves; and the
Covenant it self like a Ship, like Noah's Ark, whereinto those that enter, and
will continue in it, may be landed safe in the Kingdom of Heaven. So that the
Covenant of Grace, in whose Terms and Conditions you have been lately
instructed, does restore us you see into a state of Salvation, whereby we are
put again into a state of Safety and Security, if we please.

And now, Thirdly, it will be infinitely worth our Enquiry, That by the
Mediation of Jesus Christ it was, that we obtained such a gracious Covenant,
whereby we are restored to a state of Salvation.
by whose Mediation we obtained such a Covenant of Grace, and were restored
thereby into a state of Salvation. And it was through Jesus Christ our Savior.
You have seen how wretchedly Man did break his Covenant with his Maker, and
into what a miserable State he plunged himself thereby.

And now behold the unspeakable Goodness of God the Father Almighty, declared
in Jesus Christ his Son! When God's Justice required, that Sin should be
punished; when his Holiness forbid, that a thing so contrary to his Nature, and
hateful unto him, as Sin is, should escape the severest Marks of his
Displeasure, and when his Wisdom would not suffer it to escape Punishment, lest
his Creatures should take occasion from thence to Rebel the more against him;
when for these Reasons it was necessary that the Sin of Man should be most
severely punished; then did Jesus Christ the Son of God interpose Himself
betwixt Vengeance and us, and did mediate and intercede with his Father, to
pardon and forgive us the Breach of our Covenant, he laying down his own Life a
Ransom for our Sins, to redeem us from Misery, and paying his own Blood a
Satisfaction for our Offenses: This we have taught us, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one
Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom
for all. And, moreover, because having fallen from our Uprightness, and lost
that perfect Light and Strength, whereby, in a State of Innocence we had been
able to perform a perfect, exact, and unsinning Obedience, the Conditions of
the First Covenant; because this we were no longer able to do; and therefore so
long as we remained bound to perform the First Covenant, we must have been
however lost; Jesus Christ did therefore, I say, moreover mediate and intercede
with his Father in our behalf, and purchasing the Grace and Favor with his
precious Blood, did obtain for us a better Covenant, a Second and more Gracious
Covenant, instead of the First, which was more Rigorous; a Covenant consisting
of such Conditions, as by his Grace we shall be enabled to perform, and of far
better Promises to encourage our Endeavors and Performances; for which reason
he is therefore styled the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established
upon better Promises, Heb. 8.6.

In particular, He did obtain these infinitely happy Terms and Conditions for
us (as has been already shown you) that if we would renounce God's Enemies, the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and return to our Obedience (which is in other
Words to Repent) we should be accounted as his Children, and have all our
former Rebellions pardoned us: That if we will firmly and practically Believe
in God, and in Jesus Christ, who died and suffered for us, we should be Members
of his Body, the CHVRCH, and partake of all those manifold Graces and
Privileges he has Purchased for it. And lastly, if instead of a perfect,
exact, unsinning Obedience, we would but perform a Sincere and Honest one, such
as, by the Grace he would afford us, we should be enabled to, we should finally
be made Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. Thus did Jesus Christ mediate and
intercede with God the Father for our Pardon, upon the Breach of the First
Covenant, paying down his own Life a Satisfaction for the Injustice done by us
to God, in violating of it, and did purchase and procure of God the Father, to
be reconciled to us upon easier Terms, such as those in the Covenant of Grace
now mentioned.

And now let us behold here, and admire the infinite Wisdom also, as well as
Goodness, in this Method of our Redemption, through and by the Mediation of
Jesus Christ our Savior. Was it necessary, as a due Reparation of God's
Honor, that the Divine Justice must be satisfied for the Breach of the First
Covenant? Who then could be sufficient for so vast an Undertaking, except the
Son of God, who is God Himself! The Sufferings of such a Person, as a
Satisfaction to the Divine Justice, could alone fully proclaim the infinite
Guilt of Sin; and, How extremely God was incensed against it, and could alone
sufficiently pacify and atone the Divine Anger thereupon! Was it, again, on
the other side, requisite to Man's Restoration, that a Covenant should be
obtained of such Conditions, as we in our state of Weakness might be capable of
performing? Who then was so proper to propose to, and obtain of the Father such
gracious Terms for us, as one who was himself Man, and so could be sensible of
all the Weakness and Infirmities of Man, Sin excepted, and had experienced
himself what was in the Power of Man to perform?

Why, all this does of it self appear to have been considered in the Divine
Wisdom, and in the Contrivance of Man's Recovery to a state of Salvation,
through the Mediation of Jesus Christ our Savior; but for our better
assurance, the Author to the Hebrews does expressly declare it to have been so,
Heb. 2.17, 18. telling us, That since he had undertaken to mediate a Peace for
us with God, that therefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto
his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, in Things
pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation for the Sins of the People: For in
that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted. By being God, he was qualified to be a faithful High Priest in
Things pertaining to God, and to make Reconciliation for the Sins of the
People: That is, as God alone, he knew what Satisfaction was sufficient to be
offered to God, and was fit for him to accept, e're he would be reconciled to
Sinners; and by being Man, he was also qualified to be a merciful High Priest;
for in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them
that are tempted: That is, as Man, who is sensible what Temptations and
Infirmities we lie under, he was more proper to be entrusted with the
Appointment of such Terms and Conditions as Man was capable to perform; and
therefore did prescribe us a Covenant of Grace, consisting accordingly of such
reasonable and performable Conditions.

And thus you see also by whose Mediation we obtained such a Covenant of Grace,
such a state of Salvation; viz. that it was through Jesus Christ our Savior.

And now, Fourthly, let us consider, The infinite Care of God the Father to
call us into it.
as you are also taught in your Catechism, by whom, and how you are called to
this state of Salvation. And truly, the same Heavenly Father who granted us,
and the same Jesus Christ our Savior, who purchased this state of Salvation
for us, have also most mercifully called us to it.

And behold and consider, first, I beseech you, what infinite Care our Heavenly
Father has taken in this great Affair, to call us to this state of Salvation.
And we have seen, and do testify, says St. John, that the Father has sent the
Son to be the Savior of the World, 1 Epist. 4.14. And how has he sent him to
save it? Why (as was long before Prophesied, Isai. 61.1.) He put the Spirit of
the Lord upon him to preach the Gospel to the Poor; he sent him to heal the
brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of Sight
to the Blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable
Year of the Lord, Luke 4.18, 19. Such was the very earnest Care of the Father,
that he Commissioned, and sent his own Son to invite us, his Rebellious
Creatures and Subjects, to lay down our Rebellious Arms against him, and to
embrace those Overtures and Conditions of Mercy and Salvation, that he offered
to us by the Preaching of the Gospel.

Nor was the Ever-blessed Son of God less intent upon this Blessed Work, The
Ever-blessed Son of God no less intent upon this blessed Work.
than the Father: No sure; it was his Meat to do the Will of Him that sent him,
and to finish his Work, John 4.34. It was his Meat and Drink to save Men's
Souls; and therefore He went about doing good, Acts 10.38. Doing good; that is,
Executing that Office to which the Father had Authorized him, in order to the
Salvation of Men; that Office of Mercy, instructing and calling of the World to
Repentance; and, in order to that, winning 'em to it by other Works of bodily
Charity, with which carnal Men are most taken, as Curing their Diseases,
Casting out Devils by the Power of him who was present with him. He went about
doing good of all kinds, but all in order to the good of Men's Souls; and he
was zealous also, to the highest degree, in this blessed Work.

How mightily he importuned us to come into this state of Salvation.
For, good God! with what mighty Importunity, and winning Rhetoric, did he, the
Son of GOD, address himself to his own foolish Rebellious Subjects, to come
into this state, and to receive freely the Means of Salvation! Ho, every one
that thirsts, cries he, (as the Evangelical Prophet represents him bespeaking
the World, Isa. 55.1, 2, 3.) come ye to the Waters, and he that has no Money;
come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy Wine and Milk without Money, and without
Price. Wherefore do you spend Money for that which is not Bread? and your
Labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye
that which is good, and let your Soul delight it self in fatness. Incline your
Ear, and come unto me; hear, and your Soul shall live, and I will make an
everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies of David. It is not to be
expressed nor imagined, with what mighty Zeal and Persuasion he did himself,
whilst on Earth, pursue this blessed Work of our Salvation.

He has left a Succession of Ministers behind him to do the like.
Nor was he contented himself, whilst on Earth, thus to call us into this state
of Salvation; but, moreover, when he was to leave the World, he provided a
Succession of Ministers, which he has left behind him, to continue to the end
of the World, to do the same good Office under him, for the Salvation of
Mankind, empowering them with the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, to enable 'em to do
it effectually: As my Father has sent me, so send I you, John 20.21. And
accordingly has he committed it to our care, as he made it his own, to Preach
the Gospel to Mankind, to make known the Love of God, as manifested in Christ
to the World, to receive those that Believe into the Covenant of Grace and
Society of Christians by Baptism, and by this means to call you into a state of
Salvation.

And as he has committed to us the Word of Reconciliation, we therefore as the
Ambassadors for Christ, and as though God did beseech you by us, we do pray you
in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. We are perpetually
preaching and declaring this (...), this good Tidings to you; we instruct you
in the Nature of that Salvation which is wrought for you, we direct you to the
means of attaining it; and, with all the powerful Motives drawn from the Word
of GOD, we do all we can to move you to seek this Salvation, in the way that
infinite Wisdom has appointed for the attaining of it.

And what, I beseech you, can be done more? What can be done to call you into a
State of Salvation, if this will not? When God our Heavenly Father, when Jesus
Christ his Son, when his Holy Spirit by his good Inspirations, when his
Apostles, Evangelists, and a whole Succession of Pastors and Teachers since, do
spend so much Care upon this one Work; what can be done more to save you? Nay,
What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it? Will
God most justly expostulate with us, as he did with the Jewish Church, Isa.
5.4. which brings me to the

Last thing which was to be spoke to in the Explication of these Words I am now
upon; viz. what infinite reason we have Heartily to Thank Almighty God our
Heavenly Father, that he has Called us to this State of Salvation, through
Jesus Christ our Savior.

And indeed it is a matter that infinitely deserves the deepest Sense, and
utmost Acknowledgements of the Divine Goodness to us, whether we consider
barely the Advantages of having GOD in Covenant with us, or our own singular
Happiness of being Called into it.

And, First, This great matter of Thankfulness whether we consider, 1. The
extraordinary Advantage of having God in Covenant with us.
As to the extraordinary Advantage it is to have GOD in Covenant with us (which
I have frequent occasion in this Argument to mind you of) and consequently that
it affords great matter of our Praise and Thanksgivings to him upon that
account; it is worthy your Notice, that in this case, GOD does condescend, even
to oblige Himself by Contract and Agreement with us, whom he might Oblige to
Odedience by his mere Authority, without any Assurance of Reward, that, if we
will but do our part, Repent, Believe, and Obey, he will be even bound in
Justice, having given his solemn Word and Promise for it, to confer upon us the
richest Blessings that Heaven and Earth can bestow, viz. Pardon of Sins, and
Eternal Life and Happiness.

Alas! if we were left to build our Hopes merely upon the Merit of our own
Righteousness and Virtue, we could none of us have the least Expectations of
obtaining, as the Reward thereof, such unspeakable Blessings as are now laid up
in Heaven for us: But GOD condescending by Covenant to engage himself to make
'em good to us, we have thereby the fullest Assurance given us, that we shall
obtain those Blessings; and upon that Assurance, the strongest Consolations and
Comforts also, to cheer us in going through the Difficulties we shall meet with
in performing those Conditions, whereby only we shall obtain such unspeakable
Blessings.

By having GOD in Covenant with us, I say, we have the greatest Assurance
possible, that we shall obtain his Favors: To which purpose, those words of
St. Paul are very remarkable, Gal. 3.15, 16. Brethren, says he, I speak after
the manner of Men, though it be but a Man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no
Man disannulleth or adds thereto; now to Abraham and his Seed were the
Promises (that is, the Covenant) made: Which words do import, that if deceitful
Man will scarcely fail to perform, what he has once obliged himself by Covenant
to do, it is impossible that the God of Truth should fail to make good to the
utmost, those Blessings he has ensured to Abraham, and his Seed; that is, to
all whom he has vouchsafed to enter into Covenant withal.

And such Assurance given by GOD, does yield also the strongest Consolations
and Comfort. For why? If you will compare one Scripture with another, you will
find, that that which ( Genesis 17.2.) GOD does call his Covenant, ( Heb. 6.13.)
is called his Promise upon Oath. And what says the Apostle in that Case? Why,
GOD, says he, verse. 17, 18, 19, 20. willing more abundantly to show unto the
Heirs of Promise, the Immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by Oath, or by
Covenant, that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to
lie, we might have strong Consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold
upon the Hope set before us; which Hope we have, as an Anchor of the Soul, sure
and steadfast, and which enters into that within the Veil, whither the
FORE-RVNNER is for us entered, even Jesus. That is, GOD having ascertained to us
his Blessings, by Promise upon Oath, or which is tantamount by Covenant, we
cannot upon such Assurance but have the greatest Comfort and Hopes of obtaining
those Blessings, and so of following, e're long, that Jesus which is gone
before us into Heaven, To prepare a Place for us; that where he is, there we
may be also, Joh. 14.2, 3. So that it is an invaluable Privilege, this, of
which the World can never be sufficiently sensible, nor thankful to God for,
that he vouchsafed to ensure his Mercies to 'em by Covenant. But,

Or, secondly, Our singular Happiness therein above the fallen Angels, or the
rest of Mankind.
Secondly, The occasion of your Thankfulness is yet greater, if you consider
your own singular Happiness, in being called into this Covenant of Grace, and
in having all God's Mercies thereby secured to you, when so many Millions of
his Creatures do want this Favor. The words of your Catechism do teach every
one of you to consider his own particular Interest in this Covenant, as the
proper matter of his Thanksgiving to God: Every one of you is taught to answer
for himself in particular, I thank God our Heavenly Father, that he has called
me to this State of Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior. And indeed, if
we are naturally most affected with, and most sensible of those Benefits, which
we see so many besides our selves to want, here is occasion for the deepest
Sense, and utmost Acknowledgments of GOD's Goodness to you, that you have been
called into this State of Salvation, when so many millions besides, both Angels
and Men, do want the Benefit of it.

As to the fallen Angels, the Covenant of Grace was a Favor never afforded by
God to them; for Christ, that he might deliver them who all their lifetime
were subject to Bondage, verily took not on him the Nature of Angels, but took
upon him the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.15, 16.

And as to Men, alas! there are many Nations now in the World, who have not yet
enjoyed so infinite a Blessing, as this happy Call into a State of Salvation;
who have not yet heard of a Savior, nor the good Tidings of the Gospel, or
Covenant of Grace; who have had no Apostles, no Evangelists, no Pastors nor
Teachers amongst 'em, and who therefore still lie groping in Darkness, and the
shadow of Death. And perhaps amongst those Nations that are called, there are
not any that enjoy the Means of Salvation, the Worship of GOD, the
Administration of Sacraments, and the Preaching of the Word, in that purity and
force, as we in this Church and Nation do. It is indeed an unspeakable Blessing
we enjoy above many other People: For now in Jesus Christ, we who sometimes
were afar off, are made nigh by the Blood of Christ, who is our Peace, Ephesians.
2.13, 14. And are no more Strangers and Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens with
the Saints, and of the Household of God, verse. 19.

It is counted a great Privilege amongst Men but to enjoy the Freedom of a
City, or Corporation, as that which puts those, who enjoy it, above the
Condition of Strangers, and gives 'em to partake of many singular Advantages
which Foreigners want: But by being taken as Fellow-Citizens of the Saints,
and of the Household of God, into Covenant with him, we are Enfranchized
Citizens of the New Jerusalem, whereby we are entitled to all those Privileges
which Christ has purchased for us, which are unspeakable and invaluable, and
which does place us, as has been often said, in so much a better State and
Condition than the rest of Mankind. Such infinite reason have we heartily to
Thank Almighty God our Heavenly Father, that he has Called us to this State of
Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior.

THE XXV. Lecture. In my Baptism, Wherein I was made.
AS to what concerns the Nature and Substance of the Covenant of Grace, I have
already opened and declared to you: I have showed, First, What are its Terms:
Secondly, That it restores us to a State of Salvation: Thirdly, By whose
Mediation we obtained so gracious a Covenant, and were restored thereby into a
State of Salvation: Fourthly, By whom we have been Called into it: And, Lastly,
What mighty Thanks we do owe unto God, that we have been called into so
gracious a Covenant, and happy state of Salvation.

My next Business must be, to treat upon the Sacrament, or Solemnity, by which
you Entered therein: For the declaring whereof, and the full Explication of
these Words, In my Baptism, wherein I was made, it will be requisite,

That I should, in some measure, (so far as relates to the Sealing of the
Covenant of Grace) open unto you the Nature and End of Baptism.

And not to give you now a full and particular account of the whole Nature, and
Meaning, and End of Baptism, which shall be more conveniently done, when we
come to the latter part of your Catechism, where the whole Doctrine of that,
and the other Sacrament, is taught you; it may suffice to our present purpose
to tell you, That

Baptism, what.
Baptism is an outward Rite, or Ceremony, of our Savior's own Appointment, for
the solemn Admitting of Persons into the Covenant of Grace; Instituted by
Christ for the better Confirmation and Assurance of its Terms; the Promises on
GOD's Part, and Conditions on ours, it being thus mutually Sealed to, betwixt
GOD and us.

First, Baptism, I say, is an Outward Rite, or Ceremony, of our Savior's own
Appointment, for the solemn Admitting of Persons into the Covenant of Grace. 1.
An outward Right of our Savior's own appointment for the solemn Admission of
Persons into the Covenant of Grace.


Although the Service prescribed us in the New Covenant, be a spiritual
Service, according to that of St. John, Chap. 4.23, 24. But the Hour comes,
and now is, when the true Worshipers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in
Truth; although the Gospel, I say, be a spiritual Service, opposite to that
Outward and Ritual Service, that was Instituted in the Law; in respect of
which, it was called, Heb. 7.16. The Law of a carnal Commandment; yet however
it pleased Almighty God, to Institute some very few Outward Rites and
Ceremonies, by which Believers, as by certain Visible Signs, should be obliged
to that Service and Obedience due unto God on their part, and by which even God
Himself would Seal, as with his Royal Signet, the Favors and Promises to be
made good on his part; that so those Outward Solemnities might be express Marks
of that mutual Agreement betwixt God and Man.

And indeed since such is the Frame and Constitution of Humane Nature, that
nothing enters into our Minds, To have some outward Rites and Solemnities in
Religion, agreeable to the Frame and Constitution of Humane Nature as being
most apt to receive Impressions from sensible Things.
but through the Door of our Senses; and that which does strike our bodily
Senses, does make the deepest and most lasting Impression upon us; since indeed
it is so with us, it was very agreeable with the Wisdom and Goodness of God, to
have that Respect to our Make and Nature in his Treatment with us, as at the
same time he threw away the many burdensome Ceremonies of the Law, to retain so
many, and such at least, as whereby we might be made more sensible of our
Engagements to God, and be the better assured of his gracious Promises unto us.
And therefore since all Men, in their Covenants one with another, ever used
some Outward and Express Solemnities of Signing and Sealing, for the better
Assurance of the Performance of Promises on both sides; it was no ways
disagreeable to the Wisdom of our Savior in so appointing it, nor with the
spiritual Nature of the Covenant of Grace, that we should transact it with God
in such a way and manner, as might make us more deeply sensible of our
Obligations by it, and more full of Hopes of Benefit and Advantages from it.

It was truly well observed by the Father, This especially requisite in the
Admission into Religious Societies and Covenants.
That Men can be associated together in no Religion, whether true or false,
unless they be combined by the common Tie of some sensible Signs and Sacraments
of their Profession. For this reason, it is like, that a visible Sign, or
Sacrament might be a continual and apparent Remembrance to 'em, and put 'em in
Mind of that Profession they took upon 'em by that Rite; and that it might be a
visible Testimony and Witness against 'em, if they should ever act contrary to
that Profession. Hence therefore all the Religions we hear of in the World,
have had their solemn Rites of Initiation or Admission into 'em.

The Israelites, The Israelites were Initiated both by Circumcision and Baptism.
they were initiated into the Covenant God made with them, by the Ceremony of
Circumcision, which is therefore called by a Figure or Form of Speech, very
usual in the mention of Sacraments (where the Sign is often put for the Thing
signified) the Covenant in their Flesh, Genesis 17.13. it being the Sign in their
Flesh of their Covenant with God. The Jews also had their Baptisms, whereby
they admitted their Proselytes, or Gentile-Converts, into their Covenant; and
by Baptism they say, all their Women who never were Circumcised, and both Men
and Women, during their sojourning in the Wilderness (when Circumcision was
dispensed with, because it would make them sore for Traveling.) By Baptism
therefore they were entered into Covenant; and this seems also to be clear from
that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.2. They were all Baptized into Moses, or
Initiated into the Religion of Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea. And indeed
the very Heathens likewise, they were initiated into their Mysteries and
Worship, by some solemn Rites or other, and that frequently by Purgations and
Washings. The Heathens were initiated into their Mysteries by Purgations or
Washings.


And now agreeably to both, the Rite, or Ceremony whereby our Savior appointed
that we should be Initiated into the Covenant of Grace, or the Christian
Religion, was Baptism, or Washing. As our Blessed Savior, out of his infinite
Wisdom and Goodness, did ordain, That agreeably to our Humane Nature, which is
most sensibly touched with Outward Things, the Covenant betwixt him and us
should be transacted by Outward and Express Solemnities; Our Savior chose the
latter, as what would be acceptable to both Parties.
so he was not scrupulous of having it done by such outward Rites, as were more
generally known and acceptable both to Jews and Gentiles.

Circumcision, the Rite of Initiation into the Legal Covenant, he would not
adopt into the Covenant of Grace, because it was detestable, and had in
abomination by the greatest part of the Heathen World; but Baptism, or Washing,
none could except against it, either Jews or Gentiles. It was used by the Jews,
as well as Circumcision, to initiate their Proselytes into Covenant, as was
before said; and the Gentiles did as often use it in a Sacramental Manner, when
they were entered into any of the Heathen Mysteries of their Pagan Worship;
especially when on any extraordinary Occasion they professed their Innocence,
as appears from Pilate, the Roman Governor's so solemnly Washing his Hands,
when he would declare himself clear of shedding the Innocent Blood of the Holy
JESUS, Especially as more significative of Christian Purity.
Mat. 27.24. And indeed, as on the account of its agreeableness to all Parties;
so chiefly, no doubt, he chose it for the Sacrament of the Christian Religion,
on this last score, viz. its being so significative of the Cleanness from the
Pollution of Sin, of the Purity and Holiness that all Christians are to
practice. As Washing purges and cleanses the Body from Dirt and Filthiness; so
our Savior chose the Washing of Regeneration, as the Apostle calls Baptism,
Tit. 3.5. to be the Rite or Ceremony whereby all his Disciples should be
initiated or entered into his Covenant, or Religion, to signify that all his
Disciples must be Pure and Holy, not polluted with the Sins and Wickednesses of
the World.

And so indispensible a Rite of our Initiation or Entrance into the Covenant of
Grace And this he has enjoined, as indispensably necessary to our initiation
into the Covenant of Grace.
did our Savior make it, that he did not only Command his Apostles, and all
the succeeding Ministers of his Church to the End of the World, to Baptize
those whom they did proselyte over to his Religion, Go, says he, Matthew. 28.19.
and teach, or disciple, by Baptizing 'em, all Nations, and lo I am with you
always to the end of the World: But he excludes all others from having any
Interest in his Covenant of Grace, which he vouchsafed unto us, and from having
any claim to the Promises of it, who are not entered into it by the outward Rite
and Solemnity, or Ceremony of Baptism. Thus he tells Nicodemus, with a Verily,
verily; that is, with a solemn Asseveration, which amounts almost to an Oath,
That Except a Man be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. By the Kingdom of God, is here meant the Church of Christ,
which is a Society of Men in Covenant with God, enjoying certain inestimable
Privileges under Christ their Supreme Head; and is often in the New Testament
called the Kingdom of God, as Matthew. 21.31. So that it is plain from hence,
that there is no admittance to the Privileges of the Gospel, or New Covenant,
which are Grace, Pardon, and Happiness; nor to the Enjoyment of those infinite
Rewards in Heaven, the chief of all the Mercies of the Covenant, without being
first entered into the Church by Baptism, which is the Outward Seal and
Confirmation of those Mercies to us; Except a Man be born of Water, and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And agreeably to this
Doctrine of his Lord and Master, did the Great St. Peter hold Baptism so
indispensibly necessary, that he ordered even those Persons, upon whom at his
Preaching of the Word the Holy Ghost had fallen (which one would have thought
might render Baptism unnecessary) yet he ordered even those to be Baptized
withal, as you may see Acts 10.46, 47, 48. Then answered Peter, Can any Man
forbid Water, that these should not be Baptized, which have received the Holy
Ghost as well as we? And he commanded them (Commanded whom? why, those on whom
the Holy Ghost had fallen, verse. 44. and) who had received the Holy Ghost as
well as he, verse. 47. he commanded even those to be Baptized in the Name of the
Lord. Thus is Baptism you see an Outward Rite or Ceremony of our Savior's own
Appointment, for the solemn admitting of Persons into the Covenant of Grace.

Secondly, And thus our Savior appointed us to be entered into the Covenant of
Grace, for the better Confirmation and Assurance of its Terms, the Promises on
God's part, and the Conditions on ours; it being thus mutually and
interchangeably, as it were, Sealed to betwixt God and us. Baptism appointed
the Rite of Admission into the Covenant of Grace, for the better Confirmation
and assurance of its Terms, the Promises on God's part, and the Conditions on
ours, it being thus mutually and interchangeably Sealed to betwixt God and us.


As in this sacred Rite of Baptism, there are two Parties concerned; God, who
by his Minister, or Ambassador and Agent, as he is called, 2 Cor. 5.20. does
admit the Person Baptized to Covenant, and does by him promise and engage to
confer upon him, particular Blessings and Favors; and the Party Baptized, who
presents himself, or is presented by others; and does solemnly engage to
Renounce GOD's Enemies, the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, to Believe in God,
and to Obey him: As there are Two Parties, I say, God and Man, thus transacting
a Covenant together; so the Minister, God's Agent, his Receiving the Party, and
Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is the Sealing
to it on God's Part, who has promised to confirm in Heaven, what they in his
Name, and by his Commission, shall bind on Earth, Matthew. 16.19. And the Party
presenting himself, or being presented to Baptism, and therein expressly vowing
to perform the forementioned Conditions, and in token of that, his being
washed or sprinkled with Water, is the putting to, as it were, his Seal to the
Counterpart of the Covenant.

And farther, as this mutual Covenanting and Sealing, does give unto God,
besides his Right of Creation, a farther Right by our own express Engagements,
to our Obedience and Service; so to us it gives (even that which we could
otherwise have, no, not the least Pretensions to) even a Legal Right and Title
to all the most inestimable Blessings and Favors of the Covenant.

It gives great Assurance of mutual Performances barely to be in Covenant
together.
It has been already more than once hinted, and shall here be more fully
declared, how that it gives us mighty Assurance, that the Mercies of God shall
certainly be conferred on us; that he has vouchsafed to engage Himself in
Covenant to make 'em good unto us; and that because this way of proceeding
gives us even a Legal Right and Title to All the most inestimable Blessings and
Favors of the Covenant. For this we are to consider, that till such time as
God has condescended to engage so and so, the utmost Services that we can pay
him, cannot give us sure and certain grounds to hope for, or expect such
invaluable Benefits to be conferred upon us. Though we should never so heartily
repent us of our Sins, there is not that in Repentance alone, that it should be
sufficient of it self to satisfy the Justice of God, and to salve that infinite
Dishonor we have done Him by our former Violations of his sacred Laws: And
though we should never so sincerely and faithfully Obey him for the future, is it
possible that such unprofitable Service as ours, should merit and deserve of it
self, the unspeakable and unconceivable Joys of Heaven, as a due Reward for
such Obedient Service? Pardon of our manifold Sins and Offenses, and eternal
Joy and Happiness, I say, can never be expected merely upon any Merit there is
in our Repentance and Obedience; nor at all, till such time as he has
graciously vouchsafed, and freely condescended by Covenant, to secure such
Benefits unto us, upon our serious Repentance, and sincere Obedience.

But then when he has once condescended to ensure unto us by Covenant, these
unspeakable Benefits, and we, on the other side, have also engaged our selves
to the Performance of such Conditions; then, what our Repentance, Faith and
Obedience, could not give us reason to expect or hope for, merely upon the
account of their own desert, shall however be ascertained to us by virtue of
God's Covenant-Obligations, which he has laid upon himself: And Pardon and
eternal Happiness shall be so far then the matter of our Hopes and
Expectations, that we shall have a Legal Claim and Title made over to us, upon
our Repentance, Faith, and Obedience to 'em; insomuch that God will reckon
himself (as has been before said) in Justice and Faithfulness bound, both upon
the account of Christ's Purchase, and his own Covenanted Promises, to forgive
us our Sins, as you may see, 1 John 1.9. and will then own us to have a Right
to the Tree of Life, Rev. 22.14. We shall then, I say, have a Right and Title
to the Blessings of the Covenant, not by virtue of any outward Merit and Desert
in our Performances, but by virtue of the Divine Promises and Engagements to
those, who having solemnly entered into Covenant with him, do take care
faithfully to perform the Conditions of it. So that this alone gives us mighty
Assurance of the Divine Mercies, that we are entitled thereunto, by his having
Covenanted them unto us; as well as he is the more entitled to our Repentance,
Faith and Obedience, because we have Covenanted to perform 'em.

But yet the more firmly to entitle, as God, to our Obedience; so us, to his
Mercies; because we never take our selves to be so well ensured of the
performance of Articles, as when we have 'em solemnly sealed to by both
Parties; God did therefore, in compliance with our own Ways and Methods,
graciously please to Seal to his part, the Promises; and required us to do the
like to our part, the Conditions, that he might be the better secured of our
Covenanted Performances, and we of his promised Mercies. And then since he has
condescended to ensure unto us, not only by mere Covenant, but moreover to seal
unto us these unspeakable Benefits; and we, on the other side, have also
sacramentally sealed to the Counter-part of the Covenant, the Conditions of it;
what can there be further thought of to entitle God to our Obedience, or us to
his Mercies?

And let this suffice, as to the Sacrament, or Solemnity, whereby we entered
into the Covenant of Grace, which was by Baptism. Baptism, as you have seen, is
an Outward Rite or Sacrament of our Savior's own Appointment, for the solemn
admitting of Persons into the Covenant of Grace, instituted by Christ for the
better Confirmation and Ensurance of its Terms, the Promises on God's Part, and
the Conditions on ours; it being thus mutually sealed to, betwixt God and us.
For, agreeably to our Frame and Nature, as I have told you, which consists of
Bodily Senses, as well as Spiritual Faculties, God has given us, besides those
most rational Terms and Conditions of the Covenant Recorded in the Gospel,
being such Promises as are becoming the Wisdom and Goodness of God to make, and
such Conditions as are highly befitting us to perform; besides these, he has
appointed to us those Outward and Express Solemnities we call the Sacraments,
to seal these Things betwixt us. And because that Baptism is a Rite most
significative in it self, and would be most acceptable to all sorts of People,
Jews and Gentiles, he was therefore pleased to Adopt that to be the Solemnity
of our Entrance into, and Sealing the Covenant with him. And this Covenant you
have seen, he would have thus mutually Sealed to betwixt Him and us, that the
Obligations to Performance might be the stronger upon us both, to discharge
each his Part of the Covenant.

And thus having spoke to the Sacrament, or Solemnity, whereby we enter into
Covenant, expressed in these Words, In my Baptism; the next thing to be showed
you is, the great Obligation which lies upon us to Perform this our Covenant
with God.

THE XXVI. Lecture. Quest. Do thou then think, that thou art bound to Believe
and to Do as they have promised for thee? Answ. Yes, verily.
IN my Exposition of the Preliminary Questions and Answers of your Catechism,
having already given you a general Account, first, of the Nature of the
Covenant of Grace; and, secondly, of the Sacrament whereby you did solemnly
enter into it, I shall now think my self Happy, if I can but convince you of
the mighty Obligations that lie upon you, accordingly to perform it. And this,
the Words that I have now read, do manifestly lead me to declare unto you; for
(taking the Question and Answer both together) they do plainly import this
Doctrine; (viz.)

The vast Obligations upon us, from the Mercies of the Covenant, especially
from our Vow in Baptism, faithfully and conscientiously to discharge our
Covenant with God. The vast Obligations lieing upon us, both from the Mercies
of God, and our Baptismal Vow, to perform the Covenant of Grace.
And what those several Obligations are, which arise from each of these
Considerations, I will, with as much clearness and force of Reason as I can,
declare unto you.

And to begin with the Mercies of the Covenant, there is not one Article of
Grace or Favor on God's Part contained therein, but if the Nature and
Importance of 'em be truly considered, they do each of 'em lay inviolable
Obligations upon us, faithfully and conscientiously to discharge that our
Covenant.

The Obligations thereunto, 1. as Members of Christ's Church.
As, first, if we consider our selves as Members of Christ, or Members of the
Christian Church, why there cannot be a greater Argument to keep us right in a
regular, orderly Conversation, than that one Consideration should be: For to be
a Member of Christ's Church, what else, I pray you, is it, but to be one of
those Disciples of our Savior, who by the Preaching of the Word, and under the
Solemnity and Bond of Sacraments, are Called and Chosen out of the rest of the
World, to live another sort of Life, than the World is accustomed to? To this
purpose, it would be exceedingly well worth your while, to consult, and
thoroughly consider, 1 Pet. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. where you have such Characters
given of the Church of Christ, and the Members of it, as speak it to be a
selected, separated Body of Men, who are Consecrated, as it were, to God's
Service. And such Inferences are drawn from thence, concerning living at an
excellent rate upon that very Score, as speak the strongest Obligations upon
all the Members of Christ's Church to approve themselves therefore, upon that
very account, excellent Men. In the 8th. Verse immediately foregoing, the
Apostle speaking of those who would not come into the Bosom and Pale of the
Church, he terms them a Disobedient People; but coming, in the 9, 10, 11, 12.
Verses, to speak of the Members of the Church, But ye, says he, are a Chosen
Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a Peculiar People, that ye
should show forth the Praises of Him, who has called you out of Darkness into
his mavelous Light: Which in time past were not a People, but are now the
People of God; which had not obtained Mercy, but now have obtained Mercy. 11,
12. Verses: Therefore, dearly Beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims,
abstain from Fleshly Lusts, which war against the Soul, having your
Conversation honest among the Gentiles; that whereas they speak against you as
Evildoers, they may, by your good Works which they shall behold, glorify God
in the Day of Visitation. But ye are a Chosen People, a Royal Priesthood, an
Holy Nation, a Peculiar People. These are every one of 'em most distinguishing
Characters, and do bespeak the Church of Christ, and all its Members, to be a
Dedicated, a Consecrated sort of People, between whom and the rest of the World
there is such a distinction made, on the account of such their Dedication to
God's Service, as there is in the Church it self betwixt the Priesthood, who
are separated to the more immediate Service of God, and the People in it. They
Expressions are all of 'em borrowed from the Old Testament, and were the
Characters then given to the Jewish Church: And if we will be at the pains to
look back into the Mosaic Law, and see what separation and distinction they
did import there, we shall the better discern to what elevated degrees of
Holiness, they do signify us of the Christian Church to have been likewise
separated; and consequently to what a singular Life and Conversation we are
upon that Score obliged.

Ye are a Chosen Generation, an Holy Nation, a Peculiar People: The Jews chose
from amongst the Nations of the Earth to serve God.
In all these Three Expressions, he alludes to Deuteronomy. 7.6. where of the Church
of the Jews it is said, Thou art an Holy People unto the Lord thy God; the Lord
thy God has Chosen thee to be a special People unto himself, above all the
People that are upon the face of the Earth. All the People of the Earth
besides, were utterly estranged from God by their wicked Deeds; and to all
other Impieties had added this grand one, That they had fallen into the basest
Idolatry, the Worship of the very Devils, whereby they did own them to be their
Sovereign Masters instead of God. But God did select those People of the Jews,
from amongst all the Families of the Earth, and gave 'em such excellent Laws,
and required such an exact Obedience to 'em, and such a regular Conversation
from 'em, that it should raise even the Admiration of all the Nations of the
Earth, who should see or hear it, Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6, 7. You see here what
Peculiarity and Distinction these Words, A Chosen Generation, an Holy Nation, a
Peculiar People, did import in the Jewish Church; and the other of a Royal
Priesthood did no less.

A Royal Priesthood: This is an Allusion to Exodus 19.5, 6. Now therefore, if ye
will obey my Voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a Peculiar
Treasure unto me above all People; and ye shall be a Kingdom of Priests, and an
Holy Nation. As the whole Nation of the Jews were separated from the rest of
the World, peculiarly to serve the True God; so were the Order of Priesthood
separated from amongst the rest of the Jews; to a greater degree of Holiness,
and nearer Service to him, than the rest of the Jews; and for that reason, viz.
To signify a greater Purity in them than the common Jews. Those very Outward
Blemishes, which were no Impediment to the other Jews, but that they might
approach God, as far as to Laymen was permitted, were a Bar to the Priests,
that they could not thereupon Execute the Priestly Office: Speak unto Aaron,
saying, Whosoever he be of thy Seed in his Generations, that has any Blemish,
let him not appear to offer the Bread of his God; for whatsoever man he be that
has a Blemish, he shall not approach; a blind Man, or a lame, or he that has
a flat Nose, or any thing superfluous, Levit. 21.17, 18. And the reason is
given before, Verse. 6. They shall be Holy unto their God, and not profane the
Name of their God; for the Offerings of the Lord made by Fire, and the Bread of
their God they do offer, therefore they shall be Holy. So that as much as the
whole Body of the Jews were to be separated and distinguished from the rest of
the World; yet the Priesthood were to be farther distinguished by a Peculiar
Holiness.

Christians chose both from amongst Jews and Gentiles, to a more peculiar
Holiness.
And now to bring this to our present case: Does St. Peter here, in his
Character of the Church of Christ, call it a Chosen Generation, an Holy Nation,
a Peculiar People? Why, what does it import, but that the Members of Christ's
Church must study to distinguish themselves as much now from the Infidel Part
of the World, whether Jews or Gentiles, by Piety and Devotion toward God,
Justice and Charity toward their Neighbor, and a subjecting of their Lusts
and Appetites to right Reason, which is the great Duty to themselves? I say,
Christians must as much distinguish themselves from the profane Crew of
Idolatrous and Wicked Heathens, and Unbelieving Jews, by an exact and regular,
and a better Life; as the Jews were to distinguish themselves from the
Idolatrous and Wicked Heathens in those days, by a Ritual Holiness.

Nay, And does he call us a Royal Priesthood? Why, this he does here, and also
Rev. 1.6. where we are told, That Christ has made us Kings and Priests unto
God, and his Father. And what does this import, but that we are as much to
exceed both Jews and Gentiles in holy Living, as the Priests among the Jews
were to excel the rest of the People in a Legal Purity and Cleanness?
Christians are to show themselves to be Kings, by their Victories over the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, over Sin and Satan; and they are to be, as it
were, Priests, because they are to present their Bodies a living Sacrifice,
Holy, acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable Service, and are not to be
conformed to this World, but to be transformed by the renewing of their Minds,
Romans 12.1, 2. And are to offer up the Sacrifice of Praise continually, the
Praises of God, Heb. 13.15. They are to offer charitable Alms, which are called
an Odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing unto God,
Phil. 4.18. This is the Importance of those high Expressions of St. Peter; and
this indeed do the following Words declare: But ye are a Chosen Generation, a
Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a Peculiar People, that ye should show forth
the Praises of Him, who has called us out of Darkness into his mavelous
Light.

And indeed so much it concerns us, who are Members of Christ's Church, to
distinguish our selves from the rest of the World by our excellent Lives, far
above other People; that our Blessed Savior came into the World, died, and
suffered all those stupendous Things recorded in the Gospel, all on this very
Design, To purchase such a Body of Men, that should more peculiarly and
zealously serve God, and to work and persuade us to it. Thus Tit. 2.14. it is
said, That he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works.

And hence were all his Discourses and Preachings to us, (especially that most
divine Sermon upon the Mount,) to raise all his Disciples and Followers to the
highest Pitch and Perfection of Moral Virtue and Goodness: He came not to
destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill them, Matthew. 5.27. that is, to
enlarge and increase our Duties to God and Man, and to our selves; to make the
Obedience of the Heart, as necessary as that of the outward Man; to make the
very Thoughts of Uncleanness criminal, as well as Adultery it self. And, in a
word, hence does he require of us his Members, that our Light should so shine
before Men, that they might see our good Works, and glorify our Father which is
in Heaven, ver. 16. that is, He requires that by the Eminence of all Divine
Graces and Virtues shining in our Lives, we should be as a Candle set on a
Hill, to enlighten the benighted and bewildred World, straying in the darkness
of Ignorance and Error, that they might find their way by the Brightness of
our Examples, to Heaven and Happiness. And by the Savourliness, lastly, of our
good Conversation, he requires that we should be as Salt in the World, to
season the corrupted Manners of Men. Such strong Obligations lie upon us, as
Members of Christ's Church, to be faithful in our Covenant, that is, to perform
all due Obedience unto God.

Secondly, Nor is the Consideration of our being Children of God, II. As
Children of God.
less fruitful of good Arguments, showing us those vast Obligations lying upon
us, faithfully and conscientiously to discharge our Covenant with him. There is
no relation that is, which does speak more of Duty, and Duty founded upon
better Reasons, than that of a Child to his Father: A Wife owes some Duty and
Observance to her Husband, because the Husband is the Head of the Wife; a
Servant to his Master, because from him he has Provision; a Subject to his
Prince, because of Protection: But a Child owes his very Life and Being; and
all that he has, is originally derived from his Parent. Children are bound to
the strictest Obedience to their Parents, as oweing to 'em their Being.
Especially this is so with the Children of God, upon a double account, both
that of Creation, and that of Adoption. Consider us as the Children of God with
respect to Creation, and not only our Life and Being, but all Things necessary
to the support and maintenance of this Being of ours, that it falls not back
into Annihilation and Nothing, is wholly owing to that God, whose Offspring we
are, according to that of the Apostle, Acts 17.28. In him we live and move, and
have our Being, for we are his Offspring. But consider us who are Baptized
Christians farther, as the Children of God by Adoption, and then over and above
our Being, and all that belongs to it, our Well-being also both in this and a
better Life, is wholly of his Gift: For if Children of God, (as St. Paul does
argue, Romans 8.17.) then Heirs, Heirs with God, and joint Heirs with Christ; so
that if we suffer with him, we shall be also glorified together.

Children of God, as owing both Being and Well-being.
And now, if for Life and Being, and also for all that Well-being too which we
have, or hope to enjoy in this, or the Life to come, we wholly and entirely
depend upon God our Father; Do we not then owe to him as his Children, all the
Duty, all the Observance, and all the Diligence possible, in the discharge of
such Duty and Observance? This the very Light of Nature teaches us; but the
Scripture does most expressly, upon that very score of being his Children,
require of us: A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master, says God
by his Prophet, Mal. 1.6. If I then be a Father, where is mine Honor? And if I
be a Master, where is my Fear? And upon the same score of our being Children of
God, does St. Peter most earnestly exhort us to a Renunciation of the World,
and our filthy Lusts, and to a faithful and careful discharge of our Duty to
God our Father: As Obedient Children, says he, 1 Epist. 1.14, 15. not
fashioning your selves according to the former Lusts in your Ignorance; but as
he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation.
And verse. 17. If ye call on the Father, (that is, profess your selves the Sons
of your Heavenly Father) who without respect of Persons, judges every Man
according to his Works, can see Blemishes, and will punish Faults, as well in
his Children as others; if you profess your selves the Children of such a
Father, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear, is the Inference the
same Apostle makes from this Relation, of being the Children of God.

And indeed, except we do give up our selves sincerely and faithfully to obey
God, and in all Points to discharge our Covenant with him, we are in effect not
the Children of God, however Baptized, and so in Profession, but in reality are
the Children of the Devil, and from him must expect our Reward: So St. John
assures us, 1 Epist. 3.8, 9. He that commits Sin, is of the Devil; that is,
he that commits any act of known Sin, is in that, so far from being a Child
of God, that he is a Child of the Devil, of whom, and not of God, he is an
Imitator; For whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin; for his Seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God: That is, as the
Learned Hammond does Paraphrase upon the same place, whosoever is a true Child
of God, keeps himself strictly from every deliberate Act of Sin; and the reason
is, Because that contrary Principle of Regeneration, or Sonship (from which he
is said to be born of God) if that continue to have any Life or Energy in it,
is utterly contrary and incompatible with Sin. And then does follow that
Characteristical distinguishing Mark he does give of a Child of God, and a
Child of the Devil, showing the grand difference between one and the other. In
this the Children of God are manifested, and the Children of the Devil,
whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God, ver. 10.

In a word, to conclude this Argument also: As it is almost natural, and
therefore ever expected, that Children should imitate the Life and Manners of
their Parents; and if they prove dissolute, and of loose Behavior, it does
usually redound to the Parents disgrace, as generally supposed to proceed from
slackness of Government; so, should we, who are Children of God, be
Covenant-Breakers, prove lawless and dissolute Livers, it will extremely tend
to the Dishonor of our Heavenly Father, whose Name is then hallowed amongst
Men, when we his professed Sons and Servants, do dutifully and sincerely fulfill
our Engagements to Him; but, on the contrary, is then blasphemed, when we live
ungodly Lives. So that this grand Favor and Privilege of being the Sons of
God, is another most powerful Argument to render us faithful in our Covenant
with Him. And so likewise it is,

Thirdly, To be an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. III. As Inheritors of
the Kingdom of Heaven.
What restraint will it put upon a young Heir, and how careful will it make him
to please his Parents, when a great Estate is like to descend upon him; but yet
so, that he shall certainly be dis-inherited of it, except he behave himself
soberly, and regularly, and dutifully to those his Parents? And if so, how
infinitely more circumspect, and wary, and diligent should we all of us be, to
please our Father which is in Heaven, by discharging our Covenant-Engagements
to him, inasmuch as the Heavenly Inheritance is of infinite more value than an
Earthly one can be.

I shall not stand now to give you a Description of that Exceeding Weight of
Glory, and of those Vast and Immense Treasures of Happiness, which are laid up
in Heaven for those who shall faithfully perform their Covenant with God; I
shall only in short show you, that such is the Nature and Constitution of the
Covenant of Grace, that there is no Hopes nor Expectations of ever obtaining
it, without a faithful discharge of all our Covenant-Engagements to God; and if
so, then certainly there cannot be greater Obligations possible to the
performance of 'em. And as to the Nature of the Covenant of Grace, surely one
would think it were needless to prove, that the Conditions of it must be
performed, or we cannot expect to inherit the Promises. This is of the Nature
of all Covenants whatsoever, which consist of certain Promises and Benefits to
be made good on one part, not without certain Conditions to be performed on the
other. Kingdom of Heaven not to be expected, but by those who are faithful in
their Covenant.
And why then should any so fondly expect Justification and Happiness to be
conferred upon 'em, except they do Repent heartily, Believe practically, and
Obey sincerely, the only Conditions of this Covenant, as has been often showed?
Why, sure none that look into the Gospel, and see and consider, how that all
along Happiness is only promised to the Obedient, can ever expect it upon other
Terms. But so it is, that a sort of Antinomian Heretics do spread abroad their
pestilent Doctrines, teaching that Christ by his Sacrifice and Satisfaction for
us, has purchased Justification and Happiness, without any Conditions to be
performed on our part; and, that what he has done will wholly excuse us from
Duty and Obedience. But this is one of the most Antichristian Errors in the
World, as undermining the whole design of Christ's Coming, and his Preaching
the Gospel amongst us; which was to tie us up to higher Rules of Righteousness,
than were before given to the Sons of Men. It was infinitely far from the
Design of him, who came to save and deliver us from the Power and Dominion, as
well as from the Guilt and Punishment of our Sins, to do any thing that should
encourage us in Sin, and render us secure when at any time we commit it. But
that which Christ has done for us, amounts to this, that he has purchased, by
his Bloodshedding, an Abrogation of the First Covenant, wherein was no
Happiness without an unsinning Obedience; and then has procured for us this
most gracious Covenant, with these abatements of Rigor, That we shall have all
that unspeakable Bliss, and the Inheritance of Heaven conferred on us, on
condition we shall repent of, and forsake our Sins, and knowingly and willingly
not offend him for the future.

And a most encouraging Argument this will be to all considering and serious
Persons, to make 'em faithful and diligent to perform their Covenant. No
People, either Jews or Gentiles, ever before us had the like. The Jews, by the
Law of Moses, or the mere Covenant of Works, had plainly and expressly the
Assurances only of a Temporal Canaan, and the Promises of a peaceable and
prosperous Possession thereof, to encourage their Duty. And the poor Pagans had
little Inducements to virtuous living, more than the present Tranquillity of
Mind, which arises from the mere Exercise of Virtue; neither of 'em
Considerations strong enough to bear us up against great Temptations to Sin,
and the difficulties in the way of our Duty. But this one Consideration of an
Eternal weight of Glory, an Inheritance laid up in Heaven, a Crown of Life,
infallibly ensured to those who shall be faithful unto Death: This is enough to
encourage us in Welldoing, and to preserve us safe and innocent (as it has done
Thousands before us) amidst all the Persecutions of Evil Men on the one hand,
or the Allurements of the World on the other, withdrawing us, or frighting us
into Sin; so that in the strength of the Hopes of such an Inheritance, we may
be prevailed upon, faithfully and conscientiously to discharge this our
Covenant with God.

And thus you see what mighty Arguments the several Mercies of the Covenant
made over to us on God's Part, do yield us; and what inviolable Obligations
they do all of 'em lay upon us, faithfully and conscientiously to discharge
this our Covenant with God. But,

IV. As having promised and vowed in our Baptism accordingly, to discharge our
Covenant with God.
Fourthly and lastly, Another vast Obligation lying upon us to do the same, and
which ought especially to be here considered, is, That Promise and Vow made for
us in our Baptism, accordingly to discharge this our Covenant. Do thou not
think, that thou art bound to Believe and to Do as they have promised for thee?
That is the Question which is asked you; to which you are taught to answer,
Yes, verily; and thereby to acknowledge the vast Obligations lying upon you, on
the account of that Promise and Vow, to perform that your Covenant; and a
mighty Obligation too it lies upon us, there being nothing more sacred and
inviolable than a Vow made unto God, and more severely punished, if it be ever
violated.

The matter of a Vow sometimes not a Duty 'till vowed.
A Vow in general is defined to be a solemn Promise made unto God, whereby we
do in a peculiar manner engage our selves unto him to the performance of
something. And there are two sorts of these Vows, which are to be distinguished
according to the Matter of which the Vow is made: For sometimes the Thing which
we have vowed to do, was not a Duty upon us, till such time as we made such a
Vow; as when a Person does solemnly promise to God, that he will set apart such
a Portion of his Time, such a Day of the Week, for the more immediate Service
of God, in Fasting and Prayer; or that he will devote such a part of his Estate
or Gains for pious or charitable Uses. Secondly, again, the matter of a Vow
Sometimes antecedently incumbent upon us, and such is the matter of our
Baptismal Vow.
may be what was incumbent upon us before, only the Vow is added to strengthen
the Obligation: And such is the Vow was made in our Baptism, whereby we were
solemnly and in a peculiar manner Devoted and Consecrated to God's Service, and
to live to his Glory; which though it was a Duty upon us before, yet now we
have farther obliged our selves thereunto, having solemnly vowed so to do.
Generally the matter of a Vow is of the former sort, something to which we were
not obliged before; as when Jacob did vow to build an House to God, Genesis 28.22.
And of this nature are all those Lands and Possessions, over and above the
Tithe, or Tenth Part, which have been devoted and given by the Piety of
well-dispos'd Persons, for the Maintenance of the Ministers, and the Worship of
God, for the Education of Children in Schools, and the Relief of the Poor in
Hospitals. Before they were devoted to pious and charitable Uses, they were so
far in the Power of the Party who owned 'em, as that he might dispose of 'em
how, and to what Uses he pleased. But after a Vow is once made by our selves,
or Forefathers, whereby such a Part of an Estate is determinately set aside for
sacred Uses, it is then a devoted thing.

And I will be bold to add (and I will endeavor to prove it) that for that
very reason of its having been Vowed and Devoted to God, It Is a provoking Sin
to rob God of what has been once Vowed and Devoted to him, though of the former
Nature.
it is one of the most provoking Sins in the World to rob God of it. This is
plainly seen, in the Case of Ananias and Sapphira, Act. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. These
two Persons, stirred up at first, as is probable, with a like pious Zeal for
the Promotion of Religion, with many others of the first Converts to
Christianity, had sold a Possession, and given it to the Church (which
according to the Circumstances of those Times, was of more use than if settled
upon it) but Covetousness afterward prevailing upon their Hearts, they kept
back part of the Price, and laid a share of it only at the Apostles feet, v. 3.
But observe how severely Peter rebukes 'em for this Sacrilege: Before they had
devoted it, he tells 'em they might have done what they would with it; but
first to bestow it wholly on the Church, and then to keep back part of the
Price of the Land, he calls this a Lying to the Holy Ghost, and immediately
(for the terror of other sacrilegious Invaders of Things devoted) punishes it
with one of the most sudden and fearful Deaths that we find recorded, either in
the Scripture, or profane Story. This Sin of withholding or seizing of any
thing once Vowed and Devoted by our selves or others to sacred Uses, is called
the Sin of Sacrilege, and is spoke of, as seems by the manner of Expression,
Romans 2.22. as a Sin equalling the Guilt even of Idolatry it self.

And nothing is more plain to be observed, than the Anger of God, God's Anger
observable upon such occasions.
even in this Life, toward those who have sacrilegiously invaded God's
Portion, which has been once Vowed unto him, either by our selves, or our
Forefathers, and have Robbed him in his Tithes and Offerings, as he calls it a
robbing of Himself, Mal. 7.8. and threatens it with a heavy Curse, of the
Execution whereof, if I had time, I could give several instances. But let this
suffice to show how heinous a thing it is to violate a Vow to God, even where
the matter of the Vow has been something to which there was no Obligation
before such Vow.

It Is much more provoking to violate Vows; to perform which we are antecedently
obliged by the Law of Nature.
And will it be less provoking then, think ye, to violate those Vows, wherein by
solemn Engagements, Men have promised to do that which before such Vows and
Promises they were obliged to from the Law of Nature, and as a Debt due for
their very Creation and Being? In this case, there is a double Obligation to
perform such Vows: When that which was commanded to be done, and is necessary
upon other accounts, is with all solemnity engaged to be performed, then the
Vow does add to the Command, a new and farther Obligation, which will make it
more criminal, and a far more heinous Sin to break such Vows. There are many of
this kind recorded in the Scripture, particularly the first part of that Vow of
Jacob, Genesis 28.21. is of this kind; and so is our Baptismal Vow to perform the
Covenant of Grace: We were obliged to perform all that Duty, which we therein
engaged to perform, by the very Law of Nature, upon the account of our
Creation, and dependence upon God, from whom, as a Fountain, we derive all the
Good we already have, and hope to enjoy. But when, moreover, we come solemnly
and expressly to engage our selves to the performance of such Conditions, we add
strength to our former Obligations, tying 'em faster upon our selves; and in
the breach of the Laws of God, we thenceforward become not only barely
disobedient, but moreover faithless and Covenant-breakers, and shall be
therefore punished, not only as disobedient, but also as faithless and
perfidious Rebels.

Nor does it in the least lessen the Obligation, that this Vow was made by
others for you in your Infancy; for not to prove to you now, which shall be
done in its due place, that it is in the Power of Parents or Guardians, to
oblige their Minors to the Performance of Conditions, without their own express
Consent at that time, provided there shall considerable Advantages accrue to
'em thereby; it is moreover plain from Scripture, that Parents may devote their
Children to the Service of God in a very peculiar manner; and therefore they
had Power to devote us to the Worship of the True God, as prescribed us in the
Gospel, or New Covenant; to which Covenant we shall therefore stand obliged, as
much as if in our Persons we had Vowed and Engaged our selves to perform it. Of
this Power in Parents we see an instance in Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.11. Nor is the
thing contrary to Reason, and natural Equity, the Philosopher himself
affirming, that both the Parents may devote the Children whilst young, as they
please, since Children at that Age are to be accounted not so much at their
own, as at their Parents disposal.

A Vow is much of the nature of an Oath, and therefore to violate it is Perjury.
The thing is just and reasonable, and therefore it is highly criminal in us to
break that Baptismal Vow. It is a Sin much of the nature of Perjury, a Vow and
an Oath being promiscuously used in Scripture, as Numb. 30.13. one for another.
And indeed as to our Baptismal Vow, since therein God is made a Witness, a
Judge, and a Revenger, it is in its full importance no less than an Oath, and
the violating thereof would be Perjury. He is called to, as a Witness of our
Sincerity, in what we do promise, and oblige our selves thereby to do: He is
appealed to, as a Judge of our Performance, whether we are faithful or not. And
as he is a God that will not be mocked, he will certainly be a Revenger, and a
severe one too, if we shall falsely and perfidiously break our Vows of
Renouncing the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, of Believing in God, and
Obeying him; and shall, on the contrary, give our selves up to the service of
Sin and Satan, live like those that Believe not God, nor the Christian
Religion, and in perfect contradiction to the Apostle's Rule, deny not all
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, as we are commanded, and have promised; but deny
to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World. In such a case,
I say, he will be a severe Revenger of our Perjury, and of our Apostasy; I say
of our Apostasy; for he will then consider us not as ordinary Sinners, but as
those who have in effect renounced our Religion, and will allot to us therefore
not the ordinary measures of Punishments due to unbelieving Jews, Turks, and
Infidels; but extraordinary ones, such as are due to faithless and perfidious
Renegado's. Oh, it had been happy for us, if we had never been Baptized; if
after those Vows we have therein made, to do all we can to destroy Satan's
Kingdom, and the Power of Sin in the World, we shall fight against God by our
impious and wicked Deeds, Better it is that thou should not Vow, than that
thou should Vow, and not pay, Eccl. 5.5. It is a less fault not to Vow at
all, than having Vowed, not to perform; the one being but a Neglect, the other
an Affront, nay, a Contempt of his Majesty, who will not suffer a scorn to be
put upon himself.

What shall I say? why take therefore the Advice of the Wise Man, v. 4. When
thou vowest a Vow unto God, deferr not to pay it: for he has no pleasure in
Fools; pay that which thou have Vowed: And say resolutely with Holy David,
Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy
righteous Judgments; I have solemnly resolved, and bound my self by the most
sacred Ties, which I will never break, but do now confirm; that I will
carefully perform my part of the Covenant, which I find to be most just and
good.

The End of the First Volume.
THE XXVII Lecture. And by God's Help so I will. And I pray unto God to give me
his Grace that I may continue in the same unto my Live's End.
IN those several Expositions I have made upon the Words of your Catechism, I
have now fully declared unto you, first, the general Nature, Terms, and
Conditions of the Covenant of Grace; secondly, the Sacrament whereby you
solemnly entered into it. And last Day have represented to you those vast
Obligations lying upon you faithfully, and conscientiously to discharge the
same. And I know nothing so fit next to be spoke of, as the Means whereby we
shall be enabled to perform this our Covenant; and what they are, these Words I
have now read do declare unto you. And by God's, etc.

In which you are given to to understand,

I. That in order to perform the Covenant with God, you must put on a fixed and
firm Resolution faithfully to discharge the same.

II. But a Resolution it must be, took up, not in Confidence of our own
Strength, but of God's Grace and Assistance.

III. And accompanied therefore with most earnest Prayers to God not to let us
to our selves, but to be always present with us. So I will: These Words import
the firm Resolution. By God's Help so I will: These show it must be a
Resolution made not in Confidence of our own Strength. And I pray unto God to
give me his Grace, that I may continue in the same unto my Live's End: These
express how necessary Prayer will be to obtain that Assistance, which alone can
fortify our Resolutions. I shall enlarge here only on the former; namely,
First, That to put on a fixed and firm Resolution faithfully to discharge your
Covenant with God, will be a great Means toward your Performance of it. In
order to make which appear,

1. I will briefly reflect upon the Nature of your Baptismal Covenant.

2. I will show you what kind of Resolution you ought to put on to perform the
same. And,

3. I will then manifest to you how much such a Holy Resolution will conduce to
your Performance of it.

And, First, let us briefly reflect upon the Nature of our Baptismal Covenant:
And the Sum of what has been said upon the Doctrine of your Baptismal Covenant
is briefly this; namely, that in your Baptism you were Incorporated into that
Holy Society of Men, which is called the Church of Christ, and were made your
selves Members of it. You were Adopted to be his Children, and such as he would
have a peculiar Care of, and would indulge with singular Favors. And as the
Perfection of all, you had then an Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven insur'd
to you, so as to have a legal Right conferred upon you to all those unspeakable
Joys contained in that State. All these peculiar Favors you had then conferred
upon you on God's part, on these Terms and Conditions, to be made good on
yours; namely,

That you would first utterly Renounce those great Enemies of God, the Devil,
the World, and the Flesh. The Devil, because he had Rebelled against his
Creator, for which he was Banished Heaven, and has been ever since endeavoring
to withdraw Mankind to partake, and side with him in the same wicked Revolt:
But you have Covenanted with God that you will utterly abhor so base a thing,
as to side with so cursed a Spirit, either by your own Sins, or by tempting of
others to sin: And that you will be always upon your Guard against all his
cursed Wiles, whereby he would withdraw you into so foul an Apostasy from God.
As to the World, because the greatest Part of Mankind have been prevailed upon
by this wicked Spirit to desert their Creator, you have Covenanted to Renounce
their Ways, so as not to be tempted by their Examples, their Company, their
Persuasions, their Threats, or their Promises, to desert also the great Captain
of your Salvation Jesus Christ. And as to the Material World, that neither the
Riches, the Honors, nor the Pleasures of it should allure you, nor the evil
and vexatious things of it should fright you into Sin. And lastly, as to these
Enemies of God and us, you did solemnly engage your selves to exercise a
continual Warfare against the Corrupt Lusts of your sinful Nature, which are
ever and anon Rebelling against the Dictates of your own Reason, and of the
Holy Spirit of God. Thus in your Baptism you did Covenant to Renounce the
Devil, the World, and the Flesh.

And you did on the contrary then engage, as you have seen, that you would give
a hearty and ready Assent to all those Divine Truths revealed to you in the
Scripture, and given to conduct you to Heaven; particularly, and especially
that you would give an entire Credit to those Great and Fundamental Articles of
Christian Faith contained in your Creed; and that you would so thoroughly
Believe 'em, as to be influenced by 'em to the performance of the

Third thing you engaged in your Baptism; and that was, that you would
sincerely and entirely obey God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the
same all the days of your Life.

This was that Covenant we made with God in our Baptism. It was obtained for us
when we were under Condemnation for the breach of our first Covenant, whereby
we had rebelled against God, and took part with the Devil. For being in this
miserable Condition, then did the Eternal Son of God sacrifice his own Life to
make Satisfaction to the Divine Justice for our Sins; and did moreover Mediate
with his Father for us, that we might be received into favor upon the Terms
now mentioned. And he did not only come down from Heaven himself to call us
into this State of Salvation, but sent also his Prophets, Apostles, and
Ministers, as his Ambassadors, in all Ages, to invite Mankind into it, and to
pray 'em in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20.

And so many of the World as have hearkened to that Call, have been admitted by
Baptism to those Terms of Reconciliation; and have in that Solemn Ordinance
dedicated themselves to the Service of God, and have vowed to perform it, as
has been now declared. To be faithful to which Vow you have all possible
Obligations lying upon you; and, particularly, because you have so solemnly at
your Baptism, sworn to perform it. And in order to that, since Christian
Resolution, especially if publicly and solemnly made, will have a great force
in it to preserve you from the Power of Temptation, you must therefore
steadfastly resolve to continue faithful in your Covenant; only this you must
take care of, not to resolve so to do, in confidence of your own Strength, but
of God's Grace and Assistance, which you must therefore earnestly pray to him
for. And that you may the better know how to form such Resolution.

Secondly, I am next to show you the Nature of that Resolution, imported in
these Words, So I will, and which will so very much conduce to the performance
of your Covenant. And by Christian Resolution is meant a peremptory, but
rational Determination of the Will to a vigorous and speedy Execution of those
Vows and Promises made in Baptism, notwithstanding all Temptations, to the
contrary; and this publicly, delaratively, and solemnly made.

1. Resolution is a Determination of the Will. Before the Mind comes to a
Resolution, there is usually some Doubtfulness and Hesitation what Course to
take; but when a Person once puts on a Resolution, there is no longer halting
between God and Baal, the Fault of the unresolved Jews, 1 Kings 18.21. The Man
is determined within himself to adhere to God. And this his Determination must
be,

2. Fixed and peremptory, opposite to Fickleness and Inconstancy. This was the
Temper of the Jews, the most irresolute People in the World, who were
continually changing their Gods, and their Religion, for which the Prophet
upbraids 'em. Has a Nation changed their Gods, which yet are no Gods? But my
People have changed their Glory for that which does not profit, Jer. 2.11. And
a perpetual round of sinning and repenting, and of repenting and sinning again,
does sadly betray the irresolute Disposition of too many Christians amongst us.
But,

3. Christian Resolution is a Rational Determination of the Will; that is, It
is not a Wilfulness, a Stubbornness, and an Obstinacy; such as makes Men
without Reason; nay, and contrary to Reason, to stick unmovable from an
Opinion, or to a course of Life they have taken up in despite of all Evidence
and Reason to the contrary: A Temper very far from being Christian, but
proceeding from wilful Ignorance and Pride, or a sourness and fullenness of
Nature. Such was that perverse Temper of the Jews, of whom Jeremiah complains,
Jer. 18.12. as being resolute without reason, saying, We will walk after our
own Devices, and we will every one do the Imagination of his Heart. But a Man
of Resolution weighs every thing first before he fixes. And the true Method of
forming a true Christian Resolution is this, The Person who does it, as our
Savior represents his Proceeding, sits down and considers on the one hand, the
very great Difficulties and Temptations there are in the Christian Warfare
against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and moreover, that it is better
not to Vow, than to Vow and not Pay, Eccl. 5.4. Nay, and he considers his own
extreme Weakness, so as not to be able of himself to Encounter three so
formidable Enemies as the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. But then on the
other side he considers the Glorious Rewards of those who come off Conquerors,
that if he does not List himself in God's Service, by entering into, and often
Renewing his Covenant with God, he will be a Bond-slave to the Devil, and
eternally and unavoidably undone; and that though of himself he is able to do
nothing, yet through Christ that strenghthens him he can do all things, Phil.
4.13. And as the Result of this Consideration, he does most rationally and
wisely form a fixed and peremptory Resolution to Fight the good Fight of Faith,
and Maugre all Temptations, and Hazards, or Losses, to continue a faithful
Soldier and Servant of his Savior Christ. And this, I say, is the Importance
of that Parable of our Savior, Luke 14.31, 32, 33. where, under the Character
of a King going to War against a powerful Enemy, considering his Danger, and
providing accordingly against it, he represents how we Christians must form our
Resolutions.

4. And when the Will is thus Rationally determined what course to take, then
the Resolute Disciple of Christ determines to proceed to a Vigorous Execution
of his Vows and Promises. This is a part of Resolution opposite to Weakness and
Faintness of Purpose, as when Persons Wish, aad would be glad to do so and so.
O that I could die the Death of the Righteous, said Bulaam, Numb. 23.10. And
also Opposite it is to that Easiness of Disposition, a Distemper of Mind which
is very falsely, but commonly called Good Nature, which makes Persons ready to
yield, notwithstanding their former good Purposes, to the Importunities,
Persuasions, or Allurements of the next Tempter. Thus one of those easy
Persons is represented, Prove. 7.7. as one whom the Harlot meeting, with her
much fair Speech caused him to yield; so that he went after her straitway, as
an Ox goes to the Slaughter, or as a Fool to the Correction of the Stocks,
ver. 22.

5. And the Resolute Christian, as he determines vigorously, so also speedily
to put in execution what he has, upon mature Deliberation designed. He does not
think of putting off his Repentance till another Day. Nor of deferring the
hearing of good Advices till another time, like Foelix, who when St. Paul
reasoned to him of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, did shift
off the Apostle with a go thy way for this time, when it is a more convenient
Season I will call for thee, Acts 24.25. On the contrary, the truly resolute
Christian takes David for his Pattern, who having thought upon his Ways, turned
his Feet unto God's Testimonies. And made haste and delayed not to keep his
Commandments, Psalm. 119.59, 60.

6. And he determines vigorously and speedily to betake himself to the
Execution of all those Vows and Promises made in his Baptism. The Resolute
Christian makes no Exceptions of some particular Lusts, some darling Sins; but
if there be any one more than ordinary dear to him, he determines immediately
to Mortify, to Cut off that, though as near as his right Arm, and to pluck it
out, though as tender as his right Eye. He is not like King Agrippa whom St. Paul
almost persuaded to be a Christian, but he is both Almost and Altogether like
St. Paul, Acts 26.28, 29. who held no Correspondence and Familiarity with any
of the Enemies of God and his own Soul; but is resolved to abandon them all
alike, to Believe every Article, and to Obey every Command.

And thus the Resolved Christian determines to go on uniformly in the discharge
of all his Engagements, notwithstanding all Oppositions from the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil. What mighty Difficulties they will raise him, how many
Blocks they will put in his Way, and what cunning Stratagems the Devil
particularly will make use of to divert him from his Good Purposes, and to make
him break his Covenant with God, you have already showed you. But the Man of
Resolution is a Man of Courage, and will not through Fearfulness and Cowardice
give way in the Day of Battle. But with St. Paul is persuaded, because he is
Resolved, That neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any
other Creature, shall be able to separate him from the Love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.38, 39.

Lastly, And now to render the Christian Resolution complete in all its Parts,
you must publicly, declaratively, and solemnly protest it to all the World,
that it is the full determination of your Heart and Mind to adhere faithfully
to God against all his Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, that you
will neither swerve from your Faith, nor flinch from your Obedience.

Public and Declarative this Resolution must be upon all Just Occasions, as
when Profaneness and Impiety grow bold and daring; and when Sinners become
Impudent and Triumphant in Immodest and Immoral Courses. And when the
Profession of Religion is thrown off as Ridiculous, and below Men of Sense and
Spirit. In such an Age as this, I say, there is occasion given to all the
faithful Servants of Christ, to own and declare themselves his Disciples, and
that they are not ashamed of him and his Doctrines. And with the Noble
Mattathias, 1 Mac. 2.19. they must be ready to say, Though all the Nations under
the Kings Dominions shall fall, every one from the Religion of their Fathers,
yet will I, and my Sons, and my Brethren, walk in the Covenant of our Fathers.
A Noble and Heroic Resolution, worthy of us Christians to follow, and
absolutely necessary to be put on at this time, when the Public Affronts to
God and his Religion are greater than were ever in a State professing
Christianity.

And as the Resolution must be openly, and declaratively; so it must be
solemnly made, I mean, that you who are now entering into a wicked World, must
take the first Opportunity of an Episcopal Confirmation; and must there in the
Face of the World, in the Presence of the chief Officer in the Church of
Christ, the Bishop, and before the whole Assembly of Christians there met, you
must there, I say, as is prescribed in the Office of Confirmation, with your
own Mouth and Consent, openly recognize, ratify, and confirm the same Vow that
was made for you in your Baptism. The Bishop will then demand of you in these
Words, Do ye here in the Presence of God, and of this Congregation, renew the
solemn Promise, and Vow, that was made in your Name at your Baptism, ratifying
and confirming the same in your own Persons, and acknowledging your selves
bound to believe, and to do all those things which your Godfathers and
Godmothers then undertook for you. And to this Demand every one of you must
audibly answer, I do: And such as this, it is probable might be that good
Profession which Timothy had professed before many Witnesses, 1 Timothy 6.12. So
that thus at length you see in what consists Holy Resolution, the Importance of
these Words, I will.

Thirdly, And I am now to show you, that such Resolution, and so duly formed as
this, is a very powerful means, will go a great way toward the Performance of
our Covenant with God.

And, 1. The very determining of the Will with a fixed, and settled purpose,
has a great force in it to make us put in Execution the most difficult part of
our Vows and Promises. We see even in Worldly Undertakings, where the
Advantages are very inconsiderable in comparison, what Difficulties Men will go
through when they are once bent upon a Design, whereas, when Persons have no
Will, nor Mind to do a thing, the Wheels of Action move but slowly, and their
Endeavors are very faint.

For why? when Men are fully purposed, and are set upon a thing, then it is the
Subject of their Cares, they lay all their Measures, and they muster up all
their Forces to carry it on; and what is equal with all this, they provide
against all Attempts that shall be laid to ruin their Designs.

And if those who will be Rich, or Great, or Honorable, project a thousand
ways to carry their Point, leave no Stone unturned, refuse no hazards, are
discouraged at no Disappointments and cross Accidents; shall not we, who have
infinitely more valuable Treasures laid up for us in Heaven; who have Crowns of
Glory proposed to us if we excel in Virtue, shall we be faint, and languid in
our Endeavors? What can be the reason of this, but that in the great Business
of Religion, Men are not so much in earnest, so resolute, and intent, as in the
pursuit of their Worldly Advantages and Satisfactions, so resolutely bent, I
say, upon their Improvements in Religious Perfection; for this would go a great
way toward their performance of their Covenant with God.

Particularly to be fully resolved upon it, is absolutely nccessary, to baffle,
and discourage the Devil in all his Attempts upon us; whom in order to resist,
the Apostle bids us be steadfast, or resolute in the Faith, 1 Pet. 5 9. For
indeed such is his Resolution to destroy Mankind; and such especially is his
Pride in the Overthrow of the greatest Heroes in Christianity, that there is no
Devise, nor Diligence will be wanting on his part to foil you, you especially
who are devoted to God; so that you must take unto you the whole Armor of God,
that ye may be able to withstand in the Evil-Day, and having done all to stand,
stand therefore having your Loins Girt, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.13.14. which
words, and manner of Expression, speak the utmost Resolution to be necessary.
And that will do; for when he sees that you stand so much upon your Guard, that
he can have no hopes of prevailing; to avoid the shame of a foul Defeat, he
will at last leave you to the Conduct of God's Holy Spirit, and of his Holy
Angels, and will no longer molest nor trouble you.

And the same Resolution is also most exceedingly necessary to subdue the Lusts
of the Flesh. These are a headstrong and boisterous Enemy, and must be as
resolutely dealt withal, which our Savior does more than Intimate, when he
tells us, we must Cut off these Right-Arms, and Pluck out these Right Eyes of
ours, Matthew. 5.29, 30. meaning our most darling and beloved Lusts; and to Cut
off, and Pluck out is quick work. And indeed, the only danger from our Lusts
is, when we begin to parley with them, and hold Arguments against 'em; for in
the mean time they insensibly steal into our Hearts; and get Strength within
us; but a Resolute Resistance, not so much as letting 'em enter into our
Thoughts, utterly defeats 'em.

And, Lastly, The World, especially the wicked Men of the World, can by no
means be so successfully defeated in all their Attempts to draw you to Sin, as
by your putting on serious Resolutions against all sinful Ways and Courses.
Till then they will never leave you, but will be continually plying you with
Insinuations, Flatteries, Persuasions, and Arguments to accompany them in their
Riots; but when it once comes to that, that you can say with the Resolved
Psalmist, Ps. 119.115. Away from me all ye that work wickedness, I will keep
the Commandments of my God, they will no longer trouble you; they will perceive
you have an Aversion and Hatred to their Ways, and that will natu^ally separate
between you, and remove them at a distance from you.

But, 2. Our Holy Resolutions are then likeliest to be firm, and will
consequently prove a happy Instrument, and means of your continuing faithful in
your Covenant with God, when they are Ratified and Confirmed by some outward
and express Solemnity, as at Confirmation, or at a Sacrament. For to the Inward
Resolves of the Mind there will be then added the outward and express
Obligation of an Oath, which the Consciences of all Mankind, not totally
depraved by Sin, are infinitely afraid of violating. And to this purpose, it is
observable, that even God himself, Willing to show unto the Heirs of Promise,
the Immutability of his Council, confirmed it by an Oath, that by two Immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to Lie, we might have strong
Consolation, who have fled for Refuge, to lay hold on the Hope set before us,
Hebrews 6.17, 18. The two immutable things here meant, were the Promise, and
the Oath of God: And the bare Promise of him sure, who could not lie might be
sufficient to give us Assurance; But even God himself, for our greater
Certainty and Consolation, confirmed what he promised by Oath; which shows the
Additional Obligation, which any thing that carries in it the Nature of an
Oath, has upon Men's Consciences: And therefore it will follow, that your
fortifying your Resolutions at a Confirmation: wherein you solemnly ratify,
and renew your Vows to God in the Presence of his Church, who are Witnesses to
the Contract that will be produced in Judgment against you, should you happen
to violate the same: It will therefore follow, I say, that nothing can be so
likely to render your Holy Resolutions steadfast, and lasting, as when they are
so solemnly made. By thus solemnly confirming your Resolutions, you will give a
very great Force, not only to the Dictates of your own Consciences, but to the
Admonitions also of your Pastor, or any other kind Friend, who watches over you
for Good, and who then can with Moses, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. adjure you to be true
to your Covenant with God in these emphatical, and weighty Expressions, Thou
have vouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to
keep his Statutes, and to hearken to his Voice. And the Lord has avouched thee
this day to be his peculiar People, as he has promised thee, and that thou
should keep all his Commandments.

And thus I have fully showed you both the Nature of Holy, and Christian
Resolution; and also how much it will conduce to the performance of your
Covenant with God, if you can once bring your selves to Resolve well, and
especially to seal these Resolutions in a public and solemn Ordinance. I shall
but briefly here speak to the two following Particulars; viz. God's Assistance,
and Prayer, as means also of enabling you to discharge the same. These are
indeed together with Holy Resolution contained in these Words;

And by God's help so I will.

And I pray unto God to give me his Grace, that I may continue in the same unto
my Lives end.

But there will be another more proper Occasion to give a full State, and
Account of those two great Points; and therefore I shall here insist upon them
no farther, than is necessary to our present purpose of showing farther the
Nature of Christian Resolution, and how it must be qualified. To proceed then,

II. Our Resolution to be faithful in our Covenant with God, must be made, not
in Confidence of our own Strength, but of God's Grace and Assistance. Alas, of
our selves we are extremely weak, all the Powers and Faculties of our Nature
being miserably corrupted and depraved by Sin, and enfeebled to all that is
good: Of our selves we are not able so much as to think any thing that is good;
but however we have Sufficiency of God: And the Trust we have in God is through
Christ, 2 Cor. 3.4, 5. for he has purchac'd sufficient Grace and Assistance for
us to help us through all the Difficulties in our Christian Warfare, so that
though we cannot promise, nor vow that we will renounce the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, believe in God, and obey him, in Confidence of our own Strength; yet
in full Assurance of the Help of God, we may firmly resolve with a So I will:
For I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. But then,

III. It is Prayer that must obtain that Help and Assistance, you must pray
unto God to give you his Grace, that you may continue in the same unto your
Lives end.

Prayer is indeed a most Sovereign Means of obtaining Supply to all our wants;
and they never return unanswered in such a manner as shall be best for us,
provided we our selves are duly qualified with Tempers and Dispositions to
approach unto the Throne of Grace; and provided also that the Matter of our
Prayer be acceptable to God. But as to his Grace and Assistance, to enable us
to serve, and obey him, we may be sure of never failing in such our Petitions.
And therefore you may be particularly assured that the Prayers of the Fathers
of the Church, accompanied with laying on of Hands, (to which there is a
particular Promise of a gracious Answer,) will not return empty, when in their
Confirmation of those amongst you, who come with sincere Intentions to perform
their Covenant, they shall pray unto God to increase in you the manifold Gifts
of Grace, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Wisdom and
Ghostly Strength, the Spirit of Knowledge and True Godliness, and to fill you
with the Spirit of Holy Fear now and for ever: Which, and all your Prayers,
that they may be successful, may God Almighty grant of his Infinite Goodness
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

FINIS.
THE XXVIII Lecture. And by God's Help so I will. And I pray unto God to give
me his Grace that I may continue in the same unto my Live's End.
IN the discoursing of those Means whereby we shall perform the Covenant we
have entered into with God; having First showed you, that to put on a firm and
fixed Resolution faithfully to discharge the same, will be a great means
toward the performance of it.

Secondly, I am now to show you, that it must be a Resolution took up, not in
Confidence of our own Strength, but of God's Grace and Assistance. And by God's
Help so I will. In order to make which appear,

1. I will briefly represent how great our own natural Weakness is; And in what
necessity we do therefore stand of God's Grace and Assistance, to enable us to
overcome the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and to perform
our Covenant with God.

2. I will then show you what Measures of Divine Assistance proportionably to
such our Necessity, God will bestow upon us.

The whole Nature of Man depraved.
And, First, Let us take a View of our own Natural Weakness, so as to see in
what necessity we do stand of God's Grace and Assistance, to enable us to
overcome the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and to perform
our Covenant with God. And here we are to reflect, that ever since the Fall of
our first Parents, when they did break their Covenant with God, and lost their
Innocence by eating of the Forbidden Fruit, and did thereby forfeit the perfect
Light and Strength wherewith God had endowed 'em at the Creation, and had
deposited with 'em as a sacred Treasury for them, and their Posterity: Ever
since that fatal Forfeiture then made, it must be confessed that our whole
Nature is corrupted, and all the Powers and Faculties of our Souls and Bodies,
are so depraved, that every thing within us inclines us to yield to
Temptations, and to sin against, and to disobey our God.

The Lig^t of our Understanding Vnderstanding^.
is ever since become very dim to discern the Beauty of Holiness, of Religion,
and of Spiritual Things. The Natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit
of God, for they are Foolishness to him; neither can be know them, because they
are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. Our Wills Wills
they also are naturally crooked and perverse, and altogether for choosing what
pleases our Appetites, and our Senses, and are very backward to Religion and
Goodness. Our Affections Affections.
run with so strong a Biass toward Worldly Things, that we cannot easily set
our Affections on Things above, as the Apostle commands us, but on Things on
Earth. And lastly, our Lusts and Appetites Lusts and Appetites.
are naturally very evil, and carry us out to please our Senses, in direct
opposition to the Laws of God, and the Dictates of right Reason. Thus is our
whole Nature corrupt, and every Power and Faculty thereof does incline us to
yield to the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and Devil, and so to sin
against our God, and to break our Covenant with him. In a word, the Temptations
of all sorts, which we do often meet with to draw us into Sin, are mighty; and
the Duties we are to perform in opposition to 'em all, are many, and sometimes
very difficult; and our own natural Strength, whereby we should do all this, is
very weak. We see, as the Apostle words it, Romans 7.23. A Law in our Members,
warring against the Law of our Minds, and bringing us into Captivity to the Law
of Sin, which is in our Members: So that if we consider our selves as we are in
our natural State, we have reason to bewail our Condition in the following
Words of the Apostle; O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
Body of Sin, Verse 24.

But however, Christ ha^ purchac'd sufficient Grace to renew (...) throughout.
notwithstanding this our Natural Corruption and Weakness, we have reason to
take Courage, and with the same Apostle, V. 25. to thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord. For our Blessed Savior with the Price of his most Precious
Blood, amongst other high Benefits, has purchac'd that excellent Gift of
sufficient Grace and Assistance, for all that enter into the Covenant with him,
to enable them to perform the Conditions of it. And as he has purchac'd it, so
he does convey it to the Hearts of all such, to enable them to renounce, and
overcome the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; to believe in God, and to obey
him: So that though we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as
of our selves, yet we have Sufficiency of God, to enable us both to think, and
to do what is good, 2 Cor. 3.5. And indeed we can do all things required of us
through Christ that strengthens us, Phil. 4.13. And this brings me to my

Second Proposal, Which was to show you, what the Divine Assistance is, What
the Divine Assistance is.
and what Measures of it, Proportionably to such our Necessity, God will bestow
upon us to enable us to perform our Covenant with him.

And as to the Grace and Assistance of God, by it I do mean something over and
above that Reason and Perswasiveness there is in the Gospel it self to work a
Change in us; whereby on the one hand, by the proposal of infinite Rewards to
Well-doing; on the other hand, by the threatening of fearful Punishments to
wicked Living; the Gospel is apt of it self to prevail upon us, and to change
our Natures. But by the Grace and Assistance of God, I do mean, I say,
something over and above this, viz. A secret Power and Efficacy of the Divine
Spirit accompanying the Word into the Mind and Will, by means whereof the
Gospel does the more readily and effectually work upon both, to the Renewing of
'em, and to the restoring of the Image of God in the Soul; namely, that
Righteousness and Purity which we had lost by our Fall. This I mean by the
Divine Assistance.

The Measures of it proportionable to the necessity of the Church.
And as to the measures of this Assistance, every Member in Christ's Body, in
what Station soever he be, shall have sufficient Supplies of Grace derived down
from Him our Head, proportionable to his Necessities, by those means of
conveying it, which Christ has appointed for that purpose: I say, every Member
in Christ's Body in what Station soever he be: For as we have many Members in
one Body, and all Members have not the same Office, so we being many are one
Body in Christ, and every one Members one of another, Romans 12.4, 5. that is,
there are different Members in the Church of Christ. Some are to be Governors
and Teachers of others, and accordingly must be endowed with a Spirit of
Government and Gift of Teaching; and others are of a more private Capacity in
the Church of Christ, whatever they be in other Respects, and their Business is
to keep a Conscience void of Offense, both toward God and Man, and faithfully
to discharge their Duties to God, their Neighbor, and themselves. And
whatever, I say, those several Duties are, which arise from their several
Stations in the Church, they shall have a competent measure of Divine Grace,
enabling 'em to discharge the same. They have not a Promise of those Gifts that
are necessary to the Discharge of other Persons Offices, but are distitute of
those necessary for their own; that is, a private Christian, called to no
Office in the Church, is not to expect, nor ought to pretend, to have received
Gifts of Government and Teaching, in a public Ministerial way, for God is not
the Author of Confusion, but of Peace in all the Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor.
14.33. But every Member of the Mystical Body, by keeping himself united to the
Head, in such ways as has been showed, shall have such Graces and Assistances
derived down to him from Christ, who is that Head, as are necessary and proper
for him.

Extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit in the first Ages.
And that too in such Measures and Proportions, as according to the different
Times and Occasions in the Church, are wanting. Thus in the first Plantation of
the Gospel, when the Work was so extraordinary, that there was need of Miracles
to convince the Jews of the Insufficiency of Moses's Law: And the Gentiles of
the Falsehood of the Pagan Superstition, then did Christ bestow upon his
Apostles, diverse Extraordinary Gifts, viz. of Miracles, Prophecy, discerning of
Spirits, diverse kind of Tongues, and the Interpretation of Tongues, 1 Cor.
12.10. And as to all Christians in general, as the Malice of Satan did then
most violently rage against the Church, Persecuting to the Death, those who
would not Renounce Christ and his Religion; So all the Christians in those
Times were very extraordinarily strengthened, no doubt, to resist such strong
Temptations.

But now, that the Church is established, Ordinary in succeeding Times.
and the Truth of Christianity already proved and Believed, God does assist the
Ministers of Religion only with the Ordinary Graces of his Spirit, in the
discharge of their Ministry.

And as to Lay Christians therefore, except it be when the Orthodox are called
out into any part of the World (as sometimes they are to this day) to suffer
for the Truth, they receive no other than ordinary Assistances.

But this both Ministers and People are sure to do, in the use of those Means
which Christ has appointed in his Church for that purpose.

And yet even these ordinary Assistances, Even the ordinary Assistances
extensively very large: so as to repair all the Powers of Nature depraved by
Sin.
Blessed be the Infinite Mercies of God toward us therein, are extensively
very large and diffusive, so as to reach to all the Parts and Powers of our
Nature, which are Evilly Affected, Corrupted, and Depraved by Sin; and
Intensively very powerful in working a blessed-Change within us.

And, First, the Grace of God is extensively very diffusive and large in the
Change and Reformation it works within us, in that there is no Power and
Difficulty in our Natures, which by Sin is Corrupted, but by his Grace and
Assistance is Renewed. I do mean, that the Assistances which God does afford us
to enable our Weakness to perform the Conditions of the Covenant, is so applied
to us by the Goodness of God, that every Power and Faculty within us, which is
rendered weak by the Corruption of our Nature, is strengthened by his Grace to
perform its proper part and Duty. Are our Understandings dull to apprehend and
conceive of Spiritual things as they ought? His Grace does enlighten our
Understandings: Thus we read, Luke the 24.45. that our Savior opened the
Understandings of his Disciples, that they might understand the Scriptures. And
to this purpose St. Paul, Ephesians. 1.18. did earnestly Pray, That God would give
unto 'em the Spirit of Wisdom, that the Eyes of their Understandings being
enlightened, they might know what is the Hope of their Calling, and what are
the Riches of the Glory in the Inheritance of the Saints, Are our Wills
backward in performing the Conditions of the Promises, why God by throwing good
Suggestions into our Souls, and by Imprinting important Considerations upon our
Minds, does persuade and bend our stubborn Wills, and by degrees, works us into
a ready Compliance with the Divine Will: Thus is God said to work in us both to
will and to do, of his good Pleasure, Phil. 2.13. And upon this account also
all our Christian Virtues are called, the Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. Are
our Affections listless and lukewarm to Spiritual things? particularly, Are
they dull and heavy in our Devotions? Why the Holy Spirit helps to raise in us
Holy Desires, Lise, and Quickness in our Prayers? Thus the Apostle, the Spirit
helps our Infirmities, making Intercession for the Saints, according to the
Will of God, by Inspiring 'em with such Desires and Groanings that cannot be
uttered, Romans 8.26, 27. And, Lastly, Are our Lusts and Appetites violent to
carry us out to gratify them in unlawful things? Why? If by the Spirit of God
we shall mortify the Deeds of the Body, we are Promised, that we shall Live,
Romans 8.13. which implies, that by the Grace and Assistance of God's Holy
Spirit, we shall be able to subdue those unruly Lusts within us, and so shall
live Eternally.

And Intensively very powerful to renew our corrupt Natures.
And, Secondly. The Divine Grace and Assistance, even in its ordinary
Distributions, is Intensively powerful, and strong enough to Renew our Corrupt
Natures. This secret Power of the Holy Spirit does not indeed so forcibly and
Irresistably work a Change in us, as that it will be impossible to Resist this
Divine Grace and Efficacy, and to render it ineffectual to our Renovation. The
Grace of God may be resisted, and his Spirit may strive in vain with us, no
doubt, as it did with the old World, as you may see, Genesis 6.3. yet, by the
opening of the Heart, as it did the Heart of Lydia, so that it shall attend to
the Word, Acts 16.14. by fixing of the Mind to consider, and by enlightening it
to discern the Nature, Tendency, and Usefulness of things revealed in the
Gospel: Also by sweetly disposing the Will to weigh the Importance of Divine
Truths, and by giving it to taste and feel the Goodness of Spiritual Things; by
these Methods it adds such a Perswasiveness in the Word of God, that the most
wickedly disposed Persons shall be thereby Converted and changed into most
Virtuous and Good Tempers. Hence from this powerful Concurrence and
Cooperation of Grace, whereby it has an Edge given it to pierce the most
stony'd, hardened Hearts of Men, is the Word of God said, Heb. 4.12. To be
quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints, and Marrow; and that is
a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart.

And hence St. Paul speaking of the Gospel, which he preached unto the
Thessalonians, 1 Epist. 1.5. tells them, that the Gospel came not unto them in
Word only, but also in Power, and in the Holy Ghost; that is, it came
accompanied not only with the Power of Miracles, as some do interpret it, but
with a great internal Power and Efficacy of the Holy Spirit, working in the
Hearts of those to whom it was preached, as others do rightly expound it. It
came indeed accompanied with both in those days, both the Extraordinary Gifts,
and the more Ordinary Graces of the Holy Spirit made way for its Entrance, and
Entertainment in their Hearts. And so great is the Measure of Grace afforded
now under, and accompanying the preaching of the Gospel, to what was given
under the Law, that the Gospel is dignified, 2 Cor. 3, 6. with the Title of
Spirit, whereas the Law is styled the Letter; the Apostle making this
difference betwixt 'em, that the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life.
Here the Gospel is called by this Title of the Spirit, says a learned
Commentator, because Grace is a Gift of the Spirit, and is now joined to the
Gospel, which was not to the Law; which Administration of the Spirit, and
annexing of it to the Word under the Gospel, gives Men the Means to attain
Eternal Life; when the Law is the Occasion, and by accident the Cause of Death
to 'em, in denouncing Judgment against Sinners, and yet not giving Strength to
obey. And indeed, lastly, well may it be styled the Spirit, since so great a
proportion of Grace is afforded us now under the Gospel, to work in us a Change
and Reformation; and so main and principal a Means is the Grace of God of such
a Change, that the whole Work of Regeneration is called, Tit. 3.5, 6. the
renewing of the Holy Ghost; and so little Efficacy is attributed barely to the
preaching of the Word, in comparison of what is attributed to the Grace of God
going along with it, that St. Paul tells the Corinthians, 1 Epist. 3.7. who by
preferring one Teacher above another, and dividing into Parties and Factions
thereupon, seemed to impute the whole Success to the Excellency of some Men's
Preaching above others: He tells them, that neither is he that planteth any
thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the Increase; where the
whole Success of our Preaching in rendering it effectual, he tells us, is from
God's Grace, not from our Skill who preach it: So that intensively, it appears
God's Grace is very strong, mighty, and powerful, in working a Change and
Reformation in us.

To conclude then this Second Means of performing our Covenant with God: As
great as our natural Weakness is since our Fall, you see we have the Grace and
Assistance of God ready at hand to restore in us the Image of God, consisting
in that Righteousness from which we fell by Transgression. We shall have that
Grace and Assistance, I say, which is extensively very diffusive and large, so
as to renew in us all those Powers and Faculties of our Nature, which by Sin
have been depraved; and intensively very strong, mighty, and powerful in
working a Change and Reformation within us. And this is a second Means whereby
we shall be enabled to perform our Covenant with God.

The Third Means whereby we shall both obtain the Divine Assistance, and be
thereby enabled to discharge our Covenant, is Prayer unto God to give us his
Grace, that we may continue faithful in our Covenant unto our Live's End. But
of the Efficacy of Prayer, I shall speak the next Opportuntty.

THE XXIX Lecture. And I pray unto God to give me his Grace, that I may
continue in the same unto my Live's End.
HAving fully explained to you (so far as lead thereunto by the Words of our
Church-Catechism, in the Preliminary Questions and Answers thereof,) the
Nature, Terms, and Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, the Solemnity whereby
you entered into it, and the mighty Obligations lying upon you to perform it; I
am now upon showing you the Means whereby we shall be enabled to perform this
so important a Covenant, wherein all our Happiness both in this and the other
World, is contained and wrapped up; a thing indeed, which it does exceedingly
concern you to be well informed about, it being impossible to perform any thing
as it ought, without the Knowledge of its due and proper Means.

And the First Means, in order to perform your Covenant as I have showed you,
is a Holy, Christian, and Firm Resolution to be faithful in the same; the
Importance of these Words, So I will. But a Resolution it must be, which is
taken up not in Confidence of our own Strength, but of God's Help. And
therefore,

Secondly, The next necessary Means to enable us to discharge our part of this
Covenant, must be the Grace and Assistance of God, which you have taught you in
these Words; And by God's Help so I will. And concerning this, I have also
spoke all that I think is necessary to be showed you in this Place: For,

1st. I have declared to you in what Necessity we do stand, by reason of our
own Natural Weakness, of the Divine Assistance, to enable us to overcome the
Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and to perform our Covenant
with God. And,

2dly, I have showed you what the Divine Assistance is, and what Measures of
it, proportionably to such our Necessity, God will bestow upon us to enable us
to perform our Covenant with him.

And now the Third Means whereby we shall both obtain the Divine Assistance,
and be enabled also to discharge our Covenant, is Prayer unto God to give us
his Grace, that we may continue faithful in our Covenant unto our Lives end.

I shall not here undertake to treat of the whole Subject of Prayer in the full
Extent thereof: This will be more properly done in another Place, when we come
in the latter part of the Catechism to explain the Lord's Prayer. For as our
most Excellent Catechism does observe this most useful Method in your
Instruction, to teach you first in general the Terms and Conditions of your
Covenant, and all things relating to it, and then to descend to a more
particular Consideration of the same Points; So we cannot do better, than to
follow the same Method in the Explication of these Points. All that I shall
therefore do at present, shall be,

I. To show you what is meant by praying unto God.

II. To lay before you how effectual a Means of performing your Covenant
praying unto God will be; not only as it will morally dispose, nay, naturally
enforce, and lay a necessity upon you to be faithful therein, but as it will
certainly procure you the Divine Assistance.

And First, The full Meaning of Prayer.
I am to show you in a few Words what is meant by praying unto God. And by
Prayer, I do not here mean in the strictest sense of the Words, our Petitions
only to Almighty God, wherein we do implore his Goodness to bestow upon us
through Christ, what he knows to be best both for our Bodies and Souls: This
indeed is the most proper and immediate sense of the Words, and the sense that
is most directly here intended. But however in the largest sense of the Word, I
do also mean by Praying, all that Application we make to the Divine Majesty,
when either by confessing our Sins unto him we own our selves to deserve his
utmost Wrath, and the severest Punishments; or by petitioning of him, we
entreat his Forgiveness of the same, and that he will strengthen us with his
Grace to do better for the future; or when by interceding for others, we
entreat the like Favor of God for them, in the Forgiveness of their Sins, and
in the Preservation of their Innocence; or lastly, when we return him Thanks
for whatever Mercies we, or others have received at his hands. All these are so
many Parts of that General Duty of Prayer; and in whichsoever of these Acts of
Devotion we apply and address our selves to God, we are said to pray, as
appears in the Instance of the Pharisee and Publican; both which are said to
have gone up into the Temple to pray, Luke 18.10. as well the proud Pharisee,
who uttered only his Thanks to God that he was not as had as other Men were; as
the honest Publican, who poured out his Soul to God in an humble Confession of
his own Vileness, and in an earnest Petition that God would be merciful to him
a Sinner. Thus you see what is meant by praying unto God, and that all the
Parts and Acts of Devotion are therein included; though principally and more
directly by praying unto God, is to be understood here, our petitioning his
Grace and Assistance.

Pra^er a most effectual Means of performing our Covenant.
Secondly, And I am now to show you, how effectual a Means of performing your
Covenant praying unto God will be; not only as it will morally dispose, nay,
and naturally enforce, and lay a necessity, a restraint upon you to be faithful
therein, but as it will certainly procure for you the Divine Assistance.

1. As it morally disposes us to be obedient unto God.
And, 1. I say that Prayer will be a very effectual Means to enable you to
perform the Covenant of Grace, though we consider how far it morally disposes
us to Virtue and Goodness. In Prayer we draw near to God, we approach the
Divine Presence, we hold Communion with him: And those who consider that thus
they do in Prayer, how can they think of not quitting their Sins, which render
them so odious, so hateful to God, into whose Presence no impure thing must
presume to enter? It is observable what a mighty Influence it will have upon a
Man, to be often in the Company of one whom the Spirit of God has greatly
sanctified, into whose Soul the Divine Image is manifestly restored, and who is
more than ordinarily eminent for his Piety, Sobriety, Humility, Justice, and
Charity. The shining Graces and Virtues of such a Person, will strike an awful
Respect and Veneration into the Hearts of all that come near him, so that they
dare not offer at, nor so much as think of any wicked, unjust, unchaste, or
other villainous Action in his Presence; and when gone from him, there is
scarcely any so reprobate, but will carry off some good Dispositions to the
like Virtues so eminent in that Person. And how then can any appear before God,
who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, and not be put into the most holy
Frame and Temper of Mind? It is but to be frequent with God in Prayer, and it
would insensibly mould us into a like Heavenly Temper and Frame of Spirit, and
at length work in us a Divine Nature.

2 As it natu^ally enforces us to be faithful to him.
Nay, 2. constant Prayer will more than dispose us; it will naturally enforce us
to be faithful with God. I mean it is a Duty of that Nature, that it is
scarcely to be imagined how any one should persevere in Prayer, and yet
persevere withal to violate his Covenant with God: For why? If I regard
Iniquity in my heart; that is, if I do not repent of it, and turn away from it,
the Lord will not hear me, Psalm. 66.18. Nay, the Wise Man tells us, that he who
turns away his Ear from hearing the Law, that his Prayer shall be even an
Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 28.9. So that whilst a Man continues impenitent,
his Prayers, instead of appeasing, will but the more inflame the Wrath of God
against him.

And good reason why; for consider all the Parts of Prayer, and you will find
they are but mere Mockery out of the unhallowed Mouths of Impenitent Sinners;
for what less than the vilest Mockery can it be, for any one, whilst he allows
himself in any Wickedness, to come gravely into God's Presence, and there
confess before him, that he has offended against his Holy Laws; that he has
left undone those things which he ought to have done, and that he has done
those things which he ought not to have done; and yet notwithstanding all this,
designs no otherwise, than to offend him in like manner again? And how
impudently it is to affront God to the Face; for any impenitent Wretch to put
up such Petitions as these, But do thou, O Lord, notwithstanding I have sinned,
and will continue yet to sin (for this is the true Import of a wicked Man's
Prayers, neither more nor less) have Mercy upon me a miserable Offender? And
though he is far from repenting, yet to say, Spare thou me that confess my
Faults, Restore thou me that am penitent? And again, with what Confidence can
wicked Christians pretend to interceed with God for his Favors to Jews, Turks,
Infidels, and Heretics, when alas they are much less the Favorites of God
themselves; and it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the Day of
Judgment, than for wicked Christians, Matthew. 11.24. I do confess indeed, as to
that part of Prayer which we call Thanksgiving, the most wicked and impenitent
Sinners may bless God for their Creation, Preservation, and all the Blessings
of this Life: For he makes his Sun to rise on the Evil, and on the Good; and
sends Rain on the Just, and on the Unjust, Matthew. 5.45; and there is nothing
hinders but they should praise him for it.

But with what show of Sincerity can they be thought to bless him above all for
his inestimable Love in his Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ,
for the means of Grace, and for the hopes of Glory; when so long as they
continue in their Sins, they can expect no benefit from Christ's Redemption,
and can have no hopes of Glory?

True it is, there have been observed in the World, That there are praying
Hypocrites, is by virtue of Antinomian Principles.
both in our Savior's Time, and of latter days, a sort of Impious and Profane
Wretches, that have been greatly given to Pray, and yet have been most
notorious Liars and Slanderers; Proud and Censorious; and above all, most cruel
and unmerciful Exactors and Oppressors; but it is plain, they were either
Hypocrites and Atheists in the bottom, and for a pretense and color only, made
long Prayers, that they might more easily devour Widows Houses, Matthew. 23.14.
and so by the Opinion of their Sanctity delude unwary People to trust 'em, till
having 'em within their Power, they might grind 'em to Powder. Or they owe this
to some other Wicked and Heretical Principles, as our Modern Antinomians, who
do found their favor with God in his Arbitrary Election of their Persons,
without any respect had to their Virtues and Graces, as acceptable through the
Mediation of Christ; and will therefore pretend to pray to him; nay, and in
their Prayers presume to talk with him, as familiarly as one Friend does to
another. But alas, the Scripture gives none the least grounds for such
Confidence and Presumption; but does indeed let us know, it is a fearful thing
to presume to pray to God, and at the same time to continue in Sin.

Sacrifices amongst the Jews were a kind of sensible and visible Prayers, and
Prayers did usually accompany them; but whilst that People were notoriously
wicked, see how God does express his detestation of such their Sacrifices and
Prayers, Isai. 66.3. He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a Man; he that
Sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs Neck; he that Offers an Oblation,
as if he offered Swines Blood; he that burns Incense, as if he blessed an
Idol.

So that there is a great necessity of Resolving to forsake Sin, and of being
faithful in our Covenant, if we will pray to God, but if Men will go on
wilfully in sinful Courses, they had even as good not pray at all. Heaven and
Hell, Light and Darkness may be joined together, and Reconciled, as well as
Prayer and Impenitence.

3. As it will certainly procure the Divine Assistance.
3. And especially, Prayer duly qualified, will be a most effectual Means to
enable you to discharge your Covenant, as it procures for you the Grace and
Assistance of God, without which you cannot perform it, as has already been
showed you. I say, if duly Qualified, if put up with Faith and Sincerity; for
as appears from the last Particular, the Prayers of such as are resolvedly
Wicked will avail nothing but to their greater Damnation. But otherwise Prayer
doubtless is the most prevalent thing in the World with God, to derive down his
Blessings, Favors, and Graces of all sorts upon us. Prayer, says the Learned
and Pious Bishop Tailor, has saved Cities and Kingdoms from Ruin. Prayer has
raised Dead Men to Life, has stopped the violence of Fire, and shut the Mouths
of wild Beasts: It has altered the course of Nature, has caused Rain in
Egypt, and Drought in the Sea: It made the Sun to go back from West to East,
and the Moon to stand still, and Rocks and Mountains to walk; and it cures
Diseases without Physic, and makes Physic to do the work of Nature; and, in a
word, does many Miracles. But of all the Miracles that Prayer does, there is
none so valuable, (if any so great) as to Sanctify our Natures, and to enable
us to perform our Covenant with God, which Prayer is a most effectual means to
enable us to do.

I say, That Prayer will most effectually procure for us the Graces of the Holy
Spirit, to enable us to perform our Covenant with God, of which we have a most
full and pregnant Proof, Luke 11, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. our blessed Savior, in
the foregoing Verses, having given his Disciples a Prayer to learn, to enforce
upon 'em the constant and devout Exercise of this most Heavenly Duty, tells
'em, by way of Parable, how prevalent an Importunate Prayer will be, even with
an Ill-natured Man, to incline him to grant the Desires of him that Petitions
him. And then he proceeds to tell 'em, That much more will Constancy, and
Earnestness in Prayer, prevail upon God, who is more tender to us, and more
forward of himself to do us good, than our very Parents. And I say unto you,
Ask and ye shall have, seek, and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be opened
unto you; for every one that asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds;
and to him that knocks it shall be opened. If a Son shall ask Brea^ of any of
you, that is a Father, will he give him a Stone; or if he ask a Fish, will he
for a Fish give him a Serpent; or if he shall ask an Egg, will he offer him a
Scorpion? If ye then being Evil, know how to give good Gifts unto your
Children, how much more shall your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them
that ask him? Which is as if he should say, There is no fear that God should
deny such Petitions, or give his Children any hurtful thing, when they ask that
which is good for them: And though many things, which Men ask, be not good, yet
his Spirit, and the Assistances of it are so undoubtedly such, that they will
never be denied to them that ask them of the Father. This is so full a proof of
the prevalency of Prayer to procure of God the Grace of his Holy Spirit, to
sanctify our Natures, and to enable us to perform the Conditions of our
Covenant, that it would be even lost labor to multiply any more Texts to this
purpose.

What then remains, but that we therefore most earnestly and constantly Pray
unto God, that he would Sanctify our Natures, that he would grant unto us
according to the Riches of his Grace, to be strengthened with Might by his
Spirit in the inward Man. Particularly,

Let us therefore Pray, that he would Sanctify our Understandings, that being
transformed by the renewing of our Minds, we may be able to have a Spiritual
discerning of the things of God, being wise to that which is good, but simple
and harmless to that which is Evil.

Let us therefore Pray, that he would Sanctify and Reform our Wills, that we
may in every thing submit them unto his; delighting to do his Will. Not seeking
our own Will, but the Will of him that sent us,

And let us therefore Pray, that he would Sanctify and Circumcise our Hearts,
that we may set our Affections on things above, and not on Earthly Matters,

Farther yet, Let us therefore particularly pray, that having Sanctified us
thoroughly in our Understandings, Wills, and Affections, he would enable us to
perform each of the Conditions of our Covenant.

That he would strengthen our Faith, and enable us to hold the Profession of
our Faith without wavering, that he would grant unto us Repentance, That no
longer spending the rest of our Time in the Flesh, to the Lusts of Men, but to
the Will of God, the time past of our Lives may suffice to have served diverse
Lusts, and that for the future we may walk as Obedient Children, not fashioning
our selves according to the former Lusts in our Ignorance; but as he who has
called us is Holy, so we may be Holy in all manner of Conversation,

And, Lastly, Let us pray unto him to give us his Grace, that we may thus
continue, and persevere in Repentance, Faith, and Obedience unto our Lives end;
that being steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord, we
may patiently continme in well-doing, without weariness, as knowing that in due
time we shall reap, if we faint not; which that we may do, God Almighty grant
of his infinite Mercy, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom, and the Holy
Ghost, be ascribed all Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for evermore.
Amen.

THE XXX Lecture. Wherein I was made.
IN several foregoing Lectures upon the Words of the Catechism, having
explained all that I suppose necessary to be known by you, concerning the
general Nature and Substance of the Covenant of Grace, the Solemnity whereby
you entered into it, the Obligations upon you to perform it, and the Means
whereby you shall be enabled to discharge it: I come now to do the like as to
those Circumstances relating to your entrance into it, and requisite also to be
considered by you.

These Circumstances are Two: First, The Time when. Secondly, The Persons by
whom, as by Proxies you were Initiated into the Covenant of Grace.

I. I will consider the Time when; which, because it was as to most of you, in
your Infancy, as is implied in these words, Wherein I was made, a Time thought
unseasonable by some Persons for so grand an Undertaking; therefore I will
endeavor to Justify the having been admitted into the Covenant of Grace, by
Baptism, in the time of your Infancy. This, I say, is what these words, Wherein
I was made, do signify to us, viz. That it was sometime heretofore, that you
were Baptized, and entered into Covenant with God, which was, you know, as to
the Children of most Believers, in the Age of Infancy. And now, I will justify
the thing, the being admitted into the Covenant of Grace by Baptism (If the
Children of Believing Parents) even at such an Age.

Children of Believing Parents have a right to be Baptized, proved from 1 Cor.
7.14.
I say, If the Children of Believing Parents; for that such have a greater
Privilege than others, and with reference to this very particular, of being
Baptized, and ^onfederated with God, may be very fairly gathered from that of
St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.14. For the Unbelieving Husband is Sanctified by the Wife;
and the Unbelieving Wife is Sanctified by the Husband, else were your Children
unclean, but now are they Holy; for the understanding which difficult place, we
must consider the occasion of the Words, and the import of this Expression,
Else were your Children unclean, but now are they Holy.

Now, the occasion of the Words, was a Question propounded to the Apostle,
Whether a Believing Wife, or Husband, ought to dwell with an Unbeliever; which
the Apostle resolves, that either of 'em might, and uses this Argument for it,
That the Unbeliever may, by the Conversation and Persuasion of his Wife, in
time be Sanctified, and Converted himself to Christianity; however, if he be
not, his Children on the account of the Mother, being a Christian, are not
Unclean, but Holy; for the understanding of which Expression, it is to be
considered, that there is a twofold Holiness ascribed to Persons in the New
Testament, to omit some other Acceptations in the Old.

First, There is a Spiritual and Inherent Holiness, which is a necessary
Qualification to make us capable of Happiness in the Life to come, and Members
of the Church Triumphant in Heaven, according to that of St. Paul, Without
Holiness no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.

Secondly, There is a Relative, and outward, or Privilegial Holiness, upon the
account of Persons being separated from the rest of the World, to the pure and
Holy Service, of a pure and Holy God; such as is the Holiness of all the
Members of the Church Militant here on Earth, those I mean who are called into
the Covenant of Grace, as you may see, 1 Pet. 2.9. where speaking to the whole
Catholic Church of Christians, as Christians, he calls 'em a Chosen
Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a peculiar People. A Holy Nation
do ye see he calls 'em, which was spoke on the account of that Holy Profession
they were Baptized into, though all of 'em, in their own Persons, were not
Inherently Holy, no more than all that are called to the Profession of the
Gospel, are chosen to the Salvation of it. So that by these Expressions, Else
were your Children Unclean, but now are they Holy, must be meant a Relative and
Privilegial Holiness they have, by being descended from a Christian Parent,
whereby they are capable of being Members of the Catholic Church, that Holy
Nation meant in St. Peter; capable, I say, of being made so by Baptism, the
only Door of entrance into it.

And if the Children, even of one Believing Parent, are thus Relatively and
Privilegially Holy, by being within the Covenant, or capable of being took into
it by Baptism, on the account of having one Christian Parent, much more should
the Children of those be so accounted, both of whose Parents are Christians.
Possibly one reason wherefore the Child of one Christian Parent is thus Holy,
as to be reputed capable to be a Covenanted Member of Christ's Church, is,
because it may be fairly presumed, the Christian Parents Zeal for God's Glory,
will make He or She train up that Child to the Knowledge, and Belief, and
Service of the One True God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: And if it may be
fairly presumed, that where there is but one Christian Parent, that Pious Care
will be there taken; much more may it, where both are Christians. So that the
Children of such Parents as are both of 'em Christians, must have an undeniable
Right to be Baptized into the Covenant of Grace.

This remarkable Scripture does indeed, to any unprejudiced Mind, if put into
its true Light, sufficiently prove it to be the peculiar Privilege of
Christians Children to be took into Covenant with God; however, the most
prejudiced cannot deny, but that from hence it does appear, they have some
Privilege more than ordinary, above the Children of mere Heathens. And that
this is their Privilege, that they may be Confederated with God in Baptism,
even in their very Infancy, I will farther prove from these following
Arguments, and by proceeding gradually by these several Steps, showing,

May be proved also from several other Topics.
I. That Infants were Initiated by Circumcision into that Evangelical Covenant
made with Abraham.

II. That they were Initiated both by Circumcision and Baptism, into that legal
one delivered by Moses.

III. That it was, without all doubt, the Intention of our Savior, that under
the Gospel likewise, they should be Baptized into the Covenant of Grace.

IV. That agreeably to the Mind of their Master, the Baptizing of 'em into it,
was, in all probability, practiced by the Apostles of Christ.

V. That it is very agreeable to the Ends and Reason of Baptism, and the Nature
of the Covenant of Grace, that they should be Baptized into it. And,

VI. And Lastly, That it is a Happy, a mighty Advantage for those Infants, that
have been at that Age Baptized into it. All which particulars, when I shall
have made out, more perhaps may be, but I do not know any thing farther that
need be said, to Justify Infant Baptism. And,

1. Because Infants were Initiated by Circumcision into the Evangelical
Covenant made with Abraham.
I. I am to show you, that Infants were Initiated by Circumcision into that
Evangelical Covenant made with Abraham.

I do call the Covenant God made with Abraham, Genesis 17. wherein the Almighty
promised to be a God unto him, and his Seed after him, ver. 7. and that in his
Seed all the Nations of the Earth should be Blessed: And Abraham, on the other
side, Believing God, was to leave his Father's House, and Country, and Kindred,
and their Idolatry, Genesis 12.1, 2, 3. I do call this, I say, an Evangelical
Covenant, having the Authority of an Apostle for it, who tells us, it was
Confirmed before of God in Christ, and distinguishes it from that Covenant
delivered by Moses, Gal. 3.17.

The Covenant made with Abraham, the same in Substance with the 2 made with
Adam.
It was indeed the same Covenant of Grace, and in something a clearer Edition of
it, that was made with Adam soon after his Fall, wherein God vouchsafed to
restore him to a State of Salvation, in that Promise of the Seed of the Woman;
that is, the Messiah, which should bruise the Serpent's head; that is, the
Devil. It was the same Covenant of Grace, I say, and expressed indeed in
something clearer Terms, than at first in that Promise to Adam; for still the
nearer the Son of Righteousness did approach with healing under his wings, the
more full were the manifestations he was pleased to make of this Salvation, and
the Methods of it. And it contained under these Words, And the same in a more
imperfect Edition of it with that made with Christ.
And in thy Seed shall all Families of the Earth be blessed, Genesis 12.3. All the
Gospel-Promises of Pardon, Justification, and Happiness, couched more darkly,
than afterward they were revealed in the Gospel; for by the Messiah's
conferring of these things, as has appeared since the preaching of the Gospel,
Abraham, and we, and all his Spiritual Seed, are blessed. And it had the same
Conditions, on the performance of which these Promises did depend, viz. Faith;
for Abraham believed in the Lord, and it was accounted unto him for
Righteousness, Genesis 15.6. And lastly, Circumcision, the Seal of this Covenant,
is called the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.11. that is, the Seal
of that Covenant, whose Condition is such a Righteousness as proceeds from
Faith, which is the very Condition of the Gospel Covenant: All which do
manifestly show, that the Covenant made with Abraham, was that very Evangelical
Gospel Covenant, revealed afterward more fully in the Gospel it self; and
which was established by the Mediation of Christ, betwixt God and us.

And now that Infants, even at eight Days old, were to be initiated into this
Covenant by Circumcision, is to be seen, Genesis 17.11, 12. And ye shall
circumcise the Flesh of your Foreskin, and it shall be a Token of the Covenant
betwixt me and you; and he that is eight days old shall be circumcised amongst
you, Nay, and so indispensable was this Circumcision, even at eight days old,
that it is declared, Verse 14. that the uncircumcised Male-Child, whose Flesh
of his Foreskin is not circumcised, that that Soul should be cut off from his
People; he has broken his Covenant. So that I think it is plain, that as the
Covenant made with Abraham, was no other than the Evangelical Covenant in a
more imperfect Edition of it; so Infants were of necessity, under the greatest
Penalties of being debarred all benefits from it, to be initiated into it, by
the outward Rite, and Seal of Circumcision.

And now this I take to be a very good Argument to justify, nay, to
necessitate the Baptizing of Infants now under the more complete and perfect
manifestation of the Covenant of Grace. For why should any one imagine, if it
were no unreasonable thing, for Children of eight days old to be initiated into
it then, by an outward Right or Ceremony, why, I say, should any one think it
should be so now? Nor is it at all material, that then it was by Circumcision,
now by Baptism; for both of 'em are equally outward Rites and Seals of the same
Covenant; which Rite of Circumcision, God was pleased to change for that of
Baptism, only because this latter would be more agreeable to both Jews and
Gentiles, As he was cut off from the Covenant, who was not circumcised; so that
Person is to be excluded the Church, who is not baptized.
designed now to be took into the Covenant of Grace; and who, for the most
part, would not have endured Circumcision, which was abominable, and a matter
of Derision to the greatest part of the Heathen World.

And was it then declared, Gen, 17.14. that the uncircumsised Manchild, whose
Flesh of his Foreskin was not circumcised, that that Soul should be cut off
from his People, as one that had broken his Covenant; and may it not be thought
now a Matter of indispensable Duty and Necessity, to baptize Children into the
Covenant; and a thing extremely dangerous and prejudicial to their Happiness,
to deny it 'em? I am sure it is not for want of Scripture-Evidence, that we
should not think Baptism as necessary now, as Circumcision was then; since the
same Word of Truth has told us, except we be born of Water, and of the Spirit,
we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Joh. 3.5. So that those misguided
Parents do not know what infinite prejudice they do their Infant-Children, in
denying them the Privilege of baptizing them into the Covenant of Grace; and
whether they may not be a means of debarring them of all those inestimable
Benefits, Christ has purchased with his Blood for us, and which he ensures only
to those who are in Covenant with him.

2. Because they were initiated both by Circumcision and Baptism into that
legal one delivered by Moses.
II. And as Infants were circumcised into that Evangelical Covenant made with
Abraham; so they were both circumcised, and also baptized into that legal one
delivered by Moses. The Legal Covenant delivered by Moses, is frequently
distinguished by St. Paul, from the Covenant of Grace confirmed with Abraham.
Thus, Gal. 3.17. This I say, that the Covenant that was before confirmed of God
with Abraham in Christ, the Law which was 430 Years after, cannot disanull,
that it should make the Promise, or Covenant of Grace (which is so called, to
signify the gracious Nature of it, as being made very much up of most gracious
Promises) of none effect. Here the Legal Covenant is distinguished, both in
Time, as being given 430 years after; and in point of efficacy, as that which
is not of that force, as to disanull the other more weighty, and important
Covenant made with Abraham. It is usual sometimes for after-Covenants to
disannul former ones; but it seems it was not so here; but this Legal Covenant
given after, was superinduced upon the other still remaining in force, as the
only one by which Salvation was to be expected.

And the Enquiry might well be, to what End this Legal Covenant was added, like
an Appendix, as it were, and Codicill to the former Will? And not here to give
a full Account of all the Ends and Reasons of it, which is besides our present
purpose; my Answer to the Question, Wherefore then serves the Law, shall be
with St. Paul, Gal. 3.19. that it was added because of Transgressions, until
the Seed should come. It was added because of Transgressions; that is, to
discover the multitude, and heinousness, and guilt of Sin, for the discovery of
the perfect Rule of Righteousness, made it easy for Persons, comparing their
own Lives therewith, to find out how infinitely defective they were. And it was
added till the Seed should come: It showed them therefore, by giving 'em a
sight of their Sins, how much they stood in need of a Savior. And the
Sacrifices, Offerings, and Rituals of it, which were very many, were, for the
most part, but Types and Shadows of this Savior to come. This may suffice at
present, as to the Legal Covenant, and the Reasons of it.

That they were admitted by Circumcision, ^ndisputable.
And now let us enquire, whether Infants, during the time of this Legal Covenant
delivered by Moses, were not admitted into it, as well as grown Persons, by
some outward Rites and Solemnities? And that we shall see they were, both by
Circumcision and Baptism. That Infants of eight days old were of necessity to
be circumcised, was positively commanded, Lev. 12.3. And in the eighth day, the
Flesh of his Foreskin shall be circumcised; which Circumcision was an
Engagement upon them to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. But that the Infants in
the Jewish Church were circumcised, even at eight days old, is so evident a
Truth to those that do themselves read, or hear the Scriptures read, that I
need not certainly spend time in proving of it.

But that they were baptized, That they were also by Baptism asserted both by
Scripture.
is not indeed so commonly understood and known, but wants not its Evidence
even from Scripture: As, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. where St. Paul tells us, All our
Fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all
baptized unto Moses; that is, the Religion of Moses, in the Cloud, and in the
Sea. And that their very Infants, as well as their Parents, were so baptized,
is certain, for that all were alike under the Cloud, and in the Sea.

And I think it is generally agreed amongst the Learned, And by Jewish Writers.
that as the Israelites, during their whole Travels through the Red Sea, and
Wilderness, were not circumcised, because it would make them sore for
traveling; so instead thereof, that they were baptized, or admitted into
Covenant by Baptism.

But especially they tell us, it was used for the Admission of Proselytes, or
those who had been before Aliens and Strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel,
that it was especially used for the Admission of such into the Covenants and
Promises. And the Original use of it to this end, some ascribe to the Patriarch
Jacob, when he chose into his Family and Church the young Women of Sichem, and
other Heathens, who then lived with him. Jacob said to his Family, and to all
who were with him, put away from you the strange Gods, and be you clean, and
change your Garments, Genesis 35.2. By which Words, Be ye clean, some do interpret
the washing of the Body, or Baptism; which Reason it self does also persuade us
to believe, as being very proper, when they were to abandon their filthy
Idolatry, and to embrace the pure Worship of the true God.

And it is also well known to those, who are skilled in Jewish Customs, that
when any Parents, Dr. Lightfoot. Vol. 2. P. 1133.
or Masters of Families were thus baptized, that all who did belong to them,
their very Children, and Servants, and all those over whom they might be
supposed to have any Authority, and Power, to bring 'em up in the Jewish
Religion and Covenant, were also baptized. Nay, all the Nation of Israel, says
Lightfoot, do assert, as it were with one Mouth, Ib. Page 117.
that all the Nation of Israel were brought into the Covenant, among other
things by Baptism. Israel (as he cites Maimonides in particular) was admitted
into the Covenant by three things; namely, by Circumcision, Baptism, and
Sacrifice. So that I hope it does sufficiently appear by what has been said,
that Infants in the Jewish Church were both circumcised, and also baptized into
the Legal Covenant.

Nor is it of little force, to prove that Christian Infants under the Covenant
of Grace, may be baptized, that the Jewish Infants were circumcised, and
baptized under the legal: For not now to insist, that circumcising and
baptizing of Infants, and that by God Almighty's own Appointment, does
demonstrate to us, that there is no Incapacity in an Infant, that he should be
admitted into Covenant with God, by some outward Solemnity, even whilst an
Infant; for if there were any unreasonableness in the thing it self, God would
not have so ordered it. But not now to insist on this; I do humbly conceive it
may be fairly gathered, that if under a more harsh and rigorous Dispensation,
Children were so far Priviledg'd, as to be admitted to the Advantages of a
Covenant with God, much more are they to be presumed to have this Favor
granted 'em by God, under that blessed and Merciful Dispensation of the Gospel,
which, in all respects, is a better Covenant, and established upon better
Promises, Heb. 8.6. and contains far more enlarged Privileges. But to proceed,
for I design not this of the Baptizing of Infants into the Legal Covenant, so
much an Argument to build Infant Baptism upon (though it is no inconsiderable one
of it self to that purpose) as a Foundation rather, for a far better proof of
the Matter, which is this, that Baptizing of Infants having been practiced in
the Jewish Church.

III. Because our Savior Adopted the Jewish Rite of Baptism, for the Sacrament
of Initiation, without excluding Children from being Baptized.
III. That it was without doubt the Intentions of our Savior, they should
continue to be Initiated into the Christian Church by Baptism also, he having
Adopted the Jewish Rite of Baptism for the Sacrament of Initiation, without
excluding Children from being Baptized.

It is a thing well known amongst the Learned, that the Matter of both the
Sacraments were of a Jewish Original, and more of Human than Divine
Institution, till made so by our Savior, who notwithstanding approving of 'em,
rejected Circumcision and the Passover from being the Sacraments of his
Religion; and Adopted the Baptism of Water, instead of Circumcision; and Bread
and Wine instead of the Passover to be the two Sacraments, the one of
Initiation, the other of Confirmation into his Religion and Covenant. And
finding the Baptizing, as well as the Circumcising of Infants to be practiced
in the Jewish Church, his not forbidding Children to be of the number of
Persons Baptized, when he chose Baptism to Initiate Persons into his most Holy
Covenant, must be an undeniable Argument to all unprejudiced Persons, I do
think, that he designed no Alteration of the Persons to be Baptized, but
intended such for Baptism, as well as they were before; The force of this
Argument:
for if it had been contrary to our Savior's Intentions, that Children in
their Infancy should be Baptized, though he had admitted the use of Baptism, he
would expressly have forbid the use of it to Children, or it would be impossible
for the Church not to be led into the Error of Baptizing 'em, by reason of his
silence in not forbidding 'em.

Nor was it at all needful, if he designed Infants to be Baptized, he should
have given some Command about it; for taking it as he found it in the Jewish
Church, who Baptized Infants as well as grown Persons, this was sufficient to
clear his Design, that Infants in the Christian, as well as grown Persons,
should also be Baptized, or else he would have declared the contrary. The whole
Nation knowing well enough, Dr. Lightfoot, Vol. 2. Page 9.
that little Children used to be Baptized; there was no need of a Precept for
that which had ever, by common use, prevailed. Please to take the Case as it is
thus represented by the Learned Dr. Lightfoot.

If a Royal Proclamation should now Issue forth in these words, Let every one
on the Lord's Day, resort to the Public Assembly in the Church, certainly he
would be Mad, who in times to come, should argue hence, that Prayers, Sermons,
Singing of Psalms, were not to be Celebrated on the Lord's Day in the Public
Assemblies, because there is no mention of them in the Proclamation. For the
Proclamation provided for the Celebration of the Lord's Day, in the Public
Assemblies, in general; but there was no need to make mention of the particular
Kinds of the Divine Worship to be Celebrated there, when they were always, and
every where well known, and in daily use, before the Publishing of the
Proclamation, and when it was Published. The Case is the very same in Baptism.
Christ Instituted it for an Evangelical Sacrament, whereby all should be
admitted into the Profession of the Gospel, as heretofore it was used for
admission into Proselytism into the Jewish Religion. The particulars belonging
to it, as the manner of Baptizing, the Age, the Sex to be Baptized, etc. had no
need of a Rule or Definition, because these were by the common use of 'em
sufficiently known, even to the most Illiterate and Ignorant Men.

On the other-hand therefore, there was need of a plain and open Prohibition,
that Infants and little Children should not be Baptized, if our Savior would
not have had 'em Baptized. For since it was common in all Ages foregoing, that
little Children should be Baptized, if Christ had been minded to have that
Custom abolished, he would have openly forbidden it. His silence therefore, and
the silence of the Scripture in this Matter, is the best Argument that can be
in this Case for Infant Baptism, and does confirm and continue it unto all Ages.

Thus that Learned Author. And thus to me it seems beyond all doubt, that the
Intention of our Savior was, that under the Gospel likewise, as well as
before, under the Law, Infants should be Baptized into the Covenant of Grace.

IV. And agreeably to the Mind of their Master, IV. Because in all probability
Infant Baptism was practiced by the Apostles.
the Baptizing of 'em into it was in all probability practiced by the Apostles
of Christ. As for our Savior's own Practice in this Matter, we are to expect
no Evidence, the Evangelist having declared it, John 4.2. that Jesus Baptized
not, but his Disciples: But that his Disciples did actually Baptize Infants, is
more than probable from those three famous places in the Scripture, viz. two of
'em Acts 16.15. and again, the 33. ver. and the other, 1 Cor. 1.16. where we
find mention made of whole Households being Baptized, together with the Head of
the Families respectively. And though we cannot certainly conclude, there were
Infants in those Families, yet as it is hardly to be imagined, that there were
not such in some of 'em; so if there were any, we may certainly conclude they
were Baptized, both because of the mention made of the Household being Baptized,
and of the known Custom in the Jewish Church, from which Christian Baptism was
derived, of Baptizing all, both Children and Servants, together with the Heads
of the Families, when any were Proselyted and Converted, as was showed before.

V. Because it was very agreeable to the End and Reason of Baptism, and the
Nature of the Covenant of Grace, that Infants should be Baptized into it.
V. And it was very agreeable to the ends and reason of Baptism, and the Nature
of the Covenant of Grace, that Infants should be Baptized into it. It is here,
the Adversaries of Infant Baptism do chiefly raise their Batteries against it.
They do therefore say, that Infants are incapable Subjects, because that
Baptism is a Covenanting with God, and such are incapable of entering into
Covenants. But the contrary I will make appear, viz. that the Infants of
Believers are capable of Covenant-Priviledges, and of Covenant-Engagements too;
and if of those, then the Signs and Seals whereby such Privileges are ensur'd
unto 'em, can in no Reason and Equity be denied 'em.

Infants not incapable of entering into Covenant with God, proved from Deuteronomy. 29.
Now, that Infants are capable to enter into Covenant with God, is apparent in
general from Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. Ye stand this Day all of you before the Lord
your God, your Captains, your Tribes, your Elders, and your Officers, with all
the Men of Israel; your little Ones your Wives, and the Stranger that is in thy
Camp, that thou should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into
his Oath which the Lord thy God makes with thee this Day. Here you see, that
the very Little Ones were called upon to enter into Covenant with God, as well
as the Elders of the Tribes of Israel. And that Circumcision, the Sign or Token
of the Covenant, Genesis 17.11. that this was to be imprinted on Children, not
exceeding Eight Days Old, is what every body knows that reads the Scripture; so
that there is nothing in the nature of a Covenant in general, that should make
it unreasonable, that Children and Infants should enter into it, except you
will accuse God himself of appointing things unfit or unreasonable, which were
mere Blasphemy but to imagine.

As also from the Nature of the thing.
Nor is there any thing in the Nature of the Covenant of Grace in particular,
that should exclude Infants from being Parties in it. It consists, as has been
more than once told you, of certain and invaluable Privileges and Benefits
made over to us on God's part, and of certain very reasonable Conditions to be
performed on ours.

They are capable of having Privileges conferred upon them.
But as for the Privileges, which of 'em is it which may not be Sealed and
Confirmed to an Infant? May not such a one be made a Member of Christ's Church,
when our Savior has told us, that of such is the Kingdom of Heaven? May not a
Child or Infant be Adopted a Child of God, and so be brought into a condition
of Pardon, as well as the Child or Infant of an Attainted Rebel, by the Grace
and Favor of his Prince, be restored to his Blood, and to all the Privileges
of a Freeborn Subject? And, Lastly, may not such be made an Inheritor of the
Kingdom of Heaven, when of such, as was before said, must consist the Kingdom
of Heaven? There is nothing in the nature of the thing, that should hinder
Privileges from being confirmed unto, and conferred upon Children as well as
Elder People; and we do daily see it practiced in other concerns. Infant
Princes are sometimes Crowned in their Cradles; and Children, to their great
Advantage, are often left Executors to great Fortunes and Estates: In both
which Cases, as there are usually very great Privileges redounding to 'em, as
well as Engagements lying upon 'em, so it is not thought that they are
incapable of 'em.

Nor is it more unreasonable, And of being bound to Conditions.
that they should be obliged to perform certain Duties, as Conditions of
enjoying those Privileges. The Covenant beforementioned, that the Little
Ones, as well as Elders, were called to enter into, Deuteronomy. 29. as it had this
Privilege made over to 'em on God's part, that He would be unto them a God,
which indeed was a happiness to 'em, beyond what all the Nations on Earth
besides did enjoy; and was in it self inestimable; so the Counter part was,
that they should be unto him a People, Ver. 13. a People that would not turn
away from the Lord their God, to go and serve the Gods of other Nations. And
Circumcision which was Imprinted on Infants of Eight Days old, did not only
confer on 'em this Privilege, that they should be God's peculiar People; but
withal, laid upon 'em this Obligation, to observe the whole Law; for I testify
for ye, said St. Paul, to every Man that is Circumcised, that he is a Debtor to
do the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. And surely, we do daily see, that a Man may bind
his Heir whilst an Infant. True it is, this cannot be done by the Infant
himself, nor by any other for him; but in such Cases, where it will be very
much for the Interest of the Infant to be so bound; not unless he is to be a
gainer by the Bargain: But provided the Infant shall gain considerable
Advantages by the Covenants that shall be made in his behalf, and without his
express consent, by his Parents, or Tutors, or Guardians, then he shall stand
obliged in all Law and Equity, to what Conditions they have promised for him.
We see it often so Adjudg'd in our Courts of Justice: And the Case is the very
same here. The Conditions of the Covenant of Grace are of some difficulty, true
it is, to be performed, yet have such invaluable Benefits annexed to 'em, that
the Tongue of Men and Angels are not sufficient to express the value of 'em;
and they were worth our utmost endeavors to obtain, though by the severest
Penances and Services of a Thousand Years; and therefore it ought not to be
thought any unreasonable thing, that others should be engaged in our Name for
our performance of such Conditions, or that we should be accounted as Engaged
our selves, for what our Guardians, our Godfathers and Godmothers did Promise
for us; for this indeed, which was the

VI. And Last thing I proposed to speak on this Argument, VI. Because it is a
great Advantage to Infants to be Baptized.
We are to account it the greatest Happiness to those Infants, that were so
early entered into Covenant with God, in order to the Enjoyment of such
inestimable Privileges, and to their Engagement into such reasonable Services.

First, I say, First, On the account of enjoying thereby such inestimable
Privilege.
We are to account it the highest Happiness to those Infants, that have been so
early entered into Covenant with God, on the account of their enjoying thereby
such inestimable Privileges; for being Baptized, and having once Covenanted
with God, they are now no more under the Condemnation of the first Covenant
made with Adam, nor shall be prejudiced by the forfeiture of Mercies which he
had incurred for himself and his Posterity, by his breach of that Covenant.
Their Original Sin is now washed off, and shall be no more imputed to 'em; that
is, the former Covenant which was at first Cancelled, by being nailed to the
Cross of Christ, is now particularly Cancelled, and put out of any force with
respect to them, they being Baptized, and thereby entered into a Covenant of
Grace; so that whatever Guilt might have been imputed unto 'em, by reason of
Adam's Transgression, shall now be clean done away from 'em; which seems to me
to be the meaning of our Original Sin being washed away by the Waters of
Baptism; It imports, that the Covenant which made Original Sin imputable to us,
is now Cancelled, and the Condemning force of it took away by our being
admitted into another more Merciful and Gracious Covenant. And this, I say, is
a very great Happiness to Infants; so that we may be sure of their Salvation,
whenever they dye in their Infancy, having all the Forgiving Mercies purchased
by Christ, and held forth to them in the Covenant of Grace, enstated on them.
And indeed, if the thing were disputable, whether there were any such thing as
the Original Sin of Adam imputed to his Posterity; however, I should be very
careful to have my Infant as early Baptized as possible. It is at leastwise the
surer side to be actually in a Covenant of Grace and Mercy, than to remain
under one, where there may be the least probability of incurring Danger by
being in it. One cannot make too sure of a state of Salvation. So that the
being early Baptized into such a state, is to be accounted a very great
Happiness, were it only on the account of those mighty Privileges it instates
upon 'em, and insures unto 'em.

Secondly, On account of their being engaged thereby so early in the Service of
God.
Secondly, Nor is it less a Happiness to those Infants that have been Baptized,
That they have thereby been so early engaged in the Service of God. It is happy
for 'em, that God has had the first Possession of 'em. It will be like to prove
a means of keeping out the Devil from getting any Interest in 'em. They have
been hereby already preingag'd, and dedicated to the Service of their good God;
and it is to be hoped their Parents and Sureties (or it will be infinitely
their fault) will be continually minding 'em of it, as they grow up, and will
instill by degrees into their Hearts, an understanding and sense of the Terms
and Articles of their Covenant with God; watching withal, that they swerve not
away from their solemn Vows and Promises made unto him. And besides, by this
early Dedication of Persons, whilst Infants, unto God, it is provided (which
alone is a great benefit to them, and the Church of Christ) that so many shall
not stand off so long out of the Pale of the Church, by not entering into it
through the Door of Baptism; that so many shall not stand out, I say, through
some unreasonable Fear or Scrupulosity, lest if they Sin after Baptism, it
would be worse for 'em; even as many as do now absent themselves, upon some
such pretenses, from the Lord's Supper, perhaps all the days of their Lives.
Many Thousands of these, who are now happily within the Pale of the Church, and
Covenant of Grace by Baptism, if they were not to be took into it till grown up
to Years of Discretion, it is much to be feared, least by reason of some
Misperswasions or Delusions of Satan, or Love to their Lusts (which every Man
naturally has) they would defer it too long, till the approach of Death
perhaps, before they would put themselves into a state of Salvation, as some
misperswaded Persons did in the Primitive Times, to the very great Scandal of
the Church, and the infinite prejudice of their own Souls, when many times they
were snatched away by Death before they could put themselves out of the State of
Infidels. But this Scandal to the Church of Christ, and danger to their own
Souls is happily prevented by Persons being Baptized into it in their Infancy.
So that, I say, it is a very great Happiness to those Infants that have been
Baptized on this account also, that they have been so early engaged in the
Service of God.

And now, I hope, what has been hitherto said, may be sufficient to Justify
your having been Baptized into the Covenant of Grace in the time of your
Infancy. Each of these Arguments I have made use of to this purpose, I do take
to have sufficient force of themselves to prove the Point; but I have
endeavored so to range 'em one with another, that besides that Native Strength
there may be in each of 'em in particular, like the Parts of a well-compacted
Building, they should be the stronger for being joined together. And though
indeed it may require your more close Attention to carry the whole Train of
Arguments along in your Minds, than to apprehend one single Reason by it self,
yet the Conviction, I am sure, would be the stronger, if you will take 'em all,
as I have laid 'em together.

But let this suffice as to the Circumstance of Time, and to Justi^^e our
having been Initiated by Baptism into the Covenant of Grace, in the Age of
Infancy, the thing implied in these words, Wherein I was made. Our next
Consideration, with reference to these Circumstances of the Covenant of Grace,
must be Who were the Persons who presented you to Baptism, and Introduced you
to the Covenant of Grace. And it was your Godfathers and Godmothers who did it,
who did Promise and Vow three things in your Name: But of this the next
Opportunity.

THE XXXI Lecture. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you? They
did promise and vow three things in my Name.
IN commenting upon these Words, In my Baptism wherein I was made, I have
already considered one material Circumstance, relating to the Entrance into the
Covenant of Grace; viz. the Time when you were initiated therein; and I have
justified your having been baptized into it, even in the Age of Infancy. And
now I come to the like Consideration, and Vindication of a

Second Circumstance relating to the same Matter, and requisite also to be
considered by you; viz. whom as your Proxies and Sureties (considering it was
at an Age you could not personally do it your selves) did present you to
Baptism, and undertake for you this Blessed Covenant. And it was your
Godfathers and Godmothers, who did promise and vow three things in your Name:
For the more full Explication, and Justification of which Use of Godfathers and
Godmothers, I will enquire,

I. Into the Meaning and Importance of the Words, Godfathers and Godmothers.

II. Into the Nature of their Office. They did promise and vow three things in
my Name.

III. I will show what reason the Church had to appoint Godfathers and
Godmothers, both to represent, and to engage for the Infant in Baptism.

IV. And lastly, for the farther Justification of the thing out of Scripture, I
will prove from thence, as a Power and Authority given by Christ to the
Governors of the Church, to appoint such reasonable Circumstances, as they
shall think fit, for the better Order and Decency of Divine Administrations,
and the better Edification of the Souls of Men; so that their appointing of
Godfathers and Godmothers, was a most excellent and useful Institution to this
purpose. And,

I. Let us enquire into the Meaning and Importance of the Words, I. The
Importance of the Terms Godfathers, and Godmothers.
Godfathers and Godmothers. And in the Ancient Writers of the Church, we find
the Title of Sponsores, or Sureties, Tertul. de Bap. August. Tom. 2. 35. d. 2.
given 'em, which imports them to be Persons that have given Security to God
and the Church, about some Matter relating to the Infants they have presented
to Baptism. As also they are called Fide Jussores; which is a Word of the like
Importance, and signifies a Surety, or Bondsman. In the latter Ages,
particularly amongst the Reformed Churches, where they are generally in Use
(and even Junius and Tremellius, Calvinist Writers, do derive them from Is.
8.6.) they came to be called Compatres, and Commatres; which give me leave to
translate Joint-fathers, and Joint-mothers, with respect to their Spiritual
Birth and State; which seems farther to import, that the Security they give to
the Church, with reference to those Children they present to Baptism, is
concerning something that belongs to Natural Parents to take care of, the Words
signifying 'em to be joined with 'em in the Parental Care. And lastly, amongst
us they are properly enough styled Godfathers and Godmothers, because this
Collateral Security given by 'em, in behalf of the Infants, is given to God,
and his Church, and is a Security given by these Persons, styled Godfathers and
Godmothers, that they will be instrumental to their New Birth, as their Parents
were to their Natural. And let this suffice, as to the Importance of the Words;
all which put together, do signify thus much, that Godfathers, and Godmothers,
are a Collateral Security joined together with the Natural Parents, in the
behalf of their Children entered into Covenant with God; and that this their
Security is given to God, and his Church, that they will be Instruments in
begetting them to God.

II. And now let us enquire into the Nature of their Office, II. The Nature of
their Office.
implied in these Words, They did promise and vow three things in my Name. And
truly the Nature of their Office seems to me to be no more, nor less than this;
1. An express Engagement given to Christ, and his Church, in behalf of those
Infants they present to Baptism, that so soon as they become capable to be
taught, they shall be instructed in the Nature of that Covenant, which they
their Sureties have undertook for them; and, 2. That they shall be admonished,
and advised by them to lead their Lives according to the Obligations laid upon
them by that their Covenant: And lastly, That those Infants shall moreover,
after sufficient Instruction in their Covenant, solemnly take upon themselves
the Profession of it, before the Chief Minister of Christ's Church, the Bishop.
I say that the Office of Godfathers and Godmothers, does seem to me to import
no more, nor less, than a Security given to God and his Church, that the
baptized Person shall do thus, shall be instructed in his Covenant, shall be
minded to live according to it, and shall solemnly declare it, that it is his
sincere Intentions so to do. And,

First, It is not only as a Proxy to speak for the Child in Baptism.
First, that he shall be instructed in his Covenant. True it is, these Words,
They did promise, and vow three things in my Name do seem to import something
more; as if the Sureties in Baptism did not only engage for the Instruction of
the Party in the Nature of his Covenant, but for his actual performance of it
too; which as it lays a very great and weighty Charge upon Sureties, too much
it is thought for any one to undertake for another; so I am not willing to
interpret them in a sense, as will be apt to deterr conscientious People from
doing so charitable an Office; and make others have no Care about it, as a Bond
they despair of ever discharging. I am not therefore inclined to expound them
in so discouraging a sense, if the Expressions will fairly bear milder, as I
humbly conceive these will: For to do a thing in ones name (especially in the
transacting of Covenants, where Privileges and Advantages accrue thereby) is to
act as a Proxy in the others stead. In the acting as such, in any Covenant, by
reason of the Absence, or Minority, or other Incapacity of the Person mainly
concerned, it is very usual for the Proxy, so to personate the Covenanting
Party himself, as if he were the Person whom he represents. And thus these
Words, They did promise and vow three things in my Namr, shall be understood to
mean no more than this; that I being incapable my self, by reason of my
Infancy, to express my Consent to my Part of the Covenant, my Godfathers and
Godmothers were my Mouth, who did it for me. Now this I do indeed take to be
part of the Sense, but not the whole Importance; for then there would be no
Engagement to any thing on the Godfathers and Godmothers part, whereas they are
something more than mere Proxies, and are really, and truly Sureties for
something to be done, though not perhaps that the Person baptized shall actually
perform his Covenant; yet, at least, that he shall be instructed in the Nature
of it, so as to know what he ought to perform.

But it imports withal a Security given to God, and his Church, that the Child
shall be instructed in his Baptismal Covenant.
And this taking care of the Child's Instruction, is the first part of the Duty
of Godfathers and Godmothers: For the best way, I conceive, to understand the
meaning of any Author in Words more generally expressed, is to consult those
Expositions and Explications he makes of his own Sense elsewhere, if any such
can be met withal. And now we have a most excellent Key for the opening of this
Engagement of the Godfathers and Godmothers, in the behalf of the Child
baptized, in the Exhortation given them after Baptism, and in the Charge to
bring the Baptized Person to Confirmation. The Words of the Exhortation run
thus:

Forasmuch as this Child has promised by you that are his Sureties, to
renounce the Devil, and all his Works, to believe in God, and to serve him; Ye
must remember, that it is your Parts and Duty to see that this Infant be
taught, so soon as he shall be able to learn, what a solemn Vow, Promise, and
Profession he has here made by you. And that he may know these things the
better, ye shall call upon him to hear Sermons; and chiefly ye shall provide,
that he may learn the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments in the
Vulgar Tongue, and all other things, which a Christian ought to know, and
believe to his Soul's Health; And that this Child may be vertuosly brought up
to lead a Godly and a Christian Life, remembering always that Baptism does
represent unto us our Profession, which is to follow the Example of our Savior
Christ, and to be made like unto him; that as he dyed, and rose again for us,
so should we, who are Baptized, dye to Sin, and rise again unto Righteousness,
continually mortifying all our evil and corrupt Affections, and daily
proceeding in all Virtue, and Godliness of Living.

So that hereby it does appear, that the Engagement of the Godfathers and
Godmothers is in the first place, that they will take care to have those
Infants, whom they have presented to Baptism, Catechized in the Nature of that
Covenant they have in the way of Proxy for them, entered into; which is the
Importance of these Words: Remember that it is your Parts and Duties, to see
that this Infant be taught so soon as he shall learn, what a solemn Vow,
Promise, and Profession he has here made by you, which is the proper Work of
Catechizing to teach 'em.

They are also, for their farther Edification in this grand Matter of their
Covenant, to call upon 'em to hear Sermons, which are a Method of Instruction
designed to improve 'em in all that necessary Knowledge, the beginnings of
which was laid by Catechizing. But especially their Care must be to have 'em
thoroughly Catechized, which lays the Foundation of Divine Knowledge in the
Principles of Religion, without which there can be no bottom for their
Edification any other way; Chiefly, says the Exhortation, ye shall provide that
they may learn the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments in the
Vulgar Tongue, and all other things which a Christian ought to know, and
believe to his Soul's Health, which I say, is the proper work of Catechizing to
teach 'em.

Secondly, Secondly, It is the Office of these Sureties to admonish the Child
to live according to his Baptismal Engagements.
Having thus took care to have 'em well instructed by Catechizing and
Preaching, in the Articles and Conditions of their Covenant, their next Care
must be to admonish and advise 'em, seriously to apply themselves to live
according to those Obligations laid upon 'em in their Covenant with God. Youth,
of all Persons, want good Monitors, as being of themselves giddy, and
inconsiderate, and too regardless of what does mainly concern 'em; and their
Sureties ought to make it a part of their Care, peculiarly to admonish such as
they have a band in bringing into the Covenant, that they live according to it;
so it follows in that most Excellent Exhortation, Ye shall take care that this
Child may be vertuoulsy brought up, to lead a Godly and a Christian Life, etc.

Thirdly, And then as for the last thing, Thirdly, And to take care that at
Years of Discretion, the Child should take his Vow upon himself before the
Bishop in Confirmation.
wherein I said consists the Office of Sureties in Baptism; viz. that they take
care their Youth after all due Instruction in the Nature of the Covenant,
should personally, for their own parts, take it upon themselves before the
Chief Minister of Christ, the Bishop: This you have delivered plainly and fully
in the Charge given about Confirmation, running in these Words, Ye are to take
care that this Child be brought to the Bishop to be confirmed by him, so soon
as he can say the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments, in the
Vulgar Tongue.

So that if you will allow the Blessed Authors of our most Divine and Excellent
Liturgy, the Liberty to explain themselves: The utmost Importance of these
Words, They did promise and vow three things in my Name, is, 1. an Engagement
to Christ, and his Church, in the behalf of the Baptized Infant, that so soon
as he becomes capable, he shall be instructed in his Covenant; 2. that he shall
be admonished to live according to it; and 3. that he shall solemnly declare
his sincere Intentions so to do.

III. The Reason the Church has to require Sureties.
III. And now let us see what reason the Church had to appoint Godfathers and
Godmothers, not only to represent, but thus to engage for the Infant in Baptism.

It is for the better Order and Decency of the Administration, that some should
be the Mouth of the Child.
And truly, as to the representing part, there seems to me to be as great reason
for that, as that all things in Divine Administrations should be done decently,
and in order, as the Apostle commands, 1 Cor. 14.40. For why? You are not again
to be told, that this whole Solemnity of Baptism is the transacting of a
Covenant with God; a Covenant, wherein both Parties concerned are either
personally themselves, or by others, as their Proxies, to make mutual
Engagements one to another, to perform each his Part of the Covenant.

Now God, who is the first and prime Party in this Covenant: He, true it is, is
sufficient for these things of himself, and needs no other to engage for him;
yet in Compassion to our Infirmities, who cannot bear the Majesty of God's
Presence (hence the Israelites, after the Thunder and Lightning on Mount Sinai,
prayed he would speak to them by his Servant Moses, lest they should dye) Though
God need not, I say, to treat with us by Proxy; yet, in conformity to our
Weakness he has substituted the Priest in his stead, to assure us of the
Promises, his part of the Covenant. And what then shall the Infant do, who is
so far incapable of transacting personally the Covenant, and engaging by
himself to perform its Conditions, that he does not, nor cannot understand the
Conditions of it? what I say shall he do? Why it is fit, that he likewise by
his Sureties, as by Proxy, should engage that he will do his part. To this
purpose, says a Father; since for want of Age Children cannot believe with the
Heart to Righteousness, nor confess with the Mouth unto Salvation, therefore
others answer for 'em, that the Sacrament may be admitted completely to 'em.

It would indeed seem to me a very odd, and indecent, and disorderly thing
(extremely unlike the usual way of transacting Covenants) when one, and He so
great a Party concerned as God, should vouchsafe to make over by his Proxy (the
Minister of the Covenant) express Assurances of Infinite Mercies; the other
Party, a poor wretched Creature, in whose Favor this is done, should not have
a Mouth, either by himself or others, to make an open and solemn Protestation
of Acceptance of those Gracious Terms, and of sincere Resolutions to perform
his part. A silence on his side, would look like a sullen, ungrateful refusal
of such Gracious Overtures and Terms of Mercy, the most indecent and disorderly
thing in the World. The Administration would be extremely indecent, without a
Proxy to Represent the Infant.

And indeed, so much is the Honor of God, and of the Church, It is of
concernment to the Church, that Security be given, that every one who is
admitted a Member into it, should live to the Reputation and Interest of it.
and of the Christian Religion concerned, that no Person be entered into the
Profession of the Gospel, who will not live answerably to it, that it is highly
fit, it is extremely requisite, all possible Security should be first given to
God and his Church, that the Person admitted into the Society of Christians,
should at leastwise be Instructed, and Admonished, and be Engaged solemnly to
profess what belongs to him to do, as a Member of that Body. So far it is
requisite Security should be given before he is admitted a Member of Christ's
Church, if it be not farther necessary it should be given, for his living
according to the Obligations of the Covenant. Indeed, so far is it from being
unreasonable to require Security, that he should be Instructed and Admonished,
what are his Obligations, that if we closely consider the Matter, it may not
seem so unreasonable, as some do imagine, to exact Security of the Person
Baptized, even that he shall live up to the Obligations laid upon him in his
Covenant.

We see it daily practiced, This is what Societies, whose Honor and Interest
is of infinite less consequence, do daily require.
and it is allowed a reasonable and prudent Caution in all Societies of Men, to
exact Security from those who are not responsible themselves, that they shall
Answer the Ends and Interests of that Society, whereinto they desire to be
admitted, before they will take 'em in amongst 'em. This is the common practice
you know, in all Corporations and Companies. And even in our Parish concerns,
no Man shall be admitted into either, from whom they apprehend any Danger,
without giving Security against all Disadvantages that may accrue by his
Admission. And may not the Church of Christ, upon as good Grounds, require good
Security from Children, who cannot Answer, nor Engage for themselves; and who
(considering the inbred Corruption of Nature) are in danger enough (without a
great deal of Care) of proving very pernicious Members? Shall not She, I say,
as well as other Societies, whose Interests are infinitely less, exact of all
that are admitted into her Body, that they will never depart from, or contemn
her Laws, nor Act contrary to the Honor and Interest of her, and her Lord and
Savior? Is not the Church of Christ a Society, yea, the chief of all
Societies? Are not her, and her great Masters Honor and Interest, the most
considerable of all others in the World? And does it not then infinitely
concern her, that none of her Members turn Rebels to the Laws of God, that they
do not become Profane and Wicked Livers, the greatest Injury that can be done
to God and her self? I sure, I think it does, for there is nothing tends more
to the dishonor of her Savior, and of Religion, and of her self, than that
any of her Members should become Profane and Wicked. The III Lives of her
Children make her a Sport to the vile Atheist, a Scorn and Reproach to Turks
and Infidels. It extremely hinders the Gospels prevailing upon Infidels abroad,
and is hugely Offensive to all her Pious Sons at home. Blame her not therefore
for taking such Prudent Care, as to admit none into her Society, without having
first Security given of their good Behavior.

That of Parents not sufficient without Collateral Security.
And indeed, so far is she from deserving Blame therein, that we are to reckon
her moderate in her Demands, when she requires no more than Security, that the
New Member shall be well Principl'd, and Educated, and duly Admonished. Things
that may be easily in our Power to take care of.

Nor is it sufficient Security to the Church, that the Parents are bound to
take this Care of their Children. The Natural Parents, it is confessed, are
obliged both by the Light of Nature, and the express Laws of God, to bring up
their Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord; But this is not
enough in so grand a Concern; Parents possibly may not live to Educate their
Children, and how many of those that do live, are woefully careless in the
Principling of them, with a due Knowledge and Sense of the Goodness of God to
them, and those great Duties they owe to him? What through Earthly-mindedness
in some, who care for nothing but to Train 'em up in all the Arts and Cunning,
how to Live, and grow Rich in the World; and what through the Fondness of
others, whose fatal Indulgence will not suffer 'em to put their Children much
upon any thing ungrateful to 'em (as Religion indeed is to Flesh and Blood)
these things considered, it is more than requisite, that besides the
Obligations of the Natural Parent, there should be moreover some Collateral
Security given by such Persons as are likely to use all convenient Industry
upon the Parents neglect (which is too usual) to provide 'em good Education as
far as Reading at least, to instill good Principles into 'em by Catechizing, and
to give 'em good Admonitions by way of Reproof or Exhortations, as there shall
be occasion.

The requiring of this as reasonable now as in the Primitive Times.
Nor is the giving such Security for their Religious Education less necessary
now, than it was in the Primitive Times. It is well known, that then all
Infants had their Sponsors or Sureties that engaged at the Font for their
Christian Education, and Faithfulness in their Covenant; And that for this,
amongst other Reasons, lest in those Persecuting Times the Parents being took
off by their Persecutors, their Infants and Children should remain exposed to
the danger of being Trained up in Paganish Idolatry, for want of some Persons
particularly Engaged to take care of 'em.

The Church, true it is, is not now so often shak'd with violent Persecutions,
as in those Days: Though sometimes it has its cruel Enemies, in the very Bowels
of it, full as furious as ever were the Heathens in their bloody Slaughters,
and as zealous to ravish from the Orthodox their Children, to train 'em up in
their wicked Idolatry. But however, This Charge no unreasonable Imposition at
any time, being little more than what is required from one Christian to another
in common Charity at all times.
besides this, it ought to be considered, that our Covenant with God is not
broke, only by Apostatizing back from the Service of the true God, to the
Worship of the Devil, or Evil Spirits, but by living in Ungodliness and Worldly
Lusts; and therefore that equal Care ought to be taken, as then that the Child
should Renounce the Devil and all his Works, and believe in God; so now that he
shall Obey God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the Days
of his Life; And God and his Church is as much Dishonored, and the Soul as
much endangered by the lewd and vicious Lives of Christians now, as by the
Apostasy of Christians to Paganism or Idolatry, it was then; and therefore
there is as much reason, that the Church should now take all possible Security
against the one, as then it did against the other sort of scandalous and
dangerous Violations of its Covenant; especially if it be farther considere'd,
that Prosperity and Peace being infinitely more apt to corrupt the Lives and
Manners of Men, than Sufferings are; Persons are much more subject to fall into
these Violations of their Covenant, by sinful Immoralities now, than by
Paganish Apostacies they were then.

Nor, Lastly, Is it at any time a hard and unreasonable Imposition upon the
Godfathers, and Godmothers, to make 'em give Security for the Christian
Education of other Peoples Children. We are all of us to be helpful to one
another, especially to be assistant in those things which concern the good of
their Immortal Souls; and there is none but a cruel and murderous Cain would
have said, Am I my Brothers Keeper. And if the utmost that the Sureties do
Promise and Vow in behalf of the Infant, does extend to no more than this, to
see that he shall be Trained up in the Principles of Religion; and Admonished
to live up according to what he has solemnly Covenanted; and openly and
solemnly to confirm this his Covenant, when he comes to an Age of
Understanding; and this only upon the natural Parents neglect: Why, this truly
it is confessed, will cost some Pains, and perhaps too some small Charge; but then
let such a one consider, he has an opportunity put into his Hands to save a
Soul, and let him withal consider, what the Apostle says for his Encouragement
therein, James 5.20. that He which shall save a Soul from Death shall cover a
multitude of Sins. So that thus you see what reason the Church had to appoint
Godfathers and Godmothers, not only to represent the Infant, but to engage for
it in Baptism. But

IV. And, Lastly, For a further Justification of the thing out of Scripture, I
will prove from thence, as a Power and Authority given by Christ to the
Governors of the Church, to appoint such reasonable Circumstances, as they
shall think fit, for the greater Order and Decency of Divine Administrations,
and the better Edification of the Souls of Men; so that their appointment of
Godfathers and Godmothers, was a most excellent and useful Institution to this
purpose. But this, as it is a Point, that must have a great deal said to the
Proof and Enlargement of it, so I shall defer the speaking to it till the next
Opportunity.

THE XXXII Lecture. Q. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you.
Answ. They did Promise and Vow three things in my Name.
IN order to the Explication of these Words, and to the Justification and Proof
of the Doctrine contained in them, I have already led you,

I. Into the meaning of the Words, Godfathers and Godmothers.

II. Into the Nature of their Office.

III. I have showed you what Reason the Church had to appoint Godfathers and
Godmothers, both to Represent, and Engage for the Infant in Baptism. And now,

Lastly, For the further Justification out of Scripture, of the use of
Godfathers and Godmothers, to Introduce you to Baptism, I will prove from
thence, As a Power and Authority given by Christ to the Governors of the
Church, to appoint such reasonable Circumstantials as they shall think fit, for
the greater Order and Decency of Divine Administrations, and the better
Edification of the Souls of Men; so that the Churches appointing of Godfathers
and Godmothers was a most excellent, rational, and useful Institution to this
purpose. And I have reserved this Head of Discourse for the last; and shall
make one entire Discourse upon it, not only to show the Lawfulness and
Expediency of Godfathers and Godmothers, but withal, with a design to lay such
Principles in the Heart, as will sufficiently Justify our Church in all its
other Rites and Usages in Divine Administrations, and will enable you to oppose
those that shall Gainsay. To proceed therefore, I say,

IV. Besides the reason of the thing; IV. A further Justification of the use of
Godfathers and Godmothers.
In order to justify out of Scripture the use of Godfathers and Godmothers to
introduce Infants to Baptism, I will prove from thence, as a Power and
Authority given by Christ, to the Governors of the Church, to appoint such
reasonable Circumstances as they shall think fit, for the greater Order and
Decency of Divine Administrations, and the better Edification of the Souls of
Men; so that their appointing of Godfathers and Godmothers was a most excellent
and useful Institution to this purpose.

I say, besides the reason of the thing, It is a sufficient Justification of
any Ecclesiastic Institution, that it be reasonable, though not supported by any
express Scripture.
It is a very unhappy Prejudice which some do labor under, that the best
reason is no proof with them, without some express Scriptures to command that
very Particular, though it be not a Matter above Reason, but left by Scripture to
the Determination of it.

Now, to come to a right Understanding of this Matter, we must distinguish upon
such Points as are not, and such as are to be determined by mere Reason. And,

1. There are some great Points of Faith, 1. The sole Authority whereon to
ground the Belief of the Mysteries of Religion, must be Divine Revelation.
such as the Mystery of the Trinity, of the Incarnation, Mediation, and
Satisfaction of Christ, above the reach of Human Reason to have found out; and
now, that they are Revealed beyond the compass of it fully to comprehend; which
Articles we call the Mysteries of Christianity. And these we are bound to
Believe, according as they are Revealed to us, without adding to, or taking
from 'em, being fully assured, that the Holy Scripture, that Word of God, which
does Reveal these Truths to us, is it self most Infallibly true, as being the
Testimony of him who is Infinite Wisdom, and cannot be deceived himself; and is
Infinite Justice, and will not, cannot deceive others. And therefore with
respect to these Sacred Truths, it is the part of every Christian to Cast down
Imaginations, or Reasonings, and every high thing that exalts it self against
ithe knowledge of God, bringing into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience
of Christ: 2 Cor 10.5. Not but that Reason has its Use here in Judging of the
sufficiency of those Proofs from Scripture, which are produced to establish the
Truth of any Article of Faith. But as it is beyond the Power of mere Natural
Reason to have discovered God's Methods of saving us by Christ, and the like;
so it would be the highest Presumption to oppose our narrow scantling of Reason
to God's Wisdom in his Dispensations toward us.

2. In the next place, there are other Points in Religion, 2. Both Faith and
Practice, as to the Articles of Natural Religion, and Moral Duties, grounded
both upon the Word of God and right Reason.
as well Articles of Faith, as Moral Duties, to regulate both our Belief and
Practice, in reference to which, we are left to Scripture and Reason
conjunctly, with this difference; that we must have our Eye upon Scripture, as
the only perfect Rule, such are the Articles of Natural Religion, as the Belief
of God, of a Providence, of the Immortality of the Soul, and of Rewards and
Punishments in another World. And all, or most of the Duties of Morality also,
have the Light of Nature, or our own Reason, both directing and enforcing the
Practice of 'em. Only our Natural Reason in this our Corrupted State, being a
Candle that burns very dimm: We must, I say, have our Eye principally upon the
Light of Scripture, which is the singular Gift of God, given to Conduct us safe
through the Intricate Mazes and Difficulties of this World, to another, and
that a better; to be a Light unto our Feet, and a Lanthorn unto our Path, that
our Footsteps may not slide, Psalm. 119.105. And a most perfect Rule the
Scripture is, It being given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that
the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good Works, 2 Timothy
3.16, 17.

But though Natural Reason, now in its Eclipse by Sin, yields not Light enough of
it self, without the help of Divine Revelation, to guide us unto Happiness; yet
so far as it can direct us, and is agreeable to Scripture Light, we are to
follow its Guidance; It is as well the Gift of God as the other, and was given
us to the same Ends and Purposes; and we are therefore to bless God for so
excellent a Gift as our Reason, and must follow its Dictates, without going
contrary to the Reason within us, in whatsoever it does prescribe us that is
not contradicted by the Word of God; for where the Word of God does not thwart,
our own Reason in that Case, is left by God in its Original Authority, which it
had before Divine Revelation, and we are to look upon it as the Divine Will and
Pleasure, that we should act what seems but reasonable.

And hence we find that our Blessed Savior himself, and his Apostles, do often
appeal to our own Reason as a Guide we ought to follow. Thus Luke 12.57. Yea,
and why even of your selves judge you not what is right, says he to the
Pharisees. And indeed in one of the most important Cases that was ever put to
any decision, the Apostles Peter and John do appeal to Men's own Reason to
determine 'em what they should do. The Rulers of the Jews called them, and
commanded them not to speak at all, nor to teach in the Name of Jesus; but
Peter and John answered, and said unto them, Whether it be right in the sight
of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye, Acts 4.18, 19. The
Apostles did not here call in the Authority of Scripture to justify them in
what they did, but did appeal to their own Reason. And the 1 Cor. 10. the
Apostle undertaking to convince them how ill a thing it was for 'em to partake
of things offered to Idols; how does he go about to do it? Why, says he, I
speak unto wise Men, judge ye what I say, Verse 15. and so goes on by many
Arguments, fetched from the Nature and Reason of Sacrifices and Sacraments, to
prove that Men ought not to partake of two such different ones, as the Table of
God, and the Table of Devils, Verse 21.

3. Religious Rites and Ceremonies left to the Reason and Discretion of
Church Governors to appoint.
3. There are besides these necessary and essential Parts of Religion, others
but Appendages, or certain Modes and Circumstances retaining to it; such are
those Ceremonies appointed by Authority for the greater Solemnity of Divine
Administrations. And the determining what these are to be, is plainly permitted
to the Reason and Discretion of the Governors of the Church, as may be fairly
concluded from 1 Cor. 11.13, 14, 18. where the Apostle makes Reason the sole
Judge that must be submitted to in point of Decency and Order. The Case before
the Apostle, was, whether Women ought to appear veiled in the Church; and how
does he prove it; why from Reason, and the Custom of the Churches; and he
severely twits those as perverse Persons, that in such Cases will not be
governed by such Arguments: Judge in your selves, is it comely that a Woman
pray with her Head uncovered, does not even Nature, that is Custom, it self
teach you? But if any Man be contentious, we have no such Custom, nor the
Churches of God; that is, if People will be so perverse, I think it sufficient
to tell them, as that which ought to govern 'em, the Nature and Reason of the
thing, and the Custom of the Church is against 'em. So that Reason you see is
not excluded from judging what is fit, and proper to be done in point of
Decency and Order, and for the greater Solemnity of Divine Administrations: And
therefore having showed you what Reason the Church had to appoint Godfathers
and Godmothers, not only as Proxies to represent the Infant, but as Sureties to
engage for it in Baptism, I need not much to insist on other Arguments in
justification of that Usage of the Church. But however that no Scruple may
remain, if possible, in any honest Mind, that will be convinced, for a farther
justification of the Lawfulness and Expedience of 'em:

I. I will prove out of Scripture, I. That Christ gave Commission to the
Governors of the Church to institute such Vsages, as shall be for Decency and
Order, and the better Edification of the Souls of Men, proved from Scripture.
that there has been a Power and Authority given by Christ to the Governors of
the Church, to appoint such reasonable Circumstances as they shall think fit,
for the greater Order and Decency of Divine Administrations, and the better
Edification of the Souls of Men. And then,

II. I will show you, that their appointing of Godfathers and Godmothers, was a
most excellent and useful Institution to this purpose.

And First, I will prove out of Scripture, that there has been a Power, etc.

It were a thing very well worth the Consideration of all Persons, what
Observance our Blessed Savior paid to those Circumstantial Appointments
relating to Divine Worship, which the Governors of the Jewish Church (without
any farther Authority from Scripture, than the general Commission and Power it
gives Governors to exercise) had of their own selves ordered. There was as
little need one would have thought in that Church, as any, This allowed to the
Governors of the Jewish Church.
for its Governors to appoint any new Modes or Ceremonies of Worship, God
himself having given 'em such very particular Orders relating to Divine
Service. But as little need as there seemed to be of 'em, they however took
upon 'em to appoint many things, besides what God himself had ordained. And yet
Christ did not only conform to 'em in his own Practice, as appears from his
celebrating the Feast of Dedication, John 10.22, 23. which was a Festival of
mere humane Institution, in memory of their Deliverance from the Tyranny of
Antiochus Epiphanes, and the purging of the Temple, and the Altar from his
Idolatry; but moreover, he commanded his Followers to do so too, so long as
they continued under the Jewish Dispensation.

From the several Instances that are given by Thorndicke, Hammond, Lightfoot,
and others skilful in Jewish Learning, they were Unscriptural Rites, and mere
Humane Inventions, all those many Ceremonies that the Jews had introduced into
their Worship in our Savior's time: But notwithstanding that, the Blessed
Jesus did not only himself conform to the Custom of the Church in the Use of
'em, but commanded likewise others to be obedient likewise themselves to those
who sat in Moses's Chair; whose Constitutions therefore he would have to be
observed, as you may see, Matthew. 23.2, 3. Saying, the Scribes and Pharisees
(that is, those of 'em who made up the Sanhedrim, the highest Jurisdiction in
Church Matters amongst the Jews) sit in Moses's Seat; and therefore whatsoever
they bid you observe, that observe and do. They had given him but little reason
to favor their Authority, as you may see in the Chapter immediately before:
They came to ensnare him with their Questions, and to trepan him into some
mischievous Inconvenience if they could; but however, no sooner was he quit of
their troublesome Company, but he takes care to advertise his Disciples, that
such of 'em who were of the Sanhedrim, were to be looked on by them as their
lawful Rulers, that had Authority over them, succeeding Moses and the Seventy,
Numb. 11.16. as our Bishops and Church: Governors, now do Christ and his
Apostles; and therefore he bids 'em to conform themselves to all their lawful
Commands, in all regular Subjection and Obedience; which is a manifest proof,
what Observance our Savior would have to be paid to the Governors of the
Church in all their Constitutions, that, relating to the Worship of God, do not
thwart the Divine Commands.

True it is, our Blessed Lord did in another Place, Matthew. 15.3. reprimand the
Pharisees for their Superstitious Observance of their Traditions, and for
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, Verse 9. But then it ought to
be well considered, what sort of Traditions and Doctrines they were, whose
Observance he reproved 'em for. And what were they, but such, in whose
Observance they did plainly violate God's express Commands, or at least did
undermine the force of his Laws thereby? As appears by the Instance he gives;
which was this, of denying Maintenance to their Parents in necessity, under
pretense of having devoted their Substance before to God; by which Evasion, he
tells them, they made the Commandment of God, concerning Honor due to Parents,
of none effect by their Traditions, Verse 6. and tells them withal, that in
vain they did worship him, teaching thus for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.
Such Constitutions indeed, which did contradict, or evacuate and undermine the
Laws of God, we see here he did reprove 'em for; but what is that to the
forbidding those, which do no ways tend to any such thing, but to the greater
Order and Decency of his Worship? As to such his own Doctrine, of observing the
Commands of those who sat in Moses's Chair, and his own Practice in conforming
to whatsoever they appointed of that Nature, does sufficiently show us, what
Power he owned then to be in the Governors of the Church, to appoint such
reasonable Ceremonies and Circumstances, as they should think fit, for the
greater Order and Decency of Divine Administrations, The same Power continued
to those else who preside in the Christian.
and for the better Edification of the Souls of Men.

Nor did He, or his Apostles, afterward retrench the Governors of the
Christian Church of that Authority, which then he owned to be in ^he Jewish.
No; He commits it to their Care, that all things in the Church Assemblies
should be done unto edifying, 1 Cor. 14.26. or so (...) may be most to the
Benefit and Advantage of the Worshippers; and Verse 40. that all things be done
decently, and in order; which Commands being only general, without particularly
expressing all the ways whereby these things may be provided for, must of
necessity leave it to the discretion of Church-Governors to appoint, what
according to the Changes and Customs of Times and Places (which in these things
do often vary) they in their Wisdom should think to be most fit, decent, and
orderly to be observed.

And as he empowered Governors to appoint, what in their discretion they should
think fit to this purpose; To whose Ordinances the People are commanded to
submit.
so he commanded the People to be obedient to 'em in such their Constitutions
and Appointments. Obey them that have the Rule over you, Heb. 13.17. and submit
yourselves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, 1 Pet. 2.13.

The Apostle indeed, Gal. 5.1. bids 'em stand fast in the Liberty wherewith
Christ had made 'em free, and not to be entangl'd again with the Yoke of
Bondage; that is, not to impose upon themselves the necessity (for God did not)
of observing Moses's Law, which they were so addicted to, and to dissuade 'em
from which was the main Design of that Epistle; but then as he bids 'em
preserve their Liberty from the Mosaical Rites, so Peter, 1 Epist. 2.10. bids
'em not to abuse their Christian Liberty, and (though free from the burden and
bondage of Moses's Law, which neither they, nor their Fathers were able to
bear, yet) to take care they use not their Liberty for a Cloak of
Maliciousness, Verse 16. to be a pretense for maliciously opposing the
Ordinances of their Superiors; which in the 13th Verse he had bid 'em submit
to for the Lord's sake, and that they might not bring a Reproach upon the
Gospel of Christ, by a Schismatical and refractory Stubborness.

Nor do such Constitutions and Appointments, as do tend only to the better
Order and Decency of Divine Administrations, and the better Edification of the
Souls of Men, bring the Church-Governors under the Imputation of adding to the
Book of Life, which is a thing so severely threat'ned, Rev. 22.18. No, it is so
far from adding any thing else unto, that it is the very executing no other,
than that very Commission, the Word of Life has given 'em. God had entrusted
Church-Governors with such Power and Authority under him, committing it to
their Care by a Commission running in general Terms, to appoint what shall be
thought decent and orderly, and tending to Edification in all Divine
Administrations; and their particular Constitutions to that purpose, well
suited to Time and Place, and not contradicting by their burdensome Number, nor
insignificant Frivolousness, the Spirituality and plain Simplicity of the
Gospel; but being few and grave (which admirably tends to Order and
Edification) must needs be no other than a particular executing of what they
were empowered to do, by a general Command: Even as an Ambassador, who has a
general Commission granted him by his Prince, to treat on such Matters in his
Negotiation, does not exceed, but execute his Commission in those particular
Articles he does make, pursuant to such his Commission.

Decency and Order in all Ages of the Church, not otherwise to be provided for.
And indeed it is hardly possible, that Provision could be made for the Decency
and Order of Divine Administrations any other way, than by committing it to the
Prudence and Discretion of the Governors in every National Church, to appoint
those things; for the Modes and Expressions of Decency and Order, are
infinitely different in several Countries, so that one thing shall be a
signification of Reverence and Respect in the Eastern Part of the World, and a
quite contrary in the Western; and the same Observances may not tend to
Edification in one Age, even in the same Country, as in another; for the
Humors of Men are extremely subject to change in this Matter, so that it was
necessary the Appointment of mere Ceremonial and Circumstantial things, should
be lest to the Discretion of Church-Governors to order, or to alter, according
to the Exigencies and Conditions of Time and Place. So that it appears to me to
be sufficiently plain, that there has been a Power and Authority given by
Christ to the Governors of the Church, to appoint such reasonable
Circumstances, as they shall think fit, for the better Order and Decency of
Divine Administrations, and the better Edification of the Souls of Men. And now,

II. The Appointment of Godfathers and Godmothers, a most useful Institution to
the foresaid Purposes of Decency. Order, and Edification.
Secondly, I am to show you, that their appointing of Godfathers and Godmothers,
was a most excellent and useful Institution to this purpose, that is, that it
is an appointment that contributes much to the decent Administration of
Baptism; and it is also very serviceable to the Edification of the Baptized
Members of Christ's Church.

How decent and orderly, and like to the transacting of a Covenant, it renders
the administration of Baptism, I have already told you: But that it is very
serviceable to the Edification of Persons Baptized, I will farther declare unto
you. And this surely must needs be owned, if we consider,

1. The Nature of their Office. And,

2. The good Effects we often see of Persons having had Godfathers and
Godmothers, as Sureties for 'em in their Baptism.

First, If we consider the Nature of their Office.
And, First, If we consider the Nature of their Office, how can we but expect
from 'em a great deal of good, as to Persons Edification? For by the Nature of
their Office, are they not Persons that are solemnly engaged in the Presence of
God, and of the whole Congregation then Assembled, and this to God himself,
that they will take a special and particular Care of that Person then entered
by their Means into the Society of Christians, that he shall be truly informed
of the Nature of his Covenant, and what Obligations lie upon him to discharge
those Duties contained in it, and which are to be performed on his Part, as he
will expect to share in those unspeakable good things promised on God's part?
And is not such a solemn Engagement to God, made by the Sureties in such a
Presence, and in such a Place, and before such a number of Witnesses, likely to
make Men careful to be as good as their Promise? And this if they shall be, and
shall accordingly take care (if there be any occasion for it by the Parents
neglect) to have the Child Catechis'd and Instructed in the Christian Religion,
and shall Reprove him for his Miscarriages, and Exhort him to a circumspect
walking with God, and never leave off till they have brought him at Years of
Understanding before the chief Minister of Christ's Church, the Bishop, there
solemnly and seriously to profess in his own Person, that he will do so and so,
as they have engaged in his Name: If this they shall do, is not this the
likeliest way in the World to train up a Child in the Knowledge, and Love, and
Fear of God, in which consists his Edification.

Why, the thing I suppose would be readily granted, that the Office being
considered in it self, the Institution of Godmothers and Godmothers might be
very useful to Peoples Edification, if Sureties would but take a due Care (if
there should be occasion) of the Christian Edification and Conversation of such
whom they have Engaged for. We only want to see the good Effects of such their
Undertaking, which (God knows say some) are but small; for who is it, say they,
do we see take any care of any such thing? This is what is commonly urged
against this Institution, by those who are not well-affected to this, nor any
other Constitution of our Church; and as weak as this Exception is, many think
it a sufficient Plea against having Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism.

But I would desire such Persons to consider, that if the Abuse of any
Ordinance, by Persons that are Profane and Careless, were a sufficient Reason
against it, we must even abolish the Sacraments themselves; for how many are
there who come unprepared, and unworthily partake of 'em, not regarding what
Obligations they have laid upon themselves in the use of 'em, to be good Livers
ever afterward; and the very Gospel it self, though a Savor of Life unto Life,
unto some few, who live according to its Rules, is a Savor of Death unto
Death, unto those (and they are the greatest number) unto whom it is Preached,
and yet lead Lewd and Profligate Lives. But this is by Accident, and through
Men's own Fault, that neither the Gospel can persuade, nor the Sacraments engage
some Men to Obedience; and for that they must answer themselves, and both the
Gospel and its Sacraments must notwithstanding be continued in the Church, for
the good they are capable of Working, and the good they actually do effect to
some few. And so ought the Institution of Godfathers and Godmothers. In its own
Nature its an Office fitted to do good, and though many do not that good they
ought, under that Character, yet on the score of that good it may do, and those
good Effects we really see it sometimes does do, it ought for that reason to be
continued in the Church.

I say, Secondly, Secondly, Those good Effects of it.
on the score of those good Effects we sometimes see it really does do; for
this I am well assured of, and I have known my self many Instances of Persons,
who owe that Understanding they have of Religion, and the fear of God, purely,
next under God, to the Care of their Godfathers and Godmothers, who have
brought 'em up to Reading, bestowed good Books upon 'em, given good Advice unto
'em, and caused 'em to be Confirmed, when nothing of this would have been took
Care of by their Careless, Loose, and Ignorant Parents. And I do not question,
but amongst the many Neglects, there are Thousand of like Instances in the
Nation, of Persons who have been happily brought up to a good understanding and
sense of Religion, by the sole Care of their Godfathers and Godmothers. And
then, I am sure, so precious is one Soul in the sight of God, that the
Institution that shall contribute to the Salvation of many, shall be of no
small account with him.

Which good Effects would be much greater, were the choice of Godfathers and
Godmothers made according to the Canons of the Church.
And to the Edification of very many more, I am sure this Ordinance would
contribute, if that choice were made of Persons for Godfathers and Godmothers,
which the Church prescribes. For as our most excellent Church has taken an
admirable Care of her Children in providing Security for their good Education
and Christian Behavior; so to make that Security, as good as possible; and
that they may be such as will be most likely to have that Care of those they
stand for, she Ordains in her 24th Canon, That no Persons should be admitted to
be Godfathers and Godmothers to any Child at a Christening or Confirmation,
before the said Person so undertaking has received the Holy Communion. And
now, if all Parents would provide such only, and all Ministers would receive
none other but who have Communicated, then we should see much better effects of
this Institution, and that it would Minister very considerably to Edification;
for then the ungodly Crew, that never approach the Holy Altar, being excluded,
there would none but Persons of a tolerable good sense of Religion themselves,
be Sureties for others; and from such we might expect a discharge of their
Obligations: But if Parents having other Respects than the good of their
Childrens Souls, will only provide such as are likely to make the Infant a good
Present, or leave it a Legacy, or bestow handsomely on Midwives and Nurses, let
'em be never so Loose, and Lewd, or mere Children, or otherwise unqualify'd,
then no wonder if we see fewer good Effects of this excellent Institution,
which in it self is admirably well fitted to promote Edification. But then this
is the Fault of Parents, not of the Church; and notwithstanding this, the
appointment of Godfathers and Godmothers, as Sureties in Baptism, ought to be
considered as a thing of a very useful Tendency, as to the more decent
Administration of the Sacrament of Baptism, so to the better Edification of the
Person Baptized; to which purpose, according to the Power given 'em by Christ,
the Governors of our Church have appointed it.

The Conclusion.
And thus, in Commenting upon the Preliminary Questions and Answers of the
Catechism, I have at length gone through all those Heads of Discourse, I did at
first propose to speak to, in order to give you a full Understanding of the
Covenant of Grace, that Covenant you enterd into with God in your Baptism. For,

I. As to the Nature of this Covenant, I have, in the first place, explained to
you the Terms and Conditions of it, both on Gods part, and on ours. In the
second place, I have laid before you the Gracious Importance of this Covenant,
showing you how that it is a State of Salvation. Thirdly, I have accounted for
the Original of it, and by whose Mediation you obtained such Terms of
Reconciliation with God, and that it was through Jesus Christ our Lord. I have,
Fourthly, acquainted you by whom, and how you have been Called to this State of
Salvation, that it was Your Heavenly Father who has called you to this State
of Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. And, Lastly, have Admonished you
of the very great Reason you have to thank God, and our Savior Jesus Christ,
for so exceeding great a Mercy, as his Calling you into it. So far I have let
you into the Knowledge of the Nature of the Covenant of Grace. And,

II. Having done this, I have declared to you by what Sacrament or Solemnity
you entered into it.

III. I have showed you the vast Obligations lying upon you faithfully to
discharge your Covenant with God.

IV. I have directed you by what means you may perform it.

And, Lastly, That nothing might be wanting fully to Inform you in all that
pertains to the Doctrine of this Covenant, I have now Informed you in those two
Circumstances relating to your entrance into it, the Time when, and the Persons
by whom you were Initiated therein.

These last Points indeed, I thought once to have deferred the treating upon,
till I shall come to the Last Part of the Catechism. But though the whole
Doctrine of Divine Assistance and Prayer, may be treated upon when I shall come
to the Lord's-Prayer, and the Question which leads to it; yet as they are the
necessary Means of enabling us to perform our Covenant with God, they ought at
leastwise to be generally considered here. And even the Doctrine of Infant
Baptism, and the use of Godfathers and Godmothers, though there is a Question and
Answer more direct upon both at the latter end of the Catechism, yet the
positive handling of 'em is properest in this place; And whatever Objections
can be raised against either, will most naturally be handled upon these Words;
Why then are Infants Baptized, when by reason of their tender Age they cannot
perform them? The Answer to which is, Because they Promise them both by their
Sureties; which Promise when they come to Age themselves are bound to perform.
There is an Objection and Solution in these Words, and therefore they will be
the fittest to found a Discourse upon, consisting of the like. However, I think
the general Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace could not have been handled in
all its Parts, without the consideration of these latter Points; and that, I
think, may be sufficient to justify us in treating upon 'em here, so as to
give you a general View, as of the Covenant of Grace, so of all that pertains
to the Doctrine of it.

And now what remains, but that you seriously reflect upon all that has been
delivered upon this most important Subject of your Baptismal Covenant? I do
call it such, and I do think it ought to be the most studied by you of any
other. For why? First, I take the Covenant of Grace, or our Baptismal Covenant,
to comprise the whole Doctrine of Christianity, even all that, than which no
Man as a mere Christian is necessitated to know more, and than which the
meanest ought not to know less. No Man in any Civil Contract can perform his
Bonds, without knowing the Conditions of the Obligations; no more can a
Christian be supposed to perform his Covenant with God, without knowing the
Nature, Terms, and Conditions of it. Secondly, It is absolutely necessary that
all Youth should comprehend the general Nature, Terms, and Conditions of their
Baptismal Covenant, before they go to be Confirmed. Thirdly, And all Persons
before they communicate in the Holy Sacrament, because in both these Ordinances
they ratify their Baptismal Covenant with God. Fourthly, And if it be
considered, that all Persons, in order to prepare for Death, must strictly
examine themselves, concerning their Failures in all, and every the Terms and
Conditions required on their part in their Baptismal Covenant: And lastly, that
at the Day o^ Judgment they will be justified, or condemned, according as they
have performed, or not performed their Covenant with God: All this considered,
I think you would be sensible that there is nothing more fundamentally
necessary for every Christian, especially for Youth to be acquainted withal,
than the Nature, Terms, and Conditions of their Baptismal Covenant.

It is indeed the General Terms and Conditions only, that you have been
hitherto instructed in, by this Exposition upon the Preliminary Questions and
Answers; and the more particular understanding of 'em, is to be given you in my
succeeding Discourses upon the Creed and Decalogue. But the most useful Method
of Instruction is to begin with Generals, and then to proceed to the Knowledge
of Particulars. And that by both you may be rendered wise unto Salvation, may
God Almighty grant of his infinite Mercy through Jesus Christ his Son, to whom,
and the Holy Spirit, Three Persons and One God, be all Honor, and Glory,
Might, Majesty, and Dominion ascribed both now, and for evermore. Amen.

The End of the First Volume.
THE CONTENTS.
LECTURE the First.
THE Meaning of the Word Catechize. The Definition of a Catechism. page 1
Christian Religion, What? First, a Moral good Life, an essential part of
Christianity. 2 Secondly, To act Virtuously upon Christian Principles. Thirdly,
Dependence upon the Mediation of Christ, that our imperfect Righteousness may
be accepted, also necessary. 3 Such Dependence, the distinguishing Character of
a true Christian. Dependence upon Christ, necessary to take down an arrogant
Conceit of our own Righteousness, a Temper of Mind most displeasing to God. 4
The Nature of Fundamental Principles. An Enumeration of Fundamental Principles.
First, The general Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace. Secondly, The Articles of
our Christian Faith. 5 Thirdly, The Laws of the Ten Commandments. Fourthly, The
Doctrine of Prayer, and of the Sacraments. A Catechism ought not to be crowded
with any thing more, than what is purely Fundamental to a good Life here, and
Happiness hereafter. 6 A Catechism is a general Instruction in the fundamental
Principles of Christianity. Such were the Ancient, and Apostolical Catechisms.
And such is our Church Catechism. The Persons, that are to be Catechized, are
every Person. 7 The necessity of every Person's being well grounded in
Religious Principles by Catechetical Instruction. The Contempt hereof is the
effect of Pride, and the cause of Ignorance. 8 The Seeds of Virtue, and
Principles of Religion, can never be too soon sown in Childrens Hearts. However
a clear Understanding of Catechetical Doctrines is attainable only by Persons
grown up to some Years of Discretion. It is not below Persons of any Age, or
Quality, to lay the Foundation of their Knowledge in Catechetical Instruction.
The End of Catechizing to prepare for Confirmation. Confirmation, What? 9
Confirmation necessary. First, As a solemn Ratification of the Covenant with
God. Secondly, As it consists in the Episcopal Benediction, and laying on of
Hands. Confirmation Beneficial. First, As the solemn Profession therein made,
imprints serious Thoughts, and religious Resolutions. 10 Secondly, As the
Episcopal Benediction, Prayers, and laying on of Hands have spiritual Blessings
attending them. 11 Catechizing necessary. First, To the solemn Ratifying of our
Covenant with God. 12 Secondly, To the Receiving Benefit, by the Episcopal
Benediction, Prayers, and laying on of Hands. 13
LECT. II.
Catechizing requisite to prepare Persons to be worthy Communicants. 15 The
want thereof the occasion of People's Ignorance concerning the Sacrament, and
consequently, First, of Receiving unworthily. Secondly, of not Receiving at
all. 16 Thirdly, Catechizing is requisite to Persons being Edified by
Preaching. 17 Fourthly, Catechizing necessary to prevent being seduced into
dangerous Errors. 18 Lastly, Catechizing is exceedingly necessary, First, to
preserve Youth from ever falling into an Ungodly way of living. 19 Secondly, To
recover out of it, when fallen therein. 20
LECT. III.
The reason wherefore the Catechism begins with asking the Catechumen his
Christian Name, is to put him in mind of his Christian Profession. The Force
there is in a Christian Name to make a Man lead a Christian Life, as under that
Name having Listed himself. First, a Disciple of a most holy and excellent
Religion. 24 Secondly, a Servant of a most Holy and Just God. Thirdly, to Fight
against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Fourthly, as under that Name he
professes to believe such Articles as are the most powerful Motives to deny all
Ungodliness. Fifthly, to obey the most righteous Laws. Lastly, as having under
that Name received Promises of most powerful Assistances to do all this. 25 The
bad Lives of Nominal Christians do an infinite Prejudice and Dishonor to
Christianity. It hinders the Conversion of Infidels. It puts bitter Reproaches
in the mouths of Atheists, especially when Wickedness is committed under the
Guise of Religion. Few Men will endure their worldly Calling to be put at
naught, and reproacht. 26 An Exhortation therefore to Christians, to stand upon
the Dignity of their Christian Name and Profession. First, as that which is
more considerable than Titles of Honor. Secondly, because of that near
Alliance there is between the Christian Name, and Profession. Thirdly, Because
the primitive Christians did in virtue of the Christian Name resist the
fiercest Temptations. 27 Fourthly, Because of the Indecency of living
unsuitable to the Christian Name and Profession. Fifthly, That to quite other
Purposes, we gave up our Names to be Christians. Sixthly, most Christian Names
afford some Examples of Virtue, which should prompt Christians to an Imitation
of those, who were Eminent under those Names. 28 And therefore Parents are
advised to choose for their Children, the Names of Persons Eminent for Virtue,
not Infamous for Vice. 29
LECT. IV.
Our Catechism gives an entire Instruction in the Covenant of Grace, both
generally and particularly. First, Generally in the Three first Questions and
Answers. 32 The Notion of a Covenant. It is a mutual Agreement. 33 As there are
Conditions therein on our side, so express Promises on the other. A View of the
Covenant of Grace. God having made Man upright, and in a capacity never to have
violated his Covenant, did engage him to a perfect, exact, and unsinning
Obedience. Man did violate it. 34 The Divine Justice, Wisdom, and Holiness
required Satisfaction. Man being himself incapable to make it, by less than
suffering an everlasting Punishment. The Son of God undertook. First, to
satisfy for the Breach of the First. Secondly, to Cancel it, and in its stead
to make a Covenant of Grace, consisting of Conditions performable in our fallen
state. Wherein Repentance, Faith, and a sincere Obedience is accepted, instead
of a perfect, exact, and unsinning Obedience. 35 It resembles Articles of
Accommodation, made through the Intercession of a Prince's Eldest Son, betwixt
him and his Rebellious Subjects. 36 Little more of universal Concernment to be
known, but the Articles of this Covenant. The Catechetical Method most useful
to that Purpose. 37
LECT. V.
A Member of Christ, is a Member of Christ's Church. 39 A Definition of
Christ's Church. The Church of Christ a well-ordered Society, wherein some are
Governors, some Governed. 40 An Episcopal Clergy undoubtedly such. 41 The
Church is the universal Society of Christians, taking in Men of all Nations, as
well of the Gentiles, as of the Jews. It consists of such, who are called out
of the World, by the Preaching of the Gospel, to a holy Profession and Calling.
42 First, Repentance from Dead Works. Secondly, to the Knowledge, Belief, and
Service of the One True God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 43 Thirdly, to enjoy
the Privileges of the Gospel. The Church are such, who to the End of being
Incorporated into one Society, and of having God to be their God, and they
themselves his People, have entered into Covenant with him. 44 First, in
Baptism. Secondly, to renew it at the Lord's Supper. The Church one Body. 45
Sub divided into several particular Bodies and Churches. First, for the
convenience of Government, into Diocesan Churches. Secondly, for the
convenience of Worship, into particular Congregations. 46 But however united by
one Covenant, into one Body. As also by holding Communion with each other, in
hearing the Word, in Common Prayers, Sacraments, and in affording to each other
mutual Assistances. 47 The Church united into one Body, under Jesus Christ its
supreme Head. Christ a Political Head of the Church. Christ the Mystical Head
of the Church. 48 The Church of Christ a spiritual Kingdom. But yet
notwithstanding a visible Society. 49 What it is to be a Member of Christ's
Church. 50 Every Baptized Person is a Member of the visible Church. And shall
continue such, till cut off by the just Sentence of those, who have the Power
of the Keys, to receive in, or shut out. 51 Or till he cuts himself off, by a
causless Schism and Separation, from any of its sound Parts. 52
LECT. VI.
The Privileges of our being Members of Christ's Church. First, a most
excellent Body of Religion, Laws and Ordinances. The Christian Religion and
Laws, far exceed the Pagan, Mohammedan, or Jewish. The Pagan Superstition tended
to nothing, but to defile humane Nature. 55 The Gods the Pagans worshipped,
were, at best, the most Infamous Men and Women. Many times they worshipped the
very Devils themselves. And that with lewd, barbarous, and cruel Rites. The
Mohammedan Religion is a vile Imposture. 56 Its Principles tend to Lust and
Cruelty. Judaism was an imperfect, and unfinished Draught of Religion.
Christianity a most excellent Religion. 57 It gives a most excellent
Representation of God. It gives an honorable account of his proceedings with
Mankind, with reference both to his Creation and Redemption of us. 58 Its Laws
are excellently contrived for the good Order and Happiness of Mankind. And are
enforced by most powerful Principles and Motives. Another Branch of this first
Part of a Christian's Privilege, are most edifying and comfortable
Institutions and Ordinances. 59 First, Public Ordinances, the Privilege of
every Member of Christ's Church. 60 Scandalous Members to be suspended from the
Lord's Supper. First, Christian Ordinances are a singular Favor, which Aliens
and Unbelievers do not, nor have any Right to enjoy. Secondly, they are
excellent Advantages considered in themselves. 61 First, as conducing much
toward our Edification. As most comfortable to the Souls of those who enjoy
them. 62 They are seldom sufficiently valued, till most wanted. The second
general Privilege belonging to the Members of Christ's Church, is a sufficient
measure of Divine Grace and Assistance, derived from him, the Head, and
conveyed by his Ordinances, to enable us to conform our selves to his Religion,
and to obey his Laws. 63 By the same means, that Christ is united to his
Members, is Grace conveyed down from him, as Head, to those Members. The first
Medium of Union betwixt Christ and his Members, must be each Member's Union to
the Catholic Church. Secondly, its union to the lawful Governors and Teachers
of the Church. 64 Thirdly, the use of Christ's Institutions and Ordinances.
First, Divine Grace, a most singular Privilege, if compared with what others
enjoy of this Nature. 65 Secondly, an exceeding advantage considered in it
self. All the Members of Christ have Supplies proportionable to their Station
in the Church. 66 And also in such measures as according to different Times and
Occasions in the Church are wanting. 67
LECT. VII.
What is meant in the Catechism by a Child of God. First, Not the Son of God by
an Eternal Generation. Secondly, Not every Son by Temporal Creation, which is a
Sense too wide. 68 Thirdly, Nor such only who are Children of God, by spiritual
Regeneration, which is a Sense too narrow. 69 Such indeed are in a peculiar
manner, and in the highest sense, the Children of God. But every Child of God
is not actually Regenerate, either in the sense of Scripture: Or of your
Catechism. But, Fourthly, a Child of God, as meant in the Catechism, is every
one, who is so by virtue of a Covenant Relation. This was the Notion of a Child
of God before the Law. Under the Law. 70 Under the Gospel. Also a Child of God,
as meant in the Catechism, is every one, who is so by virtue of Adoption.
Adoption, what? The use of it amongst the Israelites, and the Privileges it
gave them. The use of it amongst the Gentiles, and the Rights it conferred upon
them. 71 How we Christians, especially such who are descended from the
Gentiles, are according, as has been spoke, the Adopted Children of God. To the
Israelites did once pertain the Adoption. But that Covenant, by entering into
which they were his Children, was only Temporary. To last only till the
Publication of the Gospel. After which they, and all Christians were to be
Children of God, by faith in Christ. 72 But the Jews adhering to their Law, and
refusing Christ, and his Gospel, in whom God had predestined all to be his
Sons, the Apostles turned unto Gentiles, preaching Christ, and Salvation to
them, and to as many as received him, to them gave he power to be the Sons of
God. What are the Privileges, which do belong to the Children of God, as such.
In general, such as an indulgent, but wise Father, may be supposed to allow his
Children beyond Aliens and Strangers. Particularly: First, Pardon of all Sins,
upon hearty Repentance. 73 Secondly, by being his Children, he will not be so
severe, as to mark what is done amiss as to Sins of Infirmity. 74 Thirdly, to
the Children of God is granted an easier access by Prayer, to the Throne of
Grace, for Pardon of Sins, and other Mercies. Lastly, a Child of God is more
surely instated in the Inheritance of Heaven, than others. 75 The infinite
reason we have to praise God for these Advantages. 76
LECT. VIII.
By the Kingdom of Heaven, is meant in Scripture, either first, the Kingdom of
Grace in this Life, or secondly, the Kingdom of Glory, in the Life to come. The
Kingdom of Grace, the Gospel State. 77 The reason why the Gospel State should
be dignified with the Title of the Kingdom of Heaven. viz. Because it so
directly tends to render Men so exactly like the Blessed Saints, the
Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Heaven. 78 This is not the meaning of the Kingdom
of Heaven, here in the Catechism. Secondly, the Kingdom of Heaven signifies the
Kingdom of Glory. This, a most noble and glorious State, as being dignified
with so honorable and glorious a Title, as the Kingdom of Heaven. 79 Hence all
those things in this World, wherein we conceive the highest Glory and
Happiness, are used, as Emblems, to set off our future Glory. All which things
come short of expressing it. An Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven, what? An
Heir is one, who has a legal Right and Title to a Possession made over to him.
Such who have entered into the Covenant of Grace, are in like manner Heirs of
the Kingdom of Heaven, as Children are Heirs. 80 It is through Christ alone,
not owing to the Merit of our Obedience, that we are Entitled to the
Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven. The vastness of a Christian's Privilege
in being made an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. First, it is in it self a
very great Privilege to have the invaluable Possessions of Heaven, so settled
and ensur'd, as to have a legal Claim and Title thereto, made over to one. 81
Secondly, if compared with what others enjoy, it is a singular Privilege. The
best amongst the moral Heathens could have but faint Hopes, built upon
uncertain Conjectures of a future Happiness. And their Hopes being faint, they
could not in the strength thereof overcome great Temptations. But the
Christian's Hopes are sure and steadfast, being founded upon the express
Promises and Covenant of the God of Truth. And being such, there is no
Temptation so alluring, nor Suffering so great, which he may not overcome. 82
And whatever Certainty an honest Pagan might have, that God would reward his
Virtue, yet depending only on the Uncovenanted Goodness of God, he could
promise himself no greater a measure of Happiness, than what his good Deeds did
of themselves deserve, which must fall vastly short of what is meant by the
Kingdom of Heaven. But a Christian, to whom God has Covenanted, to make sure a
Crown of Glory, may, without Presumption, rely upon him, to make good the same.
As Life and Immortality is brought to light through the Gospel; so by Embracing
it, and by coming into Covenant alone, Salvation can be expected. And to a
sincere Christian, who is faithful in the Covenant, the Heavenly Inheritance is
certain. 83 Asumm of those invaluable Privileges, made over to us, on God's
Part, in the Covenant of Grace. 84
LECT. IX.
Whereof the First is, to Renounce the Devil, the World, and the Flesh. 85 The
Devil, his Names, and their Importance. He was once one of the highest Angels,
and is now that Arch-Rebel againsts God. He, with many Legions of Inferior
Angels, whom he drew into the same Conspiracy, is Banished Heaven. 86 Being
acted with a Spirit of Revenge against God, he afterward withdrew Mankind to
join with him in his Rebellion. And prevailed so far, till God's Authority was
almost utterly Banished from amongst Men. Which occasioned the Son of God's
coming into the World, to recover Mankind. The Works of the Devil in general
are, First, Sin. By Sin God's Authority is thrown off, which is the Devil's
constant work. 87 Whoever therefore does wilfully sin, does strike at God's
Authority. For which Reason no Sin ought to be the Subject of any Man's Mirth.
Some Sins more particularly the works of the Devil. First, Such as are directly
levelled against God's Authority, viz. Idolatry, Sorcery, Charming, Witchcraft,
and Conjuring, as also Resorting to such as use those unlawful Arts. 88
Secondly, Such as express more of the Devil's Temper, than others, viz. Pride.
Envy. 89 Malice. Thirdly, Such as are more the Practice of Satan himself, than
other Sins, viz. Murder. Apostasy. Lying, and especially Calumniating, and
Evil-speaking. 90 To Renounce, a Word of various Importance, according to the
Renounced. 91 To Renounce the Devil, in the sense of the Ancient Church, was to
disclaim his Usurped Dominion, and Authority over Mankind. To Renounce his
Works of Sin, was in their sense, to abandon and forsake every Sin, as being
the proper Service of the Devil. 92 The Words are to be understood in much the
same Sense at this day; Satan having his Kingdom still in the World, and even
amongst Christians, and the Laws of Sin, which are the Laws of his Kingdom,
being still obeyed by the greatest Part of Mankind. This Renunciation, for the
most part, the same with Repentance. 93 The Devil, and all his Works of Sin,
must be absolutely and entirely Renounced; because, There is nothing but Evil
proceeds from Satan. And Sin, whether we consider it in its original Cause and
Nature; or in its sad Effects and Consequents, is the utmost Evil. Therefore no
one Sin, nor any thing the least of Sin, must willingly be complied with. 94
And indeed, if the Nature of Satan, and of Sin, and the horrid Consequence of
yielding to either, be well considered, it is hardly possible, not absolutely
and entirely to Renounce both. However this if we do not do, we shall forfeit
all Right and Title to those infinite Blessings, held forth in the Covenant of
Grace. 95
LECT. X.
To Tempt is to make a trial of a Person. To Tempt, a thing morally Good, or
Evil, according to the End thereof. To Tempt a Person, in order to prove his
Virtue, or discover his Corruption, consistent with the Justice, Wisdom, and
Goodness of a Governor; and thus God does Tempt Men. 97 First, Thus he tempted
Abraham, to try his Faith, and to reward him for it. Secondly, Hezekiah, to
discover his Hypocrisy, and to humble him in the sight thereof. These
Temptations of God are therefore in no sense to be Renounced, but to be
Rejoiced in, because for our Good. 98 A Temptation to ensnare a Person into
some Sin, that so God's Anger may be kindled against him. And the Person
punished for this Transgression, is wicked and malicious; and so the Devil,
together with the World, and the Flesh, do tempt us. The vast Concernment it is
to us, to know his Temptations. The several Heads of Satan's Temptations. 99 By
what Methods he first tempted our first Parents, and still does continue to
tempt us. First, By insinuating into the Minds of Adam and Eve false Notions of
God, and an ill Opinion of their Maker and Governor, particularly with respect
to his Justice and Mercy. 100 And by Entertaining false Notions of God's
Justice and Mercy, do Men generally Encourage themselves in Sin at this Day.
But all such Conceits of God are to be utterly renounced and cast out of our
Thoughts, as Diabolical Suggestions, most destructive to our Souls. Secondly,
By Corrupting the Understanding and Reason of Man, by putting him upon curious
Enquiries after useless Matters, and upon making a sinful Experiment of the
differences between Good and Evil. 101 The Mind of Man naturally desirous of
increasing Knowledge. Experimental Knowledge of Sin clouds the Reason, and
stupifies the Sense of Spiritual things. And even mere Curiosity after less
Profitable things, takes off from the Knowledge of God, and our Selves, and the
Means of Happiness. 102 By these Means he brings that Ignorance in Divine
Matters, which reigns in most Men's Minds. And being spiritually Ignorant, Men
are easily led into whatever Sin and Misery. This therefore another Wile of
Satan's, which must be carefully avoided. 103 Thirdly, By Bribing the
Affections with something nearest our Hearts, and rather than disoblige and
lose which, we will commit any thing that is Evil. And by whatever we most
place our Affections upon, does he still Inveigle us to do what is Forbidden.
And therefore our Savior would have us bear that Indifferency of Affection
toward our nearest Relations, as to be able to Forsake them, and their
Interests, rather than God. Lastly, By exciting their Lusts and Appetites after
the forbidden Fruit, by proposing the fairest Objects, and most delicious
Dainties to their Senses. 104 And by the same Methods does he prevail, to this
day, upon the far greatest part of Mankind to Rebel against God. For Man being
made up very much of Sense, so that nothing enters into the Soul, but through
the Doors of our Senses; we are easily prevailed upon by what gratifies our
Senses. Especially the Senses of Seeing and Tasting. 105 But our being taken
only with Outward things, is such an high Ingratitude to God, who has provided
so much better for us, and such an Abuse to our Souls, which are capable of
relishing higher Enjoyments, as is not to be Endured. 106
LECT. XI.
What Temptations Satan levels against the Church of Christ. God recovers out
of the fallen Race of Mankind a Body of Men, the Church, to his Service, Listed
'em under Jesus Christ to Fight against Satan. The Devil enraged, to have his
Prey snatched out of his Teeth, continually Attacks it. His first and chief
Endeavors are, utterly to destroy it from off the Face of the Earth. 107 This
he Endeavored to do in the Person of Abel. And when afterward Recruited in
the Family of Seth, yet he Reduced it again, by the Bloody Posterity of Cain,
to Eight Persons in the Days of Noah. When after the Flood, God chose Abraham
and his Posterity, to be a special People unto himself, Satan endeavored
utterly to have Extinguished that People, by his Servant Pharaoh. And in all
Periods, till our Savior's coming, he stirred up the Idolatrous Nations, their
Neighbors, especially the Four Monarchies, to Harrass them. But soon after,
that Christ appeared in the World, did he most vigorously Exert his Malice
against it. 108 So that for the first 300 Years we hear of nothing but of
bloody Persecutions. The Emperors of Rome the Instruments, but Satan the
Instigator. And wheresoever any Attempt is made to Convert a Country from
Paganism, he does instigate the Princes and People thereof, to Persecute and
Destroy the Preachers of the Gospel. And he is no less Industrious to drive
Christianity out of those Countries, whereof it had once Possession. And he has
an Antichristian Party within the Bowels of Christendom, most sadly weakening
Christ's, and most effectually promoting the Interest of his own Kingdom. 109
And now all Christians are so far to Renounce Satan, with respect to those his
persecuting Temptations, as to submit to the sorest Sufferings, which Satan and
his wicked Instruments can inflict, rather than deny Christ, or his Truths.
Secondly, When those bloody Methods fail, Satan then does endeavor so to
corrupt Men's Notions of God and Religion, that by their very Christianity they
may dishonor him. 110 This Politic Method of his, discovered to us under the
Parable of a malicious Enemy, coming privately in the Night, and sowing Tares
where the Husbandman had before sowed good Seed. Like a skilful Husbandman he
is choice about the Nature of the Seed, the Temper and Preparedness of the
Soil, the Fitness of the Season, and the Skilfulness of the Seeds-man. First,
As to the Nature of the Seed, he takes care his Heretical Opinions and
Practices should bear some Resemblance of Divine Truth, in order to conceal
their Discovery. Thus especially he Gilds his Errors, where the Light of the
Gospel does most clearly shine, as here, First, When under the plausible
Appearance of Advancing God's Honor, in some of his Attributes, he renders him
odious and dispis'd in Others. 111 Secondly, When under the Color of Advancing
Gospel Truths, he propagates Heresies, which do undermine Religion, and the
Necessity of a Holy Life. Thirdly, when he teaches to prefer some eminent
Christian Duty, or some part of a Duty, or one Way of performing a Duty, to the
Disparagement of another. As to prefer Prayer, to the neglect of Preaching, or
Sermons to the contempt of Prayers. As also Praying in Spirit, to the regard of
Bodily Worship. And Extemporary Prayer, to the utter Contempt of Forms of
Prayer. 112 By this latter Means, Satan has utterly Defeated those excellent
Helps we have in our Church, and brought in a great Neglect of Public, Family,
and Private Devotion. 113 Secondly, As to the Temper and Preparation of the
Soil, in Churches where the Scriptures are Locked up, and Ignorance prevails, he
imposes the grossest Heresies, as Articles of Faith. Especially he introduces
Idolatry and Superstition, whereby he is most immediately and directly served.
Thirdly, As to the fitness of the Season, he is dexterous in accommodating his
Counsels, his Actions, and his manner of Acting to such Seasons, as are most
proper to his Purpose of seducing Men. 114 Hence in dark and ignorant Ages,
nothing so common as the Apparitions of Saints, as was pretended to introduce
the Belief of Purgatory, Image Worship, and the like Superstitions. And in
Learned and Philosophical Ages, he is as shy in appearing, lest he should
destroy the prevailing Sadducism. Fourthly, As to the skilfulness of the
Seeds-man, Satan is wonderfully Cunning, in making choice of fit and proper
Instruments; and in furnishing those with the proper Arts of Deceiving, and
with suitable Qualities, whom he employs to sow the Seed of corrupt Doctrine in
the Souls of Men. 115 Such as place all Religion in Morality, shall be adorned
with Humanity. Such as turn it all into Mystery, shall be gifted with Canting.
116 And yet sometimes the Crooked Serpent by Men seeming Godly, will propagate
Principles extremely Immoral. The most difficult Part of a Christian's Warfare
is to preserve One-self untainted with Heretical Pravity, colored over with
the Varnish of Gospel Truth. But yet by trying it by proper Rules it may be
done, viz. First, By its tendency to an Ill Life. Secondly, By its taking off
from our Dependence upon the Mediation of Christ, for the acceptance of a good
One. 117
LECT. XII.
Thirdly, Satan's great Industry is to gain over to his Party, or to Tempt to
some scandalous Enormity such Persons as are more than ordinarily Eminent for
their Rank, their Order, or their Piety in the Church. First, Such as are most
Eminent for their Station or Quality. 119 Such Men's Wickednesses, not
altogether from the Temptingness of Riches, but the Industry of Satan, to get
over such leading Men to his Party. Such Men's Examples, if bad, of malignant
Influence, because conspicuous. And will bring upon 'em the Guilt, not only of
their own, but of other Men's Sins, because Their Actions have the force of a
Precept, as well as of a Pattern, which Inferiors are afraid to show their
dislike of. 120 Great Men therefore must of all others Renounce the Temptations
of Satan. Secondly, Such as are most Eminent on the account of their Order,
viz. the Ministers of Religion. He is doubly Enraged against such, both because
in the Nature and Design of their Office, they are to destroy his Kingdom, and
because the rest of the World do altogether eye them for their Pattern. Hence
no Temptation left untried to withdraw such into some scandalous Enormity. 121
And hence the more Industrious a Minister is, the more Industrious is Satan to
overcome him. And in the very way wherein he is most serviceable to the Church
of God, Satan does endeavor to make him most Mischievous. As by turning his
Zeal into Faction. His spiritual Mindedness in Enthusiasm. If he cannot prevail
over him by real Miscarriages, he will render him useless by forged Calumnies.
122 It wonderfully concerns the Interest of Religion, that the Reputation of
its Ministers be kept unsullied. Hence Satan, and Satanical Men so Industrious
to blast it. And slanderous Reports lessen the Authority and Influence of the
Clergy almost as much as real Sin. 123 It behooves the Clergy therefore so far
to Renounce and Resist the Devil's Temptations, as to take care not only to be
really Blameless, but also to abstain from all appearance of Evil. Thirdly,
Such as are signal for their extraordinary Piety and Virtue. Good Men the Devil
knows, will be scandalized at such a One's Fall. And the Atheistical will
triumph therein. And withal the lapst Person will be rendered almost incapable
ever after of Converting others by his Example, or Exhortations. 124 Against
this Bulwark of Religion, therefore the Devil draws up all his Artillery. The
Pride and Pains he takes in overcoming such a One, represented in a Parable.
125 The more Exemplarily Pious therefore any Man is, the more it concerns him
to beware of the Devil, and all his Temptations. 126
LECT. XIII.
Lastly, what Temptations Satan levels against all Persons indifferently
considered. The Devil's Temptations not easily known to be his, nor always
distinguishable from those of the World, and the Flesh, which are managed and
directed by him. 127 Some of the most considerable of his Methods of Tempting
us discovered. First, He permits, if not furthers some in a partial Obedience
to God in some Particulars, the better to detain them perfect Slaves to himself
in others. This a most fatal Delusion, when some Sins only of a scandalous
Name, are exchanged for contrary Virtues, but with the Retention of Impieties
of a higher Nature. 128 Such the most Irreclaimable of all Sinners. Secondly,
By putting plausible Names upon the worst of Sins, under that disguise he does
cheat Persons into a good Opinion of 'em, and then to commit 'em. Sin in that
disguise gets Reputation amongst Men. 129 Thirdly, By changing the Nature of
several Divine Graces, so that they degenerate into very great Sins. Sins thus
mistaken are seldom Repented of. Fourthly, By putting Novices upon undertaking
Severities, greater than they can go through with, on design that when they grow
weary thereof, they may together with those their voluntary Severities, throw
all Religion aside, as too Burdensome, and not at all Practicable. 130 The
difference between God's Ordering, and the Devil's Management of Men in these
Matters. Fifthly, By injecting evil Thoughts into our Minds at our Devotion, to
unhallow those Services, whereby we do really and most immediately glorify God,
and benefit our own Souls. 131 And thus he hinders the Efficacy of the Word.
Sixthly, The Devil observing the outward Wants and Necessities of Persons, he
accordingly Tempts them, by the use of unlawful Means, to remove those Evils.
Seventhly, Knowing every particular Person's inward Dispositions, he
accordingly presents such Objects to the Fancy, as shall be likeliest to
prevail over such a Man to commit some grievous Sin. 132 Eighthly, Above all,
by Representing to the Fancies of Men, the Convenience of Riches the Glory of
Honors, and the Sweetness of Pleasures, he does thereby Bribe 'em to Rebel
against God, and to Sin against their own Souls. In his Representation of this
World's Goods, he shows only the fair Outside to allure into Sin,
industriously concealing all that is Hurtful therein, and would deter Men from
it. 133 Ninthly, Having prevailed thereby upon Persons, to commit some grievous
Sin to obtain them, he then lays the shame and disgrace of their Sins before
'em, persuading 'em to commit another horrid Wickedness, to hide from the Eyes
of Men, the shame of the former. 134 Tenthly, Having once Engaged a Person into
many Sins, he either lulls him in Security, or drives him into Despair. Lastly,
There are those, whom God does in a great measure give up to the Delusions of
Satan, others whom he does wholly Abandon to the Power of the Devil. First,
Such ill-dispos'd Minds, as out of love to their Lusts, seek after such
Principles and Teachers, as will make Sin easy to their Consciences, are justly
left to the Delusions of Satan. Secondly, Such as by a long Course of many
damning Sins have laid wast the Conscience, and have baffled all the Methods of
God's Grace to Reclaim 'em, these are sometimes, even in this Life, abandoned
by God, to be acted by the Devil. 135 And lastly so are Witches, Magicians, and
Conjurers, who have Covenanted away both Body and Soul to the Devil, on
Condition he will be for some time at their Beck, to execute their vile and
malicious Purposes. Upon the general View of the Works of the Devil, both of
Sin and Temptation, it does appear his Drift is no less than to usurp God's
Throne, and to draw the whole Race of Mankind into the same Cursed Rebellion
against the Majesty of Heaven with himself. 136 What it is, and how we must
Renounce this great Work of the Devil, his Tempting of us to Sin. 137 The
Temptations of the Devil are then only properly Renounced, when they are
Resisted by us. That they may be successfully Resisted. First, We must keep our
selves always Sober. Sobriety, First, As opposite to Drunkenness, a necessary
Preservative against Satan's Temptations. 138 Secondly, As opposite to Passion.
Secondly, Watchful over those our Weaknesses especially where Satan will be
likeliest to Attempt us. And Thirdly, we must be constant and fervent in Prayer
to God, to Protect us from them. 139
LECT. XIV.
What is meant by the Pomps and Vanity of the wicked World, and in what sense,
and how far we must Renounce the wicked World, with its Pomps and Vanity. Three
things here to be Explained, and accordingly Renounced: 1. The World; 2. The
wicked World; and 3. The Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World. The World a
great Enemy to God's Glory, and our own Happiness. 141 It is to be considered
both Generally and Particularly. First, By the World in general is meant that
whole Frame of Nature, which we behold, and all that variety of Creatures which
it contains, and is given us by the Bounty and Goodness of God, for our Use and
Benefit. The World in this sense is not in it self Evil, but only accidentally,
by Man's Abuse of himself, or it. 142 Considered in it self it is very Good,
and convenient to us. And as it is not absolutely in it self Evil, so neither
is it entirely to be Renounced; but being Good in it self, it may in some
measure be desired and enjoyed by us. Nevertheless through our own Corruption,
whereby we abuse the good Things of the World, it becomes accidentally the
occasion of most of our Sins, and of our Estrangement from God, our sovereign
Good. How the World becomes so. 143 In what manner it does Captivate us, and
draws us from God. So far therefore as it engages our Affections too closely to
it, so as to make us Inordinately, and Irregularly to mind it, and to neglect
our great Concern, the Business of Religion, it is to be Renounced and Rejected
by us. So long as we wear these Earthly Bodies about us, we are permitted the
Use and Enjoyment of worldly Things, provided in Things lawful, and in Degrees
allowable. But being our Souls, our principal Part, are soon to remove to
Heaven, we must chiefly set our Affections on things Above, and mainly
endeavor to attain 'em. 144 Secondly, Concerning the World, considered in its
Particulars, and those Temptations result both from the Good, and the Evils
thereof. The good Things of this World, Riches, Honors and Pleasures; the
Evils, Poverty, Disgrace, and Afflictions. And Things of a middle Nature are
the different Callings, Conditions, and Cares of this World. First, As to
Riches, these are not in themselves Hurtful, but Good, and are bestowed upon us
to good Ends and Purposes. And those who enjoy 'em, have great Advantages of
doing Good therewith, to others Comfort, and the Benefit of their own Souls.
Nevertheless Riches are a mighty Temptation, whether we consider Men as
Getting, Possessing, or as Parting with, or Losing of them. 145 First, In the
over-eager Pursuit of Riches Men do run themselves into many grievous Sins. As
also into many miserable Snares, so as to be hardly ever able to disentangle
themselves but of 'em. For as Restitution is necessary to Peace with God, so it
is extremely difficult to be willing, or able afterward to make. 146 Secondly,
And no less Temptations are those subject to, who do possess 'em. In the
Possession of Riches, Men are tempted to the highest Offenses against God,
their Neighbor, and themselves. But lastly, the great Sins of all are
occasioned by a Lothness to part with, and a Fear of losing 'em. 147 From a
lothness to part with Riches, arises Unmercifulness to Men. From the Fear of
losing 'em, Apostasy from God. In what sense, and how far Riches are to be
renounced. 148 In general, being they are not Evil in themselves, they are in
Cases only to be renounced by us, wherein we cannot without Sin Pursue,
Possess, or Retain them. As first, Riches considered in the getting, no Man
must so put his Heart upon 'em, as to Esteem 'em his chiefest Good and
Happiness. Nor must he labor after 'em with immoderate Care, so as to neglect
the great Duties of Religion and Devotion. Especially he must beware of
Enriching himself by unjust Means. 149 Particularly not by Sacrilege. Whoever
has unjustly gained any thing, must renounce it, by making Restitution thereof.
Secondly, Riches considered in the Possession, are to be renounced, by paring
off those Superfluities, which tempt Idleness and Luxury, Pride and Insolence,
and an Idolatrous Trust in Riches; and by bestowing it to Pious and Charitable
Uses. 150 And lastly, By suffering the Loss thereof, rather than Apostatize
from the Faith 152
LECT. XV.
What is meant by the Honors of this World, and in what Sense, and how far
they are to be renounced. What is meant by Honor properly and strictly. What
in the general Meaning of the Word. 153 First, Nobility, or Gentility. The
original Nature of Nobility, or Gentility. The Abuses it is subject to, and in
what Instances to be renounced. First, A Gentleman, be he of what Rank or
Quality soever must utterly renounce all that Honor, which pretends to place
him above the Laws of God, or Man, and beyond Reproof, or Punishment, when he
has Violated either. 154 Such a One is bound above others to be a strict and
orderly Liver, and upon his Failure, is more open to Reproof, and more liable
to be severely Punished. Secondly, As also that which exalts Persons above
their Brethren, to that degree, as to despise and oppress the rest of Mankind,
as if they were but a lower Rank of Creatures, and had not the same God to
their Father, Bodies formed out of the same Clay, and Souls as Excellent in
their Natures, and as capable of Improvements; as precious in God's sight, and
as much the Heirs of Heaven, as their own. 155 Thirdly, Such ought even to
renounce all Pretensions to Honor, who have degenerated from those worthy
Qualities, which Ennobled their Ancestors. 156 This the Determination of our
Savior, and his Apostles, in their Case. Lastly, and such ought to renounce
all Pretensions to Honor, amongst Christians at leastwise, who despise
Religion, and its chiefest Virtues, as Qualities beneath 'em. But if such are
accounted Honorable by vain Men, they are Despicable in the Eyes, both of God,
and of all wise and good Men. 157 The sum how far Paternal Honor is to be
renounced. Secondly, In what sense, and how far Civil Honor is to be
renounced; whether the Favor of Princes, or the Effects of their Favor, Posts
of Honor. 158 These kind of Honors and outward Glories, are dazzling and
bewitching things. But First, A Prince's Favor, tho extremely Valuable, when
it can be had without Sin, yet no Man must gain, possess or retain it by wicked
Arts, or sinful Compliances. Nor Secondly, the Effects of their Favors, high
Places, and Titles of Honor. First, In the obtaining of these, no Man must
grasp at that, which is above his Capacities and Abilities to manage to the
Public Good. 159 This Mischievous to the State. This Mischievous to the
Church. Nor Secondly, ought Persons of the best Capacities, and greatest
Abilities, be over-eager and importunate in their Suits and Applications to
those, who bestow them. 160 Thirdly, How far, and in what sense that Honor,
which consists in the highest Esteem and Reputation of the wise and virtuous
part of Mankind, is to be renounced. This is what the Wiseman calls a Good
Name, and is more valuable than Riches, or precious Ointments. 161 It is a more
peculiar Blessing than any the greatest Treasures, and procures better Security
to our Persons and Estates. It is a necessary Qualification to the Episcopal
Promotion. It is comfo^^able to a Man's own self. 162 And smells sweet in the
World. It renders a Person capable of doing Good in it. And active in Promoting
it. A desire of Reputation and Credit, is a thing Implanted in our Natures by
God. And to preserve a Reputation untainted and unsuspected of Evil, is a Duty
enjoined us by his Laws. 163 Nevertheless, even a Good Name is in some measure
to be Renounced by us, and the Temptations it gives us. As First, We must so
far Renounce the Honor that shall accrue to us from our good Works, as not to
make our own Glory the End and Reason of any good we do. 164 Secondly, We must
not affect, but renounce those Praises, which are above our Deserts. Thirdly,
We must beware of taking the Honor and Respects given us for any worthy
Performances, wholly to our selves, and of not transferring it to God, to whom
the Glory of all that is good in us, does properly belong. 165 Fourthly, We
must abhor making a Reputation for Religion, an Instrument only to our own
Advancement. But must use the Authority our Credit gives us, to discountenance
Vice, and to encourage Virtue in the World. 166 Fifthly, As valuable as is a
good Name and Reputation amongst Men, we must renounce all undue Means of
preserving it. Such are Duelling upon the account of Slanders, amongst the
great Ones. Going to Law thereupon, usual amongst common People. Lastly, We
must utterly renounce and forfeit the Esteem of Men, rather than incur the
Dis-favour of God. 167 Fourthly, How far that Honor is to be renounced, which
consists in the Applauses of the Vulgar, upon what they do account
Praiseworthy and Honorable. 168 This sort of Honor must be utterly and
absolutely renounced. Lastly, In what Sense, and how far we must renounce these
outward Expressions of Respect, either by Word or Deed, which are usually given
upon the account of any of the forementioned Honors. 169 First, No Created
Being, either Men, or Angels must suffer those Respects to be given them,
whether by word, or deed, which are proper and peculiar to signify our sense of
God's Majesty and Perfections. Women therefore must with Detestation renounce
those Blasphemous Complements, wherein Divine Perfections are usually ascribed
to them. Secondly, Every Man must renounce and refuse those Titles and
Respects, and Precedencies, which are not his due, but belong to Persons above
him. 170 Lastly, And must in Modesty, Humility, and good Manners, decline his
due in this kind; and must renounce the Entitleing of himself, and permit that
to others. Objections against receiving Titles of Honor, Respect and
Precedence, answered. 171
LECT. XVI.
What is meant by the Pleasures of this World, in what Sense, and how far they
are to be renounced. First, Rational Pleasure is very Excellent and Allowable.
173 But first, no Man must make mere Pleasure the End of his Knowledge. Nor
secondly, must that Satisfaction and Delight, which arises from the Sense and
Conscience of good and worthy Deeds, be so much, because we are admired and
applauded for it, as because they are really in themselves Virtuous. Secondly,
Sensitive Pleasure, which results from the suitableness between the perceptive
Faculties, and the Objects that affect them, is lawful. 174 These Pleasures
unlawful only when they become, Thirdly, Sensual. As first, when we prefer them
in our Judgments, or Desires, either before our spiritual Joys in God, or the
eternal Joys of his Kingdom. 175 Secondly, When a Man relishes no Enjoyments
like those of Sense. Thirdly, When he gluts himself, so as to surfeit on these
Sweets. And lastly, When the Deliciousness of these Pleasures causes him to
load and burden his Nature therewith, so as to render him unfit for the Duties
of his Calling, and Religion. Recreative Pleasures of a middle and indifferent
Nature. 176 The most Innocent thereof are to be sparingly used. 177 The Evils
of the World are Poverty, Disgrace and Afflictions. Poverty and Afflictions
instead of Temptations to Sin, and Hindrances to Virtue, do very often prove
Mortifiers to Vice, and the great occasions of a holy Life. 178 Nevertheless,
they are often great Temptations to many Sins and Impieties. First, It behooves
those, who labor under Poverty, or any kind of Affliction, to beware of
Impatience and Discontent. Secondly, Those, in the worst of Circumstances, must
not envy the outward Felicity of the Wicked. Thirdly, A Person that is Poor,
must be infinitely careful, least to Rescue himself out of it, he be tempted to
Fraud, especially to Stealing and Purloyning. 179 Nor, Lastly, must any think,
that because they are Poor, they are e're the more dis-engaged from the Service
of God, and their Attendance upon him in all the Parts of Divine Worship. In
what sense, and how far we must Renounce Disgrace, and the Temptations it gives
us. 180 First, The Callings of the World, and how the Temptations they give,
are to be Renounced. Every Man is to betake himself to some Business. It must
be such as Providence has fitted him with Abi^^ties for. And such he is
preparatively Called and Appointed to by God, with due Abilities. 181 To
whatsoever Calling he is appointed, he must employ himself therein to God's
Glory, and his own, and the public Good. First, All Persons must renounce such
Callings and Professions, as are directly sinful and wicked. Secondly, Such as
tend to the Hurt, not the Good of the Public. 182 Thirdly, All sinful Arts in
the most useful Callings. 183 Fourthly, All Levity and Desultory Skipping, from
one Calling to another. 185 Fifthly, Any Calling whatsoever is to be declined,
for which a Person is not Qualified, both by Education, Abilities, and
Inclinations. Especially Callings of great Importance, such as the Ministry.
186 Sixthly, Idleness in any Calling is to be renounced. Idleness not
allowable, no not in Gentlemen. 187 It is one of the greatest Temptations in
the World to Sin. And is it self a very great Sin. Lastly, No Man must Live
above his Calling. 188 Secondly, Amongst those Things of the World of a middle
Nature, the different Conditions and States of Men therein, are to be
considered. First, A Master has great Advantages of doing Good. But all that
Dominion is to be utterly Renounced amongst Christians, which treats Servants
no better than Slaves and Brutes. The State of Servants not in it self Unhappy.
First, It concerns every Person, who is to live by a Service, to avoid such,
where there is neither the Means of Religion, nor Restraints- upon Sin. 189
Secondly, In the most Irreligious Families a Servant shall happen into, he must
put on a steadfast Resolution to preserve his Innocence. Thirdly, The State of
Celibacy advantageous to Devotion, and in Times of Distress. This must be
renounced, when Persons cannot Contain. Lastly, The Married State has its
Advantages. First, All Solicitations from either of the Married Couple must be
renounced, which would persuade to sinful Compliances in times of Distress. 190
Secondly, And Engage too much in Worldly Cares. Lastly, The Cares of this
World, the last of those things pertaining to it, in some measure necessary.
First, It becomes Christians to renounce a Multiplicity of Cares. Secondly,
Every Worldly Care, so far as it does alienate our Affections from God and
Heavenly Things. 191 Lastly, All manner of Worldly Care, when advanced in
Years. 192
LECT. XVII.
Secondly, What Is meant by the wicked World, and how far, and in what sense we
are to renounce it. Thereby is meant such as make it their Business, like that
wicked One, the Devil, to tempt others to Sin. 193 First, We must renounce that
Diabolical Wickedness of becoming Tempters our selves of other Persons. It is a
terrible thing, to have been an Instrument of another's Damnation. 194 It is an
Injury to Men's Souls, in some Cases hardly ever, in others impossible to be
repaired. Secondly, We must renounce to Conform our selves to wicked Men, when
they shall Tempt us. viz. First, By their evil Examples. Examples have the
greatest Influence upon us; especially, 195 First, If Examples of Sin.
Secondly, If common, and many. Thirdly, If of such, for whom we have a great
Esteem. Fourthly, If of those of whom we stand in awe. 196 We must by all Means
renounce, and refuse Conformity to such bad Examples: For First, A Christian is
called out to Combat against the wicked Examples of the World, as much as
against any one sort of Enemy in his Christian Warfare. 197 Nay, secondly, to
Confront their bad Examples with an excellent One of his own. II. When they
shall Tempt and Entice us by their evil Company. The Company of the Wicked
extremely infectious. 198 Most of the Miscarriages of Men owing thereunto. This
makes Men Atheists, Libertines, Thieves and Robbers. Drunkards. Withdraws from
the Worship of God. Evil Company therefore of all things to be abhorred. I.
Young Women must shun the corrupt Conversation of young Men. 199, 200 II. All
Persons of either Sex, both Young and Old, as they will prevent the Infection
of evil Company, must take all possible Care to avoid it. 201 But, Thirdly,
when Employment and necessary Occasions draw Men forth into the World, they
must refuse to Conform themselves to the Manners of ill Company. First, By
discountenancing their Profaneness and Riot. Secondly, By diverting 'em by
useful Discourse from both. Thirdly, If all Methods fail, by openly Reproving
them. To do this Service to God we are particularly Listed in our Baptism. We
shall be much discouraged from this by Men. But have infinite Encouragements to
such Fidelity from God. 202
LECT. XVIII.
Thirdly, Flattery a great Temptation to Sin. The Ground thereof our own
immoderate Self-love. 204 This Flattery keeping Men ignorant of the good or ill
Qualities in 'em; thereupon the Good never come to Perfection. And the Ill that
is in Men does thereby grow Incorrigible. 205 First, In order to Renounce
Flattery we must Cashier every vain Opinion of our own selves. Secondly, We
must so far Renounce the Flatteries of Men, as to take it kindly to be
Reproved. 206 Especially the Reproofs of God's Ministers are to be kindly
received and regarded. Fourthly, Wicked Men Tempt others to Sin by their false
and fallacious Arguings against the Necessity of a Holy Life. 207 All which
wicked Reasonings we must fortify our selves against; as when they Plead,
First, That it is inconsistent with God's Mercy, for the Sins of a short Life,
to Condemn the Guilty to an Eternity of Woe and Misery. 208 Secondly, That the
Duties of Religion are hard Sayings which no Man can bear. Thirdly, That they
are made of Flesh and Blood, and that therefore sure God will not require Men
upon the Forfeiture of Salvation, if they do not, to mortify the Flesh. Lastly,
That God has set us in a World full of Temptations, and abounding with sensual
Delights and Pleasures; and that he therefore who has placed us in it, will not
command us, upon Pain of Damnation, to overcome those strong Temptations, and
to deny these Pleasures of the World. Fifthly, Wicked Men will add Kindnesses
and Promises to Oblige us to do ill Things, and on the contrary will much
discourage us, nay sometimes Threaten us to forbear our Duty. 210, 211 First,
Kindnesses must not corrupt us to Sin. Secondly, Promises must not bribe us.
Thirdly, Discouragements must not hinder us from discharging our Duty. Nor,
Fourthly, must Threatenings, or Frowns fright us from it. 212 Lastly, The evil
Customs, which have prevailed in the World, are a powerful Temptation to Sin.
Custom takes off the sense and fear of Hurt in the most Unchristian Practices.
213 A Christian must courageously and vigorously renounce, and withstand the
Force of all sinful Customs whatsoever. Such only as are Immoral are to be
Renounced. 214 The greatest Courage required to this Part of a Christian's
Warfare. Cowardice the Cause of Complying with the Custom of Duelling, or any
other Custom of Sinning. 215
LECT. XIX.
First, Thereby were anciently meant those pompous Spectacles, Plays and
Scenical Representations exhibited in the Roman Theaters. 217 Our Modern Plays
no less Inferior to 'em in Impiety, than in Pompousness. And having such a
malignant Influence upon Faith and Manners, ought never to be frequented by
Christians. 218 Secondly, By Pomps, in the sense of the Ancients, were meant
the solemn Processions of the Heathens in Honor of their Gods. The Idolatrous
Processions of the Papists, in honor of the Saints, answerable to these; And
must not therefore be joined in. Thirdly, By Pomps reductively, may be meant
the Revels and Drunken Riots of our Youth, at Wakes and Festivals. 219 These to
be abstained from. Vanity of the World, what? First, when Persons out-go their
Ability in Building and Furniture. 220 Secondly, It appears in striving for
Precedence. Thirdly, In affecting Titles above one's Quality, and to be
esteemed Virtuous above one's Desert. IV. In the vain Affectation of costly
Apparel and Ornaments: As, First, When Persons exceed what becomes their Rank
and Degree, in what they wear. Secondly, When they are proud of their
Ornaments. Thirdly, When they adorn themselves to undue Ends and Purposes. 221,
222 Lastly, When they spend too much time, and at unfitting Seasons therein.
Decency, according to what is suitable to Age, Sex, or Quality, the Rule in
this Case. 223
LECT. XX.
To know our selves, especially our natural Imperfection, a most useful part of
Knowledge. 225 The Flesh variously expressed. What is meant by the Flesh. 1. The
whole Unregenerate Nature of Man, Soul and Body. 2. The whole Man not as
created by God, but as he is now in the State of Corrupted Nature. 3. As
spoiled in his original Frame and Constitution, as despoiled of the Image of
God, and as inordinately tending toward the Creature. 226 The original Frame
and Constitution of Humane Nature, what. The Image of God, wherein Man was at
first created, what. 227 The Bent and Inclination of the Soul toward God,
what. 1. In the Unregenerate Nature the Original Frame and Constitution of Man,
wherein he was created, is broken. 228 2. The Image of God, wherein he was
first created, defaced. Lastly, the Tendency of all the Faculties, both of Soul
and Body, are toward the Creature. 229 1. To renounce the Flesh, is to be
renewed in the whole Frame and Constitution of our Nature, after the Image of
God. The Image of God must be restored as far as it can in this Corrupt State.
It must be renewed to a perfection of Parts, though not of Degrees. 230 2. To
renounce the Flesh, is to be converted in the whole Bent and Inclination of the
Soul toward God. 231
LECT. XXI.
The sinful Lusts of the Flesh, what. 232 The sinful Lusts of the fleshly Mind,
what. 1. When we are curious to know Things which are either hurtful to be
known, or not proper for Man to know. 233 2. When we do immoderately study to
be exquisitely skilled in whatever Humane Arts and Sciences, to the neglect or
contempt of Divine Knowledge. The Knowledge of our Christian Religion, as it
serves to nobler purposes, so ought it to be preferred to any other. 234 The
necessary Points of Christian Knowledge. 3. When out of Pride, Prejudice, and
Contradiction, to all sacred Truths, we set up our own carnal Imaginations, and
fleshly Reasonings against those spiritual Notions, and those mysterious
Articles of our Faith, which are delivered to us in Scripture. 235 This Humor
of opposing Reason to Revelation proceeds from mere Pride. This corrupt Will,
what, and how to be renounced. 236 3. The Affections, what, and how to be
renounced. 237 1. As they are misplaced upon wrong Objects. 2. As they are
disproportionate to the Love, Worth, and Evil that is in those Objects, toward
which it is lawful to be well or evilly affected in moderate Degrees. 3. The
Lusts and Appetites are such sinful Lusts of the Flesh as are to be renounced.
238 1. As they do desire undue Objects. 2. As they desire them in immoderate
Measures. Lastly, the inferior and bodily Powers, viz. the Affections, Lusts,
and Appetites to be renounced, as they rebel against right Reason. 239 The
Business of Religion is to reduce Man, as near as possible, to his primitive
State of Innocence and Integrity. To this purpose of keeping under our fleshly
Lusts, it was that our Reason was given us. 240 3. To renounce ALL the sinful
Lusts of the Flesh, what. There must be no one fleshly Lust suffered to reign
in us. Our Business is particularly to oppose Lusts of Temper and Constitution.
This because it is a hard Doctrine to the Carnal Man, is much evaded. 241 The
Objection from Romans 7. cleared. We must renounce the Flesh, and all its sinful
Lusts, so as to have an Aversion, an Antipathy in our Hearts thereunto. This
the hard Part. 242, 243 The reason of having enlarged so much upon this one
Article of renouncing the Devil, etc. 244.
LECT. XXII.
Articles of Christian Faith of what Nature. The whole Bible the Object of a
Christian's Faith, both the Old and New Testament. 259 Some Instances of such
Truths. What it is to believe those Truths, so as to make us capable of Life
and Happiness. 261 Our Belief thereof must be operative and practical. Such was
the Faith of Abraham, and of all the Saints. And such an operative and
practical Principle is Faith, whenever the things believed are of great
Importance or Concernment to us. 262, 263. 2. To believe savingly, we must
apply our selves to Jesus Christ, to intercede with God the Father for our
gracious Acceptance. What to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.
1. To believe them All does import, that we must assent to all and every one of
those great Articles of Christian Doctrine contained in the Apostles Creed. 264
Such as tend to destroy a good Life, and send us to other Mediators than
Christ, to intercede with the Father for its Acceptance, no Articles of
Christian Faith. 2. To believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, is to
be fully persuaded of all, and of every of those single Truths contained in
each of those Articles. 265 A Heretic may be such by believing only of one of
those Truths contained in the Article. 266
LECT. XXIII.
1. What it is to obey God's Holy Will and Commandments. The Nature and
Measures of Christian Obedience. 267 1. Our Obedience must be sincere, by being
a true and undissembled Service of God, opposite to all Hypocrisy, or a false
and feigned pretense of obeying him, when in truth we serve our own selves,
does not forbid us all intending our own Advantage in the performance of his
Commandments. 268 But, 1st. That man's Obedience is insincere, who together
with his Intention of serving God, joins another Intention of serving Sin.
2dly, When he designs some temporal Ends in the practice of Virtue, as much, or
more, than he intends God's Service. 2. Evangelical Obedience must be entire,
viz. 1st. The Obedience of the whole Man; that is, in the first place, of the
Mind and Understanding. 2dly, of the Will. 3dly, of the Affections. 269, 270
This the distastful part; and therefore endeavored to be shifted off. 271
2dly, It must be an Obedience to the whole Law. This endeavored to be evaded
by Excuses; But in vain. 3dly, What it is to walk in the same all the days of
our Lives. 272 God will not endure a constant Revolution of Sin and Repentance.
273 The difference between Evangelical and a Legal Obedience. This difference
not so great, but that our wilful and chosen Sins will put a Bar to our
Salvation. 274 Some Sins are directly and expressly wilful. Some indirectly and
interpretatively. 275 But the difference is, 1st. that those who sincerely and
entirely obey, shall not be called to an account for unchosen and involuntary
Sins. The first cause of an innocent Involuntariness, Ignorance of our Duty.
Provided it be not wilful. 2d. Inconsideration excuses, 1. When through
surprise. 276 2. When through natural weariness, and the length and strength of
a Temptation. Lastly, When by the violent discomposure of our thinking Powers,
our Minds are so disturbed, that we cannot think what we do. Ignorance and
Inconsideration excuse not those Sins, 1. which we have time to understand and
observe; nor, 2. Crying Sins; nor, 3dly, Those we do not endeavor against; nor
lastly, which we are not sorry for. 277 The 2d. difference between Legal and
Evangelical Obedience, That our wilful and more heinous Sins when repented of,
through the Mediation of Christ, according to the Terms he has obtained for us
in the Covenant of Grace, shall be forgiven us. Remission of Sins upon
Repentance, the great Doctrine of the Gospel. Repentance will be accepted to
our pardon, for our unknown or secret Sins, whether wilfully, or unwillingly
committed, but now forgot, though generally repented of. 2. For our most known
and wilful Sins, if particularly repented of. 278 And in case of Injury to Man,
if Restitution be made. Of high Dishonor to God and Religion, if that be
repaired by an eminent Repentance. The sum of Evangelical Obedience. 265 The
sum also thereof, according to Dr. Hammond. 266
LECT. XXIV.
That in the Covenant of Grace, we are restored to a State of Salvation. How we
brought our selves into a state of Misery before. How by the Covenant of Grace
we are put into a state of Security, if we please. 268 That by the Mediation of
Jesus Christ it was, that we obtained such a gracious Covenant, whereby we are
restored to a state of Salvation. 269 The infinite Care of God the Father to
call us into it. 271 The Ever-blessed Son of God no less intent upon this
blessed Work. How mightily he importuned us to come into this state of
Salvation. He has left a Succession of Ministers behind him to do the like.
This great matter of Thankfulness, whether we consider, 1. The extraordinary
Advantage of having God in Covenant with us. 272, 273 Or, 2. Our singular
Happiness therein, above the fallen Angels, or the rest of Mankind. 274
LECT. XXV.
Baptism, what. 1. An outward Rite of our Savior's own Appointment, for the
solemn Admission of Persons into the Covenant of Grace. 276 To have some
outward Rites and Solemnities in Religion, agreeable to the Frame and
Constitution of Humane Nature, as being most apt to receive Impressions from
sensible things. This especially requisite in the admission into Religious
Societies and Covenants. The Israelites were initiated both by Circumcision and
Baptism. 277 The Heathens were initiated into their Mysteries by Purgations or
Washings. Our Savior chose the latter, as what would be acceptable to both
Parties. Especially as more significative of Christian Purity. And this he has
enjoined, as indispensibly necessary to our Initiation into the Covenant of
Grace. 278 Baptism appointed the Rite of Admission into the Covenant of Grace,
for the better Confirmation and Assurance of its Terms, the Promises on God's
part, and the Conditions on ours, it being thus mutually and interchangeably
Sealed to betwixt God and us. 279 It gives great Assurance of mutual
Performances barely to be in Covenant together. 280
LECT. XXVI.
The vast Obligations lying upon us, both from the Mercies of God, and our
Baptismal Vow, to perform the Covenant of Grace. The Obligations thereunto,
first, as Members of Christ's Church. 282 The Jews chose from amongst the
Nations of the Earth to serve God. 283 Christians chose both from amongst Jews
and Gentiles, to a more peculiar Holiness. 284 2. As Children of God. Children
are bound to the strictest Obedience to their Parents, as owing to 'em their
Being. 285 Children of God, as owing both Being and Well-being. 286 3. As
Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. Kingdom of Heaven not to be expected, but
by those who are faithful in their Covenant. 287 4. As having promised and
vowed in our Baptism accordingly, to discharge our Covenant with God. The
matter of a Vow sometimes not a Duty till vowed. 288 Sometimes antecedently
incumbent upon us, and such is the matter of our Baptismal Vow. It Is a
provoking Sin to rob God of what has been once Vowed and Devoted to him, though
of the former Nature. God's Anger observable upon such Occasions. 289 It Is much
more provoking to violate Vows; to perform which, we are antecedently obliged
by the Law of Nature. A Vow is much of the nature of an Oath, and therefore to
violate it is Perjury. 290
FINIS.
LECT. XXVII.
I. In order to perform our Baptismal Covenant, we must put on a fixed and firm
Resolution to discharge the same. 293 A Summary Recapitulation of the Doctrine
of our Baptismal Covenant. 294 The Nature of Holy Resolution, as it refers to
the performance of it. 1. It is a Determination of the Will. 2. It must be fixed
and peremptory, opposite to Fickleness and Inconstancy. 295 3. It is a Rational
Determination, opposite to Wilfulness and Obstinacy. 4. It is vigorous in the
Execution of its Vows and Promises. 5. Speedy. 296 6. It is vigorous and speedy
in the Execution of All those Vows and Promises made in Baptism. 7.
Notwithstanding all Opposition to the contrary. Lastly, It must be Public and
Declarative. 297 And solemnly made at Confirmation. A Resolution so formed will
go a great way toward the performance of our Covenant with God. 298 It will
effectually baffle the Devil. The Flesh. The World. Especially when solemnly
Ratified and Confirmed. 299 II. Our Resolution to be faithful in our Covenant
with God, must be made not in Confidence of our own Strength, but of God's
Grace and Assistance. 300
LECT. XXVIII.
The whole Nature of Man depraved. 302 Understandings. Wills. Affections. Lusts
and Appetites. Christ has purchased sufficient Grace to renew us throughout.
What the Divine Assistance is. 303 The Measures of it proportionable to the
necessity of the Church. Extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit in the first Ages.
304 Ordinary in succeeding Times. Even the ordinary Assistances extensively
very large: So as to repair all the Powers of Nature depraved by Sin. 305 And
Intensively very powerful to renew our corrupt Natures. 306
LECT. XXIX.
The full meaning of Prayer. 309 Prayer a most effectual Means of performing
our Covenant. 1. As it morally disposes us to be obedient unto God. 2. As it
naturally enforces us to be faithful to him. 310 That there are Praying
Hypocrites, is by virtue of Antinomian Principles. 311 3. As it will certainly
procure the Divine Assistance. 312
LECT. XXX.
Children of Believing Parents have a Right to be baptized, proved from 1 Cor.
7.14. 314 May be proved also from several other Topics. 1. Because Infants
were initiated by Circumcision into the Evangelical Covenant made with Abraham.
The Covenant made with Abraham, the same in Substance with the Second made with
Adam. 316 And the same in a more imperfect Edition of it with that made with
Christ. As he was cut off from the Covenant, who was not circumcised; so that
Person is to be excluded the Church, who is not baptized. 317 2. Because they
were initiated both by Circumcision and Baptism into that legal one delivered
by Moses. That they were admitted by Circumcision indisputable. 318 That they
were also by Baptism asserted both by Scripture, And by Jewish Writers. 319
III. Because our Savior adopted the Jewish Rite of Baptism, for the Sacrament
of Initiation, without excluding Children from being baptized. The Force of
this Argument. 320 IV. Because in all probability Infant Baptism was practiced
by the Apostles. 321 V. Because it was very agreeable to the End and Reason of
Baptism, and the Nature of the Covenant of Grace, that Infants should be
baptized into it. Infants not incapable of entering into Covenant with God,
proved from Deuteronomy. 29. As also from the Nature of the thing. They are capable of
having Privileges conferred upon them. 322 And of being bound to Conditions.
VI. Because it is a great Advantage to Infants to be baptized. First, On the
account of enjoying thereby such inestimable Privileges. 323 Secondly, On
account of their being engaged thereby so early in the Service of God. 324
LECT. XXXI.
I. The Importance of the Terms Godfathers, and Godmothers. II. The Nature of
their Office. 327 First, It is not only as a Proxy to speak for the Child in
Baptism. But it imports withal a Security given to God, and his Church, that
the Child shall be instructed in his Baptismal Covenant. 328 Secondly, It is
the Office of these Sureties to admonish the Child to live according to his
Baptismal Engagements. Thirdly, And to take care that at Years of Discretion,
the Child should take his Vow upon himself before the Bishop in Confirmation.
329 III. The Reason the Church has to require Sureties. It is for the better
Order and Decency of the Administration, that some should be the Mouth of the
Child. 330 It is of concernment to the Church, that Security be given, that
every one who is admitted a Member into it, should live to the Reputation and
Interest of it. This is what Societies, whose Honor and Interest is of
infinite less consequence, do daily require. 331 That of Parents not sufficient
without Collateral Security. The requiring of this as reasonable now, as in the
Primitive Times. This Charge no unreasonable Imposition at any time, being
little more than what is required from one Christian to another in common
Charity at all times. 332
LECT. XXXII.
IV. A further Justification of the use of Godfathers and Godmothers. It is a
sufficient Justification of any Ecclesiastical Institution, that it be
reasonable, though not supported by any express Scripture. 1. The sole Authority
whereon to ground the Belief of the Mysteries of Religion, must be Divine
Revelation. 2. Both Faith and Practice, as to the Articles of Natural Religion,
and Moral Duties, grounded both upon the Word of God and right Reason. 335 3.
Religious Rites and Ceremonies left to the Reason and Discretion of
Church Governors to appoint. 336 I. That Christ gave Commission to the
Governors of the Church to institute such Vsages, as shall be for Decency and
Order, and the better Edification of the Souls of Men, proved from Scripture.
This allowed to the Governors of the Jewish Church. 337 The same Power
continued to those also who preside in the Christian. 339 To whose Ordinances
the People are commanded to submit. 339 Decency and Order in all Ages of the
Church, not otherwise to be provided for. II. The Appointment of Godfathers and
Godmothers, a most useful Institution to the foresaid Purposes of Decency,
Order, and Edification. First, If we consider the Nature of their Office. 340
Secondly, Those good Effects of it. 341 Which good Effects would be much
greater, were the choice of Godfathers and Godmothers made according to the
Canons of the Church. The Conclusion. 342
FINIS.
THE XXVIII. Lecture. Rehearse the Articles of thy Belief.
HAving heretofore Explained the General Nature of the Covenant of Grace, as it
is taught in the Four first Questions and Answers of the Catechism, I come now
to declare unto you in a more particular manner, the Terms and Conditions of
the same Covenant: Of which Conditions this is one, That we Believe all the
Articles of our Christian Faith. What these Articles are, you are here
commanded to Rehearse, and to give an Account of them, whenever you are
thereunto called. And to open the meaning thereof, there are Two Things
requisite to be made clear to you.

1. What is meant by the Articles of our Belief.

2. What is the Importance of this Word Rehearse: Rehearse the Articles of thy
Belief. What meant by the Articles of our Belief.


First, Our Belief, we call that whole Collection and Sum of Christian
Doctrines and Truths, which has been ever accounted by the Church of Christ
necessary to be believed by every Christian in order to his Salvation. And the
Articles of our Belief are every particular Truth contained in this general
Sum, Collection, or Body of Christian Doctrines.

This Abridgment and Sum, The Creed wherefore entitled to the Apostles.
is generally called the Apostles Creed. The Word Creed comes from the Latin
Word Credo to Believe; and this is so called, because it is a Body of Truths
necessary to be Believed. It is called the Apostles Creed, either, 1st. because
it was compiled by the Apostles themselves: Or, 2dly, because it contains the
Substance of the Apostles Doctrine gathered into one Abridgment, which was
dispersedly delivered in their Writings.

1. Because testified by the Ancients to have been written by the Apostles.
And first, there wants not sufficient Testimony from the Writings both of the
Greek and Latin Fathers, that the Creed was compiled by the Apostles
themselves. But it is not so proper, considering to whom I speak, to insist
upon this kind of Testimony; the Proofs of this Nature being to be brought from
Authors, whose very Names are unknown to you. And indeed my whole Design in
this Exposition being to deliver to you the plainest Truths, and to give you
for the same only Scriptural Proofs: I shall wave the first Reason of the
Belief's being called the Apostles Creed, and shall proceed to the

2. Because it contains the Substance of the Apostles Doctrine.
Second, which is this, That it is therefore so called, because it contains the
Substance of the Apostles Doctrine gathered into one short Abridgment, which
was dispersedly delivered in their Writings, and which alone is enough to give
it the Title of the Apostles Creed.

In the Holy Scriptures and Writings of the Apostles, we have Doctrines of
diverse kinds intermingled and interspersed one amongst another. Sometimes we
meet with Matters of Faith proposed as necessary to be believed by us, and
sometimes Duties both to God and Man necessary to be practiced. Sometimes we
have Considerations serving as means to direct us, and sometimes as motives to
persuade us to do our Duty. And this being so, it is not every Christian that
has either leisure or skill of himself to sort these several kind of Doctrines
asunder, much less to distinguish between many Matters of Faith, which are
Fundamental, and chiefly necessary to be believed, and other Points which are
only wholesome Truths, but not of principal consequence to be explicitly and
expressly assented to and confessed.

And now as God himself for the Ease and Benefit of his Worshippers, did
collect the Sum of Religious Duties into T^^ Commandments; which contain the
principal, and to which all Inferior Duties may be reduced; And as our Blessed
Savior gave us a short Form of Prayer containing all things fit for us to ask,
or God to grant; so did the Apostles themselves collect together into one
Abridgment and Sum, all those principal Points of Faith which are mainly
necessary, and of greatest consequence to be believed, and upon all occasions
openly confessed by every one that calls himself a Christian. And it was this
Abridgment, or Sum, as is highly probable, and as the best Expositors do
understand the Words, which the Apostle means by that Form of Doctrine that he
delivered to the Romans, Chapter 6.17. and which was the Form of sound Words that
Timothy had heard of him, 2 Timothy 1.13.

The Reason of their making such an Abridgment.
And the reason of their making such an Abridgment of our Faith, was no doubt to
guard all true Believers against the Heresies and Errors of seducing Teachers.
Even in the very Times of the Apostles themselves, did Satan and his
Instruments begin to sow the Tares of corrupt Doctrines in the Field or Church
of Christ; and there could be no readier way to discover and distinguish their
Pestilent Errors, than for every Christian to have a Rule of Faith collected
out of the Holy Scriptures, ready at hand whereby to try those other Doctrines:
To which Form or Pattern of Sound Words, as it is called, 2 Timothy 1.13. if what
they taught did not agree, it was easy for the most unlettered Christian to
discover their Falsehood, which without a considerable degree of Skill and
Knowledge in the Holy Writings, could not otherwise have been done.

And hence also it is, that the Creed is called Symbolum, in most Christian
Churches; viz. because it is the Sign and Badge whereby to know a true and
sound Christian, a Watchword to distinguish him from false Heretics that
creep in clandestinely to beguile unwary Souls, and a Passport in all
Christian Churches: For all these things does the Word Symbolum mean; and to
all these Purposes was the Creed made use of in the Primitive Church. For did
any Stranger come among 'em, they did immediately demand of him a Confession of
his Faith; which if he did deliver agreeable to this Form of sound Words, they
took it as a Sign of his being Orthodox, and not an Heretic; and it was a
Passport to him, whereby he might either remain amongst them, or have Letters
Commendatory from 'em to go in the Peace of God to other Churches of the
Christians.

And well may our Creed be accounted the surest Test and Touchstone of all
Sound and Orthodox Doctrine, there being hardly any Heresy and deadly Error
that has heretofore, or shall hereafter arise in the Church, which it does not
oppose or obviate: Nor any material Truth of Christian Religion, that concerns
either God or Our selves, that it does not hold out to us as necessary to be
believed; as will soon appear to you, if from this more general Account of it,
we do but proceed more nearly to view the Excellent Frame and Method thereof,
and the particular Articles of which it does consist.

And this, I say, if we do, we shall see it does contain all the most material
and weighty Truths that are necessary to be Believed concerning either God or
Man, and more we are not much concerned to know.

First, Concerning God, A Scheme of the whole Creed.
we are instructed in the Knowledge

1. Of his Being and Attributes, which we are taught in these Words, I Believe
in God; for in the Notion of God are implied all those High Perfections which
we call the Divine Attributes.

2. Of the Three Persons in the one Godhead, which we are taught to know and
believe under these Three Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

3. And we are instructed in those Personal Works and Operations properly
attributed to each Person in the Sacred Trinity: This in the following
Expressions and Articles of the Creed. As to proceed in this General View and
Dissection of it.

I. To God the Father does originally belong the Creation of the World, and the
Exercise of a wise Providence over it; which we are taught to know and believe
in these Words, Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.

II. To God the Son does belong the Redemption of the World; that is, the
reducing from the Power and Dominion of Sin and Satan, to the Obedience of the
Father, that part of the World which had revolted from him, and so the Delivery
and Salvation of it from cruel Slavery and woeful Misery. To accomplish which
Redemption, we are taught,

1. In general, That he was a Savior; or one that both procured for us
Salvation, and instructed us, by revealing the Gospel, in the only Way and
Method of attaining it. This in the Word Jesus: And farther yet, in the Word
Christ, to the end he might save us both from Sin and Satan; that as a Mediator
betwixt God and Man he was invested with the threefold Office of Prophet,
Priest, and King. And to enable him effectually to discharge this threefold
Office, that he was himself both God and Man, God, which is the Import of these
Words, The only Begotten Son of God; an innocent and sinless Man, the Import of
these, He was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary.

2. In particular, we are instructed in each single Act pertaining to these his
Mediatorial Offices. And indeed it speaks the excellent Structure of our
Catechism, as I before observed, that it lets Instruction gradually into the
Souls of its Disciples, by giving first a general view of things, and by
descending afterward to inform the tender Minds of young Beginners in the
School of Christ, more particularly and distinctly in each of those Christian
Truths contained in the General Article. And this proportion is also observable
in the Form of the Creed, where, as short as is the Form of sound Words,
besides the Doctrine of our Savior's Mediation, and the Offices he underwent,
more obscurely coucht in the Words Jesus Christ; in order to our more distinct
Apprehension of what he has done for our Redemption from Sin and Satan, and for
our Reconciliation with the Father, we have the Nature and Acts of those
several Offices particularly taught us in the following Articles of the Creed.
Only,

1. As to the Nature and Acts of his Prophetic Office, they are not indeed so
expressly and distinctly taught us as those of the other two, namely His
Priestly and Kingly are in the following Articles; for the whole of that Office
being discharged in revealing to us the Gospel, as the only Way and Method of
attaining Salvation; and all the Doctrine concerning that being already couched
in the Words, I Believe in Jesus; or I Believe that Jesus has revealed unto us
the true way to Salvation, there is nothing needful to be farther expressed upon
that Head. But

2. As to our Savior's Priestly Office, there is not one Act which belongs to
it, that is not particularly and distinctly taught you in the succeeding
Articles of your Belief. His Priestly Office was to consist in giving a
Satisfaction, by way of Sacrifice and Atonement, for our Offenses, and in
going into Heaven, the Holy of Holies, to interceed, with the Father in the
Merit of that Sacrifice for the Forgiveness of our Sins. And now,

1. What belongs to his Sufferings, by way of Sacrifice, we are taught in these
Words; He Suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was Crucified, Dead and Buried, He
descended into Hell.

2. What pertain'd to his going into Heaven to incerceed for us there, we have
delivered in these, The third day he rose again from the Dead, He ascended into
Heaven, And sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty. Nor,

3. Are the Nature and Acts of his Kingly Office less particularly and
distinctly delivered in the Creed, than those of his Priestly. One main
Prerogative of that Royal Office, is, that from Heaven, He shall come again to
judge both the Quick and the Dead; and all the remaining Articles declare the
several other Parts of it. But these will also fall under another
Consideration, under which I shall mention them.

III. Then as to the Holy Ghost, the Third Person in the Blessed Trinity; to
Him it does belong to prepare, qualify, and sanctify with all necessary
Virtues and Graces, all whom Christ has redeemed and saved from the Dominion of
Sin and Satan, and cleans'd from the Pollution of their Natures caused thereby,
that they may be meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light. And this we are taught to believe that he does, in the Article, I
Believe in the Holy Ghost; for the Attribute Holy does here import His doing
this, His sanctiing of us. Thus does the Apostles Creed instruct us first in
all the more material and weighty Truths necessary to be believed concerning
God; And next, secondly, it does the same concerning the State and Condition of
us Men, both in this and the World to come. For,

1st. In general, we are taught to Believe that all our Hopes of Redemption and
Happiness on the Account of Christ's undertaking for us, depends upon our being
Members of His Holy Catholic Church.

2dly, In particular it teaches us the great Privileges we enjoy through him,
by being Members of the Church, both here and hereafter; namely, that thereby
we have the benefit of the Communion of Saints, and the Forgiveness of Sins;
and, that we shall have a Resurrection of our Bodies to Life Everlasting.

And thus I have given you to understand what is meant by the Articles of our
Belief.

Secondly, The Importance of the word Rehearse.
I am next to declare to you what is the Importance of the Word Rehearse.

Rehearse the Articles of thy Belief. And,

1. This Word Rehearse, possibly in its primary Design, 1. It primarily
signifies the Catechists Command to the Catechumen, to render him an Account of
his Faith.
may import no more than the Ministers Command to those that come to be
Catechis'd, that they give him an Account of what they do Believe concerning
God and his Church. And as the end of your Faith is the Salvation of your
Souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. So it is the Duty of such as are under our Care, first to
get as good an Understanding as they can in the Christian Faith, and then to
give an Account thereof with all readiness imaginable to us the Ministers of
Religion, whenever we demand it.

Thus the Apostle commands you to Obey them that have the Rule over you, and to
submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give an
account, that they may do it with joy and not with grief, Heb. 13.17. And if
the Pastors of Christ's Church must give a strict Account to God of your
Proficiency in Faith and Knowledge, it must be your Duty to make it appear to
us, how much you have profited under us. And thus it lies upon you to do, that
our Ministry may be easy and comfortable, and that we may have Joy and not
Sorrow in the Execution of it. Alas, for us to be discouraged in the Exercise
of our Ministry, is not for your Profit; for so long as we do it uncomfortably,
we cannot do it so effectually as otherwise we might. To do it with grief, that
it is unprofitable for you, says the Apostle in the same Verse. And would to
God you would believe it; But so it is, that there is nothing in the World
would be a greater Satisfaction to us than to see you, as in the Jewish Church
they did, sit at the Feet of your Gamaliels, your Teachers; than to see you not
altogether cumbred with Worldly Business, as Martha was; but to attend on your
Teachers with Mary, who chose the better part, as our Savior gave Testimony to
her, because she diligently sat to attend the Word delivered by our Savior,
Luke 10.42.

2. It may reductively signify the Churches Command to all Worshippers audibly
to recite the Belief after the Minister.
2. This word Rehearse, may be also reductively interpreted, as a Command of the
Church, that whenever you come to worship God, you should pronounce with an
audible Voice the Articles of your Belief, together with your Minister, thereby
publicly, and before the whole Congregation, confessing that you are
Christians, and that you Believe all that Christians should Believe to their
Souls Health; according to that usual Form of Words used by some before their
reciting of the Creed in Divine Service, calling upon the People to join with
'em in making Confession of their Christian Faith.

Now it is ordered by our Church to very good purpose, that the whole
Congregation should bear a share throughout the Common Service; and that all,
both Ministers and People, should with united Hearts and Voices, utter God's
Praises, and set forth his Glory in the Psalms, and Hymns, and Creeds. And it
is an admirable means to fix your Attention to the great Business you are
about; that you are not to be standers by, as it were, when God is glorified,
but are personally to echo forth his Praises. And it will also wonderfully
stir up, and quicken each other in your Devotion to him, when you are striving,
as it were, which shall celebrate God's Goodness and Mercies with the mightiest
Vehemence and humblest Reverence. And as I do not doubt but it does enliven you
in your Prayers to, and Praises of God, to have the Minister of Religion
perform the Service with Seriousness, and a becoming Devotion; so I must
profess, that to see and hear some devout Worshippers heartily to sound forth
their Praises to God in the Congregation, has not a little enkindled a Flame in
my own Breast; so that to rehearse, and utter forth with an audible Voice the
Glorious Excellencies of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in every one of
the Psalms and Hymns, is a thing very much becoming every Christian.

But especially every one of you should openly rehearse and profess his Belief,
together with the Minister, as often as we are called upon to it in Divine
Service. We are to pray not only for Our selves but for Others; for we may be
benefited not only by our own, but by others Prayers: But every one must
Believe for himself, and shall be saved only by his own Faith; which is the
reason that whereas our Public Prayers are in the Plural Number, Our Father,
our Belief runs in the singular, IN Believe; and therefore no Man, that owns
himself a Christian, ought to be silent when the Creed is rehearsed in Divine
Service; but every particular Person ought to signify his firm Belief and
Assent to the same, by openly and solemnly rehearsing it together with Christ's
Ministers.

I say by openly and solemnly rehearsing it; for because that this Body of
Christian Truths ought in the most open and solemn manner to be confessed, our
Church has appointed that the Creed should not only be rehearsed and pronounced
by every particular Member of the Congregation, so often as it occurs in Divine
Service; but also that it should be done standing. In the Creed, Libertas
Ecclesiast. p. 458
we do professedly (says the Learned Faulkner) acknowledge the Three Persons in
the Glorious Trinity to be the only true God, and our only Lord; and a standing
posture well becomes a Servant in his professed owning and attending upon his
Master: We openly declare every one for himself, in the Words, I believe, the
Ground of our Christian Hope and Comfort, that in believing in the Father who
made the World, and in the Son who Died and Rose again, Ascended, and shall
judge all Men, and in the Holy Ghost, that we have Expectation in the Church of
God, and the Communion of Saints, of obtaining Forgiveness of Sins, a
Resurrection, and Everlasting Life, and do also acknowledge all these Articles
of the Christian Faith: And a standing Gesture is very suitable to any solemn
Declaration of our Minds in Matters of moment and concernment. And as the open
Profession of Faith includes a steadfast Resolution to continue firm in the
Acknowledgment of the Christian Doctrine, this in particular is so properly
signified by the standing Gesture, that standing to a thing, Deuteronomy. 25.28. and
in several other Scriptures, signifies an asserting and professing a thing with
Resolution; so that you ought both openly, with an audible Voice, to Rehearse
your Belief after the Minister in Divine Service; And to signify your steadfast
Resolution to stick to your Faith, and to remain unshaken in such your Belief,
you ought to stand up when you so Rehearse and Profess it.

3. But yet farther, 3. It may remotely imply God's Command to all Christians
to confess him upon other occasions.
This Word Rehearse may be interpreted remotely to imply that other great
Christian Duty which may lie upon you; and that is frankly and openly to own
the Belief and Persuasion of any, or all these Christian Truths, when at any
time there shall be occasion given for such a Declaration, though it may be to
the hazard of your Lives, and the loss of Goods, Livelihood, or all that is
dear to you; or though you shall suffer the utmost Scorn, and the Reproaches of
profane and wicked Men for such your Belief and Confession. And the two great
Occasions for such a Declaration are, when the Superior Powers shall demand
it, in order to persecute you for the same; or when, through a general
Indifference to Religion, impious and wicked Men do take courage to run it
down; and that the more, for the Cowardice of the Orthodox Professors of it, as
if afraid, or ashamed to own it. But upon both these, or on any other occasion,
you must be ready always to give an Answer to every Man that asks you a
reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear, 1 Pet. 3.15.

First, Now as to the first of these Occasions, the Primitive Christians were
often put upon this Duty of openly and publicly Confessing their Faith, when
such a Confession was certain to bring upon them the severest Torments that the
Malice of Men or Devils could inflict. For the then Princes of the World were
Pagans, and Worshippers of false Gods, who would often force the Christians,
either to Renounce their Belief in the one True God, the God of Israel, and in
Christ his only Begotten Son; or they would tear their Flesh with burning
Pincers, would throw 'em to be devoured by wild Beasts, rend their Limbs
asunder on Racks, and put 'em to infinite other Tortures: But such was the
Constancy of those Christians, that they would not through Fear dissemble their
Faith, but would openly before the Heathen Tribunals declare their Belief of
the True God, and of Jesus Christ his only Begotten Son. And this their
Declaration of their Christian Faith, in the Language of the Scripture, and of
the Ancient Church, was called a Confessing of Christ; and the Persons that did
so, were entitled with the Glorious Name of Confessors. And thus to confess
Christ, by openly declaring your Belief in Him, and in God the Father, and God
the Holy Ghost; and likewise your Belief in any other the Articles of the
Christian Faith, whatever should be the danger in so doing, is expressly made
your Duty, Romans 10.9.10. and has Salvation promised as the Reward of it. If
thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine
heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, for with
the heart man believes unto Righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto Salvation: Where you see that an open Confession and Profession of
your Faith with the Mouth, is made as necessary to Salvation as to Believe it
in the heart.

Secondly, A second Occasion for a frank and open owning of the Great Truths of
Christianity, is when through a general Indifference to Religion, impious and
wicked Men do take Courage to run it down, and that the more for the Cowardice
of the Orthodox Professors of it, as if afraid, or ashamed to own it. God be
praised, it is not now made by the Powers that are above us in this Nation, a
Matter worthy of Death or of Sufferings for any to own himself an Orthodox
Believer; yet so many are the profane and ungodly Persons, the Men of no
Religion abroad in the World, that they will scoff at those who seem to
believe, and dare to own the Principles of Christianity. And so few are those
who have the Courage to stand up in Vindication of the Truth (the Generality of
Lay-Christians, Gallio like, seeming to care for none of these things, and
thinking it only the Clergy's Business to contend earnestly for the Faith) that
the Adversaries to Religion are mightily emboldened thereby to bear it down,
deriding all serious Christians and true Believers, as a Company of credulous
and easy People, and applauding themselves as the only Men of Reason, and
Free, because Licentious, Thinkers.

But now whenever it shall be the Lot of any of you to fall amongst such who
will scoff at you for believing, and professing that you believe the Articles
of the Faith, you must boldly oppose 'em, and let 'em know that you are not
afraid, nor ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, nor to own your selves Christians,
Romans 1.16. And you must not through Fear, Bashfulness, or Cowardice, dissemble
such your Faith, lest God, if you deny, or dissemble your owning of him here,
should deny in the World to come his knowing of, or having any thing to do with
you, as he declares he will, Matthew. 10.33. You see in Matthew. 26.70. how Peter
being ashamed of his persecuted Lord and Master, and afraid for himself, did
deny his Savior: But withal you see how severely he smarted for it; for being
pricked at the heart with an extreme remorse of Conscience for such a base
piece of Cowardice, he went out, and wept bitterly, v. 75. And it was well he
did, or else he had perished everlastingly. So that to conclude, you must not
only rehearse, that is, give an Account of the Christian Faith to us the
Ministers of Religion; and pronounce it amongst those who are Friends to it in
the House of God; but upon all just occasions you must elsewhere, even in the
Face of its greatest Enemies openly declare and profess your Belief of those
great Christian Truths, and that when you are sure to suffer the severest
Persecutions and Reproaches for so doing.

This last I must confess is not so directly the meaning of the Word Rehearse
in this place* But if ever there were occasion to extend the Importance of it
to such a Sense, it is now, when the Confidence of Infidels in professing their
impious Principles, and the Cowardice of Believers in Confessing the True
Articles of their Christian Faith, is so extremely, and on both sides so
shamefully great.

And thus I have given you the utmost, that I conceive can be the Importance of
these Words, Rehearse the Articles of thy Belief; which may serve as a
Prefatory Discourse to the Exposition I design, by God's Assistance, to make
you of the Creed, upon the Explication of which I shall next enter.

THE XXIX. Lecture. I Believe.
COmmenting upon these Words, Rehearse the Articles of thy Belief, I have given
you, by way of Preface to the Exposition of the Creed it self, an Account of
its Authority; how that it is a summary Abridgment of the Christian Doctrine,
collected, as is highly probable, by the Apostles themselves; however
undoubtedly containing the most weighty and essential Points of Apostolical
Doctrine that are necessary to be Believed in order to Salvation. And then as
to the Importance of the Word Rehearse, I have told you how necessary it is 1.
that you should give a good Account to God's Ministers of what you Believe: 2.
That you ought openly and solemnly to pronounce your Belief every time you meet
together to worship God in the Public Assembly: Nay, and, 3. That you must
undauntedly confess, and own all these Christian Truths before the Face of any
Man, though you should incur the greatest Danger of Life, Livelihood, or
whatever is most dear to you, or expose your selves to the Reproaches of wicked
Men for so doing. And having thus by way of Preface to the Creed it self,
spoken what I thought necessary to its Authority, and the Confession you are to
make of it, I come now, by God's Assistance, to lay open before you the Meaning
and Importance of every particular Truth therein contained.

And that which does first offer it self to our Consideration, and will indeed
require a very large and full Explication, is the single Word Believe. Every
particular Article of the Creed, and every single Truth (as there are many)
contained in each Article, is to be Believed by us: It is therefore, I presume,
very requisite that we should with all possible Clearness and Exactness,
explain the Nature of Faith, and show you what it is to Believe to your Soul's
Health, before we come to consider the several Truths that are to be Believed
accordingly.

Faith and Belief are two Words that signify the same thing; Faith and Belief
synonomous Terms.
and so indispensable a Condition of our Justification and Salvation it is, to
Believe, that not to mention more Texts, Romans 3.28. It is said a Man is
justified by Faith: And, Mark 16.16. we are told in plain and express Words,
that he who Believes shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned. You must not therefore think me tedious, if in the Explication of this
Point, I shall be something large; since to Believe is a thing which you are
not only to do in reference to every particular Article of our Creed; but that
also as ever you will be justified and saved. And for the more full Explication
of this Point, I will do these Three Things.

I. I will show you in general what it is to Believe; together with the Effects
and Fruits of True Believing.

II. I will more particularly explain unto you the Nature of Justifying and
Saving Faith. And then,

III. By way of Inference, I will lay before you, wherein the Defect of several
sorts of Faith does lie, which we find by Scripture and Experience that many do
rely upon, but yet will by no means justify and save 'em. And,

1. I am to show you in general, What it is to Believe.

And to Believe both in the proper and in the common Meaning of the Word, is to
give Credit to the Report of another? Faith is founded upon a credible
Testimony.
And herein it is distinguished from those other Acts of the Mind, Opinion,
Experience, and Knowledge; that Opinion is, when one varies in his Judgment,
being not without some doubt, whether the thing may not be otherwise than he
thinks; Experience is, when one's own Senses tell one it is so and so; and
Knowledge is, when I gather from undoubted Causes and Reasons, that the Effect
is thus. But Belief, as it is more certain than Opinion; so it is founded not
upon my own Experience and Knowledge, but upon the Authority of some one else
who does relate the thing to me.

It is indeed thought by some, that to Believe, in the Language of the
Scriptures, which are the Words of plain Men, spoke to the general Bulk of
Mankind, does many times signify a full Persuasion of the Mind, whether
wrought within us by the Evidence of the Matter, or by our own Sense or
Experience, or by some strong Argument and Reason, as well as by some Credible
Testimony; and accordingly we Believe God's Being and Existence by the
strongest Evidences of Reason; but yet however, though the Belief of God's Being
be indeed a Knowledge that he Is; a Knowledge, I say, that we have from several
demonstrative Proofs and Reasons, besides what we have from the Testimony that
he Himself has given us of his own Existence; yet as the Testimony that he has
given us by Miracles, Prophecies, and his Providence, are properly his
Attestation to the Truth of the Article; so it is the nearest and the plainest
Proof thereof, and that upon which the Faith of the far greatest part of
Mankind (who do not much employ their Reason to search after Truth) is founded;
so that generally, as well as properly speaking, to Believe is to give Credit
upon the Authority and Testimony of another, that his Relation is true.

Human Faith upon Human Testimony.
And according as is the Authority and Sufficiency of him upon whose Testimony
we Believe a thing to be true, accordingly more or less is the Credit we give
to what he speaks. If it be only the Word of a mere Man which we have for the
Truth of a thing, we are not to Believe it as that which is infallibly certain;
for the wisest and best of Men are insufficient to give us ground to Believe
'em as infallible in what they deliver: The wisest of Men may be ignorant of
the exact Truth of Things, and so may be deceived themselves; and those that
are not the best, nor very honest, though they do know what they say, yet may
deceive others: So that the Credit we give to any Man living, can amount to no
more than a Human Faith, such as is fit to be given to Man; and we cannot
Believe infallibly what an uninspired Person shall say, as if it were
impossible it should be otherwise than he reports.

Divine Faith upon Gods Word and Testimony.
But if it be upon God's Authority, and upon his Testimony that we Believe a
thing, since God is of Infinite Knowledge and Wisdom, so that he cannot be
deceived Himself, and take that for true which is not; and since He is a God of
Infinite Truth, Justice, and Goodness, so that if he could, he will not deceive
any Man; since God, both upon the account of his Wisdom and Uprightness, is of
that Sufficiency and Authority, that He cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. whatever
therefore he does deliver, we are undoubtedly to Believe as infallibly certain;
and this is a Divine Faith, proper only to be given to God's Testimony and
Word. And this is to Believe in the Christian Sense of the Word. It is to be
undoubtedly persuaded, upon the Divine Authority, of the Infallible Truth and
Certainty of whatever God has delivered and revealed to us in the Scriptures;
particularly and especially it is to be undoubtedly persuaded of the Infallible
Certainty of those main Truths of Scripture, the Articles of our Christian
Faith, wherein are declared the only Method of Reconciliation betwixt God and
Man, through our Savior Jesus Christ, as well as the strongest Motives to a
Holy Life: And lastly, it is to be persuaded of these things in such a manner,
and with such Acts of the Mind, as is agreeable to the Nature of these several
Truths.

Divine Faith defined.
This is the fullest and plainest Description I can give you of the Nature of
Faith, or Believing, as including an account both of all those Objects, or
Divine Truths necessary to be Believed, and of all those Acts of the Mind
implied in Believing. But to make this Description clear, I will, in as few
Words as possible, open the several Parts of it to you.

1. To Believe is to be undoubtedly persuaded upon God's Authority, of the
Infallible Truth and Certainty of all that he has Revealed.
1. To Believe, is to be undoubtedly persuaded, upon the Divine Authority, of
the Infallible Truth and Certainty of all that God has revealed. A Christian
must not entertain the least Doubt of the Truth of any Divine Revelation; for
this is to conceive meanly and unworthily of God, as if He were such a one as
our selves, either one that were Ignorant, and did not exactly know the Truth
himself of what he spoke, or one that were Insincere, and did design to delude
us into a false Persuasion of Things; but far be it from us to conceive any
such thing of GOD. There is nothing past, present, or to come; there is nothing
in the Nature of Things that he does not most clearly know and apprehend; there
is not any Creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked
and open before the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. So that let
his Revelations and Divine Mysteries seem never so Improbable to us, or be
never so Incomprehensible, and beyond the reach of our Human Understandings to
fathom, we may notwithstanding assure our selves they are such as they are
delivered, since the Infinite, the Omnipotent, the Almighty GOD says it. Nor is
he Insincere, and one that would delude us into a false Persuasion of Things:
No; it is the Devil that is Insincere, and the Father of Lies, John 8.44. but
it is impossible that God should lie, Heb. 6.18. And to what end should he
deceive us, by making us to Believe a Falsehood? What Interest can he serve by
it? Our being deceived, can in no wise profit Him. False and deceitful Men do
indeed love to delude others to Believe Errors and Falsehoods, thereby to make a
Prey of 'em; but we can in no wise advantage God by our Misperswasions. So that
we are in such manner to give Credit to all Divine Revelations, even the most
Incomprehensible Mysteries of the Gospel, and Articles of Faith, as to be fully
persuaded it is impossible but the Divine Declarations concerning these things
are true, since God has Revealed 'em to us. But,

2. They are those Revelations, and those only, 2. Those Revelations, and those
only, which are contained in Scripture, are the proper Objects of Divine Faith.
N^^ such Doctrines as are derived only from unwritten Tradition. Nor any
particular Propositions concerning my self, as my own particular Election, and
Justification in special.
which are contained in the Holy Scriptures, that we are thus to Believe. We
are not to Believe with a Divine Faith, and as founded upon the Testimony of
God, such Doctrines and Tenets as being derived only from Unwritten Tradition,
have no Foundation in Scripture: From which corrupt Fountain alone it is, that
the Church of Rome has all those Articles of her Creed wherein she differs from
Us: And with respect to which we may truly say of the Romish Doctors, as our
Savior did of the Pharisees, That in vain do they Worship God, teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men, Mark 7.7.

Nor are the Objects of a Divine Faith any particular Propositions concerning
our selves in special, as some think, who define Faith to be a firm Assent not
only to all things which God has revealed to us in his Word, Fides est non
tantum certa notitia, qua firmiter assentior omnibus, quae Deus nobis in verbo
suo patefecit, sed etiam certa siducia, a Spiritu sancto per Evangelium in
cord meo accensa qua in Deo acquiesco, certo statuens, non solum aliis, sed
mihi quoque remissionem peccatorum, aeternam justitiam, and vitam donatam,
idque gratia ex misericordia Dei, propter unius Christi Meritum. Cattches.
Heidelbergens.
but also a certain Assurance kindled in the Heart by the Spirit of God through
the Gospel, whereby I put my full trust in God, being assuredly persuaded, that
not only to others, but to me in particular, Remission of Sins, Justification,
and Eternal Life, are bestowed, and that freely through the Mercy of God, for
the Merits of Jesus Christ. And agreeably hereunto do our Antinomians teach
their Disciples, That saving Faith is nothing but our Persuasion, or absolute
concluding within our selves, That our Sins are pardoned, and that Christ is
ours.

But this is a most false and dangerous account of Divine Faith; False, because
God has nowhere in Scripture told any Man amongst us, that he in particular is
Justified, and shall be certainly Saved: And Dangerous also, because it tends
to nourish Presumption in Men's Hearts, and to make 'em Believe better of their
State than it is. God does indeed declare in his Word to all Men, in General
and Conditional Terms, Mark 16.16. That whosoever believes shall be saved;
and, That Blessed are they who keep his Commandments, that they may have right
to the Tree of Life, Rev. 22.14. And all Christians are to examine themselves
whether they be in the Faith, and to prove their own selves, 2 Cor. 13.5. and
if upon strict search he finds himself to have Repented thoroughly, to have
Believed practically, and to have Obeyed sincerely, he may have strong Hopes
that his Sins are pardoned, and his Righteousness through Christ accepted
(only, because the Heart is deceitful above all things, so that no Man knows
it, Jer. 17.9. Let him be careful he does not deceive himself with false shows
of Faith and Repentance; and let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest
he fall, 1 Cor. 10.10.) But as for a Divine Faith, which is a full Persuasion
founded upon the Testimony of God in Scripture, no Man can be said to have that
concerning his own Acceptance, because no Man has any Scripture-Revelation
testifying it to him in particular.

And if Persons of Antinomian Principles shall say, that the Assurance kindled
in the Heart by the Spirit of God, is a Divine Testimony to them, and therefore
may be sufficient to denominate such Assurance a Divine Faith; then it must be
granted by 'em, that the written Word of God is not a sufficient Rule of Faith,
as not containing all Truths necessary to be Believed in order to Salvation
(amongst which, they count this particular Assurance to be the chief) which
Persons of Protestant Principles will not own. Nor indeed can any so far
derogate from the Perfection of Scripture, as to say, that other Truths are
necessary to be Believed in order to Salvation, besides what are contained
therein, except it be such who are not afraid of those Words wherewith the Holy
Canon is closed, Rev. 22.18. If any Man shall add unto these things, God shall
add unto him the Plagues of this Book. So that those Revelations only which are
contained in Scripture, are the proper Object of a Divine Faith.

But whatever is revealed in the Word, a Christian must Believe.
And whatever is revealed in the Word, a Christian must Believe as true, for the
Authority of God who declared it such. And in the Holy Writings are contained
Declarations of Diverse kinds; some of less, others of greatest Consequence,
whereof the first need not to be so expressly apprehended; but the latter must
be both clearly Apprehended, and firmly Believed. A very great part of these
Scripture-Truths of Consequence to be Believed, are those various Precepts of
Holy Living, and Duties to God, our Neighbor, and our selves, declared in the
Gospel, as necessary to be discharged by us in order to Salvation. And it is as
necessary an Act of Faith as any, to Believe that our sincere Obedience to all
the Divine Commandments, is an indispensable Condition of Life and Happiness.
Again, in the Holy Scriptures, as we have Promises of inestimable Rewards, to
those who shall walk uprightly in the fear of God; and, on the other side,
Threatenings of the severest Punishments, and that to all Eternity, to all such
as shall persist in Rebelling against Him: So as to both these Promises and
Threats, we are to be undoubtedly persuaded of the Truth of 'em; and that God's
Veracity and Sincerity, in the delivery therein, is such, that not a tittle of
either shall fail.

But since neither the Fear of God's Threatenings, nor the Encouragements of his
Promises can prevail upon us in this our corrupt State to perform a perfect and
unsinning Obedience to all God's Commands; so that the best of Men will be
found Sinners before God, and will need a Mediator to compass their
Reconciliation with him; amongst all the Divine Revelations,

3. Therefore, 3. The Articles of our Christian Faith the chief amongst
Scripture-Truths necessary to be Believed, because, 1. Therein are declared the
only Method of Reconciliation betwixt God and Man through Jesus Christ.
and especially we are to be thus undoubtedly persuaded of the infallible Truth
and Certainty of those main and fundamental Truths of Scripture, the Articles
of our Christian Faith, wherein are declared the only Method of Reconciliation
betwixt God and Man through our Savior Jesus Christ, as well as the strongest
Motives to a Holy Life.

The Articles of our Creed do import (as has been already spoke, and shall
hereafter, by God's Assistance, be fully explained and proved) this comfortable
Scheme of Divine Truths; viz. That a God of infinite Perfection and most
Glorious Attributes, did at first create and give us our Being; and that the
same Almighty Father, has from the beginning, and will for ever exercise a
Wise, Just, and Gracious Providence over all his Creatures; that Man the work
of his hands, having rebelled against his Maker, God the Father did in his wise
and good Providence so order it, that His only Begotten Son taking our Nature
upon him, and being God-Man, should come into the World amongst us, and
afterward return to our Father which is in Heaven, to mediate a Reconciliation
betwixt him and us: And to the end his Mediation might be effectual to salve
the Dishonor done to God by our Revolt, and reduce us to our Allegiance and
Obedience to him, that this Second Person in the Glorious Trinity did take upon
him to discharge a Threefold Office; viz. that of Prophet, Priest, and King: By
the first whereof, he declared to us that Covenant, and those Conditions on
which God would receive us to Mercy: By the second, that of Priest, he made way
through the satisfaction he gave for the breach of our first Covenant, for the
Divine Goodness to receive us to Favor, according to the Terms of the second;
and does still interceed with the Father for our Acceptance in the performance
of such Conditions: And by his Kingly Office he so governs by his Holy Spirit
and Righteous Laws, those who abandoning the Kingdom of Satan, are admitted
into his Kingdom, the Holy Catholic Church, that they shall be made meet for
the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. And in the Execution also of this his
Royal Office, having by his Almighty Power raised all Men from the Dead, he
will come again to judge 'em according to their Works, forgiving the Offenses
of those who are penitent, and allotting them to an Everlasting Life of
Happiness, and dooming the Impenitent to an endless Life of Misery in another
World.

This in few Words is the main scope and purport of those great and fundamental
Truths of our Religion, the Articles of our Christian Faith, as they relate to
the Method of Reconciliation betwixt God and Man.

And the same are every one of 'em the most powerful Motives to a Holy Life, as
shall be hereafter showed: 2. The most powerful Motives to a Holy Life.
And therefore to be undoubtedly persuaded of the infallible Truth and
Certainty of these main Truths of Scripture, must in a peculiar manner be
incumbent upon us. All Scripture is indeed given by Inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good Works, 2 Timothy 3.16.17. That is, all the Parts of Scripture are more or
less serviceable to our Salvation; and therefore far indeed be it from a
Christian to entertain in his Breast a doubt of the Truth of any thing which
God has revealed in his Word. However this undoubted Persuasion, which is
necessary to constitute a true Believer, must in an especial manner be had of
the most important Truths; because more does depend upon our having a steadfast
and unwavering Belief of them than of others. The Belief of these is the very
Foundation of the Christian Life, and the distinguishing Character of a
Disciple of Christ; if therefore our Faith should stagger as to these, upon
every Temptation there will ensue a Fall, if not a Falling away, and a total
Apostasy from the Christian Religion. And therefore the Belief of these
Articles concerning the Transaction between God the Father, and God the Son,
with relation to Man, is made the great Condition of Man's Salvation. This is
Life Eternal to know, that is to Believe Thee the only true GOD, and JESUS
CHRIST whom thou have sent, Joh. 17.3.

4. To Believe, is to be persuaded of all Revealed Truths in such manner, and
with such Acts of the Mind as is agreeable to the Nature of those several
Truths. 1. It is firmly to assent with the Mind to all Scripture-Truths
indifferently.
4. And as to Believe, is to be undoubtedly persuaded of the Infallible Truth
and Certainty of Divine Revelations; so in such a manner, and with such Acts of
the Mind, as is agreeable to the Nature of those several Revealed Truths. For
why? The Nature of those Things of whose Truth we are to be persuaded, are very
different; and therefore it must needs be, that the Acts of Mind which cannot
but receive their stamp and modification from the Things Believed, must with
reference thereunto, be accordingly various.

As, 1. There are several Truths contained in the Scriptures, especially of the
Old Testament; which however they concerned the Jews whilst their Religion was
in force, are not of that great Concernment to us Christians: And therefore the
Belief or Persuasion that may suffice us to have in respect of these, or the
like, which are not of great Importance, is only a general firm Assent of the
Understanding, whereby we yield that these things are certainly so as God has
declared, because he who alone is True has spoke it, Romans 3.4. And indeed to
all Scripture-Revelations indifferently considered, and of what kind soever
they be, we must yield a firm Assent, because of the Authority of God declaring
'em to us.

2. It is to Consent with the Will to live agreeably to the Importance of
practical Truths.
2. But besides some things of lesser Moment, there are several Doctrines of
weighty Importance and Concernment to us Revealed in the Holy Writ, concerning
which, it is not sufficient that we only Assent unto 'em with our Minds that
they are true, but it is moreover necessary to give us the Title of True
Believers, that in reference to such Concerning Truths, we should withal give
up the Consent of our Wills, to live as is fit for Persons of such Persuasions.
Thus we are taught in the Gospel, That God has sent unto us his Only Begotten
Son, to declare on what Covenants and Conditions he will receive us to Mercy:
And that this same Jesus will hereafter come as a King in all Pomp and Glory,
to Judge both the Quick and the Dead, to pass Sentence upon us either of
Happiness, or of Misery, according as we have performed, or not performed, that
gracious Covenant he has made with us. These are some of those weighty and
important Truths contained in the Scriptures, and which in the Creed are
particularly proposed to our Belief; and these that we may be said to Believe,
and to be thoroughly persuaded of the Truth of 'em, it is not sufficient that we
barely Assent, and yield that they are true, but we must Consent with our whole
Wills, that we will live and act as those who are fully persuaded of such
Truths. That is, if we are thoroughly persuaded, that Jesus Christ, by being
Crucified, Dead, and Buried, has purchased Pardon for none other but those, who
abandoning their evil Ways, do in the sincerity of their Hearts endeavor to
please him, we shall consent to Obey God's Holy Will and Commandments, and to
walk in the same all the Days of our Life. And again, if we are undoubtedly
persuaded, that he will finally come to Judge both the Quick and the Dead,
according to their Works, we shall heartily Consent to conform our selves in
Thought, Word, and Deed, to his Holy Will and Pleasure. To be undoubtedly
persuaded of such Truths as these, which do so much concern us, does almost
inseparably carry in the Notion of it a Consent of the Will to live as may be
expected from such as are persuaded of the Truth of such Things; and a bare
Assent of the Mind that those Things are so, will not be enough to give a Man
the Title of a True Believer.

To Believe indeed in Propriety and Strictness of Speech, may seem to signify
an Act of the Intellect only assenting to the Truth of a Proposition: But in
the Scripture, Believing is a more practical Word, and includes a Compliance of
the Will with such Practices and Courses, as are consequent upon such Belief,
if hearty and sincere. And this is that which the Apostle, Romans 10.9, 10. calls
a Believing with the Heart, for with the Heart Man believes unto
Righteousness. And this was the Faith of those mentioned Acts 11.21. of whom it
is said, That many Believed, and turned unto the Lord: Not to instance here in
Abraham's Faith, of which I shall speak hereafter. So that, in short, the
Scriptural Notion of Faith, or Belief, with respect to those Practical Truths
revealed to us in the Gospel, is nothing else but a true, serious, resolute
embracing of Christianity; not only a being persuaded that all the Doctrines of
Christ are true, but a consenting and submitting to his Will and Commands in
all things: It is a Receiving and Accepting of Him as our Prophet to Instruct
and Teach us, and as our King to Govern and Order us in the whole course of our
Lives, as well as our Priest, on whose Satisfaction and Intercession we are to
Rely for our Acceptance with God; which brings me to speak of Reliance, a 3d
Act of the Faith we are speaking of. To proceed then,

3. Farther yet, there are very many of those Christian Truths, 3s It is to
Rely on Promissory Truths.
of whose Certainty we are to have a firm Belief and full Persuasion, which
carry in them the Nature of most precious Promises of excellent Benefits, to be
made good to us upon our Performance of such and such Conditions. And with
respect to these, our Belief and Persuasion is not only to be a bare Assent of
the Understanding that those Promises are true; nor yet a mere Consent of the
Will only to Perform the Conditions upon which those Promises are made; but
there must be moreover a firm and steady Reliance on God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ; an Affiance and Trust in Him that his Promises shall be made good to us
on the Performance of the prescribed Conditions. Such is the Belief of these
Attributes of God, His Goodness and his Mercy, his Power and his Truth; to
Believe, which is firmly to Rely upon him to help and reward us on the
Performance of our Duty, as being a God that is wonderfully willing, and one
that is equally able to do us good: Such again is the Belief, That Jesus is the
Christ, whom God the Father did send into the World to mediate a Reconciliation
betwixt Himself and us; and whom, that there might be no Impediment on the
score of the Divine Justice and Holiness, to his Receiving so Rebellious a Race
as Mankind into Favor again, he therefore gave to offer Himself a Sacrifice, a
Propitiation and Atonement in our stead, to Suffer under Pontius Pilate, to be
Crucified, Dead and Buried, that we might be redeemed from Death Eternal. To
Believe, which is to depend solely upon Christ's Merits and Intercession, not
on our own Righteousness, that God the Father will, upon our sincere
Repentance, receive us to Mercy, though we have been the greatest Sinners. And
such, lastly, is the Belief of the Forgiveness of Sins, of the Resurrection of
the Body, and of the Life Everlasting, which are Promises of so many good
things to us, on condition we shall forsake our Sins, and sincerely for the
future obey the Gospel. And to Believe these Articles, is to have a steadfast
Confidence in God, that accordingly through Christ he will forgive us, Raise up
our Bodies from the Grave at the last Day, and translate us into Joys
everlasting, if we shall repent and obey him.

We are not to Rely, nor to depend upon God's Mercies in Christ, Without our
Repentance and new Obedience; for this were not to Believe, but to Presume upon
Him; for he never made any Promises, no not through Christ, of accepting us
without our Amendment and Reformation; but upon our Amendment and Reformation,
we may undoubtedly Rely upon him, as one that is able, and one that is willing
to fulfill his Promises to us.

And this Reliance on the Promises of God, is that Act of Faith which is
called, Romans 4.20. a not staggering at the Promise of God through Unbelief;
and, v. 24. a Believing on God, a Believing in Christ, John 3.16. And such a
Reliance and Dependence upon God the Father for Mercy, through the Merits of
Christ his Son, appears in the Scriptures to be an Act of Faith more peculiarly
well-pleasing and acceptable unto him, in that it excludes Boasting, which the
Apostle makes very necessary to Justification, Romans 3.27. and expects all Good
from God's free Mercy in Christ, without any Reliance on the Merit of our own
Performances.

The genuine Fruits and Effects of Believing, are Victory over,
And thus having showed you in general, What it is to Believe, and in what Acts
of the Mind it does consist, it only remains, in order to complete this Account
of the Nature of Faith, which I have undertaken to give, that I speak in a few
Words of the Genuine Fruits and Effects of a True Christian Faith. The Tree is
best known by its Fruits, and in like manner is Faith known by its Works, as
St. James tells us, Chap. 2.18. And surely from what has been said, it will
easily appear to you, that your Faith, if it be complete in all the Parts of
it, will undoubtedly produce a total Change in the Nature, and Dispositions,
and Actions of that Person who does firmly Believe the Great Articles of his
Christian Faith. A steady Persuasion of such Concerning Truths, will not sail
in time to subdue all our Spiritual Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, and all that mighty Host of Temptations they will bring against us, to
force or entice us from our Obedience to God.

I. As to the World particularly, St. John does assure us, 1 John 5.4. 1. The
World.
That whosoever is born of God, overcomes the World; and that this is the
Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith. Now to be Born of God, is by
the Quickening lively Spirit, together with the Word of God, to be renewed and
changed in our whole Nature, Faculties, and Dispositions; so as to put off the
Old Man with his Corruptions and Lusts, and to put on the New Man, which, after
God, is created in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. And by
the World is meant both the Things and the Persons of this World, that would
entice us into Sin: The Things of this World are either Riches, Honors, and
Pleasures, (and they are commonly called the Good Things of the World,) and
these would withdraw us from our Duty, to use unlawful means to compass 'em; or
they are the contrary to these, viz. Poverty, Disgrace, and Afflictions, which
are usually styled the Evils of this World, and would force us to sinful ways
whereby to avoid 'em. And the Persons that make up the Wicked World, are those
evil Men, who by their Examples, Society, Flatteries, Arguings, Kindnesses or
Promises, or by their evil Customs, would engage us in sinful Compliances. The
force of all these various Temptations from the World, I have already laid
before you; and it is Faith we are here told in the Words of St. John now
cited, whereby he who is born of God will be able to overcome this World, with
all its Temptations. An undoubted Persuasion rooted in the Mind of the
Certainty of those Great and Powerful Truths of Christianity already mentioned,
will be able to pall and deaden our relish to these Pretended good Things of
the World; so that we shall not immoderately affect nor indulge our selves in
the Enjoyment of 'em; and the same full Persuasion also will most effectually
baffle all the Insinuations of wicked Men lying in wait to deceive us. Nor,

II. Will a thorough Persuasion of these great Practical Truths of
Christianity, 2. The Flesh.
be less efficacious to the subduing the Temptations arising from the Flesh,
that is, from our own Lusts and Appetites, there being no Considerations of
that force to oblige us to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live
Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World, as all the Articles of
our Creed, particularly the looking for that blessed Hope, and the glorious
Appearing of the Great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave Himself for
us, that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify to himself a
peculiar People zealous of Good Works, Tit. 2.12, 13, 14. A thorough Persuasion
applied home to the Heart by serious Consideration, that the Son of God did
Himself descend from Heaven, by wonderful and amazing Methods, to rescue us
from the Slavery of our brutish Lusts and Appetites; and that he will again
come in Glory, to Judge and Reward us for the Victory we shall gain over 'em,
are enough to work upon all Reasonable and Thinking Creatures; and nothing can
prevail with us to abandon our Lusts, if these will not. And,

III. Lastly, but above all, 3. The Dev^^.
the great Power and the glorious Effects of Faith are seen in the Victories it
will enable us to obtain over that Great Adversary the Devil. We had need to
put on the whole Armor of God, that we may be able to stand against the Wiles
of the Devil: For we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, a contemptible Enemy
in comparison, but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers
of the Darkness of this World, against spiritual Wickedness in High Places.
Wherefore St. Paul does warn us, to take unto us the whole Armor of God, that
we may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand: But
above all to take the Shield of Faith, wherewith we shall be able to quench all
the fiery Darts of the Devil. Ephesians. 6.11, 12. The Temptations and Assaults of
the Devil, which the Apostle does here so solemnly rouse us up to resist, are,
I suppose, the terrible Persecutions that Satan does in all Ages raise against
one part or other of the Church; and these, though dreadful indeed, and most
likely to overpower us, yet are conquerable by a firm Faith, Looking unto Jesus
the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who for the Joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, despising the Shame, and is set down on the Right hand of
the Throne of God: For if we consider him that endured such contradiction of
Sinners against himself, we shall not be weary, nor faint in our Minds, Heb.
12.2, 3.

So that, in short, the true and genuine Effects of Faith, are constant and
perpetual Victories against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and an
universal Obedience, notwithstanding any of 'em, to the Commands of God. And
therefore since so much depends upon a true Faith, that he who believes shall
be saved, Mark 16.16. And by the Grace of God we are saved through Faith, Ephesians.
2.5. It does infinitely concern you to examine your selves whether ye be in the
Faith, and to prove your selves, 2 Cor. 13.5. And the only way to prove the
Sincerity of your Faith, is by examining the forementioned Fruits of it in
your own Lives and Conversations, and by seeing whether it produces a good
Life. For this we may assure our selves, having the Authority of an Apostle for
it, Jam. 2.26. That as the Body without the Spirit is dead; so Faith without
Works is dead also. So that except upon examination you shall find your
spiritual Enemies in a great measure subdued, and an Habit of Virtue rooted in
your Souls, your Faith is not sincere.

THE XXX. Lecture. I Believe.
HAving already explained and laid before you the Nature and Effects of Faith,
or Believing, I might now proceed to the Consideration of those main
Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity summed up in the Apostles Creed, and
which are to be Believed accordingly: But since so great Weight is laid in the
Covenant of Grace upon Faith, that on Condition thereof we are said to be
saved: Sirs, said the Keeper of the Prison to Paul and Silas, What must I do to
be saved, And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved, and thy House, Act. 16.30, 31. since whosoever Believes in Christ,
shall receive Remission of Sins, c. 10 43. And (which has most perplexed
Persons Heads to understand the meaning of it, and from the misunderstanding of
which, the most Fatal Errors have ensued) since a Man is Justified by Faith,
without the Deeds of the Law, Romans 3.28. And being Justified by Faith, we have
Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. And lastly, since a
true state of this Doctrine of Justifying Faith, will, above any other single
Doctrine, excepting that of the Covenant of Grace, let you into the full
Understanding of the Nature, Texture, and Constitution of the Whole Christian
Religion: For all these Reasons, I think I ought not to dismiss this Subject of
Faith, without giving you a State of the Doctrine of Justifying Faith, and
without distinguishing betwixt it and other sorts of Faith, which will fail us
in the great Business of Justification and Salvation. And in order to the
Explication of so considerable a Point,

I. I will give you to understand what is meant by Justification.

II. I will then show by what sort of Faith we are accordingly J^nstified: And,

III. And, lastly, in what sense we are said to be Justified by Faith without
the Deeds of the Law. And,

I. I will give you to understand what is meant by Justification. Justification
defined.
And Justification is God's Adjudging us through Christ as Just and Righteous,
according to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, and his acquitting of such
from the Punishment of those Sins, of which, according to the Terms of the
First Covenant, there was no place for Pardon. To make this Description more
plain to you, I will a little enlarge upon it, and prove the several Parts
thereof. And,

1. There are Just and Righteous Persons since the Fall.
First, I say, there are those who even in this lapsed and fallen state of Man,
have the Testimony of God Himself, that they are Just and Righteous Men. Thus
Abel obtained witness that he was Righteous, God testifying of his Gifts, Heb.
11.4. And Lot is also mentioned in Scripture as a Righteous Man, 2 Pet. 2.8.
And Joseph, Simeon, Cornelius, and others are said in the Gospel to be Just
Men; and at the end of the World, the Angels shall come forth, and separate the
Wicked from the Just, Matthew. 13.49. Which supposes, that all those who shall be
saved, shall be Just and Righteous Persons.

2. It is according to the Terms of the Gospel, that any are such.
Secondly, Those who are thus Just and Righteous, are such according to the
Terms of the Gospel. Justice and Righteousness are to be measured according to
some Rule, in conformity to which Righteousness consists. Now this Rule of
Righteousness, according to which any Person living, ever since the Fall, may
be termed Just and Righteous, cannot be the Original Law made with Adam, which
required a perfect, exact, unsinning Obedience, a never offending in any one
Point: For if we were to have our Lives measured by such, not only the Wise
Man, Eccles. 7.20. tells us, That there is not a a Just Man upon Earth that
does good and sins not: But St. Paul has proved, both Jews and Gentiles,
that they are all under sin; and that there is none Righteous, no not one, Romans
3.9, 10.

But our Comfort and Happiness is this, That the First Covenant which exacted
from us an unsinning Obedience, The First Covenant now cancelled.
is now cancelled, and we have been admitted, in our Baptism, into a Covenant
of Grace; wherein a hearty and sincere Conformity to the Terms of the Gospel,
that is, a practical Believing of those Great Doctrines of Christianity summed
up in our Creed, A Covenant of Grace succeeds in its room: Evangelical
Righteousness measured by this last.
and a sincere Obedience, proceeding from such a Faith, to all the Laws of our
Lord and Master Jesus Christ, together with an unfeigned Repentance for such
Failures in Faith and Practice as we have been guilty of, shall be graciously
accepted. And this our Conformity to this Second Covenant, is that which ( Romans
3.22.) is termed the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith in Jesus Christ
unto all, and upon all them that Believe. And which, Phil. 3.9. St. Paul, in
opposition to his own Righteousness, which is of the Law, does style that which
is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. And
the reason of its being called the Righteousness of Faith, and the
Righteousness through Faith of Jesus Christ, is because such a Faith, or
through Persuasion of all those main Truths summed up in our Creed, concerning
the Methods of Reconciliation between God and Man, and the Belief of such
Motives to a holy Life, as those great Truths are, will produce such a
Righteousness in us; that is, will make us sincerely and heartily to obey the
Laws of the Gospel, to repent us of all our Sins, and to rely on Christ to
accept such a Faith, Obedience and Repentance. And the reason the same Apostle
opposes this to his own Righteousness, which is of the Law, is because of the
manifest difference betwixt the Perfect Legal Righteousness exacted by the Law,
and this Evangelical accepted in the Gospel.

The Legal Righteousness, Vid. Allen's Christ. Justif. stated.
as one Judiciously states this difference, stood in a perfect and indefective
Conformity to whatever God commands, or the Law of Nature required of Man: But
the Evangelical Righteousness stands in a hearty and sincere Desire,
Resolution, and Endeavor in a Man, to conform to all that God requires in
conjunction with Repentance for Defects, and in Affiance of God's Mercy through
Christ for Forgiveness. So that though the Best Man living does not perhaps
keep any one of God's Commandments in a Legal sense; yet the meanest sincere
Christian keeps 'em all in an Evangelical sense, that is, in sincerity of
Resolution and Endeavor.

And in this sense, Good Men are in Scripture said to keep God's Charge, his
Commandments, his Statutes, and his Laws. As for instance, it is said of
Zacharias, and his Wife Elizabeth, that they were both Righteous before God,
walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luke 1.6.
And therefore in the same sense, that is, according to the Terms of the Gospel,
not according to those of the Law, either the Law of Nature, according to the
Exactness of which, Adam in his state of Innocence was bound, or the Laws of
Moses, by which the Jewish Nation were obliged to live; I say, according to the
Terms of neither of these, but according to the Conditions of the Gospel, are
all the Disciples of Christ to be accounted Righteous.

Thirdly, 3. Justification is God's Adjudging those to be Righteous, who have
performed the Conditions of the Second Covenant.
And now Justification is God's Adjudging those to be thus Righteous, who have
performed the Conditions of the Second Covenant; that is, who have Believed
practically, Obeyed sincerely, and Repented heartily. To be Justified is not to
be made Just and Righteous; Persons are made so by Sanctification: But in
Justification, they are approved of by God as such, and adjudged to be so; and
this whoever considers the Scope of those Places of Scripture where this Word
is used, will find to be the Importance of it, and that it is a Law-Term, and
almost always used in a Judicial sense, and particularly that it is the Act of
a Judge acquitting a Person from Guilt and Punishment, in opposition to the
condemning him in either. In this sense it is used, Prove. 17.15. He that
Justifies the Wicked, and he that Condemns the Just, even they both are an
Abomination to the Lord: Where to Justify the Wicked, is to Acquit him of
Fault, or Guilt; as, on the contrary, to Condemn the Just, is to pass Sentence
against him as a Wicked Person. So in these Words, Who shall lay any thing to
the Charge of God's Elect? It is God that Justifies; who is he that
Condemns? That is, Who shall produce any Accusation against those whom God
has approved of? It Is certain that God has Acquitted them.

And according to this Sense of the Word, we shall in abundance of places sind,
that good, sincere, and faithful Persons, are said to be Justified, that is,
Approved of by God as Just and Righteous, or such as have performed their
Covenant with him. To this sense it is said, Luke 18.11. that the Publican went
down to his House Justified, that is, Approved of by God. And to the same sense
it is said, James 2.24. That by Works a Man is Justified. That is, upon a
conscientious Discharge of the Duties required of us in the Laws of the Gospel,
shall a Man be Approved of, and Adjudged by God as a Just and Righteous Person.
But,

4. That any are so Adjudjudged as Righteous, it is through Jesus Christ.
Fourthly, That any the most Righteous and Just Men, are, upon a practical
Faith, a sincere Obedience, and an unseigned Repentance, thus Approved and
Adjudged by God as Just and Righteous Persons, is through Jesus Christ, or by
virtue of his Mediation with the Father, that we should be Accepted upon such
Terms, and that our Righteousness should be measured according to the Rules of
the Gospel. For Man having broke his Covenant with God, and become so depraved
in all the Faculties and Powers of his Nature, that he could no longer live up
to the strictness of it, then did the Son of God mediate with the Father for a
disannulling of all former Covenants impossible to be performed, and for the
substituting of a more gracious Covenant in their room: For which reason, it is
said, That Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a
Curse for us, Gal. 3.13. And that he Blotted out the Hand-writting of
Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of
the way, nailing it to his Cross, Col. 2.14. and that He is the Mediator of a
Better Covenant, Heb. 8.6. In short, the Case is this:

All Mankind having Rebelled against God, and by their Breach of Covenant with
Him, made it impossible for 'em to be Justified by that Original Law of
Righteousness, which required an Unsinning Obedience; and whilst Vnjustified,
they must of necessity be in a State of Damnation; that, to the Honor of God's
Government, his Justice might be satisfied for the Violation of his Laws; and
yet that we might be reinstated in a Capacity of being Justified and Saved by
virtue of a more Gracious Covenant consisting of Terms and Conditions
performable by us; our Savior Jesus Christ did Satisfy for our
Transgressions, and, moreover, Purchase with the Price of his Most PRECIOUS
BLOOD, such Terms and Conditions for us, as, by His Grace and Assistance we
might be able to perform; and upon such Performance, God being always ready to
Approve of us, and to Judge us as having Obeyed his Gospel; Therefore it must
be, that through Jesus Christ it is, that God does accordingly Justify and
Adjudge us as Righteous Persons.

And therefore in this sense it is true, and none other, that Christ's
Righteousness is imputed to us. Christ's Righteousness imputed to us no
otherwise than in its Effects and Consequences.
It is not possible that his Personal Righteousness should be imputed to us as
ours, so that we shall be looked upon as having perfectly kept the Law in him;
an Opinion that has no Foundation in Scripture, is absurd in Reason, and is
dangerous with respect to Practice, it being a very great Temptation to Persons
to cease their Endeavors to be inherently Righteous themselves (which at best
cannot be but in imperfect degrees) when they are persuaded that they shall be
accounted such, by having the unspotted Righteousness of Christ thus imputed to
'em: But let no Man deceive you (says St. John) he that does Righteousness, is
Righteous, as he is Righteous, 1 John 3.7. Yet however, the Righteousness of
Christ is imputed to us in its Effects and Consequences; for by his fulfilling
the Law of Mediation, and those Conditions concluded upon betwixt Him and the
Father, in which consisted his Mediatorial Righteousness, he procured and
purchased for us that Inestimable Favor, that our imperfect Righteousness,
such as we by his Grace are enabled to perform, according to the Terms of the
Gospel, should be accepted to our Justification; and thereupon that we should
be Approved as Just, and should stand recti in Curia, according to Evangelical
Terms, the Gospel Rules and Measures of Righteousness. Thus all having sinned,
and come short of the Glory of God, we are Justified freely by his Grace,
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ; whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation for our Sins, through Faith in his Blood, to declare his
Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that are past, through the Forbearance
of God, Romans 3.23, 24, 25. That is, all Mankind, both Jews and Gentiles, being
found Sinners, neither Justification nor Salvation could be had for 'em,
according to the Terms of the First Covenant: Whenever therefore any are
Justified, it must be freely by the undeserved Favor of God, through the Great
Work which Jesus Christ has wrought for the Redemption of Man, accepting of
their imperfect Righteousness, instead of an unsinning Obedience, and pardoning
their Sins through the same Christ. Which brings me to the last Particular to
be accounted for, in my Description of Justification; but makes it unnecessary
to add much more explication of it: And that is this:

Fifthly, 5. Justification an Acquitting of all sincere Penitents from the
Punishments of all those Sins, of which according to the Terms of any
preceding Covenant, there was Remission.
That Justification is an Acquitting of all sincere Penitents from the
Punishment of those Sins, of which according to the Terms of any former
Covenant, there was no place for Pardon. By what has been already said, you see
that the First Covenant, which required a Righteousness not performable by us
in our fallen State, being cancelled through Christ, there is place for
Repentance in this Covenant of Grace. And as under this, our Repentance is a
great part of our Evangelical Righteousness; so the Acquitting us upon our
Repentance from the Punishment of our Sins, is a great part of God's
Justification of us through our Savior Christ. And that God's Acquitting of us
from the Punishment of those Sins we have Repented of, is one Notion of a
Christian's Justification, appears from that eminent Place, Acts 13.38, 39. Be
it known unto you, Brethren, that through this Man is preached unto you the
Forgiveness of Sins; and by him all that Believe are Justified from all things,
from which ye could not be Justified by the Law of Moses. In which words, as it
is evident that the Gospel of Christ allows Pardon upon our Repentance, for
those Sins, for which the First Covenant, that of Moses (and much less that
made with Adam) allowed no Mercy: So it is also manifest from hence, that the
Justification which is now declared from Christ, consists in God's pardoning
such Sins, Acquitting the Penitent Believer that now comes into the Obedience
of Christ, whatsoever his past Sins have been.

And this part of Justification, the Pardoning of our Sins, is that which the
Apostle means, by not Imputing of our Sins, Romans 4.7, 8. Blessed are they whose
Iniquities are Forgiven, and whose Sins are Covered. Blessed is the Man unto
whom the Lord will not impute Sin. In which place he who considers the drift
and force of St. Paul's Discourse, will easily perceive, that Justification,
Forgiveness of Sins, Covering of Sin, and not Imputing of Sin, are equivalent
Phrases, and signify the same thing.

And thus at length I think I have fully and sufficiently declared unto you the
meaning of Justification. And from what has been said, it does appear, that to
the Praise and Glory of his Grace, he has made us acceptable in the Beloved,
in whom we have Redemption through his Blood, the Forgiveness of Sins,
according to the Riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 1.6, 7. That is, from what has been
said in the Explication of this Point of Justification, it is manifest, that as
it consists in God's Adjudging of us as Righteous, according to the Terms of
the Second Covenant; and in his Acquitting of us from the Punishment of such
Sins, as would not be pardoned under any other: So the Favor of being thus
Justified by God in both its parts, is owing to the Mediation of his Beloved
Son, our Savior Christ, in whom he is so well pleased, as to be pleased also
with us upon his Account. And thus having given you the full meaning of
Justification,

II. I am now to show you by what Faith it is, that we are accordingly
Justified.

2. By what Faith we are accordingly Justified.
By what has been said, as it does appear that Justification is a Judicial Act
of God Adjudging us as Just and Righteous, according to the Terms and
Conditions of the Second Covenant; so likewise that Repentance and Obedience
are no less necessary in the Gospel Covenant than Faith it self is, to render
us Evangelically Just and Righteous; and therefore when our Justification is by
Scripture, in so peculiar a manner attributed to Faith, it cannot but be of
mighty Importance rightly to understand what that Faith is by which we shall be
approved by God as Just and Righteous.

And in order to this, I must here premise, That nothing is more usual in
Scripture Language, than to attribute the whole Rewards of a Christian Life, to
any one of those Conditions of Christianity, which by the great Influence they
have upon other Parts of Religion, may be said to imply all the rest. Thus for
instance, the Mercy of God is promised to be from everlasting to everlasting,
upon them that Fear him, Psalm. 103.17. The Reason is, because Fear is such an
active Principle in us, that no one who really fears God, but immediately seeks
out all ways, and betakes himself to all Courses to obtain his Favor. So
again, Blessed is the Man that makes the Lord his Trust, Psalm. 40.4. The
reason is, because no Man can reasonably trust in God for the performance of
his Promise, but he must perform those Conditions upon which such Promises are
made to him; and the greater are his Hopes in God's Goodness and Truth for the
making good his Promises, the greater will be his Care and Diligence in such
ways in which alone he can with reason Trust and Hope in Him. And not to
mention more, even Life eternal is promised to the Knowledge of God and Jesus
Christ. This is Life eternal, to Know Thee the only True God and Jesus Christ,
whom thou have sent, John 3.17. And why shall the Knowledge of God entitle any
one to eternal Life? Shall this be exclusive of Repentance and Obedience? No,
by no means, but as productive of 'em, and indeed including 'em; for it cannot
easily be imagined, but that he who thoroughly knows the Nature and Attributes
of God, and the Wise and Great Methods he has taken to Recover Mankind from
their lost State, and to reconcile 'em to Himself by his Son; it cannot easily
be imagined, I say, but that lie who thoroughly knows these things, must
betake, himself to such Courses, as will Reconcile both himself to God, and God
to him: And he who seriously considers what he thus knows, will undoubtedly
take this Care.

And now this being premised, By a Faith that is perfect and complete, as to
all those Acts beforementioned.
the like Observation may be made of the Promises of Justification and
Salvation made to Faith or Believing, Romans 5.1. Gal. 3.8. Ephesians. 2.8. and in many
other places. These great and precious Promises are made to Faith, as
productive of Repentance and Obedience, and indeed as including them; for in
Jesus Christ, or in the Christian Religion, or under the Christian
Dispensation, nothing avails any thing but Faith, which works by Love, or
which is perfected by Love, Gal. 5.6. So that the Faith or Belief by which
alone we shall be Justified and Saved, must be perfect and complete, as to all
those Acts before mentioned; that is, it must be so through a Persuasion of the
Infallible Truth and Certainty of whatever God has revealed to us in the Holy
Scriptures, as thereby we must not only Assent with our Minds, that all these
Great Things are true, which are revealed to us in the Gospel, and summed up in
our Creed, but we must also heartily yield up the Consent of our Wills, of our
Affections, and of the whole Man, to be Governed in our whole Life and
Conversation, by those Great Truths and Doctrines. And farther yet, it must be
a firm and steady Reliance upon God, that all his precious Promises of Pardon
and Happiness shall be fully made good to us through Christ's Mediation, upon
our performing of the Conditions, on which such this Promises were made. Such a
Faith as this, through the Mediation of Christ obtaining that Benefit of God
for us, shall be accepted; so that they who do so Believe, shall be justified
and saved; but that Faith which is short of this, is but maimed and imperfect;
it is but either the Faith of Devils, mentioned by St. James, 2.19. or the
Faith of Hypocrites, or in some respects or other defective; and so shall not
avail us to Justification or Salvation.

And this will fully appear to us, This exemplified in the Faith of Abraham, who
if we consider the Faith of Abraham, what it was, concerning which we find
several times in Scripture, as, Romans 4.22. Jam. 2.23. this Honorable mention,
That it was imputed to him for Righteousness: For such as was Abraham's Faith,
the Father of us all, Romans 4.16. Such must be our Faith, if we will be the
Children of Abraham, and be blessed with Faithful Abraham, Gal. 3.7.9. And as
to Abraham's Faith,

The first great Act of it we find mentioned in the Scripture, 1. Consented to
the most difficult Performances at God's Command.
was his readily leaving, at God's Command, his own Country, and his Father's
House, and his going into a Country that God should show him, Genesis 12.1, 2.
Which ready Obedience to God's Command of leaving his own Country, was so
acceptable to God, that, Genesis 15.6. it is said, That this Believing on the
Lord, was accounted to him for Righteousness. And this teaches us, that
whenever God is pleased to lay upon us the hardest Conditions (such as was
Abraham's leaving his own Country, and his Father's House) we must not boggle
thereat, but immediately consent to set about the performance of them, as we
will approve our Faith to God, and have it accepted by him to our Justification.

2. Relied firmly upon God's Promises, in full assurance of his Power and
Goodness to perform 'em.
A second Act of that Faith which was imputed to Abraham for Righteousness, was
his steady Reliance, Trust, and Confidence in the Promises of God, of granting
him a numerous Offspring, even after that, in all human appearance, it was
impossible for him and Sarah to have Children: Yet he against Hope, believed in
Hope, that be might become the Father of many Nations: And being not weak in
Faith, he considered not his own Body now dead, when he was about an hundred
years old; neither yet the deadness of Sarah 's Womb: He staggered not at the
Promise through Unbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving Glory to God: And
being fully persuaded, that what he promised, he was able also to perform,
therefore it was imputed to him for Righteousness: That is, this steadfast
Faith and Reliance of his upon the Divine Promises, was a sign of the good
Opinion he had of God's Power and Fidelity, and was therefore most graciously
accepted by him, Romans 4.18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

Now this, as the Apostle goes on, v. 23, 24, 25. was not written for his sake
alone, that it was imputed to him; but for us also, to whom it shall be
imputed, if we Believe on Him who raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead; who
was delivered for our Offenses, and was raised again for our Justification:
That is, in this Act of Faith also, in a steady Reliance upon the Promises of
God, was Abraham a Pattern to us whereby we may see, that if we distrust not
his Power and Goodness in Matters of the greatest difficulty, but firmly Rely
upon him without Doubt or Dispute, this will render us acceptable to him. But
especially it will be a most acceptable Act of Faith in us wholly to Rely upon
his Promises in Christ (who became a Sacrifice for our Sins,) that all our most
heinous Offenses will be pardoned, if we unfeignedly Repent, and our imperfect
Obedience will be eternally rewarded, if it be but sincere; in Testimony and
Assurance of which Promises, God has raised our Savior from the dead.

And thus you plainly see what sort of Faith, or Believing, it is, that must
now Justify and Save us. It must not be only giving up the Assent of our
Minds, that all that God has spoken is true, but we must with all our Hearts
Consent to a sincere and faithful Obedience to all his Commands, such as may be
expected from those who are undoubtedly persuaded of the Truth of all the
Articles of the Christian Faith, which are every one of 'em Doctrines very apt
to move us to Holy Living. And moreover, it must be a firm Reliance on God's
Truth, that all his Promises shall certainly be made good to us, on Condition
of our Performances. Especially, as the case now stands with us Christians, it
must be an Entire Dependence upon Christ, that through his Mediation with the
Father on our account, we shall be Justified, Pardoned, and Saved, on Condition
we perform the Covenant of Grace, that is, Believe, and sincerely Obey the
Commands of God given us in the Gospel.

Reliance upon God's Promises of Pardon to us through Christ, an essential Act
of Faith incumbent upon us, as the case now stands with us Christians.
I say, as the case now stands with us Christians; for all Mankind, by reason
of Adam's and our own Transgressions, were liable to the Wrath of God, and had
been condemned to eternal Destruction, had not Jesus Christ interposed betwixt
his Father and us, and Mediated with him, that we might have Pardon and
Happiness, on Condition we would turn from our evil Ways, and sincerely Obey
him for the future; so that through the Blood of Jesus Christ it is, that we
have Redemption and the Forgiveness of Sins, according to the Riches of his
Grace, Ephesians. 1.7. And as in him are given unto us exceeding great and precious
Promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. so all the Promises of God in him are Tea, and in him
Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. That is, upon the account of Christ, all his Promises of
eternal Life and Happiness, shall be certainly and infallibly made good to us,
on condition we forsake our Sins, and obey him. And yet when we have done all
things which are commanded us, we are to account our selves but unprofitable
Servants, having done no more than was our Duty to do, Luke 17.10. And we
cannot lay claim to those unspeakable Rewards laid up for his Obedient
Servants, merely upon our own Deserts, as if we had merited and deserved 'em;
but that no Flesh might Glory in his Presence, it is Jesus Christ who is made
unto us Wisdom and Righteousness, and Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor.
1.30. That is, it is Jesus Christ who is the cause of our Justification and
Sanctification; and by the Merit of what he has done for us, shall our
imperfect Righteousness be so accepted of by God, that we shall be unspeakably
rewarded for it.

And if so; if all our holy Performances shall be Accepted and Rewarded only
through Christ, it is on Him then, and not on any thing that we have done our
selves, that we must depend, and Rely for Pardon and Happiness. For without
his Merits to supply our Defects, our best Performances will want Pardon, and
all that we can do will not merit nor deserve eternal Life and Glory. Thus we
must Believe, that is, Rely on Christ, and we shall not perish, but have
everlasting Life, John 3.16.

And indeed this Reliance and Dependence upon God for Mercy, Because it
excludes Confidence in our own Merits, and Boasting in our own Performances
on the account of what Christ has Merited for us, not on the account of any
Deserts of our own, appears in the Scriptures, as I before said, to be an Act
of Faith more well-pleasing to God, and acceptable unto him, in that it
excludes Boasting, or Glorying in our own Righteousness (which the Apostle
makes very necessary to Justification, Romans 3.) and expects the Reward merely
from God's Free Mercy in Christ, without any Reliance upon our own
Performances: For, as it is verse. 23, 24, 25, 26. All have sinned, and come
short of the Glory of God, being Justified freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Rightoousness that he
might be Just, and the Justifier of Him that Believes in Jesus. Where is
Boasting then? It is excluded? By what Law? The Law of Works? Nay, but by the
Law of Faith; therefore we conclude a Man is Justified by Faith, without the
Deeds of the Law. Which brings me,

III. To show you in what sense we are said to be Justified by Faith, 3. In
what sense we are said by S. Paul to be Justified by Faith without the Deeds of
the Law.
without the Deeds of the Law. Both this Text of the Romans now mentioned, and
that Parallel place, Gal. 2.16. seem to exclude Good Works from being at all
necessary to our Justification. And yet by what has been already said from St.
Paul, it does appear, that Repentance and Obedience, are Conditions equally
requisite to our Justification with Faith: Or when Faith alone is mentioned, it
is as including the other two; and St. James also does most expressly assert,
that by Works a Man is Justified, and not by Faith only, Jam. 2.24. So that to
clear the Holy Scripture from any Contradiction, in this case, it will be
requisite to consider what St. Paul means by the Law, and by the Deeds of the
Law, when he excludes either from having any thing to do in our Justification;
and what that Faith is, upon which he does sometimes seem to lay the whole
stress in that great Affair.

By Law in St. Pual's discourse with the Jews, was meant both the Law of
Nature, and the Law of Moses.
And St. Paul disputing with the Jews about the Invalidity and Insufficiency of
any other Dispensation, or Law, to render us Just and Accepted by God, besides
the Gospel; and the Necessity for all Persons that will be Justified and Saved,
to Believe and embrace the Gospel, as the only means of both: By Law he
understood both the Law of Nature, and the Law of Moses; according to either of
which, if they would stand a Judgment, he shows it was not possible for any to
be Justified, or accounted as Just; because there was no Man living but had
transgressed and violated those Laws, and fallen short of those Conditions
prescribed in 'em, according to which a Man was to be accounted Just and
Righteous. He had proved before, both Jews and Gentiles, that they were all
under Sin; and that therefore by the Deeds of the Law, there shall no Flesh be
Justified in his sight, Romans 3.9, 20. So that the whole of St. Paul's meaning,
when he denies Justification to be by the Law, is this, That according to the
perfect Rule of Righteousness prescribed to Adam, or by Moses, no Man now in
this our fallen State, can be accounted, reputed, or Adjudged Righteous.

By Works and Deeds of the Law, are meant both Moral and Ceremonial Duties, as
performed by the Power of Nature without Faith, and as meritorious of the
Reward.
Nor can any be Justified by the Works and Deeds of the Law for another reason;
for by Works and Deeds of the Law in the Jews meaning of those Words in that
Dispute St. Paul had with 'em, were meant the observance of the Moral and
Ceremonial Works and Duties of the Law, as performed by their own Natural
Strength, without the Supernatural Assistance of God's Grace, and not
considered as flowing from Faith; and, moreover, these Works and Deeds of the
Law they accounted as meritorious of the Reward, they were Works upon which the
Reward would have been reckoned, not of Grace, but of Debt, Romans 4.4. and which
would have given occasion for Boasting, v. 27.

And now this being the meaning of the Law, and the Deeds and Works of the Law,
in St. Paul's Dispute with the Jews; and the Jews Doctrine being this, That by
observation of the Law of Moses, they could approve themselves as Just and
Righteous before God, and by the Deeds and Works of the Law, performed by their
own Natural strength, they could merit the rewards of Obeying, and could have
good reason to Boast of their Righteousness, which the Pharisees amongst 'em
were so apt to do, In opposition to which sense of the Law and Works, St. Paul
does plead Justification to be attainable only upon Gospel Terms.
as we see Luke 18.11. In opposition to this, St. Paul does bend the Force of
his Arguments, as there was great reason, to prove to 'em, That since,
according to the Tenor of either the Law of Nature, or the Law of Moses, all,
both Jews and Gentiles, are under Sin; so that there is none Righteous, no not
one, Romans 3.9, 10. That therefore we are Justified freely by God's Grace,
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness that he
might be Just, and the Justifier of him that Believes in Jesus, v. 24, 25, 26.
That is, Christ has revealed this way of Justifying Sinners; namely, that he
will accept and reward all those as Righteous Persons, who shall Believe and
embrace those Terms of Salvation proposed in the Gospel, and shall accordingly
give themselves up to be ruled by it.

And this is to be Justified freely by his Grace, And this is to be Justified
freely by God's Grace.
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ; and does also sufficiently
exclude Boasting: This, I say, is to be Justified freely by his Grace; for that
we have this condescending Rule of Righteousness given us, whereby we shall be
accepted of as Righteous, and Acquitted from Punishment upon our Practical
Faith, a sincere Obedience, and unseigned Repentance, is an Act of mere Grace
and Mercy in God, through Jesus Christ, the Purchase of which cost Christ His
BLOOD, but cost us nothing. And it is by the Grace and Assistance of his Holy
Spirit, that we are enabled to perform these Conditions of our Justification,
viz. Repentance, Faith, and Obedience.

And it does also sufficiently exclude all reason for, And it does also
sufficiently exclude all occasions of Boasting.
and occasion of Boasting: For when all is done, our Repentance, Faith, and
Obedience, has nothing of Virtue, or Merit, of Natural or Moral Efficiency in
it, toward the purchasing of the Pardon of our past Sins, and to render us
Righteous, were it not for his Mercy in Christ, in giving us such gracious Laws
and Terms of Righteousness, as those contained in the Gospel. All which Reasons
sufficiently make it appear how we are Justified freely by his Grace,
notwithstanding the necessity of our inherent Righteousness to Justification,
and are far from having any reason to pride our selves in any of our most Holy
and Virtuous Performances.

And by what has been said in the Explication of this Part, And from the same
account it will easily appear how S. Paul and S. James may be Reconciled.
I hope it does also sufficiently appear, that there is no real opposition
between St. Paul and St. James, when the former does assert, That a Man is
Justified by Faith without the Deeds of the Law; and the latter, That by Works
a Man is Justified, and not by Faith only. For it is not, you see, the same
Law, nor the same Works, upon which their Discourses proceeded; but quite
different, both Laws and Works; and therefore there could be no Contradiction
between 'em. The Works and Deeds of the Law by which S. Paul denies we can be
Justified, are either an unsinning Obedience according to the Law of Nature, or
the Observance of Moses's Laws. The Works by which, according to S. James, we
shall be Justified, are the Works prescribed by the Laws of the Gospel flowing
from Faith. The occasion also of these Discourses, was different.


The Law St. Paul excludes from being a Rule of Justification, was both the
perfect Law of Nature, and the Law of Moses; and the Deeds and Works of the
Law, which he likewise excludes from being the Terms on which God will Justify
us, were a perfect, exact, unsinning Obedience, such as is required by the
Original Law of Righteousness, or an Observance of all the Laws of Moses. By
neither of which Laws, nor the Deeds and Works of such Laws, could we at all be
Justified; since according to those Rules of Righteousness, Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things to do 'em, Gal. 3.10.

But the Works St. James, c. 2.24. seems so carefully to interess in the Affair
of our Justification, jointly and equally with Faith, are those Works
prescribed by the Laws of the Gospel, proceeding from, and produced by Faith,
or Works by which our Faith is demonstrated, to be a true and real Faith, c.
2.18.

And the occasion of these Discourses of St. Paul and St. James was different,
which also was the reason they did so differently express themselves in this
matter. St. Paul had to deal with Jews, Pharisees, and false Teachers, who
pleaded the necessity of Observing the Law of Moses, and also those Works and
Deeds it prescribed, which gave occasion to him to preach the Abrogation or
Cancelling of that Law, S. Paul having to deal with Pharisaical Jews, boasting
of their own Righteousness according to the Law.
and the substitution of the Gospel in its stead, as a Rule of Righteousness;
the Believing of which, in such a manner as has been spoke, he declared would
be sufficient through God's Mercy in Christ to their Justification. And though he
took all care that was requisite to prevent the misunderstanding of him, as if
a mere Opinionative Faith would serve the turn, by assuring them at the same
time, he told 'em, that in Christ neither Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision
would avail any thing; yet that Faith which works by Love, would, Gal 5.6.
That is, that it must be such a Faith as must be made perfect by the addition
of those Duties which we owe to God and our Neighbor; yet Men of corrupt
Minds, reprebate concerning the Faith, or void of Judgment concerning the
Faith, as St. Paul complains of some, 2 Timothy 3.8. perverted his meaning in this
his excellent Doctrine, and turned all to this sense, That a mere Assent of the
Mind to the Truth of the Gospel, though they were careless in the subduing of
their Passions, and bridling of their Tongues, and regulating of their Actions,
S. James having to do with Solifidiant Libertines pleading their Faith,
separated from Gospel Righteousness.
was all that was necessary to their Justification. And thereupon they thought
themselves safe upon the Account of their Barren Faith, though they were Proud,
and Conceited of their Knowledge and Seize, Censorious and Contentious,
Unmerciful and Uncharitable; which Error concerning Faith prevailing much in
those Early Times, occasioned St. James with a great deal of Earnestness to
plead, and to prove the Necessity of Good Works to our being justified before
God; And that neither Faith, nor good Works alone, but both jointly were the
Condition now under the Gospel, upon which we shall be justified, and approved
of by God, as Just and Righteous Persons. And he proves it by the Instance of
Abraham's Faith, Jam. 2.21, 22, and 23. Was not Abraham our Father justified by
Works, when he had offered his Son Isaac upon the Altar? See thou how Faith
wrought with his Works, and by Works his Faith was made perfect. And the
Scripture was fulfilled, which says Abraham Believed God, and it was imputed
to him for Righteousness, and he was called the Friend of God. So that St.
James's Doctrine of Justification is not a contradiction, but a vindication of
St. Paul's from the False Glosses of Solifidian Libertines.

And it were happy for these latter Ages, if St. James's Doctrine concerning
the necessary Conjunction of Faith and good Works to our Justification, could
have put a stop to Men's Mis-interpretations of the other Great Apostle in this
Point. But alas, to the grievous Scandal of the Reformation, too many amongst
us have heretofore, and do to this day earnestly contend for those Mistakes;
which our Adversaries make great Advantages of, who greedily catching at any
thing of Error professed by any Party of Men under the Denomination of
Protestants, are never backward to lay the Scandal of it to the whole
Reformation, to the very great hindrance of its Progress.

But above all, the Mischief of this Opinion reaches directly to the
Destruction of Men's Souls; whilst being deceived in the Nature of Justifying
Faith, and thinking it to be a mere Assent of the Mind to the Great Truths of
Christianity, which is but the Act only of one Faculty of the Soul; and not
looking upon it as implying a Consent also of the Will to act agreeably to the
Nature of such practical Truths, they do most fatally presume themselves to be
Christians indeed, and such as shall be saved by Christ, though their Lives
declare them to be far from being New Creatures, from being renewed in the
Spirit of their Minds, as those are, who have been taught as the Truth is in
Jesus, Ephesians. 4, 21, 23.

And therefore since so much depends upon a right Understanding of this great
Doctrine of Justifying Faith, it will not appear to you to be without Reason,
that I have been so large in the Explication thereof. In speaking to which,
having, 1. showed you in general what it is to Believe, together with the
Effects and Fruits of True Believing; and, 2. having more particularly
explained unto you the Nature of Justifying and Saving Faith;

3. Now it remains only, that by way of Inference I should lay before you, 3.
The several sorts of Defective Faith mentioned in Scripture.
wherein the defect of several sorts of Faith does lie, which we find both by
Scripture and Experience, that many do rely upon, but yet will by no means
justify and save 'em. And from what has been said, it does appear, that the
Faith which will not Justify and Save us, must be some way or other defective
and lame as to those several Acts, which, I have showed, must go to complete
the Nature of Justifying Faith. And there are several sorts of Believers we
find mention made of in the Scripture, which fall short of having that Faith
which will alone Justify and Save us. And,

1. We have the Faith of Devils, mentioned Jam. 2.19. 1. The Faith of Devils.
which is no more than a bare Assent of the Mind that there is a God, One who
is Merciful to them that serve Him, but terrible in Judgment to those who
disobey Him; and the like of the other Articles, Thou Believe there is one
God; thou do well; the Devils also Believe and tremble. But will thou know, O
vain Man, that Faith without Works is dead, Jam. 2.19, 20. The Devils, though
they do Believe, and are thoroughly persuaded, and do know that there is a God
infinitely Merciful, Just, and Holy, who cannot endure Iniquity nor Sin; yet
out of Enmity to Him, or because they will not conform themselves to that Holy
Being which they so much hate, or because no Promise is made to them of Pardon
and Happiness, that should encourage them to Repent of their Apostasy from God,
and to conform themselves to his Holy Laws; whatever is the reason, this is
certain, that they are utterly disobedient; and though they do Believe, yet
because their Faith is only a mere Assent of the Mind to the Truths of
Religion, and does not render 'em Obedient, their Believing therefore will
avail 'em nothing to Pardon and Happiness.

2. Another sort of Lame and Defective Faith, 2. The faith without Works
which we find mention made of in the Scriptures, as that which will as little
avail us as the former, is a Dead Faith: And this we are told in the same
Scriptures what it is; that it is also a bare Assent of the Mind only, which
does not stir up the Will to choose, nor the Affections to delight in the Laws
of God, but is utterly barren and fruitless in Good Works; Faith if it has not
Works, is dead, being alone, Jam. 2.17. And so far is such a Faith as this,
which does not move and stir us up to Good Works, from being acceptable to God
to our Justification and Salvation, that, v. 19, 20. it is compared to the
Faith of Devils, and is reckoned no better.

3. A little Faith, and Faith which has not taken deep root in the Heart.
3. Again, We find mention in the Scriptures of a Little Faith, Matthew. 6.30. and
of Faith that has not taken root, Luke 8.13. Either of which is a Faith which
will carry Men to something of Religious Performances, but is not strong enough
to bear 'em up under the Difficulties of Religion, and through all the
Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Thus those who in the use
of honest means, cannot trust in God for the providing themselves of all things
necessary for this Life, but are full of carking Thoughts for the morrow, that
is, for the future, are upbraided by our Savior, Matthew. 6.30. as Persons of
Little Faith, Why take you thought for Raiment? If God so cloth the Grass of
the Field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven, shall he not
much more cloth you, O ye of little Faith? And those, who when shockt with any
Temptations do thereupon yield, because their Faith has taken no root, they
are compared to stony Ground; of which it is said, that when they hear, they
receive the Word with Joy; but not having root, these do but for a while
Believe, and in time of Temptation fall away, Luke 8.13.

4. Even the Faith of Miracles will prove insufficient to Justification, if not
accompanied with Obedience.
4. As to that which may be defective, and fall short of a Justifying and Saving
Faith, this we are told even the Faith of Miracles will do, if it be not
accompanied with Good Works. This Miraculous Faith we find often mentioned in
the Scriptures: And it was a strong Persuasion wrought in the Party by the
Spirit of God, that by the Power and Authority of Jesus, he should do such a
Miracle beyond the Power of Nature to be performed, as the casting out Devils
by the Word of his Mouth. But even this Faith of Miracles, if it is not
accompanied with Good Works (of which Charity and Love to one another is the
chief) will signify nothing; so says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 13.2. Though I have all
Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and have no Charity, I am nothing.

Especially accompanied with Pride.
Many, we are told, Matthew. 7. will presume much upon their excellent Gifts of
Prophesying, or Preaching fluently, and of their Power even to cast out Devils;
but yet our Savior protests he will not so much as know them, if they have
been wicked Livers; if proud, and full of themselves, and contemptuous of
others, as Gifted Persons are apt to be. Many will say unto me in that day,
Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out
Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful Works? And then will I profess unto
them, I never knew you; depart from me, ye that work Iniquity, verse. 22, 23.
No, nothing he assures us will ever avail us to Happiness and Salvation, less
than such a Faith as will procure a sincere Obedience to his Holy Will and
Commandments. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the Will af my Father which is in
Heaven, v. 21.

5. The Faith of Hypocrites.
Lastly, Another sort of Faith which will not Justify nor Save us, may be
styled the Faith of Hypocrites; and this is the Faith of such who expect to be
Justified and Saved merely for Believing, or rather for Relying and Recumbing
upon Christ, without performing the other Conditions of Repentance and
Obedience, which are the necessary Effects, or Ingredients rather, of
Justifying and Saving Faith; and without which, it is not our Believing alone
which will at all avail us. Of this sort were many among the Jews of old, of
whom the Prophets do often complain, that looking upon themselves as a Chosen
Nation, as a peculiar People whom God had Elected out of all the Nations of the
Earth to bestow his Favors upon, Such was the Faith of many among the Jews,
presuming that they were a chosen People.
they would confidently lean and depend upon him, that he would assuredly be
their God, and that they should be his People, notwithstanding that they gave
themselves up to work all Unrighteousness, and were cruel Extortioners,
Oppressors, and the like. Thus, Micah 3.9, 11. They abhor Judgment, and pervert
Equity; yet they will lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us?
None Evil can come upon us. And Isaiah complains, that though they would swear
falsely by the Name of the Lord; yet they had the Confidence to call themselves
the Holy City, and to stay themselves upon the God of Israel, Isai. 48.1, 2.

And, there are too many also amongst us Christians, And such is the Faith also
of many Christians, presuming likewise that they are the Elect.
who confidently presuming that they are the Elect Children of GOD, do
undoubtedly hope for all that Pardon and Happiness, which Christ with the Price
of his most Precious BLOOD hoth obtained for us, merely upon the account of
their firmly Believing that Christ has done all for 'em; and if they can but
Believe this, they fondly persuade themselves they shall certainly be
Justified, let them be never so Wicked and Disobedient to God's most Righteous
Laws; yea, though they are Proud, Boasters, Covetous, Envious, and Bitter
Revilers of those who are much better than themselves. And in this their wholly
depending upon Christ, without any Good in themselves, they think they shall
most Honor Christ, and set forth the Greatness of his Redemption of us,
whereas to preach the necessity of our own Righteousness, though wrought by his
Grace, and accompanied with many Defects, were to teach Men to depend (as they
foolishly enough imagine) not upon the Merits of Christ, but their own Deserts,
which are none at all, and so would derogate from, and lessen the Grace of
Christ, and the Greatness of that Redemption he has wrought for us. And this
sort of Faith or Dependence upon Christ alone, as those before mentioned, Micah
3.11. and Isai. 48.1, 2. So our Christian Hypocrites likewise, call Leaning
upon the Lord, and casting themselves upon the God of Israel, a Leaning and
Rolling themselves upon the Promises of Christ for Salvation.

But for any to expect to be Justified and Accepted by God, without forsaking
their evil Ways, and without working out also their own Salvation with fear and
trembling; that is, without being extremely careful themselves to be Obedient
to God's most Holy Laws, is gross Hypocrisy, and will miserably deceive us.
Hypocrisy is with vain Shows and Pretenses to deceive our selves or others;
and to be only Hearers, or Believers, of the Word, and not Doers, is to deceive
our selves, St. James tells us, 1. 22. And a greater than he, even our Blessed
Savior himself has assured us, Mat. 7.21. That not everyone who says unto
him, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the
Will of his Father which is in Heaven.

And as for the Pretense they have to live securely in unrepented Habits of
Sin, that the Grace and Mercy of Christ is more Magnified, the greater Sinners
they are; I answer, That the greater Sinners they have been, the greater is the
Mercy which Forgives 'em, when they do repent, according to that of the
Apostle, Romans 5.20, 21. Where Sin abounded, Grace did much more abound; that as
Sin has reigned unto Death, even so might Grace reign through Jesus Christ our
Lord. But to make the Magnifying of God's Grace a Reason for Security, whilst
Men continue in Sin; this indeed was a false Conclusion, that some in the First
Times, as well as now, were apt to draw from St. Paul's Doctrine of
Justification, but which that Great Apostle rejected with the utmost
Indignation and Abhorrence in the next Chapter, v. 1, 2. What shall we say
then? Shall we continue in Sin, that Grace may abound? God forbid? How shall we
that are dead to Sin, live any longer therein? No sure, the Doctrine of
Christianity, though it lays aside the Original Law of Righteousness, and the Law
of Moses, from being either of 'em a Rule of Righteousness, in conforming to
which we shall be Justified; yet this Doctrine most strictly obliges us to a
sincere Reformation from all former Sins, and to a Newness of Life, as the
indispensible Condition of being Justified by God. Nor is there the least
occasion given us by this Doctrine, to value our selves upon our own Righteous
Performances, when it is only of Grace that we are able to do any thing which
is good, and the Acceptance of the Good we do, is owing to the Mediation of
Christ, who obtained such Gracious Terms and Conditions of Justification for
us: Which Considerations, as I have already made appear, do sufficiently show
that we are Justified freely by God's Grace in Christ, and do exclude all
Grounds and Occasion of Boasting.

A summary account of justifying Faith.
In a word, and to conclude this whole Point, the only Faith or Belief that will
Justify and Save us, must be such a full Persuasion of the Truth of
Christianity, and all its Great Doctrines; those I mean which are in a peculiar
manner called the Articles of our Christian Faith; it must be such a through
Persuasion, I say, of those great and powerful Truths, as will purify us in
Heart and Life, and will effectually excite us to live up to the Rules of
Christianity, and make us sincerely and heartily to Obey God, in all his most
Holy and Righteous Laws: And it must be such withal, as will cause us to depend
solely upon God's Mercies in Christ for the Acceptance of our imperfect
Righteousness to our Justification. And all those kinds of Faith, call 'em what
you will, which are barren of unfruitful in Good Works; or if they stir us up
to encounter some Difficulties, do not bear us up under all Temptations, nor
enable us to perform the more difficult Instances of Christian Duty and
Obedience, those which are most contrary to our Lusts and Interests, as well as
the more easy, which are agreeable to our Profit or Pleasure; The Faith that
is not powerful enough to carry us through all Temptations, is defective to the
great Purposes of Justifying and Saving us.

The necessity of our often incalculating such a Faith.
And moreover I must acquaint you, that the necessity of a working Faith to that
end, as it is the great Doctrine of Christianity; so it ought to be thoroughly
explained, and often insisted upon by us Ministers of the Gospel, for fear of
People's Mistakes in this matter, which will be most dangerous to their Souls.
And accordingly St. Paul lays a solemn Charge upon us, Tit. 3.8. that we should
in the same manner I have already done, explain and inculcate the Doctrine of
Faith unto you: This is a faithful Saying, and these things I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which have Believed in God, might be careful to
maintain Good Works; for these things, or these Doctrines, are profitable unto
Men.

THE XXXI. Lecture. I Believe in God the Father Almighty Maker of Heaven and
Earth.
I Have already showed you what it is to Believe, that our Faith must be such
as rectifies and renews our Corrupt Nature, as moves us to the performance of
the most difficult Instances of Christian Duty; and such as after all causes us
to rely solely upon the Mercies of God in Christ, for the Acceptance of our
imperfect Obedience to our Justification.

And now by the Divine Assistance, I shall proceed to explain unto you all
those sacred Truths contained in your Creed, which are of such mighty
Importance. And there are not a few such powerful and practical Truths implied
in this one Article, I Believe in God the Father Almighty Maker of Heaven and
Earth. Toward the full Explication of which, that it may effectually work a
blessed Change both in our Hearts and Lives, I will do these Things.

I. I will in some measure declare unto you the Nature, and Infinite
Perfections of that Divine Being, which we call God. I Believe in God.

II. I will prove to you, that this Infinitely perfect Being, out of his
Infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, made the Heaven and the Earth, and all
Things both Visible and Invisible therein contained; Maker of Heaven and Earth.

III. I will explain, and prove that this same God who made the Heaven and the
Earth, does now exercise a most Wise, Just, and Good Providence over it, and
every thing therein contained, which is the Importance of the Word Almighty in
this Article, as shall be showed hereafter.

IV. I might here demonstrate to you, that there is but one God; for so the
Nicene Creed, which is but a Paraphrase upon this, does teach us, I Believe in
one God.

And, Lastly, that in the Unity of the Godhead there is a Trinity of Persons,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. I Believe in God the Father: And the other two
Persons are also mentioned in their proper place. But because I would be as
little guilty as possible, in this Exposition, of repeating hereafter what I
have said before, I shall referr the Doctrine of the Unity in Trinity, and of
the Trinity in Unity, till I come to the Article; And I Believe in Jesus Christ
his only Son: in which I shall prove the Divinity of the Son, in respect of
whom principally it is, that God is styled the Father, and together with whom,
and the Holy Ghost, the difficulty is to conceive how he should be one. To
proceed then, I shall consider here in their order each of the three former
Truths, explaining their full Meaning and Importance, and showing the
particular Influence each of 'em is to have in the renewing of our Depraved
Natures, and the Reforming of our Lives and Manners. And,

1. I am to declare unto you the Nature and Infinite Perfections of that Divine
Being which we call God. I Believe in God.

The Knowledge of God's Nature and Attributes highly necessary.
The Knowledge of God, as it is the most Noble Knowledge in respect of the
Object, whose transcendent Excellencies deserve our most inward and retired
Thoughts, and can never be sufficiently meditated upon by us; so it is the most
useful Knowledge in the whole World; for there is no Attribute in the Divine
Nature, but being understood, does teach some Virtue or other; and all of 'em
do necessarily create in the Minds of those who do consider them, the highest
Veneration, Love, and Honor toward that Being which does possess 'em.

The Truth of it is, to the want of a due Knowledge of the Divine Nature and
Attributes, and to Men's Misapprehensions concerning 'em; to this, for the most
part, are owing all those higher Enormities which the more degenerate Race of
Sinners do commit, as Atheism, Superstition, and whatever other unrepented
Habits of Sin. The short-sighted Atheist does not behold God as the First Cause
of All Things, and the Fountain of all those Perfections which are found in the
Creatures, and therefore he does as Ignorantly, as Impiously deny his Being: On
the other side, the Superstitious Religionist does look upon him as a Morose
and Arbitrary, a Humoursome and Captious Power; and therefore does study to
flatter him with servile Rites and Observances, instead of paying him a
Reasonable Service, such as the Scripture does prescribe And on the contrary,
the loose Libertine frames his Notions of God, as of one that is wholly made up
of Mercy, to the Impeachment of his Justice and Holiness, and to the utter
disanulling the Truth of all his Fearful Threatenings; and thereupon does live
securely in those Habits of Sin, in which he has long indulged himself, and
that without Thoughts of repenting of 'em; so mischievous are the Effects of
Ignorance and Error concerning the Divine Nature.

But besides, and above all, it is to be considered, that the Knowledge of the
Nature and Attributes of God is of such mighty Consequence, that it is made the
great Condition of Life and Happiness: This is Life Eternal to know Thee the
only true God, Joh. 17.3. As well it may, since there is no entering therein,
'till we are conformed to the Image of God; but how can we imitate that Nature,
and those Perfections, which we have little or no Knowledge of. Not that the
Divine Nature can be known to Perfection. It is one Attribute thereof, that it
is Incomprehensible. But so far as God has Revealed himself to us in the Holy
Scripture; so far we may safely enough declare that we know him. And contenting
my self with those accounts which we may be able to derive from thence
concerning him; I shall adventure to give this very imperfect Description of
God. Namely,

That he is a Self-existent Being, An Enumeration of the Divine Attributes.
of Infinite and Incomprehensible Perfections, viz. a Spirit Immense and
Omnipresent; Omnipotent, Eternal; Independent and All sufficient, Immutable;
that he is a Being transcendent in Knowledge, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Truth,
and Holiness; and as the Result of all, that he is an infinitely Happy and
Glorious Majesty. And,

I. I say, God is a SELF-EXISTENT BEING. 1. He is a Self-Existent Being.
He it is that is Being it self, or self-existent; whereas all other Beings,
whether things in Heaven, or things on Earth, derive their Being from him, and
may yet be deprived of their Being, or Anihiliated by him. But as it is
impossible that God should ever heretofore not have been, so it is impossible
he should ever hereafter cease to be. And this is said both by Jews and
Christians to be the importance of the word Jehovah, by which he would be
distinguished from the Crew of Pagan Gods. They either had no Being but in the
fancy of their Worshippers, or else were but mere Creatures Deified by the
Superstition of Men; but the God whom we serve, is, and ever was the same from
all Eternity, and therefore does give that strange account of himself, when
Moses would needs know by what Name he should set him forth to the People, I am
that I am, thus shall thou say unto the Children of Israel, I am has sent me
unto you, Exodus 3.14.

II. And as he is necessarily Existent, 2. Infinitely Perfect.
so he is a Being infinitely PERFECT; that is, all possible Perfection is
included in his Nature, so that nothing of Perfection can be conceived or seen
by us in any of the Creatures, but it is infinitely greater in God. To
understand this we must consider that he is the first Cause of all things, for
of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be Honor and Glory
for ever, Amen, Romans 11.36. And being whatever Perfection is found in the
Effect, must needs be eminently greater in the efficient Cause that produced
it, it must therefore follow, that considering those manifold and vast
Perfections which are found in all the Creatures from the lowest to to the
highest, God who Created all these, and gave 'em these several Perfections,
must be himself infinitely Perfect; such Reason had Zophar in Job 11.7. to cry
out, Can thou by searching find out God, can thou find out the Almighty
unto Perfection? Which brings me,

III. To show, that as he is of Perfections infinite in themselves, 3. Of
Incomprehensible Perfections, viz,
so of such as are INCOMPREHENSIBLE by us. And indeed how is it possible it
should be otherwise? For all our Faculties are finite, and how then shall we be
able to reach that Height, or to fathom that Depth of Perfection which is in
God? It is high as Heaven, what can thou do, deeper than Hell, what can
thou know? The measure thereof is longer than the Earth, or broader than the
Sea, Job 11.8, 9. Such reason had St. Paul in Admiration of the
Incomprehensibleness thereof, to cry out, Romans 11.14. O the depth of the
Riches, both of the Wisdom, and of the Knowledge of God, how unsearchable are
his Judgments, and his ways past finding out? It is indeed impossible for us to
have any Adequate Conception of God, or thoroughly to comprehend his Nature. But
however we may be able to know a great deal concerning him and his Attributes,
even from the Consideration of those Perfections which we behold imprinted upon
the Creatures, for St. Paul testifies Romans 1.20. That the invisible things of
God from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the
things which are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead, so that those who
know him not are without excuse. But much more can we Christians be able to
know a great deal of him, when our Reasonings from a Created Perfection are so
much assisted by Divine Revelation, declaring and deciphering God so clearly as
it does, both in his Nature and all his Attributes.

Now the Perfections which belong to the Creature may be reduced, as a Learned
Man observes, to such as pertain to it as a Substance, or as having Life, as
having Perception or Sense, or as having Reason. And to proceed therefore from
our general Conceptions of God, as a Being Infinite in all Perfection, and
Incomprehensible by us, to the Contemplation of the Divine Nature and
Perfections; so far as we shall be able to gather what they are, from what is
legible in the Creature, and especially in the Holy Scriptures;

1. A Spirit.
I. If we consider God as a Substance, since the more Fine and Spiritual any
Substance is, it is always accounted the more Perfect (as the Animal Spirits in
the Body are far exalted above the grosser Matter) God therefore must not be
conceived to be of a Bodily Form and Composition, the lower Form of Substances,
but to be of the highest of all, viz. purely a SPIRIT. And being also the Cause
of the Spirits, both of the Souls of Men, and of the Angels of Heaven, he must
then be transcendently exalted in the Spiritual Nature above those most
Glorious Beings, the Holy Angels.

It is not easy, nor is it necessary for us, whose Faculties being Clothed
with Flesh, can discern nothing but through the door of the Senses, to form a
True and Adequate Notion of a Spirit. It is sufficient to conceive of God that
he is absolutely Incorporeal, without Figure or Parts, which are the Accidents
of Matter; and therefore he is invisible to Mortal Eyes, and accordingly is
said by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.15, 16. To dwell in the Light which no Man can
approach unto, whom no Man has seen, nor can see. It is necessary also to
believe him infinitely more Spiritual in his Nature than the Souls of Men, or
than the Angels themselves are, and therefore is he called the God of the
Spirits of all Flesh, Numb. 16.22. The Father of Spirits, or he who makes his
Angels Spirits, Psalm, 104.4. For if he is the Cause of that Spiritual Nature
which the Souls of Men, and the Angels in Heaven do possess, he as the Cause,
must have much more of that Perfection in him than he imparts unto others. In a
word, the utmost that we can conceive of God, as to this kind of Perfection,
is, that he is a pure and Divine Mind, as even the wisest amongst the
Philosophers were wont to call him.

II. He is IMMENSE or OMNIPRESENT. II. Immense or Omnipresent.
This is another of those Attributes or Divine Perfections which belong to God,
under the Notion of a Substance. And a transcendent Attribute this is, whereby
he Infinitely excels all Created Beings. As for bodily Substances they are
Circumscribed and Limited by other Bodies, touching and bounding 'em on all
sides; so that no two Bodies can be in the same place; nor can the same Body be
possibly in two places at the same time. And as to those Spiritual and Immortal
Substances, the Souls of Men, and the Angels of Heaven, they are also Defined
to certain Places; so that when they are in one place, they cannot be in
another at one and the same Instant. But as to the Divine Nature, it is in one
and the same Instant present in all places. It is neither Included nor
Circumscribed in any place, nor Excluded from any; but he is every where
present in an Ineffable and an Inscrutable manner; so that there can be nothing
conceived where God is not, Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God
afar off? Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, Jer. 23.23, 24. To which purpose
also, that place Psalm. 139.7, 8. does admirably set forth the Omnipresence of
God, whither shall I flee from thy Spirit? or whither shall I go from thy
Presence? If I climb up into Heaven, thou art there, if I go down to Hell, thou
art there also.

III. God is a Being OMNIPOTENT. III. Omnipotent.
This is another Attribute which belongs to God, and it pertains to him as he
is a Living Substance. For though many things Inanimate have their Virtues, yet
Power and Activity are the Properties and Result of Life. And if the Angels
which have received their Being from him, do so excel in Strength, that one of
'em slew an hundred fourscore and five thousand of the Camp of the Assyrians in
one Night, 2 Kings 19.35. how eminently great must that Power be which created
those potent Spirits. It is an Attribute which does fall in very properly to be
considered after God's Immensity; for wherever God is present, as he is every
where, he can do whatever he pleases, and nothing can resist his Power,
concerning which, the Scripture gives us the plainest Testimonies, and the most
astonishing Instances. Thus Matthew. 19.26. it is said, that with God all things
are possible. And the Instances thereof are no less, than that whole Frame of
Nature which we behold, even the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and all the Host of
Heaven; concerning whom it is testified, Genesis 1.2. and Ps. 148.5. that God did
but speak the Word, and they were made, that he Commanded, and they were
Created. And sure then all things possible can be effected by the Power of God,
if he pleases.

I say all things possible, Being able to effect all things possible, or which
have no repugnancy in themselves, nor to the Nature of God.
for some things there are which it is a a Contradiction to the nature of the
things themselves they should be done, as that a Body whose Nature it is to be
Circumcised and bounded in the place wherein it it is, should be in different
places at the same time. And other things are repugnant to the perfect Nature
of God to do, as to Die, to Deceive, to do Injustice, to damn an Innocent
Person to all Eternity; in respect of which it is said, that it is impossible
for God to Lie, Heb. 6.18. And that he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13.

And he does whatsoever he pleases, And whatsoever he pleases.
for this is the difference between God, who is a voluntary Agent, and other
necessary Agents, that whatever does Act necessarily, does operate to the
utmost of its Power; as for Instance, the Stone in descending falls as low as
it can; but a free Agent as God is, Acts so far only as he Wills (for he might
make a Thousand more Worlds than he has if he pleases) and his Will is directed
by his Wisdom in the Framing and Ordering of the World; in which sense it is
said, Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleases, that did he in Heaven and in
Earth, in the Seas, and in all deep places. And he works all things after the
Counsel of his own Will, Ephesians. 1.11. Thus is God Omnipotent, so as to Act What,
and How he pleases.

IV. Eternal.
IV. God is ETERNAL. This is also another Perfection of Life: And it imports,
that the Living God had his Being from Infinite Ages backwards, and will
possess it to infinite and endless Ages to come; that he neither had beginning
of Days, nor will have any end of Years; so that as his Spiritual Nature is
diffused through all Spaces, and his Power can be Bounded or Restrained by no
Force nor Impediment; so this Immense and All-powerful Being has preceded all
Time, and will it self endure when Time, that is, the Revolution of Sun and
Moon, which do measure Time, shall be no more. And how is it to be imagined,
that a Being Immense and Allpowerful should not be eternal. For what is it that
could give to such a one his Existence, since whatever is the Cause and Creator
of another, must be more powerful than that thing which he makes; but what can
be more powerful than that which is Omnipotent? So that God must necessarily
have Existed from all Eternity. And supposing the forementioned Attributes, he
must as necessarily endure to infinite and eternal Ages to come. For if he
should cease to Be, it must be by the Power of something out of his Reach, or
Mightier than himself, which that it is impossible that any thing should be,
has been already showed. No sure, The Throne of God is established for ever, he
is from Everlasting, Psalm. 93.2. This speaks his Eternity a part ante, his
never having had any Beginning; Thou art the same, and thy Years shall have no
End, Psalm. 102.27. This speaks his Eternity also a part post, his continuance
to be what he was before, even to endless Ages to come. Before the Mountains
were brought forth, or ever thou have formed the Earth and the World, even from
Everlasting to Everlasting thou art God, Psalm. 90.2. which words do most
magnificently bespeak both.

V. God is a Being INDEPENDENT and ALSVFFICIENT, V. Independent and
Alsufficient.
which is an Attribute of the sensible Nature, that is, He is a Being that
depends on no other Cause, either as to his Essence, Subsistence, or
Operations; but he Is, Subsists, and Acts of himself alone, and enjoys in
himself without any Accession from things without, an Infinite and Immeasurable
Felicity.

He is a Being that depends on no other Cause, either as to his Essence,
Subsistence, or Operations, but he Is, Subsists, and Acts of himself alone.
That he Is, and Subsists of himself alone is evident from what has been just
now cited from Psalm. 90.2. before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever
thou have formed the Earth and the World, even from Everlasting to Everlasting
thou art God; for if he had his Being before the World, and he gave that Being
to it which it has, he must himself Be and Subsist without it, or any thing
contained in it. And he also Acts independently, without the help or assistance
of any other Cause in the Production of it, having made the World out of
Nothing, and not out of any precedent Matter which was Coeternal with him: For
through Faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God, so
that things which are seen were not Made of things which do Appear, Heb. 11.3.

And he enjoys in himself without any Accession from things without, an
Infinite and Immeasurable Felicity. For why, he possesses all Good himself, and
in himself, and is himself the chiefest Good. And being therefore infinitely
happy in himself from all Eternity, he could gain no Accession of Happiness, by
making us Happy, O my God, my Goodness extends not unto thee, said the
Psalmist, Ps. 16.2. No, this cannot be: For,

VI. God is IMMVTABLE, VI. Immutable
which is another Attribute of the sensible Nature, that is, God is not subject
to any Change in his Nature and Attributes from what he was from all Eternity;
nor is be Fickle and Inconstant in his Decrees and Covenants.

He is not subject to any Change or Alteration in his Nature and Attributes. In
his Nature and Attributes.
He is not more or less Omnipotent, Allsufficient, Wise, Good, Just, Holy, and
Happy. Nor in any other of his Perfections does he suffer any Increase or
Diminution. There are different degrees of Perfection, amongst the Creatures of
God; some are but of a days continuance, some endure for many Years, and the
Souls of the Blessed after Judgment, and the Angels of Heaven will remain
unchanged in their Natures to all Eternity. But whereas the most perfect of
God's Creatures are more or less, sometime or other liable to undergo some
Changes; God, in whom the Perfections of all the Creatures do center, without
the least mixture of that Imperfection adhering to any of 'em, is, and ever
will be still the same; so the Psalmist, Thou Lord in the Beginning have laid
the Foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the Work of thy Hands, they
shall perish, but thou shall endure; they all shall wax Old, as does a Garment,
and as a Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed, but thou
art the same, and thy Years shall not fail, Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27. He is the
same Yesterday and to Day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8.

Nor is he subject to any Change or Alteration in his Decrees or Covenants with
Mankind. In his Decrees and Covenants.
This is indeed what the wisest Governors of this World are subject to, for
being Men they cannot foresee all those Difficulties which may alter their
Measures: But God, as he did from all Eternity, foresee what was fittest to be
Decreed and Enacted, with respect to all Ages; so he did establish such Laws as
were agreeable thereunto and Enacted a Covenant with Mankind, the Covenant of
Grace I mean, whose Articles shall be the unalterable and everlasting Terms and
Conditions of Life and Happiness, and is therefore called his Everlasting
Covenant, Heb. 13.20.

Nor does it at all argue Fickleness or Inconstancy in the Decrees and Purposes
of God, that he is sometimes said to Repent, as Genesis 6.6. 1 Samuel 15.11.
Repentance indeed as it is found in Men, argues unsteadiness; for it arises
from the consideration of having done amiss, with a design to amend; and it
proceous either from Ignorance or Imprudence, when a Person finds that Matters
have not happened out as he imagined, or from Impotence, when he has begun a
thing which he cannot finish; or out of Inconstancy, when a Man disapproves
what he did formerly like well of. And such is properly Repentance, and
therefore in this sense of the Word, God is denied to Repent, Numb. 23.19. God
is not a Man that he should Lie, nor the Son of Man that he should Repent. But
as when a Man Repents he changes his Actions, so the Divine Spirit, in
condescension to our ways of Expression, is pleased to speak of God as
repenting of the Destruction he had threatened to the Ninevites, Jonah 3.10.
when upon their Humiliation, instead of Destroying, he Saved 'em. The truth of
it is, with respect to those very Actions, upon the occasion of which God is
said to Repent, there is really the greatest Constancy in the Decrees and
Purposes of God, which are to save all Believing and Penitent Persons, and to
cut off Unbelievers and Impenitents. And though the Persons who are threatened to
be cut off, should afterward be Saved, this shows indeed an Alteration in
those Persons who have changed from worse to better, and so prevented God's
Anger; but it speaks no Variation in God himself, who is ever fixed to his own
Rule of Rewarding every Man according to his Works; so that the Result is this,
that with God there is no variableness, nor shadow of turning, James 1.17.

Hitherto we have considered such Divine Perfections as do infinitely transcend
those of any created Substance, though never so perfect in Life and Perception;
those which follow, are such as transcend all Perfection discernable in the
Rational Nature. These indeed are more peculiarly called his Communicable
Perfections, because they are in some lower Degrees, and by way of
Participation, communicated to Man, being made after the Image of God. For as
if we consider the Perfections of the Humane Nature, to the Understanding do
belong Knowledge and Wisdom; to the Will Goodness, Justice, and Truth; to the
Affections freedom from Disorder, or Perturbation; and to the whole Nature
Holiness or Integrity, and the Result thereof Happiness; so there are found in
the Divine Nature the like Attributes and Perfections: But yet still it is with
this vast difference, that in God they are transcendently above what is found
in Man. To proceed then in that short Character we have begun to give you of
the Divine Perfections, in order to form in your Minds a right Notion of God, a
thing so exceedingly necessary for all Men to have.

VII. God is OMNISCIENT VII. Omniscient.
and Knows all Things. Knowledge is a great Perfection of the Rational
Nature, and great are the Seize therein, that Men may arrive to by Study
and Industry. And as to the Souls of Men departed, and the Blessed Angels,
their Knowledge is vastly more extensive; and their Faculties of Knowing not
being clouded with Flesh and Blood; and their Thoughts more Free and
Disentangl'd from Matter; they know things more Intimately, more Certainly, and
more easily than we do. And since God is the Author of all this Knowledge, both
in Men and Angels, how transcendently more perfectly, both as to the variety of
Objects, and the manner of Knowing, must God apprehend 'em? He that planted the
Ear shall he not hear, and he that formed the Eye shall he not see, and he that
teaches Man Knowledge, shall not he know? Psalm. 94.9, 10. that is, more
Objects, and that more perfectly than Men or Angels do?

1. As to the Object of Knowledge, he knows all Things. Knowing all things.
There is not any Creature that is not manifest in his Sight, but all things
are Naked and Open before the Eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13.
And he perfectly understands their Natures, Dispositions, and Qualities, their
Powers and Virtues; particularly, he knows the Good and Bad Dispositions of
Men. As to the Good, I know Abraham that he will Command his Children and his
Household after him, Genesis 18.19. And likewise as to the Bad, he sees and views
the perverse Doings of the Sons of Men, for his Eyes are upon all their ways,
they are not hid from his Face; neither is their Iniquity hid from his Eyes,
Jer. 16.17. Nay, and he is acquainted with the most Secret Thoughts and
Contrivances of their Hearts. The Lord searches all Hearts, and understands
all the Imaginations of the Thoughts, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.

He knows Things Past, Present, and to Come. As to things past, Past, Present
and to Come.
the knowledge of 'em is called Remembrance; and to signify his exact
Remembrance of the minutest Circumstances past in the World, God is said to
have a Book of Remembrance, Mal. 3.16. As to his Knowledge of things present,
that cannot but be most distinct, when all things are naked and open in his
sight, Heb. 4.13. And as to his Knowledge of things to come, all those
Predictions and Prophecies of future Events are so many Proofs of the thing.
And such a proof they are of the Infinite Extent of God's Knowledge, and indeed
of the Godhead it self, that he Challenges any of the Idols to give the like
Demonstration of their Divinity, Let them bring forth and show us what shall
happen, or declare us things to come, show the things that are to come
hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods, Isai. 41.22, 23.

2. And as to the manner of the Divine Knowledge, And infinitely more Perfectly
than Men or Angels.
the Perfection thereof is infinitely beyond what the most Knowing, and the
most Learned Men can pretend to: For first, His Knowledge is most deep and
intimate, reaching to the very Essence of things, ours but slight and
superficial; His is clear and distinct, ours but confused and dark; His
Infallible, ours liable to Mistake; And lastly, His Easy without Labor and
Difficulty, always present and actual, ours gotten by sore Travel, and easily
lost again by the defects of Memory, by Sickness, or by Age. There is no
searching of his Understanding, Isai. 40.28. such is the Perfection you see of
God's Knowledge.

VIII. And in like manner is he also Transcendent in WISDOM. VIII.
Transcendently Wise.
Wisdom is another Perfection of the Understanding. It consists in these four
Particulars, 1. In fixing upon a right and excellent End. 2. In choosing fit and
proper Means. 3. In observing advantageous Circumstances and Opportunities for
compassing a Design by its proper Means; And lastly, in overruling the
Stubbornness of Opposition, and the Perverseness of Men's Wills, so that all
Things shall work together to the Good designed, though without their own
Knowledge, and though never so contrary to their own purposes. And had we time to
surveigh the Wisdom of God in all these Particulars, we could not choose but cry
out with the Psalmist, Psalm. 147.5. that Great is the Lord, and Great is his
Power, yea, and that his Wisdom is infinite.

But this Attribute will be farther illustrated when we come to consider the
Works of God in the Creation of the World, in his Providence over it, and in
his Redemption of Mankind. To proceed then,

IX Transcendently good.
IX. God is transcendent in GOODNESS. The two former were Perfections of the
Divine Understanding, Goodness is perfective of the Will. And so great a
Perfection it is, that this is his Beloved Attribute, insomuch that whereas the
Exercise of Severity, the Act of his Justice, is called his strange Work, Isa.
28.21. Mercy which is the Issue of his Goodness, is that which he delights
in, Mich. 7.18. And the Nature of it is this, That he is both Infinitely
Excellent in his own Nature, and communicates thereof in various degrees to his
Creatures.

He is transcendently Good in his own Nature, insomuch that in comparison of
him none of his Creatures can be termed Good. There is none Good but God,
Matthew. 19.17. And he loves, out of the inexhaustible Fountain of his own
Goodness, to communicate himself to his Creatures. The Eyes of all Things wait
upon Thee, O Lord, and thou give 'em their Meat in due Season; Thou openest
thine Hand, and fillest all things living with Plenteousness, Psalm. 145.15, 16.

The Divine Goodness goes under various Titles, according to the difference of
the Objects toward which it is exercised.
And according as the Objects toward whom his Goodness is exercised do differ,
accordingly is his Goodness distinguished, and the Attribute it self goes under
several Names. Consider him as showing his Goodness to the whole Creation in
general, and he is Bountiful in alotting to every one of his Creatures their
proportion of Happiness agreeable to their several Natures and Capacities.
Whence it is said, that his Mercy is over all his Works, Psalm. 145.9.

Toward all Men God bears a Philanthropy and Loving Kindness.
Consider next his Kindness to the whole Race of Mankind, as well those who are
wicked, as those who are good, and his Goodness is then Philanthropy and Loving
Kindness, whereby he communicates manifold Blessings, and in great Measures to
all Men indifferently, and is sincerly desirous of their Happiness. Hence he
makes his Sun to rise on the Evil, and on the Good; and sends Rain on the
Just, and on the Unjust, Math. 5, 45. More particularly,

Toward the Wicked, he is long-suffering and patient.
Consider him next as exercising this his Goodness toward wicked Men, and
impenitent Sinners, and then he will appear to be exceedingly Long suffering
and Patient; The Lord is Long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3 9.

Consider him as exerting himself, nay, striving to reclaim these unhappy Men,
that they may not run themselves headlong into Sin and Misery and then he is
Gracious, Gracious.
and his Goodness is called the exceeding Riches of his Grace, as well it may,
Ephesians. 2.7. And then next to this,

Consider him as pardoning Sinners upon their Repentance and Amendment, and his
Goodness is then Mercy and Forgiveness. Merciful and forgiving.
And thou art a God ready to pardon, Gracious and Merciful, slow to Anger, and
of Great Kindness, Neh. 9.17. Ay, who is a God like unto thee, that pardons
Iniquity, and passes by the Transgression of his Heritage? He retains not
his Anger for ever, because he delights in Mercy, Mich. 7.18. Thus is he good
toward the very wicked: But then,

Consider his Goodness toward the Good and Virtuous, Toward the Virtuous he
bears a Complacency and Delight.
those who love and obey him, and it is Complacence and Delight in them,
whereby he cherishes 'em as his Children, protects 'em from Dangers, or
delivers 'em out of them; or at leastwise turns all to their Good in the end:
All this, even in this Life, O how Great is thy Goodness which thou have laid
up for them that fear thee, which thou have wrought for them that trust in
thee, before the Sons of Men, Psalm. 31.19.

But lastly, consider we his Goodness to such hereafter, in rewarding those who
have been his obedient Servants! and there wants then a word to express his
Goodness, the Measures of it are so exceeding great, since neither Eye has
seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of Man to conceive
what he has laid up for those that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9.

Such is the Goodness of God in all the Branches and Issues of it. It is not a
Fondness to some particular Persons which fixes by Chance and Humor upon 'em,
and then overlooks their Miscarriages, and can see none of their Misdeservings;
Nor is it an Easiness that will be wrought upon by mere Importunities to pardon
the Sins of unrepenting and hardn'd Sinners: Nor lastly is it a Tenderness that
relents at the sight of a miserable Object, and will therefore rescue the
Wicked out of their Everlasting Miseries, because it cannot bear their Sighs
and Groans. No certainly, his is the Goodness, not like that of a fond Mother,
but of a wise Governor. For,

X. As God is transcendent in Goodness, so also in JUSTICE, X. Transcendently
Just.
which is another Moral Perfection in the Rational Nature. And being the
highest Perfection of the Creature is but a mere Shadow of the Divine
Excellencies, the Righteousness of the most perfect Saints falls infinitely
short of the Justice of God, which is That Rectitude of the Divine Nature,
whereby he neither wills nor acts any thing, but what is perfectly agreeable to
the highest Reason; Governs the World by the most Righteous Laws, and passes a
most just Judgment upon every Man according to his Works, without respect of
Persons.

He neither wills nor acts any thing but what is agreeable to the highest
Reason. And it is no less than Blasphemy to represent God, Both willing and
acting agreeably to the highest Reason.
as if he governed the World by mere Will and arbitrary Pleasure, having no
regard to the Qualifications of those whom he justifies or condemns, but made
Millions of Men, and even before he created 'em, reprobated 'em to Eternal
Damnation, merely to show the Power of his Justice (as they will call it, but
such would rather deserve the Name of the cruel'st Tyranny) in condemning 'em
afterward to Everlasting Torments. But far be it from any pious Mind to
conceive thus unworthily of God. He will be found indeed to inflict the most
dismal and terrible Punishments upon both Devils and wicked Men; but that will
be upon such justifiable Reasons, as will leave even the Damned themselves, and
that in the midst of all their Tortures, without Excuse. For why,

Governing the World by the most Righteous Laws.
He governs the World by the most Righteous Laws, such as are best suited to
the Nature and Faculties of Reasonable Creatures, and which do all of 'em tend
to perfect our Natures, even to the rendering us like to God and his Holy
Angels; whereas the Courses and Ways of Life opposite to his Laws, do debase
Men below the Vileness of the Beasts that perish, and render 'em Bruits and
Devils in their Natures and Dispositions.

Rewarding every Man according to his Works.
And as all God's Laws are infinitely Reasonable and Just, so he never sails to
pass a most righteous Judgment on every Man according to his Works. Both the
Rewards of the Righteous and of the Wicked, will be greater or less
proportionable to the Good and Evil of their Deeds, but both the one and the
other will be endless and everlasting. That the very imperfect Virtues of good
Men should be so extraordinarily recompensed, even with unspeakable and endless
Joys, none do complain of, as any thing contrary to Equity and Reason. But
there are some who are ready to object against the Justice of God's Alotments,
with respect to the Wicked, that he should punish momentany and transient Sins
with eternal Woes and Miseries. But to clear the Divine Justice of any
Hardship, contrary to Reason and Equity, in this, it must be considered, that
these Everlasting Punishments are Legal Penalties, which the Great Lawgiver
does inflict for the Violation of his Laws: And if all wise Lawgivers, who
will preserve the Authority of their Government and Edicts, find it necessary
to inflict sometimes severer Penalties for lesser Crimes in their own Nature;
and indeed be the Offense what it will, such as are sufficient to deter
Offenders from the Violation of their Laws, and to secure their Government over
their Subjects: The Infliction therefore of Eternal Punishments are no more
than Necessary and Reasonable, since as great as they are (considering the
Allurements to Sin are present, and consequently more tempting, and these
Punishments apprehended at a great distance) they are found little enough to
restrain obstinate and perverse Sinners from persevering in Wickedness. In
short, all those Kinds, Measures, and Degrees of Punishment, are Just,
Equitable, and Reasonable; which are no more than necessary to preserve the
Authority of Government, and the Sacredness of its Law: And thus may the
Justice of God be fairly accounted for, as rewarding no otherwise than
according to Men's Works, though he inflicts upon 'em for their Temporary
Transgressions, Eternal Punishments.

Rewarding or punishing without respect of Persons.
Lastly, and in all his Alotments and Distributions of Justice, he is very
Impartial, Rewarding or Punishing without respect of Persons, for he accepts
not the Person of Princes, nor regards the Rich more than the Poor, for all
are the work of his Hands, Job 34.19. Such is the Justice of God.

XI. Transcendently True, viz.
XI. And as he is Infinitely Just, so he is Transcendently TRVE. His Veracity is
an Attribute of the greatest importance to be known, and considered by us. And
it consists in these particulars, That he is Sincere in all his Declarations,
Faithful in all his Promises, and certain to Execute his Vengeance upon Sinners
according to his Threatenings.

(...)
