Vindiciae Pietatis: OR, A VINDICATION OF Godliness

In the greatest Strictness and Spiritualit^ of it From the Imputations of
FOLLY and FANCY.

Together with Several Directions for the Attaining and Maintaining of a Godly
Life.

By R. A.

London, Printed in the Year, 1665.

To my dearly Beloved in Christ, the inhabitants of the Parish of B. in the
County of S.
My dearly beloved Brethren,
THe ensuing Sermons, as they had their Birth for your sakes, so are they now
offered into your hands; and they come unto you, upon the same important
errand, upon which their Author has been sent among you, viz. to show you the
Path of life, and to bring you into, and establish you in, that holy state and
way that leads to everlasting Blessedness.

The chief hindrances of Sinners eternal Happiness (next to that innate enmity
against God and Godleness, which is rooted in their hearts) are, their
prejudices against, and their ignorance of the good ways of the Lord.

Satan and his Instruments have made it their business, by those vollies of
reproaches and unreasonable calumnies, which they are continually discharging
against holiness, to render it in the judgment of the World, an empty and
contemptible thing.

Two things there are, amongst many others, which they lay to the reproach of
it. The one that it is folly; whatever there may be in this Godliness, yet it
is attended with so many difficulties, dangers, and hazards, and will be such
an unsufferable prejudice to all that will have much to do with it, that it is
a foolish thing, upon such hazards and disadvantages to adventure upon it. If
this will not do, but the consciences of Men, whilst they apprehend the real
worth and excellency of it, stand convinced, that it is not Folly but wisdom,
to adventure on any difficulties, to run any hazards, for so glorious a prize:
then comes in the second reproach, That it is but a device, a specious
contrivance, to take up eager heads, to amuse and divert the busy, and keep in
awe weak souls, when if it be enquired into, notwithstanding its glorious
pretenses, it will be found nothing else but imagination, mere fancy, and no
reality at all in the heart of it.

These impressions I have endeavored, according to my might, to wipe away from
your hearts; and the hearts of such as read, what you have heard, in the
ensuing discourses; where, I hope, you will see, both sufficient reason, whence
to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, to establish your hearts in the
firm belief, and resolved embracing of it: and abundant encouragement, to hold
on your holy course to the end.

The other hindrance of a Godly Life, is men's ignorance; They walk not in the
way of the Lord, because they know not the way of the Lord; some rude and dark
notions of Religion possibly they may have, but wherein the Spirit and life of
Godliness stands, and how to set upon an holy and heavenly course they cannot
tell. This hindrance I have in part prevented in that Description I have given
of a godly man, and more fully removed in those Directions which I have
subjoyned, for the obtaining and carrying on a godly Life.

Brethren, my hearts desire and Prayer for you is, that what I have done may be
successful to your souls; that you may be saved, as the Apostle speaks; that
you may be brought into, and established in the way of truth, and may be found
walking in the way of Righteousness. And if the Lord shall be pleased so to
follow these my endeavors with his Blessing, that they may contribute any
thing to this end; if the Lord shall so animate these (otherwise) dead words,
by his quickening Spirit, that any souls of them that are without may be added
to the Church, that any cubits may be added to the stature of those that are
within, it shall be a Crown to me, and exceeding Cause of rejoicing. Let the
Lord Almighty have the praise for ever, as from all such who shall reap any
benefit hereby; So from the soul of

Your Servant in R. A.

The Contents of the Sermons on Ephesians. 5. 15.
THe Text opened. Page 2 The Doctrine propounded. Precisians are no fools.
ibid. The Doctrine explained, 1. Precisians are described, 1. Negatively, to be
1. No Pharisee. 3 2. No Phanatick ib. 3. No Phrenetick ib. 2. Positively, 1. By
their make or constitution. They are formed after the image of God 5 2. By
their way or conversation. Where is considered, 1. The end of their
conversation. Where they are described to be, men that are traveling to
another world. 8 2. Their course, I. They take the right way Which is, 1.
Described to be, The Old and Good The New and Living The Strait and Narrow Way
ib. 2. Proved to be the most excellent Way. It is, 1. The way of Truth 14 2.
The way of Holiness 15 3. The way of God 16 4. The way of the Kingdom 17 II.
They are upright in the way 19 Their uprightness is considereed, as it has
respect To the Commandment To Conscience 21, Their uprightness as it respects
the Commandment, stands 1. In their having respect to every Command 23 2. In
having respect to the most spiritual and in ward part of every Command. 24 3.
In the endeavor to observe every Command to the utmost. 25 1. They endeavor
to get up to the highest pitch of affection, care, and activity ib. 2. They
study and seek out after opportunities for service. 26 3. They shun occasions
and temptations to sin 27 4. They obstain from all appearance of evil 28 Two
things added, 1. When they have done all that they can, they acknowledge
themselves unprofitable servants 30 2. Whatever they have done, they dare not
trust upon it, or be found in their own righteousness 32 Their uprightness as
it respects Conscience, expressed in two particulars 1. They take great care of
Conscience 34 1. About the instructing and informing conscience. ib. 2. About
keeping Conscience tender 35 2. They give good heed to Conscience, harkening
to, and following in without turning aside 1. To the right hand, either 1. By
putting Religion in those things wherein God has put none 43 2. By putting
more Religion in any thing than God has put in it ibid. 2. To the left hand 45
1. By making sins no sin, duties no duty ib. 2. By making bold with known sins
and duties ib. III. From this way they will not be drawn aside, by any fears or
dangers on the one hand, or by any flatteries or advantages on the other 46 1.
A Summary description of these Precisians 51 2. Precisians are proved to be no
fools from four Reasons, Reas. 1. God accounts them no fools 54 Reas. 2. They
will not be accounted fools at last, neither by God nor men 55 Reas. 3. The
properties of wise men are found in them 58 1. They understand themselves
aright. They understand, 1. Their Interest ib. 2. Their way 60 2. They build
sure 64 Reas. 4. The treasures of wisdom are found with them, they have gotten
great treasure 66 1. The Pearl 67 2. The white Stone 68 3. The white. Robe 69
4. The Adoption 71 5. The Inheritance 73 Use 1. Advising the profane world to
forbear censuring or reproaching them 77 Use 2. Persuading them to come in and
be of this number 80 The absolute necessity of precise godliness is evidenced
1. From Scripture 82 2. From Reasons drawn from Scripture, in six Propositions
1. The Gospel requires, as indispensably necessary to Salvation, inward
Holiness 86 2. This inward Holiness which the Gospel requires, is an holy frame
or habit 87 3. This inward habitual holiness stands in an universal compliance
of the heart with the whole will of God 88 4. This inward habitual holiness is
such as bears the sway, and has the pre-eminence in the soul 89 5. This
inward, habitual prevailing holiness, wherever it is, will infallibly bring
forth a precise and circumspect life 90 Therefore 6. Whosoever is not a person
of a precise life, is undoubtedly in the state of damnation
The Contents of the Sermon, on John. 1. 47.
THe Text opened. 94 The Doctrine propounded. Godliness is no Fancy 95 The
Doctrine explained 96 The Doctrine confirmed ib. I. The Principles or Doctrines
of Godliness are no Fancies Instanced in the Doctrines, 1. of God, his Being
and Holiness 97 2. Of Sin 100 3. Of Redemption 109 4. Of Regeneration 115 5.
Of Faith 123 6. Of Good Works 126 7. Of Judgment 140 II. The Duties and
Comforts of Godliness are no fancies 151 Instanced in the Duties of 1.
Worshipping God in the Spirit ib. 2. Walking in the Spirit 1. What is meant by
the Spirit 157 2. What by walking in the Spirit 158 1. Living under the conduct
of the Spirit 160 2. Living in the power of the Spirit ib. 3. Living a
spiritual life. 161 The Life of the Saints evidenced to be a spiritual and
Heavenly life by three things. 1. Their chief dealings are about spiritual and
heavenly things 162 2. Their delights are in spiritual and heavenly things. 3.
By their spiritual dealings and delights themselves grow daily more and more
spiritual and heavenly 166 3. That walking in the spirit is no fancy 167 Proved
from four damnable absurdities that would otherwise follow, viz. If there be no
such thing really as walking in the Spirit. 1. Then the Spirit of God is
unfaithful in his Office 170 2. Then God himself is false in his promise 171 3.
Then the Devil does more to the damning than the spirit of God does to the
saving of souls ibid. 4. Then God has no people in the world 173 An exception
against the reality of the delights, joys, and comforts of godliness answered
174
The Application.
Use. Of Direction. 1. To the ungodly, in order to the bringing them to a godly
life 194 Direct. 1. Get these three Principles fixed in your hearts, 1. That
things Eternal are unspeakably more considerable than t^ings temporal. 195 2.
That things not seen are as infallibly certain as the things that are seen 198
3. That according to your present choice must be your eternal lot 202 Direct.
2. Make your choice 203 Direct. 3. Imbarque with Christ. 204 Direct. 4. Resign
up your selves to Christ 210 Direct. 5. Confirm and complete all by solemn
Covenant 215 2. To the Godly, in order to the carrying them on in a Godly Life
227 To whom are given Directions, 1. Concerning holy Duties 2. Concerning the
leading an holy life. Four things premised concerning the influence of holy
duties on an holy Life 1. Holy Duties are the exercise of Grace 228 2. In holy
Duties we have communion with God ibid. 3. By holy duties we obtain new and
fresh supplies from God 229 4. Holy Duties are our conflicting with corruption
232 The Directions concerning holy Duties are such as have respect, 1. To the
right performance of them 2. To the right improvement of them Directions for
the right performance of the duty of Prayer 1. Be constant in the exercise of
daily Prayer 233 2. Come to pray with actual and great expectation 237 3. Learn
the skill to plead with God in Prayer 238 Four special arguments, from which
the Saints may plead with God in prayer, viz. from 1. God himself, his Gracious
Nature 239 Glorious Name 241 2. Christ 1. Gods gift of Christ ibid. 2. Christ's
purchase ibid. 3. The Interest which Christ has in the Father 242 4. The
interest the Saints have in Christ ib. 3. Promises 4. Experiences. The use and
benefit of the Saints pleading with God in prayer 243 Four special arguments
from which Sinners may plead with God in prayer 244 1. God Gracious nature 246
2. Gods call and invitation 247 3. Christ his Sufficiency 248 Office 249 4
Their own necessity ib. 4. Prayer in Faith 251 Directions for performing the
Duty of holy meditations Page 239 1. The chief matters to be meditated on,
reduced to seven Heads 1. God 240 2. Sin 244 3. Christ 247 4. The vanity and
misery of a worldly life 251 5. The nature, excellency, and necessity of a
godly Life 254 6. Death and Judgment 257 7. Eternity 263 Some particular advice
for the better managing of this duty 269 Directions for the right performance
of the Duty of Self-Examination 271 The matters to be examined, 1. Whether you
be in a state of grace, or in a state of Sin 273 There are three marks for the
trial of that 274 2. Whether you are in a languishing or flourishing state 286
Three helps for the finding out that 287 Several causes of languishing, or
hindrances of flourishing in grace, 1. Overly performance of Christian duties
289 2. Unprofitable converse with Christian Friends ibid. 3. Unnecessary
converse with carnal friends ib. 4. Overmuch business in the world 290 5. The
remaining guilt of some unrepented sin ib. 6. Some unmortified lust ib. 7.
Sloathfulnesse 291 8. Contentedness with a poor and low condition ib.
Directions for the renewing your Covenant Four things p^emised 1. Every sincere
Christian is entered into Covenant with God 309 2. Christians do often break
Covenant ib. 3. Breaches of Covenant do weaken the obligation of the Covenant,
and how 311 4. The renewing of your Covenant does revive the obligation of it
312 Directions, 1. For the time when, Four special times when this Duty is to
be performed ib. 2. For the manner how. Directions for the right improvement of
holy Duties 1. When ever you set upon Duty, resolve to put hard for it, to
obtain such sensible communion with God in it, that you may come off with some
lively impressions of God upon your hearts 315 2. What holy, lively frame you
have attained to in duty be careful to maintain afterward, from duty to duty
317 Directions for the carrying on a constant holy course I. In your whole
course pursue, and as much as possible, eye your End, God and your own
Salvation 322 II. Walk on in the Name of the Lord Jesus, or live by Faith 327
III. Deny your selves 331 IV. Order your selves aright in those things that
especially concern your selves 337 1. Allow not your selves in the practice of
the least known sin 2. Live not in the ^^glect of any known Duty 340 3. Take
heed of the World 344 4. Be humble 352 5. Temperate 356 6. Be Moderate ibid V.
Carry your selves well toward others 357 1. Toward all men 358 Be True ibid.
Just 359 Merciful 360 Peaceable 361 Courteous 363 2. Toward your Families. 368
Four General Directions for a Conclusion of the whole. In your whole holy
Course and all the Duties of it I. Be Sincere. 371 II. Be Steady and Even. 378
III. Be fruitful. 379 IV. Be steadfast and unmovable. 381 The great danger of
falling off from God and an holy life, is in time of Trouble. 38^ What kind of
troubles are the greatest Temptations Apostasy and Backsliding. What Is the
best course to prevent Apostasy in times of Tribulation. I. Try your selves
well before band. 383 Try, 1. What your are in the state of your souls, as to
the main. ibid. 2. What you are in your active obedience. ibid. 3. How you
carry your selves under the smaller crosses that come daily upon you. 386 4.
What you are in the Temptations of Prosperity 388 II. Mortify the flesh. 389
III. Be convinced of the misery ^f Apostates and Backsliders. 391 IV. Walk
circumspectly, take heed that you neither speak, do, nor suffer any thing, 395
1. Rashly. 396 2. Obstinately. ibid. 3. Proudly. ibid. 4. Ignorantly. 397 5.
Vnpeaceably. ibid. V. Be Resolute.
Ephesians. 5. 15. See then that ye walk circumspectly not as Fools, but as Wise.
IN the first Verse of this Chapter, the Apostle exhorts to the whole duty of
Christians, Be ye followers of God; the same Exhortation he gives in other
terms, verse 8. Walk as Children of light: both which Exhortations are
comprehensive in the whole duty of Christians.

In the following Verses, he gives particular Rules and Directions, respecting
the par^^cular duties of Religion; 1. Walk in Love, verse ^^ Flee all iniquity,
both, 1. Greater iniquities, For (...) cation and all uncleanness, or
Covetousness. (...) ^^ller iniquities; 1. The evils of the tongue; neith^r
filthiness, that is, filthy talking, nor foolish tal^ing, no^ jesting, which
are not convenient. Not only evil works, but evil words, not only an (...)
conversation, but corrupt communication, (...) comply in the Saints. 3.
Partaking in other men^ (...) verse. 7. which he further ^ehorts from verse. 11.
(...) ^^ing them 1. To have no communion with them (...) no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness: 2. To be guilty of no connivance at them, but
rather reprove them.

Of these strict Rules in the Text, he presses the strict observation: See that
ye walk circumspectly, with an eye to every duty, to every direction; not only
the greater and more weighty duties of Religion, but the lesser and smaller
parts of it, even to all that the Lord requires.

In the words you may observe,

1. A strict charge; See, or look diligently and carefully to it.

2. The matter given in charge, Walk circumspectly, which some render walk
warily; others, accurately, exactly, others walk precisely, and that a learned
Critic affirms, the word (...) most properly signifies, precisely.

3. A commendation of this circumspect walking; This is wise walking, not as
fools, but as wise: Intimating, that to walk loosely, is to walk foolishly, to
walk circumspect, is to walk wisely, as men of wisdom.

The observations from these words, are chiefly these two:

Doct. 1. Christians must be Precisians.

2. Precisians are no fools, or, Christians of an exact an^ circumspect life,
are whatever the World accounts of them, truly wise men: This latter
Observation is it that I intend to insist upon.

Beloved, I am entering upon a discourse of a sort o^ people, of whom we may
say, with those (...), Acts 28. 22. Concerning this Sect, we know that it is
every where spoken against; And, who with the Apostles, 1 Cor. 4. 9. Are made a
spectacle to the World, and to Angels, and to Men: concerning whom Heaven and
Earth are divided, and the World is divided within it self: Of whom God says,
The World is not worthy; Of whom the World say, They are not worthy to live: Of
whom God says, They are the Apple of mine eye; Of whom the world says, They
are a sore in our eye; whom God accounts his Jewels, whom men account the filth
of the world, and the off scouring of all things: Of whom God says, They are
the Sons of Wisdom, but men say, They are fools. And, as God, and Men are thus
divided, so are men no less divided amongst themselves. Some few say concerning
these, as they concerning Christ. They are good men: Others say, No, but they
are deceivers of the people. A Precisian, with the most, is grown into a
Proverb of Reproach, a mark of Infamy To be a Drunkard, a Fornicator, a
Swearer, is no reproach, in comparison, of being noted for a Puritan.

Well, but let us enquire a little more narrowly into the way and manner of
this sort of people, about whom the World is thus moved, and has been in all
Ages.

In order hereunto I shall show you,

First, What a Precisian is; and secondly, prove to you, against all the World,
that he is no Fool, but a truly, yea, the only wise man, which if I do not,
through the help of God, make evident to the Consciences of impartial and
unprejudiced persons, let me pass for a deceiver.

Touching the former, What a Precisian is, a Scripture Precisian. Let me first
tell you, to prevent mistakes, who he is not.

1. Not a Pharisee, a painted Sepulcher, whose Religion is a mere show: who
has the Form of Godliness without the power; who is pure in his own eyes, and
yet not cleansed from his filthiness; who is exact about the punctilio's of
Religion, and has a great Zeal about the minima Leges, the lower and more
circumstantial matters, and neglects the weightier things of the Law, this is
not he.

2. Not a Phanatick, properly so called, (though that be a vizard put upon him
by some, as the Hides of Beasts were put upon the Christians of old) not a
Phanatick, I say, whose Religion is all Fancy. Imagination, Enthusiasms, the
Dreams and Visions of his own Heart; Neither is this he. Christianity is not a
Castle in the air, but is a building that has Foundation.

3. Not a Phrenetick, no son of violence or Contentions, who not knowing what
spirit he is of, calls for fire from Heaven to set all in combustion, if every
thing be not exactly fashioned according to his own mind. Neither is this he,
The Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable; the servants of
the Lord must not strive, but be gentle, etc.

By a Precisian, I mean a sincere circumspect Christian, one whose care and
endeavor is, To walk uprightly, according to the truth of the Gospel, who
withdrawing himself from the Fellowship, Fashions and Lusts of the World, and
denying himself the sinful Liberties thereof, does exercise himself to keep a
good conscience toward God and men. This is the person against whom the great
hate and envy, and severe censures and calumnies of ungodly men, are chiefly
intended, under what color, or disguise soever they are carried; the enmity is
not betwixt sinners and Hypocrites, but betwixt Sinners and Saints; the seed of
the Serpent, and the seed of the woman, not the pretended, but the true seed,
Israelities indeed, are the Men whom the Ishmaelites persecute Gal. 4. 29. He
that was born after the flesh, persecuted him not that pretended to be, but was
born after the Spirit. Of this Person, or of this sort of people, I shall give
you a more full description in these two Particulars.

1. By their Make, or Constitution. 2. By their Way, or Conversation.
1. By their Constitution, they are made and cut out exactly according to the
pattern, they are born of the Spirit, born of God and they bare the express
Image of their Father upon them: Col. 3. 10. Renewed after the Image of Him
that created him; they are of a new Make, from what they were, there is a
mighty change wrought in and upon them, 2 Cor. 3. 18. (...), We are changed
into the same image, In our first birth, we were brought forth in the Image of
our first Father, Genesis 5. 3. Adam begat a Son in his own Image, that is, a
fleshly and earthly Image. The first man was of the Earth, earthly, and such
are all his natural Progeny, an earthly seed, an earthly Generation; he that is
born of the Spirit, is brought forth in a spiritual frame, John 3. 6. That
which is born of the Spirit is spirit: He that is born from above is of an
Heavenly Nature, as well as Original. The change that Religion makes on men, is
not such a low and inconsiderable thing as some Men make it, standing only in
some little Reformation of the Life, but it consists chiefly in the renewing of
the Sonl after the Image of God, the forming of Christ upon the heart of Inner
Man. As that second change, which shall be at the Resurrection, will be the
transforming of our vile bodies, into the likeness of Christ's Glorious Body;
so this first change is a transforming of our vile souls into the likeness of
his glorious Spirit. Christians are the Temples of the Lord, and as Moses made
the Tabernacle exactly according to the pattern showed him in the Mount, so
these spiritual Temples are made exactly according to their pattern, 2 Cor. 3.
3. They are the Epistles of Christ, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit
of the living God, not in Tables of stone, but in fleshly Tables of the heart.
Carnal Men plead hard for their Christianity, they are all Christians, all
Disciples, all the people of God, though they be ignorant, Unbelieving,
Earthly. Sensual, yet some kind of Profession (such as it is) there is among
them, a profession of Faith, a profession of Repentance, which, though it
amount to little more than bare ( saying) I believe, I repent, I am sorry for
my Sins, yet this must pass for Christianity. But (as Christ once said to the
tempting Jews (whose is this Image and superscription? Where is the Divine
Stamp and Impress? Where is your likeness to Christ? Is there not still the
Visage of the Old man? Is there not the old Pride, the old Envy, the old Enmity
against Holiness, the old Guile, and Falsehood, and Lust still spread over you?
Is this the Image of Christ? Christians that are truly such, are precisely
formed according to this pattern; they have Face for Face, Limb for Limb; Grace
for Grace; all the Grace that is in Christ, is truly, though not yet perfectly
coppied out upon them, though the Characters may be something blotted and
obscured, by reason of the remainders of corruption, yet there they are; the
same mind, the same heart that was in Christ, is in them. A true Christian is a
Transcript of Christ. As he is, so we are in the World.

This inward change; this forming of Christ upon the heart, is the very Soul
and Life of Christianity; you may as well call him a Man whose Soul is not in
him, as you may call him a Christian, who has not the Spirit of Christ in him.
Let no man count himself a Christian from any outward privileges, much less
from any outward Paint of Christianity, but from the inward Prints of it upon
his heart. Thou hopest thou art a Christian, but where is the Image and
superscription of Christ upon thy heart? Do thou not find, not only an
unlikenesse to Christ, but a dislike of Christ, an inward loathing of the
holiness of Christ, and a rising of heart against the strictness of that holy
life which he requires? Do thou not find a favor of earthlinesse and
fleshlinesse beating the sway and rule in thine heart? Do thou not find
principles, tending altogether to looseness and licenciousnesse? Is this thy
likeness to Christ? Do thou not find an emptiness of the Light, Life, Love,
Grace of Christ in thy Soul? Whatever thou have of Christ without, thou have
nothing of Christ within. Deceive not thy self, God is a Spirit, and his eye is
first upon the spirits and souls of men; he loves truth in the inward parts, he
loves holiness in the inward parts; He is a Jew which is one inwardly, and he
is a Christian which is one inwardly: He is not a Christian, who is only
outwardly so. Nay further, as he is not a Christian, which is not inwardly so,
so neither he that has something of the inwards of a Christian, and has not
radically all the Graces of Christ in him; he that has faith, and has not
Charity, he that has the light of a Christian, and not the love, he that has
the desires of a Christian, and not the conscience of a Christian, he that
wants any one of the vital parts of Christianity, has nothing at all; a through
Christian is throughout conform to the pattern. And thus you have a description
of Scripture Precisians, by their Make or Constitution.

II. I shall describe them by their Conversation, and that 1. By the end of
their Conversation. 2. By their course or Motion to this end.



1. By the end of their Conversation; What is it that these Men would have, or
whither are they bound? They cannot be content to go along with their
Neighbors, to live and do as others: whither is it that they are going, or
what is it that they would have? Why this is it, they are traveling
Heavenward, trading to another Country; they are bound for the holy Land, for
the holy City, they are going toward Sion or Jerusalem, which is above. Jerem.
58. 5. They shall ask the way to Sion with their faces thitherward. Sion was
the ancient seat of Gods residence among his People, the place of Gods solemn
service, where he was wont to meet his People, and appear unto them. This Son
which was here below, the place of Gods gracious presence, was a type of that
Sion which is above, Heaven, the peace of Gods glorious presence; this sort of
people are traveling Heavenward; they are those Strangers and Pilgrims here
on Earth, mentioned, Heb. 11. 13, 14. That are seeking a Country, not an
earthly, but an Heavenly Country, as is there expressed. There are two things in
the forementioned Text, that discover whither they are traveling. 1. The
inquiry they make, you may guess whither a Traveller is going, when you hear
him ask diligently the way to such or such a place. They shall ask the way to
Sion. 2. Their setting their faces thitherward, They shall ask, etc. with
their. Faces thither-ward. Their setting their Faces toward Sion, notes two
things. 1. Their looking wishly toward it, a Travelers eye is much toward
his journeys end; Christians that are making Heavenward are much and often
looking Heavenward; a Christians heart is in his eye, and his eye is on his
home. 2. Their setting their faces thither-ward, notes the bending of their
course thither-ward. 'Twas said of Christ, Luke 9. 51. He set his face to go to
Jerusalem. Christians set their faces Heavenward, and thither they bend their
course. They are much in asking the way, What must I do to be saved? who shall
ascend into the holy Hill? what manner of persons must we be, that we may get
thither? and they take the way that leads thither.

And this is a further Description of this sort of people, they are men for
another Country, men for another world; they are born from Above, and they seek
things Above; they are risen with Christ, and they are ascending unto Christ;
their treasure is above, their hopes are above, and thither are they hastening;
whatever they have of this worlds goods for the support of their life, yet
these things are not the scope and end of their life: They seek that glory,
honor, and Immortality which comes from God, and they are going on from
strength to strength, till they come and appear before God in Sion. And herein
lies a special difference betwixt them and all others whatsoever: Worldly men
are men for this world, for a wordly happiness, for a wordly heaven, an heaven
on earth; or if they have any thoughts or hopes of another heaven, yet they
think not so much of it as to ask the way thither, How seldom do we hear any
such question put by them, What must I do to be saved? What must I do to be
Rich? Which is the way to Honor and temporal Preferment? or how may I escape
trouble and save my self harmless? These iniquities, and such like, are
ordinarily in their hearts and mouths: but such a serious question as this,
What must I do to be saved? comes so seldom from any of them, that it is a
wonder how the Devil with all his skill can make them once believe or hope that
ever they shall attain to that salvation: or if they do ask the way to Heaven.
Yet it is not with their faces but with their backs thither-ward: whatever
little talk there may fall in sometimes about Souls and eternal salvation, yet
their faces are set another way, they bend their course to Egypt and Sodom,
toward their wealth or their wickedness. Hearken, O ye foolish wordlings, you
say every one of you, you hope for salvation, but which way are your faces set?
whither are you going? Is that way of Swearing, Lying, and Lust, and carnal
Liberty, and Covetousness, and Sensuality, to which you give up your selves, is
this the way of Life? In this a sincere Christian is differenced from all
others in the world, he fixes his heart, and his hope, and aims upon an eternal
happiness, and he bends his course toward the obtaining of it.

2. By their course or motion toward this end. And here I shall give you a
threefold description of them: 1. They are such as walk in a right way. 2.
They are upright and exact in the way. 3. From this way they will not be turned
aside by any flatteries of the world on one hand or frowns on the other.


I. They are such as walk in the right Way which is called sometimes the way of
the Lord, sometimes the way of Truth, sometimes the way of Righteousness,
sometimes the way of Life, Psa. 1. 1, 2. Psalm. 116. 1. They understand which is
the right way by these three pair of way-marks.

1. The Old and Good way. 2. The New and Living way. 3. The Strait and narrow
way.
First, The Old and Good way, that is the right way, that is the way they are
commanded to enquire after and take, Jer, 6. 16. Stand ye in the ways and see,
ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein. Stand ye in the
ways and see. There are many ways in the world, some that are apparently the
way of Death, and not a few that pretend to be the way of Life. If you would
know which of these ways is the right, ask for the old Path, the Good way: The
old path, that which was from the beginning. Godliness is no innovation, it is
as old as the world, 1 John. 1. 1. That which was from the beginning declare we
unto you. Then it is the good as well as the old way. Antiquity alone is not
enough to prove that we are in the right; there is an evil way that is an old
way, the way of sin is very ancient. The Right way is the Old and Good way;
there is a threefold good, Profitable, Pleasant, and Honest. Though the Right
way have both profit and pleasure in it: yet the proper Character of it is, the
honest way, the way of Righteousness, Mercy, Holiness, etc. Mic. 6. 8. He has
showed thee, O man: what is good; to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God. This is good, the good way. Phil. 4. 8, 9. whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, etc. these things do, and the God of Peace shall be
with you.

Secondly, The new and living way. Three things, it may be, you will ask me
about this.

1. What is this new and Living way.

I answer, Christ is this way, John 14. 6. I am the way. Hebr. 10. 19. Having
therefore boldness to enter into the holiest; verse 20. By a new and living
way, which he has consecrated for us, etc. a Christian that walks Heavenward
walks in Christ, Col. 2. 6. He walks in Union with Christ, in the Name, and
strength, and spirit of Christ, he that is not in Christ is out of his way,
whatever good there seems to be in the way he is going, yet it is not saving
good.

2. Whether there be two right ways?

I answer, No but one; it is true, there is mention made also of the way of
Gods Commandments, but these make not two distinct ways, but are one and the
same way; faith in Christ, and obedience to the Law of God, are the one way of
Life: He that walks in God walks in Christ, it is through Christ, and our Union
with him, that we are strengthened and enabled to do the will of God, it is
through Christ that what we do is accepted of God; there is no act of
obedience, be it never so excellent for the matter of it, that is a step to the
Kingdom of God, that has not something of Christ in it, that is not done
through his Spirit, and sprinkled with his Blood: and so on the other side,
whatever faith, and hope, and confidence we have in Christ, if it be not such a
faith, such an hope as brings forth obedience to the will of God, it cannot
save us: this way of faith and obedience, this is the ^ight way, and the one
and only way of Life. In all that general Assembly and Church of the
firstborn, that are already in Heaven, there is not one soul but entered by
this one way. Abel, and Enoch, and Abraham and Moses, and David, and Peter, and
Paul, with the whole generation of Saints now in glory, they all went the same
way, they walked with God, and lived and dyed in Faith, and now inherit the
Promises. And all the residue of Saints that are yet in their Pilgrimage; yea,
whoever shall be in the Ages to come, must by this one way enter into the
Kingdom of God. This is the good and old way which was from the beginning, this
is the new and living way which shall be to the end, Tit. 2. 8. These things I
will that thou affirm constantly, That they which have believed in God might be
careful to maintain good works; these things are good and profitable for men.
If this be so, if this be the one and only way of Life, then in what case are
the sinful unbelieving world? Whither are ye going, Oh ye sons of folly? You
tell us, you hope to be saved, what in your unbelief and folly? Search and see
if in the whole Book of God you find any other way of Salvation, but Faith in
Christ, and obedience to the Gospel.

3. How can one and the same way be old, and yet new? I answer, It Is old, and
yet not antiquated, it is new, and yet no Innovasion; it is old, because it was
from the beginning; it is new, because now in the latter end of the world it
has been newly cast up, made more plain, easy and open.

Thirdly, The strait and narrow Way, Matthew. 7. 14. Strait is the Gate, and
narrow is the way that leads unto life. Christians must go by a line, there
is no Elbow-room for Lust to expatiate, every step on this hand, or on that, is
a deviation; it is a Way that is hedged in; the Commandment is the hedge, which
limits us within a very narrow path: Christians must live by Rule, they must
not eat nor drink but by Rule, they must not buy nor sell but by Rule, they
must not work nor ^it still, they must not speak nor keep silence but by Rule,
Gal. 6. 16. As many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them. It Is
also a narrow Way, the word might have well been translated, a troublesome, or
painful way; the Verb from which the word comes, signifies to oppress: there
are many pressures and afflictions to be met withal in this Way, the Cross is
a Christians Waymark; Through many Tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom
of God: The way of sin is a plain, there is neither hedge nor ditch to limit
them, there is neither bush nor brake to discourage them.

Now this is the way which circumspect Christians take; this Good and Old Way,
this New and Living Way, this Strait and Narrow way, this is the Right Way, and
this is also the most Excellent Way. For,

1. It is the Way of Truth, Psalm. 11. 30. I have chosen the way of truth: John
14. 6. I am the Way, and the truth, and the life: It is the Way which the Truth
or Word of God does prescribe to us, it is the true Way, that is indeed in all
the parts of it that which it declares it self to be: The way of sinners is a
lie, a way made up of lies; The evil works of sinners are lies, Prove. 11. 16.
The wicked work a deceitful work, the work of a lie; the words signify, their
words are lying words, their very duties are a lie, Hos. 11. 12. Ephraim
compasses me about with lies: that is, with lying Duties, lying Prayers, lying
Sacrifices, lying Praises, their Prayers are no Prayers, their Sacrifices are
no Sacrifices, they do but dissemble with God, and deceive themselves in all
their performances, their hopes are a lie, their comforts are a lie, their
Refuges are a lie; the way of sinners is wholly made up of lies: But the way of
Christians is a true way, their Duties their Comforts, their Joys, their Hopes
have truth and reality in them, Psalm 25. 10. All the paths of the Lord are
mercy and truth to them that keep his Covenant. Now look what excellency there
is of truth above a lie; so great is the Excellency of this way of Christians
above all other ways.

2. It is the way of Righteousness and Holiness; Holiness has a glory in it,
every thing by how much the more pure it is, by so much the more precious in
its kind. What other excellency have the Angels of light above the Devils, but
their holiness? What was it that transformed the Angels that fell into Devils,
but the loss of their holiness? Wherein stands the Reasonable creatures
likeness to the God of glory, but in their holiness? This is the divine Nature
they are made partakers of, the Spirit of God and of Glory resting upon them, 1
Pet. 4. 14. Holiness has such a self-evidencing excellency, that the
consciences of carnal men do often, whether they will or no, give their
testimony to it. Who is there almost, whose lust has transformed into so very
a Brute, but many times, even when his tongue is reproaching it, his Conscience
gives his Tongue the lie? Who is there, whose Lust has so totally put out his
Light, that does not, in his serious Judgment, conclude, That a gracious,
humble, meek, merciful, sober heavenly life, is really more excellent (though
not so suitable to his brutish appetite) than lewdness and sensuality? There is
such a beauty and Majesty in holiness that does command an acknowledgment of
it, from all sorts of knowing men.

3. It is the way of God, not only the Way wherein the Lord has commanded them
to walk but wherein the Lord appears to them, wherein they have the Vision and
Fruition of God; and therefore a godly life is often expressed by walking with
God, by living in followship or communion, or acquaintance with God, Psalm. 16.
8. I have, set the Lord always before me, Psalm. 17. 15. I will behold thy face
in Righteousness. Enoch walked with God, Noah walked with God; Good company
will make any way pleasant, how craggy or dirty soever our way may be under
foot, it is pleasant to see the Sun shine over us, Psalm. 50. 23. To him that
orders his Conversation aright, will I show the Salvation of God. The Lord
meets his people in his Ways, and causes all his goodness to pass on before
them, proclaiming his Name. The Lord gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and
of great kindness. This Vision of God makes all the labors and difficulties of
this way sweet and pleasant to them; certainly this is a blessed way, for God
is in it. Where is blessedness to be had but in God? how is blessedness to be
had in God, but in beholding and enjoying of him? wherein stands the
blessedness of Heaven, but in the Vision and Fruition of God? Christians, let
all the ungodly world say all they can, to disgrace and disparage the way of
Righteousness, as a wretched, disconsolate, and contemptible way; yet till they
can confute your senses, and make you not to believe what you taste and see, be
not discouraged, neither let them delude you into any better opinion of their
ways of sin, from any pleasure, credit, ease, or gain, that is in them; God is
in the way of Righteousness, and there alone to be found and enjoyed, and
therefore this is the most blessed and excellent way.

4. It is the way of the Kingdom; the proper excellency of the means stands in
this, That it will certainly bring about its end; that is our best way that will
bring us safely home. This way is called the way of life, Psalm. 16. 11. Thou will show me the path of life. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 11. Add to your faith virtue, to
virtue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, patience, godliness, etc. For so an
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom:
If there were no other excellency of this way, yet this is enough to commend
it, and exalt it above all other ways, that it is the way to Heaven. If the way
of Holiness and Righteousness, were in all other respects, as despicable and
uncomfortable a way as the world imagine it; If Godliness were in it self as
great a burden and bondage, as carnal men account it; If all the reproaches,
and slanders, and calumnies, and lying reports, that ungodly men cast upon the
way of the Lord, were true; yet this, that it is the way to everlasting
blessedness, would answer all that is spoken against it. If you were to go to
London upon a business, wherein your life and all that ever you had were
concerned, you would not stand reasoning thus; Is not the way to York a better
and more pleasant way? Whatever the way to London be, how long, or how dirty,
or how dangerous, or how hard to find soever it be, yet your life and estate
depending on your going thither, leaving all other ways and disputes about
them, you would take the way that leads thither. The way of the Lord, whatever
you have to say against it, to discourage or make you unwilling to travel it,
yet it is the only way you have to save your souls, the only way to eternal
blessedness; when you have made all your objections, and all your excuses, you
must take up this holy course of life, or you can never come into the Kingdom
of God. The way of carnal Jollity and Merriment is as you think a more pleasant
and delightful way: But is this your way to Heaven? The way of covetousness and
worldliness, you count a more gainful and profitable way; but is this the way
of life? The way of sloth fullness and idleness, is you think an easy way; but
is this the way of the Kingdom? The strict and severe way of Holiness, has
little carnal delight, ease and worldly profit in it; but is not this the way
to everlasting life? Heb. 12. 14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness,
without which no man shall see God. Now if all this be so, (search sinners,
search and consider if it be not so, consult the Scriptures, consult your
Reasons and Consciences, and see if you find them not all bearing witness to
this Truth) and if these things be so, as has been said, then come all ye
foolish, and vain-hearted persons, and judge of the unreasonableness of these
scoffing demands of the looser sort to the people of God, who in scorn and
derision will be often asking of them, why must you be so nice? Why so precise?
Why so strict, and making so much ado about every small matter^? Why cannot you
be content to do as others, and take the same liberty as others? Why, it is all
one as if they should demand of them. Why will you keep your way, the way of
Life? Why will you be saved? Why cannot you be content to be damned as well as
others? Is there not a great deal of wisdom and reason in such questionings and
scoffing demands? If you stood by a dangerous mighty Bogue, through which there
was one narrow tract of firm ground, and should see a company of poor Creatures
even sunk, and almost swallowed up, and choked in the mud and mire, on the one
hand and the other, and yet should you see them laughing, and mocking, and
jeering at those who keep the narrow tract of firm ground, that would bring
them safely over; Would you not say, they were all mad or bewitched? This is
the case of foolish Worldlings, they are sunk in the Mud, they are even
swallowed up and choked with their lusts, and ready to perish, and yet they
fall a laughing and deriding of them, who will keep the sure way. Sinners, what
do you mean? you are sinking; you are sinking; a few steps further and you will
be swallowed up. Why will you not come back, and get into this safe way? Leave
your scoffing at the Saints, and learn of them, leave your judging and
censuring, and follow them in the same holy steps that they are going in,
before you.

II. They are upright and exact in the way, they walk on in the straight way,
with a staight foot, Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, or the
perfect, or entire in the way, Psalm. 32. 1. I said I will take heed to my
ways, that I offend not. It Is said of Caleb, Numb. 14. 24. That he followed
the Lord fully. Luke 1. 6. 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoicing the testimony of
our Conscience, that in all simplicity and godly sincerity, we have had our
conversation in the world, 1 These. 2. 20. Ye are witnesses, and God also, how
holily, and justly, and blamelesly we behaved our selves among you. Observe it,
they lived a holy, harmless, blameless life, and that holiness which
appeared upon them, was not a cheat, or juggle, to 'deceive the world, but was
really what it appeared to be; and for this they appealed to a threefold
witness. 1. A witness in their breasts, the testimony of their own Consciences;
This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our Consciences. 2. A witness in the
world; Ye are witnesses, your eyes have seen what our l^fe has been; be but
true witnesses, and then be you witnesses; speak but what you have seen, and
speak the worst ( among you that believe) the world will be ready to say, you
are too crafty to let us know what you do in secret, when you are amongst your
selves; I, but says he, let them that believe, speak, those that have been with
us publicly and privately, what our conversation has been; if it be said,
they are of your own party, and will not speak all they know, then he appeals
to a third witness, a Witness in Heaven, ( and God also) he that sees things,
before whom are all our ways, he that sees all things, sees our integrity and
blamelesseness.

But here, that I be not mistaken, I must distinguish betwixt their aims, or
what they are pressing and reaching toward, and their seize, or what
they have reached to. The aims of these cricumspect Christians in their whole
course, are at perfection, Phil. 3. 14. I press toward the mark; they would
keep their way without the least wandering, they would not tread one step awry,
they would not speak one word amiss, they would not think one thought amiss,
they would not neglect any one duty, nor commit any one sin, but would be what
the Apostle would have them to be, Holy and harmless, the children of God
without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked generation: These are their Aims, and
as to their Seize, though they fall short of their desires, they cannot
do as they would, The good that I would, I do not: yet they do their best, they
follow the Lord with the best of their understanding, serve the Lord with the
best of their strength, and when they have done their best, they mourn and
grieve that it is no better.

That I may more distinctly open this exact and upright walking in the way of
the Lord, which their hearts are set upon, I shall consider it, 1. As it has
respect to the Commandment. 2. As it has respect to Conscience.


1. Their exact walking, as it has respect to the Commandment, stands, 1. In
having respect to every Commandment, to the whole Word of God, Psalm. 119. 6.
Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments, Mat.
28. 20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have Commanded you.
The life of a Christian is a busy life, the Words of God finds us much work to
do, we have work for every faculty and member; our understandings have their
work, our wills, affections, consciences, tongues, ears, eyes, hands, have all
their particulars works assigned them; every grace has its work, faith has
its work, love has its work, patience has its work; every lust makes us work,
to restrain, deny, watch, crucify them; these are weights and clogs that will
hang on, and will hinder us from all other works, if we let them alone; these
are working against us continually, and apt to set us on work against our
selves; a working mischief and ruin to our souls, if they be not continually
looked to, and kept under. We have work against us for every condition, our
prosperity finds us much work, to keep our selves humble, heavenly, watchful,
in an holy fear and jealousy, lest the contentments and pleasures of this
life, make an invasion, and inrode upon our hearts, and spoil us of our graces
and comforts. Our afflictions find us work, to keep our spirits from sinking
and fainting, from murmuring, and envying at those whose way does prosper. We
have all the set and solemn duties of Religion to attend upon, we have praying
work, and hearing work, and Sacrament work, and reading work, and
heart-searching work, and meditating work: We have work to be done for others,
our neighbors and acquaintance, our friends and our enemies, our families, our
servants, our children, we have not only work to do for them as men, but work
to do for God with them, God has work for us to do among our neighbors, God
has work for us to do in our families, and for our friends and enemies,
instructing work, reproving work, praying work, works of mercy and charity,
etc. we have a continual succession of work, every day has its business:
Christians must have no sleeping days, their very Sabbaths must be working
days; we must be at work for our souls, even on those days wherein we must do
no bodily work. There remains a rest for the People of God: such a rest,
wherein they shall work no more, nor be weary any more, wherein all their work
shall be to eat of the fruit of their doings, but on this side that rest, there
is no rest, but we must be full of labor.

You see the Word has provided much work for Christians; now those that are
circumspect and upright, and in the way will be through paced, and stick at
nothing the Word requires, they (...) for any service, ready for every good
work, they will not pick and choose, they will not halt or baulk with God, but
as the Apostle, Col. 4 10. Endeavor to stand complete in all the Wills of God.
Those duties that have most pain in them, those duties that have most hazard
attending them, those duties that have the greatest contrariety to their
natural temper and dispositions; if they be duties, if the word says; This
must be done, this is that which the Lord requires, an upright heart will yield
and stoop to them. Brethren if there be any one thing required in the whole
Book of God that you cannot consent to, but allow your selves in the ordinary
neglect of concerning which you say with Naaman, The Lord spare me in this one
thing, whatsoever else you do you can have no comfort that your hearts are
upright.

2. In having respect to the most spiritual and inward part of the
Commandment; the Commandment contains fugienda and facienda, sins to be
avoided, and duties to be performed; and both these are either outward or
spiritual. 1. As there are outward sins to be avoided, sins of the mouth, sins
of the eyes, ears, hands, so there are inward sins, spiritual wickednesses,
evil thoughts. Jer. 4. 14. unclean lusts, Mat. 5. 28. inordinate affections, an
evil conscience, and the like: now sincere Christians have an eye to, and hold
a strict hand upon these spiritual wickednesses, (...) to have their
consciences purged, their hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, their
affections and lusts mortified, Gal. 5. 24, They that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh with the affections an lusts; their care is, not only that
they be no drunkards, or swearers, nor liars, nor railers, nor oppressors, nor
of proud, froward, fretful, impatient carriages and behaviors; but they would
not covet, they would not lust, they would not be of proud, impatient, fretful,
envious, unpeaceable hearts, they would not that an evil thought, not a vain
thought should lodge within them. 2. As there are outward duties to be
performed, as praying, hearing, works of mercy, etc. so there are spiritual
duties, purely spiritual, as the internal acting of faith, and love, and hope,
and the fear of God, the souls choosing of God, cleaving to God, rejoicing,
delighting in God, meditating of him, etc. Exact Christians have a special
respect to those spiritual duties, in the exercise whereof stands chiefly their
living in a holy fellowship, communion, and acquaintance with God; and for
outward duties, their care is to perform them spiritually, they pray with the
mouth, and pray with the spirit; they praise the Lord with their lips, and
offer up their hearts as a spiritual sacrifice; they hear with their ears, and
with their understanding also; they labor to bring their souls under the Word,
to pour forth their souls in prayer, to draw forth their souls in their very
alms, Isa. 58. If thou draw forth thy soul to the hungry, Psalm. 69. 10. I
chastened my soul with fasting. Oh Brethren, if this be to walk exactly, then
how much looseness does this ^iscover in us, looseness in our very Duties;
men do not only (...) like Libertines, and swear like Libertines, and neglect
duties like Libertines, but perform duties like Libertines; thou that usest to
pray in thy Closet, or in thy Family, or in the Congregation, in an outward
formal way, and do not pour out thy Soul in prayer, thou prayest like a
Libertine; thou that fastest, and does not chasten thy Soul with fasting, thou
fastest like a Libertine; thou that hear, and do not bring thy soul under
the word, thou hear like a Libertine; this is loose praying, and loose
hearing, loose from the Rule, which requires the exercising of the inner man as
well as the outward.

3. In observing the command to the utmost; and here I shall give a fourfold
further description of them.

1. They endeavor to get up their hearts to the highest pitch of affection,
care, and activity: They would be the best Christians, the most humble, the
most mortified, the most patient, the most exemplary and active Christians: not
slothful in business, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11. 2
Cor. 7. Yea, what care; yea, without clearing of your selves; yea, what
indignation; yea, what vehement desire; yea, what zeal, etc. A sincere
Christian would be a zealous Christian, in his sincerity stands the height of
it. Zeal is not a distinct grace, but the height of every grace: Love in the
height of it, Desire in the height of it, Care and Resolution to follow God in
the height of it: A zealous Christian exercises every grace, performs every
Duty, and does it with all his might; he is not willing to spare, or to favor
himself, but will spend and be spent in the work of the Lord; the flesh will be
pleading for a little ease, for moderation, it will be soliciting the Sobl as
Peter did Christ, Pity thy self, favor thy self, thou will never hold out at
this rate, thou will pull all the Country about thine ears if thou be thus
hot and forward, but the Soul returns the same answer as Christ did to him, Get
thee behind me Satan, hold thy peace slothful heart, let me alone, for I will
speak for God while I have a tongue to speak; while I have an heart, while I
have an hand, while I have an eye, while I have a soul, while I have a being, I
will follow on after the Lord, I will serve him, I will praise him, I will
sacrifice all I am, and have, to him, and then come on me what will.

2. They are studying and seeking out opportunities for service. Such
Christians are of strict lives, but of large hearts; of strict consciences, but
of large desires and aims. Grace sets limits to their consciences, but none to
their holy affections; they never do so much for God, but they are studying how
they may do more, Isa. 32. 8. A liberal Man devises liberal things; a merciful
man devises merciful things: a righteous man devises righteous things, he
does not only exercise Liberality and Mercy; and work Righteousness, when he
has an opportunity put into his hands; but he sits down and considers what
great things the Lord has done for him, what mavelous loving kindness the
Lord has showed to him, and thereupon studies and casts about what greater
things then yet he has done he may do for the Name of God: as it is said of
the wicked, Proverbs 6. 14. He devises mischief continually: And Psalm 64. 6.
They search out iniquity, they accomplish a diligent search; search out for
every opportunity to work wickedness to satisfy their lust: So Righteous men
search out, and make a diligent seach after opportunities to work
Righteousness, 2 Samuel 9. 3. Is there not yet a man left of the house of Saul
says David) to whom I might show the kindness of God? Is there not yet a poer
Sool in distress, to whom I might show kindness for the Name of God? Is there
not yet a poor Family in misery, to whom I might show mercy? Is there not yet a
poor sinner to whom I might give counsel? Is there not yet a poor Saint to whom
I might administer comfort for the sake of my God? As it is said of the Devil,
He goes up and down seeking whom he may devour; So may it be said, of such,
they go up and down seeking whom they might, save and recover out of the snares
of the Devil; other men, what good soever they do, it is as little as may be;
their consciences will not let them be quiet, but something must be done, when
they have done so much as will but keep conscience quiet thy have done: A
sincere Christian has his love to satisfy, his desires to satisfy, as well
as his conscience; he loves much, and it is not a little duty that will
satisfy strong love.

3. They shun occasions and temptations to sin; they would keep at as great a
distance from sin as possible, they are careful to keep far enough within their
line, they dare not venture to their utmost border lest they go beyond it ere
they are aware: A wary Christian, having observed what things have proved
snares and temptations to him, and have drawn him aside to iniquity formerly,
will take heed how he comes nigh them again: If carnal society has cooled and
damped his heart and left a fleshly savor upon his Spirit, he will take heed
how he comes into such company again: If going to his utmost liberty in the use
of the Creatures, either Meat, Drink, or Apparel, has enticed him beyond his
bounds, he will be wary how he allows himself the like liberty, and will deny
himself the freedom he might use, rather than again run himself upon danger; he
is sensible of his weakness to stand against a temptation, and thereupon is
the more watchful that he run not into temptation; men that are bold to venture
into temptation, to venture into evil company, to venture themselves among
frothy and vain persons, especially when they have proved what a snare such
have been, again and again to them, it is a sign that they have little fear of
sin, care of their souls or consciences, or regard to God, or godliness: a
circumspect Christian dares not venture so: profane men wonder at them, why
they will be no more free, nor familiar with them, not so much as to fit and be
merry with them: They think it strange (says the Apostle) that you run not
with them: Oh, the reason is, they are afraid of the hook, and therefore dare
not meddle with the bait.

4. They abstain from all appearance of evil, that is the command, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
22. Abstain from all appearance of evil; they would live, not only, sine
crimine, but sine labo, not only without any fault, but without any flaw or
scar upon them. Oportet Caesaris uxorem absque suspitione vivere. To the end
they may cut off all occasion from them that seek occasion against them, they
would do not only things honest, but things of good report too; they enquire
concerning what they are about to do, not only a Liceat, but a Deceat; not only
whether it be lawful, but whether it be comely; there may be diverse things that
may be lawful in themselves, which are yet unseemly, may look with an evil
face: All things are lawful, (says the Apostle) but all things are not
expedient. A circumspect Christian endeavors both to keep a good Conscience,
and to keep a good Name; he would keep a good Conscience for his own sake, and
a good Name, as far as may be, for his Brethrens sake; his desire is both to
hold up the power of Religion, and to keep up the credit of Religion; and
therefore it is he herein exercises himself, both to keep a conscience void of
guile in the sight of God, and a conversation void of offense in the sight of
men. The Servants of Christ see that there are many eyes upon them, that will
espy the least spot upon them, and therifore their care is, to keep themselves
unsp^tted of the World; to carry themselves so, that if it be possible the
World may have nothing to spot them withal; they are sensible how obnoxious
they are to the severe and rigid censures of the World, and that all the
reproaches that fall on them, fall on the Lord and his Gospel: what an outcry
is there in the World against those that fear God, as if they were briars and
thorns, the firebrarnds of the World, and the troubles of Nations, that run the
World upside down, as if there were no Lions in the world but Christ's Lambs, as
if Christ's Sheep were all Wolves; and therefore to prevent this, and to put to
silence the ignorance and malice of evil men, they endeavor as much as may be
to gain upon the hearts, and to get the good opinion of all men; to walk so,
that they may not only profit, but please others, and render the Gospel the
more lovely with them; they would not only wrong no man, defraud no man,
provoke no man, but they would displease no man; give no many any occasion of
offense or distaste at them and their way; Sinners, as much as the poor Saints,
are cried out against for troublesome and unquiet, yet they are desirous rather
to please than provoke you; they would please all the world as far as they may
without hurting themselves or them: indeed they would not sin against God to
please men: they would not wound their consciences to save their credits; they
would not lie, nor dissemble, nor flatter, nor connive at you, nor comply with
you in sin to gain your good will, but as far as they can, in order to your
good, they are willing to become all things to all men; let them alone but to
do their duty to God, to your and their own Souls; and if that do not displease
you, they are willing in all things to do their best that they may not offend
you.

And thus have I given you the description of these men by the exactness of
their walking according to the Scriptures, which stands in their endeavor, to
have respect to every command, to the most inward and spiritual part of every
Command, and to observe every command to the utmost; to this I shall add two
things.

1. When they have done all that they can, after this care and circumspection,
they will acknowledge themselves unprofitable Servants; they are thankful, and
bless God for helping them on in his way; but yet they are humble, they are so
far from boasting that they have done so much, that they are ashamed that they
have done no more: Whilst they admire the Grace of God toward them, they abase
and abhor themselves in dust and ashes, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I labored more
abundantly than they all, yet not I, (no thanks to me) but to the Grace of God
that was with me: Some comfortable difference there has been (blessed be God)
betwixt my Conversation, and the ways of many others; but, who has made me to
differ from another? or what have I, that I have not received? and if I have
received it, why should I boast, as if (...) received it not? Something through
the Grace of God has been done, some service has been performed; but what is
all this to what I might have done? what is all this I have done, to what I have
left undone? How small is my service, if it be compared with my sins? How few
are my duties, if compared with my neglects? Wha's all I have done for God, to
what I owe to the Lord, to that which he has done for me who has redeemed my
life from death, and crowned me with loving kindness? But oh! What Is all I
have done, to what God has promised to do for me? What Is my Work to my Reward?
What Is my Race to my Crown? Such humbling self-abasing thoughts as these do
Christians exercise themselves in, to lay them low, even in the dust before the
Lord. The profane World brand them for a proud Generation, who say to their
Brethren, Stand aside, I am holier than you. What more common in suc'h mouths,
precise, but as proud as the Devil? It Is true, and Christians will freely
acknowledge it, and take the shame of it upon them, that this pestilent Evil,
Pride, is a weed that is apt to spring up in the Richest Gardens; we can hardly
be lifted up to an holy course, but we are apt to be puffed up with a vain
conceit, we can hardly do well, but we are apt to think too well of what we do,
many a precious Christian, has groaned and traveled in pain, under the
bondage of a self-exalting heart; but yet he (...) bewailing it, and bemoaning
himself for it; yea, ^is very disease helps on to a cure, his pride is a means
to humble him, his being lifted up above measure, is the very thorn in his
flesh that brings him low; he abhors himself the more, and abaseth himself the
lower, for that he has exalted himself so high; and the constant desire, and
labor of his Soul is, to bring himself to, and hold himself in such lowliness
of heart and life, that whatever he be, o^ has done, the excellency of the
power may apperr to be of God, and not of him.

2. Whatever they have done, they dare not trust upon it, or be found in it;
they dare not be found in their own righteousness, but count all things,
nothing so that they may win Christ and be found in him. They labor as
zealously in the works of righteousness, as they would have done, if this must
have been their righteousness, ^n which they must have stood before the Lord;
and yet they depend as singly upon Christ, and his righteousness, as if they
had never done any thing.

Before I proceed any further, let us a little consider, what it is of all this
which has been spoken of these men, wherein their folly lies; are they fools
for making so wise a choice, for choosing the better part; those true riches,
that enduring Substance, those everlasting Treasures, which are laid up in
another world; that they will not be cheated, nor be beguiled by the Devil of
that better inheritance, by those toys and fooleries, the pleasnres, honors,
and other vanities of this present world? that is, are they fools that they are
not brutes? Are they fools that they have taken the right way, to the obtaining
and possessing that blessedness which they have chosen, that they do not
content themselves with idle wishings, and hopings for that Heaven, and promise
to themselves, they shall not fail of it, though they never take that course
that leads to it? that is, are they fools, that they be men? and will hearken
to their reasons and understandings, which tell them, that the end cannot be
attained without the means? Are they fools that they will be upright, that they
will not lie, nor swear, nor curse, nor drink, nor riot, nor defraud, nor
oppress, but are willing to walk in all the commands of the Lord blameless?
that is, are they fools, that they are honest men? Is this their folly, that
they will not content themselves with a formal outside Religion, with outward
Reformation, but will take care of the heart and inside, as well as the
outside; will perform spiritual duties, purge themselves from spiritual
wickedness; will make sure work, by laying the Axe to the root of that
wickedness, which breaks forth in their lives, those lusts that war in their
members? that is, are they fools, that they are not Hypocrites? Is this their
folly, that are so free, and forward, and zealous in that which is good? that
is, are they fools, that they will love God so much? and fear God so much, and
go on so far, and so fast in obedience to him; their hearts, the vigor of
their affections, and care, and labor, to the Devil and their lusts, and
reserve only some little for God and their Souls? An^ they fools that they will
be so wary, and watchful against sin, and temptations to it, that they will
keep themselves so far out of danger as may be? that is, Is it their folly that
they are not fools? Stand forth ye wise men of the World, that charge the
Saints with folly; read over all the particulars of that true description I
have given you of them; and tell us in good earnest, if you can, in which of
the particulars their folly lies; is it that they are not brutes, that they are
men, that they are honest men, that they are not hypocrites, or that they are
not fools, that you account them such? Men are fools that they are so precise;
it is all one, as if you should say, if they were wise, they would be brutes,
knaves, and fools: Behold here the wisdom of this World, Has not God made the
wisdom of the World foolishness?

Thus we have seen, what this exact and upright walking is, as it respects the
Commandment; Now shall we consider it.

2. As it respects Conscience; And thus I shall give this double description of
these circumspect Christians.

1. They take great care of Conscience.

2. They give good heed to Conscience.

1. They take great care of Conscience, and take great pains about their
Conscience. Their care they take is twofold:

2. About the informing and instructing Conscience.

2. About the keeping Conscience tender.

1. They take great care about the informing and instructing their Consciences;
Conscience is to be made the inward guide of their way. As the word is to be
their guide without them, so Conscience is to be their inward guide. Their care
therefore is, that it may not be a blind guide. Hence it is that they are so
much in searching and studying the Scriptures; they are much conversant in
their Bibles, they are observed to be frequent in hearing Sermons, diligent in.
Nothing, and Repeating what they hear; are often putting their doubts, and
opening their difficult cases, to those that are able to resolve them, and all
this to get their Consciences enlightened, and instructed in the will of God:
Though there are many things that they are ignorant of, yet there is nothing
that they are willingly ignorant of, their desires and prayers to the Lord, are
the same with the Psalmists, Psalm. 119. 19. Hide not thy Commandments from me:
and with Elihus in Job, What I know not, teach thou me.

2. They take great care to keep their consciences tender. Tenderness of
conscience, is sometimes taken for weakness of conscience; a weak conscience,
is that which is both weak-sighted, and is not able to discern between things
that differ, but is very subject to mistakes, it mistakes good for evil, lawful
for unlawful, and its also full of troublesome and unreasonable fears, and
endless scruples, which, as the crudities abounding in a weak stomach, do make
it keck and rise, not only at that which is hurtful, but sometimes at that
which is wholesome enough, it often fears, where no fear is; this tenderness
their endeavors are to cure, and not to cherish. True tenderness of conscience
is the perfection of it; a truly tender conscience is a sound conscience, which
is quick of sense, and presently feels, and smarts, and is put to pain with any
thing that is really an offense to it. A tender conscience is as the eye, the
least dust that is blown into it, will make it smart and this not from soreness,
but wickedness of sense. The dim-sighted world look upon all tenderness as
weakness, and count all such, whose consciences cannot down with any thing, as
a company of sickly, weakly, brainsick spirits; and all their Doubtings and
Dissatisfactions, to be humor and conceit, and peevishness, and causless fears;
but this tenderness is so far from being the sickness, that it is the health
and soundness of the heart; it was the commendation, and not the reproach of
King Josiah. 2 King. 22. 19. That his heart was tender. These temper
circumspect Christians are very chary of keeping their hearts in; and therefore
any thing that would brawn or harden them, they carefully shun; as the eye that
cannot endure the dust that falls into it, is quick at its ward, to keep off
any thing that would be noxious to it; and this is the reason why Christians
can bear any thing rather than sin, because it is this alone that is hurtful to
conscience; they are hardy enough to bear afflictions, these are no prejudice
to conscience; it is not against their consciences to suffer, but it is to sin;
affliction may perplex the thoughts, and too much disquiet and distemper the
passions, but will never trouble conscience.

Object. Tender Consciences! Who more stubborn, and peremptory, and obstinate,
and stiff in their way thau these? Do you call this tenderness?

Sol. There is a threefold-stiffeness: Manifested.

1. In a refusing to receive conviction, touching any thing wherein they are
faulty, or in an error.

2. In a refusing to revoke their errors, upon conviction that they are in a
fault; let either of these be charged upon them, and let the charge be made
good, and then call them stubborn, obstinate, or what you will.

3. In a refusing to act contrary to their conviction, to do that which
Conscience is not satisfied in; which, after their most free and fair debate,
most candid enquiring into, and most impartial, weighing, all that is or can be
said for it, their conscience still tells them, they should sin in doing it:
Hereupon, though all their Friends should come and persuade, and entice them;
though all their Adversaries should fall a scoffing and reproaching them, a
threatening and persecuting them, yet still they refuse to yield. This stiffness
is that stedfastness which the Lord requires in them, and is so far from being
inconsistent with true tenderness, that it is their tenderness.

If an Idolater should come and persuade such to worship an Idol; if he should
threaten them with the fiery furnace, with the Lions Den, and yet they will
not; Is this their stubborness? Or, is it not their tenderness? If an Adulterer
should persuade them to uncleanness; If a Libertine should come and think to
scoff them out of their strict and holy course, or to tempt them but to some
little indulgence to their flesh, in some such way as this; Why? What hurt is
there in a little mirth? What great matter is it, to take a little liberty now
and then? Why should you think your selves wiser than other men and yet they
will not hearken? will you call this their obstinacy, or their tenderness? Here
be obstinate creatures indeed: they will not be Idolaters, they will not be
unclean, they will not be Libertines, they will not be liars, nor dissemblers,
they will by no means be persuaded to rebel against God and Conscience, and
therefore they be obstinate. Persuade them to that which is good, convince them
that they are in an error, and then try whether they will be obstinate: tell
them, Friends, you walk disorderly, unchristianly; you are uucharitable,
ccnsorious, contentious, proud, vain, and convince them of it, and see if they
will not hearken to you, and thank you for your admonition.

Christians, prove your selves to be conscientious by your tenderness, however
the World go about to blast and reproach you with your consciences, and call
your uprightness hypocrisy, your tenderness obstinacy, yet part not with it
so, but still resolve with Job, chap. 27. Till I dye, I will not remove my
integrity from me. There is a double way wherein we may be said to remove our
integrity.

1. By departing from it. 2. By belying it.
1. By departing from our integrity, by turning aside to iniquity, by being
found false to God and conscience, and by a liberty in sinning, exchanging this
truth and tenderness of heart for hardness and hypocrisy. Take heed you do not
thus depart from your Integrity. Beloved, you live in a world wherein
conscience is like to cost you dear; if you will own any such thing as
conscience, or conscientious walking, you are like to smart for it. Look to it
that your conscience be sound, such as is worth the suffering for; do not
suffer for the name of conscience; or conscientious, but for the thing: look to
it, that whatsoever you suffer for conscience, you suffer nothing from
conscience; for your wronging, or abusing, or violating of it; Sufferings for
conscience, for an upright conscience, are precious; Sufferings from
conscience, from an evil and abused conscience, will be bitter. Let all the
world be against you rather than conscience: whom the world smites for
conscience God will heal, whom the world judges God will justify; but if our
hearts condemn us, who shall plead for us, or comfort us? Carry your selves so,
that conscience may be your comforter; not your tormentor: There is no torment
like the stings and revenges of an abused conscience: Keep your consciences
tender, and they will neither hurt you, nor suffer you to be hurt by others;
keep your integrity; and it will keep you. The Psalmist prays, Ps. 25. 21. Let
integrity and uprightness preserve me. Let me not think to shift my self of
trouble, by sheltering my self under sin; let me not go about to make my peace
with my troublesome adversaries, by casting in my lot with them; let me never
think to be beholding to iniquity for my safety; let integrity preserve me.
Preserve thou me in mine integrity, and let it preserve me. Christians, give
the world leave to talk and do what they will, but when they have said and done
their worst, keep you honest, and you shall keep you safe: Your consciences
will be your confidence, and your security; He that walks uprightly shall
walk sure. Be not reproached out of your refuge, let not the world find you
obstinate against your duty, nor yet yielding to iniquity; be not stubborn, but
yet be steadfast, yield to reproofs while you slight reproaches.

Let us be so gentle, flexible, easy to be entreated, so fearful to offend; so
ready to please all men, in all things, which are not against conscience, its
peace and purity, that we may convince them, that in those things wherein we
fix and do not yield, it is because we cannot, not because we will not, and let
us yet be so steadfast in those things which would be a wound and defilement to
conscience; that we may let them see it is but a vain attempt for them to think
to reproach or persecute us out of our integrity; let us be sincerely tender,
not out of any sickleness or weakness of conscience, or from groundless
scrupulosity, much less from sullenness or humor, but from a sound mind and
pure conscience.

Let us be universally tender of every evil, not only of the greatest and most
scandalous, but of the smallest sins, not only of open sins, such as come to
the view of men, but of the most secret sins, the most inward and spiritual
wickedness, such as need fear no reprover but* conscience; let us be tender,
not only of committing sin, but of any omissions or neglects; not only of our
neglects of duties, but our negligences in duties, and that deadness,
formality, cursoriness, coldness, hypocrisy, distractions which hence arise;
of the neglects or negligent performances of our duty to God, of our duty to
men, to our families, to our friends, to our enemies; our not pitying them,
nor praying for them, nor wishing them well, not doing them good for their
evil, and endeavoring by our soft, meek, inoffensive and loving carriage
toward them, to win and gain upon their hearts. Oh Brethren, we have much
(...) blame our selves for, though evil men have little, or if they have more,
they are so unhappy as not to hit upon the right, judging us and condemning us,
not for our faults, but for the good that is found in us. But however, we have
much to blame our selves for, the Lord help us, we have many haltings; and many
failings. Oh it were well for us if our hearts had no more to say against us
then men can say; what unevenness and inequality is there in our goings? what
intermissions of our care and watchfulness? what ever our aims and desires are,
what an universal regard soever we have to the will of God, yet when we come to
practice, in how many things do we go awry? It may be we dare not wholly
neglect a duty, not a praying season, not a hearing season, but our hearts will
presently be upon us and smite us for it; but are we not often remiss and
negligent in our duties, and go out with it without any trouble? may be we take
some care in the matters of our own souls, but what do we for our families, our
friends and acquistance? may be we dare not conform to evil men, nor have
fellowship with them in their evil ways, but do we not co^nive at them? may be
we do not render evil for evil, railing for railing, but do we good for evil,
do we pity them, pray for them, and labor* by all lawful means to gain upon
their hearts? may be we dare not be unrighteous or unjust in our dealings; but
are we not unmerciful, unpeaceable, unquiet? we dare not lie, nor swea^, or
curse, but are we so watchful. as we should be against idle and vain talkings,
frothy and unsavory discourses? may be we cannot suffer any rooted malice to
abide in our hearts, but are there not many sudden and furious fits of passion
and anger breaking forth, much bitter and provoking language? are we not
fretful and impatient, without ever laying it much to heart? does conscience
check us for, and make resistance against every evil? Let us be universally
tender, universally careful. Oh that our consciences were but as tender as our
lusts; our pride will not bear any thing that reflects upon our reputation, our
covetousness will not bear any thing that is an hindrance to our gains, our
passions, will hardly bear the least cross or unpleasing word; how touchy are
we at every little thing that does offend us? Oh if conscience were in every
thing as tenderas lust, what Christians should we be! but woe to us, whatever
we should be, how short do we fall? how unequal are our goings? how unsteady
are our tempers? sometimes tender, sometimes hard, sometimes watchful,
sometimes heedless, in some things careful, in some things carel^ss; how do we
too much justify the wicked, and harden them in their reproaches of us? Let us
press on with so much earnestness to this evenness and exactness in all our
ways, that it may be seen, that however we have not yet attained; yet we are
following after, though we have not reached to, yet we are reaching toward it;
though through infirmity we fall into many iniquities, yet we allow not to our
selves a liberty in any; such a conscience as this, such a course as this will
plead for its self, against all the calumnies of the World.

2. By belying your integrity; that is the sense in which Job speaks in the
forementioned Scripture, I will not remove my integrity; that is, I will never
belie my integrity: call you me an hypocrite, or what else you please, God
forbid that I should justify you by belying my self, and saying as you say.
Brethren, do not out of any base fear, or to make your peace with sinners, do
not say of your tenderness, and watchful walking, this was my pride, or my
hypocrisy, or my bumor, or self-will, but stand upon your own uprightness,
Till I dye I will hold fast my righteousness and will not let it go: mine heart
shall not reproach me while I live, v. 6.

2. They give great heed to conscience, they will hearken to, and follow
conscience, the voice of a well instructed conscience is the voice of God, and
to this voice they will hearken, without turning aside in any thing, either to
the right hand or the left. By turning aside to the right hand, I mean the same
which Solomon does, by being righteous overmuch, Eccles. 7. 16. Be not
righteous overmuch: the imposing upon ourselves such strictness, and those
severities which God has not imposed, the making those things to be sins,
which God has not made to be sins, and hereby making the narrow way narrower
than the Lord has made it: and this may be done.

1. By putting Religion in such things in which Cod has put none, laying other
bonds and burdens on our necks, then those which the Holy Ghost has laid on
us: the abridging and cutting our selves short of that Christian liberty, which
the Lord has not only allowed, but commanded us to maintain and stand fast in.

2. By putting more Religion in any thing then God has put in it, by laying a
greater weight and stress upon the lesser and smaller things^ of Religion than
God has laid on them. By the lesser duties of Religion, I mean not any moral
duties: the lowest of these, the* lowest duties of mercy, justice, charity,
truth, etc. are to be reckoned among the weighty matters of the law, wherein we
cannot err by being too strict* we cannot be too just, or too true, or too
merciful, nor too zealous for truth, justice and mercy, Mat. 5. 19. He that
breaks the least of these Commandments, and teaches them so, shall be called
the least in the Kingdom ^f Heaven: but by the lesser things of Religion, I
mean the circumstantials of the worship of God, the outward forms of worship,
the gestures, etc. to be used in it. This is a being righteous overmuch, to put
more in these circumstantials then the Scripture has put, to be so zealous for
or against them, as if Religion stood or fell with them, 1 Cor: 7. 19.
Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping the
Commandments of God: some there were that did hotly contend for Circumcision,
and did put much of their Religion in that; others were* as hot against it, and
this was much of their Religion, both these the Apostle checks, telling them
that circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing; these are not the
things wherein Religion stands; keep the Commandment, fear God, walk before God
in holiness and righteousness, let your zeal be spe^^ that way, but trouble not
your selves so much about these lesser matters. Yet two things must here be
added

1. This is not so to be unde^stood, as if Christians were to swallow all
things of this nature without examining whether they be agreeable to the Word
of God or not, a due regard must be had to the satisfying of Conscience even in
the smallest things; we may not yield to practice any little things which are
against our Consciences, though we may not spend our zeal about them, as if
Religion lived or died with them.

2. Even against these lesser things there ought to be zeal expressed, if they
should be like to prove destructive to the substantials of Religion, and hinder
the main end which they pretend to promote; by this it ^ppears what I mean by
turning aside to the right hand, or being righteous overmuch.

By curning aside to the left hand, I mean the same which Solomon there does,
by being wicked overmuch, Neither be thou wicked overmuch. This is not to be
understood, as if there were any wickedness which is not too much, a little is
too much, it checks and restrains all liberty to sin, though in many things we
sin all, yet let not sin get the head of thee, keep it under, keep it down as
much as is possible, least it grow to that height that it prove thy speedy
ruin; by turning aside therefore to the left hand, understanding all
declinings to licentiousness; Either,

1. By making duties no duties, making sins to be no sins, and so making the
way of life broader than Christ has made it; and stretching out liberty beyond
our line, as turning aside to the right hand, stands in the infringing of our
liberty, in imposing such burdens, which God has not imposed; so turning to
the left hand, stands in taking up a liberty which God has imposed; making it
no^ matter of Conscience to be strict, not only in the Circumstantials, but
neither in the Substantials of Religion; so blinding Conscience, and bribing it
over to side with lust, that it accounts it not a duty, to be so strict and so
precise in any thing, but that there may be a greater latitude allowed, and a
remitting of our care and zeal, especially in cases of any hazard or danger,
that our zeal and strictness is like to cost us.

2. Making bold with duties and sins, neglecting known duties, running upon
known sins, making shipwreck of Conscience to satisfy lust; when though
Cor-science stands convinced, that holines^, in the strictness of it, is our
duty, and that licenciousness, and living after the flesh, is our sin; yet we
will indulge to our selves, our fleshly liberty.

Now this is another Character of circumspect Christians, they will walk
according to conscience in all things, without turning aside either way, either
to the right hand, or the left; they are not willing to turn aside to the right
hand, either by putting Religion in those things in which God has put none, or
by putting more of Religion in any thing, than God has put in it; their zeal
is for the substantials and weighty things of Religion; as for the
circumstantials, though they will not act in these contrary to Conscience, yet
they list not to be contentio^s a about them, nor censorious of those, who
agreeing in the main, to differ in these things from them.

But their great care is not to turn aside to the left hand; they will not for
fear of being too precise, grow profuse and profane; but as the Apostle, Hebr.
13. 18. They have a good Conscience, willing to live honestly in all things,
endeavoring to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
righteously, soberly, and godly in this present evil World, being holy and
harmless, the children of God without rebuke in the midst of a crooked
generation.

III. From this way they will not be withdrawn, either by any hopes or
advantages on the one hand, or, by any fears or dangers on the other; they have
not taken up Religion on such slight grounds, as to be either flattered, or
frighted out of it. Christians, at their first engaging in the way of the Lord,
do sit down and consider, what it will cost them to be Christ's Disciples; they
count all the charges, they cast up all the damages that they can be subject
to, beforehand; and foresee, that there is enough in Christ to make amends
for all, and to save them ^armless at the last, whatever falls. They count upon
tribulations, losses, reproaches, and the greatest of temptations; and if they
did not foresee, that the gain of Godliness would countervail all the losses
and inconveniences it is like to be attended with, they would not have
adventured on it; but seeing for a certainty they can be no loosers, hereupon
they set up their staff, determining not to depart for ever. They take Christ
and his ways for better for worse, for richer for poorer, in prosperity and
affliction; they resolve to stand or fall, to suffer and reign, to live and dye
with him. They promise to him, as Ruth to Naomi, Ruth 1. 14. As the Lord lives
I will not leave thee; whither thou go I will go, where thou lodgest I will
lodge: They will take their Lot with Christ where ever it falls; Christ has
said to them, I will never forsake you, Heb. 13. 15. and they have said the
like to him; he that has not thus engaged, is no true Christian; this absolute
resolution to be ever the Lord's, never to forsake him, is of the essence of
true conversion; he is no true Convert, that is content to follow Christ in
fair weather only, as far and as long as he safely may; a sincere Convert will
follow Christ absolutely and unalterably. Now, being thus engaged, whatever
befalls them, it is no more than they looked for; they are called fools, and
counted stubborn, and refractory, self-willed* self-conceited; and they looked
to be counted such, and so it moves them not: they are set upon by flatteries,
and tempted by outward prosperity; but it cannot prevail, Thy money perish with
thee, says Peter, Germana illa bestia non curat pecuniam: 'Twas said of Luther,
Money will do nothing with them, Preferment will do nothing with them, Prisons,
Banishment, Death it self can do nothing with them; None of these things move
me, neither ^ount I my life dear unto me, so that I may finish my course with
joy, Acts 20. 24.

And as they will not be drawn to a total Apostasy from Christ, so neither
will they be brought to allow themselves in any little deviation, Psalm. 44. 17,
18. All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we
dealt falsely in thy Covenant, our heart is not turned back, neither have our
steps declined thy way: in what case they were, you may see in the foregoing
part of the Psalm; Thou have cast us off, thou make us to turn our backs upon
our Enemies,. and they that hate us, spoil for themselves; thou make us a
reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that are round about
us, etc. Though all this be come upon us, yet have we not, etc. Our hearts are
not turned back: We do not repent of our choice; we do not wish our selves back
amongst the prosperous world; we think never the worse of the Lord, or his way;
we have as good a will to the Lord, high an esteem of his ways, as ever we had
before we were thus afflicted; there is not the least abatement of our love and
affection; If we were now to begin again, if we were now to choose whom we
would serve, and know as much as we do now, we should make the same choice; our
heart runs out the same way, and in the fame strength that ever it did; those
many waters that have run upon us, have neither quenched* no, not so much as
cooled our love; neither have our steps declined from thy way: We have neither
been turned back in our affection, nor turned aside in our practice; through
the grace of God our hearts have been kept upright, and we have made strait
steps to our feet, Dan. 6. 10. We read, that when a Decree was made, That
whosoever should ask any Petition for thirty days space, either of God or man,
save of the King, should be cast into the Lions Den; Yet Daniel would not
forbear to pray to his God; When he knew that the Writing was signed, he went
into his house, and his Windows being open in his Chamber, he kneeled upon his
kneee Three times a day, and Prayed, etc. Carnal men would have been ready to
have said, What a precise Fool was this Daniel? What great matter was it, that
he stood so much upon? it was not the committing a sin that he was urged to,
but only the forbearance of a Duty; he was not required to fall down before an
Image, as the three Chrildren were, or to worship any false God; but to
forbear, for a time, to pray to the true God: If it had been the worshipping
before an Image that had been required, some would have reasoned thus; Why,
what great matter had that been, to bow in the house of Rimmon, to bow before
an Image, or an Altar, this is not praying to them? There is a great difference
betwixt worshipping an Image, and worshipping God before an Image; What is
there in all this? But this, which Daniel stands upon, has not so foul a face;
it was only the forbearance of his duty to God, and that only for a time: Was
this such a crime to forbear praying for a few weeks, for the saving of his
life? Or, if he would needs pray, he might have done it secretly, and kept his
devotion to himself; Must he needs keep his hours, and open his windows too?
Yea, he must do it, and he will do it: Daniel would not only continue his
course of Prayer, but he would not give his Adversaries occasion to think, that
he was afraid to pray; he held it his duty (being called out to a confession of
his Religion) to let his Adversaries know, that he had not such a slight and
low esteem of it, that he was afraid to trust his God with his safety, whilst
he continued in the exercise of his duty. It Is true, that in matters
circumstantial, such, wherein there may be variation without prejudice to the
substantials of Godliness, such which are not against their consciences, which
they may submit to without sining against God; here they are not stiff, nor
refractory, but for peace sake, and in order to the gaining upon the hearts of
others, they are willing, with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. 20. To become all things
to all men, in such things wherein they can satisfy themselves, they are
willing, as far as may be, to gratify the minds of others.

But for the Substantials of Religion, the matters of Faith, the matters of
Righteousness and Holiness, the worshipping of God in Spirit and Truth,
according to his own Ordinances and Institutions, or any thing else of the same
import with these; here they are resolved, whatever come upon them, on become
of them, not to relinq^ish, or be drawn aside from them, by any solicitations
whatsoever; they must obey God, rather than men; they must follow God, though
therein they forsake* and provoke all the world: In matters which God has left
to their liberty, they are willing to use their liberty, according as it may be
behooveful for the Gospel. In matters that concern their personal interest, as
men, they list not, they ought not to be contentious; spare them but the
liberty to keep a good conscience, give them leave to fear God, and worship
God; give th^^ leave to be holy and righteous, and to walk before the Lord in
their integrity; and for any thing else, you may persuade them to it with ease:
But, if you entice them away from their God, or impose upon them, to the
prejudice of a good conscience, you were as good spare you labor, speak no
more to them in such matters, they are at a point, God they will follow, a good
Conscience they will maintain whatever come on them, to the end of their days.

Thus I have given you a description of the Scripture-Precisians, which is
summarily this; They are the same with sincere Goly men, men fearing God, who
are in^^^dly renewed after the Image of God, who are adventurers for another
world; are gotten into the way of life, and are walking on carefully and
heedfully in that way, who^e aim and endeavor is to live; not according to the
wills and lusts of men, but according to the Word and Will of God; not
according to honor and fancy, but according to conscience. A people that will
neither make the way to Heaven narrower than it is, by being scrupulous and
nice, where God has given them liberty; nor will make it broader than it is, by
taking up looser principles, or allowing themselves in loose Practices. A
People that dare not adventu^^^ their souls upon that easy, formal* careless,
outward way of Religion, that the most do, but are willing to make sure work,
by walking to the exactness of their Rule, and living up to the height of their
Principles; and who in this holy course, are steadfast and unmovable, will
neither be bribed off by the Flatteries, nor beaten off, by the Frowns of the
world, but will retain their integrity, hold fast their holy Profession, and
hold on in their holy course, and this to the death.

Concerning these men, I shall now prove, and make evident to the Consciences
of all impartial Petsons, in the second place, That they are no fools, but
truly Wise men.

In order hereto, I must first discover what is meant by Fools; A Fool is a man
void of understanding (we are not now discoursing of natural Fools, but of
those that are such upon a moral account) a man void of true wisdom. Wisdom is
of Two sorts:

1. Fleshly Wisdom, a Carnal Policy; which consists in an understanding where
the interest of the fleshlies, and in the ordering and managing of our selves,
and our affairs so, that we may adva^^ and secure this interest. By the
interest of the flesh, I mean, all those things which please and g^atifie the
flesh, and wherewith the fleshly ^inds of men are most delighted, and place
their content and happiness in, as outward peace and quiet, outward ease and
security, outward ple^^^ and prosperity, outward credit and reputation; he that
can order his affairs, and steer his course, so as will most advance, and best
secure these his outward concernments, that which way soever the world go, he
may live in peace, and quiet, and credit, and plenty, and pleasure, this is a
fleshly wise man. Concerning this wisdom, the question is not, in this it will
easily be granted, That the chilren of this world are wiser in their
generation, than the children of light, can make a better shift to live in the
world, to keep themselves whole in all changes and casualties, the Apostle
disclaims this wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 12* we had our conversation in the world, not
in fleshly wisdom, but in the Grace of God, and in simplicity and godly
sincerity.

2. Spiritual wisdom, which consists, 1. in the understanding, where our main
interest lies, which is not in things temporal, meat, and drink, and clothes,
and money, and house* and. lands, and pleasures, and honors; but in things
Spiritual, in the love and favor of God, in a good Conscience, in
Righteousness* Peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; and in things eternal, in that
Glory, Honor, and Immortality, which shall be given of God. 2. In ordering our
selves and ways so, as to make the best provision for securing of this our
great and eternal interest, that whatever miscarriages there may be in things
of lower value and least durance, that wherein our eternal happiness stands,
may be secured to us; this is called in Scripture, The wisdom which is from
above, wisdom to Salvation; and this is the only true Wisdom. God has made
and will make all fleshly wisdom appear to be folly; concerning this true
Wisdom, this Spiritual Wisdom it is, that I shall now make good, That
circumspect precise Christians are no fools, but the only wise men, and that
from these Reasons: 1. God accounts them no fools. 2. They will not be counted
fools at last, neither by God nor men. 3. The properties of wise men are found
in them. 4. The Treasures of Wisdom are found with them.


Reas. 1. Cod counts them no fools; they are no fools upon a true account, whom
the world counts fools, but they only are such whom God counts fools; as the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 10. Not he that commends himself is approved, but he whom the
Lord commends; so not he that condemns himself, or is condemned of men for
folly or simplicity is disapproved; but whom God condemns. Beloved, whose
judgment will, you take? will you stand to the judgment of God in this case?
His judgment we have plain, Job. 28. 28. Unto man he said, the fear of the
Lord, this is wisdom; and to depart from evil, this is understanding, Ps. 211.
10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; a good understanding have
all they that do his Commandments. The [beginning] of wisdom, that notes,
either, 1. The entrance of Wisdom; men never begin to be wise till they come to
be godly. Look how long thou have lived a stranger from God, in a carnal
unconverted state, so long thou livedst a fool; thou never came near the
theshold of true wisdom till thou learned the fear of the Lord. When the
repenting Prodigal came to his Father, he came to himself, his understanding
returned to him; he was besides himself before, but then he came to himself. 2.
The top or height of Wisdom; Caput sapientiae, the word signifies a godly man,
for true wisdom is the head, and not the tail; excellent wisdom is found in
him. In these, and multitud^s of other Scriptures, you have the judgment of God
concerning these men. God is infinite in wisdom, and knows all things and
persons what they are, and God is true, and all things, and persons are
certainly what he says they are. Are you wiser than he? Will you belieive your
own conceits and apprehensions before the word of the All-wise and true God?
Either you must make sinners fools, or God a liar.

Reas. 2. They will be accounted no so^^ls at last, neither by God nor men:
They only are to be accounted fools now, that will be accounted such at last;
at present men's eyes are blinded, they cannot discern, betwixt light and
darkness, betwixt wisdom and folly, and so are subject to great mistakes, but
at last men's eyes shall be opened, this blind world shall then see, and look
upon all the ways and transactions of men here below, and all the various
states and conditions of the several sorts of persons to the world, with
another eye than now they do. When the designs and ways, and actions of men
shall be brought to their issue, when all vizards shall be pulled off, and all
faces and hearts shall be made bare and naked, and open, then every one will
see who have behaved themselves ^isely, and who have played the fool, 1 Cor. 3.
13. Every man's work shall be made manifest, and thereby every man shall be made
manifest, the day shall declare them: If you ask, what day? I answer, ^he last
day, when every man shall have* finished his work, the day of Judgment, which
is both a day of trial, when all shall be proved and examined what they are,
and a day of recompense, when every man shall be rewarded according to his
work. Let this now determine the question; let those persons, who will be by
both God and Men, by good men and evil men, accounted fools at that day, let
them be accounted fools now, and let those men be accounted wise now, whom God
and all the world will acount such in that day of trial. Now the world are
divided in their judgments, some think Christians fools, others think them
wise, but at last all the world shall be agreed, and of one mind, and those
that shall be judged fools then, by the common judgment of all, let them pass
for such now. But you will say, what is this to the satisfying our present
judgment? how can we tell now, who shall then be accounted wise or fools? I
answer, besides that the Word is before you, which is the law by which that
judgment must proceed, from which you may easily learn what Men's judgments
shall be; besides this, let every man appeal to his own conscience. Here are
two sorts of persons in the world, one sort are such as own God in the world,
and follow God, and follow the Scripture, and* withdraw themselves from the
loose and vain ways of the wicked, spending much of their time in praying, and
hearing, and meditating of God, exercising themselves in holy watchfulness over
their h^^rts and all their ways; laboring in all things; that both here and
hereafter they may be accepted and approved of God. The other sort live at
their ease and their pleasu^^, mind their Farms, and Oxen, and bellies; hope
they shall do well enough here-after, but do not much trouble themselves, nor
take any care or pains about it. Let every man ask his own heart^ thus, Which
of these two sorts do I think in my conscience will be found fools, and which
wise in the day of Judgment? Beloved, will you speak your consciences in this
thing? if it were put to your choice amongst which of these two sorts you would
be found, and take your portion at last; what choice do you think you should
make, whether would you be found amongst those that spend their days in
ignorance, or those that seek after the knowledge of God? amonst those that
labor and strive to make sure the love and favor of God, or amongst those
that take no care about it, but leave it at uncertainties? Amongst the vain or
the serious, the diligent or the sloathful, the heavenly minded or the earthly
minded? Dare any of you say, let my soul stand amongst the drunkards, and
gluttons, and gallants, and good-fellows; among the covetous and proud, and
loose, and careless ones of the earth? Among the formalists, the mockers and
scoffers at the pure ways of the Lord: let my portion be with them, my place
be with them; let my sentence be according to their sentence: If you dare not
make this your choice or desire, to be found amongst such at that day, you
thereby may perceive what the verdict of your own conscience is in this case;
whatever you say of them now, your conscience tells you, that these will be
found the only fools in that day, and those only wise, amongst whom you would
choose to stand.

Reas. 3. The properties of wise men are found in them.

I shall instance but in two.

1. They understand themselves a right. 2. They build sure.
1. They understand themselves aright, for, 1. They understand wherein their
interest lies; we say of a wise Man, the is a Man that understand^ himself,
that understands what he has to do Christians are men of understanding, they
understand what that one thing is for which they live, in the pursuit and
security whereof, if they prosper, they know they shall be happy, whatever else
they miscarry in, and upon their miscarriage, wherein they know they are undone
whatever else they prosper in; they know there is but one thing needful, and
that that one thing is their eternal interest, the blessedness to come, the
happiness of the other world, the obtaining and enjoying of God; for the
portion of their Souls; be thou mine, and I have what I look for, either in
Heaven or Earth. Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and in Earth
there is none that I desire in comparison of thee. Psalm. 4. 6. There be many
that say, who will show us any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us. Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired. Phil. 3. 13. This
one thing I do. Christians have but one thing wherein they are concerned, God
is all they have to regard, this one thing they have in their eyes, they see
before them where their happiness lies; and they are able to say, Whom have I?
or what have I but thee? This one thing is in their hearts; one thing have I
desired, That I may dwell in the House of the Lord for ever; and this one thing
is in their hand too, the work and the business they mind to carry o^. This one
thing I do, forgetting that which is behind, and reaching forth to that which
is before; I press to the mark, for the price of the ^high calling of God in
Christ Jesus. Sinners, you that take your selves to be so wise, you are a
company of poor mistaken Creatures, mistaken in your interest, you are in the
world, you know not for what, you know not what you have to do here, you are
those men, upon whom God is said, Psalm. 14. To look down from Heaven, to see if
there were any among them that did understand and seek God. (That did
understand) that is, that knew that their great business they had here to do,
and their only happiness which they had to seek, lay in God, and that thereupon
applied themselves to the seeking of God; but behold, they were all out of the
way, there were none amongst them that understand this, that this was their
great concernment, and thereupon they were all out of the way, quite off from
that work that they were sent hither about? it is no wonder you shoot so wide,
when you mistake your mark: it is no wonder you do you know not what, when you
know not what you should do: Is this the work you came into the World for, to
Eat, and Drink, and Sleep, and Buy, and Sell, and Marry, and bring forth
Children, and load your selves and them with burdens of thick Clay; to Sport,
and Play, and Riot, and Laugh, and spend your days in mere Vanity and Foolery;
are there no higher things than these, which God has set before you, and more
worthy your choice and labor? Have you no Souls to mind that are of an
immortal being? and are there not lasting Riches, abiding Pleasures, an
enduring substance that may be had, that must be had for these souls of yours
t^ ^ive upon, or else they will be eternally miserab^^? and do you no^
understand that your souls are of more value than your perishing Carcasses; and
that the making provision for your souls, is of far higher consequence than the
pampering of your bodies? Will the loss of your souls be recompensed by all
your bodily pleasures and plenty? Will not the saving your souls, balance and
make amends for any losses, crosses, miscarriages in your fleshly interest? If
you do not understand this, yet do not judge them fools that do.

2. They understand their way, Prove. 14. 8. The wisdom of the prudent, is to
understand his way. The wisdom of a Merchant lies, not only in his skill, to
choose and deal in the right and richest commodities, which will bring in the
greatest, and most certain gain; but in his understanding the mystery of his
Trade, whereby he may upon the best and surest terms, procure these
commodities, to know the best way of dealing and traffiquing for them:
Christians, by their being acquainted with the Scriptures, and having been
trained up in the School of Christ, are come to understand their Trade, the
mystery of godliness; they have not only learned to prize the salvation of God,
and the glory and blessedness of the world to come, but are well acquainted
with the way that leads to it: Carnal men are ignorant of the way, though they
understand in general, that Religion is the way to salvation, yet poor
miserable creatures, they mistake their Religion; any little smatterings of the
knowledge of God, with some profession of Faith and Repentance, especially if
it be joined with some little outward devotion, now and then calling upon God
for mercy; this they count Religion enough to bring them to Heaven, and any
thing that is more than this, they think it more than needs; these are the fools
indeed, if we may believe the Scripture, Jer. 5. 4. Surely they are p^or, they
are foolish, they know not the way of the Lord. Sinners are wise enough in
their own ways; the way of sin they know, the way of lying, and oppression,
and unrighteousness, the way to health, and honor, and temporal preferments,
they sufficiently know, they have studied and traveled these ways, and are
well acquainted with them; but all this while they are foolish Children, surely
they are foolish, they know not the way of the Lord. Christians are wise, and
herein their wisdom stands, they know the way of the Lord; they have a light
without them, showing to them this good way; they have a voice behind them
telling them, this is the way, walk in it; they have made it their business, to
enquire and study, and travel this way; surely these are wise, they know the
way of the Lord, they know their way to heaven; if they know not the way to be
rich in this world, yet they know the way to be rich toward God; if they know
not how to live honorably in the World, yet they know how to live honestly; if
they know not how to please men, yet they know how to please God; if they
cannot keep a fair correspondence with the World, yet they know how to keep a
good conscience in the World; if they know not how to escape Trouble and
Affliction, they know how to suffer it; if they know not how to escape the
wrath of men, yet they know how to escape the wrath to come; if this be wisdom,
to be skilled in the matters of Religion and Righteousness, in the matters of
faith and a good conscience, to have found out the way of life, by which, to
escape from hell beneath, then these godly men, are wise men; surely they are
wise, they know the way of the Lord.

Object. But you will say, Why may not we be in the right way as well as they?
Why may not our way of Religion be as good a way, and as wise a way, and as
safe a way as theirs?

Sol. Will you make use of your Reasons? if you will, you shall answer this
Objection your selves; their Religion and yours, are not two ways of Religion,
but as to the principles of it, are but one and the same; the difference
betwixt you and them, is this, you take up a little part of that Religion which
you both profess, and you will have but a little to do with that little of
Religion which you do take up; you little mind or study, or are exercised in
that which you count your Religion; these precise ones, take up the whole of
Religion, and they give themselves wholly to the study and practice of it; they
make it their business to search the Scripture, that they may understand the
will and way of the Lord, and to govern their hearts, and order their lives in
all things according to it; So that now, if you will answer two easy
questions, you shall thereby, be able your selves to answer the Objection; the
first question is, Who are most like to be in the right? either these who
endeavor to practice all that they profess, or those, who though they profess
the truth, do practice scarce any thing of it; but a small part of it, and that
the lower, and less considerable part of it, the bare outside of it: This is no
hard question, I hope you will acknowledge to be resolved; and the second question
shall be as easy; Who is like to be in the right, the diligent Christian, that
makes it his business to study his Religion, or the careless Christian, that
seldom spends a serious thought about it? Answer but these two questions, and
then your selves will be able to give a reason, why it is more like they should
be in the right than you. Brethren, show your selves men, here are a company of
poor creatures of you, who have spent your time in ignorance and idleness, as
to the matters of God and your souls, who little meddle with that of Religion,
which your selves say you must do if you will be saved; you say you must
believe, you must repent of your sins, you must pray to God for forgiveness,
and yet what great strangers are many of you from these things? it may be if
you consider it, you have often gone whole days and weeks together, and have
scarcely ever prayed, no not so much as after your own fashion, nor scarce had
any thoughts of Repentance, or asking God forgiveness; you eat, and drink, and
go forth, and come in, and lie down, and ^ise up, and never so much as look up
to God for his mercy and blessings; these others in the mean while, make
praying, and reading, and hearing, and minding God and their Souls, and eternal
state, their daily study and business; now, what an unreasonable thing is it
to imagine, that those who so little meddle with any Religion, or any thing of
Religion, should be as like to understand it, as those that make it their daily
work. Oh beloved, how can you be confident you are in the right, when you never
seriously enquire, whether you be or no: and how can you think you have any
wisdom in you, when you trust a matter of such weight and importance upon a
mere presumption; you are strongly conceited that you are as wise as others,
and in as good a case, and in as good a way, an^ upon this conceit you venture
your souls. Friends you are a sad wonder to me, and I do so much wonder, that
men should think, that carelessness is as good as diligence; licentiousness, as
good a^ strictness; that, that loose, and blind, and easi^ way which men take
up, is as good, and as sure^ nay, a better, and more certain way of life, tha^
the strict and industrious way of the dispise^ Saints; that I very much wonder,
how men tha^ believe, and know any thing of the Scriptures, can make themseves
to think, that, that sottish, dull, lifelesse way, which they satisfy
themselves in, can give any of them the least hopes of salvation.

2. They build sure, so that whosoever or whatsoever falls, they stand sure for
ever. They are those wise bullders of whom Christ speaks, Mat. 7. 24. Whosoever
hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise man,
which built his house upon a Rock, and the rain descended, and the floods come,
and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not. Psalm. 26. 12. My
food stands in an even place. All other persons and parties stand upon
slippery places, and have but an uncertain standing. When they are in the
height of all their glory and confidence, they are often gone in a moment. A
Christian stands sure; which way ever the wheel of Providence moves, it moves
in favor of the upright; he is still uppermost, when he is undermost; he has
the better, when he has the worst; all the vicissitudes and returns of
Prosperity and affliction, do make no change upon him as to the main; he is as
happy under all his outward losses, as in his greatest gains; he is as
honorable under the greatest contempt that is poured out upon him, as under the
highest humane applause: he is as safe in the greatest dangers, as when there is
no danger appearing; he is built upon that Rock, whence the greatest winds and
waves can never beat him down: he is built upon the foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20. He has Religion, Righteousness, Innocence, yea,
the Truth and Strength of the Almighty God to uphold him: if ever a Christian
falls, Christ must fall with him; if ever a Christian falls, the Scripture must
fall with him: That Word, concerning which Christ has said, Matthew. 24. 35.
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Word shall not pass away. He shall
never be disappointed of his hopes, unless faithfulness can disappoint: he
shall never be deceived, till Truth becomes a lie: he shall never wholly be
overcome, unless Almightiness become weakness. The carnal world built all their
hopes and comforts on the sand, on the wisdom of the flesh, on the riches,
strength, and multitude of their partakers, on the successes of their carnal
counsels: they bottom their very souls upon mere facies, and presumptions, upon
that wood, hay, and stubbble, the Doctrines, Inventions, and Traditions of men;
nay they have their foundation in the dirt and mire, they strengthen themselves
in their wickedness. If iniquity be able to support them, if Unrighteousness be
able to exalt them, if Unrighteousness can secure them, they have something to
lean upon; but if Righteousness be it that must carry it, if a good conscience,
simplicity and godly sincerity; if the favor and faithfulness of God, an
interest in Christ, be the only sure refuge, then where are the generation of
the ungodly? When they are in the height of all their glory, it is but one turn
of the wheel, and they are thrown off their legs, their hopes and their joys
vanish, and all their thoughts perish. If God and Christ, and Scriptures, and
Conscience be of any Consistency, Christians have enough. If unrighteousness
and wickedness should carry it in this world, never so clearly and constantly;
yet if righteousness and holiness will but carry it in the world to come,
Christians are safe enough. Carnal men, who build their hopes on this earth,
when the earth is shaken, their hopes are shaken, their hearts are shaken, and
they are even at their wits ends. But says the Psalmist, Psalm. 112. 7, 8. The
heart of the righteous shall be established, he shall not be afraid of any evil
tidings; his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 46. 2, 3. Therefore we
will not fear, though the earth be removed, and the mountains be carried into
the Sea, though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains
shake with the swelling thereof. Though all the earth should be in an uproar,
though the whole world should be turned topsie turvy, yet we will not fear,
though the mountains shake, yet our hearts shall not shake. Are they not wise
men, that are gotten into such a case?

Reaf. 4. The treasures of wisdom are found with them. You will yet, it may be,
be ready to say, What have they gotten by their Wisdom? Where is the Income and
Revenue, that all their wisdom has brought them in? If you were to give us an
account of their losings, you might easily bring in a long Bill; some of them
have had so little wit, as to lose all they have; but, will you take your Bill,
and write down their gains? Why, if you will hearken to me a while, I will show
you what they have gained: They have gotten great treasure; as poor as any of
them seem to be, they are the richest men in the world. Particularly.

1. They have gotten the Pearl, Christ is theirs, they are those Merchants,
Mat. 13. which have ^ought goodly Pearls, and they have found the Pearl of
greatest price, Cant. 2. 6. My beloved is mine, that Corner stone which is laid
in Sion, which is a precious stone, 1 Pet. 1. he is theirs, that Pearl which is
the price of Souls, the Ransom that was paid for them, which is the food of
Souls, their bread and water, the living bread, the water of life, of which who
so eats and drinks, shall live for ever: He is theirs, God has given them
him whom they have sought, Isa. 9. 6. To us a Child is born, to us a Son is
given: He is become their own, and they call him their own. ( My Lord and my
God) said Thomas. My Savior, said Mary. This is the richest of treasures, that
comprehends all treasures in it; this will supply all their necessities, make
up all their losses; they want nothing that have Christ to be theirs. Other men
have riches, and I have none (says the Saint) I, but Christ is mine: Other men
have Friends in the world, and I have none, Oh! but I have Christ to be my
friend: Other men live at ease, in their pleasures, but it is not so with me,
but Christ is mine, and I find rest and pleasure enough in him. When I look
upon the pomp, and the glory, and gallantry of the World, I must say, These are
none of mine; when I look upon the rich fields, the pleasant Valleys, the
fruitful Hills, the Oxen and the Sheep, the Gold and the Silver of the Earth, I
must say, These are none of mine; but yet the Pearl is mine, and that is all
things to me.

2. They have gotten the Whtie Stone, the stone of absolution, R^^. 2. 7. I
will give him the White Stone, which is a Token of absolution: It was a custom
among the Heathens, to absolve Persons by giving them a White Stone, and to
condemn by giving a black Stone. Romans 5. 10. We have received the Atonement;
God is reconciled, our sins are forgiven, our Souls are absolved from those
black Bills of Indictment which were laid in against us; we have received the
Signal of this Atonement, the holy Dove, ^he Spirit of the Lord in our hearts;
and the sense of this Atonement hence arising, the peace of God possesses our
hearts; we taste and see what it is to be at peace with God, in those smiles
from his face, in those dawnings of the light of his countenance, and the
shedding abroad his Love in our hearts. Sinners, whilst you carry with you
every one his black stone, his sentence of condemnation, the earnest of eternal
vengeance, these have their white stones, the marks of their absolution, and
the earnests of their eternal blessedness. When ye look on their naked backs,
their hungry bellies, the cold lodgings, that are the lot of many of them, you
will say, surely these are a poor and foolish People; but see that precious
stone they carry with them wherever they are, there you may behold their Riches
and wisdom, when you consider your own fullness and braveries, your dainties and
delicates, your ornaments and jewels, your possessions and honors, you are
transported with pride and jollity, and have almost forgot that you are men;
but what signifies that black stone in thy breast, that guilt thou carriest in
thy Conscience? Consider Sinners, what is it to have God your enemy, wrath your
portion, the curse cleaving to your possessions, your sentence of death written
in your hearts, and upon your consciences, and then you will think those men
have gotten something, that have gotten their absolution from all this.

3. The white Robe, or the Sanctification. Holiness is not only imposed on
Christians as their duty, but bestowed on them as their privilege: Therefore
the Lord promises to his people as their encouragement to suffer affliction,
Heb. 12. 10. That thereby they shall be made partakers of his holiness: This is
the precious Treasure of the Saints, Mat. 12. 35. A good man out of the good
Treasure of his heart brings forth good things: A good man, though he has no
treasure (...) his house, nothing in his purse, nothing in the field, yet he
has a good treasure in his heart, a treasure of wisdom and knowledge, a
treasure of grace and holiness, a treasure of faith and patience, and humility
and mercy, and this is a rich treasure. It Is the rich in faith, rich in grace
and holiness, that is a rich man indeed; a heart full of grace is a better
treasure than a house full of gold; as much as strong men glory in their
strength, as much as wise men glory in their wisdom, as much as great men glory
in their greatness, one grain of grace is more worth than all: As much as
holiness is despised and trampled upon by the men of this world, it is of
greater value than mountains of gold and silver.

Holiness is the health of the Soul, the soundness of the Spirit, Health is a
poor man's portion, look what sickness is to the body, that is sin to the Soul,
the disease of it; sinful souls are sickly souls, and as it is with sickly
bodies, so it is with sinful souls, they are neither fit for employments, nor
^ap^ble of any considerable enjoyment: A sick man can do little service, and
ca^ take little comfort in any thing he has; sinfu^ souls are good for
nothing, and can take comfor^ in nothing that is good: Holiness is the health
of our Souls, Sanctification is the restitution of the Soul, with all its
faculties, to their rectitud^ and soundness: By Holiness the soul is, 1. Made
fit for service, and that is a great blessing: Wha^ a misery is it to be an
useless unprofitable lump^ good for nothing; to be serviceable, and that (...)
such high and noble ends, as the honoring the Name, the carrying on the
Designs, the shewing^ forth the Virtues of the E^^nal God; what a^ blessed
thing is it? 2. The ^oul by Holiness i^ made capable of enjoying the Lord, and
all the gifts of God; What is the reason that Christians, under a decay of
grace, and overgrown with corruption, can take comfort in nothing? Tell them of
the promises of the Gospel, of the privileges of the Gospel, of the Joys, and
Hopes and Glory to come, they can take no pleasure, they can find no sweetness
in it; Promises do not affect them, privileges do not affect them, future
hopes and expectations do not affect them: What is the reason of this? Oh!
their souls are sick, and cannot taste, or relish any thing that is good: by
how much more healthy men are, by so much more delight they can take in their
business, by so much more comfort they can take in their friends, by so much
the more pleasure they can take in their meat and drink, or any thing else that
they enjoy: And so it is with a healthy soul, by how much the more holiness, by
so much the more sweetness: Duties are sweet, Ordinances are sweet, Promises
are sweet, the Society of the Saints is sweet, the Meditations of God are
sweet: They can truly be said to enjoy their friends, to enjoy the Promises and
Ordinances, to enjoy their very Duties, to enjoy God in all they have or do,
whose souls are in such an holy healthful state. This is another of the
^reasures of wisdom which the Saints have gotten, they have gotten Holiness.

4. The Adoption, Romans 9. 4. Who are Israelites, whose is the Adoption. There
is a twofold Israelite, an Israelite after the flesh, such were the natural
children and posterity of Abraham; and an Israelite after the Spirit, such are
all believers, the children ^f the faith of Abraham; and according to this
distinction of Israelites, there is a twofold Adoption, outward and visible,
which pertain to the natural seed; inward and invisible, which is the peculiar
privilege of the spiritual Seed, all the children of the faith of Abraham. The
Adoption comprehends in it, 1. The grace of Adoption, whereby the Lord has
given us the relation of Children, and a right to all those privileges and
blessings that flow from that relation, Job. 1. 12. To as many as received him,
to them gave he power to become the Sons of God. 2. The Spirit of Adoption,
Gal. 4. 6. And because you are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father: This Spirit is called the spirit of
Adoption, not only because it works in us the disposition, and dutiful
affections of Sons, but especially because it witnesses our Sonship, Romans 8.
15, 16. Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father;
the Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit; that we are the children of
God: The Spirit evidences and witnesses our Sonship, and thereby enables us to
cry, Abba, Father, that is, to call God Father; Gives us the boldness and
confidence of children, to come to him on all occasions; to make (...)
complaints to Him, to make known our wants, our fears, and our dangers to him;
to make our requests to him, to depend on him for provision, for protection; to
put in for a child's portion, for a share in his riches; to lay claim to, and to
lay hold upon the inheritance of Sons; to cast our care upon him, and to quiet
and comfort our selves in the sufficiency of our Father. I have nothing, says
the child, but from hand to mouth, but my Father has enough; (...) a blessed
and glorious privilege that Christians have obtained, to be the sons and
daughters of the Lord Almighty, 1 Job. 3. 1. Behold what manner of love the
Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God. Seems
it a small thing unto you, said David, to be the Son in Law of a King? Why,
what King was it? It was one that was none of the best, and yet he was a King,
and that was a great thing, for such a poor man as David was, to be Son in Law
to a King: But what is it to be Sons and Heirs to the King of Glory? The Lord
says to all his Sons as the Father of the Prodigal said to his eldest Son,
Luke 15. 31. Son thou art ever with me, all that I have is thine: Son,
Daughter, (says the Lord) thou shall be ever with me, all that I have in
Heaven and Earth, all is thine, Mat. 5. Blessed are the Peacemakers: why so,
they are the Children of God: Gods children are blessed Children, not one of
them shall go without their Fathers blessing: The Lord has not only, as Isaac,
a blessing for one of his Children, but as Jacob, he has a blessing for every
child? If thou be Gods child, God, even thy God will give thee his blessing;

5. The Kingdom, Mat. 5. Theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Luke 12. 32. Fear not
little Flock, for it in your Fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom. To whom
is the Kingdom given? To the little flock, not to the herds of Swine, the
droves of wild Beasts, the profane multitudes of this Wild and wicked World,
but to the little Flock of Christ, those few that he has called out of the
World, who follow him, theirs is the Kingdom: What Kingdom? Why, the Kingdom of
Heaven, a Kingdom of Glory, a Kingdom of Righteousness, a Kingdom of Peace, a
Kingdom of joy and blessedness, the everlasting Kingdom: And here we are fallen
upon that height, and depth, and length, and breadth, which cannot be fathomed
or measured; here is the wisdom of Christians, they have gotten the birthright
and the blessing, the Sonship and the inheritance, theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven; here is the faith and patience, and hope, and prayers, and sufferings,
and labors of the Saints, the riches of their faith, the fruit of their
patience, the matter of their hope, the return of their prayers, the reward of
their sufferings, the end of their labors, the everlasting Kingdom.

Now judge, upon all this which has been said, whom will ye account the wise
men; shall those be accounted wise, whom the world, or those whom God accounts
such? Shall those pass for fools now, who will be found wise at last? Are those
the wise men, who never understood what they had to do here, and so never
minded nor he^ded that necessary work for which they were sent into the World?
Are our Infants and Children, that mind nothing else but their play, and their
meat, and their clothes, are those the wise ones of the World? Are they the
Wise Builders, who have laid their foundation on the Sand? When the Winds, and
the floods, and the waves have broken down, and blown away all that you have
been Building: will You then boast of Your Wisdom? You that count your selves
such Wise Men, and demand what the Saints have gotten, tell us, what you have
gotten by all your Wisdom? The Saints have something to show for themselves, as
Witnesses of their prudence. Christ the hidden Manna, that living bread, that
they have laid up for themselves against a time of need, that peace which they
have gotten to support them in a time of trouble; these are some things to show
they have not foolishly lost their time; every grace that they have gotten,
every comfort that they have treasured up, there is something more to show,
every dead lust pleads for them; Sampson's dead Lion was not a greater proof of
his strength, than Christians dead lusts are of their Wisdom; they have gotten
the birthright and the blessing, who was the wiser of the two, Esau that sold
the birthright, and lost the blessing, or Jacob that got both? they have
gotten the Kingdom too, theirs is the Kingdom of heaven; whilst others have
been dividing the spoils here below, scrambling for shadows and fancies,
sharing the Dominions and Dignities, and Preferments, and Pleasures of this
world amongst them; these have been laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come; does this speak them such a foolish
company as you would make them? Have they made such a wise choice, and taken
such a wise course, and yet must they go for fools? Is this your serious and
sober judgment? Do you in earnest think, that in that change which the Gospel
has made upon them, they are changed for the worse? that in the choice which
they have made of God, rather than the world, of Christ, in stead of their
lusts, of things eternal, before things temporal, that they have herein chosen
to their loss? Is this your thought, will you write down this as your judgment,
and put your hand to it, and be content that this writing should be produced at
the last Judgment, as the Test by which you will be tried, whether you are wise
or foolish? Are you Christians, and do you believe the Scriptures, and are you
not yet ashamed that any such thoughts should come into your hearts? Will you
say, The Devil is the best Master, and he is a fool that will not be his
servant, but Christ is an ^ard Master, and none that is wise will venture after
him? Will you say, that Moses was a fool, in refusing to be called the son of
Pharoah's Daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of
God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin form season, that the Apostles, and the
Disciples were fools, that Peter, and Paul, and John, and James were fools;
with the rest of those holy Men and Women, who denied themselves, took up their
Cross and followed Christ, and that the Scribes and Pharisees, and Publicans,
and Harlots, and Drunkards, and Gluttons, that made a mock and a scorn of him
and them, had more wit than they? Is not this the very thing you say in
charging folly upon those, whose aim and desire is to walk in the same steps
that those primitive Christians walked in before them? Is this your
Christianity? Is this your reason and Religion, and honesty? speak out your
hearts in plain terms. No man would hearken to Christ, unless he were a fool:
no man would be holy, unless he were a fool: no man would leave his lusts and
his pleasures, and his liberties, and his vanities, unless he had first lost
his wits: Or, at least, no wise man would take up more of Christianity, than
the name, and the shell, and the shadow: none but a fool would make sure work
for his soul, would go through with Christ and Christianity, would be an
inward, hearty, resolved, universal, sincere Christian. Would any wise man put
it out of doubt, that Christ is his, put it out of doubt, that his soul is
safe, that he is passed from death to life, and shall never come ^^to
condemnation? What do your brutish hearts and ways speak less, or rather than
this? Sinners, is this all the wisdom or honesty you have, thus to speak or
think? If it be, Be it known unto you all, that these foolish Saints have more
wit, than to count the reproaches of such brutish spirits, to be any
disparagement to them or their profession, and therefore if you will, mock on,
and go on, to admire your selves and the oaks which you have chosen, and the
gardens which you have desired, whilst you despise these and their ways; but
however, whilst they have this assurance, that God does not count them what you
call them, that [ You] will not call them at last, what you call them now; you
must give them leave (though they think never so meanly of themselves) yet,
still to have the same high thoughts of their God, of their Gospel* of that
holy profession and way that they have chosen.

Use 1. Let the ungodly World hence learn to have a better opinion of these
men, and to forbear reproaching them; think with your selves upon what has
been said: These men may be wiser than we are aware of, they may be honest men;
we may be mistaken, these may be the Israel of God, those Nathaniels of whom
Christ says, Joh. 1. 47. Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no
guile; these may be the little Flock, on whom it is the Fathers pleasure to
bestow the Kingdom; these may be those little ones, whom whosoever offends, it
were better that a millstone were hanged about his neck and he were cast into
the midst of the Sea: And what if they should be so? In what case are you then,
that have reproached and persecuted them? but I must be bold to tell, there is
no May be, in the matter. I question not, but if you would impartially weigh
what has been spoken, and what shall yet farther be spoken, you will see, that
if God has any people in the world, these are they; and therefore my advice
is, that you refrain from these men, and let them alone, lest, if you do go on,
you be sound fighters against God.

Obj. But where be there any such? There be some that make a fair show, and
make specious pretenses to the strictness of Religion, but they are hypocrites
and deceivers, and these are they that we only speak against.

Sol. 1. Let this be granted, That such men as have been described, ( if) there
be any such, are truly wise men; that men of such Principles, that men of this
profession (if) they really be what they profess, and live according to their
principles, that these are men of wisdom; do but grant that godliness is
wisdom, and the fear of the Lord is understanding: I would that I could bring
you thus far, heartily to grant, that godliness has an excellency in it, and
that a life led according to those Principles of godliness, which have been
laid before you, is the most excellent life: Hence these two things will
unavoidably follow, 1. That by how much more exactly and strictly any persons
live according to the Principles of godliness, by so much the more have they
attained to of true wisdom: If Godliness be our wisdom and excellency, then by
how much the more precisely godly any persons are by so much the more wise and
excellent; by how much the more precise a Christian or godly man is, by so much
the more he is a Christian or a godly man; and therefore, let never any man be
blamed for that he is so much, but that he is no more precise. 2. By how much
the more loosely any persons live from the Rules of Religion, by how much the
more liberty they take to walk after the flesh, by so much the more foolish
they are; and so you may without controversy conclude, that whatever these
precise people be, you that are Libertines (to be sure) are fools.

2. Are there none such? What, has God no people in the world? has the Devil
gotten all? God has a people somewhere, and a peculiar people, whom he has
chosen to salvation, whom he has redeemed, and called, and justified, and
sanctified, and set apart for himself, from the rest of the world, all are not
Israel, all are not Disciples, but there are some whom God has peculiarly set
apart to himself, from ^he rest of men; and where are these to be found, if not
among these precise walkers? the peculiar people of God are, as has been
sufficiently proved, an holy people, an hearing people, a praying people, a
zealous people, a watchful, gainful, industrious, sober; meek, merciful,
patient people, and all this in sincerity: Now, where shall we look to find out
such a people? Must we rake the kennels, and search the sinks of the earth?
Must we seek in the Alehouses, or Taverns, or Play Houses? Shall we take out
the drunkards and riotous, the swearers and liars, the covetous and oppressors,
the vain ones of the earth, the blind People, that brutish generation that
knows not, nor mind not the Lord or his ways, and say of any of these, surely
here they be, these are the people of God; here be the men that are no
hypocrites, these are that Royal Priesthohd, that holy Nation, that peculiar
people, whom God has called to show forth his praise before the world?
Sinners, if you have so much reason or conscience, as to conclude that none of
these are they, then tell us farther, who, or where they are, or else at last
acknowledge, that if God has a people any where, it is amongst those that you
have reproached.

3. If you say, there be hypocrites among them, and these are they that you
speak against, and not against those that are upright, let me give you this
double advice.

1. Take heed you mistake not the mark: do not shoot at Saints indeed, under
the name and disguise of hypocrites: do not count that hypocrisy, which God
accounts sincerity; you may be mistaken (as I told you before) and what if you
should be mistaken? what if it should prove, not only that the men which you
reproach for hypocrites, God should account sincere: but if the very thing
which you call their hypocrisy, the Lord counts their excellency, what if it
should be so? Then you have shot a fair shot; every reproach which you have
thus cast out, is as so much dirt which you have thrown into the Face of God,
so many darts which you have shot into the Apple of God's Eye: You who are so
free in reproaching Professors, take heed that it be not found, that the ground
of all your evil language against them, and evil usage of them, be not for that
they are, but for that they are not hypocrites.

2. If they be hypocrites, and only such that you speak against, take heed you
mistake not your Arrow; do not cast that upon them for a reproach, which is
good; do not take good names to reproach evil men. If they be hypocrites any of
them, and you know them to be such, call them hypocrites; but do not take the
name of Saint, or Precisian, or holy Brother, and put them as marks of disgrace
and scorn upon them; he that calls a Saint hypocrite, reproaches the Christian;
he that in scorn calls an hypocrite Saint, or holy Brother, reproaches
Christianity it self.

Use 2. But I have yet a greater request unto you then to have a good opinion
of these men, and no longer to reproach them; my request to you farther is,
That you would come in and be of this number. Some of you it may be, will be
ready to reply, he shall have hard work that will persuade me to be a
Precisian; and truly, I am afraid so too, if all that the Devil can do, will
hinder it; if all that your carnal reason and fleshly lusts can do, if all that
your sinful companions can do will hinder it, I shall be sure enough not to
prevail with you; yet know, that the motion which I make to you, is from the
Lord, and if you deny me, you therein deny him; and if you deny him; you must
come upon it, there is another day coming when he will deny you; You say, you
will not be persuaded, but what is it you will not be persuaded to: Why, this
is it, you will not take the Yoke of Christ upon you, you will not be advised,
nor be ruled by him; so as to live as he would have you live, but you will have
your liberty still to walk according to your own mind and h^^rt; that is, you
will not be Christians; Will you not? Are you in good earnest? Are you content
that the Lord should take you at your word, and for ever give you up to your
hearts lust, and let you alone to walk in your own counsels? Are you content
from henceforth to give up your hope in Christ? are you content to be damned:
Brethren, this is the choice you are put to, either an holy Life, or
everlasting Death; either you must submit to the Yoke of Christ, or you can
have no benefit by the Cross of Christ; either you must kiss his golden
scepter, or be broken in pieces with his Rod of Iron; refuse to follow him in
his Kingdom of Grace, and you thereby shut your selves out of the Kingdom of
Glory: Whereof, that I may the more effectually convince you, I shall yet
farther prove to you, both by Scripture and reason, that this strict and
precise way of life, is so undoubtedly and absolutely necessary to salvation,
that whosoever does not thus walk, cannot escape the damnation of hell.

I know carnal men are confident that they shall be saved without so much ado,
and this is that which hardens them in their sins, their strong conceit that
the way is not so strait and narrow as many would make them believe; they doubt
not but they have found out a shorter and easier way than this; and what is
this easier way? Why, it is but call upon God for mercy, keep thy Church, do no
body any wrong, be no drunkard, no swearer, no adulterer; or if thou be
sometimes overtaken, ask God forgiveness, cry God mercy, and then hope well,
never despair of Gods mercy, fear not, thou shall be safe enough.

Now I shall make it plain to you, that this loose and easy way of Religion,
will certainly leave every soul that goes no further, to perish everlastingly;
and that this strict holy life, which has been described, is indispensably
necessary to salvation. Beloved, the matter I am upon is weighty, a mistake in
your Religion is mortal, if that which you have taken up for the way of life be
not so, you are undone for ever; and that this your easy way is not it I shall
now make evident.

1. From Scripture; Let us but seriously examine and weigh those many high
expressions which we find in Scripture, in the Commands, Exhortations,
Instructions, Instances, Promises, and Prayers recorded in it; in all which,
the one way of life is described, and then let any reasonable man judge, if all
this amount to no more than that poor, and pitiful, and empty thing, which
carnal men count their Religion.

1. For Scripture-commands consider these, Strive to enter in at the strait
gate, looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God. Work out your
salvation with fear and trembling; not sloathful in business, but fervent in
spirit, serving the Lord; Put off concerning the conversation, the old man
which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts, and put on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness: Wash thine heart
from thine iniquities, that th^^ may be saved: How long shall vain thoughts
lodge within thee? ^et no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but
( speak ye) that which is good, to the use of edifying, that may minister grace
to the bearers. Walk in love, love one another, love your Enemies, bless them
that curse you, pray for them which persecute you; render to no man evil for
evil, but overcome evil with goodness; mortify your members which are upon the
Earth, walk in the spirit, abstain from all appearance of evil, be watchful;
stand with your loins girded, and your lights burning.

2. For Scripture-instructions, consider these, The Grace of God which brings
salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying all ungodliness
and worldly lusts, we should live righteously, godly, and soberly, in ^his
present World: pure Religion, and underf^led before God and the Father is this,
To visit, etc. and to keep himself unspotted of the World. They that be
Christ's, have crucified* the flesh with affections and lusts. He that is angry
with his Brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment. He that
looks on a Woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her in his
heart. Of every idle word men shall give account at the day of Judgment. If any
Man seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, that Man's Religion is
vain.

3 For Scripture-instances; David is said to be a man after Gods own heart, and
did that which was right in the sight of the Lord; and turned not Aside from
any thing that the Lord had commanded him all the days of his life, save only,
etc. Of Josiah it is recorded, That his heart was tender and perfect with the
Lord his God, and that he turned not aside to the right hand, or to the left.
Paul professes that he served the Lord instantly, night and day; that
forgetting those things which are behind, he reached forth to the things that
are before, pressing to the mark, etc. The life which I now live in the flesh,
I live by the faith of the Son of God. To me to live is Christ, to dye is gain.
I so run, not as uncertainly, so fight I, not as one that beats the air, but
I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest preaching to others I
my self should become a castaway.

For Scripture-promises, consider these* Blessed are the poor in spirit, bessed
are the meek, the merciful, they that hunger and thirst after righteousness,
the pure in heart, they that are persecuted for righteousness sake, for they
shall see God, theirs is the Kingdom of heaven; they shall be comforted,
filled, and great is their reward in heaven.

For Scripture-prayers, consider these, The God of peace sanctify you wholly,
and I pray God that your whole spirit, soul and body may be preserved*
blameless until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now the God of peace make
you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which is
well pleasing in his sight.

Multitudes of such like Scriptures might be added, but these may suffice. Now
wherefore are all these things written? Wherefore are these strict commands
given, these holy lives of Saints left upon Record, these promises made, and
these prayers kept upon the file? Are they not all written for our learning, to
let every man and woman understand what manner of persons they must be, what
manner of Lives they must live, if they will be saved? If less, or a lower
Religion would serve, to what purpose is this waste. If it be so, People may
forbear to charge Precisians with keeping more ado than needs, and lay in their
charge against the Scriptures, for requiring more than needs. But do you think
indeed, that the Scriptures have spoken these things in vain? If it be not in
vain, if all this be comprehended under the one thing needful; if all this do
but show us the one and only way of Life; if we must be thus renewed and
changed in our minds, and must thus holily and unblameably order our Lives, or
else we cannot be saved, as the Scriptures mentioned many of them expressly
affirm, then what will become of that poor confident multitude we are now
dealing with? Does all this amount to no more than keeping your Church, saying
your prayers, learning and saying over the Creed, and the Ten Commandments,
living peaceably with your Neighbors, paying every man his own, crying to God
for mercy when you have committed a fin, and the like? Can you call this cold,
lifeless way, your striving to enter in at the strait gate? Is this your
working out your salvation with fear and trembling? Is this all that is meant
by fighting the good fight of Faith, by wresting against Flesh and Blood,
against Principalities and Powers, by being instant in Prayer, fervent in
Spirit, watching and running, and pressing toward the mark? Brethren, if there
be one way of Life; if all this which has been represented to you out of the
Scriptures, be to show you from the Lord, what ^ strait way this one way of
life is; and if you will compare your way you depend upon with it, methinks you
shall need no more to convince you of your dangerous mistake hitherto, and to
leave you more ready to embrace the exhortation I am pressing upon you; namely,
To come in among the number of, and take upon the holy course of these
circumspect Christians.

But if this be not sufficient, I shall yet make it more evident by Reasons
drawn from the Scripture, which I shall give you in these Six Propositions.

1. The Gospel requires, as indispensably necessary to salvation, inward
holiness, or the renewing of the heart, or inner-man. Needs this any proof to
them that understand the Scriptures? There must be another Spirit. Numb: 14.
24. A new heart, Ezekiel. 36. 26. A cl^an heart, Psalm. 73. 1. A true heart, or an
upright heart, sprinkled from an evil Conscience, Hebr. 10. 22. Ezekiel. 18. 31.
Make you a new heart, and a new spirit, for why will ye dye? Jer. 4. 14. Oh
Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved. What do
these Scriptures, especially the addition in the two last, For why will ye dye?
And [ that thou may be saved?] What do these import less than this, That
there is no salvation possible, there is nothing but certain death and
destruction, to those whose hearts are not washed and made new, John 3. 3.
Except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Except ye
be converted, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. What is the product of
this new birth, or this conversion, but a new creature? Some there are, it is
true, that interpret this Conversion, which is made so necessary to Salvation,
to be nothing else but the coming of persons from Judaism, or Paganism, to
Christianity, to the owning and embracing the Christian Faith.* But if this be
true, then all that believe Christ to be the Messiah, and are baptized, and
live in the profession of the Christian Faith, shall be saved, Come ye
Drunkards, come ye Adulterers, Liars, Covetous, with all the profane Root of
Nominal ^^ristians, and keep an Holy Day to the memory of these two Doctors,
who bring you such a large and easy Gospel, as will carry you all to Heaven,
with all your lusts and lewdness upon your backs. But is this true? Is this
Gospel? Is this all the conversion that is necessary to Salvation? It cannot
be: For,

First, There are many that embrace the Christian Faith that are Hypocrites,
and shall Hypocrites be saved?

Secondly, There are many such Converts that walk disorderly, whose God is
their belly, whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 18.
Of whom the Apostle here tell us, that their end is destruction.

2. This inward Holiness which the Gospel requires, stands not in some sudden
and unconstant good thoughts, or some transient good affections, but is an holy
frame or habit; thus much is intimated in the forementioned expression,
Another Spirit, a new Heart, a new Creature. An holy thought, a good desire is
another thing from a new heart; they cannot so much as evidence, that the heart
is renewed; as in a renewed heart there may be some evil thoughts, and evil
lusts arising and working, so some good thoughts and affections may spring up
in an evil heart; true holiness is not a fit, but a frame; there may be fits of
passion, or of pride, or of envy (too often in a Saint, and yet in the main he
may be a Saint still: There may be fits of devotion, fits of zeal sometimes in
a ^inner, and yet he is a sinner still. Holiness is the temper and constitution
of a Christian, his new nature that abides in him.

3. This inward ^^bitual Holiness stands in an universal compliance of the
heart with the whole Will of God; the heart that is formed after the Image of
God, is conformed to the Will of God, Psalm. 40. Thy Law is within my heart; not
a piece, but the whole; every word and tittle of it. The Law is within me. The
Law is said to be within the heart of a Saint in a double sen^e:

First, It is published, and revealed, and made known in the heart; it is
understood by the soul, there is the light of the Word shining in every
Christian.

Secondly, It is embraced, approved, consented to, there is the love of the Law
in the heart of a Christian; the heart closes with it, and all that it
requires, as a good word, and worthy of all acceptance.

A Christian does not only accept the Promises. of the Gospel as good words and
comfortable words, but can heartily write, Good is the Word of the Lord, upon
every precept; he likes his Duties as well as his Privileges, his work as well
as his reward: This cowardliness of heart is set forth in those expressions of
a willing mind, a ready mind, a forward mind. And as his heart is toward his
works, so is it for any work the Lord calls it to: he has respect to all the
Commandments; he would not be without one leaf, no nor one line of the whole
Word of God; he is ready to every good work? he would not have one duty abated
to him of all that God has required; he would not have one sin allowed to him
of all that God has forbidden him: He that says concerning any one word in
the whole will of God, This I must have struck out, or be dispensed within it,
ere I can be a Christian, his heart is not upright: He that would have any one
sin to be no sin, any one duty to be no duty, any one sin to be allowed him, or
any one duty to be abated him, is no Christian.

4. This inward habitual Holiness is such as bears the sway, and has the
perheminence in the heart* though sin be there still, yet where there is true
Grace, sin is an underling, and brought into captivity, it has lost that power
and interest which it had in the Sold before, and the heart is now given up to
God; the stream runs Heavenward, the stream of the thoughts, the stream of the
affections run that way; God and the way of Holiness has a greater share and
greater power in the heart than all the world; there is more love to God,
stronger resolutions for following God, than can be balanced by the highest
interest of the flesh. God and the World stand as two su^tors for the heart,
but God carries it from the world; so that, as before, it followed the world
with the neglect of God, now it will follow God with the neglect of the World;
before it would, it may be, mind God and godliness, as far as it could without
prejudice to its worldly interest, so far as it could with honor, or ease, or
safety; but now it will mind the world and its ^le^hly interest, so far only as
is consistent with godliness and a good conscience; this is sincerity, and the
clearest, and most certain evidence of it. Can we imagine that we* love God
sincerely, when we love the World better? whe^^ we love our ease, or credit, or
pleasures, or carna^^ friends better? When these can do more with us, and
command farther, than God and golry, Matthew. 10. 37. He that loves Father or
Mother more than me, is not worthy of me. Luke 14. 33. Whosoever he be of you
that forsake not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple. If there be any
certain unquestionable Truths in the whole Doctine of the Gospel, this is one
of them, That whosoever has true saving Grace, has more love to God and
holiness, than to all things else whatsoever. Though it be controverted,
Whether common grace and saving grace do not differ more than indegree, yet
this is without controversy, That saving grace does contain in it an higher
degree of love to God, than to all things else.

5. This inward, habitual, prevailing holiness, where ever it is, will
infallibly bring forth this strict, precise, and holy life. For,

First, That holiness in the heart will bring forth holiness of life, is as
naturally certain, as that he that has the life and reason of a man, will act
as a man; as that a root will bring forth such branches and fruit, as partake
of the kind and nature of the root, as that a fig tree will bring forth figs,
that an olive tree will bring forth olives.

Secondly, It is as certain, that according to the proportion of holiness in
the heart, such will be the proportion of it in the life; if holiness bear the
sway in the heart, it will bear the rule in the life; if that little good that
is in the heart, be held as an underling in the Soul, thereafter will the ^ife
be; this is as certain, as that the Soul governs ^he Body.

Thirdly, It Is no less certain, that the lowest de^ree of prevailing holiness
in the heart, will ^^ring forth this precise holy life, In the sense I ^ave
described it: that is, though there be not ^erfect holiness brought forth*
though he that ^ath a lower degree of true grace, fall much shor^er of that
perfection, than he that has an high^er degree; though there be many failings,
and wanderings, and weaknesses, and turnings aside to ^niquity, through
corruption and temptation, yet thus far the lowest of Saints have arrived, That
his ^ims, desires, endeavors are after a perfectly holy ^ife; he has a
respect to every Commandment, ^o every Duty, he does not habitually allow
himself in any iniquity; there is some change in his course actually appearing,
and this he purposes to himself, and sets his heart upon it, to grow up day^y
to a more through and universal conformity to all the principles of godliness
laid down before him ^n the Scriptures, and made manifest in his consci^nce.

This is as certain as the two former, He that is ^incere would be perfect, in
the true love of holiness, is necessarily included a love and longing for it in
the perfection of it. He that loves holiness for it self, will love it most
when it is most it self, in its perfection; and love and longing, will
infallibly bring forth laboring, and following after* Therefore,

6. Whosoever is not truly a person of a precise life, is certainly in the
state of damnation: This so clearly follows from the former Propositions, that
it needs no further proof. He that is not inwardly, habitually, universally
sanctified; he that loves any thing more than God or godliness, that is he that
is not converted and new born, and so be^come a new Creature, is actually in
the state of damnation; and he who is not a precise walker, is not thus
converted, new born or sanctified; for whoever is made this new Creature, will
infallibly make it appear (as has been proved) by this newness of life.

You see, Beloved, to what issue this matter is brought; either you must take
up this strict way of holiness, or be reprobates from God. Whosoever there be
amongst you, that have the most rooted enmity in your hearts, against this
holiness of life, and have cast the greatest slight and contempt on it, and
those that thus live, and as Michael did David, do despise them in your hearts;
whoever among you are most peremptorily resolved against hearkening to any
farther Treaties about this thing, casting them off with the greatest scorn and
indignation, I must be bold to tell you from God, That if you live and die in
this mind, God must cease to be true, the Scriptures must be proved to be a
lie, the Doctrine of the Gospel a mere forgery or fa^shood, or you will be shut
for ever out of the Kingdom of God.

And do you not yet see enough, to persuade you to come in and be of this
number? Are you not yet convinced that it is your duty, that 'twill be your
wisdom to be such? That none but Fools and Brutes will continue to be
Libertines? Whilst you charge folly on the Saints, will you at last prove your
selves to be the only fools? And will you verify that Proverb, Bray a fool in
a Mortar, and yet his folly will not depart from him? Shall it be said of you,
Let them be instructed, let them ^e convinced, let them be warned, yet still
all is ^^ne, fools they are, and fools they will be? Oh ye ^ools, when will ye
be wise? Search the Scriptures, and learn of them, come unto Christ, and learn
of him; and if he do not speak the same things which here have been spoken, if
he do not teach you the same Lesson which here you have been taught, then go
on, and take your liberty still; but if Christ says, Be holy; if Christ says,
be circumspect; if Christ says, Be perfect, and you still refuse to hearken,
then carry this inscription upon your foreheads, We have rejected the Word of
the Lord, and what wisdom is there in us?

John 1. 47. Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom there i^ no guile.
WE need not go far back, to find ou^ the sense of these words* which they
fully enough contain within themselves* ^he occasion of them was this, Philip
calls Nathaniel to come to Christ; Nathaniel being called, comes; and coming to
Christ, our Lord gives his Judgment of him.

In the words, we have, 1. A note of Observation, Behold: This hints to us two
things; 1. That a Nathaniel, a true Israelite, is a worthy Sight, worth the
observing; Behold an Israelite. 2. That a Nathaniel is a rare Sight: We do not
use to put a Behold, on that which we see every day.

2. A Description of Nathaniel, and in him, of a^ sincere godly man. 1. He is
an Israelite; Israel was the first name of Jacob, who upon his wrestling, and
as a Prince, prevailing with God in Prayer, had this new name given him of God,
and was thenceforth called Israel; from him, afterward, the whole generation
of the Jews were called Israel; in the new Testament, all the People of God
were called Israel, Gal. 6. 16. Both (...) the Old Testament and the New;
Israelites we^^ such as had the account of the People of God* whom God has
separated and set apart for himself, as his peculiar people, out of all the
rest of the world: so that an Israelite here, notes, one that belongs to God, a
good man.

2. An Israelite indeed; (...), one that is truly an Israelite; not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit; not in show and appearance, not in conceit, or his
own or others Opinions, but in reality.

3. An Israelite without deceit, in whom is no guile; who is no Jugler, or
crafty Dissembler, that did only personate, bear the face, and act the part of
an Israelite, but an honest, downright, plain-hearted Israelite.

In all this we have a full description of a sincere godly man; ^e is an
Israelite, one separated to God, an Israelite indeed; not in conceit or fancy,
but in truth; not in deceit or guile, but in singleness of heart.

That which I intend for the foundation, on which to build my discourse, is, An
Israelite indeed. Thence let the Doctrine be?

Doct. A sincere godly man is no Phanatick; or, Godliness is no fancy. As there
is an Israelite in conceit, so there is an Israelite indeed; as there is
Godliness in show, so there is Godliness in truth; Godliness is no fancy.

The great design of Satan and his Instruments is against Godliness, to resist
it, disgrace it, and if it were possible, to root it out from under Heaven: And
because whilst Godliness appears to be, what indeed it is, in its own luster,
glory, and excellency; all such attempts against it, are like to be ^^ain and
ineffectual: therefore the plot is, to cast ^mist before the eyes of this
Pur-blinde World, and to make them believe that there is no such thing, or that
it is not what it is; that it is a mere fancy, there is nothing in it: That
which Men call Godliness is but a conceit, a mere dream of some brainsick
persons, who thinking themselves wiser and holier than the rest of the World,
and being strongly opinionated of their ways, and intoxicated with their own
imaginations, whilst they would persuade others that they are in the dark, and
under strong delusions, are most of all mistaken and deluded themselves.

Now, because this is such a mischievous Engine, to hinder the propagation of
the Gospel, and to hold men back from that true Godliness which is necessary to
salvation, and without which they perish everlastingly: I shall through the
g^^ce of God, prove and make as evident as the light, the truth of the Doctrine
proposed, That Godliness is no fancy; and that the sincerest, and strictest
Godly men, are most unjustly and unreasonably termed Fanatics, of any persons
in the World. By Godliness, I mean, that sincere and strict profession and
practice of Religion, which is above the size, and beyond the measure of the
common sort of people, who call themselves Christians, that which the Scripture
calls, pure Religion, the power of Godliness, walking with God, walking in
Spirit, living in all good conscience.

By a sincere godly man, accordingly I understand, the same person which I in
the foregoing Discourse meant by a precise or circumspect Christian; one that
will not adventure his soul on that cheap, easy, outward, careless way of
Religion, which the most do, but labors to make sure and through work, by
setting himself to live up to the height and exactness of those principles of
Religion, which he has received from the Scriptures.

When I say, That Godliness is no fancy? by a Fancy, I mean, that which has no
being, but in the imagination; that which has no foundation in the Scriptures,
but is a mere conceit or airy Not^on, a figment of men's owns brains. This is
the reproach that the profane world ca^^ upon strict godliness, That it is a
mere fiction, or a dream of men's own hearts, that the inward likeness to God,
the exact walking with God, living in fellowship and communion with God, the
joy of God, the life of faith, the Souls exercising it self upon God, and the
Lord Jesus, and the like, are mere conceits, there are no such things, but they
are men's own dreams and delusions.

Now, this is that which I shall prove and make good to you, That this
godliness, in its greatest purity, preciseness, and spirituality, is not such
an empty thing, but is fully and really that which it asserts it self to be,
and has clear foundations in, and an evident conformity to, that good, and
acceptable, and perfect will of God, revealed in the Scriptures.

The proofs which I shall bring in, shall be such as have respect to the
special parts of it; where I shall make it manifest;

1. That the Doctrines and principles of godliness are real Truths.

2. That the Duties and comforts of godliness are real Duties and comforts.

1. That the Doctrines and principles of godliness are real Truths. Wisdom has
her pillars, Godliness is not a Castle in the air, but is a building which has
foundations, Hebr. 6. 1. I shall instance in some of the chief of their
principles, and show you:

1. Concerning the Being of God, and His Holiness: That this is a certain
truth, that there is a God, and that he is an holy God, and a friend to
Holiness: If there be any real and evident truth in the world, this is a truth,
that there is a God: Aut Deus est, aut nihil est, Either, there is a God, or
there is nothing: We may as well say, when we see the Sun, and the Moon, and
Stars, and the motions of them, when we set the Earth, and the several
Creatures upon it; when we see our selves, Men and Women walking up and down
thereon, that all this is but conceit, that our eyes deceive us, that our
selves, and all the things we see, are but phantas^s, and apparitions, as w^
may question whether there be a God, Romans 1. 20. The invisible things of him
from the Creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made; even his eternal power and Godhead. And to question whether God
be an holy God, is the same in effect, as to question whether there be a God;
to conceive, that there is a God without Holiness, is to imagine, that there is
a God that is no God: Sin is such a defect and imperfection, as is utterly
inconsistent with such an infinitely perfect Being; and to question whether God
be a Friend to holiness, is to question, whether he be a Friend to himself.

Atheism, whatever the foolish World ignorantly talk, is the greatest and most
notorious Fanaticism. Psalm. 14. 1. The Fool says in his heart, there is no
God, he fancies there is not: and Profaneness, that causes men to conceive of
God as not so holy and righteous as he is, is next to Atheism, Psalm. 50. 21.
These things thou have done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self, but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes. These things thou have done; Thou have done wickedly,
have been a liar, a slanderer, a drunkard, a partaker with adulterers: And I
kept silence, I let thee alone, and did not presently testify my dislike or
displeasure against thee, hereupon thou couceitedst because thou were let alone
in thy fin, and did not presently smart for it, that I liked it well enough,
and was altogether such a one as thy self: That thou had a God after thine
own heart, after thine own soul, that was never the less a friend to thee, for
that thou were, so great a friend to thy lusts and wickedness: Thou thoughtest
this, such a foo^ish conceit thou have in thy heart; I, but it was but a
conceit; I will make thee know, that I am another manner of God than thou
vainly imaginest, I will have my time for thee, when I will reprove thee for
all thy wickedness, and convince thee of thy folly, and set all thy sins in
order before thee.

Sinners, You that either think that there is no God, or because he keeps
silence, lets you alone in your sins, lets you flourish and prosper in your
wickedness, thereupon conclude; He is a Friend, one that favors looseness
and ungodliness; he will have his time for you, to convince you, and reprove
you out of these vain conceits, and make you know that he hates and detests
both you and your ways; and that he loves that holiness, and is a Friend to
those holy Ones, which for a time he may suffer you to despise and trample
upon. Rev. 3* 9. Behold I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, (which say
they are Jews and are not, but do lie) behold, I will make them to come and
worship at thy feet, and to know, that I have loved thee.

You will not now be persuaded, but God will make you know whether you will or
not, that these are they whom he has loved: Please your selves with your own
ways, and bless your selves in your own hearts while you will, continue your
confidence, that God is no such enemy to you, that he is not so hard and severe
against ungodliness as men speak, that God is a friend to ignorance,
formality, licentiousness, and counts such his best Subjects* And as for those
which make such a talk, and such a show, and keep so much ado about holiness
and strictness, make your selves believe, that God is as much against them as
you; and that he does not like that men should be so fearful of sin, and
watchful against sin, and zealous for holiness; that he likes those best, that
will take their ease, and their liberty, and their pleasure: Yet know, that God
will have his time for you to make you of another mind, when he shall come to
reckon with you, to reprove you, and ^^t your sins in order before you.

2. The Doctrines concerning Sin are certain Truths: I shall mention but these
four.

1. That man is a Sinner. 2. That sin is the greatest of evils. 3. That
spiritual sins are the greatest of sins. 4. That sin is the root of all misery.
1. That Man is a sinner: A sinner by nature, a Sinner by practice; in a sinful
state, 1 John. 5. 10. The whole world lies in wickedness: Running on in a
sinfuli course: Psalm. 14. They are all gone out of the way; that he is
universally sinful; this sour leav^ (...) has leavened the whole lump; every
part of man, head, heart, hands, and inside, outside, all are full of wounds
and bruises, and putrefying sores, Isa. 1. 6. That man is a great sinner, Jer.
17. 9. The heart of a man is desperately wicked; it is become like those bad
figs which Jeremiah speaks of, those that were good were very good, and those
that were bad were very bad: Psalm. 5. 9. Their inward part is very wickewness.
It Is expressed in the abstract, not wicked, but wickedness, and in the plural
number, wickednesses: There is a complication of all sorts of wickednesses, and
sin is so rooted, and (as it were) incorporated into the hearts of men, as if
their natures were even transubstantiated into a Mass of corruption. Is all
this but conceit? Genesis 6. 5. God saw that the wickedness of man was great in
the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart were only
evil continually. [God saw] Gods eye cannot be deceived; men may think they see
what they see not, and may not see what is before their eyes; But can Gods eyes
fail him?

2. That sin is the greatest of evils: The Apostle to set forth the formidable
appearance that sin had by the Law, expresses it thus, Romans 7. 13. That sin
might appear to be sin: He could find out nothing more evil and odious to
express it by, than it self. If he had said, that sin might appear to be a
snare, a Serpent, a Viper, a Devil, an Hell that had been much, but yet not
enough to set forth this evil of evils: Sin never is seen in its perfect
odiousness, but when it shows its own naked face, and looks like it self: We
can never know how great an evil sin is, till we know how good the Lord is, how
precious Christ is, how precious the Soul of man is, to all which sin is so
contrary and destructive. Romans 8. 7. It is said to be enmity against God; God
has no ^nemy in the world but sin, and those whom sin has made him. Sin has
set all the earth against the God of glory. From this enmity which sin has
filled the hearts of men with, arise all their rebellions against his word and
government; all their unwillingness and averseness from his ways, their
weariness of his service, their frowardness, murmurings, impatiences, frettings
and insurrections of heart against his dispensations and providence. The
unruliness and stubbornness of the wills of men, the distemper and disorders of
their passions and affections, the vanity, vileness and confusion of their
thoughts, the defilement and deadness of their consciences, the ebulition of so
many hellish lusts, setting men's hearts upon all mischief: Whence is all this,
but from sin that dwells in them?

Sin has made men very Devils, set upon all manner of mischief, Devils against
God, hating, reproaching, blaspheming, cursing, fighting against God: There
should quickly be no God, nor Heaven, nor Being left, if the wickedness of man's
heart had power answerable to its malice. Devils against themselves, set upon
the destruction and damnation of their own souls; there needed not another
Devil to attempt and devour them; if God should but let them alone, they would
quickly make their destruction sure of themselves. Devils one against another:
There is not one sinner, but if God should pull up the fluces, and let his
wickedness have its full course, would do his utmost to damn all the World,
enemies, friends, husbands, wives, children, all should be destroyed.

And can there now be a greater evil then this imagined? I, you will say, if
all this be true it is a great evil indeed; But may be for all these great
words there may be no such great matter in it: Why do but consider what sin
has done, and cannot be envied, and then you will see reason to believe all
that has been said: Go to Mount Calvary, and see what it has done there; What
was it that slew the Lord of glory, that put Ch^^st to death? Was it not those
sins that were laid upon him? These were his betrayers and murderers. These
were the thorns, the nails, the spear that wounded him, the gall and vinegar
that was given him to drink: Let the sweat, the cries, the groans, the blood,
the soul that were pressed and poured out by sin, let these speak if too much
has been sa^d.

Turn aside from Mount Calvary, and go down to the Valley of Hinnon, lay your
ear to the mouth of Tophet, and hearken what work sin has done there: What is
it that has filled Hell so full already, that has sent down Cain and Judas,
Ananias and Saphira, with those millions of damned Souls that are already
tormented in those flames? Did God damn so many Souls for nothing, or for a
trifle, inflict so great a torment for a small off^^nce? What is it that has
cast them in thither? Was it their righteousness? was it not their iniquities?
If you could step down into those Chambers of Death, and ask those wretched
creatures, Friends, How came you in hither? What would they answer? Oh, it is
our sins that brought us into this place of torment: Oh! it was my covetousness
brought me hither, would one say: Oh! it was my lying brought me hither says
another: Oh! it was my pride, or my passion, or my wantonness, or my
sloathfuness, that brought me hither says a third: Oh sin, sin! this is it for
which we burn, we roar, we rave, we dye, we dye eternally. Can there be too
much said of the evil of sin, that has done all this mischief?

3. Spiritual sins are the greatest of sins: Soul pollutions are the most foul
pollutions.

By how much the more excellent the soul is above the body in its nature, by so
much the more vile and mischievous, being depraved with sin! The soul of man is
the prime subject of the image of God in man; there was much of God to be seen
in the body, or externals of man, but the face of God, the glory of God was
stamped upon his soul; the soul being corrupted, it became the express image of
the Devil: Satan is rudely limbed, and some darker shadows of him drawn on the
outward man, but he is drawn out to the life in the soul; the very face, the
heart of Satan, his pride, malice, envy, falsehood is engraven on the heart: A
proud heart has more of the Devil than a proud look; a wanton heart is more
vile ^^an a wanton eye; a murtherous or adulterous heart, is worse than a
murtherous or adulterous act. It is true, when Sin is committed without, it is
worse than when it sleeps in its causes within; and sin in its birth, is worse
than in its bare conception, and the reason* is because when sin is committed,
there are both parts the outward and the spiritual together, there is the sin
of the hand, and the sin of the heart too, to make up the murder: But then, if
you should distinctly consider, that which the heart has done toward the
murder, and that which the hand has done, the hearts part would appear to be
incomparably the worst: The sins of the heart, are the root sins, the spring
that sets all the wheels a going, the fountain that sets all the streams a
running: the fire that sets the furnace a smoking: Carnal men make little of
outward sins, nothing of spiritual. If they would not be Extortioners, or
Oppressors, o^ Swearers, or Cursers, some of them, yet evil thoughts may lodge
in them, Lust may bear the rule in them, Pride, Envy, Ignorance, Atheism,
Heart-blasphemy, these are scarcely accounted evils; What are Thoughts, a
little inward discontent, anger, and the like, that we should trouble our
selves with these? Oh! You do not know what there may be in a Thought, or a
secret lust, there may be a Thousand evil Words, and actions, in the bowels of
a few evil Thoughts; Lusts are big, bellied, a World of monstrous births are
continually springing forth from them: Belo^^d, if you should examine all the
wickednesses (...) our lives, Drunkenness, Whoredoms, Lying, Oaths, Perjuries,
and ask them one by one, Drunkenness, whence art thou? Adultery, when (...)
come thou? Oaths, Curses, Lies, whence are all ye? would they not answer with
the Apostle, Come we not hence, even from those lusts that war in your members?
blame not Christians, that they are too much afraid of their own hearts, that
they take so much pains, spend so much time about purging, and washing, and
watching these, keeping their thoughts, governing their passions, mortifying
their lusts; if you do not, they know what there is within them: He that makes
nothing of an evil thought, the Devil is like to bring him to something in a
little time.

4. Sin is the root of all misery; the miseries of this life, of all the
diseases, Pains, Torments, tumults, commotions, quarrellings, contentions,
Murders, Rapines, Oppressions, Wars, Famine, Poverty, pestilence, and all sorts
of Calamities that this world groans under, Jer. 2. 17. Have thou not procured
all these things to thy self? that is, by thine iniquities? What a world had
this world been had it not been for sin? A Paradise, all the world had been as
the garden of the Lord; How great peace had there been, had it not been for
this makebate; How great joy, had it not been for this Tormentor; How great
beauty, and order, had it not been for this, which is the deformity and
confusion of all things! What a world is this become by sin: how full of
violence! What Lions, Tigers, Wolves, are the Inhabitants thereof become one to
another! What thorns and briars are they, scratching and tearing one another!
What lying, and slandering, and defamin^^ and defrauding, and quarrellings, and
fightings, are there broken forth; This earth is even almost become an Hell!
Whence is all this? the Apostle tells us, James 4. 1. From whence come wars,
and fighting am^ng you; come they not hence, even from your lusts that war in
your members? Sinners lay the blame of all upon righteousness and holiness, and
the knowledge of God and Conscience, and on such persons as exercise themselves
in keeping a good Conscience, and walking holily, and working righteousness.
These are the troublers, these are the disturbers, these are the firebrarnds,
that set all in a combustion, though they little think what it is that herein
they say, To impute the troubles of the earth to righteousness and holiness,
etc. To affirm, as many do, it had been a better world, if it had not been for
so much preaching and praying, and professing, and keeping such ado about
Conscience, and the like; is all one as to say, It had been a better world if
God had not been in fault; we may thank God and his Law; we may thank Christ
and his Gospel for all our troubles. But let such blasphemers know, that it is
themselves and their wicked hearts, their atheism and ignorance, their
idolatries and adulteries, their pride and their covetousness, their lewdness
and licentiousness, that they owe all their troubles and miseries to, Lam. 1.
Jerusalem hath-sinned, therefore is she removed; her adversares are the chief,
her enemies prosper, her filthiness is yet in her skirts. Job 8. ^1. Can a rush
grow without mire?

Now from all this it evidently follows,

1. That no sin can properly be called little.

2. That the Saints mourning for sin, praying, watching, fearing, shunning sin,
with its occasions, temptations, and very appearances, are not phanatical, but
reasonable services.

Notwithstanding all this evil that is in sin, this is it which carnal men make
matter of nothing; It Is every man's case, we are all sinners, and why should we
trouble our selves at that which we cannot help; and what a wonder do they make
at the poor Saints, that they are so fearful, and so watchful, and so tender,
and so much troubled when they fall into sin, counting their fear their folly,
and their mourning madness, as if it were a mere Scarecrow, or a Bugbear, or
as if it were nothing but their own melancholic fancies that they thus trouble
themselves about? what is it that you are afraid of? why can you not be so
free, and take your liberty as well as others? what hurt is there in a little
mirth, in a little freedom, to live as other men do? Oh Sinners, if Samuels
Mantle were taken off from this Devils back, and the vail were taken off from
your eyes; if you did but see sin as it is, you would cease your wondering.

Is sin nothing? Is enmity against God* his Government, his Being, nothing? Are
the fruits of sin nothing? Is poverty nothing? Is sword and famine, and
pestilence nothing? Are all the bodily diseases that come upon yon, and the
torment of them: Is the Gout, and the Stone, and the strangury, and the pains
of Childbearing nothing? Are death and hell and the ^engeance of eternal fire,
such slight matters? Is the fruit so bitter and deadly, and do you think there
is so little hurt in the root? You may as well count these torments, which fin
has brought upon the world, to be conceits, or slight matters, as have such
thoughts of sin.

Whosoever makes nothing of sin, makes light of Christ; whoever fears not,
feels not, flies not, mourns not for sin as the most dreadful of evils, regards
not God nor his own soul. He that has so much wit as to dispute sin into a
^rifle, has yet but little understanding, and less Religion; He that conceits
that a cold ( God forgive me) will make him whole of his inward Diseases, or a
slight ( I cry God mercy) will make amends for his actual wickedness, if he
prove not himself a Phanatick in the end, let the most circumspect Christians
pass for Phanaticks now.

Sinners, if you will not yet be convinced; if the Scriptures do not convince
you, if your eyes and ears do not teach you to understand Sins better, take
heed, lest God teach you hereafter, as Gideon taught the men of Succoth, with
briars and thorns with Fire and Brimston, and fetch his proof from your bones,
and from your bowels, and cause the revenging worm, when your pange shall come
upon you, to bring back the memory of your sprighted sins upon you thus: Now
sinner, now wretch, what think thou of thy lust now; of thy pride, and thy
jollity, and thy covetousness now? Where are thy slight thoughts of all this
now? Where Is thy vain confidence now, that thou should go out with all this
well enough, that thou should escape well enough, that all the threaning
sand woes denounced against thee, would come to nothing? Now sinner learn, and
be learning this Lesson for ever, what a fool thou have been in the midst of
all thy high conceit and boastings of thy wisdom.

3. The Doctrines of Redemption is a real Truth: Need I prove this? That Christ
is true; the true Messiah, true God and true Man; had a true Body, and a true
Soul; That his sayings were true; He was a true Prophet; That his sufferings
were true; He was a true Priest; That as he was truly dead, so he as truly
rose, ascended, and is the Lord, both of the dead and of the living, and is a
true King; That he has truly and fully accomplished his whole undertaking. Am
I speaking to Jews or Pagans, that I need prove this? Am I not speaking to
Christians, who must prove themselves liars, their profession a lie, and their
faith vain, if they deny these things? But wherefore was all this? What came
Christ into the world for? Wherefore was he born? Wherefore did he live, dye,
rise, ascend? What was the intent of all this? Why, it was, to make a total and
blessed change upon the miserable condition, of whomsoever of this sinful world
shall embrace and give entertainment to him; 'twas to make this old world new;
this crooked world strait, this miserable world blessed; 'Twas to bring
deliverance to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are
bound, Isa. 61. 1. To make an end of sin, to finish transgression, and to bring
in everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9. 24. 'Twas to undo all that mischief which
sin and the Devil has wrought and brought upon this world, 1 John 3. 8. For
this cause the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of
the Devil. 'Twas to abolish death, and bring life and immortality to light.
'Twas to redeem from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. 'Twas, that being delivered from our
enemies, we might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness, all
the days of our lives, Luke 1. 74 75. That they who live, should not
henceforth live to themselves, but to him that dyed for them, and rose again, 2
Cor. 5. 15. Hereupon says the Apostle, Tit. 2. 11, 12. The grace of God, which
brings salvation, teaches us, that denying all ungodliness and worldly l^st,
we should live righteously, soberly, and godly in this present world. And
lastly, to redeem us, 1 Pet. 1. 4. To an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled,
and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for us. 1. To an inheritance.
Christians are not brought out of Egypt, and redeemed from their house of
bondage, and then left to shift for themselves, or to perish in the wilderness,
they are redeemed to an inheritance, they are a purchased people, and there is
for them a purchased possession. 2. An incorruptible and undefiled inheritance,
an enduring possession, and an holy habitation. Holiness is a great part of the
blessedness of the Saints. Sinners, you that despise holiness, despise one of
the rich stjewels in the Crown of glory. 3. Reserved in heaven; there is the
good land where their inheritance lies; that is the Country which Christ has
purchased for his ransomed ones; The whole land is theirs, theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven.

This is that Redemption which by the Gospel is preached unto you; and if
Christ had failed of performing and accomplishing of any of all this, he had
been but an incomplete and imperfect Redeemer.

By the way, learn what great reason there is, that the Gospel should have
better entertainment, than for the most part it meets withal in the world; one
would think, who considers what entertainment it has, and the Ministry of it,
that it were some dismal word, and a dreadful errand that it came upon; if
Christ had come to destroy the world, could he have had less welcome? If the
Gospel were as the Law, not only a dead, but a killing Leter, a Ministration of
Death and Condemnation: If the Ministers of the Gospel had been Messengers sent
up from the bottomless Pit, to deceive the Nations, to destroy Souls, to drag
them down to everlasting darkness, there could hardly have been a greater hate
and outcry, then there is against it and them. Surely such a message, and such
messengers, deserve better welcome, and better usage.

But to our purpose; You have heard what that Redemption is, which the Gospel
brings us* Now does Christ do his work by haives? Deliver out of Prison, and
leave his ransomed Ones in their vile Prison-garments; change their Relations,
and never change their Conditions, redeem them from death, and not redeem them
from iniquity? Was this the intent of Christ in dying for sinners; that they
might play the beasts and the rebels more securely? Did this grace abound, that
sin might super-abound? Does the law of faith, make void the law of
righteousness? Does it not establish it? What Is the import of those several
expressions forementioned; That he might redeem from all iniquity, and purify
a peculiar people zealous of good works, that we might serve him without fear,
in holiness and righteousness; that they that live, should not live to
themselves* but to him that dyed for them, that denying all ungodliness, etc.
Is not all this included in the redemption which Christ has wrought? And what
does all this import other, then that godliness we are pleading for? Is this a
part of that which Christ has redeemed us to, and is there nothing in it? Has
Christ sweat, and groaned, and labored, and traveled in pain, and all this to
bring forth a lie? Has he dyed to purge, and purify, and wash, and cleanse
his people, and when all comes to all, at this nothing but a cheat? Did Christ
dye but in conceit, and arise and ascend but in conceit? As certain as it is
that Christ did not barely personate a Redeemer, so certain it is, that his
redeemed do not barely personate Saints. Let all the world be Judges, what
honor those persons have for Christ, that have no better opinion of the fruits
of his Death. Hence it appears.

1. That the Redemption of a sinner, is the destruction of sin; Christ dyed to
save men from their sins, not in them, to redeem from iniquity all as well as
from wrath.

2. That Redemption and Regeneration are linked together: He that is bought
from being a ^lave is born a Son; he that is not partaker of the renewing of
the Holy Ghost, is not partaker of the Redemption of Christ.

The Doctrine of Redemption by Christ is abused by wilful Sinners, and made to
serve as their great Plea against the necessity of Holiness: Convince them of
sin, of the necessity of turning, of the danger of continuing, and going on,
here they presently take Sanctuary, Christ dyed for sinners; and here they
think themselves sufficiently secured, not only against all the threatenings of
wrath, but against all exhortations to Holiness: Argue with them from the
Command of God, This is the Will of God, even your Sanctification: ^ast away
your transgressions, why will you dye? turn and live: From the threatenings of
God, If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye, etc. Yet this they think will
answer all Your Arguments, Christ dyed for Sinners: I put my trust in Christ,
that I shall be saved. What? trust in Christ, and not turn to Christ? Hope to
be saved by Christ, and refuse to be sanctified: Will Christ redeem those from
the Curse, who will not be redeemed from iniquity? Jer. 7. 9. Will ye steal and
murder, and commit Adultery, and swear falsely, etc. And come and stand before
me in my House, and say we are delivered to do all these abominations? Will you
do wickedly, walk in all manner of wantonness, lasciviousness, lust,
excesses, etc. and then come and take hold of a Redeemer, as if you were
delivered to do all this wickedness? Is my House become a Den of Robbers? Are
the Redeemed of the Lord a generation of Rebels, Enemies of all Righteousness,
Liars, Proud, Covetous, Blasphemers: Are these the followers of the Lamb? It Is
true, the Apostle says, Such were some of you, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Yet he adds, But
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the Name of our
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Christianity without Godliness, this
is a fancy indeed: Let every one that names the Lord Jesus depart from
iniquity; either turn from iniquity, or talk no more of Christ: a Christian and
an Infidel are not more (...) than a Christian and a Libertine: Take heed
sinners, and let not the Gospel undo you, let not Mercy damn you; put not your
Faith to do the sad office of infidelity. Beloved, let it never, be said while
the Just live, you must die by your Faith; this is like to be your case, you
would never have dared so to have slighted Holiness, and persisted in sin, had
it not been for your trust in Christ.

You must count Christ to be no Christ, no Redeemer, or but an half, or
deceitful Redeemer, if you count your selves good Christians while you are yet
in your sins. You must have another Christ, another Gospel, ere ever you can be
saved in your sinful state, Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to them which
are in Jesus Christ, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: This
is Gospel, wherein you have the Redeemeds Charter, and the Redeemeds Character:
His Charter, He shall not come into condemnation, His Character, He walks not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit; that is, He is a man of a godly life.
Whom does the Gospel secure from condemnation? Why, those that are in Christ.
But who are they? Why, only those who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit: those that walk otherwise can have no benefit by the Gospel. You all
stand as convicted malefactors guilty of death; you have sinned, and what have
you to say, why you should not dye, and have your sentence of condemnation past
upon you? May be you will call for a Psalm of mercy, my Book, Lord, my Book,
the Gospel will, I hope, secure me. No sinner, thou can not have it, thou art
one that live after the flesh, and can not have the benefit of the Gospel.
This is the Law, and the Gospel says not one word to reverse it; If ye live
after the flesh, ye shall dye: Christ never intended the benefit of his
Redemption to any of you, whether you would repent or no, be holy or no: you
may as well write for Gospel this, He that believes shall be damned, as this,
He that obeys not the Gospel* shall be saved: And you may as well say, that
sinning is serving of Christ, as that those that live after the flesh, obey the
Gospel.

4. The Doctrine of Regeneration is a real truth: There are three things most
evident concerning this: 1. That there is such a change, and that necessary to
salvation. 2. That this is a great and mighty change. 3. That this is an inward
and Soul-change.


1. That there is such a grace as Regeneration, and that necessary to
salvation, 1 John 3. 3. Verily, verily, or truly, truly, or certainly, except a
man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

2. That the change that is wrought by Regeneration is a great and a mighty
change; it is as great as the making something of nothing: Regeneration is a
new Creation; it is as great as the raising up of persons from death to life.
Regeneration is a Resurrection: You has he quicked, who were dead in
trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. There is as great a power, as much of Divinity
manifested in quickening a dead soul, as in raising a dead body. When God would
confirm the faith of the Jews concerning their Conversion and Restoration,
after their cutting off, which the Apostle tells us shall be as life from the
dead; he evidences that he was able to accomplish it by his making dry bones to
live: Ezekiel. 37. 3. Can these bones live? Son of man, prophecy unto ^ese bones,
say unto them, Oh ye dry bones hear the Word of the Lord: 'Twas a strange
service the Prophet was put upon, but yet ^e prophesies; and behold there was a
great shaking, and bone came to his bone, and they were covered with sinews,
and with flesh, and the breath of life was breathed into them and they stood
upon their feet a great Army: These bones, says the Lord, are the house of
Israel and Judah. That is, as they lay in their state of rejection from God;
and if the Lord could not have made the bones to live, he had failed of his
confirmation of their faith, touching the Redemption of this dead people.

When the Ministers of the Gospel are sent forth to preach to sinners, it is
even as likely a service, as if they had been sent among the Tombs and the
Graves, to prophecy to the Skulls, and the Bones, and the dust of the dead?
And if there were not a Divine and Almighty power accompanying their Ministry,
their success would be the same, as if they had been preaching the beasts of
^he field into Men, or of Stones attempting to raise up Children unto Abraham.

3. It is an Inward Soul- change; Regeneration is ^he uniting of dead Souls to
Christ, Gal. 4. 19. My little Children, of whom I travel in birth, until
Christ be formed in you: Here note three things.

1. That the result of this union with Christ is a new Life, 1 John 5. 12. He
that has the Son has Life, Generatio unius est corruption alterius.

In this Generation there is a Death and a Life.

1. A Death, Colos. 3. 3. Ye are dead, that is, Your sins are dead, your old
man is dead; Our old man is crucified with him, Romans 6.

2. A Life: There is new sense and motion, there is a living power communicated
to souls united to Christ, whereby they are enabled to move and act in such an
holy, spiritual and heavenly way, as was impossible before. Grace is a living
thing, that spirits, and animates all the Faculties a new, that puts life into
all the duties and performances of the Saints; which though for the matter of
them they might have been done before, yet they were but the dead carcasses of
duties, rather than the things themselves.

2. This new Life is a n^w Nature; the Saints participation of the Nature of
Christ, a change of the qualities of the soul: they are new Creatures that have
passed the new Birth: The second Adam as well as the first brings forth his
Children in his own likeness: The divine Birth is the bringing forth of the
divine Nature: 2 Pet. 1. 4. As they said vainly, the Gods are come down in the
likeness of men: It may be here said truly; Men are raised up in the likeness
of God, renewed after his Image, made partakers of his holiness: Those that put
any thing less in this charge than the new creature, make Regeneration to be as
very a contradiction as the Popish Transubstantiation. Bread is made a God, and
yet bread is still: a brute is made a Saint, and yet remains a brute still. A
God under the accidents of bread, and a Saint under the qualities of a Swine.

3. This new nature is a glorious nature, comprehending in it that divine
light, whereby the Saint^ are enabled to understand and look into the depths of
eternity, the invisible things of God, the mysteries of the glorious Gospel,
that divine love, and faith, and hope, and the whole train of glorious graces,
together with those principles of righteousness, Truth, Mercy, Charity, etc.
whereby they are made capable of enjoying fellowship and communion with God, of
bearing his Name, showing forth his Virtues and Praises before the world, and
doing his will: In sum, it is the Image of God, the Epistle of Christ written
upon the Tables of their hearts: And thus much those Scriptural expressions,
New creatures, partakers of the Divine Nature, partakers of his holiness,
children of light, with the life, do signify and import.

What a strange piece of vanity should we make of the Scriptures, if all these
high and various expressions should signify no more than that empty and
pitiful thing that carnal men do count their Religion, or godliness, that ever
that ignorant, Sottish, formal, brutish generation, which have no more of the
knowledge of God than an Heathen, no more of the life of God than a Stock, no
more of Religion, than to say over a Prayer by rote; So far from being
partakers of the new Nature that they know not whether there be any such thing,
or what it is: That ever such a blind, senseless multitude should be imagined
to be the persons whom the Scripture means, by new Creatures, the Children of
God, the Children of Light, the Images of God: Much more that those that live
after the flesh, who are proud, covetous, sensual, filthy, beastly in their
conversations, yet if they have been baptized, and passed under that
sacramental Regeneration, and do but say, now and then, I repent, or God
forgive me, that these also are the children of God, and have all that new
Birth which is necessary to their seeing the Kingdom of God, Who can with any
color of reason imagine? Such as can make themselves believe this, have made
such a forfeiture of their understandings, that they may be like in time to
believe, that the Devil is God, and that Hell is Heaven; and may even take up
the Alcoran for their Bible, and let the Scriptures go for a Fable.

Sinners, consider with your selves, is there any such thing as the new Birth?
Can there be a New Birth, without a New Life? Does Christ bring forth Dead
Children, or do dry bones live? Does the Gospel bring forth monstrous births,
Children without eyes, without an head, without an heart, or with the heart of
a beast under the face of a man? Does it bring forth Serpents, Vipers, Dogs,
Swine, for its Children, and must the Kingdom of Heaven be peopled with such
Inhabitants as these? If these be the Children of the Kingdom, where or who are
the Children of this World? are the Nathaniels, the Israelites indeed, in whom
there is no guile: Are these the true seed, and the Saints spurious? are these
the sons, and the Saints bastards?

Or if you will let these vile ones of the earth go as none of the seed; take
the best of carnal men, that have the fairest face of Religion, and form of
holiness, without the inside, the new nature; are these they? Is the shadow
the substance, and the substance but a shadow? To say that the inward life of
godliness, the spirit and soul of Christianity, is but a conceit, and this
outside is all, this Christianity is as good reason, as to affirm, that a
picture is a man, and that a living man is but a picture; and as good Divinity
as I my self heard Preached at Oxford, about thirty years since, by a zealous
Advocate, for the lawfulness of Sports on the Lords Day; who Preaching about
the observation of the Sabbath, and distinguishing betwixt the Substantial, and
the Circumstantial duties of that day, said, That Preaching is a Religious
Ceremony, Praying is a Religious Ceremony, but bowing at the Name of Jesus,
standing at the Creed and Gospel, Holy and Religious Feasting, Holy and
Religous Dancing; these are the Substantials. Hence it follows,

1. That Regeneration is not a Suppositious change, or the counterfeit of a
change; there is some difference hereby put betwixt persons and persons; the
Regenerate and the Unregenerate are not one and the same, no more than the
living and the dead.

2. It is not a bare Relative change, as Justification and Adoption are held to
be; there is a change of nature wrought by it, and not barely of Relation.

3. It is not a Superficial change, or merely outward that goes only skin-deep;
it is not, as it is said concerning Baptism, only the washing away of the filth
of the flesh, the cleansing of the outside, and leaving lust to reign within:
Regeneration is the change of the man, and not barely of the manner.

4. In this change we may read all godliness, we may read the use of things
very much in their beings; we may know wherefore they are much the better, if
we understand what they are; Gods expectations may he read in his operations;
we may understand much of our work, by observing Gods work upon us: As God, in
making men living souls, does thereby tell us, he expects other things from
them, than from dead stocks and stones; and in making them reasonable souls,
intimates, that he expects they should live other lives than dogs or swine, so
in making them Christians, making them partakers of the Divine Nature, he makes
it evident, that he expects they should live another life than other men.

The new life, or life of godliness, may be read in our new birth, or new
natures: The Regenerate are said, Ephesians. 2. 10. To be created in Christ Jesus
unto good works, which God had before ordained that they should walk in them:
Created unto good works, that notes two things.

1. Intended to good works. 2. Fitted to good works.
1. That in their new making, they were intended to good works, this was Gods
mind and meaning, he foreordained that they should walk in them: He did not
set up such a light in man to be put under a bushel; he bestowed not such a
talent on man, to be bound up in a Napkin.

2. That in their new making, they were fitted to good works, created to good
works, that is, they were brought forth in such an holy nature, endued with
such a Divine light, such holy principles, powers, affections, dispositions,
and inclinations, as fitted them for an holy active life; And this Divine, and
excellent structure of this new creature, do both signify what life it is
intended to; and that this life to which it is intended* is indeed an excellent
life; there is something sure in this godly life; God did not new make men for
nothing; and something of worth and real excellency, or else he would not have
been at such cost in preparing men for it; if there were no other godly life,
than that which the carnal world count godliness, there needed no new Creation
to fit men for it, What is there in the whole frame of the Religion of the
vulgar, but a carnal man may reach to? For the devotional part of it, Saying,
or hearing of a prayer, observing of days, rites and customs, etc. What great
difficulty is there in that? May not a Publican do the same? Yea, may not a
Harlot, a Drunkard, an Idiot do the same? Such devotions will neither disturb
their lusts, nor yet will their lusts distate or disable such devotions; and
for the righteousness of it, to love those that love them, to be good
neighbors, to be no Extortioners, no Adulterers, etc. there is not so very
much in that, do not even the Pharisees do the same? What do you more than
others? said Christ to his Disciples. What singular or excellent thing do you?
God has done singularly well by you; you are fearfully and wonderfully made
(as it is true of the natural, so much more of your new birth) and curiously
wrought, not in the lower parts of the earth, but in the highest heavens; you
are born from above, God has done more for you than for others; what do you
more than others? Some it may be would have answered, What do you more than
others? Why, there is no more to be done, all that is done more than others do,
is mere fancy or conceit: But beloved, when you look upon that sapless,
lifeless empty way of Religion, which others are content with, methinks your
reasons should demand, What has God new-made me, made me partaker of the
Divine Nature, of the life of God, for no more but this? has God given such a
glorious Gospel, raised up such a mighty Savior, who has shed such precious
blood, sent forth such a glorious spirit, given commission to such multitudes
of heavenly Ambassadors, to Preach, persuade, beseech, exhort, to travel in
birth with me, till Christ has been formed in me, and all this, to bring me to
no better a life than this? Surely there is something farther, that the Lord
has been at all this cost, and built this structure for.

Study this new birth, study the new* Creation more thoroughly, and if you see
not the most holy, heavenly, spiritual conversation that is pleaded for
radically and seminally in the bowels of it, then let godliness pass for a
fancy for ever. Let the Regenerate but live according to their new nature, and
if that be not the very godly life we contend with you about, then call us what
you will.

5. Faith is no fancy, Hebr. 11. 1. Faith is the ground, or the subsistence of
things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. It has a sure
foundation on which it is bottomed, that sure word of promise, 2 Pet. 1. 19. To
the which (says the Apostle) ye do well, that ye take heed. There is a
believing on Christ for Salvation, and a believing that we shall be saved by
Christ; the former is called the direct act of faith, and is the Souls
accepting of Christ for Lord and Savior, and an adventuring, an^ resting upon
him for life; this is founded on the Rock of Ages, on the veracity and
faithfulness of that God that cannot lie, who has said, John 3. 16. Wh^soever
believes on his Son, shall not perish, but have everlasting life. The latter,
in the Saints, is called, The R^flex of Faith, and has its Foundation, partly
on the Word of God without them, partly on the Work of God within them: And
this Faith, or rather this Act of Faith, if the former has been first put
forth, is such also, as will never deceive. As those that trust in God, because
they have the Word and Oath of God, in which two immutable things, it is
impossible for God to lie, shall not be confounded, but have strong
consolation: So those that believe they shall be saved, because they find their
hearts purified; who believe that their names are written in Heaven, because
they find the Law and Image of God written. and engraven in their hearts, who
believe that they shall not come into condemnation, because they are in Christ,
and walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, who believe they shall
overcome death, because they have overcome the World; that they shall reap in
mercy, because they have sown in righteousness; that they shall reap in joy,
because they have sown in tears; that they shall receive the inheritance of
Sons, because they have received the Adoption of Sons; who finding themselves
firmly knit and joined to the Lord, are persuaded, that neither Death, nor
Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate them from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus their Lord. Those,
that on such grounds as these, believe they shall be saved, it shall certainly
be unto them, according to their faith; if it be thus with them indeed; if they
be in Christ; if they walk not after the flesh, but after the Sp^^it; if their
hearts be purified, etc. The Word of the Lord stands good and sure to them,
that they shall not come into condemnation; and they shall as infallibly be
saved, as if their particular names had been written in the promises: The
veracity of God stands as firmly engaged to make good conditional promises,
where the condition is fulfilled, as if the promise had been absolute.

There is a faith which is a mere fancy. The faith of Enthusiasts^ who believe,
upon unscriptural Revelation, who believe above and besides what is ^ritten;
the faith of Ignorants, whose belief is (according to the Athenians workship)
on the unknown God; the faith of Idlers, who believe they shall rest with
Christ though they never labored with him: The faith of the profane, who
believe they shall be saved, though they be not sanctified, such faith is mere
fancy; opinion or presumption you may call it rather than faith: You that are
ignorant, idle, profane, and unsanctified, and yet believe you shall be saved,
you believe a lie; you believe that which God has never said shall be; nay,
you believe that which God has said shall never be, Jer. 27. 11. They are a
people of no understanding, therefore ^e that made them will not save them, 1
Cor. 6. 11. Such shall never inherit the Kingdom of God. Hear sinners, hear,
God must be a liar, or your faith a lie.

But the faith of God's Elect, such as has been before described, this is that
precious tried faith* by which whosoever believes shall not be confounded,
Christians, you that have obtained such precious faith, a Christ-imbrac^ng
faith, an heart-purifying, a flesh-mortifying, a world-conquering faith, you
may venture safely upon it; if ever this faith deceive you, God has deceived
you, the Scriptures have deceived you* Christ has deceived you, who has
prayed (and we may be bold to turn Christ's prayer into a promise) that this
faith fail not; let the Phanatick world laugh, and mock, and call your
consolations delusions, your confidence conceit, or what they will, let them
alone, you must give losers leave to talk and laugh; yet, cast not away your
confidence, which has great recompense of toward.

6. The Doctrine concerning Good Works, is a certain truth. In this I shall
show,

First, What we are to understand by Good Works; A good work in general, is an
holy,* or gracious action; to the making up whereof th^se four things are
necessary.

1. The principle must be good from which it proceeds, it must be from an
honest and upright heart, for a pure conscience, from faith unfeigned, etc.
Mat. 12. 35. 1 Timothy 1. 5.

2. The matter must be good; something that is commended, Micah 6. 8. He has
showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee? Isa.
29. 13. Their fear toward me, wa^ taught by the precepts of men.

3. The form or manner of doing must be good, it must be well done; this takes
in the con^ideration of all its circumstances, of time, place, etc.

4. The end must be good, it must be done to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

As to the particular kinds of Good Works, they are not easily to be reckoned
up: The Papists talk little of any good works, but the exercises of bounty and
liberality, in giving Alms, feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting
and relieving the afflicted, building of Almes-houses, Colleges* and the like;
upon which they ^ufist so much, as if there were scarce any other good works,
but such as these; but we may not confine them within so narrow a compass. Good
works do signify the same with a good life, or a godly life; the doing and
observing all things which God has commanded us: Our living holily, honestly,
circumspectly, fruitfully, imports the same with our doing good works; the
exercising of all the graces of Christ, faith, love, hope, etc. The subduing
and mortifying of lust and corruption, the governing our hearts, the governing
our tongues, the ordering of our carriages toward God, and toward men; all
acts of Religion, Righteousness, Mercy, Charity, Praying, Fasting, Hearing,
Sanctifying the Sabbath, Lending, Giving, Forgiving, Peacemaking, Instructing,
Exhorting, Reproving, Denying our selves, taking up our Cross, following
Christ, Fighting the good fight of Faith, laying up treasure in heaven, and the
like: these are good works; every thing is a good work, concerning which God
will say at last, Well done good and faithful Servant: In all these the Lord
requires,

1. That we act, Ad extremum virium, to our utmost, Eccles. 9. 10. What thine
hand finds to do, and so what thy head, or thy heart finds to do, do it
with thy might, Tit. 2. 14. Zealous of good works, Romans 12. 14. Not sloathful
in business, but servent in spirit, serving the Lord, Col. 1. 10. Fruitful in
good works, 1 Cor. 15. ult. Abounding in the work of the Lord.

2. That we act in these, Ad extremum vitae; to the end of our days, Deuteronomy. 6.
2. Fear the Lord thy God, and keep all his statutes, and his Commandments all
the days of thy life.

3. That we be doing, Per totum vitae cursum, without intermission; there must
not only be welldoing, but a continuance in well-doing, Romans 2. God will not
have any Chasms or vacuities in our lives, but every day must be filled up with
the duties of it; Christians must not thin of getting to heaven, persaltum,
they must not leap, but walk; they must not leap over a duty, nor leap over a
day, nulla dies, fine linea. The Law of God does not allow a day to sin, not
abate us one days work. To demand a breathing time from the service of God, is
to desire so much time for the service of sin. We are ever serving one Master,
or the other* we are certainly serving sin, when we are not in one way or
other, serving the Lord.

Secondly, That go^d works are necessary: Necessary to salvation a so as though
we are not like to be saved by our works, yet we cannot be saved without them.
He that works not, shall not eat bread in the Kingdom of God. The everlasting
Rest is not for loyterers, but for laborers, Mat* 7. 21. Not every one that
says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that
does the Will of my Father which is in heaven. Faith cannot save us without
works: The Apostle tells us, Jam. 2. 26. Faith without works is dead; and a
dead faith cannot bring us to life. Therefore the Apostle Paul so vehemently
charges, Tit. 3. 8. This is a faithful saying, and these things* I will that
thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God may be careful to
maintain good works, for these things are good and profitable to men. Where
observe the Preface to the change, This is a faithful saying, that is, a true
saying, and a great truth, a worthy saying, worthy to be delivered, worthy to
be received, And these things, I will that thou affirm constantly, or teach
constantly or strenuously, or resolvedly, be not beaten off from it. Why, what
is this great truth? Why, ^his is it, That they which have believed in God, as
ever they would that their faith should stand them in any stead, must be
careful to maintain good works: not only to do good works, but (...), to
maintain, or to excel and abound in good works; these things are good and
profitable to men.

Now let me demand of all the world, where lies the Phanaticisme in any of all
this? Which of these Doctrines is it that is but a conceit? Is it this, that
Christians must not only be believers, but must do good works? Is it this,
That they must work with all their might, that they must be doing to the end of
their days, that they must continue at their work witho^t intermission (that
is) that they must bestow no^e of their time on the Devil* but all on God? Or
is this the conceit, That this well-doing is necessary to our well-being? Let
this be granted, that there is no fancy in all this, and I have at once
dispatched my whole undertaking, and if I had no more to say, have sufficiently
made it good to you, that strict godliness is no fancy. For this doctrine of
good works, which I have laid before you* this is Godliness, godliness in the
greatest severity and strictness of it; grant a necessity of such a life as
this, and you grant all that is desired. And can any of this be denied? Must we
serve the Lord? To be doing good is the same with serving God. Must we serve
the Lord only, and wholly, may not sin claim a share, and now and then
something to be done for the Devil? Must we serve the Lord with all our might,
or may less serve? Consider that Scripture, Luke 17. 10. When you have done all
that you can, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done no more than is
our duty to do. When we have given unto God all that we owe him, then let the
flesh and the Devil take the rest.

Beloved, consider what I have said, and observe whether all that diligence,
faithfulness, zeal, tenderness, and preciseness, which the strictest Christians
either do or profess, be not included in these three things, to serve the Lord
with all our might, to the end of our days, and in a constant and continued
course of godliness.

Christians* now that you see that little weight or reason hitherto there
appears in this charge of the world* against us, let us be encouraged to hold
fast, and hold on our holy course; let our practices be exact according to our
principles, and let our principles alone to plead for themselves; God will
plead for them against all the world: Let us no^ give occasion to evil men to
charge us with looseness, and then we may give them leave to charge us wit^
overmuch strictness.

But oh! how much reason have we to blame ou^selves on the one hand, whilst
they injuriously blame us on the other: Too strict, too precise, too painful in
the work of the Lord? Oh, how sadly* deficient rather are we! How spare are our
duties how little is our care* how uneven are our goings. We need not fear any
excess where we feel so many defects. Oh how scanty are our services for our
God, how barren are our fields, how thin do our good fruits spring up? Sinners
charge us with our barrenness, and we will join with you in the charge: The
Lord pardon us, it is but little that we have brought forth; our good fruits
are but like the gleanings of the harvest, here and there an ear, or a poor
handful: or like the gleanings of the Olive tree, Is. 17. 6. Two or three
berries in the top of the uppermostbo^gh, four or five in the outmost fruitful
branches^ Blessed be God for any thing, but woe to us that there is no more; it
is but here a little and there a little, here a line and there a blank, that we
have to show. Oh how many Chasms and Vacuities are there to be found in our
course? how many empty hours, and empty days have we lived, concerning which,
if we should have asked, Anima qu^d fecisti ^odie, Soul, what account can
thou give of this days work? Instead of giving in our Bill we must give in a
Blank, and write down nothing but Perdidi Perdidi, I have lost a day more. Oh
Brethren, let us take heed of giving in any, more such blank accounts, lest
from our Perdidi we should at last come to write down Perii, perii, I am lost,
I am undone, I have lost so much time, that now I am afraid I have lost my Sou^.

Beloved, whilst others bespatter our diligence, let us bewail our negligence,
let us bewail it and amend. If to be strict, and watchful, and fruitful, be to
be vile, and foolish, let us resolve with that holy King. We will be more vile
then this; we will be more foolish then this, if this be folly: whilst men
charge us, that our Religion is fancy, we have no such way to vindicate it, and
prove it a reality, but by being more Religious, more strictly so, more
fruitfully so, our fruitfulness in good works will be the proof of our
sincerity, and will silence our adversaries calumnies.

Object. But is there so much in this Doctrine of good works, and all necessary
to Salvation, who then can be saved? May not a good will serve to make (...)
the defects of good Works? We have heard that God accepts the will for the deed
and we hope, that though we have done little, yet that this will be accepted,
that we have a willing mind.

Sol. Though this be a truth, and may administer comfort of Christians in many
cases, that a willing mind is accepted with God, where there is little done:
yet because it has been by diverse much mistaken and abused, and this mi^^ke
has probably proved fatal to many a Soul being made use of to serve for an
excuse of a lazy heart and b^rren life: give me leave before I proceed any
farther, to turn aside a little, and make some stay upon the consideration
hereof, and to show you in what sense the will may be accepted where the work
is not done.

There is a question put amongst the Schoolmen, whether a will to sin where
the Act follows not, conracts not as great a guilt in the sight of God, as both
the will and the Act: and Durandus determines it thus, The reason why the will
to sin brings not forth the Act, may be twofold, either Propter incompletam and
impersectam voluntatem, because the will is not so fully and peremptorily
resolved and set upon it, or else, Propter impedimentum aliquod, because though
the will be fully resolved upon it, yet there is something that hinders the
execution, as it may be, want of power, or opportunity to commit it: now in the
first case says he, where the reason of the nor acting the sin, is the
incompleatness of the Will: ther^ the will without the act is not as great a
sin as the will and act together: but if the will were so fully resolved, that
it would have brought forth the act, if it had not been hindered, there the
guilt is as great, if the sin be not committed, as if it had been committed.

There may be use of this to the determining the present qu^^on: where there is
a will to perform a duty, and yet it is not ^^^ne* if the reason of the failing
be not from the ^^mpleatness of the will, but from some unavoid ^^inderance,
there the will is accepted, as if the w^^k had been done: where the will is so
strongly set upon a duty, as that it would have brought forth the performance,
had it not been for some invincible hindrance, it shall not fail of acceptance;
the reason is, because where the defect is not in the will God has the heart,
and wheresoever God has the heart, there is certain acceptance with God: where
the heart is engaged against any particular lust, and is resolved upon it, this
lust I must mortify, and through the help of God will seek its destruction,
though it cannot yet compass it, yet this resolution evidences, that the heart
is on Gods side; it does not side with lust against God, but ^^des with God
against lust, and so in all other the like cases, 2 Cor. 8. 11. If there be
first a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a man has, and not
according to what he has not: He that gives according to what he has, he that
does according to what he has, and does it heartily, shall be accepted
undoubtedly. It may be thy case may be such sometimes, that to will may be all
thou have toward a Duty: As for instance, when thou have a will to show mercy*
to give an Alms, if thou have nothing to give, thy will is all thou have. It Is
true, there may be mistakes and we are too apt to such mistakes, to impute our
failings in duty to want of ability* when they are from want of will. How
ordinarily do men thus excuse their grossest neglects, even when they yield
themselves over to an universal, careless* and idle life, wherein there is not
the least care or pains taken to please or follow God? Why, I do what I can, I
can do no more than I can; ^ould live a better life, but I cannot, when yet the
will is only in fault; though you can do (...) than you can, yet if you had a
good will to it, you ^ight do more than you do.

But still the great question ^^^ be, How may, I know (in case of failings of
pers^^^ance) whether my will be so fully set upon my duty, that there would be
performance, if it were not hindered, if it were not for want of power or
opportunity? I answer,

1. There is no pleading want of ability to excuse a total neglect of
godliness; if the pretense be, of want of ability to live a godly life in
general; I am willing to live a godly life, but cannot, there it is certain the
defect is in the will; the Spirit of Sanctification, is a Spirit of power, and
where the will is once savingly renewed by that mighty Spirit, there is
certainly such a power communicated, as will infallibly bring on the soul to
follow God in a course of Godliness, whatever particular weaknesses and
failings there may be, 2* Tim. 1. 7. God has not given us a spirit of fe^r*
but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind, Jer. 42, 20, 21. Ye dess^mble
in your hearts when you sent me to the* Lord your God, saying pray for us, and
whatsoever the Lord our God shall speak, we will do it. Here was a fair
promise, what could be said more? whatever the Lord shall say, we will do* and
like enough they might have some intention to it; but says the Prophet, Ye
dissemble with me all the while; why, how does that appear? why, in the next
verse, says he, I have this day declared it to you, but you have not done any
thing, for which the Lord your God sent me to you. If your hearts had been
right, there would have been something done, but you have done nothing.

Beloved, you that say you fain would follow God, but cannot; you would fain
live a godly life, but do nothing toward i^^ you would willingly leave off
your worldly life^ or your fleshly life, or your idle life, you would fain
leave off your drinking, and gaming, and wantonness, and betake your selves to
praying, and repenting, and denying your selves, and minding your souls* and
the things of eternity, but you are not able; the meaning is this, you are not
willing, you cannot find in your hearts to take up such a course, you have some
velleities, some wishes, and weak in^linations to godliness, but no will to it;
if there were a willing mind within, doubtless there would be some sign of it
in your course without. 2. For particular duties, when we are willing to them,
and yet fall short of performance, we may know, that the will would bring forth
the acts, were it not for some great impediments, 1. When the nonperformance
of duty brings forth sorrow and trouble of heart; when it is a grief of mind to
us that we cannot do what we would, Romans 7. 18, 19, 24. To will is present
with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not, the good that I
would do, etc. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death. That which hindered him was a sore ^urthen to him, under which he
groans, and pas^ionately wishes for his redemption and deliverance from it;
those who in case of ^ailings are quiet, and well enough contented, much more,
those who are glad of an excuse, as too often it is to be observed in many, who
when they are put upon ^ifficult or displ^asing Duties, are glad they have so
much to say for themselves, that they are not able or have not opportunity;
it is ^n argument, that little would have been done, ^ad they had never so great
ability.

2. When if we cannot do the duty, we do what we can toward it. A man that ^
poor, and cannot give an alms to his Brethren in distress, yet he can pity
them, pray for them, make their case known to others that can relieve them; if
he do not what he can, if he do not open his bowels to them, though he cannot
open his hand, though he had never so much, his poor brother would be like to
be little the better. The poor Widow, that cast in her Mite into the Treasury,
which was all she had; 'twas a sign she had a large heart, though she gave so
small a gift, 1 King. 8. 17. David had it in his heart to build an House for
God and yet did it not; the Lord hindered him* How may it be known that David
would indeed (if he might) have built it? why, by this it appeared, though he
might not do it, yet he did what he might toward it; though he might not
build, yet he prepared materials for the building. If thou art but a babe in
Christ, have had but a little time, have yet but a little understanding, a
little strength; though thou can not follow the Lord in such exactness, not
attain to such a fruitful life, as those that are grown and experienced
Christians have attained to, yet if whilst thou art but a child, tho^ do
follow the Lord as a child, according to the measure of thine understanding and
ability, thou art yet unskilful, and performest thy duties in a broken manner,
but yet thou do perform them; thou art weak as a child, but yet art tractable
as a child, willing to be led where thou can not go: if it be thus with thee,
thou netdst not be discouraged; he that whilst he is but a child, does follow
God as a child according to his measure,,it is a sign that if he were a man, he
would follow him as a man.

If you labor under any lust, or violent passion, which it may be flows from
your natural complexion, or bodily constitution, which whenever its moved and
stirred, you are not able to stand before it: and notwithstanding, you know it
is your duty to mortify and crucify it, yet still this is your case, that
though it be matter of great grief to you, and as a continual thorn in your
flesh, and it be the longing desire of your soul to have it destroyed, yet you
can do little to it; in this case,

1. If your will to be rid of it, bring forth a continual watching and praying
against it; if you cannot overcome it, yet you are fighting against it; i^ it
will live in you, yet you will not let it live in peac with you, especially if,

2. Your striving again it be not altogether without success, but brings forth
some actual restraint of it. ^ as to those outward acts by which it would vent
it self; as if you cannot overcome passion, yet you restrain in some measure
your tongue from uttering i^ in any angry words: or if you cannot overcome your
inward pride, yet you do forbear those self-exalting words, and vain boastings,
etc. by which that lust is somented; if your heart be so set against it, that
it thus strives against the lust within, and does ordinarily restrain some of
its outward actings, you may be sure, that if you could have your will, it
should not be suffered to lodge one night more within you.

If you have a sloathful heart, and are naturally, or by occasion of any bodily
distemper, dull, heavy, and unactive, and are still wishing for a more active,
lively spirit, but cannot attain it; yet though your heart be heavy and sleepy,
you will not let it sleep in quiet, but are frequently jogging, and awakening
it, by the most stirring and quickening considerations; if you endeavor to
serve the Lord with the best you have, if what you want in quickness and
sprightfulness, you labor to make up in seriousness, though you make on by a
slow pace, yet you do go on, why, then know that you have to do with a God,
that knows and considers your frame, and in this case also will accept you,
according to what you have, and not according to what you have not.

3. If there be some Duties that you are unable to, yet if you be faithful in
others, that you can do; if you have not an alms, to give to one that is poor,
yet you can give counsel to him, and therein show kindness to his soul; if you
cannot so well compose your thoughts to any fixed meditation, but are
unavoidably perplexed with confusedness and distractions, yet you can pray, or
you can spend the more time in reading; do you do that? If you cannot so
profitably, or to so much spiritual advantage, improve Christian society, do
you do the more in private, in your more retired and immediate converse with
God. If you want courage or boldness to appear for God, in exhorting or
reproving others, especially such as are above you, yet you have families
wherein you can be bold; what do you do there? to your Children, to your
servants? Do you instruct them, warn and reprove them, etc. though (as before)
you cannot extend mercy to others in their needs (having not wherewithal) yet
are you just, and righteous and honest, and peaceable in your dealings with,
and carriage toward all? If you are just, and would be merciful, if you had
wherewithal? if you are profitable in your conversing with your families, and
would be so to others, if you could get up to courage and boldness: if you are
serious, and spiritual, and affectionate in secret, and have a will to be so in
society that is an Argument, that your will would bring forth performance there
also, if it were not hindered.

4. If at such times, when there are not such impediments, we then do, what at
another time we cannot; that which we cannot do at some times, as in sickness,
or in times of desertion or temptation, may be done at another time, when we
are not under such disadvantages.

Now gather up all these together, and then the question will easily ^e
determined.

He that has a will to walk in all the Duties of godliness; he that d^es
ordinarily walk in the practice of those holy duti^s, which he has power to
do: he that does what he can toward those duties which he cannot fully reach
to; he that mourns and is grieved in his heart under his failings, this man ^ay
have ground to conclude, that his spirit is sincerely willing, though his flesh
be weak, and that this willing mind is accepted with God, as if it did really
perform: But now, those that pretend to have a good will to godliness, but yet
in their general course, are carnal and careless, and ^here's little or
nothing of a godly life to be seen; those that do not what they can, that do
no^^endevour to do what they cannot, that do not mourn under their failings,
but are contented and quiet, and satisfy themselves in this, that their will
is good, and that God accepts their will for the deed* such as these do but
deceive themselves, and are not upright before God, nor accepted with him.

7. The Doctrine of the last Judgment, and the different rewards that shall
then be rendered to those that are sincerely godly, and all others in the world,
is no fancy, but a real truth. I am dealing with Pharisees, not with Sad^uces,
and therefore shall not need to prove either the Resurrection or Judgment: My
main business here, will lie in the proof of the latter part, That the
sincerely godly, shall have in the Judgment, a far different reward from all
other men.

That God has appointed a day, in which he will judge the world in
righteousness; I hope you will give me leave to believe, that you are already
satisfied in it; When all the men of this world shall have run their course;
when the Courtly Gasl^nts, and the ruffling Roysters; when the proud Minions,
and wanton Mimicks, shall have acted their glorious parts; when the trampled
and contemned Christians shall have all run their wear Race; when the last
Scene shall be over, the Sing cleared, the Cu^tains drawn; when the beggars
Rags, and the great^^^ens Robes; when the Warriors Swords, and States men Gowrs
shall be put off and laid aside, and the poor oppressed shall stand upon even
ground with their mightiest oppressors; when the Kings of the Earth shall have
laid down the^r Cr^^ns, and the Princes their Sceptors; when the Judg^s of the
earth shall have broken up their Courts, and their term is ended; then shall
the God of glory erect his Tribunal; before which, all persons, from the least
to the greatest, must make their personal appearance, have all their ways and
actings examined, and considered over again, and receive their doom: Then shall
men return, and discern betwixt the righteous and the wicked; betwixt him that
served the Lord, and him that served him not; Then shall men say, Verily, there
is a reward for the righteous (a peculiar reward) doubtless be is a God that
judges in the earth.

If you ask, What shall this reward of the righteous be? and what shall be the
difference betwixt theirs, and the rewards of all others whatsoever? Let these
following Scriptures be examined, and give in the answer, Romans 2. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Who will render to every man according to their deeds, to them, who by patient
conti^uing in well doing, seek for glory, honor and immortality, eternal life,
but to them that are contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every
soul of man that does evil; of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile.

The words refer to the last Judgment, as appears by the former part of them,
Who shall render, etc. In the following part, we have the dividing of the Sheep
from the Goats; which are both described, and have their distinct rewards
appointed to them.

1. We have a description of the Sheep, and what their reward shall be; and by
their description, these Sheep should be the very same with Precisians, or
circumspect Christians:

1. They are such as seek for glory, and honor, and immortality; that is, that
seek for a portion of glory and immortality in the world to come: They leave
the Kingdoms of this world to be shared among the men of this world, and seek
for that Kingdom which cannot be shaken.

2. They are well-doers, good men, and holy men, men of a good and holy life.

3. They continue in well-doing, they are not good for a fit, but it is the way
of their life.

4. They patiently continue: Patience is either,

1. Of Labor, they do not complain, nor are weary of their work, but buckle to
it. Or,

2. Of Sufferings; they can bear as well as do. Or,

3. Of Delay; they are content to stay for their reward till hereafter; let
others take their portions and their rewards here, they are content to stay for
theirs till hereafter.

This is the description of the Sheep; and of all the men in the world, who
should these Sheep be: Can they be any other men then those godly men, that
have been laid open to you? Well, but what is the Reward, which in the
Judgment the Lord will render to these? Why, it is eternal Life, eternal Glory
and blessedness: to them that by patient continuance in well-doing, etc. he
will render eternal Life. This is true, Sinners, this is no conceit, it is a
certain truth, and such a truth as you yourselves must be^ieve, before ever you
can come to good Heb. 11. 6. He that comes to God must believe that God is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that (diligently) seek him. Mark it, of them
that ( diligently) seek him. They are the same men you see, that are spoken of
here, and in the former Scripture: of these God is the rewarder; that is, with
a special and glorious reward, that is necessary to be understood. God has
rewards for the ungodly: You that are proud, and persecutors, and despisers of
God, and his ways, God will reward you all for all your doings, but he has a
blessed reward for those that seek him: And thus says the Text, Every one that
comes to God must believe. Sinners you will not be persuaded now but these
people are foolish, self-deluding people, and that the Heaven, the Joy, the
Glory, and the Blessedness they feed themselves with the hope of, is only in
their own fancies: but yet, if ever you come to any thing, if ever you be
brought home to God, this is that which you (must) believe, That God is a
Rewarder, and a glorious Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Thus we
have the description of the Sheep, and of their reward, and the certainty
thereof; next we have the description of the Goats and their reward, of them
there is a general description, The men that do evil, and this threefold
particular description.

1. They are contentious.

2. They obey not the Truth: But,

3. They obey unrighteousness. which for methods sake I shall reduce to two
Heads. They are described,

1. By their Contention.

2. By their Conquest.

1. By their Contention: There is a twofold contention.

1. Of man with man.

2. Of man with God.

This latter is ^xprest in Scripture, by gainsaying, Romans 10. by resisting Acts
7. 51. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart, ye do always resist the
Holy Ghost by kicking, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. This kicking implies;

1, Opposition against God,

2. Oposition joined with scorn and contempt, putting a slight upon God, and
all his Counsels and way^s. Now this latter is the contention meant in the
Text, contention against God; they will not heark^n to his voice, nor be
obedient to his truth: The Lord commands and calls them to accept of his grace,
and to be obedient to his Law, but they rejected God, kick against his Word,
and refuse to hearken to him.

2. By this conquest or victory in this contest after all the strivings of God
with them, they still stand it out and overcome; they obey not the truth, but
persist to obey unrighteousness: where,

1. By the Truth we are to understand the whole Word of God, John 17. 17. Thy
Word is Truth; both the word of righteousness, the Law, and the Word of faith,
the Gospel: by obeying the truth, we are to understand, submitting to the
government of the Law, and accepting the grace of the Gospel.

2 By unrighteousness we are to understand, all those corrupt Principles,
according to which the lnsts of men do govern them; which (I take) the Apostle
means, Romans 7. 23. by the Law of Sin. In that, and the former Verse, there is
mention made of Four Laws contending one against another, whereof Two are on
one side and Two on the other; The Law of God, the Law of the Mind, the Law of
the Members, and the Law of Sin. By the Law of God, is understood, the Word of
God: by the Law of the Mind, is understood, in the Regenerate, Grace, in the
Unregenerate, the Light of the Natural Conscience: by the Law of the Members,
understand, Lust, or Concupiscence: by the Law of Sin, those corrupt
Principles, according to which Lust governs: As the Law of the Mind governs
according to those Holy Principles contained in the Word, so there are certain
Principles of Unrighteousness, according to which the Flesh governs.

To enumerate and reckon up all these corrupt Principles, would be as great a
task, as to reckon up all the Doctrines of Truth, and the Righteous Commands of
God; to each of which Holy Doctrines and Commands, there are in this Law of
Sin, Principles directly contrary. Now because it may serve the design I am now
pursuing, viz. To help sinners to understand themselves, I shall mention some
of the chief of them, in number Ten; which, if you will, you may call, The
Devils Ten Commandments.

1 Live to thy self: Mind thine own things: This is the first and great
Commandment, on which all the rest hang, and to which they serve, and is the
same as, be thine own God, thine own Idol.

2. Let thy Will be thy Law. Thou art thine own, thy Tongue is thine own, thy
Time is thine own, thy Estate is thine own, may thou not do what thou will
with thine own?

3. Make thy best if the time present, and of present things. Love not a
certainty for uncertainties; who knows what shall be hereafter? Eat and drink,
for tomorrow thou die; be merry while thou may, spend whilst thou have it;
make Hay while the Sun shines; Death comes, and there is an end of all thy
mirth.

4. Stand fast in the liberties of thy Flesh. Come not into boudage; be not a
voluntary slave to a strict and restrained life, when thou may, if thou will, use thine own liberty.

5. Continue in sin, because Grace has abounded. Christ died for sinners, God
is merciful, why should thou then fear to take thy course?

6. Do as others do. Go along with the multitude, fashion thy self to the
times, be not singular: Why should thou think thy self wiser than others?

7. Do no more in Roligion than needs. Be not Righteous overmuch; be not
over-forward; a little Faith, a little Repentance will serve thy turn.

8. Do not trouble thy self about small offenses. Thoughts are free: Words are
but things of course: What man man is there that lives and sins not? What
should thou keap such a do about thy sins? Are they not but little ones?

9. Be not overhasty. If thou must repent, it is time enough yet: torment not
thy self before thy time: repentance will be well enough at last: when thou art
old, thou will have little else to do: be not old, whilst thou art young.

10. Trust God with thy soul, rather then man with thy body. That is, choose
Iniquity rather then Affliction; venture no farther in matters of Religion,
then thou may with safety.

These are some of those corrupt principles which make up the Law of Sin, to
which all others may be reduced; and living under the power of any of these or
any others of the like nature, this is obeying Unrighteousness. As the Apostle
says, He that breaks one of the Commandments of God, is guilty of all: So he
that lives under the power of any one of the Commandments of the Devil, is, if
not under the power of all, yet as sure a slave to the Devil as if he were
guilty of all; he whose foot is entangled in one cord of the Net, is as fast,
as he that has the whole Net spread over him: if a bird be held by a leg or a
wing, it is as sure as if the whole body were in the Net. Here now you may have
also the description of the Goats; those are contentious, resisting the Lord
and the word of his grace; and who, after all the strivings of the Lord with
them, do overcome, and hold their own, and persist in their disobeying the
truth, and obeying unrighteousness, or living under the dominion of those
corrupt Principles, which make up the Law of Sin.

Let me here demand of you these three things:

First, Are not these Principles I have mentioned every one of them evidently
principles of unrighteousness? And may they not as well be called the Devils
Commandments, as the Devil be called a Devil?

Secondly, Are not all those that live under the power of these Principles, the
very men here meant in the Text, by those that obey Unrighteousness, may they
not as well be called the Devils Servants, as those wicked Laws, the Devils
Commandments.

Thirdly, Are not all persons that are not precisely godly, in the sense I have
before described it, evidently held under some of these corrupt Principles? Is
not this it which you in reproach charge upon the Saints, that they will not
live under these, or some of these Rules? That they will not take their
liberty; that they will nor do as others, but they must be singular, forsooth,
as if they were wiser then their neighbors; that they stand upon every trifle
and small matter, etc.

Some of these Anti-Precisians, if they be laid to these black lines, do touch
with them in every point throughout; you may well soil them Hells thorough
Conformists, or the Devils best Subjects.

Sinners, the whole generation of you that are of such a Spirit, even every one
of you that have a word to speak against the preciseness of godliness and godly
men, come and look into this glass which is here set before you. Do you know
your own faces when you see them? Are not these Principles the very Pictures
and express Images of you? If you say they are not, it is because you do not
know your own faces; if they are not, let me be rejected for a Liar and a
Slanderer. But if you be, even all of you, these very men, then look a little
further, and you may see your reward will be in the Judgment: Why, what is it?
Read on and you have it; To them that obey not the Truth, but obey
Unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every
soul of man that does evil,

If you say, This is but your opinion, but for all that you may be mistaken, we
hope to fare as well as you, the best of you, for all your great words: but our
opinion. Why, is it never your opinion too? Do you never doubt? Are you never
afraid that this may be, that this will be your portion? Did your own
consciences never preach to you the same things? but whether they did or no,
this is as true, that indignation and wrath will be the portion of every soul
of you thus living and thus dying; this is as tru^, as that God is righteous.
The Righteousness of God is engaged, to render to every man according to his
works; and so to them that obey not the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness,
indignation and wrath, etc.

And by this time you may see that there is some difference betwixt the rewards
of the godly, and the rewards of all others in the world; as much difference as
betwixt Life and Death, Mercy and Wrath, everlasting Joy and Peace, and
everlasting Anguish and Tribulation. If Heaven and Hell differ only in
conceit, and if there be not as great difference betwixt the rewards of these
and all others, as betwixt Heaven and Hell, then once more I tell you, we will
be content to be the Phanaticks. And have you not yet done with talking of our
fancies and conceits? Is it but a conceit, that there shall be a judgment? Or
is this a conceit, that it shall then fare better with the Sheep then with the
Goats? Or that those are Christ's Sheep that hear his voice, and follow his
steps, and keep by the Shepherds Tents? Is this a conceeist, that it shall fare
better with the Friends of Christ, then with his Enemies; or that those are the
friends of Christ, who are the friends of Holiness? Is this a conceit, that it
shall fare better with the servants of Christ then with strangers? Or, are
those the best servants, who waste their Talents, or bind them up in a Napkin?
Will Christ say in that day, Away thou faithful Servant; away from me ye
workers of Righteousness? You have loved me too much, you have pleased me too
well, you have followed me too close, you have given your selves to too much
praying, too much praising, too much fasting; you have been too conscientious,
too tender, too watchful, too holy; you would not be merry, and idle, and vain;
you would not go along with your Neighbors, to their sporting, to their
Revellings, to their Pleasures, but must needs deny your selves, and take up
your Cross and follow me; you could not be content with an Earthly happiness,
but you must have Glory and Honor, and Immortality; you could not be content
to venture on a groundless hope of Glory, but you must needs make sure of it,
by patient continuance in well-doing, Away from me you workers of
Righteousness; you that have followed me in the Regeneration, get you gone, get
you down to everlasting destruction; Will this be the voice of the Judge at
that day? Will he call to sinners, Come ye wantons, come ye Wine-bibbers, come
ye Swearers, Liars, Scoffers, Whore-masters, come ye blessed Crew, inherit the
Kingdom? All this must be so, if godliness be but a fancy; and do you not yet
see Sinners, what men of Reason, what men of Judgment you are, and how much
truth or weight there is in your charge against the Saints? Oh Christians, you
see I hope, sufficiently, how little ground you have to take the least notice
of, or discouragement from these confident Adversaries, who in proclaiming you
Phanaticks, must proclaim themselves either Infidels or Ideot^? Thus I have
showed, that the principles of Godliness are not Phanatical.

2. The Duties and Comforts of Godliness are no fancies; I shall instance in
such duties, and those parts of duties, which are most obnoxious to this
censure; the most spiritual duties; the most spiritual parts of duties, which
being most out of fight, and above the reach of the carnal world, are most of
all thus censuted by them; I shall mention only two, which indeed are
comprehensive of all.

1. Worshipping God in the Spirit.

2. Walking in the Spirit.

1. Worshipping God in the Spirit. If this be a fancy, the Apostle Paul with the
Christians his Contemporaries, were the great Phanaticks of their time: who
says thus of himself and them, Phil. 3. 3. We are the Circumision, who worship
God in the spirit. We are the Circumcision; that is, We are the People of God;
we are they who are circumcised with the Circumcision which is without hands,
circumcised in heart, which is all one, as if he had said, we are Christians,
who worship God in the spirit. Worshipping God in the spirit, notes,

1. The worship of the soul, or heart-worship.

2. The worshipping God through his Spirit, or in the Holy Ghost.

1. The worship of the soul, or inward worship, and that, 1. As it stands in
opposition to meet bodily worship; I say not as it is opposed to bodily
worship, but to mere bodily worship. 2. As it stands in opposition to the
Antiquated Jewish worship, which was more external, pompous, and ceremonious.
We worship God in the spirit, that is, we worship God in the heart, and in the
simplicity and plainness of Gospel Worship.

Heart-worship is the true worship; the worship of the soul, is the soul of
worship: The body without the soul is dead, and bodily worship without
spiritual, i^ dead worship, John 4. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship
him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. The latter word ( Truth) is
exegitical of the former ( Spirit) signifying, that worshipping in Spirit, is
worshipping in Truth; This is the true worship, worship indeed. The worship of
the body, the uncovering of the head, the bowing the knee, the lifting up of
the hands, or voice, these are but the outside and carcass of worship, and so
far only capable of being accounted worship, as they are helpful to, and
expressive of the devotions of the soul. As bowing of the knee signifies the
bowing of the heart; as the uncovering of the head either expresses, or helps
toward the inward reverence of the soul, so far as they worship, and no
farther, and even then but improperly so c^lled. But as they stand single and
separated from the inward worship, they are no worship, no more then a carcass
is a man, but are mere shadows and fancies. There is no such Phanatick as the
Formalist, who whilst with those Heathens, Mat. 6. 7. He thinks to be heard
for his much speaking, does but play the hypocrite and Liar: Look what the
Courtiers Complements are, such are the Formalists devotions, smooth words,
tongue-courtefies, fl^ttering salutes, fawning cringes, Your servant Sir, your
servant, command me what you please, I am ready to serve you. Here is a great
show of respect and kindness, but what is there in it? What wise man will
regard it? And what more is there in the Formalists devotions? What is it but
mere complementing with the Holy God? Very devout and lowly, as to all
appearance, and a great noise is there, that such Devotion makes, but what is
there in it? What awe; and Soul-reverence of God, what heart-striving and
wrestling with God, what heart-elevation, or lifting up the Soul to God is
there in all this? Is there no such thing as heart-striving and Soul-reverence
required in the Worship of God; or are these but shadows of worship, and is the
soul of it only in the Lips or Knees? Does he whose Soul is poured out in
prayer, whose Spirit strives with the Lord, does he but pray in conceit,
worship God in conceit, and those whose Eyes and Tongues, and Hands only pray,
have they gotten the substance, are these the true Worshippers? Beloved, be not
deceived, God sees not as man sees; he sees what is within man; he sees what is
within our duties; they are not shows or sounds that can blind hi^ Eye, or
please his Ear.

Ephesians. 5. 19. Be ye filled with the Spirit, speaking to your s^lve in Psalms
and Hymns, and Sriritual Songs, singing and making Melody in your hearts to the
Lord. Believe it Christians, Heart-musick is the best Church music,
Heart-praying, and Heart-singing, makes the best Melody in the Ears of the
Lord of Sabbath. My work and intent is not to decry all external worship, as
useless or unacceptable; We must glorify God in our bodies, as well as in our
spirits; Our Lips must bear their parts in our praises and practices; but I
would not that you should take the body of worship to be the Soul, and the Soul
to be nothing. Be not conceited that the outward part is the worship, and the
inwa^^ but a conceit. Brethren, the living God will have living services; the
God of our spirits, will have the service of our spirits; the worshipping God
in spirit, this is the true worship God will not be, and take heed you be not
cheated with shows. When all the men of the world, with their wits, parts, and
interists, have commended, garnished, and magnified, the carcass of Religion,
and decryed, and disgraced its soul and life, yet this shall still stand, as an
irrefragable Truth, They are the circumcision, who worship God in the spirit,
and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

2. Worshipping God through the spirit, through the help and assistance of the
Spirit of God; as to instance in prayer, Jude 20. Praying in the Holy Ghost,
Romans 8. 26. The Spirit it self helps our infirmities. The Spirit of God
affords a threefold help in prayer.

1. He indites our requests; suggests matter of Prayers to us, who as the
Apostle there tells us, Know not what we ^^^uld pray for as we ought. Carnal
men's lusts do often make their Prayers, and then no wonder they ask amiss; when
they should be seeking the death of their lust, they ask meat for their lusts;
we often, not knowing what we ought to ask, do ask we know not what; we ask a
stone, a Serpent, a Scorpion; sometimes, when we think we ask bread: If God
should always give his people their prayers, their prayers would undo them.
When we are poor, we ask riches, and it may be, if God should give us them, our
riches might undo us: Sometimes we ask ease, or credit, or liberty, and if we
had what we ask, it might be our ruin; the Spirit of God knows what is fit for
us, and accordingly guides our prayers; He helps us to underst^^^ our sins, and
so teaches us what confession to make, carnal men will confess sins, but any
sins rather then their own; He helps us to understand our wants, and so teaches
us what to ask; He helps us to understand our mercies, and so teaches us what
to give thanks for; carnal men often come before the Lord with mock praises,
give thanks for their election, justification, sanctification, hope of glory,
when it may be, the power of sin, and the wrath of God abides upon them, and
they remain without Christ, and without hope, and without God in the world; the
Spirit of God, if they had him, would make their devotions more reasonable and
regular.

2. He excites, and quickens, and enlarges their hearts in prayer. The Spirit
of God comes in and influences upon the heart, and draws forth the soul; and
this is the import of the following words, The Spirit it self makes
intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered; that is, he sets
up a groaning and sighing after the Lord. Groaning notes the strentgh and
ardency of desire, which through the servency of it, puts the Soul to pain,
and an holy impatience till it be heard; in which sense its used, verse 21. For
we our selves, who have received the first fruits of the spirit, groan within
our selves, waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our body. It works
such groanings as cannot be uttered, it sometimes makes the hearts of
Christians too big for their mouths, their desires more larger then their
expressions; as much warmth, and life, and strength of affection as there does
appear without, there is more within^t Oh, how flat and dead are our hearts
oftentimes; how much are we straightened in our prayers, we stand as men struck
dumb when we come before the Lord; or if there be words in our mouths, there is
scare any word in our hearts; sometimes we cannot speak, and if we can speak,
we cannot groan; the Spirit does either put words in our mouths, or else supply
the want of words, by kindling and enlarging inward desires; helping us to
groan out a prayer when we cannot speak it out; and silent groans will sound in
the ears of the Lord, when the loudest cries may not be heard.

3. He encourages and emboldens the heart in prayer, enables us to call God
Father, to pray to him, to cry to him, to be confident of audience and
acceptance with him upon this ground, Gal. 4. 6. God has sent forth the Spirit
of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba Father. And hereby he furnishes us
with a mighty Argument to plead with God; Father hear me, Father forgive me,
Father pity me, Father help me: Am not I thy child, thy Son, or thy Daughter?
To whom may a child be bold to go? With whom may a child have hope to speed,
if not with his Father? Father hear me: The Fathers of our Flesh are full of
bowels and full of pity to their Children, and know how to give good things to
them when we ask them; when they ask Bread, will they deny them? when they ask
clothes, or any thing they want, will they deny them? And is not the Father of
Spirits more full of bowels, more full of bounty, than the Fathers of our
Flesh, Father hear me

This is praying in the Spirit, and if this be a fancy with you, I must tell
you sinners, that it is such a fancy, as experienced Christians that have most
proved it, would not lose for all your substance. But will you stand to it? Is
this Fanatical praying indeed? then bring your Index expurgatorius, and expunge
these Text^ out of the Scriptures* or else, if you let them stand, and look
over them again, you will next say, Their Bible is as Fanatical as themselves.

But let me add one word to convince you from your own judgment (if you
understand what you do) that praying in the Spirit is no fancy; and this, by
putting this one Question to you; Dare any of you all, when you go to God in
Prayer, deliberately refuse to beg the assistance of his Spirit? Whether you
use a Form, or Pray without a Form, that is not so material: The assistance of
the Spirit is needed as well of those that use a Form, as of those that pray
without it: Nor dare you, I say, when you go to pray deliberately, refuse to
beg the assistance of the Spirit? Dare you say, Lord, I need not, nor desire
any such assistance; I will not ask it of thee, that thy Spirit may be given
into me, to help mine infirmities? If you beg the assistance of the Spirit, you
hope to have it, and if you have it, there is that praying in the Spirit, which
you cry down for a fancy: Judge now, whether you do not condemn the things
which your selves allow, and in your Judgment and Practice justify the
reallity of that Duty, which with your mouths you decree for Fanatical; Will
you also be his Disciples? Will you also be Fanatics?

2 Walking in (...) Spirit, this is no fancy, Gal. 5. 25. If we live in the
Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. In the prosecution of this I shall
show, 1. What is meant by the Spirit. 2. What by walking in the Spirit. 3. That
it is no fancy.


1. What is meant by the Spirit here: That, being something that is opposed to
the Flesh, or corruption, as appears, verse 16, 17. must of necessity be one of
these two things, possibly both, either the Holy Ghost, and the influence,
assistance, and operations of that holy Spirit, or else that New Nature which
is begotten in us by the Spirit; the Grace of the Spirit infused into our
hearts, and abiding in us; which of the two we understand it of, the difference
will not be considerable.

2. What is meant by walking in the spirit: Some there are, that by Spirit
understand the Doctrine of Christianity; and accordingly, would have this
walking in the Spirit, to be nothing else, but the embracing the Christian
Religion. But if this be so, then what is to be understood by flesh, which
verse 17. is said to be contrary to this Spirit? Why, by flesh they will tell
us, we are to understand Judaism: but then let me ask,

1. What is meant by the lusting of this flesh: which was now dead, against the
Spirit? Is that the meaning of it, Judaism lusts against Christianity?

2. How can this dead flesh have such a numerous offspring, as is mentioned,
verse 10. The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatries, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Variance, etc.

Must all these brats be laid a^ ^he door of the Synagogue? are these the brood
of that Ceremonious Law of Carnal Commandments, or are they not manifestly the
fruits of that corrupt Law of Carnal Concupiscence? I know not with what shadow
of reason we can understand by the flesh, any thing else but Lust or
Concupiscence; and then by the Spirit we must understand grace, or the Spirit
of Grace, which bid defiance, and are contrary to it.

Let us consider further, What is meant by that expression, of being led by the
Spirit, Romans 8. 14. Why, possibly the same men will tell us, there is no more
in this then in the former; it implores no more than the Spirits leading us
into all Truth, the truth of the Gospel, as the Star led the Wise men of the
East to the Messiah: If this be granted to be all, yet here we have gotten
something, viz. That the Spirit of God is acknowledged to be our leader: but let
us consider one Scripture more, Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put my Spirit within you,
and cause you to walk in my Statutes. What are those Statutes of God, but the
whole Will and Word of God? One or two of them I shall mention, If any man will
come after me, let him deny himself, take up his Cross, and Follow me: Work out
your salvation with fear and trembling: Quench not the Spirit: Abstain from all
appearance of evil: See that you walk circumspectly, etc. Are not these, and
many more such, found and unrepeal'd in this great Statute Book? What is it to
walk in these Statutes, other then to live in the sincere obedience of the
whole Will of God? Now, says the Lord, I will give my Spirit, and he shall
cause them, or help them to walk in my Statutes, to live an holy life. Let
these things be considered, and see if they will not help us to a better
interpretation of those words, Walk in the Spirit: Why what is the meaning then
of them? I shall give you the Judgment of one who was no Phanatick: Cornelius A
Lapide, who in his Commentary on ver. 16. of this Chapter, interprets the same
words thus, Walk in the Spirit; that is, Vitam, actiones and mores instituite
secundum dictamen, instinctum, impulsum spiritus, ac gratiae immissae and
inditae vobis a spiritu sancto, qui suadet and monet ut spiritualiter vivamus.

To walk in the Spirit, signifies, 1. To live under the conduct of the Spirit.
2. To live in the power of the Spirit. 3. To live a Spiritual life.


1. To live under the conduct and guidance of the Spirit, Romans 8. 14. As many
as are (led) by the Spirit, are the Sons of God: There is a double Guide,
whereby the Lord leads his people; The Guide of his Word, Psalm 73. 24. Thou
shall guide me by thy counsel: And the guide of his Spirit, John 16. 13. He
shall lead you into all truth. There are two things which the Spirit does in
leading on his People.

First, He enlightens their Eyes, opens their Understandings, that they may
understand the Scriptures, which point out to us our way, Luke 24. 45. Then
opeued he their understandings, that they might understand the Scriptures.

Secondly, He takes them by the hand, as it were, and leads them, Isa. 40. 11.
He shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his Bosom, and shall
gently lead those that are with young.

2. To live in the power of the Spirit, or of that inherent and assisting Grace
which we receive from him, to be carried on in an holy course, and all the
Duties of it, both from the intrins^cal power of the Life of God begotten in
us, and by the concurrent Influences and assistance of the Holy Ghost, whom God
has given us, to help our infirmities. As in the Duty of Prayer, Romans 8. 26.
So in all other Christian Duties, John 15. 5. Without me (says Christ, that
is, without the assistance of my Spirit) ye can do nothing. Therefore the
Psalmist resolves, Psalm 71. 16. I will go in the strength of the Lord, and by
thee I will make mention of thy Name. And this living in the power of the
Spirit, is no other then is signified (if we did understand what we say) in
those common expressions which we ordinarily have in our mouths, By the grace
of God, or, by the help of God, I will do this, or that: What the Apostle
speaks of himself, as Minister, is applicable to Christians, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I
labored more abundantly then they all, ye not I, but the Grace of God which
was with me.

Thus to walk in the Spirit, is to follow those directions, and intimations of
the Will of God, which he gives us out of the Word; and those impulses of the
Spirit upon our hearts, whereby, as by a gale of Wind filling onr Sails, he
moves and helps us on. When you find any clear light, breaking in from the Word
upon your Consciences, and thereupon some stirrings upon your hearts, either by
the way of check, restraining, and calling you back from any irregular or
disorderly walking, or quickening and encouraging you on in a way of duty, this
you may safely take to be from the Spirit; and when you entertain this light,
obey these checks, and follow these holy impulses; this is your walking in the
Spirit.

3 To live a spiritual Life. In whom the Spirit has begotten another heart,
those he leads on in another life. He that is born of the Spirit is a spiritual
man, and those that are led by the Spirit, walk on in a spiritual course, that
is, they live a more noble and raised life then the rest of the world: Carnal
men, who are governed and ruled by that evil spirit that is in the world, live
an evil and carnal life; worldly spiritual men a worldly life; sensual men a
sensual life: Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. Wherein in time past ye walked after the course
of this World, according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the spirit that
now works in the children of Disobedience, among whom we also had our
conversations in the lusts of the flesh fulfilling the desires of the flesh and
of the mind. Whilst we were in the common state we took the common road;
whilst we were in the flesh, fleshly men, we lived a fleshly life. To serve
ou^ bellies, to serve our appetites, to serve our pride, and covetousness, and
other lusts, this was our life. And this life was suitable to that Spirit which
was within them, and that evil Spirit, the Prince of this world without them,
that governed and steered their course. Accordingly, the Saints having a new
heart within, and a new leader without, do lead a new life; as the flesh and
the Devil carry evil men on in a course suitable to their leaders, so the Spirit
and Grace of God carry on the Saints in a course suitable to theirs, an holy,
spiritual, and heavenly lif^. So that this is to walk in the Spirit, to live
holily and spiritually; this is that life which is called, The life of God,
Ephesians. 4. 19. The Conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. Our Conversation is in
Heaven. And a Spiritual and Heavenly Life, this may be called, upon a
threefold account.

1 Their dealings are about Spiritual and Heavenly things. 2 Their delights are
Spiritual and Heavenly. 3 By these Spiritual dealings and delights themselves
become daily more Spiritual.
1 Their dealings are about Spiritual and Heavenly things, God, and Heaven, and
everlasting Glory; and those spiritual Exercises, whereby God is served, and
Glory obtained: these are the matters about which this life is spent. They live
with God, they hold daily intelligence with Heaven, they are much in the
contemplating, and admiring, and adoring the infinite beauty and
incomprehensible perfections of God and his unspeakable love and grace, and
goodness toward them. They are searching into the Mysteries of Christ,
studying out the riches of the glory of the Mystery of the Gospel. They live
amongst Angels, their hearts and their eyes are daily in that general Assembly
and Church of the firstborn. When they sleep they lay them down under the
wings of their Lord; no sooner are they awake, but they get them up to the top
of Pisgah, to take a view of the Promised Land; When I awake, I am ever with
thee, says the Psalmist: When the covetous man awakes, he is with his God; when
the Epicure awakes, he is with his God; when the Adulterer awakes, he is with
his Goddess: Christians are presently above the clouds, above the stars,
falling down before the Throne of the Almighty: Their work is to seek, and
serve, and praise, and please the Lord; to carry themselves so, that they may
be accepted to God; to be washing their robes and making them white in the
blood of the Lamb; to be minding their souls, consciences, affections,
thoughts, that these may all, in their several capacities, exalt and enjoy the
Lord: Their Trading is for the Pearl, whilst the Merchants of the Earth are
trading for Gold, and Silver, and Spices, whilst the Muck-worms of the world
are dealing in Corn, and Sheep, and Oxen, and Asses, whilst the v^luptuous
wantons of the earth are dealing about fashions, and feasts, and sports,
trading in Toys, Feathers, Apes, and Peacocks; Christians are trading in
Promises and Prayer, in Faith and Repentance, in Patience and Humility, in
Mercy and Charity, that by these they may make their Calling and Election sure,
and so an entrance may be administered unto them abundantly, into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. These are the
businesses of Christians lives, their dealings are about spiritual things.

2 Their delights are in spiritual things: The Lord is the delight of their
hearts, Delight thy self in God, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 37. 4. And what he
bids others do, he does himself, Psalm. 16. 8, 9. I have set the Lord always
before me, therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices. The thoughts of
God are dear and precious to them. The Word and Law of God is their delight,
Psalm. 1. His delight is in the Law of his God,; The Courts of the Lord, his
Ordinances, Worship, Sabbaths, are their delight, Psalm. 84. 1. How amiable are
thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts. Their work is their delight, Psalm. 40. I
delight to do thy will; Their hardest works, Fasting, and Watching, and
Wrestling, and Fighting against Sin and Temptations, crucifying, and mortifying
their own flesh, denying themselves, mourning for sin; there is much sweetness
they find in their very travels, and tears, and sorrowings; as sorrowing, says
the Apostle, yet always rejoicing. As Solomon speaks of Carnal Mirth, Prove.
14. In the midst of laughter the heart is sad: so it may be said of spiritual
Mourning, in the midst of sorrow, the heart is joyful; the heart of a Saint is
never in so sweet a frame, as when it is melted into godly sorrow; but
especially, Christ is their deleght, he is the deliciae Christiani orbis,
Canticle^ 2. 3. I sat down under ^is shadow, with great delight. Carnal men
are ready to say to them, as the Daughters of Jerusalem to the Spouse, Cant. 5.
9. What is thy beloved more ^en another beloved? What beauty is there in him,
that thou should thus desire him, or take such pleasure in him? They see no
beauty in him, he has no Form, nor comeliness in their eye, and therefore they
think there is none. Oh Sinners! you do not know Christ, you have had no
acquaintance with him, you have not t^sted of the fruits of this Tree, of the
clusters of this Vine: I sat me down under his shadow with great delight, and
his fruit was swee^ to my (taste.) Saints have tasted of the sweetness of
Christ; tasted that the Lord is gracious, and therefore can take great delight
in him. The delight they take in Christ, is that which puts such a delight into
every Ordinance, into every Duty; therefore Praying, and Reading is so pleasant
to them, because there they meet with their Beloved. Christ appears to them in
his Word, Christ meets his Saints in their Prayings and Fastings, and this
makes all sweet to their souls. Carnal men think the life of Saints to be an
heavy, a sad, and most troublesome life; they count, that themselves have the
only merry and pleasant lives: that their Hawks, and Hounds, their Carding and
Dicing, and Drinking and Dancing, their Seews and Plays, that these are the
only Heaven: This is all one as to say, that God has put more sweetness into
creatures, then is in himself; that the basest and vilest use of the creatures,
does yield more true content, then the souls exercising it self on God; as if
the thorn should yield more sweetness, the bramble more fatness then the
Fig Tree or Olive; where are the understandings of these men? I tell you
Sinners, when you have gone from flower to flower, from creature to creature,
from pleasure to pleasure, and sucked out all the fatness and sweetness that
these will yield; a poor Christian will get more real pleasure out of one
Chapter of his Bible, out of an honest Sermon, out of one hours converse with
God in Prayer, then your whole life will bring you in. The Gospel, with its
breasts of consolation, at which he sucks, yields him sweeter milk; those
clusters of Canaan, on which he lives, yield him richer Wine then the whole
world will afford any; The gleanings of a Christians joy, are better then the
Vinta^e of Sinner; and you cannot so much slight the glory of their S^n, as
they despise the glory of your sparks.

3 By these spiritual exercises and delights, they become more and more
spiritual themselves. By their beholding the face of God, they are changed from
glory to glory, into his image and likeness; by living so much in Heaven, the
temper and frame of their hearts becomes heavenly; men's ordinary company and
exercises have such an influence upon them, that it is not unusual that they
change their disposition. Frothy company, and vain exercises, will leave a
frothiness and vanity upon men's spirits, and serious, and savoury company, and
exercises, do leave a good savor behind them. He whose work is in the
Coal-mines, his hiew is thereafter; the flies that feed on the dung, look like
the dung they feed on. Carnal men, by being continually conversant about their
earthly affairs, have nothing but earthiness left upon their spirits; their
Thoughts, Affections, their Souls are become earth, earthly; their duties are
earthly, their prayers, their praises, their hearings, all are earthly: When
they go to Church, when they go to their Clossets, they must carry their earth
along with them, or leave their hearts behind them. On the other side,
Christians, by having their dwellings with God, their Delights, their
Recreations, their daily business with God; the Spirit of Glory and of God
rests upon them; by their Divine Exercises, they are made more partakers of
the Divine Nature; and as Worldlings businesses and delights, do leave an
earthliness upon their very Religion, so a Christians Religion does
Spiritualize his Civil Affairs: Carnal men's prayers do savor of their Fields,
Oxen, and sports; Carnal men's Sabbaths do smell of their Working-days, and a
Christians works do savor of his prayers; a Christians Weekdays have a
tincture of his Sabbaths; he eats and drinks, he buys and sells, he ploughs and
threshes, not as a man, but as a Saint; he does not only pray as a Saint, and
hear as a Saint, but he ploughs as a Saint, he trades as a Saint; his heart is
in Heaven while his hand is at the Plough, he is serving his God while he is
serving his own necessities; he seeks, he serves, he eyes, he enjoys his God,
in all he has or does; he proves by his sense that God is every where; with
him he dwells, feeds, labors, lodges, with him he lives, he dies.

And thus you see what it is to walk in the Spirit. Look how far forth such a
Christian lives in the Spirit, so far forth does he live such a life as this.

3 This is no fancy, and if I fail not here, if I prove this, I hope Sinners,
you will then see reason enough to take the Phanatick upon your selves, and
from henceforth style these despised Saints in your Stilo novo, Israelites
indeed.

Christians (you that hear me this day) will you help me in this proof, this
once help me, and the cause will go cleary on the Lords side; you may if you
will, come in, and be willing instances of this Truth. Will you live according
to your Principles, that Life of God which is within you? Will you live
according to your Rules, that Word of Life which is before you? Will you follow
your Leader, that Holy Spirit which is given to conduct you? Will you fall
closer to the practice of that Godliness which you profess? will you live in
the obedience of that Spirit which you have received, will you show your selves
a pattern of Faith, of Patience, of Righteousness and Holiness? Will you be
dealing less about these earthly vanities, and be less earthly in your earthly
dealings; shall your dealings be wholly about Heaven and Heavenly things, and
will you make these your dealings your delights? Will you labor by being more
conversant about spiritual things, and in spiritual exercises, to become more
spiritual, more spiritually minded, more spiritually tempred? Will you get more
clear off the love, and lusts, and fashions, and ways, and joys of this world?
Will you suffer the Eternal Spirit to fill you with his love, and fashion you
into his likeness? Will you forbear any more resisting, grieving, slighting,
quenching his holy motions; will you hearken to his counsels, answer his
impulses? Will you grow on to be more Christians daily, more Saints daily,
Saints in heart, Saints in tongue, Saints in the general frame o^ your course?
Will you make your graces more vi^^^le, your comforts more visible, your
spiritual joys and delights more visible will you let your light so shine
before men, that they must either put out their own Eyes, or else be forced to
acknowledge that God is in you of a truth?

Brethren, We may much thank our selves for all our Adversaries slanders; we
have helped them to reproaches, we have furnished them with accusations, by our
walking so much in the Flesh, and so little in the Spirit, we have taught them
to question, whether there be any such thing a^ walking in the Spirit. The Lord
pardon us, the Lord make us sensible of it; we have brought up an evil report
upon our God, upon his Spirit, Gospel and ways, and for ought we know have
undone many poor wretches, by our hardening them in their misconceits of
Godliness and Religion: There have been so much Dross in our Gold, so much
Ashes upon our Fire, so much Earth upon our Spirits, such sad mixture of Water
with our Wine, so much Liberty taken for our Carnal joys and Carnal pleasures;
our Light has been so dim, our Grace has been so low, our good works have
been so spare, and so thin, that we have made them bold to say, We are not what
we are, but a mere lie and deceit; And we have now no such way to vindicate our
selves, our Religion, our Holy profession, to justify our God and his Gospel,
as by blowing up the Coals, shaking off our Ashes, stirring up the Graces of
God within us, and letting them have their perfect work in us. Will you
Christians, will you hearken to me in this? Then I should be bold to bring you
forth as Witnesses for God and his Truth. However, though upon your account it
would be the more comfortable, though, ex abundanti, I would bring in as many
evidences as possible, yet if you should fail me, or any other particular
congregation of professors, yet let the World know I have sufficient proof
ready at hand. For,

If this walking in the Spirit be a fancy, then these Damnable Absurdities will
unavoidably follow: 1. That the Spirit of the Lord is unfaithful in his Office.
2. That God himself is false in his Promise. 3. That the Devil does more to the
Damning of Souls, than the Spirit of God to the saving them. 4. That God has
no People, no peculiar People in the world.


1. If walking in the Spirit be a fancy, the Spirit is unfaithful in his
Office. That the Spirit of God is given to the People of God, to every one of
them, is so plainly asserted, that he must deny the Scriptures that does not
grant it, Romans 8. 9. Ye are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that
the spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the spirit of Christ,
he is none of his. That there are certain operations of the Spirit, which he is
by Office to perform, is as certain, as, 1. To Enlighten; therefore he is
called the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. 2. To sanctify;
therefore Sanctification is called, The sanctification of the Spirit, 2 These.
2. 13. 3. To Lead, John 16. 13. He shall lead you into all Truth. 4. To Assist,
and help, Romans 8. 26. Exek. 36. 27. 5. To Comfort; therefore is he called, The
Comforter. If the Spirit of the Lord does his Office, then there are persons
that are Enlightened, Sanctified, Led, Assisted, Comforted by him; If there be
none such; if the comfort of the Saints be but pretended, if their light, their
help, their quicknings, their encouragements, be all fancies; if they be but
led in conceit, quickened in conceit, comforted in conceit, then where is the
Spirits faithfulness? See what Blasphemies men run themselves upon before they
are aware. Sinners, take heed what you do; you are bold to reproach the Saints
with the Spirit, the Spirit; but take heed mean while of reproaching the Spirit
with unfaithfulness: Blasphemy against the Spirit is no small sin, though every
blaspheming of the Spirit, be not that unpardonable sin, yet it is a fair step
toward it; look to your selves.

2. If walking in the Spirit be a fancy, then God himself is false in his
promise, Ezekiel. 36. 27. beforementioned, I will put my Spirit within them, and
cause them to walk in my Statutes. If there be no such thing done, then where
is the promise of God? He that makes walking in the Spirit, to be nothing but
talks, makes the promise of God to be nothing but words.

3. If walking in the Spirit be but fancy, Then the Devil does more to the
destroying of Souls, than the Spirit of the Lord does to the salvation of
Souls. Let us consider again that Scripture, Ephesians. 2. 2. Wherein in time past
ye walked according to the course of this World, according to the Prince of the
power of the Air, the Spirit that now works in the Children of Disobedience.
There are two things there observable to our purpose; 1. Sinners are led by the
Devil. 2. They are assisted and excited by the Devil. 1. They are led by the
Devil; that is noted in that expression, They walk on according to the Prince of
the Power of the Air; according to his guidance, according to his mind and
will, he has them at his beck. When he says, Go, they go, and when he says,
Come, they come; and when he says do this, they do it. But how comes this to
pass, that the Devil can hold such an hand over them, can lead them thus at
pleasure? Why; 2. They are assisted and excited by the Devil; that evil Spirit
works in them, suggests evil thoughts into them, and thereby excites and
provokes, and sets them a work. The Devil is said, Acts 5. to fill the hearts
of Ananias and Saphira, to lie against the Holy Ghost; And when he had once put
a lie into their Hearts, their Hearts presently put a lie into their Mouths.
When the Devil has wrought wickedness into the hearts of sinners, then they
presently fall to working it out. When wicked men lie, it is the Devil lies in
them; when they curse and rage, and swell with madness, the Devil rages in
them; When the lusts of men bring forth Adulteries, Drunkenness, Riot
Revellings, etc. the Devil lies within blowing up the coals. Is this but a
conceit, that wicked men walk in the Spirit? That unclean Spirit. That the
Devil draws them on, and drives them on, and helps them on* and hardens them
on in their wickedness? Could men be so wicked as they are, could there be such
quarrelling: and contentions, such debaucheries and villainies, such cursings
and blasphemings, such rottenness and ribaldries coming out of men's mouths, and
abounding in their lives? Could there be so much constancy, fruitfulness,
boldness, hardness in sinning, against all fears, warnings, reproofs, counsels,
against Conscience, and the Dictates of their Reason and common sense, were it
not for that evil Spirit that works in these Children of disobedience? Now if
it be no fancy, that wicked men walk in the spirit (this you must grant, or
else you must conclude that they are all Devils themselves) and if you grant
it, can you conceive it to be but a fancy, that the Saints walk in the spirit?
If the Devil works lies and oaths, and curses into the Hearts of sinners, sure
you may well allow that the Spirit of God works duties, works a prayer or
praises, etc. into the hearts of the Srints. Could a poor Christian, that has
so many corruptions within, so many Temptations without, so many weaknesses,
hindrances, discouragements, ever follow the Lord in his holy ways against
them all, if he had no other Spirit than his own to carry him on? The Saints
sure have as much need of that help which is from above, to carry them on in
holiness unto life, as Sinners have of that which is from beneath, to carry
them on in iniquity to destruction; and me thinks you should not question, but
the Spirit of God will be as active to stay, as the Devil is busy to destroy.

4. If walking in the Spirit be but a fancy, then God has no People in the
World, Romans 8. 14. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons
of God. As many, that is, just so many, and no more: God has no more Children
in the World, than there are persons that are led by the Spirit; to be led by
the Spirit, and to walk in the Spirit, signify one and the same thing: If then
there be no such thing, nor no such persons in the World to be found, where
then are Gods Children? God has no Child, if this be so: You must write the
God of all the Earth childless, a Father without a Child, a King without a
People; if these wise men be true men; and true men you can very hardly call
them, who having robbed the King of Saints of all his Subjects, and the Father
of Lights of all his Children.

You see now to what a plain issue this matter is also brought: If you be in
the right in this thing, then the Spirit of God must be unfaithful in his
Office, God must be false in his promise; the Devil does more to the damning,
than the spirit of God does to the saving of souls; and one of these two things
will follow hence, either that the Devil is of more might than the Almighty
Spirit, or that the God of love has not so much love as the Devil has malice;
and lastly, that God has no People in the world.

But it may be sinners, you will yet reply, Well, We will grant that this is
true, that there are those that are led by the spirit, and walk in the spirit,
but when you talk of so much Spirituality in Mortal men, of such high notions
as living in the fellowship of the spirit, living in Heaven when you tell us of
such Glorious light, such Raptures of Joy, such Ecstasies of Spiritual delights,
here are the Fancies; These are the things which we cannot but account the
foolish Dreams of deluded hearts.

And now you think you have hit at last. But is not this it which you say, The
Spirit enlightens, but gives no light: The enlightened see no more than the
blind: The Spirit renews men, and yet they are not changed: The Spirit leads
the Saints, and yet they follow him just as fast as those that have no legs:
The Spirit dwells in them, and yet they have no more fellowship or acquaintance
with him, than those that never saw him: The Spirit assists, and yet gives no
help: The Spirit comforts, and yet gives no joy; but after all he has done,
leaves them just as other men, and whatsoever they pretend to have more, is a
mere cheat and delusion. The sum of all comes to this, The Spirit does, and yet
does not; does something, some great thing, and yet that something is just
nothing.

But is there no such life of God, wherein the Lord having gotten the chief
interest in the heart, has also the Dominion of the life? Is there no such
life, the main dealings and business whereof, is the pleasing and honoring of
God, and the seeking that glory and honor which is from him? Must God be an
underling to the World, and be put off with our spare hours which the World
will allow him? We were even as good downright to profess we own no God at
all? or if we must have one, a Baal, or an Ashtaroth, a Nisroch, or a Molech,
an Ox, or a Calf, may serve us well enough for a God; a God to be so trampled
on or to be said unto, stand aside, when ever the World has any thing for us
to do.

Is there no such Spiritual life, the comforts whereof are Spiritual comforts,
the pleasures and delights, Spiritual pleasures and delights? Are there no
delights in God, who is a Well of Life, and the Fountain of all Blessedness?
Have the Creatures their several sweetnesses issuing from them, the Sun its
light, the Fire its warmth, the Fig Tree its sweetness, the Olive Tree its
fatness, the Fruits of the Earth their pleasant tastes and smell, the
Instruments of Music their melodious Airs and sounds to gratify and please
our senses, and is the Fountain only a dry and unsavory thing, when the
Cisterns are so fresh and full? Have fleshly exercises their several pleasures?
are the labors of the Husbandman, the Travels of the Merchant, so strangely
sweetened by the gain and in-come of them? Are May-Games and Morrice-Dances,
Sports and Plays, so delightsome to men, that they will sell their Souls for
such Pleasures; and are they the Exercises of Religion only, that have no
juice nor sweetness in them? Is it Godliness only that has no bud, the stalk
whereof yields no meat? Or are the delights and comforts hereof such flashy and
airy things, that we cannot tell when we taste them, whether we be awake, or in
a dream? Once more consider the Scriptures; How excellent is thy loving
kindeness, O God, therefore the Children of Men put their trust under the
shadow of thy Wings: They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of
thy House, and thou shall make them drink of the Rivers of thy Pleasures, for
with thee is the Fountain of Life, and in thy light we shall see light. Delight
thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy hearts desire. Thou have
put gladness in my heart, more than in the time, when their Corn and Wine
increased. with Joy shall they draw Water out of the Wells of Salvation. Whom
having not seen ye love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing ye
rejoice, with joy unspeakable and full of glory. The peace of God, which
passes all understanding keep your hearts. Let him that reads understand; do
all these speak the life of Saints to be such a dry and dark, and impleasant
life?

Let me farther ask you these two Questions.

1. Are there any delights in Heaven? Is there any joy before the Throne, and
in the face of God? Are there any pleasures at his right hand? Does the Tree of
Life, that stands in the midst of the Paradise of God, yield any pleasant
fruit? Does the Crystal River that runs through the City of God, yield any
pleasant streams? Are the exercises of glory, blessing, praises, and singing
Hallelujah, Hallelujah, are there any pleasure in these? Speak Sinners, what do
you think, are there any delights in Heaven?

2. Is there not something of that heavenly joy and delight let down to the
Saints here? Whilst they bear a part in the same exercises, have they not a
little share in the same pleasure? What means then the earnest of their
inheritance, which is given here? The Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. that
the Saints, after they had believed, were sealed with the holy Spirit of
Promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. An earnest is a part of that,
whereof it is an earnest given in hand; The earnest of our inheritance is a
part of the inheritance.

Believe it Sinners, Gods Earnest is no Jest, God will not mock his Saints,
though, you do. As sinners to their cost, so Saints to their comforts, feel
that Gods Earnest is in earnest.

As the Lord sometimes (though more seldom) causes some flashings of his wrath
to fly out in the faces, to kindle in the souls, and burn in the bowels of
some incorrigible sinners, as an earnest of those everlasting flames prepared
for them, beginning their hell upon earth, so does he let fall some handfuls of
that Harvest, some drops of that new Wine, the fuller draughts whereof are
reserved to that time, when they shall sit down with him in his Kingdom; and
this is the earnest of their inheritance; something of the same joys, the same
pleasures (for kind) with those that are laid up for them, and hereby assured
to them. And is there not yet enough to convince you?

If you will still hold your own, and go about to persuade us that all this is
but fancy, we must give the same credit to you, that your selves would give to
a man that was born blind, who had never seen either Sun or Star, and hearing
you to discourse of them, should laugh at you for Phanaticks, and tell you
there were no such things as Sun, or Stars, or Light; you would believe your
own eyes before the blind man's blind confidence, you would pity rather then
credit him, and so must we you.

Do ye wonder there should be such things, and you not see them? The Riches of
Christians are hidden riches; The Manna of Saints is hidden Manna: The white
Stone and the new Name are not within the Ken of ^ulgar eyes: Think not it i^
our pride or vanity thus to speak: Does not our Lord say the same things? Rev.
2. 17. No man knows it but he that has it. A stranger shall not meddle with
his joy. The sweetness of Religion lies deep, the rich Wines are in the Cellar,
the rich Mines are in the bowels of the earth, the best of sin is in fight, the
Flower and the Cream i^ at the top, and the (...) and the Lees is at the
bottom; sin is honey in the mouth, but wormwood in the belly. Sinner, you have
not gone deep enough in Religion, to come to the pleasure of ^t: And will you
therefore say there is none in it? You may as well say there is no gall and
wormwood in sin, because you have not yet met with a bitter drop; that all the
anguish and horror that all those pangs of misery, those g^awings, and
grindings, and torments that are said to be in sin, are mere fancies, because
you have not yet felt them: But stay a while, you are not yet at the bottom:
the d^egs are yet some draughts lower: Oh the underground fruits of sin! When
these shall come up, then you shall taste what gall and gravel ther^ is in it;
^never think you are secure from sorrow, draught or two deeper may confute you
with a witness. And so on the other side, there is no ground to suspect that
the sweetness of Religion is a nothing, because some smatterers about it, which
have only trifled upon the surface and outside of it, have not had the least
taste of any such thing: The brackishness and bitterness of Religion is at top,
the best is at bottom; the Wine-cellar is lower then yet you have gone: If you
would be persuaded to go deeper, to set in more closely and thoroughly with a
godly life, your own censure would at length confute your censures; and
whatever you have heard spoken concerning the comforts and delights of
holiness, you would say with the Queen of Sheba, The one half was not told me.

We will freely grant you, that all is not gold that glisters; there are false
fires, false joys, false comforts, which many pretenders to Christianity have
boasted of, who yet have had no part nor lot in this matter; and to such as
these both Saints and Sinners have been but little beholding. The calumnies
that light upon them, and the blindness that abides on these, lie much upon the
score of such false lights; but because some men dream they are eating and
drinking, or that they are rich, or making merry, will you therefore that are
eating, or drinking, or rich, or rejoicing, conclude that you also are but in a
dream? because that there are Come^s that shines amongst the Stars, are they
all Comets? Are there no Stars? because there are Glowworms that shine, is the
Sun but a Glowworm?

Shall I add one word more? You that yet hold the same tune, and still cry out,
Fancy, fancy, all is but fancy; tell me, that I may know that you are in
earnest, and believe your own talk, tell me, dare any of you come and subscribe
this with your hand; This godliness which you have been here commending to me,
with all its comforts, joys, and delights, I do utterly renounce for ever; let
me never know what any thing of this means, nor have my part hereafter with
this godly people. Dare you put your hand to this? It is some comfort to us, to
hope that Relig^on has an Advocate in the Consciences of its Adversaries.

But if it have not, yet know, Sinners, That Wisdom shall be justified of her
children. And as for you, Beware lest that come upon you, which is spoken by
one of the Prophets; Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish, for I work a
work in your days, which you will in no wise believe, though a man declare it
unto you.

The Application of the whole.
Use 1. HAving thus, by the help of God, vindicated the good ways of the Lord,
from the Cavils and Reproaches of unreasonable men; and proved to you in this,
and the precedent discourse, that the precisest Christians are the wisest men;
and that that godliness, which is cried down for folly and fancy, is
undoubtedly, and indispensably necessary to salvation; I shall now take you by
the hand, and lead you on (as many of you as are willing to follow me to the
practice of it. And in this undertaking, I shall apply my self, 1 To the
Ungodly. 2 To the Godly.


1 I shall speak a few words to the ungodly. Speak now, O ye foolish sinners,
Is Godliness of God? Is Christianity of Christ, or is it not? Is holiness the
way of life, or can you hope to see life without it? If you say it is not of
God, and will stand to it, produce your cause, bring forth your strong
reasoning^; only I must tell you, if you say any thing, you had need look to
it, that it be something of weight that you allege in a matter of such
importance, ere you do conclude against it.

Let your Consciences speak, for to them (if you will forbear consulting with
lust) I dare now appeal; let your Consciences speak, whose voice is this, See
that you walk circumspectly. S^^ ait is the gate, and narrow is the way that
leads to life. God has set apart him that is godly for himself. Follow
holiness, without which no man shall see God. Speak Sinners, whose words are
these, and what do Precisians speak more, or other then this? Dare you say
concerning the way of life, as it has been described to you; If this be
godliness, let me never see God: I Will never see life, if this be the only way
to it.

But if your Consciences tell you this is of God, this strait and narrow way,
is the only way of life: Then, O consider, what is it that you have done, whom
is it that you have reproached? Mean you still to hold your course, be it right
or wrong, come life come death?

Is there any among you, whose heart smites him on the mouth, and whispers him
thus in the ear, Blasphemest thou God, revilest thou his servants, and will thou still go on to pervert the good ways of the Lord? Is there any among you
that does enquire, what must I do to get into this way of life? Let such of you
hearken unto me, whilst I give you these following directions.

Consider that I am now dealing with you about your entrance upon a godly life;
my present business is to help you over the threshold; to get you within the
straight gate; you must first be Christians, ere you can follow Christ, you
must first enter into the strait gate, e're you can walk on in the narrow way.
Now if ever you would attain to the beginning of godliness, take this course.

I. Get these three principles to be deeply fixed in your heart.

1 That the things which are eternal, are unspeakably more considerable, than
the things which are but temporal.

2 Tha^ things not s^en are as infallibly certain, as the things which are seen.

3 That according to your present choice, must be your eternal lot.

1 That the things which are Eternal, are unspeakably more considerable then
the things which are but temporal; It Is nothing so considerable what men enjoy,
or suffer (...) this world, as what they shall enjoy, or may suffer in the
world to come. There are good things temporal, and good things Eternal; and
there are evil thin^s temporal, and evil things Eternal; the ^ood things
Temporal, are Meat, and Drink, and Money, and Clothes, and Ease, and Pleasures,
and Credit, etc. and the good thing* Eternal, a^e G^ory and Joy, and Best, and
everlasting blessedness: the evil (...) Temporal, are the sufferings, the
losses and wants, the sorrow and shame, and scorn and torments, that men fall
under, or lie under in this life; the evil things to come, are in one word,
the Vengeance of Eternal Fire.

The good things and the evil things of this life, are more perceptible, having
the advantage of their presence, and obviousness to our senses; the good things
and the evil things to come, are less understood, having the disadvantage of
their distance, and those clouds that do yet keep them out of fight; and
hereupon those are slighted, and despised, and these are looked upon as the
only considerable things; till men be set right in their apprehensions of
these things, it will be a vain and fruitless attempt, to persuade them to
Christ; mistakes and misapprehensions here, are the grounds of men's
miscarriages.

The difficulty of persuading sinners to Christ, lies mainly here; There is so
much to be lost, and left for Christ, there is so much to be suffered and
undergone; so much labor, so much hardship and trouble, that they cannot see
how Christianity and Godliness can ever make them amends for what they are like
to suffer* they will not be made sensible, that the things Eternal will
balance the things that are before them; they will not easily be persuaded,
but that they shall be great losers by harkening to Christ. Now, whence is it
that men are thus foolish? If they did but clearly understand, and were deeply
affected with the vast difference that is betwixt the vain glory of the world,
and the weight of that glory that is to come; betwixt the light afflictions of
this life, and the astonishing torments of the other world, they would sure be
of another mind; the great objections against godliness, would then be all
answered, and removed.

Thou say Sinner, it is hard to part with thine ease, and thy pleasure, and
thy liberty, and thy carnal contentments and delights, which if thou will
follow Christ, thou see must all go. But how will thou bear it, to be shut
out of the everlasting Kingdom, to be shut out from the presence of God? Art
thou indeed in the mind of that Atheist, that said, He would not leave his part
in Paris, for his part in Paradise? Thou can not endure the trouble and
persecution of this world, but how will thou endure the torments and plagues of
the other world? Oh, if thou were but sensible, what that exceeding eternal
weight of glory is, what thou will find everlasting death and darkness to be;
then what significant things would all things that are now before thee appear
to be! Satan would then want arguments to dissuade sinners from Christ, his
tempting trade would quickly grow to be a poor trade, if the concernments of
Eternity were clearly understood, and duly regarded.

When the Lord has once showed you the wonderful things of Eternity, the true
riches, the enduring substance, the lasting joys, his rivers of pleasures,
together with the worm that never dies, and the fire that never shall be
quenched: When the Lord has showed you what a heaven he has prepared for the
Saints what an Oven he has prepared for sinners, then neglect Christ if you
can, then neglect holiness if you dare, then look down and see, what poor
contemptible things, the pleasures and the sufferings here below will appear to
be. Oh, study things Eternal more, lanch forth into these Deeps, dwell upon the
meditation of them till your hearts and all that is within you acknowledge and
confess, that things present are nothing to things to come.

2. That the things that are not seen, are as infallibly certain as the things
that are seen.

There is much Atheism and Infidelity in the hearts of men, and more then they
are aware of; if they do not peremptorily conclude, there are no such things;
yet, are there not many whose hearts do question at least, Whether there be any
such things or no? We have read and heard of another World, but no Mortal ever
sa^ it; who ever has ascended up to Heaven, and has brought us word what he
has seen there? Who ever has descended into the Deep, and brought us up
tidings thence? It may be, there may be no such matter as another world; If we
could speak with one that has been there, that would be something to assure
us. But what if it appear, that you may have as great certainty of these
things, as if one should rise from the dead, and come and tell you? Do not the
Scriptures tell you of such things? The Scriptures are a sure Word* and there
is unquestionable evidence of the truth of what they speak; and you have as
great reason to believe them, as if you had the Testimony of one raised from
the dead, Luke 16. 31. They have Moses, and the Prophets, if they will not hear
them, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead. Beloved,
if you should see before your Eyes, persons rising from the Dead; if one should
come down from Heaven, and come in here into this Congregation, in all his
Glorious Robes, with with his Palm in his hand, his Crown on his head, the joy
and glory of the Lord shining forth in his Face, and should declare to you the
wonderful things that his Eyes had seen, and his Heart had been satisfied and
ravished with in the presence of God. If you should see another coming up out
of the Deep with his Chains of Darkness upon him, with the smell of that
Infernal Fire and Brimstone about him, with the print of the Dragons claws
appearing in his Flesh, and the blackness of that smoking Furnace stricking on
his Face, and hidgeously roaring out the anguish he felt burning in his Bowels,
should tell you, This is the state of them that know not God. If you should see
to such sights appearing this hour here in the midest of you, would you not
think you had reason to believe, there were an Heaven and an Hell? This word
which is before you is a far greater, and a more certain Evidence, then if
Tidings were thus brought to you by persons rising from the Dead. And if you
will not give credit to this Testimony of God, neither would you give credit to
any such Testimony. Sinners! believe God, and believe him who was once on
Earth, and now daily speaks to you from Heaven; believe that Word which is
before you; in which appear such Beams of Divine Light, such an impress of
Divine purity, which has been so attested by a Divine power in mighty Signs
and Wonders, that you may as well question, Whether the Sun has light, as
whether his Word has truth, believe this Word to be certain, and then question
if you can, whether the things not seen are certain or no.

Let these two things sink into your hearts, (Sinners) be once settled and
established in your hearts, about the importance, and about the truth, and
certai^^ty of these Eternal things, and then you are go^ten fairly onwards in
your way toward Christ, and a Godly life.

If men were as sure that there is an Heaven and an Hell, such unspeakable
Glory and such intolerable misery, and an Eternity of both; if men were as
sure of this, and did as verily believe it, as they are sure of what their Eyes
have seen and their Ears have heard, and their hands have handled; What a
flying would there be out of the way of Death and Hell, and what a flocking
would there be into the way of Life: Half the work of Preachers, and the
hardest half (their persuading work) would then be at an end: There would be as
much knocking at their doors for counsel, as now there is at sinners doors for
their acceptance.

Oh Brethren, if you were once brought to this pass, if your unbelief were
removed, your darkness taken away, your Souls awakened, your Eyes opened to see
these mavelous things as unquestionable Truths; would you then scoff at
pureness? would you then mock at godliness? would you then slight reproofs, or
need any further conviction of your folly? You would have an Admonisher within
you, a Remembance within you, a Reprover within you; your own Consciences would
plead with you for your entertaining of Christ, and embracing his Word, and
would continually cry in your Ears, What meanest thou, O fool? Do thou not
see a Kingdom before thee, which may be thine, and art thou willing to lose
it? Do thou see that Gulf of Misery and Perdition with open mouth gaping for
thee to devour thee? Arise sluggard, look to thy self, least thou be undone
before thou art aware.

3. That according to your (choice) in this World your (lot) must be for ever
in the world to come.

Your choosing or refusing Christ and his holy ways is that which does determine
your Eternal state; choose Christ, and you make Heaven sure to you; refuse
Christ here, and you will be rejected of him for ever.

God does offer you this choice, either the strait and the narrow way, with
that life of blessedness, which is at the further end of this way: Or the broad
way, with that Death and Destruction to which it leads: Christ with his Yoke,
his Cross, and his Eternal Crown, or the Devil with his golden mines, his
Paradise and eternal Prison: and all the parts of each of these offers are
linked together: Choose the Devils golden Mines and fleshly Paradise, and you
must have his Prison too: Take Christ's Yoke and his Cross, and you shall have
his Crown, you cannot take the Devils Paradise and Christ's Crown; if you will
have his Pleasures, you must have his Prison. You cannot obtain life, but you
must choose the narrow way that leads to it.

Here is the choice, sinners, that God puts you to, this is the business of
this World to choose for Eternity: And that which is the business of this life,
is, the business of this hour. This very little piece of your time, and the
choice you make now, may be it that will give a final determination what your
Eternal state shall be: If you make an evil choice now, you may never have a
minutes time to choose again for ever. Oh, if your hearts were sensible of
this, that there is so much depending upon every hour of your lives, as Life
or Death, Heaven or Hell, Eternity, sure you could not but reason thus with
your selves, Is it a time for me to stand all the day idle? To be laughing or
sporting, or to be drudging and scraping for the muck of this Earth? Is this a
time for me to stand trifling with Christ and the Gospel, to make so many
delays, to make so many excuses; The terms are too high, the way is too
strait, the yoke is too heavy, this I cannot part with, that I cannot bring my
heart to subscribe to? Is this the business that is now under debate, what my
everlasting state must be? In which of the two Regions of Eternity my Lot shall
fall; whether I shall be a Saint or a Devil, a vessel of honor, or a vessel of
wrath? whether my dwelling shall be in everlasting blessedness, or in
everlasting burnings? which way the scales do turn now, either for Christ or
the world; Do they turn for everlasting? Sure if matters stand thus, I had need
be serious and consider what I do. This is the first direction, get these three
principles fixed in your hearts, that things Eternal are much more confiderable
then things Temporal, that things not seen are as infallibly certain, as the
things that are seen, that upon your present choice depends your Eternal lot.
Choose Christ and his ways, and you are blessed for ever; refuse and you are
undone for ever. And then,

II. Make your choice.
Put your hearts to it, to turn either to the right hand or to the left, lay
both parts before you, with every link of each; Christ with his Yoke, his
Cross, and his Crown, or the Devil with his wealth, his pleasure and his curse:
And then put your selves to it thus: Soul, Thou see what is before thee, what
will thou do? Which will thou have, either the Crown or the Curse? If thou
choose the Crown, remember that the day thou take this, thou must be content
to submit to the Cross and Yoke, the service and the sufferings of Christ,
which are linked to it. What say thou? Had thou rather take the gains and
the pleasures of sin, and venture on the Curse? or will thou yield thy self a
servant unto Christ, and so make sure the Crown?

If your hearts fly off, and would fain wave the business, and leave it
undeermined, leave them not so. If you be only unresolved, you are resolved.
If you remain undetermined for Christ, you are determined for the Devil.
Therefore give not off, but follow your hearts from day to day, let them not
rest till the matter be brought to an issue, and see that you make a good
choice.

This is your choosing the good part, God and your blessedness of the world to
come for your portion and happiness: and in this is included, Your renouncing
the world, and a worldly happiness.

III. Imbarque with Christ.
Adventure your selves with him, cast your selves upon his righteousness, as
that which shall bring you to God: As a poor Captive Exile that is cast upon a
strange Land, a Land of Robbers and Murderers, where he is ready to perish,
and having no hope, either of abiding there, or escaping home with life, and
meeting at length with a Pilot that offers to Transport him safely home, he
imbarkes with him, and ventures himself, and all he has in his Vessel: Do you
likewise; you are Exiles from the presence of God, and fallen into a Land of
Robbers and Murderers: Your sins are Robbers, your pleasures are Robbers, your
Companions in sin are Robbers and Thieves: if you stay where you are you
perish, and escape home of your selves you cannot: Christ offers, if you will
venture with him, he will bring you home, and he will bring you to God: Will
you say now to him, Lord Jesus, will thou undertake me, will thou bring me to
God, bring me into the Land of Promise? With thee will I venture my self, I
cast my self upon thee, upon thy blood, upon thy righteousness, upon thy
faithfulness; I say up all my hopes, and venture my whole interest, Soul and
Body with thee.

This is your closing with Christ as your Priest, and in this is included your
renouncing your own righteousness; you can never, you will never cast your
selves on him alone, till all your self hopes have given up the ghost.

There be two things which must necessarily be supposed to a sinner coming to
Christ:

1. A deep sense of his sin and misery.

2. An utter despair of himself, and all things else besides Christ.

1. A deep sense of his sin and misery: No man will regard a Savior, that does
not see himself a Sinner: The whole regard not the Physician, Therefore it is
said, That the Spirit of God, when he should come to Chrstianize the World,
should in the first place convince the World of sin; John 16. 8. He shall
convince the World of sin, he shall demonstrate them Sinners, bring up their
sins before their Eyes, bring home their sins upon their Consciences, and make
them see themselves, and feel themselves the most vile and abominable of
creatures: Sin hides it self from the sinners eyes, and all its vileness and
deformity; or if it come in sight, it presents it self to the sinner, as the
Witch of Endor brought up the Devil before Saul in Samuels Mantle: It shows it
self as the sinners god: Look how many sins evil men have, so many gods they
have rising up to them. Their ^ins are their gods; the gods that feed them,
they make a living of their sins; the gods that comfort and refresh them, they
take pleasure in iniquity; the gods that shelter them and hide them, they
strengthen themselves in their wickedness. But now the Spirit of God plucks off
the mantle, and makes sin appear to be sin; makes all the sinners Gods appear
to be so many Devils: brings forth the blackness and filthiness of sin into
sight, makes the sinner to see himself an unclean and abominable thing: And
withal, he brings forth the guilt of sin, sets all these Devils a tormenting
the sinner, filling him with fear and terror, and amazement. In this respect
he is called, Romans 8. the Spirit of Bondage, that works fear and trouble in the
heart: The Spirit awakening a sleepy sinner, is a kind of awakening in Hell.
Lord where am I! What mean these Legions round about me? These Chains and
Fetters that are upon me? What means the black Roll before mine eyes, of
curses, and wrath, and woes! Lord where am I! Have I been playing, and
sporting, and making merry, and my soul in such a case as this! But is there no
hope of escaping out of this wretched state? I see there is no abiding thus, I
am but a dead man if I continue as I am. What may I do to be saved?

And when he is brought to this, there is some way made for his entertainment
of Christ: Yea this is not all that is needful, but he must further be brought
to,

2 An utter despair of himself, and all things else besides Christ. Being made
sensible of his sin and his danger, a sinner will look out for help and
deliverance; but he will look every where else, before he will look unto
Christ: Nothing will bring in a sinner to Christ, but an absolute necessity. He
will try to forsake his sins, will think of leaving his drunkenness and
becoming sober; of leaving his adulteries and becoming chaste, and so see if by
this means be may not escape. He will go to Prayers and Sermons, and Sacrament,
and search out if there be not salvation in them: but all these though they be
useful in their places, yet looking no further, the sinner sees there is no
help in them: His righteousness cannot help him, this is but rags; his duties
cannot help him, these may be reckoned among his sins: Ordinances cannot help,
these are but empty Cistern^; and all tell him you knock at a wrong door,
salvation is not in us. Well, the Lord be merciful to me, faith the Sinner,
What shall I do? Abide as I am, I dare not, and how to help my self, I know
not; my praying will not help me, my hearing will not help me; if I give all my
goods to the Poor, if I should give my body to be burned, all this would not
save my soul: Woe is me, what shall I do, and whether shall I go! And now, being
brought to this distress, to this utter loss, his despair drives him to the
only door of hope that is left open. Then Christ will be accepted, when he
sees none but Christ can stead him: The Apostle tells us, Gal. 3. 23. We were
kept under the Law (shut up unto the Faith) that should afterward be revealed:
All other doors were shut up against, there was no hope of escaping, but by
that one door that was left, open, The Faith that was afterward to be
revealed. As the besieged in a City, that have every Gate blocked up, and but
one difficult passage left open, by which there is any possibility of escaping,
thither they throng for the saving of their lives; they are shut up unto that
door, to which (if there had been any other way open) they would never have
come.

And as Christ will never be accepted, so can the sinner never be received of
him, till be let go al^ other props, and trust on him alone. Christ will have
no sharer with him in the work of saving souls. If ye seek me, let these go
their way: As he said in another case; Let not only your sins go, but let your
righteousness go, all the refuges of lies wherein you have trusted; let all go
if you will have me to be a Refuge to you. I came not to call the Righteous, if
I should, they would not come; or if they come, let them go as they come, let
them go to their righteousness in which they trust, and let naked, destitute
sinners, distress^d sinners come to me, who am come to this end, to seek and to
save them that are lost.

Sinners, Will you come now? Will you venture here? For this your adventuring
on Christ, you have this three-^old warrant:

1 Gods Ordination. This is he whom God the Father has appointe^, and sent
into the World, to help and bring back his Exiles to himself, to save sinners:
This is he whom God the Father has sealed, Job. 6. 27. has marked him out for
that chosen person, in whom is Salvation, has sealed him his Commission, for
the Redeeming and Reconciling the world to himself. As God said unto the three
friends of Job, when he was angry with them Job 42. 8. Go to my Servant Job,
and he shall offer ^acrifice for you, he shall pray for you, for him will I
accept. So to sinners, Go says the Lord, to my servant Jesus, he shall offer
^acrifice for you, he shall make reconciliation for you: Isa. 42. 1. Behold my
ervant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my soul deigh^eth; I have put my
spirit upon him, be shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.

2 Gods command; 1 John 3. 23. This is his Commandment, that we should believe
on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ,

3 The Promise of God; 1 Pet. 2. 6. Behold I lay in Sion a chief Cornerstone,
Elect precious; He that believes on him, shall not be confounded.

Now having this threefold warrant, the warrant of Gods Ordination, Command,
and Promise; you may be bold to adventure on Christ, and to apply your selves
to him thus; Lord Jesus, here I am, a poor Captive Exile, a lost Creature, an
enemy to God, under his wrath and curse. Will thou, Lord, undertake for me,
reconcile me to God, and save my soul; do not, Lord, refuse me, for if thou
refuse me, to whom then shall I go? Art not thou he, and he alone, whom God the
Father has sealed, the Savior of sinners? The Lord God has sent me to thee,
has bid me come, he has commanded me to believe, and cast my self upon thee.
Lord Jesus, will thou refuse to help a distressed creature, whom the Father
has sent to thee for thy help? If I had come on my own bead, or in mine own
name, thou might well have put me back; but since I come at the command of
the Father, reject me not; Lord help me, Lord save me. Art thou not he,
concerning whom the Father has promised, He that believes on him, shall not
be confounded: I come Lord, I believe Lord, I throw my self upon thy grace and
mercy; I cast my self upon thy blood and bowels, do not refuse me, I have no
whether else to go; here I'ls stay, I will not stir from thy door; on thee I Will
trust, and rest, and venture my self; God has laid my help on thee, and on
thee i will lay my hope for pardon, for life, for salvation, if I perish, i will
perish on thy shoulders; if I sink, i will sink in thy Vessel; if I die, i will die
as thy door; bid me not go away, for I will not go.

IV. Resign, and deliver up your selves to God in Christ.
2 Chronicles. 30. 8. Yield your selves to the Lord; that is, as his servants, give
up the dominion and government of your selves to Christ, Romans 6. 13. Neither
yield your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, but yield your
selves to God, as those that are alive from the dead, and your members, as
instruments of righteousness unto God, Ver. 16. To whom ye yield your selves
servants to obey, his servants you are to whom you obey: Yield your selves so
to the Lord, that you may henceforth be the Lords; I am thine, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 119. Those that yield themselves to sin, and the World, their
hearts say, Sin, I am thine; World, I am thine; Riches, I am yours; Pleasures,
I am yours, I am thine, says the Psalmist, devoted to thy fear, dedicated to
thy service; I am thine, save me: Give your selves to Christ sinners, be
devoted to his fear.

And this giving your selves to him, must be such, as supposes that you be
heartily contented: 1 That he appoint you your work. 2 That he appoint you your
station.


1 That he appoint you your work, that he put you to whatsoever he pleases;
servants, as they must do their Masters work, so they must do that work which
their Master appoints them, they must be for any work their Master has for
them to do; they must not pick and choose, this I will do, and that I will not
dot; they must not say, this is too hard, or this is too mean, or this may be
well enough let alone. Good servants when they have chosen their Master, will
let their Master choose their work, and will not dispute his Will, but do it.

Christ has many services to be done, some are more easy and honorable,
others more difficult and disgraceful; some are suitable to our inclinations and
interests, others are contrary to both: In some we may please Christ, and
please our selves, as when he requires us to feed and cloth our selves, to
provide things honest for our own maintenance; yea, and there are some spiritual
duties that are more pleasing then others; as to rejoice in the Lord, to be
blessing and praising of God, to be feeding our selves with the delights and
comforts of Religion; these are the sweet works of a Christian, But then, there
are other works wherein we cannot please Christ, but by denying our selves; as
giving and lending, bearing and forbearing, reproving men for their sins,
withdrawing from their societies, witnessing against their wickedness, owning
and confessing Christ and his Name, when 'twill cost us shame and reproach;
sailing against the wind, swimming against the tide, steering contrary to the
temper and disposition of the times; pinching upon the flesh, parting with our
ease, our liberties, relations, and accommodations for the Name of our Lord
Jesus, with much work of this kind.

It is necessary Beloved, to sit down and consider what it will cost you to be
the servants of Christ, and take through ^urvey of the whole business of
Christianity, and not engage hand over head to you know nor what.

First, See what it is that Christ does expect, and then yield your selves to
his whole will. Do not think of indenting, and compounding, or making your own
terms with Christ, that will never be allowed you.

Go to Christ and tell him, Lord Jesus, if thou will receive me into thine
house, if thou will but ^wn me as thy servant, I will not stand upon terms;
impose on me what condition thou please, write down thine own Articles,
command me what thou will, put me to any thing thou see good. Let me come
under thy roof, let me be thy servant, and spare not to command me. I will be
no longer mine own but give my self up to thy will in all things.

2 That he shall appoint you your station and condition, whether it be higher
or lower, a plentiful, or a wanting, a prosperous, or an afflicted estate. Be
concontent, that Christ should both choose your work, and choose your
condition, that he should have the command of you, and the disposal of you;
make me what thou will, Lord, and set me where thou wi^^: let me be a Vessel of
Silver or Gold, or a Vessel of Wood or Stone, so I be a Vessel of Honor, of
whatsoever form or metal, whether higher or lower, siner or courser, I am
content; If I be not the head, or the eye, or the ear, one of the nobler and
more honorable instruments thou will employ, let me be the hand, or the foot,
one of the most laborious, and lowest, and most contemptible of all (...)
serv^n^s of my Lord, let my dwelling be on the dunghill, my portion in the
wilderness, my name and my lot be amongst the he^ers of wood, or drawers of
water, among the door-keepers of thy house; and where, where I may be
serviceable and use^ul^; I p^t myself wholly into thy, hands; Put me to what
thou will, rank me with whom thou will, put me to doing, put me to suffering,
let me be employed for thee, or laid aside for thee, exalted for thee, or
trodden under foot for thee; let me be full, let me be empty, let me have all
things, let me have nothing, I freely and heartily resign all to thy
displeasnre and disposal.

This now is your closing with Christ, as your King and Sovereign Lord; and in
this is included, your renouncing the Devil and his works the flesh and its
lusts, together with your consenting to all the Laws and Ordinances of Christ;
and his Providential Government.

Beloved, such a close with Christ, as you have been here exhorted to, is that
wherein the Essence of Christianity lies; when you have chosen the incorruptible
crown, that is, when you have chos^n God to be your portion and happiness:
when you have adventured and laid up your whole interest, and all your hopes
with Christ, casting your selves wholly upon the merit of his Righteousness,
when you have understandingly and heartily resigned and given up your ^^vs to
him, resolving for ever to be at his command, and at his disposal: when you are
Christians indeed, and never till then. Christ will be the Savior of none but
of his servants: He is the Author of Eternal Salvation to those that obey him,
Heb. 5. Christ will have no Servant but by consent, His people are a willing
people, Psalm. 1^0. And Christ will accept of no consent but in full, to all
that he requires, he will be all in all, or he will be nothing.

V. Confirm and complete all this by Solemn Covenant.
Give your selves to the Lord as his Servants, and bind your selves to him as
his Covenant-Servants, Jer. 30. 21. Who is this that engages his heart to
approach unto me; Isa. 44. 5. One shall say, I am the Lord, another shall call
himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand to the
Lord.

Upon your entering into Covenant with God, the Covenant of God stands firm to
you, God gives you leave, every man, to put his own name into the Covenant;
grant if it be not found there at last, it will be your own fault; if it be not
there, there will be nothing found in the whole Covenant belonging unto you: If
it be there, all is yours; if you have come into the bond of the Covenant, you
shall have your share in the blessings of the Covenant, Jer. 30. 21, 22 Who is
this that engaged his heart to approach to me. And ye shall be my people, and I
will be your God. Engage to me, and I stand engaged to you; Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18.
Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, to walk in his Ways, and to
keep his Statutes, and his Commandments, and his Jud^ments, to hearken to his
Voice. And the Lord ^ath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as
he has promised thee. Observe it, The same day that they avouched the Lord to
be their God, the same day the Lord avouched them to be his peculiar people:
The same day that they engag^ to keep the Commandments of God, the same day the
Lord engages to keep his Promise with them.

There is a twofold Coven^nting with God, In P^ofession, and in Reality: and
entering our Names, and an engaging our Hear^s: The former is done in Baptism,
by all that are Baptized, who by receiving the Seal of the Covenant, are
visibly, or in profession entered into it: The latter is also twofold:

1. Virtual. Which is done by all those that have sincerely made that closure
with God in Christ forementioned: Those that have chosen the Lord, embarqu^d
with Christ, resigned up, and given themselves to the Lord, are all engaged
persons have virtually Covenanted with him.

2. Formal. Which i^ our binding our selves to the Lord by solemn Vow or
Promise, to stand to our choice, etc. And this may be, either only inward in
the Soul O outward, and expressed, either by words lifting up of the hand,
subsccibiug the hand, or the like; And by how much the more express our solemn
Covenanting with God is, by so much the more sensibly and strongly it is like
to hold our hearts to him.

Now that which I would persuade you to, is this Solemn and express covenanting
with God; Providence has lately brought to my hand the Advice of a dear
Friend, and faithful Labourer in the work of the Lord about this matter,
together with an excellent Form of words, composed for the help of weaker
Christians, and aptly accommodateed to all the substantials of our Baptismal
Covenant, which having found great acceptance with many precious Christians, I
do with much zeal, and great hope of good success, for the establishing of
Souls in Holiness and Comfort, commend it to the use not only of young
Converts, but of the more grown Christians, that have not experimented this or
the like course.

And in order to the putting this matter into practice, I shall first give you
these few directions.

First, Set apart some time, more than once, to be spent in secret before the
Lord.

1. In seeking earnestly his special assistance and gracious acceptance of you.

2. In considering distinctly all the Terms or Conditions, of the Covenant, as
they have been laid before you, in the Directions already given you, and are
also expressed in the form hereaf^er proposed.

3. In searching your bearts whether you either have already, or can now,
freely make such a closure with God in Christ, as you have been exhorted to. In
special, Consider what your sins a^e, and examine whither you can resolve to
forgo them all. Consider what the Laws of Christ are, how holy, strict and
spiritual, and whether you can upon deliberation make choice of them all (even
those that do most cross your worldly interests, beloved sins, and corrupt
inclinations) as the rule of your whole life. Be sure you be clear in these
matters, see that you do not lie unto God, Consider, whether however corruption
will play its part, and be pulling you back, yet the prevailing part of you
will be for God and Christ, and all his holywayes.

Secondly, Compose your spirits into the most serious frame possible, suitable
to a transaction of so high importance.

Thirdly, Lay hold on the Covenant of God, and rely upon his promise of giving
grace, and strength, whereby you may be enabled to perform your promise. Trust
not to your own strength, to the strength of your own resolutions, but take
hold on ^^nstehig^s.

Fourthly, resolve to be faithful. Having engaged your hearts, opened your
mouths, and subscribed with your hands to the Lord* resolve in his strength
never to go back.

Lastly, Being thus prepared, on some convenient time set apart for the
purpose, set upon the work, and in the most solemn manner possible, as if the
Lord were visible present before your Eyes, fall down on your knees, and
spreading forth your hands toward Heaven, open your hearts to the Lord, in
these or the like words.

O Most dreadful God, for the passion of thy Son, I beseech thee accept of thy
poor prodigal now prostrating himself at thy door; I have fallen from thee by
mine iniquity, and am by Nature a Son of Death, and a thousand-fold more the
Child of Hell by my wicked practice; but of thine infinite Grace thou have
promised Mercy to me in Christ, if I will but turn to thee with all my heart:
The Terms of our Communion are either from which, or to which.
Therefore upon the Call of thy Gospel, I am now come in, and throwing down my
Weapons submit my self to thy mercy.

And because thou requirest, The Terms from which we must turn, are sin, Satan,
the World, and our own Righteousness, which must be thus renounced.
as the condition of my peace with thee, that I should put away mine Idols, and
be at defi-ance with all thine enemies, which I acknowledge I have wickedly
sided with against thee, I here from the bottom of my heart renounce them all,
firmly covenanting with thee, not to allow my self in any known sin, but
conscientiously to use all the means that I know thou have prescribed, for the
death and utter destruction of all my corruptions: And whereas I have formerly
inordinately and idolatrously let out my affections upon the world; I do here
resign my heart to thee that made it, humbly protesting before thy glorious
Majesty, that it is the firm Resolution of my heart, and that I do
unfeignedly desire Grace from thee, that when thou shall call me hereunto I may
practice this my resolution, through thy assistance, to forsake all that is
dear unto me in this world, rather then to turn from thee to the ways of sin,
and that I will watch against all its Temptations, whether of prosperity or
adversi^y, least they should withdraw my heart from thee, beseeching thee also
to help me against the Temptations of Satan, to whose wicked suggestions, I
resolve, by the Grace, never to yield my self a Servant. And because my own
righteousness is but menstruous rags, I renounce all confidence therein, and
acknowledge that I am of my self a hopeless, helpless, undone creature, without
righteousness or strength.

And forasmuch as thou have of thy bottomless Mercy offered most Graciously
to me wretched sinner, The Terms to which we must turn, are either ultimate or
mediate.
to be again my God throug Christ, if I woul accept of thee: I call Heaven and
Earth to record this day* that I do here solemnly avouch thee for the Lord my
God, The ultimate is God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who must be thus
accepted.
and with all possible veneration, bowing the neck of my Soul under the feet of
thy most sacred Majesty, I do here take thee the Lord Jehovah, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, for my portion and chief good, and do give up my self, body
and soul for thy servant, promising and vowing to serve thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of my life.

And since thou have appointed the Lord Jesus Christ, The mediate terms, are
ei-Principal, or less principal.
the only means of coming unto thee, The principal is Christ the Mediator, who
must thus be embraced.
I do here upon the bended knees of my Soul, accept of him as the only new and
living way, by which sinners may have access to thee, and do here solemnly join
my self in a marriage covenant to him*

O blessed Jesus, I come to thee* hungry and hardly bestead, poor and wretched,
and miserable, and blind, and naked* a most loathsome pollu^ed wretch, a
guilty condemned Malefactor, unworthy for ever to wash the feet of the servants
of my Lord, much more to be solemnly married to the King of Glory: But (...)
such is thine unparalled love, I do here with all my power accept thee, and
do take thee for my head and husband, for better for worse, for richer for
poorer, for all times and conditions, to love, and honor, and obey thee before
all others, and this to the death, I embrace thee in all thine offices: I
renounce mine own worthiness, and do here avow thee to be the Lord my
Righteousness: I re^ounce mine own wisdom, and do here take thee for mine
only Guide: I renounce ^ine own will, and take thy will for my Law.

And since thou have told me that I must ^uffer if I will reign, I do here
covenant with thee to take my lot, as it falls, with thee, and by thy grace
asisting to run all hazzards with thee, verily supposing, that neither life
nor death shall part between thee and me.

And because thou have been pleased to give me thy holy Laws, The less
principles, are: the Laws of Christ, which must be thus observed,
as the rule of my life; and the way in which I should walk to thy Kingdom; I
do here willingly put my neck under thy yoke, and let my shoulder to thy
burden, and subscribing to all thy Laws, as holy, just and good; I solemnly
take them, as the rule of my words, thoughts, and actions; promising, that
though my flesh contradict and rebel, yet I will endeavor to order and govern
my whole life according to thy direction; and will not allow my self in the
neglect of any thing that I know to be my duty.

Only because through the frailty of my flesh, (...) am subject to many
failings; I am bold humbly to protest, That unallowed miscarriages, contrary to
the settled bent and resolution of my heart, shall not make void this Covenant;
for so thou have said.

Now Almighty God, searcher of hearts, thou know that I make this Covenant
with thee this day, without any known guile or reservation, beseeching thee,
that if thou espiest any flaw or falsehood therein, thou would discover it to
me* and help me to do it aright.

And now glory be to thee, O God the Father, whom I shall be bold from this day
forward, to look upon as my God and Father; That ever thou should find out
such a way for the recovery of undone sinners; Glory be to thee, O God the Son*
who have loved me and washed me from my sins in thine own blood, and art now
become my Savior and Redeemer: Glory be to thee, O God the Holy Ghost, who by
the Finger of thine Almighty power have turned about my heart from sin to God.

O dreadful Jehovah, the Lord God omnipotent, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, thou
art now become my Covenant friend, and I through thine infinite Grace, am
become thy Covenant-servant, Amen, So be it: And the Covenant which I have made
on earth, let it be ratified in Heaven.

The Authors advice.
THis Covenant I advise you to make, not only in heart, but in word; not only
in word, but in writing; and that you would with possible reverence spread the
writing before the Lord, as if you would present it to him as your Act and
Deed. And when you have done this, set your hand to it* Keep it as a memorial
of the solemn transactions that have passed between God and you, that you may
have recourse to it in doubts and temptations.

And now Beloved, having showed you the way the Father, give me leave to be
instant with you, in pressing you to hearken to me herein, to come and join
your selves thus to the Lord. And if you will not be persuaded to this solemn
and express way of Covenanting with him, which I believe you will find a great
advantage, and do therefore make it my great request unto you) yet, if you will
not do that, take heed you refuse not to engage your hearts to the Lord, and
make a full closure with Christ, upon all the particular terms laid before you,
till that be done, I must be bold to tell you again* as I have told you
already, that you are short of Christianity, strangers from the Covenant of
Promise, and Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel.

Brethren, the Lord God has sent me amongst you upon the same E^^and, as
Abraham sent his servant, Genesis 24. To take a wife for his Son, to espouse you
to Christ: I am not without ^ear, as that servant was not, that some of you
will not follow me; but if the Lord see it good to send his Angel before me, to
make my way prosperous, if the Lord give me success in this great thing, that I
may thus bring you into Covenant with him, I shall therein have performed the
main part of my Ministerial work among you, I shall have espoused you to
Christ, ma^ried you to that one Husband; I shall have brought you within the
strait gate, and set your foot safe into that narrow way that leads to life,
and have laid the foundation of your following the Lord in holiness and comfort
here, and of living with him in blessedness for ever. For,

1 When once you are sincerely in Covenant, from thenceforth you have a God
that you may call your own, to whom you may have free access, with whom you may
be sure to find grace, to help in all times of need. How blessed is his
condition, who is able to say, I have no fri^^^ in the world, but I have a God
in Heaven; I have many enemies, but I have a God; I have no house, nor money,
nor lands, but I have a God; I have troubles, I have sins that are a daily
torment and vexation to me, but I have a God, a God to feed me, a God to
succor me, God to shelter me, a God to pardon me, a God to sanct^fie me, to
^ave me.

2 From the time of this your Covenant Union with Christ, you have the blessing
of communion with him.

(...) Whatsoever is Christ's, is now become yours; the husband gives the wife
leave to set he^ name on all his goods, and all that Christ has, you may now
write your name upon it, and say boldly, All this is mine; his prayers, his
tears, his obedience, his blood, his spirit, all are mine, because he is mine.

2. Whatsoever is yours, is his; your sufferings, your sins your debts, your
wants are all upon your husband. Christ says to you, as the old man, Judge. 19.
20. to the Levite, Let all thy wants be on me; and so all thy debts and
straits, and fears, and troubles, let them all be on me.

3 Christ and you shall have your lot together; God deals with Christ and a
Believer, as one and the same party who must be absolved and condemned, stand
or fall, live or die together. In Christ's being justified, your justification
is secured; in Christ's Resurrection, your Resurrection; in Christ's
Glorification, your Glorification is secured for ever; Because I live, ye shall
live also. This is the portion, this is the Inheritance of all Gods
Covenanting-Servants.

You that are yet in your sins, in your old Covenant with Death, and agreement
with Hell, Will you yet be persuaded by what has been said, to say one to
another, Come let us break these bonds asunder* and cast these cords from us;
come let us go over to Christ* let us join our selves to the Lord in a
perpetual Covenant that never shall be forgotten,

You that are sincerely come within the bonds of this Covenant of the Lord; the
Lord is henceforth become your God, Christ is henceforth become your Savior,
you have shot the Gulf; that good work is begun, which the Lord will perform to
the day of Christ; you are gotten within the gate, you are entered into the Path
of Life.

2 In the next place therefore, I shall give some advice to the godly* or those
that are already in Christ, whom I shall direct:

1 To a right performance of holy duties; these four duties especially, Prayer,
holy Meditation, Self-examination, and renewing their Covenant.

2 To a right improvement of holy Duties.

3 To the carrying on an holy course.

In all which, though I shall apply my self especially to those that are in
Christ, yet I shall also give some farther helps to those that are yet out of
Christ.

Before I shall enter upon the Directions for the right performance of holy
Duties, it will not, I hope, be lost labor, if I prefix a word of
encouragement to duty, by laying before you the influences which holy duties
will have upon the carrying on a holy life, which I shall dispatch in these
four particulars.

1 Duties are the exercise of Grace. Grace out of exercise grows quickly out of
case; Idleness breed^ ill humors and diseases in the body, and no less in the
soul; stirring keeps us warm and healthful. Now Duties are the stirrings and
exercises of the soul. Reading of the word is not the exercise of the eye
only, but of the understanding; Prayer is not an exercise of the tongue only,
but of the heart; it sets all the faculties of the soul on work, it sets the
several graces on work, i^ sets faith on work, it sets hope and holy desires on
work; and grace kept in action, will be by so much the more active and powerful
in the whole course*

2 In Duties we have an intimate converse with God: Therefore they are
sometimes called, Our drawing ^igh to God, Lev. 10. 3. I will be sanctified in
them them that come nigh me. Sometimes, Our meeting with God, Amos 4. 12
Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel; to meet with a Present, as Jacob met his
angry Brother; to meet him with a Prayer, and supplication, Exodus 25. 32. There
will I meet thee; when the Saints go up to meet the Lord, the Lord comes down
to give them a meeting: Sometimes, Our visiting of God, Isay 26. 16. In their
trouble they have visited thee. When God visits his people with a Rod, they
visit him with a Prayer; when we come to Duty as we ought, we put our selves
under Gods eye, we set the Lord before our face, it is necessary to the right
performance of Duties, that we have right and clear apprehensions of God, deep
impressions of the Majesty of God, of his Omnipotence, Omnipresence, Holiness,
Goodness and Faithfulness upon our hearts; This is required in that
forementioned expression, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me. Now
what an influence will this have upon the upholding and carrying on the life of
God in us, to have daily such a sight of God before our eyes, and such a sense
of God upon our hearts.

3 In Duties we obtain new supplies, and fresh influences from God. The
flourishing state of a Christian is set forth, Isay 58. 11. by a well-watered
Garden; and Jer. 31. 12. it is promised, They shall come and flow together to
the goodness of the Lord for Wheat, and for Corn, and for Wine, and for Oil.
And their soul shall be as a well-watered Garden:

Where observe these three things:

1 That the watering of the soul is from the goodness of the Lord; all the dews
and showers of Grace are from above, our Springs do not rise in our own
Gardrns: All my Springs are in thee.

2 All the influences of the grace and goodness of the Lord, are gotten down by
your applying your selves to him in duty: That is the meaning of that
expression, They shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, they shall
assemble and come together to seek the Lord.

3 The People of God in their addresses to him in Duty, though it be but for a
supply of things temporal, do get something for their souls; They shall come
for Wheat, and for Wine, etc. And their (souls) shall be as a well-watered
Garden. We never come to pray for any temporal mercy, and pray as we should,
but our souls are gainers thereby. A Christian cannot come near the Throne of
Grace for any thing, bot his heart has a share in the Blessing. And there are
three Reasons for it.

1 A Christian never prays for temporal mercies, but he has some words or
other to speak for his soul.

2 Prayer, whatever it be for, is the souls drawing nigh to God, and exercising
it self on God: And the soul never goes to God, but it brings back something of
God upon it, even then when it may be denied the temporal mercy it seeks: As
when a Saint is praying for a Sinner, and God will not hear him for that
Sinner, yet he loses not that Prayer, but has it returned into his own bosom.
So when the soul is praying for the concernments of the outward man, though it
be denied in its particular request, yet its prayer shall not be lost to it
self.

3 Temporal mer^ies obtained as a return of prayer, are soul-blessings.

But now when the matter of our requests is particularly for our souls: When
Grace is that we come for* when love, and life, and zeal, and spiritual
strength, is that we come for: when the watering of a dry and barren, and the
refreshing of a weary heart, is that we seek for, shall our souls then be sent
b^rren, and weary, and empty away.

Our hearts are as Cisterns, which however sometimes they may be full of water,
yet if there be not a supply from the Well, the waters and the Cistern will
waste, and mud, and at length dry away, Duties are our laboring at the Pump,
which will keep the Cisterns full Isa. 12. 3. Therefore with joy shall ye draw
water out of the W^lls of Salvation.

Christian, thou complainest thy heart is barr^n and dead, and dry, and fit for
nothing: Why, is there not a Well by thee, where there is water enough to
refresh and fill thee? Why do^st thou no oftener let down thy Pitcher, or labor
at the Pump, why art thou no oftener with thy God? Thy heart wants watering, get
thee oftener to the Well: more praying, more fasting, more conversing with
Christ, studying the Gospel, searching and sucking the Promises, would quickly
get thee into a better plight. He that is much with God, is rich in grace. Thou
art not so much stra^^ned, thou can not be brought so poor, and Iean, and out
of case, but thou know where there is enough to fetch thee up again, thou
know where there is a Well, that has not only water enough, healing water,
but Wine, and Milk, and Honey enough; but thou must go oftener for it. if thou will have the benefit of it; Go therefore, and let down thy Pitcher, and thou
need not fear its coming up empty. Only in exercising thy self in duty,
take heed thou mistake not the Pitcher for the Well; take heed thou fix not
thine eye on duty, as if this were thy Christ, thy Fountain out of which thou
may be supplied. Duties are but the pipes, it is the Lord that is the
Fountain from whence all the water comes.

4 Duties are our conflicting with corruption* or striving against sin. When
ever we are striving with God, we are thereby striving against sin. Duty and
sin contend for the Victory; whilst Duty holds up, sin goes down: when Duty
flags, sin gets up. Holy Prayer will make us weary of i^^quity; or our iniquity
will quickly make such praying a weariness unto us: it is not for the interest
of the flesh to suffer the heart to be much in prayer, or other du^ies, and
therefore we find for the whole Generation of carnal men, a little of it must
serve their turn.

There is no such way for Christians to be revenged on sin, and to see their
desires on this Enemy, as to bring it before the Lord. They never fight against
it with greater zeal, or with more success, then upon their knees. When the
sinner kneels in earnest before his God, his lusts must quickly kneel to him;
our confession of sin, and laying it open before the Lord, our complaining to
the Lord of it, our ^^ying to the Lord against it, pressing him upon his
Promise, upon his Covenant to help against it; these are the mightiest
^atteries our souls can make, to the beating down its strong holds: When the
Lord hears the groanings of his Israel, under their oppressing Egyptians, he
will arise and relieve them. Christians tell one another, how sad it is with
them, what woeful work they have with a proud heart, or a covetous heart, or an
hard heart, or an hypocritical heart; and you mry tell one another such stad
stories long enough, and find little help: Go tell thy God of thy sins, carry
them before the Throne of Grace, make thy complaints against them there, and
there thou* wilt find compassion and deliverance.

Now gather up these four particulars together, consider them well* and then
you will see, you that intend holiness in earnest, wh^t great reason you have
to set close in with Duties, and to accept of those Directions which shall now
be tendered unto you.

The first sort of Directions are such as concern the right performance of the
Duty of Prayer; the advice I shall give you touching this, take in these four
particulars.

1. Bring your selves, and hold your selves to a frequent and constant
performance of this duty.

There must be performance, or there cannot ^e a right performance: Those that
pray not, or but seldom, is a shrewd sign that the root of the matter is not
in them; they that can live without prayer are dead while they are alive:
Prayer is the first fruits of Christianity: It was said of Saul, a^ a token
that he was a Convert, Behold he prays. The living Child comes crying into
the World* and as it is a token of life, so it is a means by which this New
Life is nourished. Prayer is a Christians Key to unlock the Storehouses and
the Treasuries of Souls, he that can pray, God has given him a Key to all his
Treasuries. Prayer will not only unlock the Clouds as Elijahs prayer did, and
bring down Rain to refresh the dry and parched Earth, but it will unlock Heaven
too. It will unlock the Ark and the Mercy-seat, and get down Spiritual
blessinge on the Soul: Praying is a Christians knocking at the Gate of Heaven,
that knocking to which the promise is made, Matthew 7. 7. Knock and it shall be
opened. The word which the Lord speaks to us is Gods knocking at our doors;
Rev. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock. And praying is our knocking
at the Lords door, at the Gate of Heaven, that this may be opened. By the way
learn, that if you will not hear God knock* it is just to hear not yours. If
Gods voice may not be heard on Earth, your voice will not be heard in Heaven;
fear not, you shall be heard, if you will hear; hear him that speaks to you
from Heaven, and your cry shall enter into Heaven.

Our Souls will never thrive or flourish, unless the Rain and the Showers of
Heavenly Grace descend and fall upon them, and we cannot look that those
Showers should come down, unless we look up.

Persons that pray not, may be written among the Heathens, Jer. 10. 25. Pour
out thy fury upon the Heathen, and the Families that call not on thy Name.
Among the Profane ones of the Earth, who are described by this Character,
Psalm 42. 4. They call not upon God, they are altogether become filthy and
abominable, there is none that does good, they call not upon God.

Where Prayer is not, there is usually cursing and swearing, and every
abomination; look upon the non-praying persons, look upon the non-praying
families among you, and see how little good there is to be found; see if they
be not as so many dead and dry Trees, on which no Spiritual fruit appears, as
so many dark holes, into which no Spiritual light does ever shine, as so many
filthy sinks, in which every vile thing lodges.

Beloved, I have often pressed this Duty on you, both personal secret Prayer,
that there be not one person found among you that prays not; and Family joint
Prayer, that there be not one Family found among you, among whom God is not
thus worshipped; I have often pressed this upon you, and given you particular
helps and Directions about it, and have not been negligent to put you in
remembrance of it, so that if there be prayerless persons or families found
among you, the guilt of it must lie at your own doors.

But will you yet hearken to me in this thing? Will you give your selves to
prayer? No word that is spoken to you for the good of your Souls, will ever
prosper with you, if this Word prosper not, it is in vain for me to persuade
you to live a Godly life, if you will not be persuaded to live a praying life.
Would you ever come to any thing, see then that this Exhortation do not come
to nothing, be ye therefore serious, Be ye therefore sober* and watch unto
Prayer, 1 Pet. 4. 7. Be ye instant, be constant in Prayer; Set up your
resolutions and set your time; set your times, and keep your time; do not put
off this Duty, by pretending you pray always, every day, and every hour; as
the pretense of an every days Sabbath comes just to no Sabbath, so it is
usually in the case of prayer, some Carnal wretches praying always is ^ot
prayiug at all: Get thee into thy Closet, says Christ, get thee a place, set
thee a time, wherein thou say vacare De^, wherein thou may make it thy
business to seek the Lord.

Brethren, I say again, if you will not suffer me to prevail with you in this
thing, I may even spare my labor of speaking any other things to you, wherein
I shall have no hope of success, if I speed not here: Some among you in some
private Conferences I have had with you, have given me some good hopes of the
work of grace begun upon your hearts: I have found that there has been still a
neglect of daily prayer, this has struck such a damp upon my spirit, as has
brought down those hopes to be even almost as low as nothing, and by experience
I have found, that such persons, as upon advice and warning would not
afterward be brought to the constant exercise (...) this duty, if they have
retained any favor of Religion at all, have yet from year to year been at a
stand, and not the least sign of any improvement has been to be seen. If ever
therefore you will hearken to me in any thing that I tender for your souls
good, deny me not in this, set upon the daily exercise of secret prayer; and if
you be resolved on the performance, I shall then be encouraged in the next
place to help you on in the right performance. Therefore.

2. Come to pray with an actual and great expect (...) of obtaining grace and
help from God.
Do not barely impose this duty upon you, as your task, but excite and
encourage your selves to it, by looking for a return: think what it is that you
would have, and look to receive it: The reason why we obtain no more in prayer,
is, because we expect no more: God usually answers us according to our own
hearts: Narrow hearts and low expectations have usually as little as they look
for or desire: large expectations are ordinarily answered with large returns:
Expectation will put life into action; you will then pray with most enlarged
hearts, when you are most full of hopes, the reward that is looked for in the
Evening will much encourage and quicken the labor of the day, fear not to
expect too much from Heaven: Be not straightened in in your own Bowels; and you
shall not be straightened in the God of bowels: open thy Mouth wide and he will
fill it* God will never upbraid his Beggars for looking for too great an Alms;
he has enough to supply them, and he has a heart to bestow it: God will never
say to you, you are too bold, you ask too much; too much Grace, too much
holiness, why cannot less content you? God has given you commission to ask
what you will, not to the one half, but the whole of his Kingdom; the Kingdom
you shall have, if no less will serve your turn.

Christians be thankful for every little you receive, but look for much: be
thankful for every little, every little received from God is much: A drop from
that Fountain is worth the World, yet content not your selves with some drops,
when, if you will, the Fountain may be yours. The King of Glory loves to give
like a King, and will never say, This is too much, either for a King to give,
or a Beggar to receive; Since he has given you leave, spare not to speak in
large your desires, and let your Eye be as big as your Belly. God has promised
you, and therefore you may promise your selves; whatever you ask (that is good
for you) you shall not ask in vain. Oh, if we had so much in our Eye when we
come before the Throne of Grace, we should be oftener there, and yet still
return with our load. Well Christians, remember this when ever you come to
beg, look to receive, come not to prayer as to dry breast that is like to
yield no milk, or to an empty Cistern that will yield no water.

3. Learn the skill to plead with God in Prayer.
Though the Breasts be full, yet they must be drawn hard ere the milk will
come. Though the Lord be willing to give those that task, yet he will have them
first to prove they are in earnest. Store of Arguments he has furnished us
with, to press him withal, but he will have us use them. We must strive with
God, if we will prevail, and the best striving is with his own weapons. The
counsel I give you in this is, Plead hard with God, but plead with him upon his
own Arguments; there are amongst many others, these four grounds on which to
bottom your plea: 1. On God himself. 2. On Christ. 3. On the Promises. 4. On
Experiences.


1. On God himself. And there are two special things, from which you may plead
here.

1. His gracious Nature. Fetch your Arguments by which you plead with God for
Mercy thence, whence he originally fetched his Arguments to persuade himself to
show mercy; from his own bowels, from his gracious nature, from his natural
goodness and gracious inclination to mercy, John 3. 16. God so loved the world,
that he grve his only Son etc. Ephesians. 1. 5. to verse. 10. Having predestined us
to the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ unto himself, (according to the
good pleasure of his Will) to the praise of the glory of his Grace, wherein he
has made us accepted in the beloved; in whom we have redemption through his
blood, even the forgiveness of sins, (according to the riches of his Grace)
wherein he has (abounded) toward us in all wisdom and prudence, having made
known unto us the mystery of his Will, according to his good pleasure which he
has purposed of himself: Here we have heaped up in a few words the Riches of
Mercy which God has bestowed on his People. Christ his beloved, Redemption
through Christ, and the forgiveness of our sins, the adoption of Children,
acceptance in his fight, the Revelation of the Mystery of his Will, or the
discovering or making known these glorious mercies to us. But whence is all
this, who is it, or what was it, that persuaded the Lord to this abundant
kindness? Why, all this arose from himself, He purposed it in himself. He
consulted no other Argument, but what he found in his own heart: it was from
his love, the-good pleasure of his Will, his Grace, the Riches of his Grace,
wherein he has abounded toward us, Hosea 11. 8, 9. How shall I give thee up
Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee up Israel? I cannot do it: I will not do it.
I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not destroy Ephraim.
But why will thou be angry, Lord, why will thou not destroy Ephraim? Oh, says
the Lord, Mine heart is turned within me; my heart says, Spare him, my Bowels
say, Destroy him not. I am God, and not Man. I love him, and my love is the
love of a God. I have compassion on him, and my compassion is the pity of a
God: I will bear with him, I am a God of Patience: Love is my nature, Pity, and
Mercy, and Compassion are my nature: I cannot destroy Ephraim, but I must deny
mine own Nature, Love, and Pity, and Mercy, and Goodness are essential to God:
He can as soon cease to be God as to be Gracious, and this is the Fountain of
all our Mercy; Hence Christ sprung, hence the Gospel came, and all the
Unsearchable Riches of Mercy, prepared for poor, lost, and undone creatures.

When you come to pray, fetch your Arguments hence: Plead with the Lord upon
his own nature, his Natural Love, Grace and Goodness. Thus we find the Apostle
Peter praying for the Christians to whom he wrote, 1 Pet. 5. 10. [ The God of
all Grace] make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. Plead with the
Lord in your Prayers, as the Psalmist pleades with himself in his Affliction,
Psalm 77. 7, etc. Will the Lord cast off for ever, and will he be favorable no
more? Is his Mercy clean gone for ever, has God forgotten to be Gracious, has
he in anger shut up his tender Mercies? Is (his) Mercy clean gone? Has (God)
forgotton to be gracious? That men should be merciless; that men should forget
themselves, and their Friends in their low estate, is no such wonder But has
God, who is all Grace, all Mercy, all Pity, has God forgotten? Does Mercy
cease to be merciful, Grace cease to be gracious; do Compassions cease to be
pitiful? Has God not only forgotten his servant, but forgotten himself?
Remember thy self, Lord, thine own Heart, thine own Soul, and according to it,
remember me.

2. His glorious Name. The Lords Nature is to be gracious, and according to his
Nature such is his Name, Exodus 34. 6. The Lord, the Lord God merciful and
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth. This is an
Argument which the Lord puts into the mouths of his People, telling them, Ezekiel.
36. 21, 22. I had pity for my Holy Name; this I do, not for your sakes, but for
^y Holy Names sake. And upon this we find them frequently pleading with him,
Psalm. 31. 3. For thy Names sake lead me, and guide me. Jer. 14. 21. Do not
abhor us, for thy Names sake; do not disgrace the Throne of thy Glory,
remember, break not thy Covenant with us. Go you and do likewise.

2 On Christ. And there are four things from which you may plead with God upon
this account.

1 The Lords giving of Christ to you as your Lord, and your Savior. Upon which
gift you may call him your own.

2 The Purchase of Christ: who has bought from the hands of the Father, all
that you stand in need of: He has bought your Lives, 1 Cor. 6^ Ye are bought
with a price. He has bought you a livelihood, has purchased an Inheritance
and Possession for you, 1 Pet. 1.

3 The Interest that Christ has in the Father; being the Son of God, the Son
of his Love, the Servant of God, in whom his soul delights, Isa. 4^. 1, Behold
my Servant whom I have chosen, mine Elect, in whom my soul delights; whose
Name is so precious, and powerful with the Father, that it will carry any suit,
obtain any request, Job. 16. 23. Whatever you ask the Father in my Name, he
will give it you.

4 The Interest that you have in Christ. As he is precious to his Father, so
you are precious to him; as the Father can deny him nothing, so he can deny his
nothing, John 14. 13, Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my Name, I will do
it. He gives you Commission to put his Name upon all your requests, and
whatsoever prayer comes up with his Name upon it, he will procure it an answer.

Now when you are praying for any mercy, especially for any Soul-mercie, make
use of all these arguments: Lord, Have thou given Christ unto me, and will thou
not with him give me all things I stand in need of? Have thou given me the
Fountain, and will thou deny me the Stream? When I beg pardon of sin, when I
beg power against sin, when I beg Holiness, etc. Is not all this granted me, in
thy gift of Christ to me? Is Christ mine, and is not his blood mine, to procure
my pardon? his Spirit mine, to subdue mine iniquities? Are these mine, and will thou withold them from me? Oh, shall this guilt lie upon me, these sins live
in me, these losts rule over me, when by giving me in hand that whereof thou
have already given me a grant, all this would be removed from me? Look, upon
Christ, Lord; Thou have said to me, Look unto Jesue and give thy servant leave
to say the same to thee, Look thou upon Jesus, and give out to me, what thou
have given me, in giving of him to me. Look upon the purchase of Christ; Do I
want any thing, or desire any thing, but what my Lord has bought and paid for,
and thou have accepted of the price? Look upon the Name of Christ, which thou
may behold written upon every prayer I make; Though thou may s^y, for thy
own sake thou shall have nothing, not a drop, not a crumb, yet will thou say,
nor for his Name sake neither? Is not that Name still a mighty Name, a precious
Name before the Lord? etc. By these hints you may learn, how to plead with God
from any other arguments, drawn from his promises, your experience, etc.

Quest. But of what use is this our pleading with God? and in what stead does
it stand us, in order to our prevailing with him?

Ans. 1 It is not of use to change the purpose of God, to prevail with him to
do that for us, which before he resolved not to do; but to bring forth his
purposes into performance. We may say concerning the purposes of God, what
himself says concerning the accomplishing of his Promise, Ezekiel. 36. 37. Yet
will I be euquired of by the House of Israel, to do this for them. Such praying
fetches out those mercies which were in the heart of God, and puts them into
our hand.

2. By pleading with God for audience, we plead our selves into credence, or
the more firm belief the Lord acceps and will answer. And if by all these
Arguments, we can plead our selves into^a stronger faith, our faith will
certainly bring us down a fuller answer.

Quest. 2. These Arguments the Saints may use In Prayer: but is there no plea
for poor natural men, that are yet in their sins, to make use of? What may they
say themselves, when they come before the Lord? Have you never a word to put in
their mouths? They have more need of Arguments then any; What shall they say?

Answ. 1. I shall premise, That its the duty of mere natural men to pray; For,
1. Prayer is a part of Gods Natural Worship. If there were no positive Law
requiring it, yet the Law of Nature enjoynes it, and no man is exempted from
the Obligation of the Law of Nature. 2. Otherwise it were none of their sin to
neglect and restrain Prayer; where no Law is, there is no Transgression. Now we
find in Scripture, that neglect of Prayer is reckoned up amongst wicked men's
sins, Psalm. 14. 3. 4. They are altogether become filthy, etc. they call not
upon God. Sin, though it does disable, yet it does not disoblige to Duty.

Object. That which is usually objected against this is, God hears not
sinners; The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: Now, no man
is bound to offer up to God an abominable thing; better offer up nothing, than
an abomination.

Sol. In answer to this, consider, There are two sorts of sinners, Resolved
Sinners, and Returning Sinners; and accordingly there are two sorts of Prayers
made by Sinners, 1. Dissembling prayers, mocking and lying Prayers, Hos. 11.
12. Ephraim compasses me about with lies; lying Sacrifices, lying Devotions;
makes as if he had a mind to know me, and serve me, when it is not in his
heart; and such prayers are made use of, either as r^vail to hide and cover
their wickedness, and to make them appear to men to be righteous, or else as an
Engine or Device, to quiet and pacify their consciences in a course of sin.
They make confessing of sin, to serve instead of forsaking of sin; praying, to
serve instead of repenting; their prayers help them to sin the more freely;
They think they may go out with any thing, if when they have done iniquity,
they do but pray for forgiveness; Such prayers are an abomination to God, and a
desolation to sinners. Bring me no more vain Oblations, Incense is an
abomination to me. Sinners, not only your wickedness, but your very prayers
will undo you. If you make them a shelter for sin, your very prayers will be
turned into sin.

2. Returning Prayers. When a Sinner, being struck with a sense of his sin, and
of his necessity of changing his way, and of his utter inability to turn of
himself, under the fears and troubles of his heart, goes to God, and cries out,
Lord, what shall I do? I see I am in an evil case my soul is running on in sin,
and they curse and wrath I behold running on upon me; Lord, save me; Lord, help
me; Lord, pardon, Lord convert me, break me off from my sins, break me off from
my sinful companions; I cannot get loose, my heart is too hard, my lusts are
too strong, my Temptations are too many for me to overcome of my self; Lord
help me, turn me and I shall be turned, pluck my foot out of the snare that I
be not utterly destroyed: forgive mine iniquity, make me a clean heart, make me
thy child, make me thy servant, that I may never again yield up my self a
servant to sin; Such a prayer as this, if it be hearty and and in earnest; if
there be no promise of audience, yet at least there is an half promise; Who can
tell? Or, it may be the Lord may hear. Though it cannot be properly said, the
Lord does accept, neither can any man say, he will reject it as an abominable
thing: This being premised.

2. I answer to the question, That sinners, if they have but an^ heart to it,
have also a price in their hand; God has put arguments into their mouths also,
to plead with him for mercy. As,

1. The grace of God, or his gracious Nature; his readiness to show mercy; this
even strangers may lay hold upon. Benhadad's encouragement to beg his life of
the King of Israel, may be the sinners plea in the begging of his. We have
heard that the Kings of Israel are merciful Kings; Go Sinner to the Lord, and
speak thus in his ears; Lord I have heard that the King of Glory is a merciful
King; Thy name is the Lord, merciful and gracious, and thy Nature is according
to thy Name; It is thy Nature to pity, and in thy heart there is plenteous
compassion; Oh, I am a miserable creature, a poor, undone, helpless wretch; do
for me according to thy Nature; do for me according to thy Name; will the God
of mercy send away such a wretch that comes for mercy; will the God of Grace
send me away without Grace? The God of Mercy hear me, the God of Grace grant me
to find grace in his eyes.

2 Gods Call, or gracious Invitation, Isa. 55. Ho, (every one) that thirsts,
come to the Waters, and he that has no Money, come ye, buy and eat: buy Wine,
and Milk, without Money and without ^rice. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all
the ends of the Earth. Come unto me all that are weary and heavy laden, and I
will give you rest. Rise sinner, he calls thee: Go to the Lord, and when thou
go, tell him, Lord, thou have bid me come, and behold here I am; I come Lord
at thy Word, I come for a little Water, I come for thy Wine and thy Milk, I
have brought no price in my hand, but thou have bid* me come, and buy without
Money and without Price. Though I have no grace, yet behold at thy word I come
for Grace; though I have no Christ, yet I come for Christ; though I cannot call
thee Father, yet being called, I come to thee as Fatherless; With thee the
Fatherless shall find mercy. And is it only those that want the Fathers of
their Flesh? is it not also those that want the Father of Spirits? Shall
earthly Orphans find pity, and only Spiritual Orphans be left Orphans? If I am
not thy child, may I not be made thy Child? Have thou not a child's Blessing
left yet to bestow upon me? Thou have bid me come, come for a Blessing, bless
me, even me also, O Lord. Wherefore have thou sent for me? Shall I be sent away
as I came? I come at thy word, do not say again, be gone, be gone out of my
fight; I cannot go at thy Word; I will not go; for, Whither shall I go from
thee? Thou have the Words of Eternal life. Since thou will have me speak; Lord
answer; Though I dare not say, Be just to me a Saint, yet I do say, I will say,
I must say, Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

3. Christ. And there are two things in Christ, upon which sinners may plead
with God.

1. His Sufficiency. There is enough in Christ, in his obedience and death, to
save the worst of sinners, to save the whole World of Sinners, There is a
fullness in Christ, Col. 1. 19. It pleased the Father, that in him should all
fullness dwell. There is a fullness of Merit to obtain pardon, to make
reconciliation for whoever comes; a fullness of the Spirit to Sanctify, and
cleanse them from their sins; He Is able to save unto the uttermost, all those
that come unto God by him. From this, Sinners may reason thus with the Lord. O
Lord, I do not come to beg that of thee, that cannot be had; Thou have enough
by thee; Look upon Jesus that sits at thy right hand, (...) there not
Righteousness enough in him, to answer for all my u^righteousnesse: Are there
not riches enough in him, to supply my poverty? Oh, shall I die for want of a
pardon, when there is such blood continually before thee, pleading for pardon!
Oh, shall I lie down in my own vomit, and wallow in the mire of my filthy
lusts, when there is such a Fountain by thee, that is still open for sin and for
uncleanness! Oh sprinkle me with this blood. O wash me in this Fountain. Hear
Lord, send me not away without an Alms, when have it by thee.

2. His Office: which is to bring sinners to God, to make reconciliation for
sinners, to make intercession for Transgressors, Isa. 53. Psalm. 68. 18. Thou
have received gifts for men, yea even for the rebellious also. What a strange
and mighty Plea is here for poor sinners! Oh, it is true Lord, I am a
Transgressor, and have been from the Womb: I have played the Traitor, and been
a Rebel against thee all my days: But is there none in Heaven that will
i^tercede for a Transgressor? Has the Lord Jesus received no gift for this
poor Rebel, that falls down before thee? Though I am a Rebel, Lord, yet I am a
returning Rebel: Though I am a Rebel, yet let me recieve a Rebels gift, not a
Rebels reward, Lord, that would be dreadful, but some of those gifts which
Christ received for the Rebellious. Does Christ make intercession for
Transgressors, and shall not he be heard? If thou will not hear me who am a
sinner, yet will thou not hear him that speaks for sinners, whose blood speaks,
whose bowels speak, whose spirit speaks? Does he speak for sinners, and yet not
for me?

4. Their own necessity; Sinners are necessitous Creatures, they have nothing
of value left them, In the fullness of their sufficiency they are in straits;
As a sinner of an hundred years is but a child, so a sinner of thousands by the
year is but a beggar; poor, miserable, blind, and naked: He can want nothing,
and yet does want every thing that is good; Sin has stripped him to the skin:
stab^d him to the heart, the iron has entered into his Soul, it has left him
nothing but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores: Is this thy case,
sinner, and have thou nothing to say? Spread thy wants and necessities before
the Lord, and let these speak for thee: Learn of Beggars that come to thy door,
who if they have ever a sore or malady about them, a blind eye, a lame leg, a
burnt hand, a broken arm, that they will be sure to open, to move pity and
procure an Alms. Their pinching hunger, their parching thirst, their naked
backs, their cold lodging, thy door shall be sure to ring of: Never a pe^ny in
my purse, never a morsel of bread have I had for this long time; their
necessity will both make them to speak, and help them to speak.

Sinner, spread thy necessities before the Lord, spread thy wants, open thy
wounds and thy sores, tell him how desperately sad thy case is, tell him of the
guilt that is upon thy head, the curse that is on thy back, the plague that is
in thy heart: God of Bowels look hither, behold what a poor, blind, dead,
hardened, unclean, guilty creature, what a naked, empty, helpless creature I
am: Look upon my sin and my misery, and let thine eye affect thine heart: One
deep calls to another, a deep of Misery cries out to a deep of Mercy. Oh my
very sins, which cry so loud against me, speak also for me. My misery speaks,
my curses, the woe and the wrath that lies upon me; my bones speak, my
perishing Soul speaks, and all cry in thine ears, Help Lord, God of pity help,
help and heal me, help and save me: Come unto me, for I am a sinful man, O
Lord: I dare not say as once it was said, Depart from me, for I am a sinful
man. Come Lord, for I am a sinful man. Thou could never come where is more
need; Who have need of the Physician but the sick? Come Lord; I have too often
said Depart from me, but if thou will not say, Depart, to me, I hope I shall
never again say, Depart, to thee; My misery says come, my wants say come* my
guilt and my sins say come, and my soul says come; Come and pardon, come and
convert, come and teach, come and sanctify, come and save me; Even so come
Lord Jesus.

Thus you have the sinners plea. Poor Sinner* Art thou willing to return from
thy sins, fear not to go to thy God. Take thee some such words as these, and go
and tell the Lord, that one of his poor Ambassadors told thee from him, that he
expects thee before the Throne of Grace, and is ready if it be not thine own
fault, to grant thee mercy. Go, and the Lord help thee, give thee thy hearts
desire, and fulfill all thy mind, and for thy encouragement take along with thee
this Scripture, Isa. 55. 6. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye
upon him while he is near; Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him, and to our God, for be will abandantly pardon.

4. Pray in Faith, James 1. 6. But let him ask in Faith. You will here enquire;
What Faith is it that is necessary to our prevailing in prayer? I answer; Not
only the Faith mentioned by the Apostle, Heb. 11. 6. He that cemeth to God
must believe that God is; Nor only a persuasion that he is able to perform
our petitions, or that he is ready to answer those that seek him aright, nor
only a persuasion concerning prayer, that this is Gods Ordinance, appointed by
him as a means whereby we may obtain mercy from him: Though all this be
included in it, yet this is not all. The same faith is necessary to the
acceptance of our prayers, which is required to the acceptance of our persons,
That faith which gives a person interest in Christ, will alone procure the
acceptance of his prayers.

Now this faith puts forth in prayer a threefold Act.

1. It presents and offers up the prayer in the Name of Christ, Heb. 11. 4. By
faith Abel offered his Sacrifice. Faith carries our Prayers to our Mediator,
the great Master of Requests, for his hand to be put to them, without which
they will not be regarded; yea, it puts them into his hand, it says unto
Christ, Lord Jesus, take thou this prayer, what infirmities there are in it, do
thou cover; what sins thou find in them, do thou hide* Mingle thy blood
with my Sacrifice, let thine incense ascend with my offering, and thus let it
be carried before the Throne of Grace, where that it may speak for me, let thy
blood speak for it.

2. It depends and relies upon God through Christ for acceptance and
performance. It eyes and leans upon the Promise of God, which in Christ is Yea
and Amen; and setting to its seal, that God is true, upon this it stays it
self.

3. It works the heart to a confidence, or a confident persuasion, that God for
Christ's sake will hear and answer, 1 John 5. 14. This is the confidence that we
have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us: But
here consider that this confident persuasion, that God does hear and accept us,
however it ar gues an higher degree of Faith, and brings in much Peace and
Comfort to the heart; and if it be well grounded, is a good Argument that the
Lord intends to fulfill our desires; yet is it not so necessary to the
acceptance of our Prayers, but that they may be heard where this is wanting. If
the former Acts have been put forth; if there has been a presenting them in
the hands of our Mediator, joined with some little staying of our hearts upon
the Promise; though there be a great fear upon the spirit, that God does not
regard them, yet for all this they may not be rejected. I fear, says a
doubting Saint, I fear the Lord will not hear me, nor regard my prayers; there
is so much sin in them, so many weaknesses, wanderings, distr^sts, distractions,
that I much doubt whether the Holy God will ever have respect to them; but such
as they are, there I leave them, in the hands of my Advocate; I leave mine
Offering on the Altar; as poor as it is, it is the best I have; and though I
much question, whether it will be accepted, yet there I leave it, waiting what
answer the Lord will give. I doubt not but such a Prayer will be heard, and my
ground is this, as it is the justification or acceptance of our persons, so it
is in the acceptance of our duties; (...) our person, will doubt less justify
our prayers, and that weakness or wavering, which will not hinder the one, will
neither h^nder the other. Now it is universally granted, that our persons may
be justified, even when we are strongly persuaded of the contrary; and: know no
reason why the like must not be granted concerning our prayers.

I note this the rather, for the support and comfort of many of the poor
weakling servants of Christ, or such as are in a troubled or deserted estate;
who, after they have signed out their broken prayers, because their own
misgiving hearts return them a negative answer, conclude that God does so too:
my prayers are lost, the Lord does not regard them: Why, how can you tell God
does not regard them? How can I tell, why, I cannot believe; the Lord will hear
none but the P^ayers of Faith, and I cannot believe; I cannot be persuaded that
God does hear. But by what has been said you may perceive your ^^istake; you
cannot be persuaded that God hears you, therefore you do not believe? Why, you
may even then believe when you want this persuasion: Have you offered up your
Prayers in the Name of Christ? Have you committed them to his hand, to present
them to his Father, and leaving them with him, and adventuring them upon his
Interest, can you now but wait what answer the Lord will give? This is that*
Faith which will secure your Prayers from being lost.

Having thus in brief showed you what it is to pray in Faith, what remains, but
that you practice accordingly, study the Attributes of God, his Power,
Goodness, Mercy and Truth: Study Christ, his Office, Interest, Sufficiency, and
Faithfulness, study the Promises and the stability of them; let your faith set
its seal to all this, that God is good, merciful, mighty, and true: that Christ
will be faithful in his Office, that his Name is mighty with the Father, that
the Promises of God are in him, Yea and Amen. Strengthen your selves here, and
so go before the Lord: let God be in your heart, Christ be in your hand, the
Promise in your eye, when ever there is a Prayer in your mouth. Let your Prayer
be so presented, your dependence be so settled, and your confidence, as much as
may be, so raised; as before you have been directed; or whether you can attain
to this confience or no, yet do not fail of such dependence, and then see, what
a rich return your prayers will sooner or later bring down upon you:

But he that will pray without thus believing, let not that man think to
receive any thing of the Lord; and if he does get nothing, let him not lay the
blame on Prayer, as if this were an empty useless thing, but on his unbelief.
The answer, which God gives to Prayer is always this, Be it unto thee
according to thy Faith: And in this is included, Be it unto thee according to
thy unbelief.

This is the first means or help to a godly life, Prayer.

THe second special Duty I shall direct you in, is holy Meditation. And
touching this, my purpose is not to insist upon the general nature of it, but
only to give you some directions for your putting it in practice.

The directions which I shall give, shall be such as concern, 1. The matter of
it. 2. The Method.


Concerning the former, I shall reduce the chief matters to be ordinarily
meditated on to seven heads; which, as I shall afterward advise may save an
Head for a day, and so in every week you may go over the whole.

I. Head concerning God.
BEgin with him who is the beginning of all things, in whom we have our being;
in whose nature, as well as his will, is the very foundation of Religion. In
the spiritual nature of God, is the reason of our spiritual worship, his wisdom
is the reason of our submission to him, his power of our dependence on him, his
holiness of our conformity to him, his justice of our fear, his goodness of
our love, his truth of our trust, his grace of our prayers, his glory of our
praiser.

Now there are two things especially (that I may contract all into as narrow a
room as possible) which you may pitch your thoughts, and exercise your
meditations upon concerning God; Namely his Dreadfulnesse. Goodness^.


Direct. 1. In order to the bringing you to a due apprehension, and sense of
the dreadfulness of God; set before your eyes, what the Scriptures speak of the
Majesty, Glory, Omnipoten^^, Omniscience, Holiness, Severity, and Righteousness
of God. The Scriptures speak of the Name of God, as a fearful Name, Deuteronomy. 28.
58. That thou may fear this glorious and fearful Name, [the Lord thy God.]
And this dreadfulness of God, is set forth,

1 By the greatness of his power, Jer. 5. 22. Fear ye not me, says the Lord,
Will ye not tremble at my presence? Luke 12. 5.

2 By the immensity of his Nature, Psalm. 139, 7. Whither shall I go from thy
Spirit? Whither shall I flee from thy presence?

3 By the Glory of his Holiness, Exodus 15. 11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord,
who art glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders.

4 By his Justice and Severity, Hebrews 10. 31. It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the Living God. Heb. 12. 29. For our God is a consuming Fire.

Direct. 2. That you may understand, and be duly affected with the goodness of
God, confider what the Scripture speaks concerning his All Sufficiency, loving
Kindness, Mercy, Faithfulness, Patience, etc. Genesis 15. 1. Fear not Abraham, I
am thy Shield, and thy exceeding great Reward, Psalm. 36. 7, 8, 9. Thy mercy, O
Lord, is in the Heavens, and thy Faithfulness reaches unto the Clouds. How
excellent is thy loving Kindness, O God, therefore the Children of Men put
their ^ust in ^hee. They shall be abundantly satisfied with thy fatness, for
with thee is the Fountain of Life, in thy Light, we shall see Light, Psalm. 10.
5. For his anger endures but a moment; in his favor is Life, Psalm. 73. 26. My
flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion
for ever, Psalm. 91. 4. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his
wings shall thou trust, his Truth shall be thy Shield and Buckler, Psalm. 84.
11. The Lord God is a Sun and a Shield. These Scriptures set forth the Lord, as
a sufficient portion, wherein his people may be happy, and a sure refuge,
wherein they may be safe. He is a Fountain of Light, Life, Joy, Rest, Peace,
Everlasting blessedness, and Everlasting safety. He is the inheritance of the
Saints, wherein they shall be satisfied; and their defense, wherein they shall
be safe for ever.

Direct. 3. Ask thy heart these Questions.

Quest. 1. Is not this God worthy to be feared, believed in, and chosen for my
portion and trust?

Some choose riches for their portion, some pleasures, some put their trust in
worldly friends; but will it not be well with me, if I can bring my heart to
choose, and can obtain the Lord to be my friend, my refuge and my portion?

Quest. 2. Is it not good for me to draw nigh unto God?

To get acquaintance and intimacie with God, to dwell in his Presence, and to
live in the light of his Countenance; is there any life so full of true
pleasure, and satisfying delight, as to enjoy and behold the Face of God in
Righteousness?

Quest. 3. Is the Lord mine?

Is he reconciled to me, is his love and mercy made sure to me? Some are
confident the Lord is theirs, but they are mistaken. Am not I mistaken? Is the
Lord mine indeed? My God and my Portion, and my Friend indeed? If he be not,
then,

Quest. 4. How may I obtain the Lord to be mine?

What pains should I refuse? What course should I count too hard? what price
too great to lay out for such an inheritance? Oh, how happily were I provided
for, what a sufficiency had I laid up for me, for my body, for my soul, for
this life, for everlasting; were the Lord once sure to me? What shall I do to
obtain him? if he be mine, then,

Quest. 5. What shall I render to the Lord?

Oh the height, and depth, and length, and breadth of the Love and Goodness of
God to my Soul, that he should bestow himself on such a worm. It Is much that he
should give me a being in his sight; that he should give me bread, or clothes;
that he should feed me with the crumbs that fall from his Table. It Is a wonder
he should not feed me with Ashes, with Gall and Wormwood, with Fire and
Brimstone, that he has not clothed me with flames, with fury and vengeance.
It Is a wonder he should give any of his good Creatures to comfort me, his Earth
to be mine inheritance, and my portion; but that he should give himself to me,
that ever a poor Creature should be so provided for, as to feed upon his God,
to live upon his God, to possess his God for a portion; Oh, come unto me, all
ye that fear the Lord, come unto me, and I will tell you what he has done for
my Soul, He that is mighty has done for me great things, and holy is his Name.
Oh, that I could love thee more! Oh, that I could please thee, and praise thee,
and honor thee, and rejoice, and triumph, and make my boast of my God, and
speak good of thy Name while I have any being, The Lord is my portion, the
lines are fallen to me in a pleasant place, and I have a goodly heritage.

II. Head concerning Sin.
Direct. 1. EXercise your thoughts on the evil nature of sin, and consider what
the Scriptures speak, concerning, 1. The Malignity that is in Sin. 2. The Guilt
of Sin.


1. Concerning the malignity which is in sin, calling it by the name of plague,
leprosy, gangrene, poison, death, hell, enmity, treachery, rebellion,
filthiness, rottenness, vomit, etc. All which are Scripture expressions, which
also tell us, that it has made us in Gods account, fouls, beasts, dogs, swine,
serpents, vipers. devils, etc. What a Monster is sin, that must have so many,
and such names, to express the malignitie that is in it?

2. Concerning the guilt of sin, Romans 3. 19. All the World is become guilty
before God, Mat. 5. 22. Guilt has two things in it.

First, A merit of everlasting wrath. Every sinner is worthy to die, worthy to
be damned.

Secondly, An Obligation, or binding over to wrath, Act. 8. 23. For I perceive
that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity. Sinners are
bound under a curse, bound over to eternal vengeance.

Direct. 2 Consider your own particular sins, both, the special prevailing
sins of your Hearts; as ignorance, unbelief, stubbornness, obstinacy, pride,
passion, covetousness, malice, etc. And the evils of your practice, lying,
swearing, drunkenness, oppression. Reckon up as near as you can, and write
down in a Roll or Catalogue, all the several wickednesses you have been guilty
of, and can remember, together with your sins of Omission, neglects of Prayer,
Hearing, etc. your neglect of Christ, and the Gospel, etc.

Direct. 3. Ask thy heart these Questions.

Quest. 1. Am I not a sinner?

Quest. 2. Is all this which the Scriptures speak of sin, and sinners in
general, true of me.

Am I by my very nature, such a serpent, such a viper, such a dog, such a beast
in the sight of God? Is there all this enmity, and treachery, and rebellion,
rooted in my nature? Am I this guilty creature, worthy to die? Am I in this
gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity? If this be my case, oh, how can I
lift up my face in the presence of God, without shame, and blushing, and
self-loathing, and self abhorrence?

Quest. 3. Is my filth and guilt done away?

This was once my condition, is it not still? Is the Enmity slain, is my
corruption subdued; is my conscience purged, my soul washed? are my sins
pardoned, is my guilt removed? If not, then,

Quest. 4. What if this corruption should never be purged, this guilt never be
removed?

What if I should die in this case? If all this sin and this guilt, should
stand and stare me in the face, when I come to look death in the face? What if
I should appear in this woeful plight before the Judgment Seat? May I not fear
it may be so? My sin has been so long growing, and rooting in my heart; I have
stood it out so long against the Gospel, I have had so many warnings, so many
convictions, and yet mine iniquity remains unpurged, that I have reason to
fear that it may never be purged. And, Oh, what if it should not?

Quest. 5. What must I do to be saved from my sins.

I see I am in an evil and woeful case, bu^ is there no Balm in Gilead, is there
no Physician there, that can heal such a desperate disease? Is there no ransom
to be fonnd, that may redeem such a captive? Is there no blood shed, that may
cleanse me, even me from all my unrighteousness? Is not Christ exalted to be a
Prince and a Savior, to this very purpose, that he might give Repentance and
Forgiveness of Sins? Wherefore is the Gospel preached to me? Does not Christ
therein call to me, and bid me come to him and be saved? Is such an
opportunity to be slighted? Is Redemption from such a state, worth the making
after? May I obtain Redemption by Christ, whether I seek it or not? whether I
repent or not? Must I not believe or be damned, repent or perish? Is it a time
for me to delay, or linger in a matter of such importance? Awaken, O my Soul,
put away thy sloth, lay aside thy excuses, and be think thy self what thou will
do. The Lord calls thee this day, calls thee to return and repent, that thine
iniquities may be blotted out; bethink thy self what answer thou will return.
Will thou hearken, or not?

III. Head concerning Christ.
Direct. 1. FIrst, Consider what the Scriptures speak;

1. Concerning the Excellency of his Person, John 1. 14. And the Word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth: Heb. 1. 3. Who being the
brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person.

2. Concerning the Glory of the Mystery of Christ Crucified, Isa. 53.
throughout; He is despised and rejected of men; a man of Sorrows, and
acquainted with grief, and we hid as it were our faces from him. He was
despised, and we esteemed him not; Surely he has born our griefs, and carried
our sorrows, yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God. But he was
wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisements of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
All we like Sheep, have gone astray, and have turned every on to this way, and
God has laid on him the iniquities of all. He was oppressed and afflicted, yet
he opened not his mouth, Col. 1. 27. To whom God will make known what is the
riches of the Glory of this Mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you
the hope of Glory, Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. Who being in the Form of God, thought it
no robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took
upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of men; and
being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto
death, even the death of the Cross.

The Gospel is a Mystery full of wonders.

1. There is a wonder of Righteousness and Severitie; That God should not
spare, but punish Sin, though upon his own Son.

2. A Wonder of wisdom; That God should being Light out of Darkness, Life out
of Death; that God should bring about the Rising of the World, by the Fall of
the Lord; the Riches of the Word, by the Poverty of their Lord; the Fullness
of the Saints, by the emptiness of the King of Saints.

3. A Wonder of Mercy; That God should harden his Heart against the Cry of his
Son, and open his Bowels to the cry of Sinners.

4. A Wonder of Love; Love in the Father, in giving his Son; Love in the Son,
in giving himself, his blood, his life, his Soul, a Ransom for sin; and all
this, for Worms, Traitors, Enemies.

Direct. 2. Ask thy heart these Questions:

Quest. 1. Oh, what monster is sin?

What an Hell, what a bottomless pit is it, of malignity, and wickedness, that
none but God can expiate or purge it away; that God cannot do it, but by taking
flesh; that God manifested in the flesh could not purge away sin but by
suffering; that no suffering would serve but Death; that no death could serve
but such a cruel and cursed death? Oh what a Monster is Sin, that must have
such blood, the blood of God to take it away!

Quest. 2. What strange Love is the Love of Christ?

1. Strange in regard of the fruit and benefit of it: All that Holiness and
Beauty that my Spirit is clothed with, all that peace and joy that possesses
my heart, all my glorious hopes and expectations for hereafter, all that
difference that is betwixt my state and the state of Cain, Judas, and the whole
reprobate World; this is the Love of Christ. Where had I now been, had it not
been for the Love of Christ?

2. Strange Love in regard of the fervency and ardency of it; and that not
only to the whole generation of the Elect, but to my Soul in particular. To
express this, ask this one Question farther, What if Christ had done and
suffered all this for me alone? What if there had been but one Sinner in the
World, and I had been that Sinner, and Christ should have come down from
Heaven, clothed himself with flesh, giving himself to death, given such a
glorious Gospel, sent forth such a multitude of Ambassadors, to preach to, to
convert, and save this one Soul, this my Soul, this had been strange love. Such
is the love of Christ to every Elect person, that if there had been but one
Sinner, Christ would have done and suffered all this for one sinner, rather
then he should have perished.

Quest. 3. Is Christ mine?

Have I a share in the Gospel? is my name written in the Lambs Book? All are
not Israel; though Christ died for all, yet all are not made alive by him.
There are many from whom the Gospel is hid, there are many that have rejected
the Gospel, that have put from them the Word of Life. Whilst there are such
multitudes that are lost and perish for ever, is my Soul found, found in
Christ? Has he that has died for me drawn me to himself? Has he that has
given me a liberty to lay hold on him, given me a heart to lay hold on him:
Has he given me his Spirit in my heart, to sanctify and cleanse me from my
sins? If I have not the Spirit of Christ in me; I am none of his. Unless I wash
thee thou have no part with me. If he be not mine, then,

Quest. 4. What may I do to get Christ to be mine?

May I have him without seeking him? Can I live by Christ without coming to
Christ, believing, repenting and following of Christ? is this ignorance, this
idleness, is this earthly, this Carnal course I take; is this loose and vain
life I live; is this the way to get an interest in Christ? if Christ be mine,
then,

Quest. 5. How may I walk worthy of Christ?

Is it not by being made conformable to him? Conformed to his image, by being
holy, humble, and meek; Conformed to him in his obedience, cheerfully and
readily doing the Will of God? Conformed to him in his sufferings, by being
content to be brought down and laid low, and made vile for his Name; Conformed
to his Resurrection and Ascension, that this poor Soul which has descended
with Christ, may also ascend with him? Ascend in holy desires and affections,
ascend in holy praises and acknowledgements, confessing to him, Worthy is the
Lamb that wa^ slain, to receive power and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honor, and glory, and blessing, for thou have redeemed my Life from Death,
and Crowned me with loving Kindness and tender Mercies.

IV. Head, concerning the vanity and misery of a worldly life.
BY a Worldly life, understand any course or way of life, which is short of a
godly life. That which the Apostle calls, Ephesians. 2. 2. The course of this
World: Such a life, the main business, care, and delight whereof lies in the
managing our Worldly affairs and interests, in buying, selling, working,
trading to get together this worlds good. The main comfort whereof stands in
the enjoying these Earthly things, when as for Souls, and the things of another
World, little or no care is taken about them, and as little pleasure taken in
them.

Direct. 1. Consider what the Scripture speak^ concerning the vanity and misery
of such a life, Psalm. 30. 6. Surely man walks in a vain show, he is
disquieted in vain; he heapeth up riches, and knows not who shall gather
them. Matthew. 16. 26. For what is man profited, if he should gain the whole
World, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul? Jam. 5. 1. 2, 3. Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries
that shall come upon you: Your Riches are corrupted, and your garments
moth-eaten; your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat you as it were fire, ye have heaped up
treasures together for the last days. Luke 12. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. And he
spoke a parable unto them concerning a certain rich man, whose ground brought
forth very plenteously, and he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do,
because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? And he said, this I will do,
I will pull down my barns, and build greater, and there will I bestow all my
fruits: and I will say to my Soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many
years; take thine ease, eat drink, and be merry. But God said to him, Thou
fool, this night shall thy soul ^e required of thee then whose shall those
things be that thou have provided? So is he that lays up treasure for
himself, and is not rich toward God.

Direct. 2. Ask thy heart,

Quest. 1. Is not my life a worldly life?

What have I done for hereafter? What have I laid up for the World to come?
Have I been trading for Heaven, have I been trading in faith, repentance,
prayer, have I been sowing in righteteousness and mercy, following of holiness
and purity? What labor and pains have I taken in seeeking Knowledge, Grace, an
interest in Christ, reconciliation with God, etc. that it might be well with my
soul hereafter? My body is cared for, I have enough laid up for that, my Wife
and Children are all cared for, I have made sufficient provision for them, but
is not my poor soul uncared for.

Quest. 2. How long will this life and the comforts of it last.

My soul is immortal, and must never die. I must have a being some where or
other to all Eternity. Is the happiness which I have chosen and pursued an
everlasting happiness? Are my Money, and my Corn, and my Land, everlasting.

Quest. 3. What shall become of me when this life and the comforts of it fail?

Will this golden or silve^ ^^ey open the gate of Heaven to me? Will my money
buy me an inheritance in the Land of Promise? will my thriftiness and good
husbandry for this world plead for me before my Judge, or excuse my neglect of
my soul? Will the memory of my plenty, or my pleasure, or my ease, in which I
have lived here, be a comfort and refreshing to my soul hereafter? Can all my
carnal friends and companions, with whom I have lived so merrily, and spent so
many a jolly hour, can their good word stand me in stead then? Will God own me,
or Christ plead for me then? Is not this he whom I have despised, and refused
to hearken to, and will he not then say to me, Go to the Gods whom thou have
chosen. Go to thy Money, and thy pleasures, and thy companions, let these save
thee if they can. Oh what shall I do, and where shall I dwell for ever if I
continue in this vain course?

Quest. 4. Shall I now set upon a better course?

Shall I in earnest? will thou, oh my Soul, will thou now in earnest become an
adventurer for another World? A Traveller to the holy City, which is above?
Will thou cast in thy lot with Christ and the everlasting Gospel? Will thou at
last fall to labor for the true Riches, and enduring substance; Will thou
provide the bags that wax not old, a treasure in Heaven that fails not? Shall
I take this course, or shall I continue as I am?

V. Head concerning the excellency, blessedness, and necessity of a Godly Life.
Direct. 1. COnsider what the Scriptures speak concerning, The Entrance Nature
Blessedness Necessity of a godly Life,
1. Concerning the Entrance of a godly Life, or the way by which we come to be
godly; that is expressed, by being born of God, John 3. by being converted to
God, Acts 3. 19. Repent therefore and be converted; by having Christ formed
upon our hearts, Gal. 4. 19 My little children, of whom I travel in birth
again, until Christ be formed in you. A new birth must go before a new life,
conversion before an holy conversation.

2. Concerning the Nature of a Godly Life; which the Scripture sets forth in
these and such like expressions: Walking with God, walking in the fear of God,
and the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, living by Faith, having our Conversation in
Heaven, and as it becomes the Gospel, being holy, harmless; the Sons of God
without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked Generation, shining forth as lights
in the world, denying all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, living righteously,
soberly, and godly; keeping our selves unspotted from the world: walking
circumspectly, keeping a good Conscience, etc. By all which expressions, and
many such like, it appears, that there is more required to a true godly life
than is ordinarily imagined.

3. Of the Blessedness of a Godly life, Psalm. 1. 1, 2. Blessed is the man that
walks not in the way of sinners, but his delight is in the Law of the Lord,
Psalm. 4. 4. The Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself, has taken
him out from the rest of the world, to be his own peculiar possession, his
Favorite, his Servant, his Child, on whom he intends to bestow himself for an
Inheritance.

Direct. 2. Ask thy heart,

Quest. 1. Am I converted to God?

Is there any supernatural change wrought upon me? Is this change a thorough
change? Conversion is not a slight, but a great and mavelous change. Am I
become a new Creature? Is there a new light set up in me, a new life begotten
in my heart? Am I become a man of quite another constitution, temper,
disposition, then formerly I was? Am I born from above, and is my heart now set
upon things above?

Quest. 2. Is my life a godly life?

Do I think in my Conscience, that the course of life which I live, is that
which the Scriptures mean by walking with God, living by Faith; having the
conversation in Heaven, keeping a good Conscience, walking circumspectly, etc.
Can this fleshly, idle, easy, trifling, life which I live, be possibly
accounted a truly godly life?

Quest. 3. Is a godly life necessary?

Can I be saved without it? Do not the Scriptures entail everlasting
blessedness in the life to come, on godliness of life here?

Quest. 4. Can I be too godly?

Can I have too much likeness to God? too much care of my ways? too much fear
of sin* Can I be too sure that God is mine? Can I have too much peace, too much
joy, and inward comfort? I may be too rich to be happy, too great to be good,
too merry to be wise, but I cannot be too gracious, too humble, too watchful,
too circumspect! Let me ask of dying, persons, whether they have taken more
care then needs? whether they have more grace then needs? Let me ask of those
who when they come at last to be weighed in the balance, are found wanting,
whether there were any fear of making too sure, or being too busy, and
diligent, and painful about the work of their Souls?

Quest. 5. Shall I now, without any longer delay, set upon a godly Life?

If it be necessary to take up this holy course, When shall I begin? Shall I
this day resolve upon it? Can I begin too soon? Can I look after God too soon?
I may defer too long, till it be too late, and what if I should? What if I
should stay so long in Sodom, till it be too late to escape to Zoar? What if I
should dwell in the Tabernacles of Wickedness, till it be too late to return
into the way of Righteousness? Awake, O my Soul, awake from thy worldiness, and
sensuality; away from thy carelessness. To day, to day, if thou will hear his
voice, give thy self to God, give thy self up to the power of his Spirit, and
government of his Word. Hitherto I have been a fool, hitherto I have been a
Servant of Sin and the World. Oh, that from henceforth I might yield my self to
God, as one made alive from the dead.

VI. Head concerning Death and Judgment.
Direct. 1. THink on what the Scriptures speak concerning, The Dread Death of
Death.


1 Concerning the Dread of Death, Rev. 6. 8. It is set forth by a pale Horse,
an horse for strength, there is no resistance of it; an horse for its
swiftness, an horse for its office, and use, to carry away: a pale-Horse for
its ga^^^iness: Death has a grim and ghastly countenance, that strike, terror
into all hearts, and paleness into all faces Job 18. 14. It is called the King
of terrors, the Black Prince, the Prince of Clouds and Darkness, as some
render it: Darkness has its terror in it, and the King of Terrors, that
notes, the highest and most terrible of Terrors.

The terror of death arises,

1 From its Office or Errand, upon which it comes, which is,

1 To arrest the guilty sinners, and commit them to custody, to be reserved to
Judgment.

2 To revenge the quarrel of an angry God. By sin death entered: Death came
into the world, not only as the Per dissequa peccati, one of its Retinue or
Attendants, but as the vindex peccati. By sin, man provoked God; by death, God
takes vengeance on man.

3 To cut off, and carry us away to our place, Death is the door betwixt the
two worlds; the parting point, where sinners take their leave for ever of their
pomps, and their pleasures, of their Houses and Lands, and their Friends, so as
never to return to them again.

It is dreadful to be carried away from our habitations and acquaintance, we
know not whither; sad was the death of him, who dying said, Anxius vixi, dubious
motior, and nunc quo vado nescio; I have lived in care, I die in doubt, but
whither I am going, I cannot tell: but to them that understand whither death is
carrying them, (as it is the case of self-condemned sinners) into the place of
darkness and eternal misery; This is it that make Death indeed the King of
Terrors.

2 From its Armor: Death is furnished,

1 With a Dart; this notes the stroke of Death, whe^^by it dissolves this
Tabernacle, divides betwixt Soul and Body. This dart of Death is such, against
which there is no Armor of Proof can secure us; from which no quality or
condition can exempt us; neither King nor Captive, neither Rich nor Poor,
neither evil Men nor good Men, can escape this Dart: whomsoever Death strikes,
it strikes sure, and strikes home, and never fails of doing Execution.

2 With a Sting, 1 Cor. 15. 56. The sting of Death is sin. A sting does two
things, 1 It pierces, 2 It poisons. Hence follow those rumors and
inflammations, and that anguish that a sting puts men to.

But what is the sting of Death? It Is Sin. This is the Poison upon the Dart of
Death, that makes it so full of torment; an evil heart, an evil conscience, an
evil life, this is it that makes Death so terrible. A guilty Conscience often
stings a sinner, in his life, in his health, in the midst of all his
prosperity; but when Death and a guilty Conscience strike in together, then it
stings with a witness.

2 Concerning the Death of Death, or its destruction. This Enemy is to be
destroyed, Hos. 13. 14. Yea, it is in part destroyed already, 2 Timothy 1. 10.
Christ, by dying, and rising again, has overcome Death; and this not for
himself, but for his Members, on whose behalf he has disarmed Death, and taken
away its sting, so that though it strike them, yet it cannot sting them. Death
a^ an hornet has stung our Lord, and in him has lost his sting. Hereupon the
Apostle, in the persons of all Believers, triumphs over Death, 1 Cor. 15. 55,
57. O Death, where is thy sting? Thanks be to God who has given us the
Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Christians, that through Christ have
conquered sin, by the same Jesus have conquered Death; so that now it is
possible for thee to live above the fear of Death: some natural fears there may
be, some shrinkings back of the flesh, but the great fear is over, the
bitterness of Death is past.

2 Consider what the Scripture speaks concerning Judgment; Consider these two
Scriptures, 2 Cor. 5. 10. For we must all appear before the Judgement-Se^^ of
Christ, Mat. 25. 34. to the end. The^ shall the King say unto them on the right
hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you,
before the foundation of the world, etc.

Direct. 2. Ask thy heart these questions.

Quest. 1. Must I not dye?

Quest. 2, Whither will my death carry me?

In which of the two Regions of the other world, is my death like to land me?
Either in the Region of Everlasting Light, or in the Region of Everlasting
Darkness? To which of those two Regions am I now traveling? By this I may
guess, whither my death will transport me.

Quest. What a strange change will Death make upon me?

What a change of my Judgment, and Opinion? With what a different eye shall I
look on all things then, from what I do now? Shall I look on God, on Christ, on
Holiness, on peace of Conscience, with such a slighting and undervaluing eye:
or on the Glory, and Pleasures, and Lusts of the World, with such an admiring
and doting eye, when Death comes, as now I do? A godly Life, a good Conscience,
the promises and privileges, and hopes of the Gospel, I can now look on as
follies, and fancies, and trifles; shall I count them so then? Sin, and guilt,
I make a matter of nothing now; shall I have the same thoughts at death? It I
could speak with any soul, that is gotten one step beyond the Grave, and should
ask him, What do you think of sin, and the pleasures of sin now? What an answe^
might I then expect?

What a strange change will Death make upon my person? When, if I be a Saint,
this poor Soul? that has had its habitation in Meshech, has been imprisoned
in a sinful body, mourning, and sighing, and laboring under the burden of
sins, and lusts, and temptations, and doubts, and fears, and scotts, and
scorns, shall in an instant be set at liberty from all this, and be lodged in
the arms and bosom of the Lord of Glory. Or, if I be a sinner, when I shall
be taken from all my glory and greatness, from all my delights and dalliances;
from all my hopes and confidence, and be thrown down like Lucifer, Son of the
Morning, from all my brightness, into the blackness of darkness for ever.
When, though I lie down in hopes and confidence, that I shall have rest, yet
within a minute after Death has closed mine eyes, I shall awaken in
everlasting flames: How will my undone soul then cry out, Oh, where am I? Is
this my place? Must this be my dwelling for ever? Are all my hopes and
confidences come to this? Is all my mirth and my pleasures come to this? Woe,
woe, woe to me miserable Wretch; how am I deceived, whether am I fallen?

Quest. 4. How dreadful will this day of Death be to sinners, when it is come?

Whilst its only preached, or thought of at a distance, it affects but little;
but when the day of darkness is come, and they shall feel their house of Clay
falling; when their last Sand is running, their last breath drawing, their
miserable, souls lanching into the depth of Eternity; when a few minutes will
lodge them in the place of darkness, and everlasting torments; What a black day
will it appear then?

Quest. 5. On which hand am I like to stand in the Judgment?

Am I like to stand on the right hand, or on the left? Among the Sheep, or
among the Goats? On which hand do I stand now? Have I my Conversation among the
Goats, my fellowship with the Goats here, and can I expect to have my sentence
with the Sheep?

Quest. 6. What may I do to get above the fear of death, and Judgment?

How blessed is the state of those Christians, that are gotten beyond this
fear? They may well be content to bear the Cross; they may well be patient in
tribulation; they need fear none of those things they shall suffer here, their
great fear is over; Death is swallowed up in victory. But how may I, upon good
grounds, be out of this fear? How I be fit to die, and to stand in the
Judgment, and not may thence be afraid? Oh, if I could get the Sting of Death
out, this sin crucified, this guilt removed; Oh, if I could get such a Life,
over which Death can have no power; if I could get Christ to be my Life, my
Judge, to be my Friend, then welcome Death, and the Grave; welcome the Great
Day; then that black hour will become the blessed hour; then that dark and
gloomy day, at the approach whereof, this sinful world will call to the
Mountains to cover (...) and the Rocks to fall on them, would be to me a
glorious day; wherein I should lift up my head with joy, because my Redemption
is so nigh. So let me live, that I may be fit to die, and then let my Lord
com^, whenever he pleases: Yea, then I may say, Wh^^ are the wheels of his
Chariot so long a coming? Make haste, my Beloved, and be thou like to a Roe on
the Mountains of Spices.

VII. Head concerning Eternity, or the World to Come.
THere is a twofold Eternity: Of Blessedness, and of Misery: The ones the
portion of the Saints: the other, the reward of all the ungodly of the Earth.

Direct. 1. Consider what the Scriptures speak,

1. Concerning the Eternity of Blessedness; Heb. 4. 9. There remains
therefore a Rest to the People of God? Psalm. 16. ult. At thy right hand there
are pleasures for evermore, 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light affliction, which is
but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory. Whence note, that the state of the Godly in another World, is, 1. A
State of Rest. 2. A State of Joy. 3. A State of Glory. 4 That the Joy of this
Rest is unspeakable and unconceivable; Therefore called the Rest of God, the
Joy of the Lord; When a King makes a Feast, he makes a Royal Feast; When a King
gives Gifts and Favors, he gives like a King. God will save like a God, reward
like a God; such shall be the reward of the Righteous, that men shall say,
Verily he is a God that Judges, Psalm. 58 11, 5. that this Joy is Eternal, 2
Cor. 4 18. The things which are not seen, are Eternal.

2. Concerning the Eternity of Misery; Isa. 30. 33. For Tophet is ordained of
old. Tophet is a place lying in the Valley of Hinnom, near Jerusalem, where the
Idolatrous Jews burnt their Children in Sacrifice to Molock. And it is used as
a Type to signify Hell, or the place and Punishment of the Damned hereafter:
Whereof this is the Description; He has made it deep and large, the Pile
thereof is Fire and much Wood; the breath of the Lord, like a stream of
brimstone, does kindle it, Matthew. 8. 12. But the Children of the Kingdom shall
be cast into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth,
Mark 9. 44. Where their Worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.

Whence note, That the torments of the ungodly in another world shall be,

1. Intolerable. It is the wrath of the Lord that will lie upon them; the
breath of the Lord shall kindle and feed their flames. As the Lord will save
like a God, so he will punish like a God. The Wisdom, Power, Severity, and
Justice of God shall be exercised in compounding such a deadly Draught, such
exquisite Torments, that the ungodly World shall feel, that he is a God with
whom they have to do.

2. Eternal. That shall never have an end. This makes Hell to be Hell indeed, a
Pit without bottom, a night that has no day following it, a Grave from which
there is no Resurrection. Oh the height and depth, and length, and breadth of
this one word Eternity.

Direct. 2. Ask thy Heart,

Quest. 1. Who shall ascend into the Holy hill?

Shall the unclean enter in thither? Or the Ignorant, or unbelievers, or
adulterers, or drunkards? does not the Scriptures tell me who they are? Psalm
15. throughout, He that walks uprightly, and works Righteousness, and
speaks the truth in his heart; he that back-biteth not with his Tongue, nor
does evil to his Neighbor, in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, etc.
Matthew. 5. 3. to the 12. The poor in Spirit, they that mourn, the meek, they
which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, the merciful, the poor in
heart, the peacemakers. These are they that shall ascend into the Holy hill.

Quest. 2. Who shall descend into the Deep?

Rev. 20. 15. And who^oever was not found written in the Book of Life, was cast
into the lake of fire. Chap. 22. 15. For without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and
Whoremongers, and Adulterers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a
lie. 2 These. 1. 8. 9. In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power.

Quest. 3. Am I in the way to this rest of God?

Quest. 4. Is my Title to this rest sure?

Is my name written in the Book of Life? am I sealed with that Spirit of
promise, which is the earnest of my inheritance? have I gotten an assurance
that Christ is mine and Heaven is mine? is not this assurance to be had? is
there not a promise left unto me of entering into the Rest? May not this
promise, by my believing and accepting, and adventuring upon it, be made sure
to me? what mean I to sit down so quietly, short of this assurance? am I
content to leave my earthly inritance under such uncertainties, that I cannot
tell what to call my own, I cannot tell whether I have any thing or nothing? Do
I refuse any labor, cost, counsel that may secure my worldly interest? and
what is it only Heaven and everlasting glory, this is not worth the securing?

Quest. 5. What if I should fall short of this Rest?

If at last I should see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets, sit
down in the Kingdom of Heaven, and my self be thrust out? I have made
profession of Religion, I have some good will to the ways of God, born some
affection to the People of God, had some communion and fellowship with them,
had a nam^ and good opinion amongst them; I have gone to the House of God with
them, joined in Prayers, Fastings, Sacraments with them, I have attained to
some probable Evidences of Grace: But what if notwithstanding all this I should
be found at last to be short of sincerity and of true saving Grace? I have
complained often of an carthly heart, of a slothful heart, of a careless
heart, of a lingering delaying heart, I have had some motions and stirrings in
me to shake my self out of this sloth, to awaken and rouse my self out of these
delayings and triflings; I have been thinking often of taking more care and
pains; I have been wishing often for a diligent heart; I have been hoping that
it will not be thus always with me: but that one time or other I shall attain
to more life and seriousness: But what if after all this complaining, and
thinking, and wishing, and hoping it will be better, I should still run on thus
from one day to another, from one year to another, till I be surprised, and
should be taken away before I have gotten my heart to a through closing with God
in Christ?

Quest. 6. How joyful will my state be when that day comes, if I may then be
counted worthy to enter into this Rest?

When the voice shall sound in mine ears, Well done good and faithful Servant,
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, When all these filthy garments and rags
of the Flesh shall be but off, when all these bitter tears shall be wiped
a^ay, when all the clouds of darkness, doubts, fears, sorrows, afflictions
shall be blown over, when I shall be brought into the presence of the King of
Saints, and see all those glorious things that have been spoken of the city of
God: When mine head shall wear that Immortal Crown, and my heart shall taste
and drink of those everlasting pleasures at Gods right hand: When I shall be
brought into that general assembly, and Church of the firstborn which are
written in Heaven, to an innumerable company of Angels, to God the Judge of all
men, to Jesus the Mediator of the New Testament, to the Spirits of just men
made perfect; when my heart shall acknowledge, Now I know indeed whom I have
believed, and see for what I have labored: When this poor Soul, that in its
travel toward Sion has passed through a Wilderness, lain among the Pots, been
fed with Tears, clothed with Reproaches, clogged with Infirmities, discouraged
with fears and dismayings, shall after all this be set down in the Kingdom of
God, and be lodged in the arms and bosom of the Lord of Glory, and bear a
part in those everlasting praises and Hallelujahs before the Throne of God for
ever, when mine eyes shall come to see all this, and my heart to possess it,
will it not be a joyful day?

Quest. 7. Can mine heart endure to think of being shut out from this
blessedness forever?

Can I burn? Can I endure the vengeance of Eternal fire? Will boiling Oil,
burning Brimstone, scalding Lead, a glowing Oven, a scorching Furnace, be an
easy Lodging for me? Thou will not (oh my soul) be persuaded to repent, there
is too much pain in that: Thou can not bear a cross, or an affliction, a
scoff, or a reproach, talk to thee of crucifying the flesh, of denying thy
self, of parting with thy fleshly Insts, thy worldly companions, of entering in
at the strait gate, of walking strictly and precisely according to the Gospel,
thou cryest out, Oh these are hard sayings who can bear them? But how will thou
do to dwell with the devouring fire? How will thou dwell with everlasting
burnings? Whatsoever it seems to thee now, think what Hell will be to thee when
the day comes that thou must descend into it: Now thou look at it as a
scarecrow, or a bug-bare; thou can drink away, or laugh away the fear of it;
but what will it be to thee, when thou feel thy self wrapped up in the flames
of it, and not a drop of water left to cool thy tongue? Think on Hell, oh my
soul, and then think on Christ, and confider, if a Redeemer from such misery,
be not worth the accepting; think on Hell, and then think on Sin, then think on
thy carnal pleasures and delights, and consider how they will relish with thee,
when thus salted with everlasting fire. Are these the things, for which I dye?
Are these the price for which I sell my soul to Hell? Away, away from me all my
lusts and pleasures, away from me my companions in sin, I confess I love you
too well, but I must not burn for you, I must not damn my soul to please my
flesh.

Touching the practice of this Duty, take these two further Directions.

1. Every day, morning and evening; set apart sometime for secret prayer; and
when you go to pray, do not rush inconsiderately upon it, but first sit down
and take one of those Heads, meditate on what the Scriptures speak upon them,
and then propose the several questions to your hearts, and when you find your
hearts affected and warmed by these Meditations, then fall to prayer.

2. Let each mornings Meditation be ordinarily matter for your thoughts, to
work on, and for discourse that day, unless providence cast in, and calls you
to some other profitable subjects.

The matter of Meditation is purposely divided into seven Heads, to the end you
may take one of the Heads for each days Meditation, and so in every week you
may go over the whole, being the chief things of Religion: And thus continuing
from day to day, from week to week, you will be both more thoroughly acquainted;
and more deeply affected with the things of God, and will find, through his
blessing, more liveliness and enlargement in Prayer, and more comfortable
success.

Only take heed of formalitie, of resting in the work done, of going on in a
round of Duty, without a due regard to the end of Duty: Let this be your aim in
all, to get your hearts more fixed upon, and affected with the things of the
world to come, more enlarged and quickened, and more effectually carried on in
that course of holy and heavenly walking, the end whereof is everlasting life.

But now, least any should complain that this course is too tedious, and that
which they cannot have time daily for; or that by reason of ignorance, or want
of helps, they cannot perform it: I shall add this, that such persons who are
weaker in their understandings, and thence unable to go through with this
course, and all others at such seasons as they are unavoidably straightened for
time, nay, instead of the larger, take this shorter course.

When ever thou set upon the Duty of prayer, sit down, and ask thy heart
these Questions.

Quest. 1. What am I? am I a Believer or an unbeliever, converted or
unconverted? do I think in my Conscience I belong to God, or do I not fear I am
yet the child of the Devil?

Quest. 2. What do I? what are my ways, are they such as please the Lord, and
tend to the Salvation of my Soul, or are they the ways of death and damnation?

Quest. 3. Before whose presence do I now stand?

Is it not before the Lord, the Almighty God, who is the rewarder of them that
diligently seek him, and the avenger of those that slight or rebel against him?

Quest. 4. What am I come before the Lord about.

Is it not to plead with him for my soul, to beg my life at his hands, to beg
my pardon, and redemption from everlasting death, and to obtain grace for the
salvation of my Soul?

This short and (...) course would be some advantage, thou (...) that are able,
and can redeem so much (...) would commend the constant use of (...) ^rections

THe third special Duty I shall direct you in is, Self-examination:

It is of great use to the carrying us on in an holy course, to know our state.
For,

By the knowledge of our state we shall the better know our work, when we know
what we are, we shall the better know what we have to do. If the question be,
What must I do to be saved? The answer of that will depend upon another
question, How far forth am I come already? Am I converted or unconverted, in a
state of sin, or in a state of grace? Let that question be first answered, and
the answer of the other will be easy.

2 By the knowledge of this, that we are in a good estate, we shall have much
encouragement to hasten on. Assurance will quicken and encourage us on in the
way of holiness: Those that a^firm, that the Doctrine of assurance is a
licentious Doctrine, and serves for nothing, but to maintain men in a loose,
lazy, and idle life, understand not what they say, nor whereof they affirm.
It Is all one as if they affirmed. That the more assurance any person has of
the love of God, the less he will love God, or that the more he loves God, the
less care he will take to serve or please him. Those that know no other motive
to Duty, but fear, may preach such Doctrine; but those that have found the
quickening and constraining power of love, must lay down both their reason and
sense too, before they can believe it.

The way to know our selves, is, to search, and examine our selves, 1 Cor. 13.
4. Examine your selves, prove your selves, know ye not your own selves?

Now to help you in this duty of Self-examination, I shall give you these two
Directions:

1. When you set to examine your selves by any marks or signs: In the first
place, examine your Marks that you would try your selves by. If you would prove
your selves, whether you have true grace or no, by any mark that is given,
examine that Mark by the Scriptures, whether it be a certain and infallible
sign of grace, so that you may be bold to conclude, that if you can find this
Mark in you, you are undoubtedly in the state of grace. That Is a proper mark of
true grace, which, whosoever has it, has grace, and whosoever has it not,
has not grace. If you take that for a mark of true grace, which is common to
Saints and Sinners, you may take your selves to have grace, when you have none.
And if you take a mark to try your selves by, which is proper to Saints, but is
not common to all Saints, you may take your selves to have no grace, when you
have. The former mistake may lose you your peace; this may lose you your souls;
therefore Christians, be wary here; try your marks, before you try your selves
by them.

2. For the matter of your enquiry, let it be,

1. Whether you are gotten into the way of life, or not; or, whether you are
translated out of a state of sin and death, into a state of grace and
salvation? And if so, then,

2. Whether you be in a thriving or flourishing state; or in a languishing or
decayed state?

To help you in the former trial, I might only send you back to those
directions formerly given, concerning your closure with Christ, whence it will
not be difficult to gather some certain marks to try your selves by; but I
shall add two or three more, wherein, let it not be offensive to any, that I
follow that light which I have received from the worthy labors of that
faithful Servant of Christ, Mr. Baxter; whence I confess my self to have,
through mercy, grown into the fuller acquaintance with mine own heart, and
which I shall therefore the rather make use of, for the help and benefit of
others.

1. Mark.
1. Wheresoever there is true Grace, there is an hearty willingness to part
with every sin.

The first work of the sanctifying Spirit upon the soul, is, the discovering of
sin, making it appear to be an enemy; and the first saving work is, the
dividing betwixt sin and the soul, making an utter breach betwixt them. The
Spirit of God makes us first to look on sin as an enemy, and then to deal with
it as an enemy; to hate it, to fear it, to be impatient at the presence of it.
Romans 7. 24. Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? When the good Spirit enters into the heart, from that day forward, the
Soul looks on sin, as Saul looked on David, when the evil spirit fell upon him;
It Is said, he eyed David from that time forward, he looked on him with an evil
eye, with an envious eye: Oh! that I were once well rid of this David; Oh!
(says a Convert) that I were once well rid of this Lust. It Is now become to
the Soul, as the Daughters of Heth were to Rebeccah, Genesis 26. 35. A grief of
mind to it, a weariness to it. I am weary of my life, because of these
daughters of Heth.

When there is this breach made betwixt sin and the Soul, it is grace that has
made it; when sin has lost the will, it has lost the man; when Christ has
gotten the will, he has gained the man. The will, is the heart; give me thy
heart, is the same, as be willing to be mine; the will is the strong hold of
the soul; this is it that holds out last against God; when this is won, all is
won. Sin may have lost the understanding, and lost the conscience; these may
plead for God, and for holiness, and may cry out against sin, Away with it,
away with it; Crucify it, crucify it; there is Death and Hell in the bowels
of it, away with it. But as long as sin has the will for it, it still has the
man. Reason says, I ought to tura; Conscience says, I must turn, but yet
nothing follows; but when the heart says, I will turn, then the work is done:
Reason says, these Idols ought not to stand; Conseience says, these Iusts
must be subdued; these my sinful pleasures, these my sinful ways, these my
sinful companions, must be left; but when the will says to them, Get you
hence, there is a work of Grace begun.

But now this willingness to part with, or turn from sin, that it may
infallibly prove grace to be in us, must be,

1. Universal. A willingness to be rid of all sin. The enmity against sin,
that is wrought by grace, is against the whole kind, against all sin, Root and
Branch, Body and Members. A true Israelite, would not have one Canaanite left
in the Land, would have the whole generation rooted out, Psalm. 119. I hate
every false way. Psalm. 139. Search me, O Lord and see if there be (any)
wickedness in me.

2. Habitual. It must not be only for the time that the heart is set against
sin, when it is under some terror or trouble, but there must be an abiding
willingness. Pharaoh, when the Thunder, and the Hail, and the Fire, and the
Frogs, and the Flies, were upon him, for the time was willing to let Israel go,
but presenrly after he meant no such thing: It Is not what thou art in a fit, in
a fright, or sudden passion, in sickness, or under the apprehensions of death,
that will give thee any certain light, by which thou may judge of thy state,
but what thou art in the standing and abiding disposition and bent of thy soul:
A Godly man is never unwilling (when he is himself) to be rid of every sin.

3. Prevalent. The willingness must be greater than the unwillingness. A
gracious heart is more willing to be rid of sin, than to continue in sin. He
had much rather, if it were put to his choice, live without all sin, than to be
allowed to live in any sin. Whatever the pleadings and reasonings of his flesh
are, for an indulgence to any particular sins, whatever the advantages of
yielding to the flesh herein might be, whatever damages or prejudices might
follow upon his parting with them, yet he had much rather, whatever comes of
it, be freed from them all. If the Lord should come to such a soul, and give
him as large ^grant as he did to Solomon, Ask what I shall give thee, ask what
I shall do for thee, write down what thou will, and thou shall have it; this is
that which he would have, Lord take away mine iniquittes. It Is not the lives of
mine enemies, or a revenge upon them, that I desire; it is not freedom from
trouble, or affliction, that I desire; make me a clean heart, O Lord, purge me
from my sins, let my lusts die, my corruptions die, and then though mine
enemies live, and their malice lives, and my troubles live, yet if my sins be
once dead, I have my desire.

And this willingness will discover it self to be prevailing by bringing forth,
1. Resolution. 2. Resistance against sin.


1. Where a man is truly willing to be rid of sin, there will be resolution
against it; he will not only be patient and content to give God leave to
crucify all his beloved lusts, and darling corruptions, and give the world
leave to hew and strike home at the root of them, without hiding them, or
warding off the blow, or wishing they might be spared to him, but stands
steadfastly on Gods side, and taking part with him against sin, resolves to use
all his means for the conquering and overcoming of them.

2. This resolution will bring forth resistance. An heart that is weary of sin,
will fall to striving against sin, Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, for these two are contrary the one to
the other. Contraries are naturally expulsive each of other. Such a pair as a
Jacob and an Esau, such Twins, as an Isaac, and an Ishmael, cannot lie quietly
togeth^^ in the same womb; no, nor live quietly together in the same house, but
there will be a mutual prosecuting and persecuting each of other; fire and
water may as well agree in the same vessel, as grace and sin in the same heart.
A gracious heart will be restraining, curbing, and withstanding it, in all its
workings. It Is a mere vanity, for men to talk of being willing to be rid of
sin, when they let it live, and work, and rule, and run in its course, without
ever laying the hand to the bridle to restrain it.

Let me add one word more; if you strive against sin, and your striving be
attended with success; if you have gotten any degree of victory, the evidence
will be much more full and clear.

This now is the first Mark, by which you may try your selves, whether there be
the truth of grace in you, or not.

He that is willing to be freed from all sin, habitually willing, prevailingly
willing; he that is more willing to be freed from sin, than to be allowed to
live in sin, and hereupon is resolved to use all God's means for the conquering
of it; and accordingly strives, prays, watches, and wrestles against it,
especially if he finds his lusts begin to fall before him, undoubtedly there is
grace in that man's heart. As Haman's Wife said to her Husband, If this Mordecai
be of the seed of the J^ws, before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not
prevail against him; I shall be bold to say to such a person, without any ifs
or ands, this Mordecai is of the seed of the Jews, this grace, before which thy
lusts have begun to fall, is the Seed of God, and therefore thy sins shall
never totally preval against it; but shall finally fall and be destroyed by it.

2. Mark.
2. Wheresoever there is true grace, there is a preferring in the esteem and
choice of a strict and sincere godly life, above any other life in the world.

A godly man loves all godliness, and he loves it above all. Psalm. 19. 9, 10.
The fear of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever, the Judgments of the Lord
are true and righteous altogether; more to be desired are they than gold, yea,
than much fine gold, sweeter also than the honey and the honeycomb; that is,
than all the world: more to be desired are they; that is, the fear of the Lord,
and the Judgments of God deserve more respect from men, are of more value,
more worth the desiring and looking after, than gold or honey; Here are all the
advantages of a worldly life put together in two words; The profits of it, and
the pleasures of it; and the fear of the Lord preferred before them all. ( Than
Gold) Gold is all things; Gold, much gold has greatness following it: Gold
has glory, all the glory of the world attending it: Lands, and livings, and
honors, and friends, and all things that a carnal heart can desire, are hidden
in the golden Mines. Honey notes all the sweetness, pleasures, and delights of
a worldly life. Now, says the Psalmist: put all this together, all the
revenues, and incomes of a worldly life, together with all it is pleasures and
delights, and the fear of the Lord will weigh them down all. Though this
foolish world run a madding after money, and pleasure, spend their days, waste
their lives, prostitute their consciences, throw away their souls upon these
things, yet one dram of godliness, one day spent in the fear of the Lord, is
better than all this: this the Psalmist gives as his Judgment.

Let us next consider what his Choice is: Psalm. 4. 6. There be many that say,
who will show us any good? Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon
us; thou have put gladness in mine heart, more than in the time when their corn
and wine increased. Psalm. 17. 14, 15. The men of the world have their portion
in this life, their bellies thou fillest with thy hid treasure; they are full
of Children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes: but as for
me, I will behold thy face in Righteousness. The men of this world; as they
seek, so they have their portion in this life, they have a glorious and a
gallant time of it here, great portions, great possessions, great prosperity;
their bellies full of pleasure, enough to spend upon themselves, and to leave
to their Children after them; this they have, and much good may it do them: Let
me but behold the face of God in Righteousness, walk before the Lord in my
integrity, keep a good conscience, live in the obedience of his Will, and in
the light of his Countenance, and then let them take the corn, and wine, and
what else they can get: let the Lord be mine, and I shall never envy them their
portion: Psalm. 84. 10. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the House of the Lord,
than to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness. The meanest condition of those that
live in the presence and favor of God, I more desire, and would rather have,
than the highest condition of others. Let me be a doorkeeper among the Saints,
rather than a dweller with the wicked. So Moses, Heb. 11. 25. Choosing rather to
suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season; esteeming the Reproaches of Christ greater Riches than the
Treasures of Egypt. Psalm. 119. 30. 111. I have chosen the way of Truth, etc.
Thy testimonies have I taken as mine heritage for ever. Where observe,

1. How he came into the way of Truth: that is, not by chance, but by choice; I
have chosen the way of truth. There are some that stumble in upon Religion, who
being cast into such places or societies, where Godliness is in fashion and
credit, join in to do as others do, and yet their hearts have never chosen
Religion: but I have chosen the way of truth, says the Psalmist.

2. What it is he chose of Religion; The way of Truth, the Testimonies or
Precepts of the Lord. Some there are that have chosen the wages of
Righteousness, but not the way of Righteousness, the Promises, but not the
Precepts of the Lord; as much as you will of the sweet, but none of the sweat
of Religion: But I (says he) have chosen the way of Truth.

3. What account he has of what he has chosen; He accounts it as his
heritage. There be some that choose Religion, but it is only for a covering, or
a cloak to hid their wickedness, making the same use of it, which a Whore does
of her paint, to hide the deformity that is under. Others take up Religion for
their last Refuge; something they must have, to which they may have recourse at
last; but they will not have much to do with it, nor take much pleasure in it
at present: But he chooses it, not only as his Refuge, bur as his Riches, not
only to be the ground of his future hopes, but to be the matter of his present
joy.

From all these Scriptures, observe,

1. That a godly man's settled Judgment is, That a godly life is the best and
happiest life.

2. That a godly man's choice is according to his Judgment. He esteems the fear
of the Lord above Gold, and he chooses it before gold; He is better pleased,
and does rather take up with the meanest, and most afflicted condition, in a
way of holiness, than with the most plentiful, and prosperous estate, in a way
of sin; he prefers the poverty of Christ, before the riches of the World.

3. Godly men and worldly men are distinguished, and may be known the one from
the other, by their choice they make for themselves. He that makes a worldly
choice, is a worldly man; and he is a godly man that makes a godly choice. Take
Godliness with all its inconveniences, with all its difficulties and
distresses, when it is most under a cloud of reproach and contempt, and take a
worldly life with all its advantages, preferments, pleasures, in its greatest
Sunshine of outward prosperity and glory: And he is not a godly man, he is not
of the Psalmist's Spirit, that is not able to say, Give me this poor despised,
godly life, before the most flourishing life of worldlings.

3. Mark.
3. Whosoever has true Grace, does actually live a godly life.

The tree is best known by its fruits, the sincerity of our purposes, by our
performances. If you think you have chosen a godly life, and yet do not live a
godly life, it is a sign you are mistaken, and have not sincerely chosen it. 1
John 3. 7, 10. He that does righteousness is righteous; he that does not
righteousnese is not of God.

There is a twofold Righteousness, and there is a twofold doing Righteousness.

First, There is a twofold Righteousness. Righteousness is taken,

1. In a strict sense for Justice, properly so called, which stands in the due
observation of that Rule, Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, do
you even so to them.

2. In a larger sense for Holiness, or an universal rectitude of all our
actions. To live according to our Rule, the whole Word of God, is, to live
righteously. In this Scripture it is taken in this latter and larger sense; He
who carries himself holily and unblameably, both in the things pertaining to
God, and also in the things pertaining to men, he does righteosness.

Secondly, There is a twofold doing Righteousness.

1. In a Legal sense, which stands in an exact obeying and fulfilling the Law.
And thus there is none righteous, no not one; because thus, there is none that
does righteousness.

2. In an Evangelical sense: A walking uprightly according to the Truth of the
Gospel: A sincere endeavor to observe all things which the Lord has commanded
us.

For the further clearing whereof, I must make use of a twofold distinction.

1. I must distinguish betwixt a single good action, and a series of good
actions. It is not one, or a few single good actions, but a continued course of
holy actions, that denominates us holy. As there is no man so holy, who does
not sometimes fall into sin; so there are few men so wicked, who do not
sometimes fall in with that which is good, and as every sin which a godly man,
through infirmity, falls into, does not presently denominate him ungodly; so
neither will a few good actions done by another man prove him godly. It Is what
the course and tenor of the life, that must be diligently observed. A godly
man makes godliness the business of his Life. Religion is a Christians trade,
and you may well call it his trade upon a double account.

1. It is his living and livelihood; men live upon their trades, a man's trade
is his maintenance, his bread, and his clothes, and his lodging, all comes in
from his trade: Godliness is a Christians whole living, he prays, and he lives
by praying; he believes, and he lives by faith; he loves, and he lives by love;
all the supports, succors, comforts of this life, come in this way. A
Christians livelihood is all laid up in Christ, and in the exercises of
godliness, he gets it down into his Soul: Take away from a Christian his
Religion, take away Faith and Prayer, and Hope and Love, and the Labors and
Exercises of them, and you leave him a poor man indeed; take away his house,
and his means, and yet he lives; take away his bread, and yet he lives; but
take Faith, and Hope, and Prayer, etc. from him, and he dies.

2. Godliness is the business of his life: A man's trade is his constant work;
not the exercise of now and then a day, or an hour, upon occasion, but it is
his every days work. Godliness, as it is a Christians daily bread, so it is
his daily work. Judge not thy self by what thou art in some few Holy days of
thy life, when perhaps by falling into affliction, or into some good society,
or being present at some good Duty, or Ordinance, thou seem for a fit, to be
another man than thou art at other times. Judge not thy self to be what thou
art, when thou art not thy self, when thou art but in a fit: but see what the
trade and ordinary way of thy life is; he that in his ordinary course does
righteousness, he is righteous.

2. I must distinguish betwixt a Christians actions, and his care about his
actions: the Holy actions of some that are really Godly, especially of young
beginners, may be but few, in comparison, but their care is more continued:
what the Apostle says of unmarried persons, is true of all Christians; every
soul that is married to the Lord, cares how to please his Husband: though I do
nor say, that all carelessness does conclude we have no grace; yet this I say,
it is more than careless Christians can tell, whether they have any grace or
no, though such may have grace, yet they can have no assurance. He that finds
that the great care of his life is how to please the Lord, is of God.

Try your selves by this Mark also: do not enquire only about your affections,
what your desires are, or what your joys are, what your comforts are, or what
your peace is, but what your paths are: when all comes to all, this is the
surest mark, He that does Righteousness is Righteous, he that does not
Righteousness, is not of God.

Put all these together, and whosoever there is of you that is thus willing to
part with sin, does thus esteem, and has thus chosen a godly life above all
other lives; and has this attested by his actual care in his ordinary course
to please God, Oh! be thankful, and bless God for ever: there is that work of
Grace begun in thy soul, that does undoubtedly prove thee to be of God, and in
the State of Salvation.

Having faithfully tried your selves by these certain and infallible marks, and
proved your selves to be in the state of Grace, (for I would advise you, to
bring your trial to a clear judgment) then proceed in the next place to examine;

2. Whether you be in a thriving and flourishing estate or no? whether you have
made a comfortable progress in holiness? or whether you be at a stand, or
behind hand?

To help you in this, I shall only give you these two or three short directions:

1. Compare your selves with your selves; your present state with your former
state: Look back and consider what you were, or have been at any time since you
first believed, and then see what ground you have gotten or lost.

2. Compare your state with your time that you have had, and your means, and
opportunities, and the several talents that you have received. See if your
stature in grace be answerable to your standing, if you are of seven, or ten,
or twenty years standing in the Vineyard of the Lord, consider* if you also be
of so many years growth; See if your reckonings you have to bring in be
answerable to your receipts; If you have been of long standing, and yet are but
little of stature; if your knowledge be as little, your faith as weak, your
love as cold, your peace, your comforts as uncertain, your corruptions as many
and mighty as they have been many years since, much more if the waters of grace
and peace run lower now than they did heretofore, you may conclude your selves
to be but in a poor case, and indeed to be out of case.

3. Compare your selves with the best of other Christians, to whom you have
been equal in time, and other circumstances. See if you have kept pace with the
best of your time. If you see your selves behind your company, much more if you
see diverse that have set forth after you, to have outrun you, and gotten much
before you: If you see Christians of less time, of less parts, that have had
fewer helps, greater hindrances, to have gotten the start of you: if those
that have been but a few hours in the field are returning home laden with the
sheaves they have gotten, and you that have been there all the day, have gotten
only a few poor^handfuls, you will have no reason to think it over-well with
you.

Christians, you, whose case this is, a barren and unthriving case: Oh! labor
to see it, and to lament it, and to acknowledge it; I confess it is even thus
with me, I confess this is my case; if it be, bewail it, mourn over your
neglects, and bemoan your poverty: If you had had a great trade in the world,
and a good stock, and good markets, and should trade and trade from time to
time and never prosper, but be poor and low, when you see others of the same
trade to flourish and grow rich, how near would it go to your hearts?
Christianity is a good trade, Grace is a good stock, the Ordinances of God,
under which you have lived, have been good Markets, many that have set up long
since you did, are grown rich, rich in grace, rich in comfort, rich in good
Fruits, and yet that you should still be so poor, and behind hand, this is
lamentable: And oh! lament over it, and consider, that it is time for you now
at length to look better to your selves.

That you may get into a better case, examine a little farther, what it is that
has hindered your thriving, and kept you back: Some of these following
hindrances, which I shall name in a word to you; some one, or more of them,
it is very likely, have kept you thus back. Either,

1. A slight and overly performance of Holy Duties: Duties have a great
influence upon the state of our Hearts and Lives. Look what Christians are in
their secret duties, you shall find them much after the same rate in their
ordinary course; if you see a Professor that is dead and barren, and careless,
and unsavory in his life, follow him into his Closet, and you shall (ten to
one) find him as slight, and dead, and heedless in his Prayers; and those that
shift over their duties, will but shuffle in their conversations. Try if this
be not your case. Or,

2. Unprofitable Converse with Christian Friends. The Communion of Saints
should be improved to the edification of Saints. Christians should find other
matters to talk of, than of their Corn and Cattle, the Weather, or News; What?
have you not a God, nor a Christ, nor a Soul to be minding each other of? Never
a word of your Country whither you are Traveling? We should come together, to
get light from each others Candle, to get warmth from each others fire: If you
squander away such opportunities, no wonder if you remain dark and cold:
Examine if you be not faulty here. Or,

3. Unnecessary Converse with Carnal Friends. Frothy and Unsavory Company
leaves a chill, and a damp, and a vanity upon our Spirits. It is not for
nothing that Christ requires his Disciples, to forsake all the world, Father
and Mother, Son and Daughter, much more such carnal friends as are at a greater
distance; if we cannot forget these, they will quickly help us to forget our
God, and our selves.

Yet Religion does not teach us to be unnatural, or uncivil, it requires that
we give to all their dues, friendship to whom friendship, courtesy to whom
courtesy; and duty to whom duty belongs; but this it teaches, that we do not
unnecessarily converse with those, whose society we may avoid, nor unwaily with
those whom we may not avoid. With whom soever your dwelling be, let your
delight be in the Saints: if God cast you among others, let them he your fear,
rather than your familiars; and keep suce a due distance, as may neither hinder
you in your duties to them, nor prejudice you in your duty to God; examine how
it has been with you upon this account. Or,

4. Over-busying your selves about the affairs of this life. It may be, you
find so much work to do abroad, that you let all lie at random within. It may
be, the reason why your hearts are so cold, is, because you have so many Irons
in the fire, you have so many fields to look to, that your garden is all
overrun with weeds: Or,

5. The remaining guilt of some unrepented sin, Israel cannot prosper whilst
there is an accursed thing in the Camp. Or else,

6. Some unmortified lust that you live under the power of, and yet, it may be,
take no notice of. You have, it may be, a proud heart, or an angry, fretful
heart, or an envious, revengeful heart, and this may be it that makes you pine
away. An unmortified lust in the heart, is like a moth in the Garment, that
eats out the strength, and marrs the beauty of it. Pride in the heart, is as
proud flesh in a wound, whatever medicines be used, the wound remains uncured,
till the proud flesh be taken off. An angry, fretful heart, is like a Wolf in
the breast, whatever be applied, it will prey upon and devour it, and the body
pine away, till the fretting humor be cured. And so any other prevailing lust
will have the same effect. As a man in a Consumption, that is wasted to skin and
bone, whatever cordials, or restoratives he takes, his flesh will never be
gotten up, his strength will never return, till the corroding Rheum be staid.
If there be any prevailing lust in thy soul, especially if thou indulgest to
it, in vain shall thou use many Medicines, for thou shall not be cured, till
that lust be subdued. Thou may pray, and fast, and complain all thy life
long, of thy deadness, and barrenness, and languishing state, and yet still be
pining away, whilst there is any iniquity that thy heart gives indulgence to.
Search diligently, and see if this be not thy case.

7. Slothfulness. The field of the sluggard is a barren field. He that will not
plough, nor sow, nor weed, nor watch, nor work in his field, is like to have
but a poor crop, Prove. 24. 30.

8. Contentedness with thy poor, and low, and barren state. Some that are born
poor, live all their days, and take up with their poor state, and never look
after riches. For ought thou know, thy heart might have been in much better
case, if thou had intended riches. It Is the covetous Christian, that is the
rich Christian. As it is with worldly men, the Covetous of the earth, these are
the rich men of the earth, these are the monied men, the landed men, that have
laid house to house, field to field: and it may be, if thou had been
spiritually covetous, thou might have laid grace to grace, comfort to
comfort, and have been a man of great possessions before this day: but thou
have been a narrow-hearted, poor-spirited creature, that never had any
ambition, not tookest up any design to grow great and rich toward God; and
hereupon it is that thou art as thou art.

Christian, though there be none of the former causes mentioned, but may have
an hand in bringing poverty upon thee, or holding thee under it; yet, it may
be, this last, a contentedness with a little grace, is that to which thou owe
most of thy pining disease. This is too common a case with Christians. We have
not large hearts toward God, we are not covetous after holiness, we are too
well contented to be Babes in Christ, to be children in the grace and knowledge
of God; where shall we find a Christian almost, that is resolved to be rich; to
seek great things for himself, the great things of Eternity I mean, to bring
forth much fruit. It is no wonder there are so many barren sheep in Christ's
Fold, so many barren fig trees in Christ's Vineyard, so many starveling souls
among the Professors of Religion; when there are so few that do seriously
design fruitfulness. We might have been as those sheep which Solomon mentions,
to resemble the Church by, Cant. 6. 6. Whereof every one bears Twins; we
might have gotten double to what we have done, if we had had a mind in earnest
to it.

Brethren, Consider how it is with you, and if you find this to be your case,
that your souls are in an unthtiving state, search narrowly if some of the
forementioned particulars be not those that have kept you back; and when you
have found out the cause of your disease, rest not till it be removed; for be
ye well assured, That that which has hindered, will hinder, till it be taken
out of the way.

THe fourth and last Special Duty I shall direct you in, is, the Renewing of
your Covenant: Wherein, before I give you the Directions, I shall premise,

1. That every sincere Christian is (as has been before showed) entered into
Covenant with God.

2. That Christians are guilty of much treachery and false-dealing with God.
They break Covenant daily. The Lord may take up that complaint against many of
us, which he took up against Israel, Psalm. 78. 36, 37. Nevertheless they did
flatter him with their mouth, and lied unto him in their tongue; their heart
was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in the Covenant.

There is a double falsehood in the Covenant, which we may be guilty of.

1. There is a falsehood in our entering into Covenant; when we do it not
heartily, but feignedly, when our promises to God are nothing but words; when
we mean not, nor intend any such thing as our mouth speaks; this is lying unto
God. They lied to him in their Tongues. Oh! how many such liars are there to be
found amongst those that are called Christians! We have all covenanted to
renounce the world, and the love of it, to renounce the flesh, and the lusts of
it, to renounce the Devil and his works. We have all Covenanted, to take the
Lord to be our God, to cleave to him, obey and serve him only, and all our
days. All this we have done in our Baptism, and in our profession that we have
since made, to stand to our Baptismal Covenant. But have we not, many of us,
lied unto the Lord Has there ever been any such thing in our hearts? Those
that are false in this Foundation of their Christianity, are but false
Christians; those that have lied unto God in their Covenants, are but lying
Converts.

2. There is a falsehood in our keeping Covenant; when, whatever reality there
has been in our intention, yet we fail in execution; when we do not stand to
our word, nor are steadfast in our Covenant, and every part thereof. And thus
every Christian is more or less guilty. Every sin we commit, is, in a degree, a
breaking Covenant, a departing and going back from the Lord, and a dealing
treacherously with the most high. Oh! how much falsehood of this kind is there
to be found in every one of us, when some of our hearts are so set upon the
world, and take so much liberty in pursuing, and so much pleasure in the
enjoying of these earthly things, that the Lord is the less regarded and looked
after. Is this according to our Covenant? When there is such fleshliness and
sensuality to be found amongst others, when we live such idle, easy, careless
lives; when our appetires, our passions, our tongues are left so much at their
liberty; when there is so much provision made for the flesh, and so little for
the soul; Is this according to our Covenant? Is this all we meant, in promising
to be Christians? Is this our living to God, our living to Christ? Oh! what
falsehood have we been guilty of!

3. That all our breaches of Covenant, do exceedingly weaken the bond and
obligation of the Covenant. The obligation of the Covenant may be said to be
weakened in a double sense.

1. Really, when the tie of it is relaxed and loosened, and we cease to be so
strongly bound as before; and thus no sin can weaken our Covenant-obligation;
it does not become ever the less our duty, to cleave unto God, for that we have
so often departed from him, or ever the less our sin, to follow the world, for
that we have followed it so long. Our sins, in this sense do rather add to the
obligation, by how much the less we have paid off our debt, by so much the more
there is behind; Our former neglects do oblige us to the more care for the
future.

2. Sensibly. When the bond of the Covenant being so often broken, is not now
accounted so solemn or so sacred as before; by how much the more it has been
broken, by so much the less sensible hold has it upon us. It seems but a
very light thing to persons that have so often and ordinarily broken their
Faith with God, to break it over and over again; It does not much affect or
trouble such hearts which have been accustomed to transgress, to revolt more
and more. When sin can plead prescription, it grows bold. If I were to begin
again (says the sinner) I would take more ear, and look better to my ways;
but over shoes over boots, now I have gone on so long, it will not be much
worse if I go on a little longer.

4. The Renewing of our Covenant, will revive the Obligation of it. Though
there be not a stricter, yet there is another Tie; There is a new link added to
the old cord. Men are more afraid and ashamed to break their word as soon as it
is gone forth out of their mouths. The seriousness wherewith such a sacred duty
should be performed, will leave some impressions upon the heart. The very
considering over our Covenant-breaches, which is necessary to our renewing of
it, will awaken our hearts to more care and watchfulness.

These things being premised, I shall give you this double Direction for the
performance of this Duty.

1. For the time when. 2. For the manner how.
Touching the former, there are some special times when this Duty is especially
seasonable. As,

1. Upon your falls into any greater sins. Great sins make great breaches, and
it is not safe to let them lie unmade up. Breaking of Covenant makes a breach
upon Conscience, and this will prove as the breaking down the banks of the Sea,
which, if they be not presently made up, there may be no stopping them.

2. In great straights and Afflictions. We have then our hearts at the
advantage, to bring them back, or to bind them the faster to the Lord, when we
stand in any special need of comfort, or help from God. Genesis 28. 20, 21. when
Jacob fled from his Fathers house, for fear of his Brother Esau, he vowed, If
God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me
bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my Fathers house
in peace, then shall the Lord be my God. Times of straights and difficulties
are a special season for this Duty; though it be too ordinary that those vows
which we make in the days of our distress, are quickly forgotten in the days
of our prosperity: Sickness-promises are in our health like Sampsons Withs,
broken, as Tow when it touches the fire.

3. In case of any declinings to a careless remiss, and senseless frame of heart
or life.

4. At our approaches to the Table of the Lord. These are some of the special
times for the performance of this Duty.

2. For the manner how.

1. Remember your Covenant, read over, and consider distinctly the terms of it,
and weigh diligently the strictness, and great solemnity of your engaging to
God therein, that your hearts may be the more deeply affected herewith.

2. Remember your faults: Read over, and consider distinctly the sins you have
fallen into since your engaging to the Lord; together with the several
aggravations of them, and repent and be humbled under them, Isa. 50. 4, 5.

3. Especially, consider how your hearts have stood toward the Lord in the
main; whether your falls have not been such as give you occasion to suspect
that you were not upright in your first engaging. Consider whether such a life
as you have led since, such sins as you have been overcome by since, are
consistent with sincerity.

4. Resolve upon more care, watchfulness, and faithfulness for the future.
Verbal promises, though there appear some affection at the time, if they be not
joined with a resolution to take more care, are like to come to nothing.

5. Have a special eye in your engaging to the Lord at your special sins,
failings and neglects, that you have found your selves more inclined to, and
more ordinarily overtaken by. I will, through the help of God, watch against
every sin, but especially against covetousness, passion, or lying, etc. This is
my sin, herein I am apt to be faulty, here my hardest work lies. I will watch
to every Duty, but especially to temperance, or patience, or self-denial,
herein I have been most wanting.

6. Lay hold on the Covenant or Promise of God, for the renewing of his Grace
toward you, for the renewing of your strength, whereby you may be more enabled
to perform your promises, and pay your vows. It may be your former experiences
of your unfaithful hearts, have quite discouraged you. I have found this heart
of mine so fickle, and so false, and so feeble, that I dare not trust it so
far, as to engage any further for it. I have found my work so hard, my lusts so
strong, my temptations so many, my strength so small, my attempts to follow
God, so successess, that I am afraid I shall never come to any thing; I doubt I
shall but mock God, and bring more guilt upon my self, by adventuring to
promise any thing farther for this sinful, infirm, and unfaithful heart. Why?
though thou dare not trust thy heart, yet trust thy God, who has said, That
he will put his fear into thee, that thou shall not depart from him, that he
will renew thy strength, and that his grace is sufficient for thee. Depend upon
God for the renewing of thy strength, and then fear not to renew thy Vows.

7. In this strength of the Lord, go into his presence, and with sorrow in
thine heart, and shame in thy face, falling down before him, humbly confess and
acknowledge thy falls and failings; and then, in the like solemn manner, as
thou have been before directed, engage thy self again to the Lord in the same
Covenant.

2. I shall next direct you to make right improvement of Duties.

Godliness does not stand barely in Praying, Meditating, or Examining; there is
something farther that these Duties have a respect, and must be useful to; It Is
an holy life, that is the end to which our holy Duties are to lead, and help us
on. That they may do so, take these two following Directions.

1. Whenever you set upon Duties, resolve to put hard for it, to enjoy such
sensible Communion with God in them, that you may come off in a better and more
spiritual frame of heart than you came on.

2. Having gotten up your hearts to any better frame in Duty, be careful to
keep it up after Duty.

Whenever you set upon Duties, resolve to put hard for it, to enjoy such
sensible Communion with God, that you may return from them with some advantage
upon your spirits. Resolve with him, Nunquam a te absque te recedam, whenever I
come before the Lord, I will never go away without him.

The reason why we thrive no more by Duties, is, because we do not meet our God
in them: God never meets with his Saints, but he sends them away with some
marks of his Goodness upon them.

The reason why we do seldom meet with God in our Duties, is, because we do
not so wishly look for his appearance. God waits for thy coming, Soul, and, if
it be not thy fault, thou may see his face before thou departest; and, if
thou see God in a Duty, thou will not then return without some impressions of
God upon thy heart.

When Moses came down from the Mount, where he had seen the Lord; his face did
shine, there was something of the glory of God upon his countenance. Israel
might plainly see that Moses had met with God, they might see the beams of
divine Glory in his face. Oh! how sad is it, that Christians should return from
duty with no more of God in their faces, or upon their spirit, than for the
most part they do. We come many times with no other spirits from our Bibles, or
our Closets, than we come out of our Shops, or out of our Barns, no body would
ever think we had been praying, or conversing with God, there is so little
savor of God upon our hearts, that we bring back with us.

Brethren, whenever you let down your Pitchers into the Wells of Salvation, be
not content to bring them up empty: be so conversant with God in your Duties,
that you come off laden, as the Be from the Flower, with the honey and
sweetness of your duties.

And this I advise you to endeavor after, not only in your secret duties, not
only in your solemn public duties, on Sabbaths, Humiliation-dayes, or
Thanksgivings, but in your daily family duties, your Reading, Singing, Praying,
yea, even in those shorter Prayers and Praises which you use before and after
Meals. Whenever you draw nigh to God, look to see God, to taste of God, and to
get down something of God upon your hearts. And then,

2. Whatever you have gotten from God in Duty, what life, what warmth, what
refreshing, what enlargement of heart, be careful to maintain and keep it alive
afterward. See that your Spirits do not presently sink and cool again, after
they have been thus raised and warmed. Do not satisfy your selves with this,
that you have some comfortable entertainment with God, and feel some warm and
lively works of your heart toward God, and some refreshings from him in Duty;
but look to it, that you keep that holy fire that is there kindled, from being
presently quenched again. You do not eat and drink for an hour only, that you
may have the comfort of your food while your meal lasts, but you eat for
afterward, that the spirits and strength which you get by one meal may hold
you out to the next meal. Duties are the set-meals of the soul, wherein it so
feeds it self upon God, that in the strength of what it receives, it may
afterward walk with God more comfortably and cheerfully.

The Lord promises to his people, Lev. 26. 5. The Threshing shall reach to the
Vintage, and the Vintage to the Seed-time. And Amos 9. 13. The Plough-man shall
overtake the Reaper, and the treader of Grapes him that sows Seed. The
meaning is, Your old store shall be so much, and last you so long as till new
com again: you shall not only reap enough for the time of Harvest; you shall
not only gather enough to serve you during the time of the Vintage, but your
corn shall last from Harvest to Harvest; your Wine shall serve you from Vintage
to Vintage: your Old store shall not be spent till New come to supply you.
Duties are the Harvests and Vintages of our souls. Oh! what blessed lives
should we live, did we so improve and husband what we get in one Duty, that it
might last us out to another; that the Vintage might reach to the Vintage, the
Harvest to the Harvest; that the life, and warmth, and refreshing we get in one
Duty, might hold by us till the next, and so we might be carried on in an holy,
lively, heavenly Frame from Duty to Duty, as Israel walked on from strength ^o
strength, till they came and appeared before God in Sion.

That which holds us so low and barren in Religion, is, that whatever we have
obtained from the Lord in Duties and Ordinances, we presently lose it: when we
have been weeping sometimes before the Lord, and wrestling with him, and
pleading hard for some quickening or comforting influences of his Spirit upon
our hearts, and the Lord has heard us, and given us our desires; yet then as
soon as duty is over, we go away, and forget all, and bury all that we have
thus obtained, in a confused heap of worldly thoughts and businesses; we
unbend, and let down our spirits, and lay aside all thoughts of God, till we
come to duty again; we conrent our selves to live in such an estrangement from
God all the rest of our time, that sin and the world have a whole days time to
pull down what an hours duty has been building; a whole weeks time to destroy
and steal away what a Sabbath has gotten in; and so at the returns of duty, we
find our hearts at the same loss, in the same deadness and hardness that they
were before.

In the Old Testament, though the Sacrifices were offered but morning and
evening, yet the fire that kindled them was not to go out night nor day; there
must be fire kept alive from the Morning-Sacrifice, to kindle the
Evening-Sacrifice, and fire left from the Evening to kindle the
Morning-Sacrifice: Oh! Behold, how often is it, that though at our
Morning-Sacrifice a fire is kindled, yet we let this fire lie all day under the
ashes, and take so little care to keep blowing at it, that it goes quite out
before the Evening; and when we come to offer our Evening-Sacrifice, we have no
fire to kindle it

Brethren, has the Lord visited you, and quickened, and comforted you in duty;
Oh! think with your selves, what a sweet life should I live, might it be thus
with me always? What pity is it, that such light should ever go out? that such
grace should be so short lived? Why? if I do not look to my self the better,
this Sunshine will last but a little while; and how will the Lord take it, if
I suffer such sparks that he has kindled, so suddenly to be quenched? How is
my Soul ever like to prosper, if such precious food pass away from it as soon
as it is received? Is this a fast that I have chosen, for a man to afflict his
Soul for a day? Is this a prayer that God regards, for a man to afflict his
heart for an hour? to be in the Mount with God, to be raised up to Heaven for
the time, and within a few minutes after to be sunk into the dirt of the earth?
What a sad change is this! How can you bear such a loss as this? When will your
souls come to any thing, if you have only some few such lucida intervalla, and
all the rest of your time are covered over with clouds and darkness?

Beloved, as ever you expect to prosper in grace, or be settled in peace, be
chary of maintaining your duty in-comes; do not think to make use of your
prayer-comforts, to save you the labor of an after care, but to help you to be
more careful and fruitful.

But how may we do to keep this Holy and lively frame?

1. Be watchful. Nehem. 4. 9. Nevertheless we prayed, and set a watch against
them night and day. Beloved, it is with you as it was with those Jews, whatever
you have gained, you have Adversaries lying in wait to steal it away; whatever
you have built, you have adversaries lying in wait to pull down again. I have
heard of some enchanted places, where what men built in the day, the Devil
pulled down at night, and this danger you are continually in; what is built at
one prayer, the Devil labors to pull down before the next. Let your eye be
much upon your hearts, observe diligently, how they hold up or sink, that if
there be the least damp or decay, growing upon you, you may epsy it before it
be gone too far: It Is no wonder we lose all upon such a sudden, when
ordinarily, as soon as ever our duties are done, away we go, and think no more
where we have been, or what we have been about; as if we were well content to
take our leave of our duties, and our God together. When you depart out of your
Closets, leave your hearts behind you; Worldlings seldom bring theit hearts
thither; when they come to pray, they leave their hearts behind them: Let
Christians never carry them thence: when you have done praying, and must abroad
to your earthly affairs, let your hearts stay behind with your God: Let your
thoughts be much upon the entertainment you have had; see to it, that the
temptations you meet with, do not so easily divert you from minding what you
have been begging, or wrestling for.

2. Make present use of what you have obtained; God gives Grace, and Strength,
and Life, for use, and use will preserve it. Has the Lord warmed thy heart?
go warm thy Brothers heart, and that will keep thine from cooling: Has God
spoken comfortably to thy soul? go and speak of thy God, and what he has done
for thee to others. Has God inclined, and thereby fitted thee for action, take
the season; thou may do more for God, and for thy soul, in such an hour,
than in many days beside; be doing with what thou have received, and thou
need'st not fear losing it: when we are idle, then we fall asleep and grow
cold; Instruments do not rust while they are in use. We never more spend our
strength, than when we spare our labor.

3. Life up your hearts to the Lord often every hour, in some short
Ejaculations. No business, no company can hinder this duty, and this will be of
special advantage to you, therefore neglect it not; every sigh, or breathing of
your souls Heaven-wards, will fetch down fresh influences from Heaven upon you.

4. Charge this whole course actually upon your selves every morning, and
examine every evening how you have kept to it.

5. If you cannot otherwise bring, or hold your selves (...) this course, bind
your selves to it for some time, by special vow; till being a while inured to
it, it may become at length more easy.

Being thus entered upon, and prepared for a godly life, I shall give you some
directions.

3. How to carry it on; and for your help herein, take these following counsels.

I. In your whole course, pursue, and as much as possible, eye your end, God,
and your own salvation. Consider often wherefore you live, and what it is you
would have; and if this be it, that God may be honored, and your souls saved,
let this be pursued and prosecuted in all the parts of your life. Take not that
course, do not that action, that has not some tendency that way, and that
which has a tendency, let it be directed to that glorious end. Let every arrow
be levelled at your mark. The reason why the end is no more attained, is,
because it is more intended; it is no wonder we shoot short, or beside our mark,
when our eye is not upon it.

The eying our end, will both direct our course, and quicken and encourage us
on.

Set the Lord much before your eyes, dwell upon the contemplation of his Glory,
and glorious Excellencies; consider, how worthy the Lord is to be exalted, and
what an honor it is to poor creatures, to be any way serviceable to his
Honor; and what pity it is, that any of your time, any of your strength should
be spent upon vanity, which might be so improved, to so worthy and high an end?
Begrutch every minute of your time that is not bestowed on God.

Consider the blessedness of living for ever in the presence and enjoyment of
God. Look toward the holy City, enter by faith into the Holy of Holies, set
your selves before the Throne of God; view (as much as at this distance you are
capable) that everlasting light, those blessed and glorious joys, those rivers
of pleasure, that exceeding eternal weight of glory, which is there possessed
by the Saints; And then say to your hearts, Come on soul, come on, here is that
thou art praying for, here is that thou art laboring for, here is the Country,
the Kingdom, the Crown that thou art fighting for, and wrestling for, and
running, and suffering for.

The setting this glory before your eyes, will both quicken and sweeten your
holy course, and take off your hear^^ from any other courses. The end puts a
beauty upon the means, and a blackness upon all the hindrances of its
attainment. A sight of Heaven will make a holy life a beautiful life.

There are two things that make an holy life beautiful, 1. That it is the Image
of an Heavenly life. 2. That it is the way to it.


All the labors, difficulties sufferings of a godly life, are therefore
pleasant and beautiful, because they are the way of the Kingdom.

And, on the other side, a sight of Heaven, will make the ways of sin to be
unpleasant, to be dark and black ways.

There are two grounds upon which sin is odious to the Saints.

1. It Is Opposition and unlikeness to God; it bears the Image of Hell upon it,
not of Heaven.

2. It Is Interposition betwixt them and their end.

Nothing else can ever keep them from God; There Is no danger of their falling
short of Everlasting blessedness, but by sin. This is the only Gulf that is
fixed between them and Glory. And hence it is that the way of sin, with all its
pleasures, ease and delights, is to the Saints, a dark and dismal way. The
pleasures of sin are black pleasures, the gains of sin are black gains, the
jollity, and liberty, and prosperities of sin, are all dark and black in their
eye. These clouds, whatever brightness there seems in them, do keep the Sun
from shining on them.

Oh! what progress might you make in the way of Life, where Holiness with all
its difficulties become beautiful, and Sin with all its delights become odious!
What would there then be wanting, that might encourage you on, what would there
be then left to hinder you? Why, let God and Glory be more in your eye, and
then Sin will be more odious, Holiness will be more precious in your eye; you
would then neither want encouragements to lead you on, nor be encumbered with
such temptations as now keep you back. Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. The Grace of God
(which brings Salvation) teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts,
and to live righteously, etc. Looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 4. 16, 18. For
the which cause we faint not, while we look not at the things which are seen,
but at the things which are not seen. Before he had declared how hard 'twas
with them, troubled, perplexed, persecuted, cast down, always bearing about in
the body, the dying of the Lord Jesus, etc. Notwithstanding, says he, we faint
not, -- while we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that
are not seen.

Brethren, look on the things not seen, and take from them both direction in
your way, and encouragement to go in it.

1. Take Direction from Heaven; when you are traveling, and see the place
before you whither you are going, your eye will tell you your way. When you are
entering upon any Course, then look up, and consider, Is this my way to God?
When you are eagerly and greedily pursuing the world, ask your hearts; Is this
my way to Heaven? Am I now working out my salvation? When you are walking in
the way of carnal pleasure or liberty, then look up to the Lord, and look in
upon your heart, and say, if you can, Now, Lord, I am hastening to thee, now
Soul, I am taking care for thee, my sports and my pleasures, and my lusts, are
the way to make God sure, and Heaven sure to me. Can you say so? Will not your
own heart tell you, that is not the way? If Heaven be it that I intend, if
Salvation be it I mind, sure then I am not out of my way?

2. Look Heavenward, and take encouragement thence to go on, View the glory
that is above, and consider what happy men you would be, if you were once
safely there: and let such thoughts press you to hasten on, and encourage you
against all the labors and difficulties you must first pass through. Think
with your selves, when you are setting upon any duty, If I can get well through
this duty, I shall be one step nearer Heaven; When you come to the beginning of
every day well, I shall this evening be gotten one days journey nearer home;
when you are falling into any trouble or affliction, if I can cut my way well
through this wave, I shall be so much nearer Harbor.

Every new degree added to your grace, is, another stone laid up upon the
building of glory, every holy Duty you have rightly performed, you are gotten
one round higher in Jacob's Ladde^; look how many days you have walked with
God, so many days journey you are nearer your rest. Look how many troubles and
temptations you have gotten Christianly through, so many gulfs have you shot,
so many rocks have you passed by toward your harbor.

Oh! if such thoughts and considerations were continually upon your hearts, and
before your eyes, how strangely would they quicken you, and encourage you on
your way! Consider, Christians, and thence take courage, after a few days
more, a few duties more, a few ways more, you will be safely landed in your
Country. Lift up your eyes and see, and then lift up your heads and rejoice to
see, how by every duty and difficulty your redemption draws nigh. A traveller
in his journey, that is almost spent and tired, if he once comes within sight of
home, and be almost there, this adds new strength and life, and on he goes
again amain. Let your eye be more on your home, and there will be less
loytering or weariness in your way.

II. Walk on your way in the name of Christ. Or, live by faith, Gal. 2. 20. The
life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God. The
strength of a Christian is his Faith; the strength of Faith is Christ; the
strength of Christ is put into the Promises. If you would live to God, live by
Faith, if you would live by Faith, go often to the Promises.

1. Study the Promises, the freeness of them; there is Grace in the Promise. The
fullness of them, there is Christ in the Promise, and with him all things;
there is wisdom, righteousness, strength; there is bread, and clothes, and lands,
and friends and safety; study the sureness of the Promises, there is an Yea and
Amen set to them; All the Promises of God are Yea and Amen.

2. Set thy Seal to them. Believe that God is true.

3. Clear up thine interest in them, and thereby make it out that they are sure
to thee.

4. Treasure up in thy memory, a stock and store of particular promises, which
may answer every case of thy life, that so thou may have a word always at
hand to rely upon. And then,

5. Upon the credit of that word, venture on after thy Lord in any duty,
through any sufferings he calls thee to; whatsoever difficulty thou see in
thy work, whatsoever danger thou see in thy way, whatsoever want, or weakness
thou see growing upon thee, go on, resting upon Christ for success in thy
duties, and support under thy trouble, and supply of thy wants, according to
his Word.

It may be when thou look before thee upon an holy life, thou will say, This
is indeed a beautiful and blessed life, if I could attain to it: but oh! I see
there is so much to be done, and so much to be born, that I am in great doubt
how I shall ever be able to go through it.

The Lord requires me, if I will come after him, to deny my self; This first
step puts me to a stand; I doubt I shall stumble and fall at the very Threshold
of Christianity. Deny my self! Alas! I cannot deny my friend or companion, I
cannot deny mine Enemy that entices me to sin. If Satan do but speak a word to
me, to draw me aside to iniquity, he presently prevails; and must I yet deny my
self, when I see how unable I am to deny mine enemies? I cannot, I c^^not do
it. Why, here thy faith, if thou will con^lit with it, will furnish thee with
this encouragement, Though thou art able to do nothing of thy self, yet though
may be able to do all things through Christ which strengthens thee, Phil.
4. 13.

Again, thou say, The Lord requires me to make me a clean heart, to purge my
conscience, to crucify my lusts: But who am I, that ever I should think of
doing such great works? I could as easily make a new world, as a new heart; I
can as well stop the Sun in its course, as stop my lusts in theirs; I can as
easily dry up the fountains of the great Deep, as cleanse the fountain of my
corrupt heart, and purge my self from an evil conscience. I, but now thy faith
will tell thee, He that bids thee cleanse thy heart, has said to thee, Ezekiel.
36. 25. That he will sprinkle clean water upon thee, and thou shall be clean
from all thy filthiness. Thy faith will carry thy fountain ( of) sin to that
fountain that is opened for sin and for uncleanness, Zech. 13. 1. Wherein thou
may wash and be clean: thy faith will tell thee, Thy old man is already
crucified with Christ, Romans 6. 6. By whom the body of sin is destroyed; that
is, has received its deaths wound, that thou may not serve sin, and that
the same mouth that commands thee, Let not sin reign in thy mortal body, the
same mouth has promised thee, Sin shall not have dominion over thee.

But yet thou addest, The Lord commands me to keep my heart, to keep my tongue,
mine eyes, to make strait steps to my feet, that I turn aside to no iniquity,
that I turn aside from all temptations to sin, ^^stain from all appearance of
evil; and many (...) the like words has he given me in charge, requiring me to
walk in all his Commandments, and to keep all his Statutes and Judgments, to
do them; these are hard sayings, who can hear them? I, but he that said this,
(says Faith) said one word more that will make all this easy. Ezekiel. 36. 37. I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye
shall keep my Judgments, and do them.

Once more thou reply, but Christ commands me to take up my Cross, to suffer
with him, to part with all I have, to lay down my life for his Name. Can I do
so little for his Name, and am I ever like to be able to suffer for his Name?
Am I put so hard to it in every light affliction that befalls me, and is it
possible I should be able to resist unto blood? The Lord pardon me, I have
found that a little shame or reproach is more than I can well bear; a scoff or
a scorn for Christ, to what impatience has it often put me? Have I run with
the footmen, and have these wearied me? how then shall I contend with horses?
But God is faithful, 1 Cor. 10. 13. who will not suffer you to be tempted above
that you are able. The Lord will lay on thee (says Faith) no more than thy
load; either he will increase thy strength, or not increase thy burdens. He
that has given thee a little strength to go through small trials, has said,
he will, and thou may trust him, if he lay more load on thee, give thee more
strength to bear it. The Lord will either enable thee to die for his Name, or
he will not call thee to it.

Christians, believe God, to him that believes, all things are possible, and,
if you believe, they shall be so to you: He has said he will be, and therefore
you may boldly say, The Lord is my helper. Trust in the Lord, and keep his way;
trust in the Lord, and be doing good, and verily you shall be fed, verily you
shall be assisted, verily you shall be supported; commit your way to him, and
whatever difficulty there be in your work, he shall bring it to pass: commit
the keeping of your selves to him, and you shall be kept by his power, through
faith unto salvation. Faithful is he that has called you, and will do it.
Distrust your selves as much as you will, but distrust not your Rock: you are
weak creatures, but you have a strong God: you have empty hearts, but a full
Savior: you have but a poor stock in your selves, but a rich stock in the
Promise, whence you shall have such a continual supply, that your barrel of
meal shall not waste, nor your cruse of oil spend, till you have finished your
work and your course. Hang on your crucified Lord, take hold on his Covenant,
take hold on his Strength, go forth in his Strength and Name, and then fear
not; your difficulties shall vanish, your way shall prosper, your Souls shall
flourish, you shall have your fruit unto Holiness, and your end everlasting
Life.

III. Deny your selves. Matthew. 16. 24. If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself. Remember your Covenant, you have given your selves to the Lord,
and are now no longer your own; you are not debtors to the flesh, to live after
the flesh; you owe your flesh no observance, you have already paid it more than
its due; let him that lives, live to the Lord; let them, for whom Christ died,
live no longer to themselves, but to him that died for them, and rose again.

Christ and Self are contrary; you cannot serve these two Masters: If you will
not deny your selves, you cannot but deny your Lord; and if you can deny your
selves in any thing, you will deny Christ in nothing: If you can heartily say,
Not my will, you will easily add, but thine be done.

But what is this Self we must deny? I answer, as Christ said to the Woman of
Samaria, He whom thou have for thy Husband, is not thy Husband: That which thou
hold for thy self, is not thy self; thou call it, and countest it thy
self, and love, and cherishest it as thy self, but it is not thy self. That
which is here called thy self, is elsewhere in Scripture called thy flesh, thy
corrupt, or carnal part; that corruption that is gotten into thy understanding,
and sits there, giving thee evil counsel; That corruption which is gotten into
thy will, and sits there, swaying thee in all things to choose thy hurt; that
is gotten into thy appetite, and makes thee to fall a lusting after all things
that are pernicious to thee, and a resisting all that would do thee good. This
is thy self to he denied, the corruption of thy nature, that has insinuated it
self into all thy parts and powers, and governs thee in all thy actions. This
is it which carries thee from God, keeps thee from Christ, resists the Word of
Life, leads thee out of the way of Life, leads thee about after thy pleasures
and sports, and companions, holds thee down to this earth, and is dragging thee
to Hell.

This is it which makes sinners say concerning the Word of Life, The Word that
is spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not do, but will do whatsoever
proceeds out of our own mouths: That makes them say concerning Christ, We will
not have this man to Reign over us: Let the World reign if it will, let the
Devil reign if he will, let Pride, and Envy, and Malice reign if they will;
but whosoever reigns, this man shall not reign over me. It Is this that lays so
many blocks, creates so many difficulties in the way of Holiness, makes this
way seem too strait and narrow; the duties of it impossible, the troubles of it
intolerable. Were it not for this, the way of Christ would be easy, and his
burden light: This is that Self which must be denied, if you will follow
Christ.

If you ask what it is to deny self? In short, it is to shake off its
government, to resist its reasonings, to disobey its commands, to refuse to
follow its inclinations, or satisfy its lustings.

Brethren, whatever Christ counsels you to, or commands (as I told you) this
Self will be reasoning against it, and counter-manding it. When Christ says,
Be humble, be watchful, be circumspect, be perfect, labor, run, strive,
suffer; Your flesh will contradict, this is an hard Master, these are hard
sayings; all this is both needless and intolerable: Shake off thy heavy yoke,
and take thy liberty, turn out of this straight way, and take thy course; pity
thy self, spare thy self, and put not thy self to such hard service when thou
may be free; at least, thou may abate something of this strictness: If
thou will be holy, what need so much care and labor about it? Allow thy self
some liberty, some ease, some pleasure. And if you yield in a little, then it
will counsel you to take a little more, and a little more, and never give over
till it has reasoned you out of all Christianity, and commanded you into very
Brutes or Devils.

But what shall we do, or how shall we deal with this Self when it is thus set
upon us?

Why, return the same Answer to it as Christ did to Peter, when he gave him the
like counsel, Master, pity thy self. Get thee behind me Satan, (says he) Hold
thy peace, Devil, Speak no more thus to me; Say to this Flesh, as the men of
Sodom said to Lot, Genesis 19. Stand back: This fellow came in to sojourn, and he
will needs be a Judge, or a Ruler. Thou art stolen in, I know not how, stolen
into my head, stolen into my heart, and now thou think to be a Counselor,
to be a Ruler. Stand back ( Flesh) hold thy peace, for I may not hearken to
thee. Say to it as the King of Israel said concerning the Prophet, I hate him,
for he never speaks good to me, but evil. Say to this wicked Flesh, as those
wicked ones said against the Lord, The word which thou have spoken to me, I
will not do: The liberty thou demandest, thou shall not have: the pleasure, and
the ease which thou cravest, I will not allow thee: my Lord, whom thou
counsellest me against, shall be my Lord; him will I love, him will I obey, him
will I follow in all that he shall say to me: I will not pamper this Flesh, but
pinch it the more: I will not humor this fleshly mind, but cross it the more:
I will not feed this fleshly appetite, but hold it the shorter for its cravings
and lustings: I will not Pray the less, or Fast the less, or Hear the less,
because this Flesh is against it, but will Pray the more, and Fast the more,
and beat down this body, and bring it into subjection with the more care and
diligence: I will starve this proud beggar, and weary it out of its imperious
demands; it shall get nothing, if I can help it, by all this ado it makes, but
shall rather be held the shorter; I will the rather deny my self what I may
allow my self, because I will not feed or foster such an enemy.

Oh Christians! What an exact life might we live, and with what ease might we
go on our holy course, if this enemy were once well laid? What an uncontrouled
dominion might our Lord have over us, if this Self were pulled down from
sitting with him in the Throne? And how much might be done to the destroying of
it, by our constant denying it? Keep the Flesh low, and by degrees you kill it.

But woe to us, what Friends are we of this Enemy? how gently do we deal with
this old man? What provision do we make for this Flesh? What we have a mind to,
we must have; what we have a mind to do, we will do; whither we have a mind to
go, we will go, and seldom give our Reasons, or our Consciences liberty to say
to us, What do thou? or once to judge, whether it be good for us, or fit for
us, or safe to us, or no? We are just like some fond Parents, if their Child
cry, though it be but for a knife, or a handful of dirt, it must have it to
still it. A wise Parent will rather give his Child a Rod, than that which will
hurt it, and knows that this will be hurt enough, that a Child should always
have its will: Oh check and whip this Brat, and let not thy Soul spare for its
crying. Better the Child cry, than the Parent; better the Flesh cry, than the
Soul and Conscience.

But oh what a sad wonder is it to observe, how strangely indulgent too many
Christians are this way, who suffer their flesh to leave them almost to any
thing; who in a self-seeking, flesh-pleasing life, have equalled and even
out-gone many of the carnal world. What a liberty have many that seem to be
Christians, even of the highest form, often taken in the days of their
prosperity? Some seeking great things for themselves, driving so hard after
estates, honor, high places, etc. as if they meant to return, and take their
portion with the men of this world. Others living in pleasure with Solomon,
Eccles. 2. 10. Whatever their eyes desire, they keep not from them, they
withhold not themselves from any joy. Who, as if they hoped to charm their
flesh out of its enmity, or to kill it bd kindness; or if this were the Enemy,
which when it hungers, they must feed, when it thirsts, they must give it
drink, and thereby heap devouring coals upon its head; will not say it nay
whenever it craves. Oh what liberty have we seen taken by many such, for
excessive feastings, costly attire, vain fashions, frothy, light and carnal
merriments; yea, and despisings, and condemnings of the stricter, and more
self-denying way of more severe and mortified Christians; as if this proceeded
out of an affectation of a voluntary humility, or an ignorance of their
Christian liberty.

But is this indeed the way to crucify the flesh? Or have you gotten it so
much under command already, that now you can securely trust it with, any thing
it would have, without fear of its getting head, and making war against Christ
or your Souls again?

Look to your selves, Christians; look back, and consider, whether your Souls
have not suffered, whilst your flesh have been thus surfeited; whether there
have not been some abatements made to Christ, for every such allowance granted
to the flesh; and whether God has not been provoked, whilst self has been
thus pleased. Think sadly, whether this abuse of our liberty be not something
that the Lord is now pleading with us about, and scourging us for. We have even
put the Lord to it, to cast us into the house of mourning, thereby to repair
the breaches that have been made upon our Souls in our Houses of Feasting: And
our Lord Jesus puts us the harder to the second Lesson, Take up your Cross,
because we did no better learn our first, Deny your selves.

IV. Order your selves aright. Beloved, if you will observe the former Rules
well, all that remains will be the more easy, and I shall be the shorter in
it. Order your selves aright, iu those things I mean, that especially concern
your own persons; keep your own hearts with all diligence, look well to your
own ways, Gal. 6. 4. Le every man prove his own work, and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself, and not in another. Keep a strict and severe eye upon
your selves; hold a strict hand upon your selves, be more severe toward your
selves, than toward all the World. It Is an ill sign, to see Professors of
Religion severe in their observing, imposing upon, and censuring others; and
more remiss toward themselves. Be more can did and charitable toward others,
but exercise more severity at home.

In the right ordering your selves, take great care that you, 1. Allow not your
selves in the least know Sin. 2. Live not in the neglect of any known Duty. 3.
Take heed of the World. 4. Be Humble. 5. Be Temperate. 6. Be Moderate.


1. That you allow not your selves in the practice of the least known sin. Do
not look on this as any Apology for sin, or your easier entertaining of it,
That it is but a little one.

There is no sin that can properly be termed little. The least iniquity will
cost either the Blood of Christ or the blood of your own Souls.

Little Sins are spreading sins; a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump:
Elijahs Cloud, out of the bigness of a Man's hand, in a few hours clothed the
whole Heavens in black: You will find it something in your Repentance, which
you counted as nothing in the Commission.

Little sins are leading sins; the child conveyed in at the Window, will open
the door to let all the great Thieves in. When Gad came into the world, his
Mother said, Behold a Troop comes, 2 King. 6. 32. When the Messenger of the
King of Israel came to the Prophet, Shut the door, hold him fast (says he) at
the door; Is not the sound of his Masters feet behind him? Shut the door
against every sin, for whose Messenger is it? Look behind, and see who comes
after; Is not the sound of his Masters feet behind him? The Devil is not far
off, whenever Sir knocks for admission; and the door being opened to the
Messenger, it is like to stand open for the Master to enter: Take heed,
Brethren, that you do not give a tolleration to any sin; little sins allowed,
become great sins. The allowance of sin is that which makes the great wast upon
Conscience, and the great spoil upon our peace. I will not say, what grace
there may be in the heart, but sure there is but little tenderness in the
conscience, that does not bid defiance to the least of Sins.

Beloved, if Sin does get the possession at any time of your hearts, let it be
rather upon surprise, than surrender; be so watchful, that if it be possible,
you may not be surpised by sin, or taken at unawares; but whatever you do, see
you do not surrender your selves to it; be so jealous, that if it may be, Sin
may not steal in upon you in a disguise, but when you see what it is, beware of
it as of the Devil: Will you let a known Enemy lodge within you? Brethren, do
not shut your eyes against sin, nor open your doors to it. Shut not your eyes
against it, be willing to know it, do not go about to persuade your selves
concerning any thing you have a mind to, that it is not sinful, that it may be
lawful enough, for ought you know, but examine it, and look through it
impartially, and if you find it to be sin, receive it not in. I cannot well
say, whether of the two be in the worse case, those that are not willing to
know they do, or those that do what they know to be evil; but this I can say,
that neither the one nor the other, (if there be any thing of God in them) are
like to know whether there be or no; such winkings will blind their eyes, and
such walkings will blot their Evidences, and both hinder that progress in
holiness, which is necessary to build them up in comfort. If you would be sure
the Lord is yours, keep close to him, if you would keep close by God, keep
clear of sin, and if you would keep clear of sin, keep your Windows open, but
your doors shut; see who it is that knocks before you let them in. An open eye,
and a tender conscience, will be the best security to both your grace and peace.

2. Live not in the neglect of any known duty. The Devil may be served not only
by your doing evil, but by your doing nothing. We obey the will of the flesh,
when we only neglect to obey the will of God: As our Commissions stab, so our
Omissions starve our souls. God will not, and our souls cannot want a duty; our
lamenesse in our practice, will quickly appear in the leanness of our Souls.

O missions will be reckoned for a Judgment, and therefore must be reckoned,
and repented of now. Do not content your selves with a negative holiness, that
you do not harm; do not think it enough, to be able to say, I know nothing by
my self, no hurt that I have done; suppose you do not, yet thereby are you not
justified. God will judge you, and may condemn you, for what you have ( not)
done. If you had nothing to answer for, but your neglects: The neglects of one
day, of one hour, will undo you for ever, if you have not a Christ to answer
for you. To be holy has more in it than to be harmless. There must be doing
your duty, as well as departing from iniquity, Isa. 1. 16. Cease to do evil,
learn to do well.

Nor is it a little now and then that will serve, There must be continuance in
well-doing, a readiness to every good work, a fruitfulness in good works, a
faithfulness in good works. Well done good and faithful Servant. That Is a
faithful servant, that has done his best, that has not voluntarily neglected
any thing of his Masters work, nor wasted any of his Masters talents: that is
able to say, though I have not done what I ought, yet I have endeavored to do
what I can. Every neglect is a degree of unfaithfulness. If ye will be the
servants of Christ, be faithful servants; and that you may be so,

1. Neglect not any kind of Duty; One thing lacking may be the loss of all.
You can hear, it may be, but you cannot pray; you can pray in secret, but you
cannot pray in your Families; you can instruct your Families, but you cannot
govern them; you can love the Saints, you say, but you neglect the communion of
Saints; you can be just in your dealings, but you cannot be charitable; you can
give an Alms to an hungry body, but you cannot give counsel to a sinful soul;
you can give Counsel, but you cannot give a reproof; this or that you cannot
bring your heart to; but take heed, though you cannot bring your heart to it,
yet neglect not to be working your heart to it, to be persuading, and
reasoning, and praying your heart to it; take heed there be not an Act of
Indulgence passed for this neglect: take heed you do not say, the Lord pardon
me in this thing, and so give off, and let it alone.

2. Neglect not any opportunity of duty. Whenever the Lord calls to duty, let
your heart answer: whenever the Lord opens a door for any service, take the
season.

1. Be watchful, and observe every opportunity. Sometimes the Lord puts thine
enemy into thine hand, gives thee some special advantage against such a lust or
corruption: Sometimes the Lord puts a price into thy hand, an opportunity of
getting in, or laying up for thy Soul, an opportunity of laying out for God or
thy Soul, observe diligently all such seasons. Thou may do more, or get
more, in such an hour, than in many days after.

2. Keep thy heart in a disposednesse, and constant towardliness to Duty: be
always prepared to every good work; see that however sometimes thou may
want power to perform, yet to will may be always present. When a price is put
into thine hand, seee thou want not a heart to it; When thine Enemy is in thine
hand, let not thy heart spare it, let not thine heart be out of the way,
whenever the season serves; let not thy heart recur thus upon thee afterward, O
what a day have I lost? how much seed might I have sown this day for Eternity?
what a treasure might I have laid up for Everlasting?

3. Above all, take heed you (live) not under a neglect of duty. The most
diligent and vigilant Christians have too many neglects, but see that you are
not guilty of any neglect in ordinary; that there be not any thing that you
know to be your duty, which you commonly, and of course, pass over, so that
this day, is even as yesterday, and to morrow, and next day, and next week, and
so on, is like to be as this day. Whatever it be that you perform, such a
neglect as this will unavoidably hinder the thriving of your Souls in the Grace
of God. For,

1. The guilt of such a neglect, will wither and mar the beauty of what is
done, and the Lord will have such a standing controversy with you for what is
not done, that he will not accept or prosper what is done.

2. There will be the want of the influence of those duties that are neglected.
We cannot want a duty, but we may afterward find the want of it in the state
of our Souls. Grace out of exercise grows to decay, and if one of thy spiritual
members suffer or wast, the whole body suffers with it.

3. The Devil will fill up the vacuities of our lives. There is not a void Plat
in thy Garden, but the Devil will be sowing his seed; If you do, the Devil will
not leave an empty day, nor an empty hour of your lives: If grace do not fill
up each day with the duties of it, he will fill it up with sin: It Is an hundred
to one, but a weed grows up in the room, where a Flower is wanting.

Brethren, if you would be thriving Christians, be Universal Christians, for
any work your Master has to do; be ingenuous Christians, willing to know your
whole duty; be watchful Christians, that you may know your duty seasons; and
then be faithful, allow not your selves in, be not patient with your selves
under any neglect.

3 Take heed of the world. If you be Christians, Christ has gotten the better
of the world, has gotten the pre-eminence in you, and brought the world under.
If it be so, take heed it get not head again, and that you may be both secured
from the snares of the world, and make your best advantages, as Christians of
it, Take these following Directions.

1. Never make an exchange of Christ, or any thing of Christ, for the world, or
any thing that is of the world; never buy or purchase any thing of the world at
so dear a rate, as the loss of any thing of Christ. Lose not any degree of
grace, for the gaining this worlds goods; lose not a spiritual duty, for the
attending on a worldly business. Enrich not your bodies upon the impoverishment
of your Souls.

What possession or use of this world, you may have without your spiritual
prejudices, enjoy it, and be thankful; but beware you do not so take up with
the businesses, and take in the advantages of this earth, that your souls
suffer loss; that you should ever have occasion to say of any thing you have
done or gotten, This is the price of my peace, this is the price of my comfort,
this is the price of a Sabbath, or a Sacrament, or a Prayer; I have lost a
Sabbath, I have lost my communion with God in prayer; I have abated the life
and the vigor, and exercise of my grace; and this is all I have for it, some
addition to my outward state: I have more of earth, but so much the less of
Heaven, more Gold, but the less Grace, more of this Manimon, but so much the
less Manna, more of the Cistern, but so much the less of the Fountain. Beloved,
it was never the intent of the Gospel to strip you of this worlds goods, but to
secure you only from the mischief of it: be but so watchful, and so fearful,
and so wise, and wary in the managing your worldly businesses, in the improving
or securing your worldly estates, that you be not hereby losers upon a
spiritual account, that you may have what you have as an addition, but not so
in commutation for Christ, and he will never begrutch it you, or blame you for
it.

2. Let not Christ and the world again change places or interests. If Christ
has your hearts, let him not again be thrown under your feet; If the world
begotten under foot, let it not again get up into the throne, let it be your
servant if you will, but let it never again be your God. Let Christ be the
chief in you, let him have the highest esteem, the dearest, the strength of
your affections, the great command of you: Let the Word of Christ be of more
power with you, and carry you farther, than all the gains and glory of the
World. Let not this be your rule, To follow Christ and Holiness so far as you
may, without any prejudice to your worldly interest; but let this be it, Follow
the world so fur only as you may, without being false or unfaithful to Christ.
Venture on in Holiness to the greatest hazard of your estate, but venture not
after this, with the least hazard of your Religion. Resolve to be Christians,
whether you be rich or poor, but endeavor not to be rich, but upon such terms
that you may be never the less Christians. Especially take heed that the
Prosperity of the World steal not away your hearts: Psalm. 62. 10. If riches
(increase) set not your hearts upon them. It Is hard to prosper in the world,
and not to prostitute our hearts to it. Temptation of prosperity are the worlds
courting, and complementing, and wooing of our love: If ever a Suitor be like
to prevail, it is when he puts on his best array, and trims up himself in his
Richest and most enticing habit. Prosperity is the World in its glory; when
ever it presents it self thus to you, then take heed lest you forget God, and
prove Adulterers and adulteresses from Christ.

3. Let not the Lord want any thing that you have, There is nothing that you
have, but it may one time or other be said to you, The Lord has need of it;
and if he has, let it go: If the Lord say, I have need of it; do not you say,
I cannot spare it: Desire to have only for use, and what you have be willing to
use it, and use it well. Nothing is well used but what is used for God, That
which is bestowed on your selves, or your Children, is misused if it be not
bestowed there for the Lord: ^ntitle God to all you have, write his Name upon
(...), and make it up for him. This is his Wool, and ^is Flax, and his Corn,
and his Silver, and his Gold, and use it for him.

If your lusts, your pride, or your gluttony, or your envy, if your sports, or
your pleasures, or your companions, demand any thing to be spent on them, or
given to them, let your answer be, It is ^ot mine to give; or what Nabals was
to David, when ^e sent to him for provision for himself and his followers, 1 Samuel 25. 10. What is David, or who is the ^on of Jesse? Shall I take my bread,
and my wa^r, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and ^^ve it to
men whom I know not whence they be? What ^^e these lusts? What is this pride?
What are these ^^easures? Shall I take these good things which the Lord has
given me, and bestow them upon ^^ch vile things as these? Were these things
^^ven me to feed mine enemies, and the enemies ^f God? To feed Snakes and
Adders, Vipers, and ^corpions? Was this the end why God has made me greater
than others, that I might be more wicked than others? Has God made me Rich,
that I might be a drunkard, or an adulterer, that I might maintain my pride,
and my pomp, and my brutish pleasures? Has God made me a rich man, that I
might make my self a beast.

Beloved, the Lord has rather lent you then fully given you what you have; you
are but stewards of his manifold gifts he has put into your hands, you must
give an account to God for all your receipts and disbursements, and your
account will be but a lame account, if you bring in any thing laid out, that is
not laid out for God* Let not the cause of God, or Religon want an^ thing you
have: Let not the poor Saints, or any of the poor afflicted ones of the Lord,
go without their parts: Let it not be said of any of you, (...) good they had
been beggars, as rich men, for any goo^ they have done. He that has gotten
such power over all he has of this world, that he can freel^ dispose of it to
its proper use, may be numberd (...) mong those that have overcome the world;
and (...) is in the less danger of sinding it a temptation and a snare to him.

4. Be you able to want what you have not. (...) be able to want the world, is
a greater hono^^ and comfort, than to possess and enjoy it. I kno^ not which
is more difficult, to be able to use (...) well, or to be able to want it; but
ordinaril^ he that can do one, can do both; he that ca^ carry himself as a
Christian in his plenty, will be able also to carry himself so in his
penury: The Apostle tells us, that he had learned how to do both, Phil. 4. 12.
I know how to be abased, and how to abound: In all things I am instructed, bot^
to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and (...) suffer need. Worldly
men can do neither, the^ know not how to be rich, nor how to be poor (...) how
to be in credit, nor how to be in disgrace, the can neither bear wealth nor
want, that is, they know not how to be as they should be, in either state. If
they are rich, and in credit, then they are proud, and wanton, and riotous, and
luxurious; if they are poor, and in disgrace, then they are impatient, and
discontented, and envious at those whose ways do prosper: If they are full,
they forget God, if they are empty, then they fret themselves against the
Lord. To be able to want, and to abound, is the same, as to be able to be a
Christian, and to carry himself as becomes a Chri^^^an in both estates: to be
able to hold on in a ^hristian course, without being hindered or turned ^side
by the one or the other: to be able to be holy ^ith the world or without it: On
the one side, to be able to be high, and yet humble; honorable, and yet
honest; rich in this worlds goods, and yet rich in good works, to bear his
burden of thick clay, ^^thout either sinking his spirit, or slackening his
^^ce heavenwards; and on the other side, to be able (...) be poor and patient,
afflicted and cheerful, com^^rtable, contented, and as constantly serving the
^^rd in the want of all things, as others do in the ^^lness of all things. To
be able to live by faith, ^^ough he has never so much else to live upon, ^^d
to be able to live by faith, when he has no^^ing else.

Christians, if you can want, you shall never want. He has enough, that is
able to spare that ^^ich he has not. If you can want the world, the ^vil will
then want a temptation, either to en^^e you from, or discourage you in your
holy ^urse; you may then be Christians in spite of all (...) world.

5. Above all, Take heed you be indeed gotten clear of the world, from under
its dominion. Me^ may go far in Religion, and yet may perish b^ the world at
last: its dreadful to consider, ho^ many sad instances there are to be found
among Professors of Christianity, who have ^eemed to have much love to Christ,
and thin^ they love him sincerely, whose hearts are yet secretly chained to the
world. There is many (...) Professor that has made a fair show, and give^
great hopes, and has gotten up both in h^ own and others Opinion, even to the
higher rank of Saints, and is persuaded in his Co^ science, that he is upright
with God, and y^^ his heart does secretly cleave more strongly t^^ the World
than to Christ, and so may peri^^ everlastingly. As there may be secret pride
tha^ Men may be guilty of, and not know it; (...) there is secret hypocrisy,
reigning hypocrisie^ that men may be guilty of, so there is a secret reigning
covetousness that men may live^ and die, and be damned in, when they never
suspected it; and this I fear is a more common case than is supposed: When we
see men owning the Gospel, setting up the exercises of Religion in their
Families and Clossets, Praying like Saints, Speaking like Angels, melted into
tears, raised in joys, separated from the world, holding communion, and in
many things holding pace with the best of Saints: When we see such persons (and
are there not such to be seen?) so excessively greedy, and so industriously
driving on after the World, so constantly busie^ in laying house to house, and
field to field; so possessed with worldly cares, so extremely pinching and
penurious, so hard-hearted, and straithanded toward those that are in need,
hiding themselves many times from their own flesh, whose worldliness is
apparently too hard for their Religion, whose Religious duties must in ordinary
give place to their worldly business, but their affection to Christ does make
no abatement upon their earthly appetite and Worldly cares, but is ordinarily
abated by it; who can say to duty, Stand aside, to prayer, stand aside, to
hearing or meditation, give place, when ever they have a Worldly business
before them; but seldom or never can say, Stand aside World, Stand aside Oxen,
and Sheep, and Trades, and Livings, I have a God, and a Soul to be looked
after; but can content themselves for that, with those few leisure times they
have, wherein they have nothing else to do, and yet notwithstanding, because
there is something of Religion kept going, and at times, some strong workings
of their affections that way, thereupon do comfort their hearts, and conclude
all is well; nay, let them be never so plainly dealt withal, and warned to
beware and look to themselves, lest they be found lovers of this world, and
strangers from Christ, yet they cannot see it, they cannot be persuaded, but
their hearts are sincere: What can be thought of such persons, but that they
are like to die for ever, by their secret adultery against God, which they will
hardly be persuaded to suspect themselves guilty of: Look to it that this be
not your case, be sure you be gotten clear of the world, and that Christ has
the pre-eminence in you. The Devil will allow you to have some respect for
Christ, some affection to Religion; will allow you profession, allow you
duties, allow you good company; let them pray, let them hear, let them
associate with the Saints, so long as the World governs their hearts, they are
sure enough. Some indeed there he holds in arcta custodia, close prisoners,
that do wholly mind earthly things; though he could wish his captives were all
in such a case, without the least sense or show of Religion; yet those that he
cannot keep under so great a restraint, he is content to hold in libera
custodia, as prisoners at large, any liberty to pray, to hear, etc. that they
may take, and yet be prisoners, he allows to them: if you be not close
prisoners, if the Devil does suffer you now and then to walk abroad and
exercise your selves in the duties, and refresh your selves with the delights,
and feed your selves with the hopes of Religion; if you be not close prisoners,
yet are you not prisoners still? Oh let it not content you, that you are
prisoners at large: Oh let nothing content you, but your enlargement out of
prison, so that you are no longer prisoners to the world, but Christ's freemen.

4. Be humble; keep your hearts low; be low in your own eyes; think not of your
selves above what is meet; be content to be low in the eyes of others: That is
the harder lesson of the two; there is many a person that is so conscious of
his own poverty and worthlessnesse, that if he would, he cannot have high
thoughts of himself; but yet he would, as Saul, be honored before the People.
Take heed of an inordinate affectation of esteem with others. Whilst you
pretend only to seek a good Name, take heed of affecting a great Name. Account
your selves with Paul, and be content if others account you so too, the least
of Saints. Whilst others are ambitious, with Simon, to be accounted Somebody,
be you willing to be counted Nobody; let who will affect to be reckoned
amongst the Worlds great Ones, let it be enough for you to be accounted amongst
Gods little Ones. If the Lord has lifted you up take heed of lifting up your
selves; your work is to abase your selves, and then let God alone to exalt you.

Pride is a pernicious enemy, and it is one of the last Enemies a Christian has
to conquer; a pernicious Enemy it is, it casts us out of the heart of God and
men; God resists, and men despise the proud. A proud man, whilst he is his own
Idol, is others scorn; it deprives of comfort, it spoils duty, it keeps us
barren: A proud man is like the high mountains, there is little good that grows
there, the lower ground is ever the more fruitful: He is like Ephraim, an empty
Vine, empty to God-wards, all his fruit is brought forth to himself.

An humble Christian has this advantage in his duties, he has none to please
but God; let God accept me, and let others think of me what they will: A proud
person has his lust to please, the eyes and ears of others to gratify; God
and his Soul can have but little of him, that has so many to mind; pride
blasts all that little good it is mingled with; it is as the fly in the pot,
that mars all the ointment: Christian, if thou badst nothing else to keep thee
humble, thy pride might do it, and would, if thou duly laidst it to heart.

Pride is one of the last enemies, and longest lived that a Christian has to
deal withal, it will rise up out of the ashes, and ruins of other lusts; it is
not seldom that men are proud, that they are not covetous, or prodigal, or
intemperate; nay, it sometimes rises up out of its own ashes: Men may be proud
of their humility proud, that they are not so proud as they have been: And can
you be too watchful against such an Enemy?

Be humble Christians; be humble, if you will be holy. Humility is of the
Essence of the New-creaure: he is not a Christan, that is not humble.

And yet, Oh how much of this Pride have too many of us to charge upon our
selves? When our eye is so much at Self, and so little at God, in all we do;
when we are so tender, and so touchie at any thing that reflects upon our
selves, and so little affected with the dishonor of God, when our very abasing
our selves is in order to the exalting of our selves: In our very Confessions
of the pride of our hearts, do we not sometimes hope, that the sense which we
discover of this evil, will more advance, than the evil it self will impair our
reputation? When whatever evils we acknowledge by our selves, we are in hope
they will not be believed: When we cannot bear it, to be reproved, or to hear
from the mouth of another, what our own mouths do testify against us: When we
love to speak in our own praise, or if we have more wit, than to be vainlie
boasting of our selves, yet we love to hear our selves commended by others?
When we are envious at those that outshine us, and so stand in the way of our
reputation: When we are so impatient of being contradicted, that those that are
not of our mind, are not for our company: Do not our habits, our looks, our
company, or behavior, our distances which we keep from those below us, sadly
discover what there is in our hearts? Oh Brethren, how is it that our hearts
tremble no more, to behold this monstrous devilish sin appearing in us? How can
we take pleasure? How can we take comfort in the best of all our parts, or
duties, or enjoyments, which are so stained with this pride? Which is even as
great an Ornament to any true worth that is in us, or in any thing we do, as a
blister, or a carbuncle, to a beautiful face: How is it that we do not oftener
question whether such a measure of pride as we find in our selves, can stand
with true grace? How is it that we are no more ashamed to draw nigh unto God,
when our hearts tell us, how false we have been to him in all our sevices? What
an Image of jealousy have we set up; another God, besides the Lord, which must
at least divide with him, in all the fruits that are growing up, out of any
thing we have received from him.

Christian, Labor to know thy self more thoroughly; and amongst all the lusts
of thy heart, which might, if understood, bring thee low, take particular
notice of this thy self-exalting Spirit, and if this do not abase thee, and
shame thee, and lay thine honor in the dust, thou art proud indeed.

5. Be Temperate. In the use of Creatures, I mean, beware of Excess; Eat and
Drink for service, nor barely for pleasure: Let not your Lord be a loser by his
bounty to you, lose not a duty in a Dinner; A full Meal makes many a drowsy
and short duty. If you be given to Appetite, take heed, give not to your
Appetite all it craves; let not Appetite, but Conscience be your measure. Eat
not your Souls into leanness, let not your Table become your Snare, and that
which is given you for your Health, become your Disease. When you are at your
meat, remember your work, and let that limit you; be only so free in your food,
as may make you more fit for service? He that has such a race to run, such a
warfare before him, must be temperate in all things, or he may lose the goal
and the battle: not only Drunkards and Gluttons, but even Christians that are
accounted sober, are more peccant this way, than they are ordinarily sensible
of. Their spirits would be more free, their services would be more lively,
their work would be more easy, and their way more pleasant, if they were but
more temperate. Christians, let this Scripture meet you at your Tables, as well
as elsewhere, Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever else you do, do all to
the Glory of God.

6. Be moderate, Phil. 4. 5. Let your moderation be known unto all men. The
Lord is at hand. Maintain such a tranquillity and serenity of mind, let all be
quiet, and in such a due and equal composure within you, that it may appear in
your carriage without. Let there be no noises, nor tumults, but as much as
possible, let there be a constant silence and calm upon your Spirits. Moderate
your cares; moderate your fears; moderate your passions: Say to your Spirits,
when they begin to swell, as Christ to the Wind and Waters, Peace, be still,
Get the Command of all within you, and keep them under constant discipline; be
careful for nothing; fear nothing; be impatient at nothing, that whatsoever
happens to you without, you may be able to say with the Apostle, None of these
things move me. Be not like those weakly bodies, whose temper changes with the
weather. Be able to bear whatever changes happen from abroad, without any
perturbations or perplexing commotions at home. In your patience possess ye
your souls. Christians, if you can but keep your temper, whatever happens, you
may keep your way, and hold on your course whatever happens: An heart our of
quiet, will put your whole Man out of course. If you can but be quiet and
patient, you may be any thing; you may do any thing, that God will have you be
or do. Let your fears, and your passions, and your impatiencies loose, and
whither will they carry you? When you should be denying your selves, you will
then be shifting for your selves, when you should be following Christ, you will
then be running from Christ; when you should be working out your salvation, all
your care will be taken up how to save your selves in a whole skin. Let these
be well laid, and you will have nothing to do, but to follow your work, and to
run your Race which God has set before you.

V. Carry your selves well toward others. A Christians work does not lie all
about himself; Though your own Souls be concerned in all you have to do, yet
your care must not be confined to your selves alone; you must have a due
respect, and a due c^rriage toward others also.

Carry your selves well.

1. Toward all men. Let your Conversations be, as in all things, so toward
all men, as it becomes the Gospel. I must contract, and here give you only
some short hints.

1. Be True. 2. Be Just. 3. Be Merciful. 4. Be Peaceable. 5. Be Courteous.
1. Be True. Take heed of the way of lying; Let sinners know that a lie is of
their Father; and not of yours. Let the Word of a Christian be Sacred. Make
sinners say of Saints the same which God says of them, They are children which
will not lie; let their experience force them to acknowledge, This spot is not
the spot of Gods Children. Be true. A Lie is,

1. Contrary to God, who is a God of Truth, and cannot lie.

2. Conform to the Devil, the Father of Lies.

3. Destructive to Society: there can be no trust, where there is no truth; and
no commerce, with those that cannot be trusted.

Temptations to Lying are many, and men are especially tempted to it, in these
Tw^ Cases;

1. In case of any faults committed. What cannot be excused, must be concealed;
and for want of a better covering, they must hide it under a Lie.

2. In their dealings in the world. In their buying, and selling, and trading.
The trade of lying gets into every Trade, as if there were no living, but by
lying. The Seller must have his lies; there must be lie to set off the Wares,
Its special good, the best of its kind, when may be it is stark naught: A lie to
set up the price, It stood me in so much, I cannot abate, when, it may be, the
next word is a lower price, The buyer must have his lie; a lie to bring down
the price, Its naught, its naught, says the buyer: A lie to bring down the
seller, I will not give your price, and yet give it. Oh how common an evil is
this, and how little considered! How few are there that have great dealings in
the world, that can altogether acquit themselves of it? How many are there,
that live upon lies? that feed themselves with lie^? that cloth themselves
with lies, their unlawful gains, that their trade of lying has brought them in.

Christians, especially you that are most ordinarily under such temptations, be
sensible of this evil, and avoid it: be resolved and watchful: Resolve to be
true, be true, though it be to your loss; be losers, rather than liars; Sell
not Conscience with your commodities, for a penny or two pence profit
extraordinary. Resolve to be true, and be watchful. Consider what you say,
before you speak, that you be guilty of falsehood, neither purposely, nor
unwarily.

2. Be Just. Observe that Rule of Righteousuesse, Do to others, as you would
they should do to you: And let this Rule be observed in all your words, yea,
and your thoughts also, as well as actions; If you would not be wronged, do not
wrong; if you would not be oppressed do not oppress: if y^u would not be
defrauded do not defraud; and so, if you would not be defamed, or reviled, do
not defame or revile: if you would not upon every report or groundless
surmise, be evil thought of, do not think evil of others. You that profess
Christianity, are you altogether faultless upon this account? Would you that
all should come upon you, which by you has fallen upon others? Would you that
all the world should be to you, what you have been to any in the world? If you
have been knowingly unjust in your dealings, yet have you neither been
injurious in your words? Would you that your faults and i^firmities should be
the ordinary discourse, and table-talk, and merriment of others, and have not
yet others infirmities, or faults been yours? Would you not be causl^sly
suspected, condemned, or despised in the thoughts of others, and have you never
dealt thus by others?

Is this not too common, and yet little considered? When you are together,
every evil report that is going, either for want of other discourse, or from a
worse cause, must be brought in to fill up the time; and evil reports quickly
beget evil thoughts and surmises. Do as you would be done by; if you would not
be thus dealt with by others, deal not so with others.

3. Be Merciful. Luke 6. 36. Be ye merciful, as your Father is merciful. You
have a Merciful Father, you have a Merciful High Priest; be ye also merciful:
As you have received mercy, as you look for mercy, be careful to show mercy.
Give to him that asks, lend to him that would borrow, visit, relieve, refresh
the bowels of him that is in misery. Be cheerful in showing mercy, let your
hearts give as well as your hands. Be liberal, be bountiful: He that sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly: He that is merciless to the bodies of men, is
therein cruel to their souls. Hardness and niggardliness in Professors of
Religion, will disgrace their Profession, and harden the hearts of sinners from
entertaining the Gospel; Can you persuade me that this is the way of God, that
this is true Religion? What a merciless Religion, a merciless Profession! God
keep me from such a Religion. Your feeding of hungry bellies, your clothing of
naked backs, may be a means to save many a soul from death. The penny, besides
that it may gain thee many pounds, a plentiful reward, it may gain many a soul
to thy Lord.

4. Be peaceable, Mark. 4. 50. Have peace one with another. Heb. 12. 14. Follow
peace with all men. The Lord is a God of peace, Christians are sons of peace.
The wisdom which is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to
be entreated. Peaceableness stands,

1. In an unwillingness to provoke or offend: A peaceable man will not break
the Peace, is not quarrelsome or contentious, will not stir up strife, forbears
all provoking carriage, has no provoking tongue, he has peace in his heart,
and that brings forth peaceable language and carriage.

2. In an unaptness to be proved. A peaceable spirit, is a patient spirit.

3. In a readiness to be reconciled, James 3. 17. Easy to be entreated. A
peaceable spirit is hardly provoked, easily pacified.

1. In a forwardness to reconcile those that are at variance: A peaceable
spirit, is a peace making spirit; such an one is both a blessed man, Mat. 5.
Blessed are the peacemakers, and a blessing to those he lives amongst. Our
angry, quarrelsome spirit may be a plague, and one peaceable and healing
spirit, may be a blessing to a whole society.

5. Be Courteous. Sweet and affable in your carriage toward all, 1 Pet. 3. 8.
This will much win upon the hearts of those you converse with, and beget their
good liking of whatever good they behold in you: This will both mollify their
spirits toward you, and make them more willing to hearken to you: Morosity and
sourness, will fright them out of your company, and harden them against your
Counsel. Your candor will be the sugar that will help to convey-down any pill
of admonition or reproof you give them, which otherwise their stomachs would
rise against, and spit out in your faces. Carry your selves so to all, that you
may convince them that you are their friends, the friends of their souls,
whilst you appear the enemies of their sins: that your counsels are the
counsels of a friend, that your reproofs are the wounds of a friends, which are
better than the kisses of an Enemy.

But still take heed that your courtesy to sinners do not lead you in a
compliance with them in their sins, that what you intend as a Net to take their
Souls, become not a Trap to take yours. Whilst you are a friend to their
persons, beware you be not drawn aside to have fellowship with them in their
wickedness. It is better to be uncivil than ungodly. Be as courteous as
possible, yet so far only that your courtesy be neither a snare to you, nor an
encouragement to them in their sins. Be wise as well as kind.

Christians, do not pass over these second-Table duties (which I have for
brevities sake packed up into a narrow room) as the lower things of Religion,
wherein you may be excused or dispensed with; which a little praying or
confessing will make up, and so you may go on: Truth, and Temperance, and
Justice, and Mercy, etc. are to be reckoned among the weightier matters of the
Law; there is so much Religion in them, that there can be no Religion without
them: Though there may be morality where there is no true Religion, yet there
can be no Religion where there is not Morality, Micha 6. 11, 12. Shall I count
them pure, with the wicked balances, and the bag of deceitful weights? The
rich men thereof are full of violence, and the inhabitants thereof have spoken
lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth. Shall I count those pure?
Are these my People? What, holy and not honest, religious and not righteous?
What, sincerity without truth, a single heart with a double tongue? What, grace
where there is no peace, nor mercy, nor temperance? What railers, and revilers,
and quarrellers, and yet religious? James 1. 26. If any man seems to be
religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's
Religion is vain. A dreadful word! There are many Professors of Religion in
whom an unbridled tongue is found: How many light and vain words, how many
false and deceitful words, especially how many bitter and angry words do we
ordinarily hear out of such mouths? what biting and devouring, what cutting and
provoking, what reproaching and reviling language does often break forth at the
same mouths, whence at other times we hear praying and blessing? But can such
consider his Scripture without a trembling heart; This man's Religion is vain.
Vain notes two things,

1. Empty: Whatever Religion such men seem t^ have, there is nothing in it.

2. Ineffectual: That is vain that falls short of and does not reach its end,
nor brin^ about tha^ for which it is. The end of our Religion is salvation.
Whatever Religion such men have, it will do them no good, nor stand them in any
stead, it will never save their souls; they may die and be damned, and lie in
hell for ever, notwithstanding all the Religion they have. All the conclusions
that men make from such Religion, that they are in a state of grace and
salvation, are false and deceitful; that faith, and that hope, and those
prayers, which will consist with the raiging evils of the tongue, will never be
any good evidence of a good state: That which cannot drive the Devil out of the
Tongue, will never prove Christ to be in the heart. And all the expectations
that are hence raised of future blessedness, will undoubtedly deceive them.
That Religion which will not tame the Tongue, will never save the soul.

I incist the more on this, because however those evils mentioned, injustice,
unmercifulness, intemperance, etc. may possibly be as common, and some of them
as pernicious, and the prevailing of them as certainly concluding men in an
evil state as this; yet these evils of the tongue, being but words, are more
apt to be passed lightly over, and notwithstanding all the mischievous
consequences of them, to be less regarded.

But can you make a light matter of that which proves you damnable Hypocrites?
Have thou spit ^ut all thy Religion in thy furious fits, and yet ^ilt thou make
nothing of them? By this biting and devouring tongue you do not only consume
^ne another, but you consume every man himself, our own peace, your own
Comfort, your own ^opes, your Religion and Salvation. You see by ^xperience how
it devours all the exercises of Religion; what duties are we fit for, whilst
our ^ongues are on fire? Prayer must be laid aside, Reading, or Conference, of
God, or of Souls, are turned out of Doors: God himself cannot be heard,
conscience cannot be heard, Souls cannot be minded, while those noises and
tumults last. And that which does destroy the exercises of Grace, cannot but
destroy its evidences, and bring us at least to question it, if not to conclude
it a nullity. I confess some evils of the tongue may consist. with Grace in the
Heart; but if this Scripture be true, an unbridled tongue cannot; Grace cannot
hold this unruly member under such constant Government, but it will too often
break ^oose; but where it is not brought under government at all, where the
Heart puts spurs to the Tongue, but no bridle; where persons looking upon ^ll
this a matter of nothing, allow themselves in (...); and letting loose the
Reins to their Tongues, ^o ordinarily surrender them up to their Lusts and
^assions, to use at pleasure, and to vent themselves ^^eely by, such men must
first disprove the Scripture, before they can prove the truth of the^^ Religion.

Christians, you that have been sick of this disease of an evil mouth, bless
the Lord if the cure be begun, but rest not till it be perfected. It will sti^^
defile where it does not destroy. It will defile you^ names; your evil words
will recoil, he that spits against the wind, his spittle is driven back in his
ow^ face. It will defile your consciences, your hearts never send forth an evil
breath, but there is some thing of it sticks behind. It will defile your duties
there will be a tincture on your prayers of that foulness of your mouth which
your evil words have left behind them. It will defile your profession; that
will hardly be spoken well of, which will bear evil speaking. It will disturb
where it does not devour; it will disturb you in your holy course, if it does
not quite divert you, never look to prosper in holiness, or to be fruitful in
good works, whilst you break forth into such evil words; these lean kin^ and
thin ears of envy and contention will eat up all your good fruit. I rather
wonder to see any thing green in those Gardens, where such Locusts lodge, than
that there is no more. Oh Brethren, let us no longer excuse, but judge our
selves for this: let our bitterness become bitter to us; let us weep over it,
let us watch against it, let us quench those fires within, that there be no
more such flames and smoke without: let us be sensible of those inward
inflammations, of that unquietness and unpeaceableness of our spirits, whence
all our outward paroxisms arise: they are our foul stomachs that fu^ our
tongues.

We lay the blame of all upon temptations and provocations, but they are our
lusts, our lusts that are in fault, which war in our members. Let us be more
sensible of these; let us be humbled, let us be ashamed, that we that profess
our selves sons of peace, should harbor such sons of contention in our hearts.
Let the experiences we have had, of the loss we have sustained, the guilt we
have con^racted, the wounds that we have given to our ^rethren, to our own
souls, to the Gospel of our Lord already; let these set us a purging out this
^our leaven. Let salt be cast into the fountain, that ^he streams may become
sweeter, and when the fountain is healed, then let us sweep the Channel: let
there neither be war any longer in our hearts, nor a sword in our mouths. Let
us beat our Swords into* Plough-shares, and our Spears into pruning hooks. Let
our words plough up the hearts, and not break the heads; let them pare off, and
reprove the sins, and not reproach the faces of our brethren: Let us counsel,
and admonish, and comfort one another, and provoke to love and good works; but
let there be no more bitterness, or strife, or envying, or quarrellings found
among us; let us leave these evil fruits, to grow only on evil trees, where we
can expect nothing else. Whilst we cannot look to gather Grapes of Thorns, or
Olive-berries of Thistles, let not the fruit of the Bramble, or the ^rickles of
the Thistle, be found sprouting out of ^he root of the Olive. Let the Saints
still be found what they were of old, Doves, Lambs, Lillies, among Thorns: Let
there be nothing that hurts or ^ffends in all the Mountain of the Lord. Let the
^ricking briar, and grieving thorn, be rather in our sides, than in our mouths:
Let blessing and praising, and praying, and entreating, take up all the room*
that there be no place left for wrath and contention.

And whilst we take this care about our words, let us take as great a care
about our works. Let there be no virulence in our ^ongues, nor violence in our
hands; Let there be no deceit in our Lips, nor falsehood in our dealings; Let us
speak the words of truth and soberness, and let us keep the way o^
righteousness and peace: Let us walk humbly with God; and let us do justly,
and love mercy, and live peaceably with men; Let good words and good works meet
together; let Religion and Righteousness kiss each other let peace spring up
out of the Earth, as Grace has looked down from them. Let us add to our Faith
Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, to Knowledge Temperance, to Temperance
Patience, to Patience Godliness, to Godliness brotherly Kindness, to
brotberly Kindness Charity. Finally* whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
what so ever things are of good report, if there be any Virtue, if there be any
Praise, think on these things. Brethren, so speak ye, and so walk; these things
do; live in peace and love, and the God-peace shall be with you.

2. In special. Carry your selves well in, an^ toward your Families. You that
are Governor of Families, you have more souls than your own to look to. You
have curam animarum, the charg^ of souls lying upon you. You are not only to
look to your Families in matters civil, but in matters of Religion. In the Law,
the Master of the Family was by the appointment of God, to circumcise all the
males in his house: In the fourth Commandment, the Master of the Family is
charged, not only to keep the Sabbath himself, but to see that his whole Family
kept it. Thou shall do no work therein, and no only so, but neither thy Son,
nor thy Daughter, etc. Parents are required, Ephesians. 6. 4. To bring up their
children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; to nurse them up for God,
to nourish them up in the words of Faith and good Doctrine, to suckle their
souls with the milk of the Word, as well as their bodies with the Milk of the
breasts. Now, where there is a charge of Souls, there must be an account given
of Souls. When there is a Child brought forth, or a Servant brought into thy
Family, God says to thee, as the man in the Prophets parable, 1 King 20. 39.
Keep this man, look to this man, if he be lost, Thy Life shall go for his Life.
If any in the house perish through thy neglect, thy Life shall go for his life,
thy Soul shall go for his Soul. This is thy charge, and if thou be not,
faithful, so shall thy Judgment be.

But what must we do for the right ordering and governing our Families? Why,

1. Instruct your Families, teach them the way of the Lord; dwell in your
Houses as men of knowledge, and make God known to all yours, by reading, and
acquainting them with the Scriptures, which are able to make them wise unto
Salvation, by Catechizing them, etc.

2. Endeavor their Conversation to God, by speaking often to them, of the
faithfulness and misery of their natural state, of the nature and necessity of
conversion, by enquiring often into the state of their Souls.

3. Bring them into Covenant with God, as you have already done it vertually,
in bringing them to be baptized; so when they are grown up, and well instructed
in the principles of Christianity, and made sensible of their baptismal
Engagement, endeavor to bring them to an express dedicating, and engaging
themselves to the Lord, according to those directions that have been formerly
given to Christians in general.

4. Teach them to pray, and call upon them often, and see to it, that they
neglect it not.

5. Pray for them, and pray with them.

6. Dispense your favors and frowns, your corrections and encouragements, not
only as they are more or less towardly to you-ward, but as they are more or
less tractable, and careful in the matters of God.

5. In your disposal of them, either to callings, or in marriage, have a
special regard to the advantage of their Souls. I can now but name these
particulars, which I have formerly more largely insisted on, and pressed upon
you.

8. Be examples of holiness to them, walk in the midst of your house with a
perfect heart; do not unteach them by your practice, what they have learned,
from your instructions; do not teach them to slight your words, by the
unsuitableness of your ways to them.

For a conclusion of the whole, observe farther, these four general directions:
1. Be Sincere. 2. Be Steady. 3. Be fruitful. 4. Be Steadfast.


I. In your whole course, and all the particular actions, of it, be sincere.
Sincerity is not a distinct grace, but notes the truth of every grace, and
gracious aicton. There is a sincerity of, Our State. Our Actions.


1. There is a sincerity of our state. That notes the uprightness of our hearts
in the main, and has been already desoribed, in the directions I have given,
in the duty of self-examination.

2. There is a sincerity of our actions: This is twofold, either such as
respects particular and single actions, or the series of our actions, our whole
course, 2 Cor. 11. 12. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our Conscience,
that in all simplicity, and godly sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom, but by the
Grace of God we have had our Conversation in the world; in all simplicity and
godly sincerity: There is a natural sincerity, and a godly sincerity; natural
sincerity, imports no more, but simplicity, or plain-heartedness, when there is
no guile or deceit in any action; no purpose to deceive, no pretense of what is
not intended; no Conscience of any evil in what we do, nor any evil intent in
it. In this sense, God bears witness of Abimelecks integrity, Genesis 20. 6.
Testifying concerning his taking Abraham's Wife, that he did it in the integrity
of his heart, that is, he knew no evil in it: He knew not that she was another
Man's Wife, nor intended any wrong to her Husband in it. Then there is also a
godly sincerity; this supposes the sincerity of our state. He cannot have his
conversation in godly sincerity, that is not first a godly man. It concludes in
it, not only Truth, but Faith, and Love, and ingenuity to God; not only a good
meaning, but a good will to the work, and to the Lord, for whose sake we do it.

To walk sincerely, is to walk both as in the sight of God, as the witness of
our uprightness, to whom we dare to appeal, and in the power of the Grace of
God, which carries us on to pursue his honor and interest. The opposit^ to
this sincerity, is fleshly wisdom, or carnal policy, which models our Religion
and the exercises thereof, in a consistency with, and subservency to our
fleshly interests: And hypocrisy or dissimulation, to which it is most
properly opposed. And there is a twofold hypocrisy in our actions. Either
total, that which denominates them hypocritical actions, Or tial, when though
as to the main the heart be upright, and the action acceptable to God, yet
there is some little mixture of deceit in it; which, though it be matter of
humiliation to the doer, yet does not wholly hinder the acceptance of what is
done. As there is no person, so there is no action so perfectly sincere and
upright with God, but there is some obliquities to be found in it.

Brethren, be upright in your way, be true to the Lord, not putting him off
with eye-service, but serving him in singleness of heart; be ingenuous toward
God; with good will, doing service; whatever good words you speak, whatever
good duties you perform, whatever good fruits you bring forth, let good will be
at the bottom. Let not fleshly wisdom have any thing to do in the managing and
ordering your Spiritual ways. You must be fools if you will be honest. He that
will be wise (says the Apostle) let him be a fo^l. So he that will be upright,
let him lay down his fleshly wisdom. Let him not consult with Flesh and Blood,
nor study to cast himself into such a mode, or limit himself to such a measure
of godliness, as will best secure and advance his earthly concernments, but
laying aside such considerations, let him follow the Lord in all things,
whether it be right or wrong, as to matters outward and carnal.

Beware of Hipocri^ie and dissimulation: be not mockers of God, Gal. 6. 7. Be
not deceived, God is not mocked, says the Apostle. That is, either God cannot
be mocked; there is no juggling with God; there is no deceiving of Gods Eye; when
you have done all you can to varnish an empty or deceitful work, God cannot be
deceived; his eye sees what it is. There Is no dissembling with God, whatever
there may be with men: Or else God will not be mocked; he will never be put off
with, nor bear mocking services, but as men sow, so shall they reap. Look what
their work is, such shall their reward and their wages be.

There is a twofold-mock: 1. A Deriding Mock. 2. A Deluding Mock.


There is a deriding mock, or a putting of scorn upon persons. The Enemies of
Jerusalem, mocked at her Sabbaths; the Persecutors and Cruci^iers of Christ,
mocked him, and said, Hail King of the Jews.

And there is a Deluding M^ck, or a putting a Cheat upon them, to deceive them.
He that promises any thing that he does not intend, he that does any thing, or
gives any thing, which is another thing than it appears to be, is a Mocker.
Thou have mocked me these three times, said Delila to Sampso^, when he
pretended to have told her all that was in his heart, and yet hat but lied to
her, Judge. 16. 15. He that refreshes the needy with good words only, be
filled, be warmed; or Promises, I will give, I will relieve you, this is but
Mock-Charity: He that paies his debts, or buys his Commodities with brass
money instead of silver, this is but mock Justice, and he that worships God
with tongue-worship, instead of heart-worship, this is but mock Religion.

Oh, how much, such mocking of God, are many Professors of Religion guilty of.
There Is nothing but words in their Professions; nothing but words in their
Prayers; nothing but words in their Confessions and Acknowledgments. Their
Faith is a mock Faith, and their Repentance is mock Repentance; their Humility
is mock Humility; nay, their very Alms and Benevolences, wherewith those that
received them, are refreshed and relieved, are in respect to God a mock
Charity, mock Alms. Whatever there is done, there is nothing of the heart in
it; there is no good will in all their good work, and where that is wanting, the
Lord looks on all as nothing.

Oh, remember and bewail all your Hypocrisies and Dissimulation; you are apt to
think, at least would make others think, when you have been Praying, or
Fasting, or keeping Sabbaths, or visiting the Sick, or relieving the oppressed,
that you have been doing some great good services; when yet, it may be, you
have been dissembling with the Lord in all, and had need to go pray again, not
only, Lord forgive us our sins, our pride, or our covetousness, but Lord
forgive us our Prayers; Lord forgive us our Repentance, our Fasting, our
Sabbaths, our Sabbath-mockeries, our Prayer-Mockeries. Consider, brethren, what
an high provocation this is: It Is no small sin to be mockers of men; but will a
man mock God? Mal. 3. 8. Will a man rob God? says the Lord. Though you dare to
steal, and purloin one from the other, yet dare you be so highly impious and
sacrilegious, as to rob God? Ye have robbed me, says the Lord. You have not
only robbed my Prophets and my Servants, but ye have robbed me. Will a man rob
God? So, Will a man mock God? Seems it to you a small thing that you weary
men, that you will weary my God also, says he Prophet: Seems it a small
thing to you to deal falsely with men, but will you deal falsely with God also?

Brethren, in all your ways observe the rule, Do as you would be done by. If
you would not that the Lord should mock you, be you no longer Mockers of God.
Do not put off the Lord with mock-duties, unless you will be content to be put
off with mockmercies, mock-comfor^s, with a mock-pardon, and a mock salvation.

Beloved, Let us bewail our Hypocrisy; Let us not only bewail and humbled
under any thing we have offered up to God, wherein we have been hypocritical in
toto, have done nothing else but played the hypocrites; but let us bewail all
those lower degrees of hypocrisy, that have been mingled with the best of all
our duties: blessed be God, that though we have been too hypocritical, yet we
are no Hypocrites, blessed be God for any sincerity that he has seen in us,
but woe to us, and shame to us, that there has been so much hypocrisy mingled
with it. Oh, let us fear an hypocritical heart, Oh, let us watch against an
Hypocritical heart: let us purge out all the remainders of this Pharisaical
leaven.

Let there be truth in all we do, and as much as in us lies nothing but truth.
Let us draw nigh to God with a true heart, Heb. 10. Let us be und^filed or
upright in the way of the Lord, Psalm. 119. 1* Let our works be found perfect
before him. Let us love in truth, let us speak the truth in love, let all our
paths be mercy and truth; Let our hearts be in every word, in every step of our
lives, let the heart do all, let the heart pray, let the heart hear, let the
heart give and lend, and forgive; Let the grace of our hearts do all; Let Faith
pray, and Obedience hear, and Repentance celebrate our Fasts; Let wisdom guide,
let Truth speak, let Mercy give, let Love forgive, let Patience bear, and
Long-suffering forbear, let Temperance feed us, Humility cloth us, and
integrity preserve us; Let Grace do all, and let God have all, let Pride have
nothing, and Covetousness nothing, and Envy nothing; let Lust neither bear a
part in our doings, nor eat any of the fruit of our doing. Let there be written
on all we have or do, Holiness to the Lord.

Let us be more desirous to be holy, than to be acounted so; to be merciful,
and just, and humble, and patient, than to be accounted such; to have a good
conscience in the sight of God, than to obtain a name amongst the best of men.

If we be not reckoned amongst the ablest Christians, for Gifts, for Parts and
Endowments, let it content us that we are Christians. If we be not the most
skilful Christians, if our fruits be not the fairest and most beautiful, yet
let them be fruits brought forth unto God, the right fruit, sound fruit; If
what we do be weakly done, yet let it be ^onestly done.

Let us be Nathaniels, Israelites indeed in whom is no guile. So plain-hearted,
and single-hearted in all our ways, that though our Adversaries do, yet neither
our God, nor our consciences may call us Hypocrites. Let us be able to appeal
to God, as the witness of our integrity. Lord thou know that I love thee,
thou know that my heart is with thee: Let us be able to commit our selves
and our ways unto the Lord, as he that shall plead for us against all the
slights, and censures of men: My God shall plead my cause, my God shall answer
for me.

Brethren, Sincerity will give us boldness before the Lord: We shall be able
to lift up our faces in his Presence, and look in his Face in peace, and he
that can be bold with God, may be bold with all the world. He that can look God
in the Face, may look his accusers in the face, his Despisers and Persecutors
in the face: He that can freely appeal to God, can boldly appear before men.
The sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulness surprizeth Hypocrites: The sense of
their guilt and guile sides with every danger that they are in, strengthen
(...) very feer that comes upon them, makes their own hearts to fall upon
themselves, puts a sting into every cross, starves them out of all their
comforts. To God they dare not look, to Conscience they dare not remember, they
are forsaken of all their supports, and left to shake and sink under every
trouble that comes upon them. It Is innocence that has boldness, dare to be
upright and fear nothing. Go thy way, ear thy bread with joy, drink thy wine
with a merry heart, for God accepts thy works.

II. Be steady and even in all your goings. Be not off and on, in and out,
Prove. 4. 24, 26, 27. Prove. 33, 17. Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day
long. Alone, in company, at home, abroad, in thy duties, in thy business, in
thy recreations, all the day, and every day, let tomorrow be as this day, and
next day as to morrow: In this evenness and equality of our lives stand the
beauty and comeliness of them, when all the several parts of them bear their
due proportion each to other. Let your ways be conform to the Canon, and let
them be uniform: be like unto God, and then be ever like your selves, be
unchangeable. We appear almost so many men as we live days, or come into
companies: We have more of the Moon than of the Sun, little light, but many
changes and spots. Let not your conversation be so checkered, let not
Christians be speckled birds, let there not be so many black among your whites,
sometimes something of God, sometimes as much of the flesh. What a deformity
is it to a new Garment, to have here and there a company of old rotten
patches? Now a little of God, and then as much of the Devil; now serious in the
Spirit, and then in the flesh, now serious and savourie, by and by frothie and
vain; this hour in a Divine Rapture, and the next in a fleshly frolic; now a
little of Godliness, and then a patch of sensuality, Be Christians, ^^nd be
ever your selves, do not change your Hearts with your Company. Be not of those
vain ones, who can cast themselves into any shape, can suit themselves to any
Times or Companies. Who can weep with those that weep, and mourn with them that
mourn, and pray with them that pray, and can also laugh, and be merry, and
jolly with those that are so: Let all your goings be established, be ever in
the fear of the Lord.

III. Be fruitful. That ground is counted fruitful which brings forth good
Fruit, and which brings forth much Fruit. I have already directed you how to
bring forth good Fruit, now let me press you to see to it, that your Fruits do
abound, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Always abounding in the work of the Lord. Jam. 3. 17.
The wisdom which is from above is pure and peaceable, etc. and full of good
fruit. John 15. 18. Here in is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much
fruit. Romans 6. 19. As you have yielded your members servants to uncleanness,
and to iniquity unto iniquity, even so now yield your members servants to
Righteousness unto Holiness: You have been the servants of sin, be ye now the
servants of Righteousness, and be ye as free, and as forward, and as fruitful
in the service of righteousness, as ever you have been in the service of sin.
You have added sin to sin, unrighteousness to uncleaness, iniquity to inquity
A sin has abounded and multiplied its fruits, s^^ let grace also abound, and
bring forth its fruits abundantly.

Let your lives be as much filled up with the works of righteousness, and
mercy, and holiness, as they have been with the works of the flesh. Brethren,
time was, when a little sin could not suffice you, a little sporting, a little
pleasure would not serve your turn; you thought you would never have enough of
the world, and the lusts and vanities of it; why, prove your selves, now to be
as heartily the servants of Christ, as ever you were the servants of sin, by
being fruitfully his, as ever you were fruitful to sin. If Christ be a better
Master, and a better Play Master, let him have more and more cheerful services.
Bring forth good fruits, and of all sorts. As it is said of the Tree of Life
that stands in the City of God above, Rev. 22. 2. so let it be said of every
living Tree that stands in the Vineyard of God here below. That they bring
forth twelve manner, that is, all manner of fruits; be fruitful in every good
work, and bring forth fruit for every season. There are summer fruits, and
there are winter fruits, that God expects from you. By summer fruits I mean,
those that are most proper for the days of your prosperity, as thankfulness,
watchfulness, fear, humility, self-denial, mercy, compassion, etc. Your winter
fruits rae such as God looks for in the days of your affliction, fasting,
repentance, mortification, humiliation, submission, patience, etc. Brethren, be
not only good summer servants, but winter servants also, and when ever it is
winter with you, ^all close to your Winter-work, be much in the ^xercise of
repentance, godly sorrow, patience, etc. ^et the persecuting World see, that
godliness will ^ot only live, but flourish too in the hardest Win^er: The truth
is, there is no such flourishing time ^or the Saints as the time of trouble:
Gods trees do usually bear best in Winter. The Winter frosts do ordinarily
bring forth and ripen their fruit better than the Summers warmth^. At least the
hard Winter prepares for a fruitful Summer; Beloved, ^s it Winter with any of
you? lose not this fructi^ying season, to your work, to your work. Let your
work serve you in stead of fire to keep you warm. ^et not the cold winds and
storms chill and freeze your spirits, and so kill your fruits: let a fire be
kindled and kept alive within you, the fire of love and holy zeal, I mean, let
those winds not blow ^ut, but blow up these fires; let them blow out the fire
of lust, of passion, and contention, but let them blow up the fire of love and
zeal, and let your winward warmth supply the want of outward comforts and
encouragements, for the cherishing and ^^ripening of your fruit. Be either
bringing forth fruit, or preparing for fruit, let nor the Plough stand still,
let the clods be broken, let the seed be cast in: If it be the day of your
tears, sow in tears; it is good sowing in such a rainy day; and such a
seed-time will bring forth a comfortable Harvest.

IV. Be steadfast and unmovable, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Be not moved, either from the
hope of the Gospel, or from the Obedience of the Gospel. Be not Apostates from
Christ, let not the fear of the Cross make you weary of the yoke of Christ:
Turn not back from the holy Commandment, for any Tribulation that may come upon
you. Suffer not your selves to be persecuted out of your Religion or conscience.

Tribulations are temptations, and will try what there is of God in you, what
reality there is lying under all your professions, whether the Word of Christ
has taken any root in you: And such troubles will make the greatest Trial of
you, which fall upon you for righteousness sake.

There are some troubles that fall promiscuously on all, good and bad, and put
no difference betwixt the one and the other, but as an overflowing flood, bear
down all before them: As in general families, pestilences, and wars, in which
it happen* alike to the just and unjust, to him that serve^^ God, and him that
serves him not.

There are other troubles that fall only on the heritage of the Lord, on the
best among a people. When the vile of the earth prosper and flourish, and those
only in whom some good thing is found, are the suffering people. When the Sun
shines on the barren Mountains and miry Marshes, and (...) Storms, the
Thunder, and the Hail fall only on (...) fruitful Fields; when the Corn is
smitten, and (...) the Thorns and Briars escape. Such troubles as fall on the
Righteous of the earth, and for their righteousness sake; when the bread and
water of affliction are given to Disciples, and in the name of Disciples, these
are the most trying troubles. Such troubles as leave men to their choice,
either to sin or suffer: When godliness becomes the common rode to tribulation,
and ungodliness is the only door that is left open, by which we may escape and
shift our selves out of danger. Such afflictions as these will make the most
narrow search, and through trial, whether we are godly indeed or not.

Brethren, see that your hearts be so established with grace, that you stand
your ground, and keep your way in such days of temptation. And that you may
hold out, and hold on, and abide in the day of greatest trials, take this
course.

I. Try your selves thoroughly aforehand, 1 Cor. 11. 3. If we would judge our
selves, we should not be judged: Though I cannot say, if we would try our
selves, we should not be tried, yet this I can say, if we would try our selves,
we should be the more likely ^o abide the trial of the Lord. Try your selves
aforehand: And that,

1. What you are in the state of your souls, according to the instructions I
have already given you in this matter.

2. What you are in your duties, in your active obedience: He that is not
faithful in doing the Will of God, is not like to be found faithful in
suffering the Will of God. He that carries himself Christianly in his present
state, needs not trouble himself with fears and doubts, how he shall stand in
any future state he may be brought into.

The trial that trouble will make upon us is, whether we will be faithful in
doing the Will of God when we must suffer for it: Now he that neglects his
duty, and cannot hold his heart to an holy conscientious course when he is in
no danger, and his Religion is like to cost him nothing, what is like to become
of this man's godliness, when it may cost him the loss of all? We read^ Dan. 6.
10. When a decree was signed, That whosoever should ask any Petition of God, or
man, save of the King should be cast into the Lions D^n: That Daniel prayed and
gave thanks to his God three times a day (as he ha^^ done aforetime:) If Daniel
had not used to pray aforetime, when praying would bring him into n^^ danger,
he would not doubtless have adventured o^^ it in such a time, when he saw
evidently that it wa^ like to cost him his life.

Brethren, Consider what your present course and care is: Do you pray now, and
fast now, and withdrawing your selves from the lusts and liberties of the
world? Do you now apply your selves to a so^ ber, ser^ous, self-denying life?
Are you now active for God and your s^uls, and have you been conscientious, and
watchful, and fruitful aforetime, when there was nothing to molest or
discourage you? If you have been carnal, and vain, and remiss in the exercises
of Religion, when you might have been as holy as you would, as strict and as
zealous as you would, without any fear of suffering for it: If you have wasted
away your encouragements, and spent out your Sunshine, in a careless
unprofitable life, how do you think to be ever useful or serviceable in the
dark? If you cannot now bear the pains of a godly life, how do you think you
should bear both the pains and the charges of it? If you could follow Christ no
closer in the plenty of all things, how do you think to follow him, when it
must be in hunger and thirst?

Do thou talk of suffering for Christ, and suffering for Righteousness, and
hope thou shall never forsake him, whatever come upon thee, when thy heart
tells thee, how much thou have slighted Christ, neglected thy duty to Christ,
contented thy self with a cold, heartlesse, lukewarm Profession, without the
power of Christianity, and that when thou have had no pretense of damage or
danger that was hereby like to come upon thee? You that how can keep at
distance from Christ, for the satisfying of a lust, have reason enough to fear
that you will utterly forsake him, if ye be put to it, for the saving of your
Life. You that in a calm can ordinarily remit your Religion, for the pleasing a
lazy heart, will be like enough to renounce your Religion in a storm, to quiet
a fearful heart. He that can sell his Conscience for a Lust, will hardly be
persuaded to buy it, with the loss of all that ever he is worth. Thou say,
it may be, with Peter, Though I dye with him, I will not deny him: I, but do
thou deny thy self for him now, deny thy pleasures, and thy ease, and thy
companions now? Have thou not many a time denied him a Prayer, or an Alms, when
he has called for it? Can thou watch with Christ? Do thou walk with Christ
as thou ought? Do thou live to Christ? Art thou faithful in bringing forth
fruit unto Christ, the fruits of holiness and righteousness? If not, how do
thou think to be able to suffer for him? If the way of Christ be too strait for
thee, thou will find his burden to be too heavy; if thou can not bear his
yoke, thou will be less able to bear his Cross.

Christians, consider what your ways and your doings are at present; and if
you find the Lord helping you to walk in all good conscience now, you need not
doubt of being enabled to witness for a good conscience when called to it. If
you keep the Word, and do the work of the Lord, you may expect his help for
bearing his burden. If you be faithful in your lives, you are the more like to
be faithful to the death, Because thou have kept the Word of my patience, I
also will keep thee in the hour of temptation, Rev. 3. 10.

2. What you are in the ordinary and smaller crosses, that come daily upon you:
There is not that man that lives, that meets not with his crosses, which though
they be, many of them, but light and inconsiderable things, below the Spirit of
a Christian to take notice of, yet how sadly may we observe at what a loss they
are presently by them. Every little Wind raises a storm; every little cross
puts us out of course. What breaches are often made upon our consciences, what
interruptions of duties, what abatements of our comforts, to what distance are
we put from Christ, and our holy communion with him, and all merely for a thing
of naught. We cannot bear an unkindness from a Friend, or an injury from an
Enemy, the provocation of an evil tongue, a scoff, or a slander, but presently
our spirits are in an uproar, and there are such tumults raised up within us,
that for the time we forget that we are Christians: Duties, and Comforts,
Christ and Conscience, Souls, and the matters of Eternity, and all regard to
them, are laid aside, and turned out of doors; Faith and Patience, and
Meekness, and Moderation, are either made to be silent, or at least cannot be
heard, for the noise of our passions, and disquiets; and all this sometimes for
such trivial things, that when we come to our selves, we are all quite ashamed
of our selves.

Brethren, such fails by these lower temptations, I cannot wonder if they make
our hearts shake at the fore-fight of greater. If every small party which the
Adversary sends out against us, does put us to the rout, How shall we stand,
when he comes upon us with his full body? If we are overcome of the footmen,
how shall we contend with the horsemen? If a rod, or a little finger does so
disturb us, how shall we bear the weight of the loins, or the stinging of
Scorpions? If we cannot bear an unkindnesse, or a nod, or a scoff, or a
slander, what would become of us? should we be brought to resist unto blood?

Beloved, it is of greater import to Christians than they are aware of, both to
observe themselves daily, and their carriages in these lower things, and to
inure themselves to patience, and meekness of spirit under them. Though it ^e
no great virtue to be patient, where there is no great provocation, yet there
may be great benefit by it. If we could but shame our selves out of this folly,
and childishness of Spirit, whereby we are apt to be moved with every toy; if
we could reason, and pray our selves into such a fixed calm and quietness of
spirit, that we could keep our way, with the neglect of such disturbances, our
lives would be both more comfortable and honorable at present, and we should
be in the better preparation for any harder things that might come upon us. If
we know how to be Christians among briars and thorns, we shall be the better
able to continue such among Spears and Arrows.

3. What, you are under the temptation of prosperity. The World is a Christians
Enemy, it expresses its enmity in its temptations; the end of all its
temptations, is to draw us off from God. Its temptations are of two sorts,
either of prosperity or affliction, and both driving at the same end, though in
a different way.

Prosperity allures, entices, and flatters us away from God; it steals away our
hearts from God, as Absalom stole the hearts of Israel from David, by fair
speeches, by its fair and smiling face, thereby drawing us into a neglect and
forgetfulness of God, to grow cold and remiss in our duty to God, to let fall
our love and affection, and to lay aside our care of Religion.

Afflictions fright us from God, dealing by us as Rabshakeh by Israel, when he
sought to get them off from Hezekiah by his threatenings and great words, Isa.
36. If you will not hearken to me, I will make you drink your own piss, and eat
your own dung: Afflictions are apt to weary men out of the ways of God, to
starve them out of their Religion, to persecute them out of their Consciences,
and to make godliness too hot for them.

The stronger and the more dangerous of these two sorts of temptations, are
held to be the temptations of prosperity; the World flatters more from Christ,
than ever it can fright from him.

Now beloved, if you have stood your ground against the former of these
temptations, you may with the more confidence encounter the latter: he that
has been holy in prosperity, will be holy in afflictions; he that knows how
to abound, will the better know how to want; he that has kept close to God,
kept up his affections, kept on his way, against all the fawns and flatteries
of the world, his Spirit is not like to be sunk under its frowns and
threatenings; The God that has preserved you from being lulled asleep by the
warm Sun, will also preserve you from being withered by the scorching Sun.

II. Mortify the flesh with the lusts of it. It Is corruption that makes
affliction tedious and dangerous. Unmortified lusts will both make affliction
to be the sharper, and also to be the greater temptation.

1. They will make afflictions to be the sharper and more painful. A Christian
who has two men in one, the old man and the new, has two tender parts, which
are apt to smart, and to be put to pain at every little thing that offends: his
Conscience and his Lust: that which offends Conscience, and makes it smart, is
sin; that which offends Lust, and puts it to pain, is affliction. If Conscience
be grown dead, and benumbed, sin never troubles, and if Lust be once dead,
afflictions never trouble: kill your lusts, and you at once kill all your
adversaries and afflictions.

What makes contempt and disgrace so tedious? Why, it is the pride of our
hearts. What makes poverty and want so grievous, but the covetousness and
greediness of our hearts: The appetite will be quarrelling that it wants its
dainties; the wanton mind will be vexed, that it is deprived of its gay clothes,
and rich attire; carnal fears, and worldly cares, come in with their vexations:
kill these lusts, and you give present ease to your hearts; it is sin that makes
sufferings smart:

2. They hereupon make afflictions to be the greater temptations: the more
afflictions pain us, the more strongly do they persuade us, to take heed of
that which brings them on us, and to comply with any thing that will give us
ease or relief. Every pang and throb that comes upon us for godliness sake,
will be clamouring and crying out against it, away with it, away with it: this
professing, and praying, and precise walking, has undone me; this Conscience
has broken my back, lost me my Estate, my Liberty, my Friends; bereft me of
all my comforts, my credit, my quiet, and created all these fears, and sorrows,
and vexations which are upon me. Will remitting my zeal, dispensing with
Conscience, cast off care, make me whole, and save me all this harm and loss?
why then shall I thus torment my self, when I have such a way open to escape
all?

Brethren, would you be secure from such temptations? get your lusts slain,
which put an edge upon them: Cut off all provision from the flesh, that would
keep it in heart. Allow not your selves the liberty to live a sensual life,
while you have opportunity; bring your selves under a voluntary restraint;
abase your selves, before God has the abasing of you; deny your selves,
before God comes to deny you; put the bridle upon your appetites, before God
come and puts bonds upon them and you; restrain your selves of your delicates,
before God come and shorten you; uncloath your selves of your wanton habits,
before God has the stripping of you; starve your lusts to death, that the Lord
come not and storm them; let tribulations find their hard work done to their
hand, and they will lie more easy.

Get your hearts so low, that the contempt of men cannot bring you lower; that
the Spoilers cannot make you poorer than your hearts have made you already;
give all you have to God, your ease, and your pleasures, and your liberty, and
your Estates; give away all you have from lust to God, and then you will be
disquieted at whatsoever Messengers he sends to fetch it away.

When this is done, what hurt can tribulation do you? what temptation will it
be unto you? You will then dare to follow the Lord against all the world; you
will not fear your Religion will prejudice you; you will not fear loss; you
have nothing to lose, all is given away already; you will not fear a Prison,
your hearts have cerried you thither already; you will not fear disgrace or
contempt, your hearts have brought you so low, that the pride of men cannot lay
you lower; you will not fear torments, when your flesh is dead, and can feel no
pain.

III. Be convinced of the dreadfulness of Apostasy, and the misery of Apostates
and Back-sliders. Remembur Lots Wife: God has left us many Pillars of Salt
before our eyes, to warn us to take heed of looking back.

Mat. 7. 27. The fall of that House was great, that is, it was a dreadful and
terrible fall; it was spoken of the house built upon the Sand, which when
assaulted by the winds and floods of persecution, fell; because it had no
foundation, and great or dreadful was the fall of it; a fall from an house to
an heap.

Heb. 13. 38. If any man draw back my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Let
him go, take him who will for me; take him World, take him Devil, for I regard^
him not. Thou may go whither thou will, that art gone from thy God; thou
must look to thy self, and shift for thy self as thou can, God has no
further favor for thee; his soul is loosed from thee.

Rev. 16. 15. Blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments: (that
keeps his garments) that is, that keeps his Faith, his Conscience, his
Religion, his holy profession, wherewith he is clothed; that keeps them
clean, ne polluantur, that has not defiled his garments; that keeps them
safe, ne cripiantur, that has not lost his garments; that has neither defiled
his Profession, nor lost his Religion and Conscience; he is a blessed man,
Revel. 2. and chap. 3. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree of
Life, of the hidden Manna; to sit with me on the Throne. To him that
overcomes, that is, that holds out to the end. Hold out, and you overcome,
overcome, and you shall reign; overcome and you shall eat of the Tree of Life,
and hidden Manna.

Now brethren, if a blessing be the portion of him that keeps his Garments,
keeps his Faith, and keeps his Conscience, what shall be his Portion that has
lost all, and thrown off all? He that has lost his holy garments has woven to
himself a clothing of curses, not of blessings; If he only that overcomes
shall sit on the Throne, shall eat of the Tree of Life, then what shall he eat,
or where must he sit that is overcome? He shall eat the fruit of his own
doings, of his lies, and hypocrisy, and dissembling, he shall feed upon death
and wrath; death shall feed upon him, and he shall have nothing else to feed
upon, there is meat for him to eat, and a place prepared for him, such as it
is; his place shall not be on the Throne, but under the Footstool.

Now put all this together, and you may see the woeful state of Apostate
Professors, they are Monuments of Vengeance: Though they have lost their
savor, yet they will serve for Pillars of Salt; a standing dread, and terror,
and warning to others, on whose foreheads is written, Let him that thinks be
stands take heed lest be fall. They are clothed with curses, must feed upon
fire, and have their dwelling under the footstool in scorn and everlasting
contempt.

Apostates are the worst of men, Those that have lost their Religion, have lost
by their Religion, 2 Pet. 2. 21. Better had it been for them not to have known
the way of Righteousness, than having known, to turn from the holy Commandment.
Religion, which is a wing to Saints, whereby they rise up into Glory, is become
a weight to hypocrites, to sink them so much the deeper in wrath. Apostates are
in the worst case of all men.

1. They are the worst in Gods account. The Lord has a double quarrel with
them, not only for being found under the Enemies colors, but that ever such
varlets should have marched under his colors: A quarrel with them for their
Profession, for their Prayers, wherein they have but abused his Name and
Gospel: God and his ways have suffered from none so much as from Renegado
disciples.

2. They are the worst in the account of men, both good men and evil men: there
are none that can speak well of Renegado's; they are the sorrow of Saints, and
the sport of sinners, good men's shame, and evil men's scorn, and the hate of all.

3. But especially they are the worst and most miserable of men, considered in
themselves, they have not only lost their Religion, but they have armed it
against themselves. All the profession and prayers that they have made,
together with all the hopes, and joys, and comforts that once seemed to grow up
out of them; the remembrance of them (I mean, when ever they come to remember
themselves) will be as many darts in their livers, and stings in their hearts.
All their hopes, and joys, and comforts have given up the Ghost, and these
ghosts do haunt them and torment them with such thoughts as these.

Wretched creature that I am, where am I? what an exchange have I made? Light
for darkness, Wisdom or folly, Righteousness for wickedness, Gain for
godliness, Conscience for credit, Heaven for hell!

I was once, as I thought, in the way of Life, and I had hopes I should have
seen life; I made profession of Religion, and took pleasure in Religion; I
walked after the Lord, and the thoughts of God were precious to me; I found
comfort in Christ, I took sweet counsel with the Saints, and went to the house
of God with them in company. Sabbaths were a delight, Ordinances were a
refreshing to me; I have tasted of the good Word of God, and the powers of the
World to come; and whilst it was thus with me, I had great peace, and was full
of hopes that I should once see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the
living.

But woe is me, where am I now? How has my treacherous heart, that I never
suspected, turned me aside from God, and spoiled me of all my hopes and
comforts? I must now bid adieu to all: farewell ^rofession, farewell Religion;
farewell Conscience; farewell Duties, Sabbaths, Ordinances, Saints, the sweet
delights I took in them; farewell Joys and Hopes for ever. Welcome Drunkards,
Swearers, Liars, welcome Turk, or Pope, or Devil, I must now be of your side,
and take up my lot with you for ever. Oh whither am I fallen? Study well the
misery of such persons, and let that be a warning to you.

IV. Be Circumspect. See that you do not unnecessarily pull sufferings on your
selves, especially look to it, that you suffer not as evil doers. If your sin
lead you into sufferings, God may leave you in them, and then what is like to
become of you?

There is a suffering for our faults, there is a suffering for our
righteousness, without our fault, and there is a suffering for our
righteousness through our fault. We sometimes run our selves upon trouble when
we need not: as when by our unwary and imprudent managing and ordering our
selves in some duties, we lay our selves open to those sufferings, which a
little prudence might have prevented. We must be wise as well as innocent.
Christians should never ordinarily expose themselves to suffering, till God
has so hedged up all lawful ways of escape, that they must either suffer or
sin.

Be so wary in your course, that you may not faultily suffer for the good that
is in you; but especially see to it, that you suffer not as evildoers, and for
the evil that is found in you; to this end be careful.

1. That you speak not, nor do any thing in the matters of Religion rashly.
'Twas good counsel which the Town-Clark gave the Ephesians, when they were in a
tumult and uproar about their Goddess Diana, Acts 19. 36. Seeing that these
things cannot be spoken against, ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing
rashly. Christians should be considerate and well advised in what they speak or
do, should mark and weigh their words and actions themselves, which they know
will be so narrowly observed and weighed by others.

2. That you speak not, nor do, nor refuse to do any thing obstinately, or out
of stomach, or animosity. Let your ways be guided, not by passion, or a spirit
of contradiction, but by conscience and meekness of spirit: be not self-willed,
let nothing be done through strife, etc. Phil. 2. 3. Be steadfast, but not
stubborn; be faithful, but not wilful; be zealous, but not contentious.

3. That you neither do nor suffer any thing out of pride or vainglory; as the
Apostle exhorts, Phil. 2. 3. Do nothing, so suffer nothing out of strife or
vain glory. Take heed that an affectation of popular applause, of gaining the
repute of active Christians, of bold and resolved Christians, be not it that
leads you on. Your pride may cost you much, but will never bear your charge,
may bring you into trouble, but will never bear you out.

4. That you do nothing ignorantly, or upon mistake. Be clear, especially in
those things which may be costly. Study your duty thoroughly, labor to see your
way plain before you; to see the pillar of fire and of the cloud going before
you: Give heed to the word of the Scriptures, which is a light to your feet,
and a Lanthorn to your steps: Where you are clear you will be bold; but take
heed of suffering upon a mistake. Your troubles will be like to open your eyes,
and show your mistake, and thereby put out your lights, destroy your supports
and comforts.

5. Do not suffer unpeaceably. Suffer not for unpeaceableness, and suffer not
unpeaceably; be patient and you will be peaceable.

Brethren, see that you be thus well advised, meek, humble, peaceable, and
clear in the grounds of your sufferings: And then,

V. Be resolute. Be sure you stand on good ground, and then resolve to stand
your ground against all the world. Follow God, and fear not men. Art thou
godly? repent not, whatsoever thy Religion cost thee; let sinners repent, but
let not Saints repent; let Saints repent of their faults, but not of their
faith, of their iniquities, but not of their Righteousness. The Psalmist, as
holy a man as he was, was almost brought to it, his feet were almost gone, he
began to say, when he considered the prosperity of the wicked, and his own
afflictions, Psalm. 73. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed mine
hands in innocence.

Look to your selves you that stand, and take heed lest you fall: You that
stand in integrity, take heed lest you fall away by your Repentance.

Repent not of your righteousness, lest you afterward repent of your
repentance. Repent not of your righteousness, no, nor of your zeal; or your
forwardness, or activity, in the holy ways of the Lord. Your zeal, it may be,
has put you in the front of the Battle, where you receive the first and
hottest charge of your enemies reproaches and persecutions, when others that
have kept them more close, and been more remiss, or hid in the crowd, and more
out of gunshot, yet wish not your selves a step farther back, or a cubit lower
in your stature in the Grace of God: Wish not any thing undone, concerning
which, God will say, well done.

Repent not, and remit not of your zeal; think not of a retreat. Do not as the
King of Israel, hide your selves under a disguise; feign not your selves to be
worse, in hope to escape the* better; the arrow may find you, though you be hid
from the eye. Let not any of you that have been confessors of Christ, return to
be only his midnight disciples.

Forsake not the Lord till you can find a better Captain, that is, till God
cease to be God, till the Lord say, shift for thy self, there is no help for
thee in thy God: Retreat not from holiness till you are sure you can retreat
without loss. Be not false to Religion, till you find it false to you If ever
Godliness leave you in the lurch, renounce it and spare not. If ever Religion
cost you more than it is worth, throw it off as you will.

Christians, know when you are well, and hold your own, be not betrayed out of
your refuge. If you must suffer, suffer for that which will pay you your
charges; suffer not for your sins, but for your Religion; suffer not for the
shadow or name, but for the substance of Religion. If any thing in the world
will save you harmless in your sufferings, and quit the cost of all your
expenses, it is substantial goodness. If there be any Stigmata L^udis, they are
the marks which we bear in our bodies of the Lord Jesus. If there be any shame
that has a glory in it, it is the reproach of Christ, and the shame that you
suffer for his Name. If there be any Cross that is a Crown, it is the Cross of
Christ: If there be any Cross that can be undoubtedly called the Cross of
Christ, it is the holy Cross, or sufferings for holnesse. Those Martyrs that
suffered under the Popish tyranny, for witnessing against the abomination of
the Mass, with the rest of their Idolatries and Superstitions, had not a more
clear and glorious Cause and Crown than thou have, who suffer for the power
of Holiness.

If there be any thing in the World which God owns, and wherein his honor is
nearly concerned, it is holi^ess. If ever the Devil showed himself a Devil, it
is in his opposing holiness; if ever he showed himself a Devil in print, it is
in those books of reproaches and scoffs that are written against purity; if
ever he showed himself a Devil in grain, it is when his hands have been dyed
with the blood of Saints.

Brethren, if you will resist the Devil, if you will be on the Lords side, be
on the side of Holiness. If you will stand to any thing, if you will not be
whifling, inconsistent, shaken reeds, tossed up and down with every Wind, if
you will fix any where, fix here, upon substantial godliness.

This is the great controversy betwixt Heaven and Hell, betwixt the seed of
the Woman and the Serpent, betwixt the professing and profane world, about the
substance and power of godliness, some quarrels and contests there are about
the shadows and appendants of Religion, matter merely circumstantial: but
whatever noise there be made about such things as these, the bottom of the
controversy lies deeper; it is about the body of Religion, and not the skirts
of its garments: it is he that will live godly in Christ Jesus, that does and
must suffer persecution.

Art thou godly? Fix here, and let this be thy resolution: I live in a World of
quarrels and contentions, contentions about shadows and circumstances; but for
such things as these, though I will not defile my self by complying in my
practice, with what Conscience complies not, yet I list not to be contentious,
nor to perplex my self or others about them. But by the grace of God, whilst
God is a God of holiness, whilst holiness is the image and Interest of God,
whilst these words of the Lord, Be ye holy, follow holiness, live righteously,
soberly, and godly in this present World, whilst these, and the like words of
the Lord, stand un-repeal'd, by the Grace of God I will be a Friend, an
Advocate, a Confessor, a practitioner of Holiness to the end of my days. This
is my resolution, and in this resolution I commit my self to God, and so come
on me what will.

FINIS.
PHIL. 4. 9. Those things which you have both learned, and received, and heard,
and seen in me, do, and the God of Peace shall be with you.
WHat the particular Reason of my choice of this Scripture this day is, if you
compare my present station, with the intent of the Apostle, in these words, you
will easily understand.

These words of the Apostle, being part of the close of his Epistle to the
Philipiant, are his Valediction, or Farewell to them: It is not unknown to you
that I must now be parted from you; and I have pitched on this Scripture, to be
the Close of my Twenty Years Ministry among you.

God has sent me among you to be a Builder, and I have chosen this Text to be
an Hammer to fasten, and drive home those Nails of Instruction and
Consolation, which I have been so long endeavoring to enter into you.

God has sent me among you as a Fisherman; and I have chosen these words to be
as the closing of the Net. Behold, once more the Net is spread, and I am now
making my last Draught; and oh that it might have the same good speed, as
Peter's last had, Luke 5. 6. It would then pay the Charges, though the Net
break.

God has sent me among you as an Husbandman, to plow and to sow; and I am now
come to cover what has been sown.

What is my aim in Preaching, let be yours in Hearing: Oh that both Preacher
and Hearers might heartily join in this Desire! This once more, God speed the
Plow.

In this Desire and hope I drive on.

In the Text observe, A Precept, A Promise, An Entail of the Promise on the
Precept.


In the Precept we have, 1. An Act; [ Do.] 2. An Object; [The things that ye
have learned, received, heard, and seen.]


The Promise is in these words, [The God of Peace shall be with you,]

The Entail of the Promise on the Precept, you have in the Connective Particle
[ And] which knits them up together. Do the Work, and have the Reward; Obey the
Precept, and enjoy the Promise; Do what you have received and heard, and the
God of Peace shall be with you. Be careful of the former, and be not careful
about the latter; If the Precept be performed, the Promise shall be made good.

Doct. 1. Christians must be Learners before they can be Doers [What you have
learned, that do.]

Doct. 2. He has learned well, that has learned to do well.

Doct. 3. Christians Eyes, as well as their Ears* (...) Religion: Or, The Holy
Examples (...), should be living Sermons to people^ [ What you have see^ in me]
Therefore the Apostle ^xhorts, Phil. 3. 17. Mark them which so walk, as you
have us for an example; and 1 Cor. 11. 1. Be ye followers of me, as I am of
Christ; that is, either, I have been a Follower of Christ, be ye therefore
Followers of me; or else, Be ye Followers of me, as far ^orth as I have been a
follower of Christ. Those Ministers may go off the Stage with Honor and Co^^^,
who have left behind them the good Seed of ^ou^d Doctrine* and the good savor
of an Holy Example.

For mine own part, what my Doctrine and manner of life has been among you,
you are witnesses, and God also. And however, I have great reason to judge and
condemn my self before the Lord, and to bewail it, that my Conversation has
been less exemplary and useful, than oh that it had been! yet I go off from you
with this Testimony upon my heart, that I have not been of those who bind heavy
Burdens, and lay them on other men's shoulders, but will not touch them with
one of their fingers; but my endeavor has been, to press on mine own Soul,
and to hold out in my own practice, that Word of Life which I have preached to
you; and therefore am bold, in this sense, to exhort you in the words of the
Apostle, Be ye followers of me, as far forth as you have seen me a follower of
Christ.

Doct. 4. Godly Ministers, when they are parting from their People, would fain
leave God behind them. Though it be not unusual, when the Lord sends them away,
he goes with them; God and his Messengers, do not seldom take their farewell of
people together; yet their earnest desire is, that though they must away, yet
the Lord would stay.

Doct. 5. Faithful Ministers would be Messengers of Peace, going, as well as
coming.

As the Apostles first words were to be, Peace be unto you, Math. 10. so some
of this Apostles last words were, The God of peace shall be with you.

Doct. 6. Whenever Ministers part with their People, if they can but leave
Godliness in them, they shall certainly leave God with them. Or,

Those that obey the Gospel, whatsoever, or whomsoever they want, shall ever be
in a peaceful and blessed condition.

These things do, that is, live in the practice and power of that Doctrine of
Godliness, which you have received, and heard; and then fear not, the God of
Peace shall be with you.

This Doctrine I shall fully prove to you, after I have premised,

That the Doctrine which I have preached to you, is the Doctrine of Godliness;
the sum whereof take in these four particulars:

1. That Jesus Christ, who came into the World to save sinners, came also to
sanctify and purge them from their sins.

2. That those that believe in Jesus, must be careful to maintain good works,
or to live a Godly Life.

That this Godliness is not such a flight and easy, and empty thing, as the
mistaken World imagine; but stands in an exact conformity of the whole Man,
He^^^, and Life, to the whole Will of God.

4. That as whosoever believe^ not in Jesus, so whosoever is short of this true
sincere Godliness, cannot be saved.

This is the sum of that Doctrine which I have preached unto you; which being
the eternal Truth of God, I herein imbarque my own Soul and Life, desiring to
be found in that same Jesus, and to be found walking in that same way of
Righteousness, which I have declared unto you.

2. That my Design and Aim, in preaching this Doctrine to you, has been to
beget in you, and through the influence and assistance of the Eternal Spirit,
to bring you to this true Godliness. I have traveled in birth with you, that
Christ might be formed in you; that I might leave you possessors and partakers
of that Grace which accompanies Salvation; that your Faith might stand, not in
the VVisdome of men, but in the power of God; That your Repentance might be
Repentance unto Life, not to be repented of; that you might obey from the heart
that Form of Doctrine that has been delivered unto you; that you might stand
complete in all the Will of God; that you might be holy and harmless, the
Children of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked Generation, amongst
whom you must shine as Lights in the World, holding forth the Word of Life;
that being rooted and grounded in love, you might comprehend with all Saints,
what is the height and depth, and length, and breadth, and might know the love
of Christ, which passes knowledge, and be filled with all the fullness of God:
To this end have I taught every one, and warned every one, that I might present
you perfect in Christ Jesus.

3. That as far forth as the success has answered my Design and aim upon any
of your Souls, so far forth stand you entitled to this glorious Promise in the
Text, The God of peace shall be with you. Look how many Souls there are amongst
you that live in the power and obedience of those Truths you have received; to
so many can I with confidence give this Farewell of the Apostles, without Its or
Ands, the God of peace shall be with you. To whomsoever the Lord has been a
God of Grace, to them will he be a God of Peace. Whoever amongst you have this
God of Grace dwelling and ruling in you, shall certainly find this God of peace
dwelling and abiding with you: As for all others, though I can heartily make
this my parting prayer, The Lord be with you, the God of peace be with you; yet
I cannot turn this prayer into a Promise, nor give you any assurance, that the
God of Peace will be with you.

These things premised, I shall now give you the full proof of the Doctrine in
the following Reasons. The Doctrine you remember is, Those that obey the
Gospel, whatsoever, or whomsoever they want, shall ever be in a peaceful and
blessed Condition.

The Reasons are, 1. The God of peace shall be with them. 2. If God be with
them, all things whatsoever befall them, shall make for their good.


Reas. 1. The God of Peace shall be with them; these things do, live in the
obedience of the holy Doctrine which you have received, and the God of Peace
shall be with you. This glorious Promise is pregnant with all the blessings
that Heaven and Earth can afford.

If you ask, why, what is there in it? I demand of you, What is there in God?
God is in the Promise, all that is in God, is here assured to the Godly. The
Philosophers of old attained to some glimmerings of the excellencies that are
in God, by these 3. ways.

1. Per viam Negationis, conceiving of him as a Being, removed from all things,
signifying imperfection: as ignorance, impotence, iniquity, corruptibility,
composition, alteration, or any limits or bounds of this Essence, Power and
Glory.

2. Per viam causalitatis, conceiving of him, as the Fountain of all other
Beings; and thence concluding, that whatsoever Excellencies, or perfections are
scattered up and down in the whole Creation, are all united in him, from whom
they had their Original.

3. Per viam eminentiae, by way of Excellency; so that whatever perfections,
whatever goodness is to be found in any Creature, though it be not to be found
in God, formaliter, yet there is that in him (he being the first cause of all)
that does infinitely, superabundantly answer them all. Though there be not the
same Specific Excellencies in him, nor those very pleasures and delights
issuing from him, which the creatures yield; yet there are such Excellencies,
such perfections as transcend and surpass them all.

The Scripture tells us more positively, and plainly; that God is Almighty,
Omniscient, Omnipresent, Infinite, Eternal, Unchangeable, All-sufficient, Holy,
Righteous, Gracious; the Portion, the Protection, the Rewarder, yea the
exceeding great Reward of them that diligently seek him. And this is he, that
is in the promise, God is in the promise. I must not enlarge in this spacious
Field; I shall keep nearer the Text, and shall confine my self to these four
particulars.

1. God is in the Promise as the God of Peace, as the Author and bestower of
Peace. The greatest of Blessings, is the Blessing of Peace, Peace has all
blessings included in it. It has possession, fruition, and security; it has
plenty, pleasure and safety: where there is no peace, there is no security for
the holding, nor opportunity of enjoying what we have. Whatever we have, we
have it as if we had it not. Peace is the greatest of Blessings.

Peace with God is the most glorious of Peace. What is there that is excellent,
what is there that is desirable, that is not comprehended in this Peace with
God? Where there is Peace, there is Pardon: guilt cannot consist with this Peace;
being justified by Faith, we have peace with God. Where there is Peace there is
Grace, and holiness: there is no Peace says my God, to the wicked. Where
there is Peace there is Love, and good will. As love, so peace is the union no
less then this; the Almighty God bears you good will. These two, peace and
good will, are Twins: On earth peace, good will toward men. Where there is
peace, there is life, everlasting ife; Internal, is the seed of eternal peace.

This peace is a Portion; peace with God is our possession of the God of Peace.
This Peace is a Sanctuary; if the God of Peace be with us, the Peace of God
will keep our hearts.

Christians, in the World you must have trouble; suppose you have, yet in him
you shall have peace, who has overcome the World, Isa. 26. 5. Thou will keep
him in perfect peace (in peace, peace, as it is in the Original.) whose mind is
stayed on thee. Psalm. 85. 8. I will hear what the Lord God will speak, he will
speak peace to the People, and to his Saints. What a clattering is there in the
World? what tumults, and commotions are raised about the followers of Christ,
as if the World were falling about their ears? The Devil speaks wrath, evil
men speak death, and bonds to them; breathing out threatenings, reproaches,
persecutions against them. In the midst of all this fearful noise, I Will
hearken, says the Psalmist, what the Lord God will speak. Whatsoever men or
Devils speak, I Will hearken if the Lord God speak at the same rate. Oh no, he
will speak peace to his Saints: Let the Sons of contention do what they can,
the Sons of God shall be the Sons of Peace; they shall live in peace, they
shall dye in peace, they shall dwell in peace for ever, Isa. 32. 17, 18. The
Work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of Righteousness shall be
quietness and assurance for ever. And my People shall dwell in a peaceable
Habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places: Oh how great is
the peace that they have who love thy Law. Christians fear not to follow God:
let not that sad word, nor the fulfilling of it, scare you out of your duty,
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution. What if they
do? whilst you are able to say, I am persecuted, but I have peace; I am poor,
but I have peace; In a Prison, but I have peace; in a Wilderness, but I have
peace; though all the World be against me, God is at peace, my Soul is in
peace; what discouragement should all that be to you?

2. He that is the God of peace, is the God of power. He promises peace, and he
promises no more than he can perform. He can create peace, he can make their
enemies to be at peace with them. He can make a league for them, with the
Beasts of the field; with the Lions, with the Wolves, with the most brutish
among the people. He can say to the proud Winds and Waves, peace, be still, and
they obey him. He can give them rest [from] the days of adversity: he can
give them rest [in] the days of adversity: he can give his Beloved sleep, upon
the points of Swords and Spears.

3. He that is the God of peace, is the God of patience. This is my great fear,
that though God gives, yet I shall break my peace; The God of peace with me?
oh! this is he whom I dishonor, and disoblige daily; by my distrusts,
discontents, impatiencies, murmurings, and what peace to such an hearr? what
peace, so long as such unbelief, so much iniquity, as I find daily within me,
remains upon me? Will he, with whom no iniquity can dwell, dwell in that
heart, where there is so much iniquity, by which he is provoked every day! but
he that is the God of peace is also the God of patience; who though he will not
bear the iniquities of his adversaries, yet he will bear much with the
infirmities of his People. Psalm. 89. 30. etc. If his Children forsake my Law,
and walk not in my Judgments; if they break my Statutes, and keep not my
Commandments; then will I visit their transgressions with a Rod, and their
iniquities with stripes. Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly
take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.

4. He that is the God of peace, is the God of hope. I have not peace in
possession, whatever there be in the promise. I live in the fire, am born a man
of contention. What likelihood is there, that I should ever live to see a good
day? my comforts are broken, my Estate is lost, my liberty is gone; friends I
have none, enemies I have many, and migh^ty, I dwell in M^sech, I have my
habitation in the Tents of Kedar; I am for peace, they are for War: whither
ever I look, round about me, before me, behind me, on the right hand, or on the
left, all speaks trouble and terror to me. I have no peace; What, no^ no hop^
of peace neither? where is thy God man? have thou a God in thee, and yet no
hope in thee? the God of peace, and yet no peace! the God of hope, and yet no
hope! the God of hope will yet fill thee with joy and peace in believing, Romans
15. 13. Why art thou cast down oh my soul? and why art thou disquieted within
me? hope in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
Countenance, and my God, Psalm. 43. 11. The God of hope will open a Window of
hope in the darkest times, a door of hope in the most desperate cases. The God
of hope will bear up the spirits of his Saints, in hope against hope; and this
hope will never disappoynt them. It shall never be said, there is no peace,
there is no hope, till it can be said, there is no God in Israel.

But how, or in what sense, is it to be understood, that this God of peace will
be with us.

I answer in three particulars.

1. The heart of God will be with you Joseph's blessing, the good will of him
that dwelt in the Bush, will be thy portion, Deuteronomy. 33. what was the Bush? the
Church, or Israel of God. What case was the Bush in? 'twas all in a light fire,
'twas all in a flame. Who was it that dwelt in the Bush? God was in the Bush;
and that kept it from consuming, though not from burning. The good will of this
God shall be with thee: his love, his favor, his care. I love them that love
me, Prove. 8. 17. The Lord loves the Righteous, Psalm. 146. 8. The Love of God
is the womb of all good. Hence sprang the morning Star, from the love of God
came the Son of God: hence came that womb of the Morning, the blessed Gospel;
which is so big with glorious grace; with Light, Life, Pardon, Peace, Glory,
Immortality; from the love of God came the glorious Gospel of God. The upper
Springs, all spiritual and heavenly blessings: the neither springs, all earthly
and outward blessings do all rise, and bubble up out of this Fountain, the love
of God. The precious things of Heaven, the precious fruits brought forth by the
Sun: the precious Fruits put forth by the Moon; the chief things of the ancient
Mountains, the precious things of the lasting Hills; the precious things of the
Earth, and the fullness thereof: All these flow in with the good will of him
that dwelt in the Bush.

Love is all; the Apostle tells us, Romans 13. our love to God is the fulfilling
of the Law; that is, it will bring forth all that to God, all that duty, and
obedience, which the Law requires. I may tell you, that Gods love to us, is the
fulfilling of the Gospel: that is, it will power down all that upon us, it will
do all that for us, which the Gospel promises. Look over the whole Gospel;
read, and study every precious leaf, and line of that blessed Book: and if
there be enough in all that to make thee blessed, and to encourage thee on in
thy holy course, all this is thine. Thou have that love of God with thee, which
will fulfill the Gospel: there shall not one jot or tittle fail thee, of all
that the Gospel promises. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this, Isa.
9. 7.

2. The help of God will be with you, the Lord will be your helper in the day
of your distress. Heb. 13. 5, 6. He has said, I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear
what man can do unto me. He has said, I will not leave thee: and therefore we
may say, I will not fear: He has said, I will be, and therefore we may boldly
say, the Lord is my Helper: He has said, he will not forsake, he will help;
and who is he that shall say, There is no help for thee i^ thy God.

There Is no man, whose Case may not be so desperate, as to be above all humane
help. If he should cry out, as the woman to the King of Israel; Help O King;
the King must answer, If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee?
If he should cry out, Help O Man of God: the Man of God must answer, If the
Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? If he cry out, Help O my
Friends, my Wit, my Policy, my Purse; all these must answer, If the Lord do not
help thee, whence shall we help thee? But what case is there, wherein an [ Help
Lord] will not do?

Foolish men count their case desperate, when they come to their [ God help]
that is an usual expression, to set forth the extremity and helplesness of any
man's case. When we see men even lost in any misery, and their case even utterly
hopeless, then to signify our sense of such men's lost condition, we cry out,
God help that man, God help that woman, they are lost Creatures. I, but if men
did understand and consider what the help of the Lord is, they would see there
could be no case so desperate, but an Help Lord, might recover all: 1 Samuel 30.
6. when David was greatly distressed, and all was gone, He encouraged himself
in the Lord his God.

Consider here two things.

1. What his Case then was; he was in great distress; he had lost all that ever
he had; his spoils that he had taken were all gone, his Corn, and his Cattle,
his Wives, and his City were all lost; he had not an habitation in all the
World; he had nothing left him but a poor Army, and these were worse than lost,
they were even ready to fall upon him: The people spoke of stoning him, but he
encouraged himself in the Lord his God.

2. What the event hereupon was; why God helped him to all he had again: verse.
19. There was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great, neither sons,
nor daughters; neither spoil, nor anything they had taken, David recovered all.

Hence note,

1. That a Christian, when he has lost all, has yet a God to go to at last.

2. Whilst a Christian has a God to go to, his case is never desperate; let
him but encourage himself in his God, and all will be recovered.

Sinners, triumph not over the poor people of God; when they are at their
worst, when they are brought as low as your Pride and malice can lay them;
though they should be stripped naked, and left destitute of all their comforts,
though all the World should ride on their backs, and tread on their necks, yet
rejoice not against them: though they fall, they shall arise, when they are at
their worst, there is still help for them in their God.

3. The Presence of the Lord shall be with them. Whither soever they may be
scattered, they shall not be scattered from their God. That Promise made to
Moses, Exodus 33. 14. My presence shall go with thee, belongs to all (...)
Israel of God. [ My presence] in the Original it is my face; in the Septuagint,
my self shall go with thee.

The presence of God is either, General, or Special.

By his general presence, he is every where: 1. Per Essentiam, he fills all
things. 2. Per Cognitionem, he beholds all things. 3. Per Sustentationem, he
upholds all things. 4. Per Dominium, he governs all things.


But to let this pass as not so proper to our purpose.

2. There is his Special or his gracious Presence, whereby he manifests himself
to be with his people.

1. In some visible and standing tokens of his presence; as in those
extraordinary, the Pillars of the Cloud, and of the Fire: and in those
ordinary, the Ark and the Temple, of old, and the Ordinances of the Gospel now.

2. In some inward influences, and irradiations, upon the hearts of his people.

3. In some visible and signal effects of this presence, whereof there are
very many. There are, amongst others, these two notable effects of Gods
gracious presence; which his People, by virtue of this Promise, may with
confidence expect, Conduction, Covering:
they shall be Led in their way, and they shall be Hid in their way.

1. Conduction; The Lord will be with them, to lead them and guide them in the
way that they should go. Psalm. 25. 9, 12. The Meek will he guide in Judgment,
the meek will he teach in his way, Psalm. 107. 7. He led them forth by the right
way, that they might go to a City of habitation, Psalm. 5. 8. Lead me, O Lord,
in thy righteousness, because of mine Enemies, make thy way strait before my
face.

The Lord leads his people in their way, chiefly by his Word, which is a Light
to their feet, and a Lanthorn to their paths: And sometimes also by his
Providence, hedging up all by-ways, and leaving but one way open to them,
that has the least appearance of the way of God. So ordering the matter that
any other way that is before them, looks with too foul a face, to leave any
doubt upon them, whether that be the way of God or nor.

It Is never uncomfortable to the people of God, while they see their way before
them: Doubts about their way, are more perplexing, than dangers in their way.
When they know what God would have them do, they can cheerfully trust in him
for any thing they are like to suffer. Do thou meet with Wolves or Lions in
thy way? thou may bless God it is there thou meetest them, 'twould be ill
meeting them elsewhere.

2. Covering or Protection in their way, Psalm. 31. 20. Thou shall hide them in
the secret of thy presence, from the pride of man; thou shall keep them
secretly in a pavilion, from the strife of tongues. [Thou shall hide them in
thy presence] or face; thy light shall be their dark place to cover them: Thou
art my hiding place, Psalm. 32. 7. [In the secret of thy presence] the Saints
hiding place is a secret: Such, where neither the pride of man can find them,
nor can they understand what it is. Reproaches shall not find them,
persecutions shall not find them, whose Souls are hid in God; they are not
found, when they are found; they are hid when they seem to lie most open, and
most exposed to men's will, and lust. Sinners do not understand what refuge the
Saints have in God. It is a great secret, a Mystery to them: as the joy of the
Saints, the comforts of the Saints, are a secret; A stranger, shall not meddle
with his joy: So is their safety or security; they do not understand what kind,
nor how great security; what sure, nor what sweet repose, the Saints find in
God. The secret of Gods presence is a sure, and a sweet resting place, for all
his Saints; but how sure, and how sweet, no man knows, but they that enjoy it.
The secret intimations of the care of God for them, of his everlasting kindness
to them; of his governing hand in all that befalls them, working it to their
greater good; the secret supports and refreshings darted in, as the beams of
his Countenance; their secret sense, that their head, their main, is in safety,
though they have bruises in their heel, will yield such rest in the day of
greatest adversity, as men can neither see, nor take from them. The Pillar of
the Cloud interposed, did both hinder the Egyptians pursuit, and hide from
their eyes the comfort of that Light which shined upon the Camp of Israel.
Moses knew what the comfort of Gods presence meant, when he said, Exodus 33. 15.
If thy presence go not with us, carry us not hence. It Is (if considered) a
great word. Israel was then in a Wilderness; among wild beasts, among briars,
and thorns, in a weary pilgrimage; but they had God among them: The Lord was
carrying them to Canaan, the Land of their rest, a Land flowing with milk and
honey: but Moses prays, If thy presence go not with us, carry us not hence. We
had rather be where we are, in a Wilderness with God, than to go to Canaan, and
leave our God behind us. If thy presence go with us, we are willing to go, when
thou will, whither thou will, which way thou will; though by the Tents of
Edomites, Ishmaelites, Moabites. Hagarens; though through the Armies of
Anakims, Zamzummims, we will go any whither, so God go with us. The absence of God
makes a Canaan worse than a Wilderness: the presence of God makes a Wilderness
better than a Canaan: And this presence of God, shall be the Lot of all his
Saints.

Reas. 2. If God be with you, all shall make for you: All Providential
Occurrences, and Events whatsoever: All Difficulties, Straits, Disasters,
Disappoyntments, whatsoever, that may come upon you, shall make for your good.
Romans 8. 31. If God be with us, who shall be against us? Who can be against us!
that is, None can be against us: Or if any be, yet those that are against you
shall be for you. Genesis 42. 36. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not (said old Jacob
and must Benjamin away too? all these things are against me: but yet as old as
he was, he lived to see all making for him. Romans 8. 26. We know all things
shall work together for good to those that love God. This is such a Promise, as
if it were thoroughly believed, would set our feet on the necks of all our fears
and dangers, and will prove the truth of Sampson's Riddle, Out of the eater
came meat, and out of the strong, sweetness.

Now because there is so great encouragement to godliness in it, I shall sperd
the more time in enlarging upon it; and shall show,

1. What those things are which are especially intended, in that comprehensive
term ( all things)

2. What that good is, which these things shall work to.

3. To whom these things shall work for good.

4. How these things shall work for good.

5. That they shall undoubtedly work for good, to them that love God.

1. What those things are, which are especially intended, in that comprehensive
term [ All things.] Some there are, as Augustine with others, who understand it
universally, of all things whatsoever, whether good or evil, extending it even
to the sins of the Saints. It Is true, God does often bring good out of these
evils, making use of former sins, to be forces against future: as the thorn,
that did hurt in the Garden, will be of use in the Hedge: sin often becomes
it is own death, which was intended to be the death of the Soul: There Is nothing
that does make the Sinner more weary, and wary of sin, than Sin it self: the
review of what we have done, does oftenest fright us of doing so any more. When
you look back on sin, and see it is face (for sin carries it is face in it is
back) you will fear it the more, when ever you meet it again. There Is no argument
does more effectually humble, and break the heart, and make it more fearful,
and watchful against sin, than the shame, and the smart of those sins we have
fallen by; he that has felt the wound, will take heed how he plays with
edge-tools. This is true, God does often make this use of sin, to be it is own
cure: and therefore it is not seldom seen, that the chief of Sinners have come
to be the chief of Saints. Yet, besides that this is not the subject matter
that the Apostle is here treating of; let those that bring sin within the
compass of this promise, and make this to run into the sense of it; that even
all the sins of the Saints shall work for their good, let such tell us, how, or
in what way its imaginable, that the sinful decays of such who back-slide from
God, and never recover to their former life, and vigor, but live and dye in a
languishing state of Soul, le^ them tell us, how such sins can be imagined to
work for their good: 'till then, we must enter our dissent from this
Interpretation.

This then is not the sense of the promise, that all sins shall work together
for good.

And yet if it were, it would be but a poor argument, to take the more liberty
to sin, because God will turn it to good; this would be even as rational, as
for a man to tear his flesh, break his bones, pluck out his eyes, burn his
house, etc. because God will turn all his sufferings to good: he is little
better than mad, that would not conclude such a man out of his Wits.

Others restrain it to the evil things that befall the Saints, not the turpia,
but the tristia, their sufferings and afflictions; to that vanity, and those
vexations, they are in bondage under, and under which with the whole Creation,
they groan and travel in pain, waiting for their redemption: of which, the
Apostle had been treating in the former part of this Chapter. And yet while
they pitch the sense, especially on such things as these, they grant it may be
extended to all other things, sin only excepted; ad omnes res, ^reaturas
eventus, tum secundus, tum adversos: To all things and events, whether
prosperous or afflicted. So Paraeus, with others.

And these I take to have hit the right. All heavy things, all the sufferings
and afflictions of the Saints; and not only these, but all things else
whatsoever, that in the whole course of providence be their lot or po^^ion: all
the dealings of God with them, all the disp^^^ations of Providence toward
them, shall all work for their good.

2. What is that good, which these things work to the Saints; or in what sense
all things may be said to work good to them. The sense in general is this; They
shall all work to their welfare, they shall all happen to them for the better:
there shall nothing befall them, but one time or other, they shall have reason
to say; 'Twas well for me, that it was thus with me. The wisdom and goodness
of God, did cut out such portions continually for me, did lead me through such a
series and succession of cases and events, which though I could not understand,
yet now I see that every condition, every contingency and occurrence of my
life, through which Providence led me, was useful, and could not well have been
wanted, but it would have been the worse for me. Thus in the general.

Particularly, for the fuller understanding what good it is that all things, to
consider, that there is a twofold good of the Saints; Such as they obtain and
enjoy, whilst they are in via, in their way or Course; or such as they shall
obtain, when they are in termino: when they are gotten to the end of their way,
when they are come to their place. Or thus, There is a threefold good of the
Saints, Temporal. Spiritual. Eternal.


^. Temporal good, or our bona c^rporis, the outward good things of this life,
which may serve, and please, and delight us in these days of our pilgrimage:
which may abide with us, and attend us to our graves, but there will take their
leave of us.

2. Spiritual good, or our bona animae, and those are either, 1. Exeternal, as
the Ordinances of God; the Light, Liberties and privileges of the Gospel, the
Society and Communion of Saints, and our peaceful and plentiful enjoying of
them. 2. Internal, as spiritual ^race, Faith, Love, Hope, Patience, etc.

3. Eternal good, or that glory and joy, that everlasting rest and peace, the
possession of that inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that is reserved in
Heaven for us.

Now here note these things.

1. That our bona corporis, our outward good things, are only good for us, as
they are conducible ad bonum spirituale, to the good of our Souls. The bona
viae, are only good in the event, when they tend to the bonum Patriae. This
World is but a Nursery for Eternity; we are planted in this, in order to our
transplanting into the other World: and whatever we have here, is either good
or evil, according to the respect that it bears to hereafter: As far forth as
our immortal part is improved by these perishing things, so far forth only, are
they good for us. He that has this worlds goods, and is not hereby made more
rich toward God; he who prospers in this World, and yet his Soul does not
prosper: much more, he whose outward fullness becomes the emptiness, and
leanness of his Soul: Are these good things good for him? Is he in pr^sperity
upon a true account, whose Soul prospers not? It is not ever good to prosper in
the World: It cannot be universally said, It Is good to be rich, its good to be
in health, its good to be in honor, it is good to be at liberty: the contrary
may sometimes be true* it is good to be poor, to be sick, to be in disgrace, to
be in bonds: the necessity of our Souls does not seldom require it: Then alone
is it good to be full, and to abound, when our outward abundance furthers our
spiritual welfare.

Christians, could we receive this truth, That our outward good things are only
good for us, as far forth, as they conduce to our spiritual good, could we
receive this truth, and live under the power of it; what a different judgment
should we then have of all these worldly matters, from what we have? and how
strangely would the course of this world be then changed? Would there then be
such violent and eager pursuing these carnal things? Would there then be such
whining and complaining, and murmuring at every cross Providence? We would
then say, This may be good for me; good for my soul, how sad soever it looks.

2. That the external spiritual good things, the Ministry and Ordinances of the
Gospel, etc. are so far good to us, as they conduce to our internal spiritual
good; and they being ordinarily so, it must be concluded, That ordinarily it is
good for us, that we enjoy them, and be not deprived of them. God may see the
cutting Christians short of those Privileges, and Liberties, to be sometimes
needful for them; and then even this also makes for their good: Whereof more
anon.

3. That our inward spiritual good, is good for us, so far forth as it tends to
our eternal good: and therefore grace is ever good for us. It Is ever true; It Is
good to be holy, good to be humble, to be in the fear of God, and to flourish
in his grace. We may have too much Money, too much Credit, but we can never
have too much Grace. Our greatest flourishing and fruitfulness in grace, will
certainly abound to our more full reward.

4. Note, That this is the plain sense and meaning of the promise, All things
shall work [for good] that is, whatsoever befalls, shall certainly promote our
internal and eternal welfare: And as far forth as the outward Privileges of
the Gospel, yea, and the good things of this life, conduce toward this, all
shall work for these also. If it be good for us to be rich, if it be good for
us to be in honor, good for us to be at liberty; good for our Souls, good in
reference to our eternal state; if it be good for us that we enjoy the Ministry
of the Gospel; there shall nothing befall us, that shall hinder; there shall be
nothing wanting to us, that might further this our good.

The sum is, That all providential dispensations shall be so ordered, that we
shall want nothing but what its better want than have: We shall suffer nothing
but what we cannot well be without, but what the good of our Souls requires;
and that which we do possess, and that which we do suffer, shall not fail of
bringing about its end, the advancing our eternal good.

And if this be the meaning, what a glorious Promise is this? What can any
rational man desire more? nothing shall befall him but shall be for his good:
He shall be deprived or kept short of nothing, but what he had better be
without than have. He that is unsatisfied with this Promise, it is either from
Lust or Unbelief; Either he does not believe, that God is true, and will
perform this Word: or else it is because his Lust must be satisfied, though with
the denial of his Reason and Interest; he that desires an Estate in the world,
Ease, Pleasure, Liberty, or any thing else upon any other terms, but as they
may be for his real good, has as much lost his Wits as his Faith: and he that
will take upon him to know what is good ^or him, better than God, may as well
take upon him to govern the World. You may with as good reason, desire a
Fever, or a Dropsy, that you may have the p^easure of your drink; as for the
pleasures that carnal things would bring you in, to desire them, when they
would be a snare to your Souls.

3. To whom these things shall work for good: To them that love God, to them
that are called according to his purpose: To the people of God; who, you see,
are here described by their Election and Vocation, [the called according to his
purpose] and their Sanctification, [they that love God] Love is, as I told you
before, the sulfilling of the Law. Love God, and you will live in the obedience
of his whole Will: These are the people to whom this Promise is made; prove
your Calling and Election, prove your Sanctification, and you may write your
names in this glorious Promise: All things shall work for your good.

To those that are Rebels, and Reprobates from God, all things shall work
together for evil. Whilst things hurtful work together for good to the Saints:
all good things work together for the hurt of Sinners: their Peace hurts them,
their plenty hurts them, their pleasure hurts them: yea, both their prosperity,
and adversity; their plenty, and their poverty; their pleasure, and their
trouble, their honor and disgrace, and every thing that befalls them, turns to
their prejudice. Their prosperity destroys them: their Table is their snare;
their pleasures are their plagues; and their very punishments are turned into
sin: every thing that befalls them, heightens and hardens them in their
wickedness, and ripens them for vengeance. God is not with them, and therefore
nothing prospers with them. God is with his Saints, and therefore nothing comes
amiss to them, but all for their greater advantage: Christians, this is your
portion, and your peculiar, wherein the men of this World shall neither partake
with you, nor be ever able to deprive you of it.

4. How all things shall work for their good: in special, how shall the evil
things, the Sufferings of this life be for their good: How can this be? Must we
disbelieve our Senses, lay down our Reasons, ere we can believe the Scriptures?
Must we call evil, good; and good, evil? Must we count darkness light, and
light darkness? Is pleasure pain, and pain pleasure? Is loss gain, and gain
loss? Is ease torment, and torment ease? Does Religion make things cease to be
what they are, and to be what they are not? or at least, Must we believe, that
darkness is the Mother of light, that good is the Daughter of evil? Can we
hather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Can darkness give light, or death
it self bring forth life? Must we say, that contraries no longer destroy, but
produce each other, and that the womb brings forth its own destruction? How can
these things be?

But must God give a Reason of his actions, or else they are not! though evil
cannot bring forth good, darkness cannot bring forth light; yet, Cannot God
bring forth good out of Evil, light out of darkness? Though darkness cannot
bring forth light; evil cannot bring forth good, by a natural causation; yet
Cannot God make evil an occasion of good? Though it do work efficiently, yet
can it not work objectively neither to it? Though the torment, the Medicine
puts men to, be not ease, yet may it not work toward ease? May not the storm,
though it help not, yet hasten the Labourer on his work, the T^aveller on his
way? May not the darkness of the night, make more diligent in the day? May not
sickness teach men more temperance, and poverty more frugality?

But to proceed more distinctly; How can the Saints evil things work to their
good? That they do so cannot be denied, unless we will deny, not only
Scripture, but common Sense and Experience; but how comes it to pass?

I answer in 4. Particulars:

1. The Affliction and Tribulations of the Saints are the way that leads them
on to the possession of that good, which God has intended to them; afflictions
are the way of the Kingdom; the Cross is the way to the Crown, Acts 14. 22.
Through many Tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God. Psalm. 66. 11,
12. Thou broughtest us into the net, thou have laid affliction upon our loins,
thou have caused men to ride over our heads: we went through fire and water,
thou broughtest us into a wealthy place.

Observe it; Their troubles are their way to their Triumph; their very falling
into the net, their way to escape. Their Enemies boast; Escape! Arise! yes, let
them free themselves with such hopes while they will, we have them sure enough,
we have them under foot, we have them in the net: If this be their way, we will
keep them in their way long enough; Now we have them down they shall not be
able to rise. I, but yet it appears, through all this the Lord led them forth
into a wealthy place. The Highway of the proud is not their more ready way to
the dust, than the dust of Saints is their sure way to honor. When Israel were
to go to Canaan, they must take the Brick-Kilnes, the Red Sea, the Wilderness,
Jordan, in their way: could any one have imagined, that the bondage, the
straits they were under, the doubling their Tasks, the cruelty of their
Taskmasters, their enclosure at the Red Sea, did mean any good to them? yet
how fell it out at last? their darkest dispensations had light in their latter
end; Their greatest bondage leads on to their greatest liberty.

Every cross Providence is a step to the accomplishment of the Promise; The
Wheel is ever moving on to its end; it moves still forwards, even when it seems
to go quite backwards: As the River by its many turnings and windings forwards
and backwards is still in motion to the Sea, when it seems to be running quite
contrary.

Christians, if ever the Salvation of God seems to be removed farther off from
you; If the work of God should at any time seem to go backwards; if cross winds
should turn the whole course, so that you appear rather to be marching back to
Egypt, than on to Canaan; yet be not discouraged; though your way be an
unlikely, an unpromising way, though you be led about forwards, and backwards,
yet still you are making on: though the lesser Wheels be never so cross and
contrary in their motions, yet the great Wheel is still moving Right on to your
blessed and hoped end. God intends your good, your spiritual good here, your
eternal good hereafter: and believe it now, for he will let you see it
hereafter, that those very things which most threaten your miscarriage, and a
total abortion of your hopes, are made all to concur to the bringing them
about, and to your more full and speedy possession of them.

Note farther here two Things.

1. All things work; not they shall work, de futuro, but de praesenti, they do
work; as the Apostle says, The Mystery of Iniquity; so we may say, The Mystery
of the Saints Redemption does already work; the work is already on the wheel,
and every wheel is in its motion for you: not only your Brethren, the Saints
and Angels, who are all praying for your peace and seeking your good, but your
Enemies also, the Dragon, with all his Armies, are at work for you; all the
Councils of this world, are already sitting upon the very matter: God has
called them together for this purpose. The Pope, with all his Conclave; the
Jesuits, Priests, Monks, and Friars, with all their Covents; yea, the Devil,
with all his Conclave of Hell. are all at work for the good of Saints. It Is
true, they mean not, nor intend any such thing, their designs are against you;
they count, they are working for themselves; as it is said concerning the
Assyrian, Isa. 10. 6, 7. God sent him forth upon a Design of his own, to
execute his Counsel, in the punishing of Hypocrites; to purge out the Chaff
from the Wheat; nevertheless, he means not so, nor does his heart think so;
the Assyrian minds not what God's Design is, but follows his own Design, fights
for himself, and spoils for himself; but God's Design is still carried on by
him, though he think not of it.

All the Events in the World are driving the same way; every Disease or
Infirmity that comes upon you, every Loss that you sustain, every Scoff or
Reproach that you suffer; the shame in your Faces, the Sorrow of your Hearts,
the Torment in your Bowels, the Aches in your Bones, are all working your good.
All the changes of your Conditions, your fair Weather and your foul, your
Sunshine and your Clouds, your Plenty and your Wants, your Eases and your
Pains, your Liberties and your Prisons, are all making for you; your good is
already working by all these Things.

See Christians, what an Harvest of Blessedness is growing up to you, out of
this Promise; the Seed is already sowing, your good is already working; God is
at work, the whole Creation is at work, Men and Angels, good men and evil men,
Friends and Enemies, Heaven and Earth, and Hell, are already engaged to work
your good.

2. They work together, that is, as some understand it, they work together with
God: all the second causes work together with the first Cause; or as others,
They work together amongst themselves. There is such a concatenation and
concentring of all these second causes, in the same Design, that however they
seem to thwart, and cross, and destroy some of them, what the others build and
advance, yet they are all united in their End, they jointly contribute in the
Weal of the Saints. Though, if I mistake not, this latter be the more sense of
the two: Yet I know no reason, why both may not be understood. In the hand, and
under the conduction of Providence, all these lower Things concur and
cooperate in the good of the Church.

By the way, observe what an Harmony there is in all the Works of Providence:
The most cross and thwarting Occurrences, do all conspire, and go hand in hand
to bring about the same end. As the differing Virtues of various Drugs, do all
concur ^o make up the Medicine: As the differing sounds of several strings or
Instruments, do all together make up the Melody. As the differing Colors in a
Picture, the dark as well as the brighter, do jointly contribute to the Beauty
of the Piece; no less do the most contrary, and contradictory Actions and
Events, both make up the Beauty of Providence, and jointly subserve that one
End, to which, by an unseen Hand, and an all-seeing Eye, they are directed, and
intended.

2. The evil things that befall the Saints, come upon them to keep out worse
things. Wherever the cross comes, if it had not come, something worse might?
The Cross may be a means to secure from the Curse: The Curse was slain on the
Cross of Christ; and our Cross also has its use, to the delivering us from it.

1 Cor. 11. 32. We are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned
with the World. Periissem nisi periissem: I had died, if I had not suffered:
It Is more men's cases besides his that spoke it; it is no bad Exchange, to have a
Cross instead of a Curse.

3. The evil things of the Saints prepare them for better things: that they may
work good for them, they are working them to good; working out their sin and
iniquity, wearying them of sin, Hosea 2. 6. I will hedge up her way with
thorns: then shall she say, I will return: Sin brought in Afflictions into the
World, and Afflictions help to carry sin out; the Cross, to which sin was once
nailed, is now nailed to Sin: The Saints can seldom be meddling with Sin, but
they find it too heavy for them; The Cross that is nailed at the farther end of
it, makes it a ^urthen which they cannot bear. In some sense, not only the
Blood of the Lamb, but the Blood of the Sheep may purge away Sin: though only
the (...) can expiate and take away the guilt, yet the (...) may have their
place, in purging away the filth of sin; By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be
purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin. Our Lord beats the
Devil with his own Weapons, by those very means purging his Saints, by which he
endeavors to pollute them: making those very Persecu^ons, by which he labors
to force them from Holiness, to fix them in it: A fawning World does them more
mischief, than a fuming Devil. By that the Devil has cast up his Cards, he
will find himself a Loser by all his Rage.

Christians, comfort your hearts: those Floods that are cast forth against you,
shall but wash you the whiter, and make you more meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in Light: your Purgatary prepares you for your
Paradise. No unclean thing must enter in thither: and you are not like to be
made so clean, as by falling into the hands of the unclean. The Saints never
look so well: like Sheep come from the washing, as when they come up from the
Pots, their very black makes them comely.

Oh Christians, what a comfort would it be, if your Experiences might come in,
and seal to this Truth: If you could say, Thus it has been with me, Before I
was afflicted, I went astray: I was proud, and vain, and wanton, and slothful,
and carnal, but now have I kept thy word.

Sinners, Whatever your mind be in persecuting the Saints, never think to
debauch them by it; if that be your aim, you mistake your course; the living
Spark which God has kindled in them, will (...) be blown out, but be blown up,
by your puffing at it; the Dirt you cast upon them, does but scour them the
brighter: You take the best course you can, to keep them closer to the Lord,
and his way: The warm Sun will more hazard the loss of their Garments, than the
blustering Wind: Let them alone, the Spirit of the Lord within them will be too
hard for Hell, with all its black Regiments; and will not only secure them, but
advance them yet higher, by all their Assaults. These stars shine the
brightest, when the Night is darkest: When you have done your worst, 'twill be
the better with them; though they will not thank you, yet they will thank God,
for what they have suffered by you. If this be your aim to make them like your
selves, you may set your hearts at rest, and give over such a vain attempt:
Your fury is like to do as little to force them, as your virtues are to invite
them to a compliance with you. Your Faces are too foul to draw them into your
love, and yet not fierce enough to drive them into your fear. Satan, try thy
utmost strength and skill, and if thou losest not by thine own play at last, if
thou find'st not the poor people of God gotten nearer Heaven, by thy attempts
of plucking them down to Hell, then let thy Lies be believed before the
everlasting Gospel.

Christian, Make me not ashamed in this same confident boasting of you; yea,
contradict not your God, by suffering your selves to be corrupted by evil men.
The Lord himself has adventured deep upon your Integrity and stedfastness: The
honor of his Truth and Faithfulness lies at stake; he has said, They shall
not be afraid of any evil Tidings, their heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord,
Psalm. 112. 7. He has said By this shall their iniquity be purged, and this
shall be all the fruit, to take away their sin. God has said, All things shall
work together for good to them. They shall not be the worse, but the better,
for all that befalls them: They shall love me and my holy ways the more, they
shall cleave unto me the closer, they shall be made more pure, and more tender,
by all they suffer for Righteousness sake: they shall love Conscience, and
their Integrity and Faithfulness to it, never the worse, for that it has cost
them so dear; but shall prize it the more, and be the more wary and tender, how
they pollute and turn aside from it. God has adventured deep on you, make not
him a Liar; the devil and his instruments will be ready to say concerning you,
as once he did to the Lord, concerning his Servant Job; Put them into our
power, let us have the handling of them a while, and thou shall quickly see,
what truth there is in them, or what trust there is to them; they will curse thee
to thy face, they will deny thee to thy face, they will eat their own words, they will
be ashamed of their God, their Godliness, and Confidence. Let God be true,
Christians, and the Devil a Liar; be living Commentaries on this blessed Text;
Let the World, and their black Prince see, that they cannot make you miserable,
because they cannot make you sinners like themselves: That you are still the
more upright, for falling into the hands of a crooked Generation: Let them see,
that though your God will not suffer you, yet you are contented to serve him
for nothing. That though his Hedge be removed from you, yet your Heart is not
removed from him: Be able to say, Though all this be come upon us, Our heart is
not turned back, neither have we declined thy way. Let our standing and
increasing in the Grace of God, and abounding in the works of Righteousness, be
a standing VVitness for God in the World, and a Seal to his Scriptures, and in
special to the glorious Truth of this Text.

4. The evil things of the Saints, prepare better things for them, their
Sufferings go into their Reward: As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so
our consolation also abounds by Christ: Every suffering comes with a comfort
in its Belly: and the sweet is so great, as swallows up the bitter; it is a
hundred fold, that the Saints gain by all their Losses in this Life; but how
great shall their Reward be in Heaven! 2 Cor. 4. 17. Our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding Eternal Weight
of Glory. They shall not only have weight for weight, measure for measure,
their Load of Glory, for their Load of Sufferings; but they shall have
over-weight, over-measure; good measure, pressed down, heaped together, and
running over, shall then be given unto them: According to their deep poverty,
shall be the height of their riches; according as their blackness has been in
their Houses of Bondage, shall be their brightness in the Land of Promise; for
all thy shame thou shall have double: The double of thy Reproach in Renown, the
double of thy Tears in Triumphs, all thy bottled Tears shall be returned in
Flagons of Joy, yea in Rivers of Eternal Pleasure.

By this time Christians, you see what glory there is in this good word: All
things shall work together for good to them that love God. And that none may
have the face to say, all this is but conceit; I shall, in the next place,
bring in clear and undeniable Evidence, that it is certainly, and
unquestionably, so as has been said: And therefore know,

5. That all things do and shall certainly work, for good to them that love
God. This (besides the Testimony of this Scripture) I shall make evident, from
these three Propositions.

1. There is a Divine Providence that governs the World.

2. The Design of Providence, is the accomplishment of the good purpose and
promise of God.

3. The Providence of God shall never fail of accomplishing its end.

1. There is a Divine Providence which governs the World: the Epicureans, who
deny Providence, and leave all on Chance and Fortune, may as well deny that
there is a God; which yet they are ashamed to stand to. Of Epicurus himself it
was said, Quem nihil pudendum pudet, pudet tamen Deum negare.

It can be no way reconcilable to the infinite Wisdom of God, who made this
Glorious Fabric, with the various Creatures therein, either not to determine
them to their Ends, or else to take no care for their accomplishing those Ends
they are determined to. The whole Current of Scripture is so plain in these
matters, that he that runs may read: Let the following Scriptures, amongst
others be considered.

Psalm. 97. 1. The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice, let the isles be glad.
Psalm. 67. 15, 16. The Eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their
Meat in due season: Thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desires of every
living thing. Psalm. 36. 6. Thou preservest man and beast, Psalm. 75. 6, 7.
Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South;
but God is the Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another. Amos 3. 6.
Shall there be Evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Psalm. 17. 13, 14.
Deliver my Soul from the wicked, which is thy Sword, from Men which are thy
Hand. The confessions of those Infidels, Nebuchadnezzar and Darius, speak the
same, Dan. 4. 35. All the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as nothing, and
he does according to his Will, in the Army of heaven, and among the inhabitants
of the Earth, and none can stay his Hand, or say unto him, What do thou? Dan.
6. 26. I make a Decree, that in every Dominion of my Kingdom, Men tremble and
fear before the God of Daniel, for he is the Living God, and steadfast for ever;
and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed; and his Dominion shall be
even unto the End: He delivers and rescueth, and he works Signs and
Wonders in Heaven and Earth; who has delivered Daniel from the power of the
Lions.

But more distinctly, the Lord governs all inanimate and sensitive Creatures,
in their actions; he orders the Stars in their courses. The Stars in their
courses, he made to fight against Sisera. He governs the Winds and the Floods;
he brings forth the Winds out of his Treasures, he rides upon the wings of
the Wind. He makes the Clouds his Chariots, he sits on the Floods; the
Thunder and the Hail, and the Rain and the Frosts, are all at his Command: He
gives Snow like Wool, and scatters the hoar frost like ashes. He casts
forth the Ice like morsels; he sets bounds to the Sea, which it shall not pass;
the Birds of the Air, the Beasts of the Field, the Fishes of the Sea; yea the
stones and dust of the Earth, are all at his beck.

More especially, he rules and governs the men of this World. He sits in all
the Counsels of men, though they see him not, he orders all their Decrees;
there is no Decree can pass unless God gives his Vote. He rules in all the
actions of men; even those things that are acted through our improvidence, come
not to pass without the providence of God. He rules in all the changes that are
in the world; he changes the times and the seasons; he changes Kingdoms, and
Governments; he removes Kings, and sets up Kings; he makes War, and creates
Peace; he bends the Bow, and breaks the Bow, and cutteth the Spear in
sunder, and burns the Chariots in the fire: Peace and War, Health and
Sickness, Plenty and Famine, Life and Death, are all the disposures of his
hand. He orders all the events and casualties of the World; even from the
greatest to the smallest. Without him, not a Sparrow shall fall, nor a hair of
the Head shall perish; though there be to men, yet to the Lord there are no
casualties, or contingencies. But all things come to pass, according as his
Hand and Counsel had before determined.

2. The design of Providence (as it respects the Elect) is the accomplishment
of Gods good purpose and promise. Providence governs the World, and the purpose
and promise governs Providence. All the works of Providence have rationem
mediorum ad finem. God does nothing in vain: it is not consistent with the
wisdom of God, to do any thing for nothing. God would have his People look
farther than the things that are before them, because all those things have a
farther aspect themselves. All the works of Providence have a double aspect;
they look backward, to the purpose and promise; and they look forward, to the
end for which they are: as they look backward, so they have truth in them,
exactly answering the purpose and promise from which they have their birth. As
they look forward to their end, so they have good in them; and that good (their
subservience to their end) is the reason of their being. Here note 2. things.

1. That the subserviency of things to their end, is the goodness of them; if
the end be good, the means must (as such) be good also: If what God has
purposed and promised be good, then all things that fall in between, having the
respect of means to their accomplishment, must upon that account be good. If
our crosses and afflictions, do subserve the bringing about of Gods good will,
and good word, we must say concerning them, Good are the works of the Lord. It
is not, how any thing looks, or feels at present, but what it means, and to
what it tends. If the potion be bitter, and yet it tends to health; if the
Messenger be ill-looked, and ill-favored, and yet comes upon a good errand,
you may bid them welcome. And thus all the Providence of God are good. If you
should ask of any Providence, wherefore art thou come? come thou peaceably?
come thou for good? they must all answer, yes, peaceably, for good and no
hurt. It Is but to help all that good into thy hand, which has been in the
heart, and has proceeded out of the mouth of thy God that loves thee. There is
not a Messenger of Satan, that comes to buffet thee, but is also a Messenger
from God, that comes to thee for good. The very thorns in thy flesh shall serve
thee for Plaissers, thine eye-sores shall be thine eye salve, and thy very
Maladies thy Medicines.

2. That this relative goodness of all the works of Providence, is the reason
of their Being. Therefore God does what he does, that hereby he may do what he
has said and intended. I do not say that the reason of Gods taking this or
that means, is always from any thing in it self, or for his natural tendency
to such an end above any thing else: God has his choice of means, he can choose
here or there at pleasure, can make use of what he will to serve his design;
but the reason why things are, is this, God in his Wisdom, saw their
ordinability to this good end, and thereupon in his Providence, he orders and
brings them to pass.

So that now, whatever befalls a Christian, he has this to allay and take off
the grievousness and sharpness of it. This had never been, but for the good
will, and good word of the Lord to me. The Lord God has said he will bless me,
and do me good; he will heal, and sancti^ie, and save me, and now he is about
it; by this he is working that Salvation for me.

Christians, you have no reason to say, If the Lord be with me, why am I thus?
why so poor, why so pained, so persecuted, so scorned and trampled upon? sure,
if the Lord had meant my good, it would have been better than it is with me: No,
no, it is because the Lord is with thee, and means thee well, that he deals in
this manner with thee. The Design of his Providence toward thee, is the
accomplishment of his Promise.

3. The Providence of God shall never fail of accomplishing its end. There is
nothing wanting that might give us the fullest assurance hereof. For,

1. The Providence of God has power with it. He is Almighty that has
promised; he that rules in the earth, dwells in the Heaven, and does
whatsoever he will. Our God is in heaven, and does whatsoever he will. I will
work, and who shall let it? Is. 43. Who can stay his hand, or say unto him,
what do thou? were it not for our unbelief, our case would be still the same
in greatest difficulties, as when the Coasts are most clear. We might say of
difficulties, as the Psalmist of darkness, there is no darkness with thee, to
thee day and night are both alike. Difficulties are no difficulties with thee,
nor is there difference betwixt hard and easy. He can save with many, or with
few; and with none, is as well as with some. We once read he had too many but
never that he had too few, to bring about his wosk. Oh how we do desparage the
power of God, when our difficulties make us doubt? Is he God, and not man? Is
he spirit, and not flesh? Wherefore then do thou doubt? Whatever God has
said he can do: Believe he is a God, and thou will never say, How can these
things be?

2. The Providence of God has wisdom with it: he is the only wise, he is the
all-wise God; He knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, 2 Pet. 2.
9. He knows what is good for his Saints, and when 'twill be in season; he
understands what is proper, and pertinent to every case. What Is proper to
every purpose, to every people, to every person, and for every season; he knows
when it is a season to abase, and when to exalt: when to afflict, and when to
deliver; when to put on the yoke, and when to take off the yoke; when to pull
down, and when to build up: every thing is beautiful in its season. If mercies
come out of season, mercies would be no mercies; and if troubles come in their
season, troubles should be no troubles: He knows the best method, and means to
his end, the fittest means; he sees sometimes the unfittest to be the fittest,
the most unlikely unpromising means, do often best serve Gods end.

Christians, if you would receive every dispensation, as coming from the hands
of the wise God: you would never quarrel with your lot, nor say of any thing
that befalls, I might be happy, but this stands in my way. If you would give God
leave to be wiser than you, you would say wherever you are, its good for me
to be here, this is my way to my ^est.

3. The Providence of God has faithfulness with it. Psalm. 25. 10. All the
paths of the Lord are mercy and [truth] to them that keep his Covenant, and his
Testimonies, Psalm. 111. 8. His Works are done in truth. Gods works may be said
to be done in truth, in a double sense.

In Reality. In Fidelity.
1. In Reality; not in specie, or in show only, but indeed. Gods Comforts, are
Comforts indeed; Gods Salvation, is Salvation indeed. The Devil will come with
his gifts, with his comforts, and deliverances; but they are for the most part,
but spectra, like himself, shows, and apparitions; quite another thing, than
what they seem to be: sinners comforts, deliverances, enjoyments, wherewith the
Devil feeds them, do leave them in as poor a case, and worse than they found
them: you will never thank the Devil for his kindnesses, when you have proved
them what they are. If you do not find your selves as fast bound, in the midst
of all your liberties; if you be not wrapped up in as many sorrows, after all
the joys he has procured to you; if the glittering glories, the glorying
pleasures he entices you by, and entertains you with, prove not trash and dirt,
and mere lies in the end, then say, the Devil has forgotten his trade of
lying: the Devils works will be even like himself, false and deceitful. But God
is true, and all his works are done in truth.

2. In Fidelity, his Works are according to his word. 1 King. 8. 24. Thou have
spoken with thy mouth, and have fulfilled with thine hand. In thy faithfulness,
thou have afflicted me, Psalm. 119. Not only in thy faithfulness thou have saved
me, in thy faithfulness thou have comforted me, in thy faithfulness thou have
succored me: but in thy faithfulness thou have afflicted me, in thy
faithfulness thou have humbled, and broken me, and cast me down. The promise of
God is, that we shall want nothing; we shall neither want his Staff, nor his
Rod: neither comforts nor crosses; neither joys nor sorrows; we cannot well
want either, and we shall want neither, because God is faithful. You may not
only write down with the Apostle, God is faithful, and will not suffer you to
be tempted above that which you are able to bear; but you may write also, God
is faithful, and will not suffer you to want a temptation. When it is
seasonable, your hearts shall be glad; and if need be, for a season you shall
be in heaviness. God is faithful, he will ever be true to himself, and
therefore to you, 2 Timothy 2. 9. He abides faithful, he cannot deny himself.
Should he be false to his people, he cannot be true to himself, to his purpose
and promise; his Word is not yea and nay. God is not as man, that he should
lie, or the Son of man, that he should repent; that he should say, and unsay:
that he should say, and not do; you may write Gods name upon every word he has
spoken, you may write his Name (I Am) upon all that he has said: It shall be.

Now Christians, put these three Particulars together, and if you cannot spel
out the conclusion out of them, the Providence of God will certainly accomplish
his good Purpose and Promise concerning you: You are of little understanding as
well as of little Faith.

If God governs the World, and nothing comes to pass but by his Providence; if
Providence governs according to Gods Purpose and promise; if Providence cannot
fail of accomplishing both.

If God be Almighty and can, if God be Wise and knows how, if God be Faithful
and true, let the Devil if he can, with all his Sophistry, evade the
Conclusion, That he will certainly do all that good for you which he has
purposed and promised: If God be not able to perform, he is not good; if he
mistake his way, if he use impertinent, improper means, he is not the All-wise
God. If he do not actually perform what he is able, and knows how to do, when
he has said it, he ceases to be the true God: So that the matter is brought
plainly to this Issue; If God be God, if God be the All-wise God, if God be the
true and faithful God, this word which he has spoken, ( All things shall work
together for good to those that love God,) shall not fail of its accomplishment
in its season.

Having thus proved the Doctrine, I shall, after I have added a few words by
way of Caution, and answered an Objection or two against the Sense I have
given, of this Promise, and subjoyned a few particular Inferences, descend to
the general Application.

1. By way of Caution.
1. Limit not the Lord to your time and way; God will make good his word, but
you must give him leave to take his own season. He that believesh shall not
make have: believe God, but do nor prejudge nor precipitate, least you fall
into temptation. Put no more into the promise, neither for matter nor
circumstance, then God has put in it: put not that into the Promise, which God
has not put in it, lest you miss and come short of that which God has put in
it. Let others mistakes and miscarriages be warnings to you: till God has
manifestly said, do not you say, This is the time; build not your confidence on
conjectures, your Faith on the strongest Presumptions; lest your Faith prove
but a fancy, and your confidence your confusion: make not the promise of God of
none effect, by looking for its effect out of season.

Believe not your selves into Infidelity: Consider, Acts 1. 7. It is not for
you to know the times and the seasons, which God has put in his own Power.
Study the Word, and its commentary, the Works of God, but be sober in your
Conclusions.

This you may safely depend upon, and this will be enough, if you have no more:
God will make good his good Word to you, sooner or later, in one time or other,
in one way other; in the best time, in the best way, in the appointed time, the
Vision shall speak and shall not lie, Habak. 2. 3. Though it may tarry, wait
for it; because it will surely come and will not tarry: At least, at the end of
the days. When you shall stand in your lot: when you shall be gotten on the
banks of Canaan, and shall thence look back on the Promises and Providence of
God, ye shall see and say, God is faithful, there has not failed one word of
all that he has promised: Now I understand, though once I could not, how every
Wheel was turning, every Instrument was moving, every event was working toward
my good and everlasting welfare.

2. Let not your expectation cause an abortion. Let not your looking for mercy,
hinder the working of your affliction: It is not seldom, and the Lord grant it
be not too common a case, that our door of hope becomes a door of sin. We do
not set our selves with that seriousness, to humble, to purge our selves from
our iniquities, as we would do, did we apprehend our case more desperate: our
fears and our sorrows have not their kindly work upon us, our hopes hinders
it. We might have been more brokenhearted, had it not been for our hopes of
building up: as it is with a person, who conceives himself to be dying; he then
falls to praying and repenting, and setting his heart in order, because he must
dye: but upon a little hope of recovery, he lays by his dying thoughts and
preparations.

Christians, Whenever you are under afflictions, take heed that your
expectation of deliverance to be near, put it not so much the farther off.
Watch narrowly over your selves, and look diligently to it, that your hope of
redemption do not harden your hearts, nor hinder your humiliation and
repentance. Hope in God, and wait for the promise of his coming: But know, That
till the Rod has done its work, it is not like in mercy to be laid by; and its
better to be continued in the Furnace, than to be brought forth with your dross
unpurged away.

Against this blessed Truth, there are some Objections: As,

Object. 1. Can it ever be said, That the removal of the Gospel, and the
preaching of it, can be for good.

Sol. This is an hard, Truth; but yet a Truth: That even this shall work for
good to those that love God.

1. It Is true, That the removal of the Gospel, and the Ministry of it, is a
most grievous Judgment: and that which carries with it a greater evidence of
wrath and divine displeasure against a People, than any thing that ever befalls
them in this World. How great a Judgment it is, we may guess, if we observe
those Scripture expressions by which it is set forth It Is called the famine of
the Word, Amos 8. 11. The glory departed. 1 Samuel 4. The Kingdom of Heaven
taken away, Matthew. 6. 41. The Salvation of God sent away, Acts 28. and can
there any thing worse befall a People? a Soul-famine, an Eclipse of their
spiritual glory, the shutting up of the Kingdom of Heaven, the carrying away of
the Salvation of God: What worse thing can come unto them? It Is a great wonder
there should be no deeper Sense of this most dreadful of evils, than is mostly
found: Men little understand what they do, who either in away of merit, or
instrumentally, procure, and bring on this plague; and few understand, or are
sensible, what they herein suffer; to be an instrument in this hellish work, is
an office for a Devil; and the suffering of such a plague, (to them that
understand it) is an hell above ground. This darkness is the very same for
kind, with the darkness of Hell; as the light of the Gospel is the same in
kind, with the everlasting light, as glory under age; so is this thick
darkness, in specie, and in semine, the darkness of the pit. Oh, what an hell
of wickedness does this World then become! the Devil is then in his Region, is
let loose, rules the World at pleasure, deceives, devours, destroys Souls,
without contradiction, takes them captive at his will, carries them down by
whole shoals to destruction: Those that observe what a World there is, where
the Gospel is not; what oaths, curses, blasphemies, belluine lusts then abound;
what Lions, Tigers, wild Bulls, wild Boars, Men then become one to another,
need not be to seek for an Argument, to prove there is an Hell; they see an
Hell aboveground.

These dark and dismal seasons, are the Devil's Marts, where he may vent his
Hellish Wares, his snares, and temptations, his deceits and delusions, and
every abominable thing by whole sale: there is nothing so false, so vile; and
abominable, but he can put it off at pleasure; Adultery, Drunkenness,
VVitchcraft, Sodomy, Buggery, Blasphemy, Idolatry, Atheism, any thing that
Satan has to offer, he will find Customers enough to receive: and the truth is
the Devil may spare his pains; men then need not a Devil to damn them, they will
do it fast enough of their own accords.

Oh 'twere happy, if Saints were so busy in improving their Light, to hasten
them Heaven-wards, as Sinners do their Darkness, to hury them to Hell. Oh the
sad proofs, that the World affords of this Dreadful Truth: Look into all the
dark Corners of the Earth, especially there where there has been Light, and
see if you find not all this fully proved to your hand. Can he then be
accounted a Christian, whose heart does not tremble at the Thoughts and the
Fears of such a sore Judgment? He is both dark and dead indeed, to whom such a
Mist is not as the firstborn of Death, or the King of Terrors.

Christians, if ever this should be your case, make not light of it; and take
heed, how sad soever it may seem in its first approach, that no Tract of Time
do wear off the sense of it.

Those that are weary of the Gospel, that cry out of too much Preaching, that
are sick of the Light that shines unto them, you may know by what has been
said, what Judgment to have of them.

But is it not strange, that there should be any such? That those that have
lived in the Light, and seen something, what difference there is between Light
and Darkness, should yet love Darkness, rather than Light? Is it not yet more
strange, that any that pretend to be set up for Lights, should be for Darkness?
That the Prophets should be against Prophesying? that the Pulpits should ring
against Preaching? Some there are, that are not ashamed to tell us, that hence
come all our mischiefs and miseries; to tell us, and to stand to it, that
there is now, in such a Land as this, little need of Preaching; that it had its
use in the first publishing and planting of the Gospel; but now that the Gospel
is received, and embraced, and competently understood, there is now little more
need of Preaching: Praying, and Reading may now serve the turn. I would put in
a word or two to such.

No need of Preaching; Why? Is the end of Preaching accomplished? Till the end
be attained, there is still need, that the means be continued: and what was the
end of Preaching? Was it men's Instruction only, to bring them to the knowledge
of Christ, to turn them from Darkness to Light? Was it not for their Conversion
also, to turn them from the power of Satan unto God? Yea, and their Edification
and Building up in Holiness to Salvation? Let these following Scriptures be
consulted, Acts 26. 18. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. The Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 12,
13. told those Christians to whom he wrote, that he would, and he thought it
meet so to do, to put them in remembrance, as long as he lived, and to stir
them up to their duty; though says he, you know and be established in the
present truth. You say you need no more Preaching, the Preacher can tell you no
more than you know already; and might not these have better said it, when the
Apostle acknowledges of them, that they did know, and more than that, were
established in those very Truths, he meant, to continue Preaching to them? And
yet he tells them, it is meet they be still put in remembrance of them: Sure
Peter's Authority weighs not so much with these men, as his that pretends to sit
in Peter's Chair: But has the Gospel indeed done its Work, and reached its
End? Witness the Objectors own cases. Let not only their Lewdness and
Impenitency, but their Ignorance and Unbelief, come in and testify, whether it
has or no. They that have most need themselves, are they that say, There Is no
more need of Preaching. There needs no more Argument, to stop such Mouths, but
the showing themselves: Or if it should have done its work upon you, yet has
it done its work upon all: Are there no Unbelievers left? Have all men Faith?
Faith comes by Hearing; and how shall they hear without a Preacher? If you say,
they have Bibles to instruct them, and their own Consciences to preach to them:
I answer,

First, for their Bibles, two Things:

1. Those that are no Friends to the Pulpit, are none of the best Friends to
the Bible: Those that would not that the people should hear, care not how
little they read the Scriptures: And be sure, whenever Preaching is let fall,
the Bible will in a little while be laid aside.

2. Understandest thou what thou read? How can thou without a Guide? He
knows but little of the Scriptures, that does not understand that they are hard
to be understood. There are, the Apostle tells us, (...) in the Scriptures,
Things hard to be understood: As there are many (...) to all that read, so to
many that read, all are so. The Vulgar can as well read the Scriptures without
their own Eyes, as understand them without the Preacher's Lips. Till we come to
hold, that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, or that Images are Laymens
Gospel: till then, let it be granted as necessary, that the Preacher's Lips
preserve Knowledge.

2. For Conscience; let the Word, at least, be Preached so long, till it be
made manifest in the Consciences of all the Hearers: That Conscience that has
not been sufficiently preached to, will prove an insufficient Preacher: Let
preaching be continued, till the Word be manifested in the Consciences of all
the Hearers; and if you will needs have it so, then let it be forborne.

Secondly, has the Devil yet given over Preaching, and are the Preachers yet
silent? Has the Devil yet given over his Preaching, his deceiving Souls, his
perverting the good ways of the Lord, and discouraging persons from walking in
them? Sure there is need that Christ be preached, while there is a Devil that
impeaches him. Has the Devil them that preach him every day, and must not
Christ have them that preach him, at least every Sabbath Day? may once a
month, or once a quarter, be enough for these, when every day, and all the
day-long, does scarce suffice for those? When, or where are evil men silent?
Are they not preaching daily? in the House, in the Streets, in the Taverns, on
the Stage, in the Stews? Preaching by their Oaths, their Curses, by their Lies,
by their Scoffs, by their Habits, by their Cups, by their Whores, and almost by
all their words, and works? And is there no need that Christ be any longer
preached any where, when the Devil is preached every where? If in such a case
the Preachers of Christ should altogether hold their peace, might we not expect
that the very stones would cry out? This is but a seasonable Demand. Let Faith
and Holiness, first have none found that preach against them, before those that
preach them, be concluded, such as may well be spared: But what need we reason
any longer, in a case so plain, wherein I can have no Adversaries, but such as
the Apostle had, when he fought with Beasts at Ephesus. Whosoever is an
Adversary to Preaching, is either an Infidel, or a Brute. I shall only leave
one word for such to chew upon, and so leave them and their cause to the
Judgment of God, Act. 13. 46. It was necessary, that the Word of God should
have been first spoken to you: but because you put it from you, and judge your
selves unworthy of everlasting Life, Lo we turn unto the Gentiles? Let all
back-friends to Preaching, pause sadly upon that Word; you have prevented the
Judgment of God, by putting the Word from you, you have given your selves your
own Sentence, you have judged your selves unworthy of Everlasting Life. Well,
by what has been said, notwithstanding all that can be said against it, it
appears, that the removal of the Gospel, and the preaching of it, is a grievous
Judgment.

2. This grievous Judgment shall yet work to the good of Saints: That which
comes in Wrath on some, may be in Mercy to others: It Is the ignorant, the
unconverted, the unbelieving part of men, on whom the Vengeance of this
Judgment falls: It Is those that are weary of the Word, that can worse it.
Sinners, you that say to the Seers, see not, to the Prophets, prophecy no more
to us; let us alone, we have enough of this preaching: if God once say, as you
say, Let it be according to their word, it is your Souls are like to go for it:
And it is not the least aggravation of the Sorrows of the Saints, the misery
they see, hereby coming on you: As for themselves, (that I may answer more
distinctly)

1. The Gospel shall never be totally removed from them; they shall never see
days of Famine: If they never again hear the joyful Sound from without, they
shall have it within. The Word which they have received, shall be in them a
Well of Water, springing up unto Eternal Life: If the showers and the Rain
fail, yet the Spring which is within them, shall supply that want: If they have
no Bible in the House, no Preaching in the Pulpit, yet they have a Bible in
their Hearts, a Preacher in their Breasts, that shall instruct and comfort
them. Pharaoh's Dream, and the Interpretation of it, shall be to the Egyptians,
and not to Israel. The lean Kine shall not devour the fat ones; there is a
Storehouse, from whence they shall be supplied.

Whatever scarcity there be, this is certain, not one of them shall want a
Viaticum, to bring them to their Journeys end. God will not suffer one of his
Elect to starve or perish in the way: There shall not fail means of one kind or
another, till the whole Body be perfected and built up: Till (we all) come unto
a perfect Man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

2. That Scarcity, that does at any time befall them, shall happen to them for
the better, and not for the worse.

1. For who knows, whenever the Ministry is removed, but it may be in order to
a greater Glory at it is Return? Perhaps, God's sending away Pastors from a
People, may be as Paul's absence from the Romans, that they may return, in the
fullness of the blessing of the Gospel: Or as Onesimus his departing from
Philemon: Perhaps, they therefore depart for a season, that they may be
received for ever: Or if this should not be the case of any particular Church,
if they should return no more; yet,

2. Their want of means shall supply their want of means; their want of means
shall be their means: When they have no Preacher, their empty Pulpits shall
preach to them; this most smarting of Rods will have its voice. If they have no
longer the Light with them, their darkness shall instruct them; if they want
their burning Lights, the very Cold shall preserve and increase their inward
vigor; the wickedness of others shall make them more holy; the violence of
evil men upon sin, shall enkindle their zeal for God; the darkness that is here
below shall make them to live more above; and all this shall make to their
fuller reward. It Is a greater virtue to keep up the heart, to keep on our way,
where there is a want, than where there are abundance of means and helps; and
an higher virtue shall have a greater reward.

3. The failing of the Word will bring back to their Memories, and upon their
own hearts, that which they have received; and as the emptiness of the Stomach,
will cause a second and better Conc^ction, and turn it into better nourishment;
when there are no more Loaves, they will gather up the Fragments, that nothing be
lost; the less there is, more to be had; the more reckoning, and the better use
they will make of what they have; their present want, will be a rebuke of their
former wantonness: their want of remembrancers will help their Memories, and
whet their Appetites. Every old truth, that has been too much laid by, will
then be precious.

4. Whenever ordinary means fail, God will either find extraordinary, or else
will feed them more immediately on himself, Psalm. 34. 9. God has promised,
that those that fear the Lord, shall want no good thing. If that be meant of
temporal good things, yet sure, it will yield us an argument, that will reach
the present case. If God will provide for their Carkases, much more for their
Souls. If God will supply them with less necessaries, then doubtless he will
not be wanting in what is absolutely necessary, Psalm. 23. 1, 2, 3. The Lord is
my Shepherd, I shall not want; and so on through the Psalm. Surely goodness and
mercy shall follow me all the days of my life; and I shall dwell in the house
of the Lord for ever.

Here we have the Psalmists conclusion, and it is foundation; or his confidence,
and its ground; his foundation or ground is, the Lord is my Shepherd; his
conclusion and confidence is, I shall not want; that is, neither the Body, nor
Soul; as appears by the following part of the Psalm. If David's Logic, and his
Faith too, does not fail him, the conclusion is firm; let the Lord be his
Shepherd, and he shall not know famine or want.

Gods Relation to his people, is their security, for a sufficient provision in
all times. If the Lord be their Shepherd, he must see them fed; he must either
find them those that shall, or do it himself. He must either find them Pastors,
or be their Pastor; he must either provide them, or be their Pasture. If
ordinary means fail, he must find extraordinary, if both fail, he must be
instead of means to them.

Here two things.

1. That God stands engaged, as the Shepherd of his people, where ordinary
means fail, either to provide them extraordinary, or to feed them more
immediately from himself.

2. That extraordinary means, or no means, when God brings his people to it,
will be better than their ordinary means.

1. That God stands engaged, as the Shepherd of his people, where ordinary
means fail, either to provide them extraordinary, or to feed them more
immediately from himself. Feed them he must, or he cannot be faithful; and if
means fail, he must supply that want one way or other. Now God is faithful, and
will not see his Sheep to starve. Isa. 41. 17, 18. When the poor and needy seek
water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord will
hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them. I will open Rivers in
high places, and Fountains in the midst of the Vallyes; I will make the
Wilderness a Pool of water, and the dry Land, Springs of water. Oh what a good
Word is here for the poor Saints to live upon in hard times! It is interpreted
to have an immediate reference to the outward, and yet a special respect also
to the spiritual wants and distresses. And it will appear, if we compare it
with the like expressions. Chap. 44. 3. I will pour water upon him that is
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit on thy Seed, and
my blessing upon thine offspring.

From the former Scriptures note, 1. That the poor people of God, may sometimes
be (as to the visible Soul-provisions) but in a poor case. Needy, and hungry,
and thirsty, their hearts fainting, their tongues failing for thirst, and their
waters dried up. [If they seek water, and there be none.]

2. All the wants and straits of the Saints, are before the Lord. [I the Lord
will hear.] Christians, though those that should will not, yet he that can,
will hear the cries of your Souls: all your faintings, and p^ntings, and
longings for the water of life, are before your eyes, and come up into the ears
of the Lord of Sabbath.

3. God has more ways than one to relieve the wants, and refresh the bowels
of his hungry ones. He has extraordinary means for extraordinary cases. If
they can find no common Rivers, he will open, or make new Rivers. The high
places, the dry places, the very Rock will yield a River, when God commands it.

4. Gods extraordinary Provisions shall not be scanty and penurious, but rich
and plentiful. It Is not some drops, or now and then a draught, a little to stay
the longing, or barely enough to keep them alive; he prepares them Rivers,
Fountains, Pools, Springs of water. [I will open Rivers in the high places,
Fountains in the Valleys, etc.] Wherever they be cast, in the high Places, in
the Valleys, in the Wilderness, in the dry Lands, wherever they be cast, I
will cause provision enough to meet them; though they have neither bag, nor
bottle, nor any thing to carry with them, they shall not want; the Rivers shall
meet them, Springs shall arise and break forth to them.

5. They are not the wanting, but the thirsting, the seeking Souls, whom God
will supply. When the poor and needy [seek] water, and there is none, Oh
Christians! how many poor are there, that fit down by their poverty; who if
they starve, yet will not beg, their emptiness has taken away their Appetites.
These are sad Souls; it is a sad sight, to behold a company of hunger-bitten
Souls, sit weeping and sighing, seeking after the Bread and Water of life, and
finding none; but to see empty, and yet not hungry; fainting, and yet not
panting, Souls; to see Souls even dying away for want, and yet not desiring or
craving a supply, this is a much sorer spectacle. A starving thirstless Soul is
next to a Ghost.

Well, if ever such Souls find, who never seek water, it is more than God has
promised. It Is they that seek water, to whom God will open a River.

6. Whatever difficulty there be, to furnish the hungry Saints, with a
sufficiency of Provision, yet one way or other it shall be done. I [the Lord]
will hear. I [the God] of Israel, will not forsake them. Upon me be all their
wants. I am [God] and can, I am [their God] the God of Israel, and will provide
for them. They must and shall be provided for: whatever course I be put to
take, I must not see them starve.

The Lord will not be wanting to them. If his Word be not heard, his Works
shall speak; if Preachers cannot, Providence shall preach to them; if their
friends cannot, their enemies, their stripes, their wounds, their rods, shall
instruct them. Thy Rod and thy Staff comfort me. If they have no other, the
Sun, Moon, and Sta^^, the Fouls of the Air, the Beasts of the Field, shall be
their Prophets, and Apostles. If any should fail, yet the Spirit of the Lord
shall not fail to be their Teacher and Comforter.

2. Extraordinary means have more in them, than ordinary, and no means more
than means.

1. Extraordinary means, when ordinary cannot be had, are sweeter and better
feeding to the Saints, than ordinary would be. The less of the Creature, the
more of God; the less of common Providence, the more of special Grace. Water
out of the Rock was more precious than out of the River; the Manna of the
Wilderness, was (to them that understood it) better than the Milk of Canaan.
Elijah never made better meals, than what he got out of the Ravens mouth. I
have heard of a woman in great distress of Soul, who received comfort, when the
Word was brought her by the mouth of a Child, which she had failed of receiving
from the mouths of many excellent Ministers.

2. No means, often prove better than means; when I say, no means, I do not
understand simply none, means they shall have, of one kind or other; their
understandings, their memories, their secret duties, Prayer, Meditation, etc.
but by no means, I understand nothing from without, no Ordinances, Friends,
Societies, Books, etc. Gods feeding of a Soul more immediately, is much
sweeter, then when he sends provision by the hands of another; the Samaritans
hearing of Christ's words, from his own mouth, was much more to them, than the
same words reported by the woman. Du^cius ex ipso font. Water is the purer,
the nearer the Fountain; the Bread that comes down from Heaven, is better
Bread, than that which grows up out of the Earth, though that be originally
from Heaven also. By how much the more immediately our comforts come from
Heaven, by so much the more they have of Heaven in them. If upon the failing of
public Communion, it b^ made up so much the more in secret, sure the Saints
have no reason to complain. And whether this be not so, let the Prisons, into
which the Saints have bin sometimes cast, the Wilderness into which they have
been sometimes banished; let Elihu's Songs in the night, Peter's, Paul's, Silahs
Songs in the Prison, in the Stocks, stand forth and testify. If Prison joys,
and exile comforts, have not been often both fuller and sweeter to them, than
when they have rolled in Manna, and lived in the fullness, and freedom of all
helps and means; then not a few Christians, have either mistaken, or
mis-reported their experiences. To pretend to live above Ordinances, whilst
God affords them, is a wickedness that some men have to repent of; but where
God denies them, he does, he will provide a better subsistence without them.

Now lay all this together, and then you will see, that even this also, this
most grievous of Judgments, the famine of the Word, whenever it befalls,
shall work for good to those that love God.

Christians, cheer up your hearts: whatever drought, or dearth may fall upon
the World, your are provided for, you shall have enough. If the shours fail
without, you have within you, that which shall spring up to eternal life. If
your streams should be dried up, if your Pastures should be trodden down, you
have a God, that will be both your Pastor and Pasture. If the River fail you,
the Rock shall supply you; what you want in ordinary, you may look to be made
up in extraordinary means. The drying up of the waters, shall but drive you up
to the Springhead. If ever the Stars fail you, God shall but exchange
Starlight for Sun-light; while there is light in the Sun, you shall not walk in
darkness. See but to this, make sure that this God is yours, and he must find
out a comfortable feeding for you; if you can but say David's first words after
him, The Lord is my Shepherd; you may then with confidence, say the whole Psalm
after him. I shall not want, he will make me to lie down in green Pastures; he
will lead me by the still Waters; though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil: thy Rod and thy Staff shall comfort me.
Thou shall prepare me a Table in the presence of mine Enemies: Surely Goodness
and Mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I will dwell in the
House of the Lord for ever.

2. There is another Objection, that seems to have one difficulty in it.
Suppose a Saint to fall into Distraction, and thereby to be deprived utterly of
the use of his Reason, and so to live and die:

How can it be imagined, that this can work for his good, either in this World,
or in the World to come? Can any good arise, out of an incapacity of any longer
doing or receiving good, or patiently suffering Evil? Can either his Grace
here, or his Glory hereafter, be increased or advanced, by a man's being
converted into a mere Bruit?

1. There Is no doubt at all, but this may make for the Churches good: Is there
nothing that others may learn out of such a sad Providence? If others may reap
good by my evil, is it nothing to me? May it not be said to be good for any
particular Saint, to bear the soarest affliction by which the Church may have
benefit? He has not much of a Saint, to whom, if it were aforehand proposed,
whether for the benefit of the Church, he would be content, if God see it good,
to fall into such a calamity: He has little of a Saint, that would
deliberately refuse it. Doubtless, a sincere Christian, who would count his
usefulness to the good of the whole Body, to be his good, would say even
concerning such a Message, were it brought to him, Good is the word of the
Lord: And that which aforehand, he would judge to be good for him to submit to,
may it not be good for him to be under?

2. It may also be more directly for his particular personal good. For,

1. It may do him the same good, which Death will do for him: Concerning which
the Apostle says it is yours, 1 Cor. 3. that is, it is for your advantage: It
may take him from the evil to come; from those sorrows, and that trouble of
heart, which God might foresee falling upon him, by any calamities, coming
either on the Church in general, or himself or Family in particular: which
being deprived of his Reason, and power to reflect on, he cannot feel, or in
the least be afflicted by. If you reply, But the Remedy is worse than the
D^sease: To be useless and unserviceable is less eligible, than to be sorrowful
and afflicted: Will any man choose to fall into a Lethargy, or Apoplexy, because
'twill secure him from the torment of a Fever? If there be any weight in this
Reply, I shall add a further Answer; which, if I mis-judge not, will cut off
all Replies,

2. Who knows, what Sins and Temptations he might have fallen into, and fallen
by, had not the Lord by this means prevented it; he might possibly have been a
back-slider, have fallen into gross sin, by which he might have been a Terror
to himself, and a Scandal to the Gospel; and is it not good for him, that this
is prevented? Is not that affliction a mercy, which secures from such iniquity?

Who can say it is not thus? that the Lord foresaw he would have fallen into
sin, and for prevention, brought him into this affliction: Who can say, it is
not thus? If none can, then this is no Objection. If you Reply, You say [ it
may be] this is the case; and I may as well say [ it may be not] there might be
no such thing, that God foresaw, as the Reason of this Providence. It Is but a
Conjecture, and an uncertainty, when you have made the most of it: Be it so;
yet it will fully answer my end: I am not now proving, that all things work for
good to the Saints, that is sufficiently done already: But you are objecting
against it; and till you prove your Objection, which you can never do, unless
you prove that this is not the case; you must give me leave again to tell you,
your Objection comes to nothing.

And so at length you see this Blessed, Glorious, Comfortable Truth, stands its
Ground, and Triumphs over whatever has any shadow of Contradiction to it.

By the way, learn hence two things.

1. Rejoice in this Promise of God: Has the Lord put in thy name here, let
thine heart say, It is enough. Be more joyful in this, that God has thus
undertaken the Care of thee, than if God had wholly put thee to thine own hand;
giving thee power to help, and liberty to choose for thy self. In what will thou
rejoice, if not in this, that the whole Creation are engaged to do thee a
kindness, to help thee into the possession of thy God? Thou may now not only
submit to, but thankfully embrace every Providence, knowing upon what Errand it
comes to thee: for good, and not for hurt. Thou may now triumph, not only in
the Consternations* but in the Triumphs of thine enemies. Whether they ride
over thy back, or thou tread on their neck, it is all one, the issue will be the
same. Thy Troubles and thy Consolations differ only in their Countenance; with
what ever Grim face thy afflictions look, there are smiles under: learn to see
through them, and thou may see light on the further side. Believe this Word,
thou may read it written upon every thing that befalls thee: there is no
Messenger that comes, but brings this promise in his hand, Even this shall work
for good. Read it, and rejoice.

2. Lay thy self down quietly under it. No more perplexing or distracting
cares, what shall become of thee: no more unwarrantable shifting for thy self:
Let God alone. Shift not for thy self, lest God leave thee to thine own shifts.
Let not the violence of evil men disturb thy Peace, or provoke thee to
unpeaceableness. Whatever provocations thou may have* avenge not thy self,
neither give place unto wrath, murmuring, or fears. In thy patience possess thy
Soul, thy God, and his good Word: Thy strength is to sit still. Stand still and
see the Salvation of God: thou have nothing to do but to be Holy, let that be
thine only care: thy God will see to it thou shall be happy: he is faithful
that has promised. Love God, and leave thy self and thy whole Interest in this
blessed Word, All things shall work to thee for good.

By this time you see something of the Riches of this Promise: God is in the
Promise; the God of Peace, the God of Power, the God of Patience, the God of
Hope; the heart of God, the help of God, the presence of God; by virtue
whereof, all that ever befalls them shall work for their good. Methinks the
hearing of this Promise opened, should set your souls, and all that is within
you a crying our, Oh that this were my portion! Wherever my Lot do fall, as
to outward things, though in a Prison, though in a Desert, though on a Dunghill;
let the lot of my Soul lie in this Promise, The God of Peace shall be with you.
Why Brethren, will you take up with Godliness: you have learned and rec^ived,
and heard the Word of the Lord; the Word of Faith, the Word of Righteousness
and Holiness, will you hearken to, will you obey these words? These things do,
and the God of peace shall be with you.

Oh what foolish Creatures are we, that ever we should be afraid of Religion,
afraid of Holiness, afraid to own, obey, and follow God and his holy ways.
What unreasonable fears are these, to those that believe the Scriptures? If the
Scriptures be true, this is the only way, this following God in holiness, to
put your selves out of all danger, to put your selves into the heart, arms,
presence, protection, of the Almighty God of Heaven and Earth.

Oh that I could persuade you in thither, and there leave you; if you are once
in the Lords Arms, you are safe en^ugh, into whatever hands you fall.

Use. By way of Application, let me once more speak a few words, 1. To the
Ungodly. 2. To the Godly.


1. To the Ungodly; my work with them shall be to persuade and direct them, how
to get into this peaceful and blessed state: Amongst the ungodly,

1. There are some who are far from the Kingdom of Heaven; as,

1. Those upon whom the Ministry of the Gospel has done nothing at all; that
miserable forlorn multitude of the grossly ignorant; who as they were born
blind, have had all their days such a mist of thick darkness abiding upon
them, that they are incapable, without a miracle, of being savingly wrought
upon. Speak unto them of Faith in Christ, of Repentance unto life, of obeying
the Gospel, in the plaine^t way possible, and you will be as a Barbarian to
them, as one of a strange Language, they know not what you say; if you should
speak Greek or Latin to them, they would understand it as well, as the
plainest truths of the Gospel: A poor Minister of Christ may break his heart,
and rend his bowels, in mourning over them; may draw forth his Soul in the most
melting expressions of his compassions to them, may break his brains, in
studying how to convey a little light unto them, and yet cannot help them,
cannot make them to understand so much, as that they understand nothing. Their
minds are so wholly blinded by the God of this world, that the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, though it shine round about them, cannot find so
much as a crany into their hearts; but being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, they give up themselves to
lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness; walking in the lusts
of their hearts, after the course of this World, in riot, luxury, excess of
Wine, revellings, banquettings, covetousness, lying, blasphemies, and
abominable adulteries, and Idolatries; and yet remain without any conscience of
sin, or fear of their danger; being as natural bruit Beasts, as if they were
made for slaughter and destruction.

Are there none such in this place? Does not the Earth every where groan, our
Land mourn, our Congregations travel in pain? Is not this Congregation black'd
and burdened with such miserable creatures; who after all the instructions,
counsels, wooings, warnings, threatenings and Judgments of God, which have been
in their ears, and before their eyes, remain to this day a stupid, blockish,
brutish generation, without the least sense of their sin, or wish to be
delivered from it?

Oh you blind and dark Souls, consider and understand, if it be possible, these
two Scriptures, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that
are lost. In whom the god of this World has blinded the minds of those that
believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them. This
darkness is from Hell; the Prince of darkness has held you under your
blindness; and this darkness leads to bell, to the blackness of darkness for
ever: You are lost, you are lost Souls, lost for ever, if the Gospel leave you
in this state of blindness in which you have so securely continued to this day.
Isa. 27. 11. It is a people of no understanding; therefore ^e that made them
will not have mercy on them, he that formed them will show them no favor.

2. Those upon whom the Gospel has seemed to have done its work; but it is its
strange work.

There are two works which the Gospel does: some it enlightens; others it
smites with blindness: some it softens; others it seals up under hardness: some
it gains over to Christ; others it gives up to the unbelief and impenitence of
their hearts. Isa. 6. 10. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their
ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, etc. Go and
preach to this people, but preach them into hardness and blindness: because
they refused to see or hear, let the light put out their eyes; let the joyful
sound strike them deaf, and stop their ears: never leave hammering them, till
thou have hammered them into rocks, or anvills. Some there are that have so
trifled with Convictions, baffled Conscience, and suffered their lusts so to
resist and bear down their light; that have had so many heats and colds, so
many thawings and freezings; that have taken up so many purposes, and made so
many promises, and yet all comes to nothing; that the Gospel has received a
Charge from the Lord, to make an end of its work: Go, says God, and make an
end with these men; I Will be mocked by them no more; I Will be trifled and dallied
with by them no longer, wound them no more, fright them no more: pe^swade them
no longer, make their hearts fat, their ears heavy and shut their eyes, and
give them up to their hearts lusts, that they may walk in their own counsels,
and fill up the measure of their iniquities.

you, that after all the warnings you have received from the Lord, and after
some workings of them, sometimes upon your Consciences, are yet going after
your lusts, prostituting your selves to your belluine and sensual pleasures,
filling up daily the measure of your iniquities. Oh tremble and consider sadly,
whether this be not likely to be your case; that the Gospel has even done with
you, and given you over unto an impenitent heart, and reprobate* m^^d. In hope,
that how near soever you are to this dreadful state, you may be yet one step at
least short of it, I shall this once more adventure a few words upon you,
together with them that I have already mentioned: And first let me reason a
^ittle with you.

1. Art thou one of them that obey the Gospel, or not? Art thou one of them
that love God, one of the called according to his purpose, or not? Art thou not
an Alien, an adversary against God, and a Rebel against his Word? Let thy
Conscience speak, set thy ways speak, let thine Oaths, and thy Drunkenness, and
thine Adulteries, thy scoffing at God, and his holy ways, thy hating his
Instructions, and kicking at his Reproofs, thy hardnings against his Calls, thy
treacherous dealings in his Covenant, and the Vows of God that are upon thee;
let these speak what thou art: Is this that which God has chosen and called
thee to? Are these the Things thou have learned, and received, and heard of
him? Did he ever say, These things do, and the God of peace shall be with you?
Thou need no other Conviction, than that of Isreal's, Jer. 2. 23. How can
thou say, I am not polluted? See thy way in the valley, and know what thou have
done How can thou say, that thou art not a Wretch? With what Face can thou
deny, but thou art an Enemy of God, and of all Righteousness? See thy way in
the Valley, trace the Footsteps of thy Life; behold thy practices and thy
course: Sure thou art very blind, if thou behold thy self in this Glass, and
do not see thy Face, as the Face of a Devil.

There are some, whom it may be harder work to convince, who have the Face of a
Christian, the Tong^e of a Saint, but within, the heart of a Beast. Hypocrites
are as hard to be convinced, as Hypocrisy is hard to be detected.

But thou who carryest thy wicked Heart in thy Forehead, upon thy Tongue, upon
the Palms of thine Hands, and in the very prints of thy Feet, whose Malice
against God and his Holiness, may be read in every look, in every word, in
every Line of thy life; need thou any further proof, that thou art not of
God? Thou may as well put me to prove, that Hell is not Heaven, that the
Devil is no Saint; as that thou art no Christian. Do thou love God, art thou
under the hope of the Promise? Ask thy ways man, and let these tell thee.

2. Do thou mean to keep at this distance from God to the Death? Do thou
in earnest? Is there nothing in those rich Promises, that have been laid before
thee, which thou can with 'twere thine? Is there no such word in thine hear^,
Oh that my Lot were here! Art tho^ content thy name should be left out for
ever? Is there so little in the peace of God, that thou can fell it for the
pleasures of sin? Art thou content that nothing should prosper with thee, but
that every thing should be a Gin, and a Snare, and a Curse to thee? Art thou
content that the Pi^ should be thy place, Eternal Wrath thy Portion, and that
every Creature, every Comfort, every Cross that comes, should give thee a pluck
down from Heaven, and a kick toward Hell? can thou think they mean thee any
thing else, when all does but harden thee in thy sin, and make thee kick
against thy God? Art thou so unwilling to leave thy sins, for the hope of the
Promise of God, that thou art content to give up thy hopes, for the love of thy
sins? Dare thou say, Let me have my part in the pleasures and contentments of
this life, and I am contented to relinquish my part in Christ? Let God let me
alone in my sins, and let him damn my Soul? Let me live at my ease, and my
liberty, and let my name be blotted out of the Book of Lifo: I am content to
take my place, and my lot, among the damned in another world, so I have my
pleasure with them in this World? And do thou say less, or other than this,
whilst thou refusest, or resolvest against following thy God? He that refuses
to accept of the Redemption of Christ, upon the holy Terms, upon which it is
offered, says, in effect, I am lost, I am sold for a Captive to the Devil; my
first Father sold me for an Apple, Christ would now buy me back again to my
self: but for my part, I am cont^nt that the first Bargain stand: As to my
interest, I confirm the Bargain: As for my Soul being sold to the Devil, to the
Devil let it go. This is the voice of every wilful Refuser of the Terms of the
Gospel. Oh Wretch does not thy heart tremble? does not thy hair stand on end?
do not thy knees shake? and are not the Joints of thy Loins loosed, to
conside^; what thou have done, and art still a doing?

Sinners, I have but a little more to speak to you, but shall that little be
nothing? Hither to you have stood it out, and will rot be persuaded, by ought
that God has spoken by me: But oh! must I leave you thus? Why may not a word
at parting, do more than all that has been spoken? Oh that it might! Shall
neither my first, nor last words prevail with you? What if [my] last, should be
[your] last? If the last that I must preach, be the last that you must hear?
There is a day set, that will be your last day: There is a Sabbath, that will
be your last Sabbath; There is Sermon, that will be your last Sermon: There is
a Warning, that will be your last warning: Oh what if this should be it? If
the Lord should take your this days denial, for your final Answer, and never
ask your consent again for ever? But whether it be your last, or no, I must be
henceforth silent to you? And oh will you send me away with so sad an Heart,
with the sorrow and shame of the disappointed? Will you break my Heart, by
persisting to hearden yours? Is this all I shall have, to return to the Lord,
that sent me unto you? I have declared thy Name unto them, but they did not
regard it: I have invited them to come to thee, but they would not follow me; I
have warned them to return from their sins, but they would not hearken? Are you
willing that I shall give in this Answer, and bear this Wi^ness against you at
the Great Day? sinners hearken; is there not one blind person among you, that
is yet willing to have his Eyes opened? Is there not one Captive to Lust and
Vanity, that is willing to be set free from his Bondage? Is there not one more
that will be persuaded to be wise, and to prefer an immortal Soul, God, Glory,
Eternity, before his brutish perishing pleasures? Is there not one Drunkaad
more, that will yet be persuaded to be sober? Not one vain person that will be
persuaded to be serious? Am I making my last Draught among you, and shall I
take nothing? Not one Soul more? If you will not yet be prevailed with, then
hear the Word of the Lord, Ezekiel. 3. 19. If thou warn the wicked, and he turn
not from his wickedness, he shall dye in his iniquity, but thou have delivered
thy soul.

But if there be any few relenting hearts among you, who are brought but thus
far, to cry out, Why what must I do? I would leave with such, these few words
of counsel* and oh that my counsel might be accepted by them.

1. Get a deep sense of thy dreadful state: What art thou sinner? What is thy
state? at ease? in peace? out of fear? in pleasure? What, and yet a sinner? In
the bond of iniquity? Captive to the Devil? without Christ? without the
Promise? under the curse? Study these Scriptures, Joh. 8. 34. He that
commits sin, is the servant of sin, verse. 44. Ye are of your Father the
Devil. 2 Timothy 2. 26. Held captive by him at his will. Act. 8. 23. In the gall
of bitterness, and in the Bond of iniquity. 1 John 5. 19. The world lies in
wickedness. Ps. 11. 6. Upon the wicked he shall reign Snares, Fire, and
Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup.
Psalm. 49. 15. Like Sheep they are laid in the Grave, Death shall feed upon them.

Rise Sampson, the Philistims are upon thee; awake sleeper, the Devil is upon
thee, Death is at thy back, the Gin is at thy heel, the Curse is over thy head,
the very next step may be Hell; Thou lie in wickedness to day, and may be
in fire and brimstone before to morrow: Sure thou art in a dead ^leep, that
can take thine ease in such a Lodging. Is this the state thou art so loath to
change? Is this the state thou so boastest of, and blessest thy self in? When
thine heart is merry with thy Wine, swelled with thy pride, jollity amongst thy
Companions; put in such a serious Question: But what am I all this while? Let
this thought, sauce thy sweet Morsel, spice thy pleasant Cups, and be the
Burden of thy merry Songs; After this, Hell, Snares, Fire and Brimstone, the
Vengeance of Eternal Fire. Oh an Heaven, a Paradise, oh my dear pleasures, oh
my sweet Laughter, oh merry days, what Mortal can part with you? I but what
comes after? What is there at the bottom? Look a little before thee, and if
that sight turn not thy stomach, sure thou art sufficiently hardy.

Study thy case, and tremble; and when thou tremblest, there is hope thou will
turn. Think not of Repentance, or escaping from thy sinful sta^e, till thou see
and fear it. We read, Isa. 42. 7. that Christ was sent, to open the blind eyes,
and to bring out the Prisoners out of Prison. If the Prisoners eyes be shut,
it is to little purpose that the Prison doors be open: Their Eyes must be first
opened, not only that they may see their way [out] but that they may see
themselves [in] Prison. Open thine Eyes, Sinner, if ever thou will escape; open
thine Eyes, and see where thou art? Thy Fools Paradise, wherein thou blessest
thy self, is thy Souls Prison, where thou art like to be held under Eternal
Bondage.

2. Give a present Bill of Divorce to every sin; hug not Death one minute
longer in thy Bosom: If thou love thy Life, say not of any one sin, Nothing
but Death shall part thee and me: No, not so much as this, Yet a little while,
and I will let thee go. Today* to day, if your will hear his voice, hearden not
your hearts.

4. Dread it as Hell, that thy hope in Christ, should lessen thy fear of sin.
Let not thy hope of a Savior be thy damnation. Make not Christ the Pandor of
sin; continue not in sin because Grace has abounded.

4. Break off from thy Companions in sin; will thou love them to the death?
Christ and thy Soul can never be married, till thy Soul and Sinners be parted.
Escape for thy life, get thee up from the Tents of these men; linger not. Thou
art held under the power of the Devil, by cords, and by knots; by the cords of
thy sins, and by the knots of thy Companions. There Is no hope that the cords
of sin will be broken, till the knots of evil Companions be loosed. Sinner,
these binding Cords will, if thou look not to it, become whip cords to torment
thee. Oh take heed thou never come to be lashed with such knotted cords!

Thy Companions in sin, as they now heighten thy pleasures, so will they
hereafter sharpen thy plagues* Sinners comfort their hearts with this thought,
That if they be damned, they shall have store of company* but let them know,
That the fire of Hell will burn just so much the cooler, for the multitudes
that are there; as the fire of their Chimney does, for the store of fuel. When
thou art charmed with the roaring of thy Companion^ in the Alehouse, think
what music their roaring with thee will make, when you shall all meet in your
eternal Prison. Away from evil company; you will remember hereafter, when ^is
too late, how much, and with how little success, I have labored with you in
this thing.

5. Baffle not Conscience once more. Awakened Sinner, Charm not thy Conscience
into silence, nor dash it out of countenance. Thy Conscience is the only Friend
that God or the Soul has left within thee. Thy will, and thy affections, and
thine appetite, are all gone; the Devil has stolen them away, and hired them
all against thee, thou have nothing but poor Conscience left.

Thy Conscience has been often upon the pleading with thee for God, and for
pity to thy Soul: It has warned thee, reproved thee, and often whispered thee
in thine Ear? What do thou mean? whither art thou going? when will thou
return? Away with thy sins, have done with thy Companions, no more of this
drunkenness, this riot, this covetousness; Thou art a lost man, thy Soul is
lost, if thou go on. Thus Conscience has warned thee, and thou have sometimes
hearkened to it, and spoken it fair. The throbs, and the pangs, and the wounds
thou have felt and received from it, have wrung from thee, now and then, a
promise: Well, through the Grace of God; I Will hearken to Conscience, I Will be a
new man: Away from me ye sinners, I will keep the Commandments of my God. And
yet shortly after, when thy Temptations return, thy Companions come, all is
forgotten; and along thou go, as a fool to the Stocks, or an Ox to the
slaughter; and this has been thy way and thy mann^r, from time to time: Now
and then Conscience draws a sigh, or a ^ear from thee; and by and by receives a
kick or a stab.

Beware Sinner; Conscience will not always be thus used. If ever it speak
again, say it not Nay; It Is next word may be it is last; if ever thou weariest
it into perpetual silence, then farewell all for ever. Conscience is the only
Friend thou have left.

Convinced Soul! How will thou bear the revenges of an awakened abused
Conscience? all thy b^fflings of it here will be repeated over in eternity: How
will all this look when it shall meet thee before thy Judge? Save thy self from
that hour: Baffle nor Conscience once more.

6. Let not the g^eatness of thy sins, nor the difficulty of Christ's terms,
hinder, or discourage thee, from making a present close with Christ. Say not,
his Yoke is too heavy, his Cross is too grievous for me to bear; or my sins are
too great for him to bear. Set the Throne against the Yoke, the Crown against
the C^oss, infinite Merit and Mercy, against mighty sins; and go unto Jesus,
cast thy self on his blood, and bowels, and put thy self under his Yoke and
Scepter. If he will give Life to thee, be content that he give Laws to thee:
and as ever thou expectest to live by him, be resolved to live to him, and no
longer to thy self. Go to Jesus, and when thou go, take with thee these two
Scriptures, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden,
and I will give you rest; Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, and you shall
find rest unto your Souls. Joh. 6. 37. Him that comes unto me, I will in no
wise cast out.

7. Fall close to Duties, and keep close to Ordinances.

1. Let secret, and Family Prayer be thy daily exercise. Count not thy self a
Christian, till thou give thy self to prayer.

2. Let not reading the Word, Catechizing, etc. be strangers in thy house.

3. Prize improve, and sanctify the Sabbaths; The Lord on those days comes
down upon his Mount, to meet thy Soul, to commune with thee, to bless thee, to
feed thee, and fill thee with whatsoever thy Soul desires or wants. Get thee
up to meet thy God: But remember when thou go, leave thy staff behind thee.

4. View often, and take an account of thy self, of the in-come and success of
all thy Duties: What is all my praying, reading, hearing, etc. come to? What is
brought forth? Is the work done, for which all these are? Are my Sins and my
Soul parted? Are my Companions in sin abandoned? Is Christ and my Soul united?
Beware you never make Praying, and Hearing, to serve you instead of believing,
and Repen^ing. But to help you on to it.

Remember these seven Words when I am gone.

1. Get a sense of thy dreadful state. 2. Abandon presently every sin. 3. Let
not thy hope in Christ lessen thy fear of sin. 4. Shake off every sinful
Companion. 5. Baffle not Conscience once more. 6. Make a present close with
Christ. 7. Fall close to Duties, and keep close to Ordinances.
These things do, and the God of peace shall be with you: But remember, There Is
no peace, says my God, to the wicked.

2. There are others that are near the Kingdom of God. Thou art not far from
the Kingdom of God. There are some that are like Ephra^m, Hosea 7, 8. Cakes
half baked; like Agrippa, almost Christians; Acts 26. 29. Almost thou
perswadest me to be a Christian; (...), Thou have brought me within a little of
Christianity. They are come to the threshold of saving Faith, within a step of
sincere Godliness. They have been professing, and praying, and hoping, and
wishing themselves in, and yet are short of it. They have been enlightened in
the knowledge of Christ, have tasted of the heavenly gift, have felt something
of the sweetness of Christ, have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, of many
excellent and useful gifts, have tasted of the good Word of God, and the powers
of the World to come. They have set out after Christ, have left the blind and
profane World much behind them, have escaped much of the pollutions of this
World, left many sins, taken up with many duties, have a name among the
Saints, have suffered many things for the Name of Christ, and notwithstanding
all this, here they stick, they cannot give themselves up fully to Christ;
something or other, either the World, or their Companions, or their pleasures,
or their ease, or their sloth has such hold on them, that they cannot,
unreservedly, resolvedly, give themselves up to the dominion of Jesus Christ,
nay, it may be, they cannot tell why, yet they cannot do it. Though they can
say, I would be, yet they cannot say, I will be the Lord's. These are near the
Kingdom of God, but yet short of it. He that cannot say, I will be, can less
say, I am the Lords.

But here I must distinguish of two sorts of almost Christians.

1. There are some that have reached to almost, and are still reaching
forwards: the state of such is hopeful, though it be not safe. Oh that we could
see more such almost Christians!

2. There are others that have reached to, and rest in almost; who mistaking
almost, for altogether, do there take up their stand. These are far from the
Kingdom of God.

Brethren, I much fear* that among the number of Professors, there are more of
these almost Christians, than we are aware of: Oh it would make our hearts
shake to consider, how far many go, to what degree of resignation, resolution,
affection, action, submission to sufferings, they attain; and yet fall off at
last, and thereby show they were still short of Christ; They went out from us,
because they were not of us.

I particularly pity^ many of the more sober Gentry, who have a good will to
Religion, and a fai^ respect for the Professors of it; countenancing holiness,
doing many worthy things for the Name and Servants of God; refraining from the
viciousness, and vanity of many of their Rank and Quality; who yet dwelling in
temptations, being entangled in carnal correspondencies, entertained with an
affluence of carnal delights and pleasures; and finding hereby a strict
self-denying and mortified life, to be of greater difficulty to them, than to
men of lower rank, are apt to think it not of such necessity; who may possibly
upon a narrow enquiry discern, after all their good hopes of themselves, and
the great opinions of others concerning them, that they are yet short of that
simplicity and godly sincerity, which alone will prove them Christians indeed.

Blessed be God there are amongst us such, those who have broken through all
temptations, have adventured upon the disobliging all the World; have laid down
their honors, pleasures, friends, and all their carnal interests whatsoever,
at the feet of Christ; and preferring a close Communion with God, the peace of
a good Conscience, the joys of Religion, yea the very reproach of Christ above
all their worldly Honors, and fleshly pleasures, have given themselves up to
the power of the Gospel, and an exemplary Spiritual and Heavenly life. But it
is to be feared, lest there be also such, who have deservedly gam'd great
respect among the Saints, and gone far along with them, who yet are come but to
the threshold of Christianity; and being afraid to put in, there they are in
danger to perish everlastingly. Quod fere fit non fit, He that is but almost
saved, is damned for altogether.

Oh Friends, what do you mean? will you lose all the ground you have gotten,
all the things you have wrought? shall all your sufferings for the name of
Christ be lost, and in vain? after you have tasted the bitterness of the Cro^s,
will you not go one step farther, and take the joys of the Cross? Is the work
of Regeneration brought to the Birth, and shall it at last miscarry, and prove
an abortion? would one step more land your Souls in the Kingdom of God, are
you gotten so near a shore, and will you perish in the Harbor? Are you gotten
off from the tents of the Edomites, and gotten even to the borders of Canaan,
and will you not enter? Are you gotten to Pisgah, and have a view of the Land
of Promise, and see that it is a good Land? are you come so near as to see,
that true holiness is such a beautiful State, such a blessed State? and do you
wish your selves in, and will you yet die on the other side Jordan? you have
prayed; put on, a little more prayer may do it: you have labored, and reasoned
with, and persuaded your hearts, give not over, a little more labor may
prevail. Oh that I knew what to say more that might bring you on. Oh that the
Lord would yet put one word or other in my mouth, that might overcome you! that
I might shoot one Arrow more, that might strike home, use one Argument more,
that might be cogent, and gain your full consent to Christ; that I might see
you safely landed ere I be parted from you. Oh think, think what a dreadful
disappointment this will be for you, that are come so near to godliness, as
that you verily think you have attained it; if after all the joys, pleasures
and hopes, the little Religion you have had, has fed you withal; you should at
last have a TEKEL written for your doom, and hear that cutting word pronounced
upon you, Thou art weigh^d in the balance, and art found wanting. With you
also would I leave a few words.

1. Lose not both Worlds: this World thou have lost already, by leaving them so
much behind thee; lose not that which is before, for want of coming on a little
farther: think not of hanging always betwixt Heaven and Hell; In the other
World there is no middle, either go back, or come on, turn thee to the right
hand or to the left.

2. Mistake not almost, for altogether, such a mistake may be mortal. Do not
too ^^ily conclude, thou have already attained; if thou take something of
Christianity to be all, thy all is nothing. It Is a wonderful thing, to see how
easily men satisfy themselves in a matter of such weight and intricacy. Thine
heart is deceitful, try it thoroughly before thou trust it* One grain too
light, and thou art undone. God, Glory, Soul, Eternity, all lie at stake; one
tittle short of sincerity, and all lost. Be jealous of thy self, never give
over suspecting thy State, till thou have put it past suspicion: Conclude not,
till thou have thoroughly disputed the case, give not over the dispute, till
the matter be no longer disputable. Can thou be too sure? the least mistake
is as wide as Heaven and Hell; the bottomless Gulf reaches home to the
Threshold of glory; thy tantum non, will be as much as the Devil looks for,
only not in, though never so near, will be thy eternal perdition.

3. Beware that this thought, one time or other, I shall have more power,
slacken not thy present care and labor. Let not thy hopes undo thee. Lose not
a present opportunity, in hopes of future ability. Labor each day to bring the
matter to a present Issue; and that with no less earnestness, than if this day
were to give a final determination, and thou were sure, that thou were just
come, to thy now or never.

4. Let not a small matter part Christ and thee. Heaven may not cost thee half
so much more as it has cost thee already. Art thou come within one penny of thy
Lords price, and shall that break the bargain?

5. Let not thy Oil thou have gotten, serve only for fuel for thy fire. Let
not thy common grace thou have obtained here, be of no other use, but to add to
thy confusion hereafter: every beam of light that has shined to thee here,
will add to the horror of thine everlasting darkness. Every drop of Honey thou
have tasted in Religion, will be thy Gall and Wormwood, in the day of thy
condemnation. Be not more miserable hereafter, for that thou have been less
wicked here; the remembrance how fair thou were once for Glory, will be one of
the sharpest Teeth of thine everlasting Worm.

6. Lastly, Be all or nothing; come up hither* or get thee down to thy lot,
particularly, 1. Be all unto Christ. 2. Let Christ be all to thee. 3. Let all
Christ be accepted and improved by thee.


1. Be all unto Christ; have none to please but Christ, and for Christ; have
nothing to seek but Christ, and for Christ; resolve against Reserves and
limits; give up all, and keep back nothing; say not thus much I can spare, and
no more; hither^o I wi^ go, and no farther. Divide not thy self, thy love, thy
care, thy aims, betwixt Christ and any thing else. Let thy whole Soul run in
one Channel. Rest not short of a full resignation, and when thou have resigned,
repent not.

2. Let Christ be all to thee; say not, I must have an Estate too, my Friends
too, my pleasures and my ease too, let Christ be enough, and all to thee;
Father, Mother, House, ^^nds, Portion; say con^^ing all thou have else, Be thou
mine Lord, and let these go their way.

3. Let all of Christ be accepted and improved by thee. Divide not thy self,
and divide not Christ; leave not any thing of thy self, for any but Christ,
refuse not any thing of Christ, for thy self. Think not thy all, too much for
thee to give, nor Christ's all, too much for thee to embrace. Thy half will not
satisfy Christ, nor will half of Christ suffice thee. Thou must give and have,
and therefore resolve to give and take, all or none. Let all Christ be
accepted, and improved by thee.

1. The merit of his blood. 2. The light and Authority of his Law. 3. The Power
of his Spirit.
1. Accept the merit of his blood; renounce thin^ own, and rely on his
righteousness; as God has, so do thou, lay on him, all thine iniquities. Think
not of Sanctification, without satisfaction. Think not to satisfy in the
least, by ought that thou can do, let that lie upon him. Judge thy self, but
seek to be justified alone through Faith in his blood. Say unto the Lord, what
I owe to thee, put it upon his account; my Christ must answer for me.

2. Accept and submit to the light and authority of his Law. Think not, he is
thy Priest, unless he ^e thy Prophet, and thy King* If he must answer for thee,
let him instruct thee, and be thou willing to learn of him; since he has
bought thee, let him govern thee; say not of any thing he requires, this is too
much to do, since he said not to thee, it is too much to dye. Count not thy self
Christian, whilst thou art unwilling to receive the utmost light, or to submit
to the utmost of thy duty; say not of any one thing, of all that Christ
requires, This I must have abated, and then I will be his.

3. Accept and exert the power of his Spirit; the Spirit of the Lord is a
Spirit of Power. The same Argument which the Apostle uses to prove himself a
Minister of Christ, is necessary to prove thee a Christian. 2 Cor. 13. 3, 4.
Since ye seck a proof of Christ speaking in me, which to you ward is not weak
but is mighty in you. Though he was crucified through weakness, yet he lives
by the power of God; for we also are weak in him, but we shall live with him by
the power of God. (Ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me,) ye put me to
prove that I am a Minister of Christ; why, here is the proof of it, My preaching
has not been weak, but mighty in you; It has been followed and attested by
the power of Christ, which has wrought migh^^ly in you; as weak as we are, yet
the power of Christ has been manifested and magnified in us. Do thou seek a
proof of thy Christianity? why, here must be the proof, that though thou art
weak of thy self, yet thou live in the power of God, which is mighty in thee.
Though thou can do nothing of thy self, yet thou art able to do all things
through Christ which strengthens thee.

Thou say, thou art willing, but thou art weak; thou desire to be, and to
do, what God would have thee, but thou can not perform.

This may comfort and support thee much under thy failings and miscarriages in
some particular duties; but if this be thy case in ordinary, in the main of thy
life; that to will is all thou have, thou art not a Christian. He that has not
the Spirit of Christ, is none of his: And he that has the Spirit of Christ, it
is in him as the living power of God, actually carrying him on in an holy life,
Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes; and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

I will not only command, persuade, incline you, but cause you. It shall be
done, my Spirit shall bring you on, and help you through. Y^ shall keep my
Sta^utes, and do them. Wherever the Spirit of God has breathed in the life
of grace, there are more than breathings out after a gracious life. Sincere
grace has more in it, than wishings and wouldings, than attempts and
overtures. Life is a power to act. Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your salvation,
for it is God that worke^h in you, to will and ^o do. Wherever God works
the (...) velle, he works also the (...) operari. Wherever God works in he
gives us a power to work out the works of Christi^nity. Oh rest not, till thou
find thy self endued with this power from on high, and enabled to go through
with thy work: They are not thy Attempts, but thy Achievements; they are not
thy Offers at an holy life, but thy acting it, that must prove thee a
Christian; He that does right^ousness, is righteous.

Be it thus with thee; be all to Christ, let Christ be all to thee; let all
Christ be accepted and improved by thee; heartily accept the merit of Christ
Righteousness, submit to the light and authority of his Law; get thy self,
possessed with, and live in the power of his Spirit; be it thus with thee, come
up hither, and then thou art safe: Thy almost is now come to altogether, and if
I must now leave thee, thou will be the better able to spare me: These things
do, and the God of peace shall be with thee. Thou art gotten into Sanctuary;
and now whatever Tossings and Tumblings, whatsoever unpleasing or afflicting
changes may be thy lot in this World, thou may sing that Requiem to thy
self, Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee: Gothy way, eat thy Bread with joy, and drink thy Wine with amerry heart,
for God now accepts thee.

Though thou walk through the shadow of Death, thou may now sit thee down
under the shadow of thy Lord, with great delight, and with great security,
whose fruit shall be ever sweet to thy taste: Though thou dwell in Mesech,
and have thy Habitation among the Tents of Kedar, yet thou may lay thee down
in peace and take thy rest, for the Lord does, the Lord will make thee to dwell
in safety.

2. To the Godly.
Happy Souls, The God of Peace is with you, all things shall work for good to
you; only that he may continue with you, continue you with him in the obedience
of that Gospel, to which you have delivered up your selves.

My Exhortation to you shall be.

1. General; Respecting the whole course of your Lives.

2. Particular; Respecting your daily Walk.

My general Exhortation shall be bottomed on that of the Apostle, Phil. 1. 27,
28. Let your Conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ; that whether
I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your Affairs, that you
stand fast in one Spirit, with one Mind, striving together for the Faith of the
Gospel. In nothing terrified by your adversaries, which is to them an evident
token of perdition, but to you of Salvation, and that of God.

[ Let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel.] Walk worthy of the
Gospel; let your lives be suitable, and answerable to the Holy Gospel which yo^
profess.

1. Let your lives answer the ends of the Gospel, the exaltation of the Name,
and glorious Grace of God in Christ; live an humble, self-denying, selfabasing;
this is a Christ exalting life.

2. Let your life answer ^he Dignities, and Honors the Gospel invests you
with. You are the children of God, the Heirs of Glory, the Spouse of Christ,
the Bride, the Lambs Wife: You are a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a
peculiar people; know your privileges, and do not live below your selves;
defile not your glory, by stooping to a Carnal and Earthly Life: a Jewel is not
more unbecoming a Swines snout, than fleshly Husks a Saints Palate: It Is below
you, who are peculiar people to your God, to live in common with the Men of
^his World: humble your selves into the least of Saints, but do not humble your
selves into Bruits a Live in the Spirit, converse with God, be dealing for
Glory, Honor, and Immortality.

3. Let your Lives answer the Names, which the Gospel puts upon you; Doves,
Lambs, Lillies; be harmless, peaceable, gentle, beautiful, fragant, sending
forth a precious savor in the World.

4. Let your Lives answer the Riches, the Reward, the Crown, the Kingdom, which
the Gospel sets before you.

Live a contented life, be satisfied, be well pleased, with what you have here,
be it little or much; disgrace not your portion, the Gospel allots you, as if
it ^re a poor insufficient portion: Let your souls ^^y, How small an handful
soever, you have of this Earth, it is enough, Christ is mine: A discontented
Christian says, Christ is not enough, Heaven is not enough: Let the
Contentation of thy Spirit, declare before the World, that the Lines are fallen
to thee in (...) pleasant place, and that thou have a goodly heritage: Do not
put this Scorn upon God, and Glory, that thou must be beholding to the Devil,
to mend thy portion.

Christian, either thou art within the Promise, or a stranger from it: Either
thou have the God of Peace with thee, or not: If not, methinks thou should
find other matter to take up thy thoughts, and not have leisure to perplex thy
self with every trivial want; that thy meat, or thy drink, or thine house, or
the carriage of thy friends toward thee, are not according to thy mind; thy
Soul, thy Soul man, thy life is in danger. Oh what an Eternity art thou like to
have of it? Can thou want a God, a Christ, an Heaven, and thine heart never
stir at it? And is the dissatisfaction of thy vain mind or appetite such a
Burden? Is the Devil in thy heart, and it never moves thee? and shall an ill
neighbor be a vexation to thee? Can thou feel a Feather, when thou have a
Talent upon thee? The Curse, the Curse of God is upon thee: I cannot wonder [
thou] should be discontent; but methinks these small matters, by a man in
thy case, should not be minded.

If Christ and the Promise be thine, is not that enough? Are not all things
enough? God is all things: He that has the son, has not only, with him, but
in him^ all things; Are all things nothing with thee? What would thou have
more than all? The Heathens acknowledged, That virtue is sufficient. I^ was a
Maxim among the ancient Philosophers (...) (...), Virtue is self-sufficient: A
virtuous Man has no need to be beholding either t^ Friends or Fortune: He has
enough in himself. The Apostle tells us, That Godliness, (...) with its
self-sufficiency, is great gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6. Solomon tells us, Prove. 14. 14. A
good man is satisfied from himself. He has that within him, out of which his
satisfaction grows. A Christian has the whole Gospel within him, He has
Christ, the Promise, the everlasting God, Heaven, Glory, within him: As rich as
he is, he may truly say, Omnia mea mecum porto. He carries his All in his
heart, and can thence get out a living, a Sufficiency for all Times, Cases, and
Wants: Cast him naked out of his Habitation, out of his Country, yet he
carries all with him, he leaves not an Hoof behind him.

Christians, leave it to the poor of the Earth, to carnal men, (the Riches of
them is poor enough) leave it them to be discontent: A carnal Man has so many
to be beholding to, to parch up his contentment, that it is no wonder he falls
short of it; the Sun, the Clouds, his Fields, his Folds, his Friends, his
Enemies, his Honors, his Pleasures, his Meat, his Drink, his House, his Money,
yea, the Devil and all, and his lusts, every Creature must come in with their
part, to contribute to his contentment: if but one thing fails him, there is
something wanting to make it up: Nay, if none fail, but they all do their best
to please him, yet all will not do, in the fullness of his sufficiency he is in
straits. When he has all he can have, his still hungring Heart cries out of
what it has, Vanity of Va^^ties, all is Vanity. Leave it to these, Christians,
who ^ave nothing but emptiness to fill their Souls with^^, leave it to them to
be discontented. Will you ^ay the same imputation upon the God of Glory? The
Discontent of a Christian, is a kind of Blasphemy: it proclaims concerning God
also, and all the Glory of the Gospel, This also is Vanity; Vanity of Vanities,
all is Vanity.

Christians, study your Riches more, count over your Treasures; dwell more in
your God, and his Gospel; Read over your Privileges, Promises, and Hopes; feed
more on that Bread of Life, drink more freely of those Living Springs, which
are broken forth to you: Prove more what Godliness has in it: Get out the
sweetness and the Pleasure of it, (none in the World live such a voluptuous
Life, as he that lives m^^t with God) get out the pleasure of Godliness, lie
more at the Breasts, suck harder, press the Clusters, and the Wine and Milk
will come; make the most of Religion, and you will have enough; never blame it
for empty, or unsatisfactory, while there is more to be had.

Gad not into other Pastures, run not from Flower to Flower, keep you Home: Let
not your God find you in another Field: If you keep with God, the less you have
of Creature-vanities, the more full will your Contentment be. Christian, Honor
thy God and his Gospel, let his Breasts satisfy thee, and err thou always in
his Love. Let the World read the Gospel-sufficiency in thy Souls pleasure, and
satisfaction with it alone.

5. Let your Conversations answer the supports of the Gospel, and its succors.
Live a patient life* Jam. 5. 7. Be patient, brethren, unto the coming of the
Lord. Patience is a Grace suited to our present Gospel state. I will call it, a
Friend that is born for the day of adversity. If you are Christians, you have
need of P^tience: and if you have Patience, you need no more. Jam. 1. 4. Let
Patience have her perfect work, that you may be entire, lacking nothing.

Patience, is a submitting, sedate, and calm frame of spirit, whereby a
Christian, from Gospel grounds, it born up under all his Troubles, and born
through all his Duties.

Betwixt Patience and Contentedness, there is this difference; Contentedness is
the quiet of the heart, and its satisfaction with its smallest portion of good
things. Patience is the quiet of the heart under the greatest pressure of evil
things.

A patient spirit is a submitting spirit: Its heartily content that God should
have his Will. With whatsoever God is pleased, it will not be displeased. It Is
the Lord, l^^ him do whatsoever seems good in his Eyes. What seems good in
God's eyes, shall not seem evil in mine.

It is a Calm and quiet spirit: It will not strive no^ cry, nor lift up its
voice in the streets; it can mourn, but it does not murmur; it can feel, but it
will not fret at the hand of God. A patient person is ever compos mentis; has
the command and government of his spirit; keeps it sober, and in due order;
does not rave, and rage. Impatience is a kind of frenzy; such persons are
besides themselves. In our patience we possess, and by our impatience we lose
our Souls: we lose the rule and government of them* the peace and the use of
them. An impatient man is besides himself, both as a Man and as a Christian.

1. He is besides himself as a Man: Impatience turns Reason out of doors; and
for the Affections, they are all in an uproar, and will know no command or
government.

2. He is besides himself as a Christian; turned quite out of course: Duties,
Comforts, Experiences, Hopes, all are laid aside. Keep you quiet, keep the
peace in your heart, and you keep your heart.

In this calmness and quietness, it bears up under troubles. Patience has
Fortitude in it, it neither frets nor faints, under all its burdens.
Christians [must] bear, and patient Christians [can] bear any thing that comes
on them. The proper exercise of patience, is enduring: he endures not that
suffers only, but that can bear what he suffers.

It bears through its Duties: The passion of a patient person does not hinder
his action. He holds his course, keeps on his way, whatever load he has on his
back. He (runs) with patience, the race which is set before him; he is not
discouraged nor diverted from his holy course by any suffering it costs him.

And indeed, Christian Patience stands not in a bare forced quiet, in a biting
in, or keeping down, our fretting aestuations, from venting themselves in word
or carriage, or in a sullen silence or stupidity; but in the maintaining such a
tranquillity of spirit, under all we suffer, as that we can still, both enjoy
and serve the Lord. He is a patient Christian, that is as much a Christian in a
storm as in a clam; that can pray, believe, love, bless God, follow God, and
keep his way, when he smites, as when he smiles.

Lastly, in all this, a Christian is upheld and carried on, from Gospel
Grounds. It Is not a natural hardiness or apathy, it is not the Spirit of a man
that does sustain his infirmities; it is upon the everlasting Gospel that he
stands.

There are three Things especially, that bear him through. His viewing, The
Hand of the Lord. The End of the Lord. The Help of the Lord.


1. He sees the hand of the Lord in all that befalls him: Whence was David's
patience? Psalm: 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, Because thou Lord
did it. Whence was Eli's patience: 1 Samuel 3. It is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good. Whence was Job's patience? Job. 1. 21. The Lord has given, the
Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. By the way note, That a
godly man is not only patient under his afflictions, but thankful: He is not
only thankful for Mercies, but for Chastisements. It Is not only, the Lord has
given, blessed be his Name; the Lord has built me up, the Lord has filled me,
the Lord has hedged me, blessed be his Name; but also, The Lord has taken
away, the Lord has humbled me, broken me, undone me, left me naked, left me
nothing; blessed be the Name of the Lord. This by the way.

2. He sees the end of the Lord; that God intends his good by all that comes
upon him. He knows that all things, and therefore this which is upon him,
whatever it be, shall work to him for good.

3. He feels the help of the Lord. When the hand of the Lord is upon him, he
feels also the hand of the Lord under him, underneath the everlasting Arms,
Deuteronomy. 32. 27.

The Gospel, as it has allotted him many Tribulation^, so it has allowed him
mighty supports. A mighty God, who is the Rock of Ages, Isa. 26. a merciful
High Priest, who being tempted himself, is able also to succor those that are
tempted, Heb. 2. 18. Precious Promises, 2 Pet. 1. Gracious experiences, Romans 5.
4. Patience works experience. This last support, [experience] has all the
rest in it. Experience is the whole Gospel proved. A patient, experienced
Christian, has proved all things, what they are; has proved the World, and
what it is, and the worst it can do: has proved the Word, and what there is in
it: has proved what God is, what Christ is* what grace, and peace, and a good
Conscience are; Tribulation often takes away God, and his Gospel; and we never
so well prove what God is, as when we have him alone; what grace is, what a
good Conscience is, as when we have nothing else left us. Our Religion never
shows so much what is in it, as when it is most put to it. When the Adversary
has gotten the greatest advantage of us; of the Sun, of the Wind, of the
Ground; when he presses with most violence, with most fury upon us, then we
best know, what the weapons of our Warfare are. The comforts and supports of
Religion are not known, either of what strength, or of what sweetness they are,
till they are thus proved. Hezekiah had never such a taste of his integrity, as
when he received the Message of death. Stephen had never such a sight of
Heaven, as through a storm of stones. Christ is never so sweet as in a prison.
When God meets his Saints in a Wilderness, then he speaks comfortably to them.
A patient Christian has more or less experience of all this; and hence is he
supported, keeps quiet under all his sufferings, and carried with courage on in
his way.

Be patient therefore Brethren unto the coming of the Lord. You have need of
patience, and no excuse for your impatience. The sufferings of the Gospel call
for patience; and the supports of the Gospel will condemn your impatience. If
you will be godly, count upon it that you have a great fight of afflictions to
endure. Venture not into the fight without your Armor: An impatient creature
is a naked Soldier: How easily will Satan destroy, whom he has once disarmed!
The more you can the less you shall suffer. Secure your spirit, and you save
your self from harm. There Is no Dart shall hurt you, that does not hit your
heart. Keep your heart whole, and the Devil loses all his shot. Be patient, and
you possess your Souls: keep your Souls, and the enemy loses the day.

Christians, It Is of great consequence to you, to be of a patient spirit, and
it is a great Duty; there is much more in it, than every eye observes.

When I persuade you to Patience; know, That it is no small thing that I am
persuading you to? It Is no less than, 1. To the whole of Christianity. 2. To
the height of Christianity.


1. To the whole of Christianity: To be truly Patient, has as much in it, as
to be a Christian: To be holy, humble, meek, mortified, self-denying, crucified
to the world, heavenly minded; all this you must be, or you cannot be patient.
Patient and proud? patient and peevish? patient and unmortified, earthly
minded, a self-seeker? This is as great a contradiction, as to be proud and
humble, fleshly and spiritual, earthly and heavenly, a Christian and no
Christian. If ever you will be possessors of this grace, you must be partakers
of all grace. Get a believing, broken, self-denying heart; get your spirits
furnished with the love of Christ, the hope of the Gospel, the contempt of the
World; live above in the other World: Let Christ, Glory, Honor, Immortality,
be the portion of your Souls; and the pleasure of your lives, if ever you would
be truly patient.

2. To Christianity in the height of it. In pressing you to patience, I am
herein pressing you to get Assurance. Without assurance, though patience be
possible, yet you will find it both difficult and very imperfect.

What Patience, when I question whether my sins be forgiven? whether God be
reconciled, and be not dealing with me as an enemy? What Patience, when I doubt
whether my afflictions be not the pension of a bastard, rather than the portion
of a Son? when I am not sure, but my present sufferings are sent to carry me
down to eternal sufferings? I am in misery and perpetual torments: never a day
without (...) it may be never shall; this or worse may last for ever. (...) if
I were sure it would be well at last, I could be quiet; but for ought I know,
the Furnace I am in may be the very mouth of Hell: The diseases, the wounds I
am under, may be sent to let out my Soul into everlasting burnings; how can I
be patient under such doubts and fears? Make God sure, Christian, make Heaven
sure once, and then thou may set thine Heart at rest; then thou may
almost as easily exercise, as thine Enemies find thee Exercise of, thy patience.

Christians, if you will be patient, you must be painful: give diligence; be
diligent in making your Calling and Election sure: be diligent in duty, be
vigilant against iniquity: If you will be patient, be impatient of sin, and you
will be patient of sorrow; make sin sure, get it slain by the cross, and buried
in the grave of your Lord, sealing the stone, and setting a watch: have nothing
to conflict with, in the day of your affliction, but your affliction; beware of
carrying guilt with you up upon the Cross. Let not the gall of guilt be mingled
with the vinegar of affliction: A mortified spirit will deaden all our pains,
and a pure Conscience will bear all our burdens.

Till this be done, I must tell you, you will find suffering to be hard
service. It Is an easy matter to talk of the sufferings of the Gospel, and to
boast great things aforehand; as you know who did once, and what came of it,
Though I die with thee, I will never deny thee. But when it comes to the pinch,
when Troubles come upon us, when the hand of the Lord touches us, and touches
where it is most tender, brings those calamities on us, which are most contrary
to us, strips us of those comforts which are most dear to us, takes away all
from us, and leaves us naked; when we feel the smart of the rod, when every
stroke fetches blood; when the feet are hurt in the Stocks, and the Iron enters
into the Soul; when the vinegar and the gall comes, when the thorns and the
nails of the Cross are struck in; when shame and reproach, when scorn and
contempt, when hunger and thirst, when cold and nakedness, when bodily torment
and pain, are all measured to you for your portion, and mingled in your cup: If
ever God should call you out, to take your part with that Cloud of witnesses,
Heb. 11. who were tortured, had trials of cruel mockings, and scourgings, of
bounds and imprisonment; who were stoned, were sawn asunder, were tempted, were
slain with the sword; wandering about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being
destitute, afflicted and tormented; wandering in deserts and mountains, in dens
and caves of the earth: If ever this should be your case, then you will know
how much there is in Christian patience: and how necessary self-denial,
mortification, living in the faith, and fellowship of God, and the power of his
Spirit, and assurance of his love, are to your patient possessing of your Souls.

Believe it, Christians, the Gospel has not furnished us with such large
provision of Graces, Comforts, Promises, Hopes, for nothing; you will find need
enough of them all. Such amazing, astonishing trials you may be called out to,
as nothing less, than the rickest stock of promises, the greatest treasure of
Experiences, the highest pitch of spiritual Graces, your greatest conquest over
Lust and the World, your living under the fullest influences of Divine Power,
and the clearest Sense of Divine Love, will furnish you with an enduring
spirit; nothing less will, but this will do it. Get sin, and the World under,
make God sure, make the Promises sure; live in a daily conflict with Sin,
contempt of the World, and exercise of all Graces; Live in the obedience,
vision, and fruition of your God, and then you are ready for the Enemy. Let
your Sufferings be what they will, come when they will, your Souls are at
Anchor, and shall have a continual Calm within, how Tempestuous soever the
Weather be.

As a farther Encouragement, and Help to this great Duty, consider, that your
patient suffering will be, 1. Your witness to the Gospel. 2. Gods witness to
your Adoption. 3. The cure of your Corruption. 4. Your triumph over Temptation.
5. The improvement of your Sanctification. 6. The advance of your glory.


1. Your patient suffering will be your witness to the Gospel. Who were that
Cloud of Witnesses, mentioned Heb. 12. 1. but the suffering Saints; that Army
of Martyrs recorded Chap. 11. whose patience is set forth as a partern to those
that should come after; These are witnesses.

What was it by which they bare witness, but by their patient suffering?

To what did they bare a witness, but to God and his Gospel?

What witness did they bear? Why, That the Gospel is true. The sufferings of
the Saints, are their Seal to the Gospel: As he that believes, so much more,
he that suffers in Faith, has set to his Seal that God is true. In the Faith
and patience of the Saints, may be seen (as the Seal in the wax) the prints and
impressions of the Truth and Faithfulness of God. God has said, he will
uphold, he will not forsake them; and their Patience shows, he does uphold, he
has not forsaken them. 2. That the Gospel is a glorious Gospel: That God is a
good Master, that its good being with Christ any where: That they are no losers
by their Religion, but that it is wages are above its work, and it is pay above
its pain.

It were not possible, when they prove how much the Gospel costs them, but they
should be weary of it, and repent of their Faith, and renounce their
profession, if they did not find the Lord a good pa^^ master.

The Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 3. 3. that Christians are the Epistles of Christ,
or his Letters of commendation to the World, in whom may be read his
Excellencies and Glory, and the incomparable advantages of his Service. And as
all Christians, so especially suffering Christians: The Character of Christ is
never so visible and legible, as when it is written in Blood. The Bowels, and
Bounty, and kindness of God our Savior, never appeared in more Glory, than
upon his Cross; and there is no such lively Transcript of them, as upon our
Cross. On his Cross, his Blood; on our Cross, his Spirit, and the precious
grace and comforts of it, are most plentifully shed forth, 1 Pet. 4. 14. If ye
be reproached, that is, and endure it, the Spirit of Glory and of God rests
upon you. The spirit and influences of a crucified Jesus, do never shine forth
to such advantage, as in his crucified Saints. Upon the patience of a Saint,
under the sufferings of Christ, he that runs may read this written, I serve a
good Master. Our patient suffering is our witness to Christ, and his Gospel.

Christian, when God sends thee to Calvary, he sends thee thither as a chosen
vessel, that thou should there bear his name before the world. Art thou
impatient at this? what can thou not bear this honor thy God has laid upon
thee? Has God chosen thee, thee amongst all thy brethren, to do him this
honor, and will thou be angry, that he did not rather choose some other? 'Twas
an unworthy answer, of a good Man, Moses, when God sent him to Egypt, to appear
for him before Phara^h, and to be the deliverer of his people, Exodus 4. 13.
Send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou will send. Send whom thou will,
any body but me. But by our sinful shifting our selves of trouble, or our
murmurings under them, we say the like: Send whom thou will to witness for
thee, but let me go free: Let me have my ease, and my quiet, and my liberty,
and take this honor who will for me. Unworthy Spirits! Oh methinks,
Christians, we should rather step one before another; and when our Lord
demands, Who will go with me? Who will bear my Cross? Me thinks we should
readily answer, I will go; let me bear it Lord; and not grudge as we do, that
he puts us to it.

Our impatience bears false witness against God, and his Gospel; what is the
voice or the meaning of impatience, less than this?

Whatever is said in honor of the Gospel, what a blessedness, what an
ineffable advantage it is, to all that heartily own it; yet having proved it, I
find it even as much as nothing, by that all the costs and charges of it are
cast up: The comforts of it will never balance them: set one against another,
the bad against the good, the bitter against the sweet: Set one against
another, and I have made but a bad bargain by becoming a Christian. This is the
voice of impatience. Christian, thou passest over thy Murmuring, as a light
evil; as if thy pain might excuse thy pettishness: As if it were, because it is
so common, a very small thing: but is it nothing to belly God, to bear false
witness against his Gospel, thy repining that ever thou were a Christian.

Brithren, Let us do the Lord this Right, by the patience of our spirits; to
confess before the world, That all the sufferings of this Life, are not worthy
to be compared to the Glory that shall be revealed: And looking unto Jesus, the
Author and Finisher of our Faith; Let us learn of him, for the Joy that is set
before us, to endure the Cross, and despise the shame: that we may sit down at
his, as he is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.

Secondly, Your patient suffering, will be God's Witness of your Adoption, Heb.
12. 7. If you endure chastening, God deals with you as with Sons: The LORD
does not use to deal so with strangers.

Afflictions are Gods Family Discipline. Yet mark, it is not the suffering alone
will prove our Sonship (the Rod is for the fools back, as well as the child's)
but patient suffering will: for,

1. Patient suffering is it self, an evidence of our adoption: it is the mark
of the Lord Jesus upon us. If thou have both the same lot, and the same spirit,
that was upon Christ, there is thy Lords mark upon thee, whereby he marks thee
out for one of his own. Men had need of other marks to prove them Christians,
than what the Rod has made on their backs; it is our quiet submitting to it,
and that upon Gospel grounds, as has been before showed, that must do it, and
this will be evidence enough. None but a Son will thus submit.

2. The suffering state of Christians, is ordinarily attended with other
evidences. Sufferings will set patience on work, and patience will set every
other grace on work. Whatsoever it be, that finds work for patience, will
therein find work for faith, and love, and hope, and self-denial. Christians
never appear so much believers, so humble, so mortified, as under the Cross. If
there be any faith, or love, or hope in the heart, 'twill appear in the day of
adversity. If there be any fire under the ashes, throw on water, and then you
shall hear it, when, it may be, before you could see none there. As Solomon
says, folly, so we may say, wisdom, grace is bound up in the heart of a child,
but the rod of correction will fetch it out. We seldom know, either how bad, or
how good our hearts are, till they are thus proved; This I did to prove thee,
and to know what was in thine heart.

Besides, this is the season, when ordinarily there are most plentiful
illapses, and incomes from above. God seldom sends such tokens of his love, as
to his Children in prison. The light of his countenance he often reserves for
their darkest estate, he sets to his Seal, when the wax is on fire. There have
been Christians that would never believe that they were such, till God has
told it them at the stake; the highest joys, the fullest sense of everlasting
kindness have been most ordinarily the portion of Gods Martyrs. When Hell is
let loose upon them, then Heaven is most open. Many Christians have met with
such refreshings in their Bonds, that their enlargement has been their Prison.

If this be so Christians, who would fear sufferings? who would not be patient?
would it comfort you, to know that God is your Father? Be patient, and you
shall know it. What would you not bear, so you might be sure you are the Lords?
It may be you have been held under doubt and fears, and sad uncertainties,
hitherto all your days; you have gone about from duty to duty, from Ordinance
to Ordinance, from Christian to Christian, enquiring, and mourning, and
complaining, and crying our, Oh if I were sure that Christ were mine, that my
faith, and my love, and my hope, and my obedience were sound, and sincere, such
as would prove my adoption, then could be I quiet: Why, if ever God calls thee
to Sufferings, follow him cheerfully; He calls thee out to prove to thee, that
thou love him. Fear not to go up with him on the Cross; Assurance is a fruit,
that most ^^dinarily grows on that Tree.

Let hypocrites only fear sufferings, 'twill be sad indeed to them; there is
many a self-deceiving Professor, that never suspected himself to be an
hypocrite, till persecution made him an Apostate: that is a woeful case, to have
sufferings come upon him for the Gospel's sake, only to tell him, That he has
no part in Christ nor his Gospel. Let hypocrites be afraid and unquiet, but let
Saints be patient. The same trials which will prove them bastards, will prove
you Sons.

Your patient suffering is the cure of your Corruption. Sufferings are our
medicine for corruption, and patience our cure: To what degree of patience a
Christian has attained, that degree of power has he gotten over iniquity.
Till lust be conquered, there is no patience: If there be but one unmortified
corruption remaining, and an affliction comes and grates upon that, this will
provoke; there is no beating it. Whence is impatience; but from this, for the
most part that we cannot bear any violence, that is offered to lust? what is
patience, but this, that we can bear that pain, that lust when pinched will put
us to? quietly to suffer our pride, our envy, our passion, our sensual
appetites, to be cut short of what would gratify them: and freely to leave
them under that which comes to kill and crucify them; to be able to want that
fuel that feeds, and endure that water that does quench these fires; this is
Patience. When our pride is stripped of its ornaments, our appetites deprived
of their delicates, our covetousness of its substance, our flesh of its ease?
and we either feel no smart, or can bear the smart of it; then we are Patient.
And when we can thus leave our Corruptions, to whatever sufferings come upon
them, without taking part with them in their sufferings; then lust is
conquered. Lust no longer lives nor maintains its power, and interest in us,
than whilst, in all its afflictions, we are afflicted; when we feel its
sufferings as our sufferings, its disappointments and dissatisfactions as our
own, and fly out against whatsoever falls upon it, as it fell upon our Souls.
When we can say, it is my passion that suffers, but not I; it is my Covetousness
that suffers, my pride that suffers, but not I; and let them suffer (for me)
let them be pinched and pained, and starved and die; none of all this shall
move me: nay, herein I do and I will rejoice: There Is Patience. Patience is
Lust conquered.

Christians you complain of Corruption, you tell one another sad stories, what
a burden, what a bondage it is you are under, whilst Lust has such power in
you; whar Briars and Thorns, what plagues and stings they are in your hearts!
You pray, and you mourn, and groan, and sigh in your selves, waiting for your
redemption from this bondgae and misery. Oh for an humble heart! Oh for a
broken mortified spirit! oh this earthliness, this envy, this peevishness, this
sloathfulness! I am weary of my life, because of these Daughters of Heth.
Wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? Why would
you be delivered?

Be patient under Afflictions; they are the Executioners sent from God to slay
your Enemies, the Medicines sent from your Physician to cure your Diseases;
Never quarrel with Affliction, unless you resolve to befriend Corruption. What,
will you be so foolish, as not to be patient of your Disease, nor your Remedy;
either bear the Cross, or else never make your selves believe, but you can bear
your sins well enough? Whatever your complaints are, it is a sign they come not
very deep; It Is an Argument, that sin sits light, where the Cross lies so
unsupportably heavy.

4. Your patient suffering, will be your Triumph over Temptation: A patient
Christian is a Conqueror over all the World. By this alone, naked Job overcame
the Devil: When Satan and his Instruments have persecuted you into patience,
they have therein brought their Necks under your Feet. This Brazen wall will
make their shot recoil on their own heads and hearts: Your Patience will be a
Shield to yours, and a Sword in your Enemies Souls. Be patient, and you have
won the field, and gotten the day. They will have no hope to drive you to sin,
where they see you can suffer. This was Job's Triumph, and shall be yours; In
all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. You may now make your boast
in the words of the Apostle, Romans 8. 35. Who shall separate us from, the Love
of Christ? shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or
Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? In all these things we are more than Conquerors
through him that loved us:

5. Your patient suffering, will be the improvement of your sanctification,
Heb. 12. 9, 10. We have had Fathers of our flesh; which corrected us, and we
gave them Reverence: Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of
Spirits, and live? For they verily, for a few days, chastened us after their
pleasure, but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.
The Fathers of our flesh corrected us, and so does the Father of Spirits; they,
at their pleasure; he, for our profit. You Will say, it may be, for what profit?
What profit is there in our Blood? in our Bonds? in our poverty? Why, there is
this profit; we are hereby made partakers of his holiness. There Is seldom any
towardliness in a child, till it be whipped into him. Gods School of affliction,
is a Nursery for Heaven: Were it not for his House of Correction, Sion would
quickly become as Sodom. Seldom does any come out thence, but their complexion
shows where they have been. It Is with them that feel the Hand of the Lord, as
'twas with him that saw his Face; his Face did shine: his very spitting in
their Faces, does wash them the cleaner. Of all Saints, there are none raised
so high toward the third Heaven, as those that have been in the Deep: No
Providence give such a lift to the soul, as those that most humble.

Christians, Whatever pains you travel under, believe it, the Births may be
such, as will make you forget your sorrow.

I have heard of an holy woman, who used to compare her afflictions to her
children; they both put her to great pain in the bearing; but as show knew not
which of her children to be without, notwithstanding her trouble in the
bringing forth, so neither which of her afflictions she could have wanted,
notwithstand the sorrow they put her to in the bearing, Heb. 12. 11. No
chastning for the present is joyous, but grievous; but afterward it yields
the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness, to them that are exercised thereby.

Oh when you see the Fruit, where then will your Sorrow be? John 16. 21. A
Woman, when she is in Travail has Sorrow, because her hour is come; but as
soon as she is delivered of the Child, she remembers no more the anguish, for
joy that a Man-child is born into the world.

If the Joy of the Birth will make you forget, why should not the hope of the
Birth make you to bear the pain?

Beloved, would you bring forth fruit unto God, and will you not bear the Plow
and the Harrow? Will you expect an Harvest, and yet must God let you lie
fallow, and still sow among Thorns? Let me ask you, and answer deliberately:
would you be more holy than you are, more fruitful than you are, or would you
not? If you would not, you are no Christian: Si dixeris sufficit, defecisti: If
you would, is that desire conditional? You would increase, so it cost you not
overmuch labor and pain; that desire comes to just so much as no desire at
all: Or is your desire of an increase, absolute? would you be more holy,
whatever it cost you: Do you so prize, and love an holy, and fruitful life,
that you are heartily content, that God should take his own course with you,
should take any course that is needful to b^ing you on to it? Can you freely
say, O Lord, I am weary of this trifling, I am weary of this dead and barren
life; Lord quicken me, Lord enlarge me, Lord perfect thy work, and fulfill in me
all the good pleasure of thy will: So thou will but hear she in this thing, I
freely put it into thy hand, to take thine own way, and use thine own means.
Use the Word, or the Rod. Command me, or chastise me, spare not this flesh for
all its crying, strip me of what thou will, inflict on me what thou will, throw
me whither thou please, let me not want the most bitter Pill that is needful,
any thing, any thing Lord; I hope I can be poor, if thou will have me so; I can
be in pain, in disgrace, If thou will have me: But I cannot be unholy, I cannot
bear it to be such a starveling in the state of my Soul. Lord, for more
holiness, Lord for more life, and care, and zeal, and fruit, let me have it,
upon what terms thou please; only let me have it. Can you say thus to the
Lord? I hope you can; what, and yet be displeased* it he take you at your word?
can you pray thus, and yet repine and murmur that the Lord hears your prayers?
Christian, when the Lord comes to deal roughly with thee, entertain his
chastisements, whatever they be, with this thought. Now the Lord is about to
give me my hearts desire; now is my day of hope* This distress, this sorrow and
anguish, the Lord has brought upon me, may be come to perform that work which
I have longed to see: What the Word has been so long a doing, and yet is not
done; What Sacraments, Prayers, Mercies, have been so long a doing, and yet is
not done. Now is the time, this may be the means to bring it about. This bitter
Cup has health in the bottom; this Plough, and these deep furrows it makes,
look toward an Harvest. The work is doing that I have been so long a begging.
This froward, this senseless, this sloathful, this earthly, barren heart, which
I feel to day, I hope now, in a little time, I shall be rid of for ever. If
this be the meaning of my troubles, as I hope it is, I will wait, I will wait
for the fruit; and if this be the fruit, oh! welcome, welcome this blessed
Providence.

6. Your patient suffering shall be the advance of your glory Remember what I
have told you already, Your suffering shall go into your reward; according to
your deep poverty, so shall your riches be: As 'twas said concerning Babylon,
Rev. 18. 7. How much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so
much sorrow and torment give her. So shall it be said concerning you; How much
they have been abased, and afflicted for me, so much Joy and Glory give them.
As sure as the persecu^ings of the ungodly shall meet them in hell; so
certainly shall the Persecutions of the Righteous meet them before the Throne
of God. This shall be written on their everlasting Crowns, Here is the Patience
of the Saints.

By this time you see Christians, that a suffering state is not so formidable,
nor patience under it so impossible, nor your impatience so excusable, as your
hearts are so apt to tell you. Sufferings you cannot avoid, but you may abide
them; your carnal hearts will cry out, I cannot endure, and therefore whatever
shift I make, I must avoid them. The Gospel tells you, You may endure; but (if
you will be Christians) you cannot avoid them. All that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. Well, since it is thus, Gird up the loins
of your Minds, and follow your Lord. Consider him that endured such
contradictions of Sinners, and be not weary, no^ faint in your minds: The
Captain of your salvation was made perfect through sufferings, and (if you will
be patient) so shall you his followers. Turn to your strong hold, ye Prisoners
of hope; prove to the world that your Faith is no fancy, nor your Rock a refuge
of lies; that your profession of holiness is not a mere talk, or vapor. Fear
not to bear yours, and thankfully accept your Lords Testimony; when the Lord
has fulfilled his sad Predictions, let your faith and patience seal to the
fulfilling his promises. Whenever the hand of the Lord touches to the quick,
and you feel in earnest, that it is hot service to be a Christian; when your
flesh begins to fly in your face, and cries out against your Soul, either as
Zipp^rah against Moses, a bloody Husband have thou been to me; or as Job's Wife
to him, Curse God and dye; chide it into silence; Thou speak like one of the
foolish Women. If it will still kick, and ^ling, and groan out to thee, do
thou still retain thy integrity? hearken not to it; leave it to groan alone: as
the flesh has left thy Soul to groan alone under sin; so let thy Soul leave
thy flesh to groan alone* under affliction. While thy Soul is quiet, there is
the glory of patience, though extremity of torment make thy flesh to roar; nay
the more the flesh roars, and the Soul yet keeps silence, the more patience.

If your fears affright you, and prophecy to you before hand, Oh I shall never
be patient; if the foresight be so dreadful, what will the encounter be? Yet
be not discouraged. You say you could be content to suffer, if you were sure
you could be patient; that is, you would venture into the water, if you had
first learned to swim; why when you are in, then you will learn, and not before.

Tribulation works patience, where it finds none; when you are in the
fight, you will find your weapons; your very sufferings will learn you to bear.
It Is the flesh that flings, and frets, but by that it has been tamed in the
house of affliction, it will be quieter. Be jealous of your selves while you
will; let not fore-hand presumption, hinder fore-hand preparation. But whilst
you suspect your selves, distrust not your God, follow the Cloud of Witnesses,
and lean on the Rock of Ages; and when you are put hardest to it, let your soul
take Sanctuary here; When my flesh and my heart fails me, God is the strength
of mine heart, and my portion for ever.

Lastly, As that wherein I shall take in most of these former particulars. Let
your lives answer that Spirit of holiness which the Gospel has powered forth
upon you; Let your lives be gracious and holy lives. Particularly,

1. Let the Grace of the Gospel be visible, and perspicuous in your lives; show
forth the virtues of him that has called you out of darkness, into his
mavelous light; Let your lives be the image of thot holy Doctrine, or the
holding forth of that word of Life, which you have received. Admire that grace
of God which has appeared to you; and let his Grace appear, and be admired in
you; let Grace appear in you, in its Purity. Power.


1. In its Purity, represent your God, and your Christ, and your Religion, in
its holiness, to the world. Teach the World to love, or at least, to reverence
holiness, by letting them see it before their eyes.

Holiness has such a Glory in it, that it will command respect and reverence,
when it is clearly seen. Let your paths be pure; as God has separated you, to
separate your selves from the lusts of men, to the Law of your God. Keep your
selves upright in the sight of God, keep your selves unspotted of the world: If
they will be spotting you, let it be only with your beauty spots, your Wisdom,
Truth, Holiness, Mercy, Meekness, Patience; the Excellencies, and Virtues of
your God appearing upon you. Let this, that you are too pure, too precise, too
tender, too watchful, too fearful of sin, too zealous against sin, be all they
have to charge you with.

Keep thee from thine own iniquities; say not so much as this, I am my
Beloveds, and my Beloved must be mine. Kick out thy Dalilahs. Thou must part
with thy darling, or thy God; Let there be no secret league, let there be no
peace betwixt thy Soul and any iniquity; to which thou may either steal out,
to delight thee, or turn in to hide thee; let no iniquity be thy leisure or
protection, if when thou a^ pursued by a persecuter, any sin, as Jael to
Sisera, should call to thee, turn in hither, and thou may escape, remember
the nail and the hammer; let no iniquity find a corner in thee to lodge in
quiet, that thou may not think to find a corner with it, where thou may
lodge in safety; say to all thy sinful delights, and sinful hopes, get you gone,
I will neither love you, nor trust you; however thy sin may please thee,
whatever it may promise thee, be sure thou will find it a sting in thy Soul,
and a stain upon thy Glory.

Keep your selves from the sins of others, beware of the Leaven of the proud
Pharisee, of the formal and vainglorious Scribe, of the extorting Publican, of
the debauched Prodigal, the ambitious Diotrephes, the virulent Tertullus, the
backsliding Demas; beware of all Epidemical Leaven, the sickness of the times
you may live in: Take heed lest you be drawn away with the errors of the
wicked, and so swimming down the stream, you fall from your own stedfastness:
Let sinners come up to you, go not you down to them.

Let them never say of any of you, The man is become as one of us; our spot is
become the spot of his children. Let your lives be a rebuke to the ungodly
World, whilst you live as the Children of God, without rebuke in the midst of
the World.

2. In its Power. Let the power of Grace be seen, in its preserving it self, in
its being, and vigorous Exercise, against all the Powers of Hell. The strength
of a man is seen in this, that he can bear wind and weather; can live any
where, without imparing his health: The strength and metal of a Sword is (...)
in this, that Iron will not turn its edg. True Grace is such a Plant, that all
the weeds of the Field, and Thorns of the Forest, are not able to choke: That
will endure not only the Summers Heat, but the Winters Frosts.

Christians, prove your Grace to be a right plant, the right Seed; the Seed of
God; let it bear up against all the world. Let not the winds of persecution put
out your Light; nor the waters cast out of the Serpents mouth quench your love,
nor so much as cool your zeal; especially take heed, that the Dragons Tail do
not draw you down among the Falling Stars. You know what a World you live in;
You know the old Quarrel betwixt the Seed of the Woman and the Serpent, both
what it is, and that it has been kept on foot, through all ages, to this day.

You know the [ White] at which Satan, and all his Archers, have been so long
Levelling, and so hotly discharging; the White stone in your Breasts, the White
Robe on your backs: A good conscience, and a holy Life, are the mark, upon
which all the Fury of Earth and Hell is spent. Oh now prove your Grace to be
Grace, by its preserving it self against all this violence. Let the Devil see
you will be Holy, whether he will or no: Let the evil world see, you will be
godly, do what they can; though they may make you poor, and destitute, and
naked, yet le^ them despair of ever making you ungodly: let grace hereby appear
to be Grace, and the mighty power of God in you: which that it may do.

2. Let Grace ripen toward Glory; let not the scorching Sun wither your
Blossoms, but ripen your Fruit. If you would hold out, get you on: If you would
not have your something to come to just nothing, increase your Store. Let your
spark grow up into a Flame, your Grain of Mustard Seed into a Tree. I tell you
a Mystery, The tallest Cedars on God's mountain will best escape the wind,
whilst the lower Shrubs are in greater danger of being overturned; if you will
stand sure, get you up on the higher ground.

Christians, befool the Devil, let him see himself a Loser by all his stirs he
makes against you. It is not the first time, that his cross Winds have proved
the most auspicious Gales, to put the Saints the sooner into Harbor. What he
has intended for a withering Storm, has often proved a fruitful Dew: those
very Clouds he expected should rain down Snares, have often dropped down fatness:
If you will go on, Hell shall help you forward; the Devil's Rods on your back,
shall but help to mend your pace; his thorns shall be Spurs in your sides: By
stripping you of your fleshly Delights, he shall but starve your Lusts, his
Friends: his Burdens shall be your Ballast, to make your course more steady:
Christians are seldom in such a th^iving and prosperous state, as when they are
just come out of the hands of a persecuting Devil.

Christians, grow in Grace; there is no season but may be a growing Season: Grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Let that
living spring, which is broken forth in you, be like the waters of the
Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 4. 7. Which at their first rising were but up to the Ankles;
but a little further were up to the Knees, a little further they were up to the
Loins, and at length they grew up to a great river, waters to swim in, the
bottom whereof could not be felt. It may be the waters of Grace do yet run low
with thee, a little Bay will stop or turn the stream; thou art yet gotten but
to ankle deep, or knee deep, get thee on, stay nor, till thy Spring become a
River; let every day, every Duty, every experience, yea, every affliction, add
to thy streams; that as the accession of every little brook to the main
Channel, raises the water as it passes along, so it may be with thy Soul; that
the farther thou go on, the fuller thy Banks may be, till thou come to be
like Jordan in the Harvest, whose waters fill all its banks. To quicken thee on
in this growth in Grace, consider.

1. That a little Grace will make but poor work with thy mighty sins; where
Grace is low, Lust is high; and how is an Infant like to stand before a Man of
War?

2. That a little Grace will not suffice to bear thee up in great Afflictions:
that which thou may make a shift with in a Calm, will not serve thee in a
Storm.

3. That a little Grace will be sadly put to it, if ever thou come to have but
little means of Grace.

4. That he that has but little Grace, is like to have no Assurance that he
has any at all. If thou would have power over Corruption, if thou would
stand in the Day of temptation, if thou would not starve in the day of
Famine, if thou would have the comfort of the Grace. thou have, let it grow
up to its fuller stature; Grace, when it is come to Age, will speak for it
self, and shift for it self the better: which whilst it is in its Infancy,
neither knows, nor can help it self.

Christians, let your Grace grow, and let the Fruits of it increase: Let your
Fields ripen to the Harvest. I may say concerning Sinners, not as our Lord
said, Behold the Fields are already white to the Harvest; but behold the Fields
are already black to the Harvest. The Word is ready to be given; Come, put in
thy Sickle, the Harvest is ripe; the wickedness is great. The Fields of Tares
are already black to the Harvest: But oh when shall it be said of you. Behold
the fields are white to the Harvest? shall evil weeds grow so fast, and shall
only the good Corn be at a stand?

Brethren, Let your Fruits grow more plentiful, and more perfect daily: Let
that Scripture be verified in you, Pro. 4. 18. The path of the Just is a
shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day. Let your hearts
be so filled with the fullness of God, that your paths may drop fatness. Let it
be said of you, as of the Spouse, Cant. 4. 18. and Chap. 5. 5. Her lips dropped
as the Honey Comb, and her hands dropped sweet smelling Myrrh. Let your lips
drop as the Honey Comb; as you have drunk in the Milk and Honey that comes down
from above, so be ever droping it down to others: Let something of the fatness,
something of the fatness, that you have received from above, be always
dropping down: Be dropping according to what you have drank: as you see sinners
of whom it is said, They drink iniquity, to be always dropping iniquity;
dropping Oaths, dropping Lies, dropping Scoffs and reproaches: So let it be
said of you, They drink the Dew of Heaven, and this they are dropping down. Let
no Child, no Servant, no Friend, come into your Company, and go away without
some sweet drops from your lips: A word of heavenly instruction, a gracious
admonition, a word of encouragement, or a quickening word, let them have; or
lift up a prayer, and drop down a blessing upon them. Something or other of the
Dew of Heaven let them feel flowing from your Lips.

Let your lips drop as the Honey Comb, and your Hands drop sweet smelling
Myrrh. Let your Holy Practices, your holy Examples, second, and set on your
wholesome counsels and instructions: Let your words be savoury, and your works be
gracious: Let lip and life speak the same things, and lead on the same way.

Christians, By your nursing up the Souls and Fruits of others, you will ripen
and increase your own. If you should look on all the Fruit as little, which
your selves have brought forth to God, you will have this to comfort you, That
you have born more upon your Brethrens knees: the Fruits of those Fields which
you have planted, or watered, will abound to your account.

Bring forth much Fruit unto God, and be much in immediate converse with God,
Phil. 3. 20. Our Convetsation is in Heaven. Be more elevated and raised in your
Spirits daily, above things sensual and carnal.

Above Carnal Delights.
Above Carnal Discouragements.
1. Above Carnal Delights: live more purely in the Spirit, let your Hearts be
wrought up to such a spiritual frame; that all the joys, pleasures, and
comforts of your lives may be spiritual. Let the Lord be all your delight,
Psalm. 37. 5. Let it be with you as much as may be, as it is with the Saints
already in glory; to whom God is all; who being changed into his Image, and
dwelling in his presence, are satisfied in him. Let God alone, be as much to
you, as God and all the world. Let the Fashions, and Pleasures, and delights of
this world, be so much beneath your Spirits, that it may neither be an
abatement of your joy, to want; nor an addition to your content to possess
them. Let the light of all these lower sparks be swallowed up in God; when the
Sun shines, all the Stars dis-appear and are not needed.

Lift up thine eyes Christian, and see, what pleasures there are within the
Veil: Come, drink thy fill of this new wine, let thy Faith draw the Curtains of
Eternity, and take a view of those heights and depths; and lengths, and
breadths of that Glory and Joy, which there it may discover. Look on him that
fits on the Throne, and those everlasting Treasures of Light, Holiness,
Goodness and Mercy, which are streaming from his Face; on those overflowing
Bowels of kindness and compassion; on those Rivers of pure and eternal
Pleasures, Rest and Peace, that rise from that glorious Throne, and run through
the City of God. Behold the Tree of life, and feed thy Soul on its precious
fruit, whose very leaves are for the healing of Nations. Hearken to, and fill
thine Ears and Heart with those Tryumphs and Exultations, those Raptures and
Ecstasies of unspeakable and glorious joys; those blessings and praisings,
those Hallelujahs that are tuned upon the hearts and tongues of the Heavenly
Chore, the glorious Angels and the spirits of just men made perfect, by the
vision and fruition of thy God, the God of Glory.

Look on, and possess this Joy and Glory, say to thy Soul, as God to Abraham,
Genesis 13. 14. Lift up thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art,
Northward, and Southward, and Eastward, and Westward, through all the Coasts,
and all the Dimensions of the blessed Land of Promise, and holy City; and then
say, Come Soul, take up thy rest here, all this is thine.

Look and love, love and long, long and hope, hope and rejoice in hope, of this
glory of God. Look on thy God, and never leave looking, till thou art changed
into his Image, and satisfied with his Image; And here let thy delight and thy
dwelling be.

2. Above all carnal discouragements, from any adversaries, or dangers,
wherewith you are baited and affrighted; as you walk in the Lord, let the joy
of the Lord be your strength, let your Sun be your shield, let your hope be
your confidence, and fear not your duty nor danger. Look to your hope, and you
will laugh at fear. Dwell in your reward, and you will not be afraid to dwell
in your duty: But of this a word more by and by. Thus much for general
Directions.

2. I shall next give you some special Directions for you daily work.

General necessarily depend on, and subsist in, particulars. As there can be
no Religion in a Kingdom, unless it be first in particular Families, nor none
in Families, unless it be in particular persons; so a general course of
Christianity there cannot be, unless it be supported in our particular daily
walk.

The advice I am giving you, I have in part borrowed for your use, which some
of you may possibly have received elsewhere.

Before I give you the particular directions, I shall first premise these
things:

1. Count upon this, that the Directions I am now giving you, (if you ever mean
to bring it to any thing) will cost you pains and labor: and how can you count
your selves Christians, if you refuse to be at the necessary cost of
Christianity? If you think to be Christians without labor, or if you will
stand out from Christianity, to save your labor, you are a like wise in both.
Either come to a Resolution to fall upon an industrious painful life, or 'twill
be in vain to give you counsel.

2. Practice the Directions I shall give you in pursuance of your Covenant with
God; wherein you have engaged to take the strictest severest Laws of Christ,
for the Rule of thy Life. What I am presing on you, for the matter of it, is no
more than you have bound your selves to, as Christians. Remember your bonds,
and let this holy practice be followed on by you, as the paying your Vows.
Remember daily, the vows of God are upon you, and there is not any material
thing here prescribed to you, which falls not under your vows. Your Covenant,
if your eye be much upon it, will be a cord to hold you to your work.

3. Press hard for sensible Communion with God in all your Duties.

4. Keep up a spiritual and holy frame from Duty to Duty. Remember what I
have elsewhere spoken to you more at large, on these two particulars. See that
there be Religion in your duties, and confine not your Religion to your duties.

5. Be Watchful. The life of all Religion lies much here; whatever you resolve
upon, will come to nothing without it. Watchfulnessis the Executioner of your
will. Let your eye be upon your Rule, and your work. Especially, watch against
your prevailing sins. There Is no Christian that observes himself, but may find
some one sin or more that in regard of their power over him, are taller by the
head and shoulders than all the rest. In some Pride, in others Worldliness, in
others Passion, in others Sloathfulness. It may be, if thou searchest, some one
of these four, or possibly some other may be it, that by a specialty thou
may call [ thine iniquity.] Find out what it is, and know, that there thy
main work lies. In vain will thou strive in other duties, till that which
hinders be removed out of the way. Fight neither against small nor great, but
against the King of Israel. Where the Enemy most ordinarily makes his breach
upon thee, set the stronger Guard. Let thy daily conflicts be here, and observe
diligently, with what success.

6. Walk on thy course in the Name and strength of the Lord Jesus. Live by
Faith. Depend on Christ for the assistance of his mighty Spirit. Forget not
this, for otherwise thou will go but lamely on.

These things premised, I shall now give you the particular Directions.

1. Directions for the Evening.
Every Evening before you sleep, withdraw your selves from the World, and
having set your hearts as in the presence of God, charge them before God, to
answer to these following Interrogatories.

1. Concerning your Duties.
Q. 1. Did not God find me on my bed, when he expected me on my knees?

2. Was there not more of Custom and Fashion, than of Conscience and Affection,
either in my secret or family Duties?

3. Had I any sensible Communion with God in my duties:

4. Have I not neglected, or been careless and overly in reading the Word and
holy Meditation?

2. Concerning your Sins.
Q. 1. Do I live in nothing that I know to be a sin?

2. Have I kept me from MINE Iniquity? What victory have I yet gotten over it?

3. Am I a mourner for mine own, and the sins of the Land?

3. Concerning your Temptations.
Q. 1. Have I feared, watched against, and not run into temptation?

2. What temptations have I overcome this day?

3. Have I had a care of my Company?

4. Concerning your Heart.
Q. 1. Have I held mine heart in a serious, spiritual, gracious frame? have my
calls to duty ever found me in a preparation to duty?

2. Has the Lord been ever before mine eyes, and Eternity upon my heart?

3. Have I been much in holy Ejaculations?

4. Have I not given liberty to the workings of Pride, sinful Anger,
Discontent, or Impatience?

5. Have I made conscience of evil thoughts?

5. Concerning Conscience.
Q. 1. Has my Conscience neither been blind nor dumb, nor my heart deaf or
headstrong against it?

2. Have I done nothing against, nor with a doubting Conscience?

3. Have I neither defiled mine own, nor wittingly scandalized my Brothers
conscience?

6. Concerning your Tongue.
Q. Have I bridled my Tongue?

2. Have I spoken evil of no man?

3. Has the Law of the Lord been in my mouth, as I sat in my house, or went
by the way, as I was lying down, and rising up?

7. Concerning your Talents.
Q. 1. Have I not wasted or vainly spent any part of my Estate? has neither my
pride had a share, nor my Appetite more than its share?

2. Have I not sent Christ away without an Alms, when I had it by me?

3. Have I redeemed my time from Needless Visits. Idle imaginations. Fruitless
Discourse, and Unnecessary Sleep.


4. Have I not lost an opportunity this day, of doing or receiving good? have I
not neglected to exhort or reprove, when occasion has been given? and if I
have been reproved, how have I born it?

8. Concerning your Tables.
Q. 1. Did I not sit down, with no higher ends than a Beast, only to please my
appetite? Did I eat and drink to the Glory of God?

2. Did I not eat or drink to excess?

3. Did I not rise from the Table without letting fall any thing of God there?

4. Did I not mock God, when I pretended to crave a Blessing, or return Thanks?

9. Concerning your Calling.
Q. 1. Have I been serving the Lord this day, in my particular Calling?

2. Have I not been idle?

3. Have I not over-eagerly minded my earthly affairs?

4. Have I defrauded no man, wronged no man?

5. Have I dropped never a Lie, nor broken promise in all my dealings?

10. Concerning your Relations.
Q. Have I faithfully discharged and done nothing against my duty (...)
Relations? Have I behaved my self Husband, Wife, As a Christian Parent, Child,
Master, Servant?


11. Concerning your carriage to those Within.
Q. Have I carried my self toward all Saints

1. Lovingly, Delighting in them. Bearing with them. Covering their Infirmities.


2. Peaceably, not provoking them to Envy?

3. Profitably, provoking them to love and good works.

12. Concerning your carriage to those Without.
Q Have I carried my self to those without,

1. Wisely, that they have not been a snare to me, nor I through my fault
become a prey to them?

2. Inoffensively: Have I not been a stumbling block to them?

3. Courteously and compassionately, that I might the better win upon them?

3. Concerning Providence.
Q. 1. Have I diligently observed all the remarkable Providence of God toward
me, especially such as have come in, as the returns of Prayer?

2. Have I been thankful for my daily mercies?

3. Have I born this days crosses?

14. Concerning the use of your Liberty.
Q. Have I kept my self far enough within my bounds?

In Sum,

Q. 1. What have I done, for God or my Soul this day? have I not lost one day
more?

2. Have I led, this day A Diligent Watchful Self-denying Life.


Directions for the Morning.
1. If through necessity or carelessness, you have omitted the reading and
weighing these Questions in the Evening, be sure to do it now.

2. Ask thy self. What Sins have I committed? What duties have I omitted?
Against which of these Rules have I offended the day foregoing? And renew thy
repentance, and double thy watch.

3. Examine whether God were first and last in thy Thoughts, Morning and
Evening.

4. Be careful to set thine ends right for all the day.

An Advertisement.
If you want time to make daily enquiry upon every one of the forementioned
particulars, (they being so many) set a mark upon, or write out such of them,
as most especially concern your case, and let not them be forgotten. Think not
thy self excused from this course, because it is too long; when, if need be,
thou may thus make it shorter: Better cut short, than wholly give out.

For the help of the weaker, I shall gather out these few of the chief
Interrogatories, which when they are straightened for time, they may only use; and
to which they may add more as they have occasion and opportunity.

Q. 1. Was I serious, and had I any sensible Communion with God, this day, in
my secret and Family Duties?

2. Has it been my care to keep mine heart in an holy Frame, from Duty to Duty?

3. Have I been much in holy Ejaculations?

4. Have I not given liberty to the working of Pride, sinful Anger, Discontent,
or Impatience; nor so much as to vain thoughts?

5. Have I not inordinately minded earthly things?

6. Have I kept me from [ Mine] iniquity, and not lived in any known sin?

7. Have I wronged no man in word nor deed?

8. Have I been temperate and self-denying in the use of the Creatures?

9. Has the Law of the Lord been much in my mouth?

10. Have I not sent Christ away without an Alms, when I had it by me?

11. Have I not lost an opportunity of doing or receiving good?

12. Have I not neglected nor done any thing against my duty to my Relation?

13. What have I done for God or my Soul this day? have I not lost one day more?

14. Have I been diligent and watchful?

Christian, here is a course prescribed, which by the ordinary assistance,
which the Lord does not deny, you may take up if you will; and which if you
conscientiously observe, will be, without doubt, through the blessing of God,
attended with great success. And those that do not take up this course, or some
other equivalent to it, let them never think to ease their hearts, by idle
complaints, I cannot attain to such a holy, even, fruitful, heavenly life, as I
desire, I would, but I cannot; God will abhor such lazy complaints, and look
upon them as they are, a mere device to keep you quiet under a slothful heart.

Set your whole Duty daily before your eyes, charge it upon your hearts, take
an account of your selves, how you discharge it; set upon it as that which is
no other than you have vowed to the Lord; commit your selves, and your ways to
him for success: and if this does not mightily conduce to advance you in point
of holiness, and establish you in point of peace, then say, that both the
Precepts and Promises of the Gospel have deceived you.

And thus I have set before you that holy conversation which becomes the
Gospel. Take up this holy course; let this be your Life you mean to lead; and
let it be carried on, In an holy Union. In an United Contention. In an Holy
Boldness.


1. In an holy Union; So the Apostle there adds, stand fast in one spirit with
one mind. Never look to thrive in Grace, if you do not live in peace. The
decays of Christianityly much upon the score of the divisions of Christians.
The Devil has also taken up that Maxim, Divide and Impera, Rent them and ruin
them. The reason why our Love is so cold, is because our Differences are so
hot. The reason of so little zeal against sin, has been the great strife among
Brethren. The combinations of Sinners have not so much prejudiced the power of
holiness, as the contentions of Saints. There are not a few who go under the
name of Saints, that have maintained disputes about Religion so long, till they
have disputed themselves out of all Religion; their searching for truth, has
been the loss of both love and life.

Christians, if ever you would be any thing, be one; be of one heart, of one
mind, holding the unity of the spirit in the bond of Peace. It were greatly to
be desired, that the people of God were both of one heart, and of one way: But
if this may not be, if there cannot be Uniformity, yet let there be Unity,
betwixt all that fear the Lord in truth.

A few words I shall leave with you for your dire^^on herein:

1. Divide not from the Head, to unite with any pretended Members: hold not
with them, that hold not with the Head. Sell not Truth, clear, fundamental
Truth, to buy Peace.

2. Divide not from real Members, lest you hereby prove your division from the
Head. Christ has but one body, if you be not in union with the body, you are
divided from the Head.

3. See the Head in every Member; see Christ in every Saint.

4. Prize Christ wherever you see him. Love Christ, and love his Image; if
you will not slight Christ, slight not any Saint. See thou an humble, m^^^,
patient, brokenhearted, self-denying, mortified Christian; in whatsoever
unpleasing form (as to matters circumstantial) he appears, despise him not,
reject him not.

5. Prize Peace and Union, a^ the strength and honor of the body.

6. Pursue Peace and Union with the utmost strength of thy soul. And that you
may obtain it,

1. Let all parties that are named of Christ, be humbled under former
Divisions. What peace so long as God is angry? Oh how have we provoked the
Lord, by provoking one another! Let him only who has been without sin in this
matter, be without sorrow and shame.

Sure they are hard hearts, who are not broken under such breaches. Let us not
mistake our selves, nor mis-call that zeal for God, which God will call pride
and peevishness.

I speak not against our being offended, either with error or iniquity; we may
not call evil, good, or darkness, light, for peace sake; but at our
unreasonable passions, against whom we suppose erring Brethren.

If the reproach of the Gospel, the hard^ing of the perverse, the stumbling of
the weak, if the hindering of edification, the promoting of confusion, and every
evil-work, which have been the sad effects of our Divisions; if Pride and
haughtiness, if Vanity and Wantonness, if Envy and uncharitableness, which have
been the Womb from which our contentions have sp^ung, be matter of Humiliation,
then sure we had need be brought upon our knees: We must be melted, e're we can
be molded up into one.

2. Let all parties unite sincerely in their ends: Let the honor of Christ,
the advancement of practical godliness, the destruction of the interest of the
flesh, the edification of the whole body, in faith and holiness, be looked at
with a single eye, and pursued with a plain and honest heart; let not the
interest of a party, the affection of superiority and dominion, the carrying on
of selfish or fleshly designs, let the God, or the Christ you are driving for,
unbiass your spirits, take the right mark, and let your motions be sincerely
levelled at it. If we were once set right in our ends, an accommodation of all
our-differences about the means, would be more facile and feisable, Prove. 11.
3, 5. The integrity of the upright shall guide him, the righteousness of the
perfect shall direct his way. Humble, single, honest hearts, are most like to
hit upon the good and honest way: If we had nothing to do, but to please the
Lord, we should not have much to do to please one another.

3. Let all parties unite in this Rule, Do as you would be done by; that is, as
being well informed, and advised, and freed from evil, and discomposed
affections, (for so the Rule is to be understood) you would that men should do
unto you: Allow to others, what you challenge to your selves; or would, if you
were in their circumstances: Deny not what you would demand: The same liberty,
the same charity that you would expect from other Christians, allow to them.

4. No longer tie up Christ to a party. Say not, Lo here is Christ, and not
there: Say of all Believers, though of different Forms, As we are Christ's, so
they are Christ's. Of all the sub-divisions of Protestants, that are
considerable amongst us, there is no party, the union with which makes us, or
the separation from which unmakes us, Christians. We had need to have more to
show for our Christianity, than that we are Presbyterians, Independants,
Anabaptists, Episcopal, or Erastians; and the Devil must have more to prove us
no Christians, than this, that we are in union with either of these, or
inseparation from them.

5. In matters circumstantial, be not over hasty in stamping a Jus Divinum* on
things disputable and doubtful: Put no more weight, nor a greater necessity, on
any thing, than God has evidently put on it; and spend no more of your zeal
about it, than is proportionable to its weight and evidence.

6. Allow for the imperfect state the Church is in. We know but in part; and
till that which is perfect is come, and that which is imperfect is done away,
we must bear with one another, if in any things we be otherwise minded.

7. Stretch not your Authority beyond your Line, take not too much upon you:
Think not to bring all others, in every thing, to your Standard; impose not
your consciences, as a Law upon others.

8. Put not conscience to the ill office of being a mere Makebate, catch not
up every Notion, and presently charge it upon conscience, as that which must be
maintained, though to the greatest prejudice of the whole interest of Religion,
and so rent and run away from all those that agree not with you. Be not rash,
be not headie; be tender, but be wary* be well instructed, if you will be
truly tender: first catefullie inform thy conscience, and then peaceably
follow it.

Of what is that conscience tender, that is not tender of making wounds and
rents in the body of Christ?

9. Beware of C^nsurings and Judgings, of biting and devouring one another. If
ye bite and devour one another, ye shall be consumed one of another. Let him
that is without fault, cast the first stone at his Erring Brother. Be not
bitter against the bitterness of others: if others sowerness offend thee, yet
let it not leaven thee: Be not reviled into a Reviler, scoffed into a Scoffer;
overcome evil with goodness: It Is not seldom that our invectives against others
bitterness, are more keen and cutting, than that we complain of: Justify not
what thou judge; Practice not thy self, what in the same Breath thou
condemnest in thy Brethren: Throw not back thy Brother's Fireballs in his
Face, lest in censuring him, thou be also thine own Judge: Pursue not matters
in difference over hotly, but learn modestly and meeklie to differ, where you
cannot agree.

10. Let your conversation be so holy, humble, and heavenly, carry your
selves in such simplicity and godly sincerity, toward God-towards one
another, and toward all men, that you may command each other to believe, that
however you agree not about your Mother, yet you are all the Children of the
same Father; that you are of God, and that the Spirit of the living God
dwells in you.

11. Hold Communion in the things wherein you agree, and Charity where you
differ: May you not pray, and fast, and hear, and hold Christian Conferences
together? Sure there is not overmuch of Gospel Spirit, where this will not be
granted?

12. Impose not on each other any hard and unnecessary conditions of your
Communion. Suppose, upon your differing Judgments, there be in some things
different practices, which some of you judge less warrantable, whilst the
consciences of others allow and use; press not the reli^quishing such
questionable practices, as the condition of your communion; especially, if they
be not mingled with the Duties wherein you join, but are used by any of you, at
other times, or in other Assemblies. Excommunicate not them from you,
excommunicate not your selves from them, with whom Christ holds Communion.
Judge not that Christ withdraws from all those who are not in every thing of
your mind and way. Destroy not all communion, by seeking after a pure^, than in
this our imperfect state, we shall ever attain. According to this principle,
(no communion at all, if not in all) where shall we rest? In all Societies
something will offend.

13. And lastly, in your communion receive not one another to doubtful
Desputations: Let your prayers, conferences, and all holy Exercises, be
studiously so managed, that there may be a sweet Accord of your Spirits
therein: Come not together to strengthen parties, or propagate opinions: Let
all matters of controversy be waved; and hereof let there be such mutual
assurance given aforehand, that you may be together, without fear of becoming
thorns or snares one to another: Which, if it be not unanimously consented to,
and inviolably observed, your Communion will be impossible, or dangerous.

Christians, are the clear and fundamental truths of the Gospel, and the more
necessary and weighty Duties of Religion, sufficiently understood and
practiced? Are your Souls safe? Is your Calling and Election sure? Is the Love,
and Life, and zeal of God grown up to that maturity, that you need not mutual
help this way? Have you any spare time from those things, to spend in
perplexing controversies? Build up one another in your most Holy Faith, provoke
one another to Love, and to good works; encourage, establish, and strengthen
one another in the known ways of holiness; and if you find not this both
better work, and work enough for you, then take your liberty.

These things do, live in peace, and love and the God of peace shall be with
you.

Hear, Oh ^ye friends of Christ, by what oblique Names soever unhappily
distinguished! will you come and be Friends one with another? Are you for
peace? Your God is the God of Peace: Your Jesus is the Prince of Peace: Your
Gospel is the Gospel of Peace; and will you not be persuaded to be Sons of
peace? Your God is one, your Mediator is one, your Faith one, your Baptism one,
your Hope one; you are one Body, one Spirit, and will you not yet be one Soul?

Oh how hopeful would our condition be, were our hearts generally set upon
peace! We should certainly obtain, did we more resolvedlie pursue it: and what
should hinder? have you not yet enough of your contentions, and quarrellings?
have not your Souls been sufficiently neglected, your Lusts strengthened, your
Faith weakened, your Love withered, your comforts wasted, your names blemished,
your holy Profession blamed? Has not your God been sufficiently provoked, and
the Devil sufficiently gratified? are your bellies so filled with gall, and
your mouths with gravel, and have you not yet enough of your contentions?

Christians, Slight not these Counsels and Warnings. As you would prove your
selves the Friends of Christ, be ye followers of peace. Study, oh study these
things that make for peace. Follow peace with all men, as much as in you is,
but especially with the household of Faith. Let there be no longer strife
betwixt us, for we are brethren.

Yet always remember, I am pressing you to an holy Union; whilst I persuade
you to follow peace, I must still add [ and holiness:] I persuade you not to
pursue peace, upon terms dishonorable or prejudicial to Truth; They must have
both together, that will be blessed in either: Truth without Peace, is as a
Jewel without its Cabinet; Peace without Truth, is as a Cabinet with nothing in
it. Peace without holiness, is as a fair and promising shell, with a rotten, or
worm-eaten kernel; holiness without peace, is as a precious kernel, under a
cracked and broken shell.

They that have peace without truth, have nothing worth the securing; they that
have truth without peace, have little security for what they have. Peace
without truth, is beauty without worth: Truth without peace, is worth with its
beauty marred. Let both go together, and then they will be, both the Columina
Ecclesiae, the Pillar of the Church, rendering it consistent within it self; and
the Corona Ecclesiae, its Crown, rendering it comely and glorious before the
World.

Be it thus wi^h us, and then Satan look to thy self, thy Kingdom shall down
amain; when thou can no longer hold up division, thou losest thy dominion.
Then Saints lift up your heads, your Communion shall be sweet, your glory shall
be great, your light shall shine, your fruit shall abound, the smell of your
spices shall flow forth; your adversaries shall envy, and your King shall
greatly delight to see your beauty. Oh may this Grace, this Peace be granted us
from the Lord; and let all that love the prosperity of Sions* say Amen.

2. In an an united Contention* Striving together (says the Apostle) for the
Faith of the Gospel. Unite, but strive: strive not one against another;
Christian against Christian, but strive together; Let your Contention be in
Communion. Strive together against sin, and unbelief: against Hypocrisy, and
earthliness: strive against strife, and debate, and envyings, and judgings;
strive together with God, in your prayers and supplycations: We often pray, but
our prayers do not agree: by keeping at such distance we know not one another
hearts, and are, so many men, so many minds: every one prays according to his
single apprehension, and affections: What one prays, another unprayes;
insomuch that we should put the Lord to do contradictions, if he must give
particular answer to all our prayers. And possibly that may be the reason, why
the Lord defers his answer so long, he will stay till we are better agreed what
we would have, Matthew. 18. 19. If two of you agree on earth, touching any thing
that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven.
Strive together in all holy and united endeavors to comfort, confirm and
establish one another in the Faith of the Gospel. Keep up the Communion of
Saints, and an united contention against sin and unbelief; Remember Heb. 10. 25.

3. In an holy boldness, in nothing terrified by your Adversaries. In nothing,
that is, either in no degree; not at all terrified: or else in nothing that you
have to do; be frighted out of no part of your duty: or else at nothing that
they do, or threaten to do against you. Be not afraid to be holy. Tell your
Adversaries, when they have said and done their worst, you must, and you will,
make bold to serve your God. Fear them not, and they cannot hurt you; they
never hurt you, unless they divert you from your duty.

To establish your hearts in this holy boldness, and against your carnal fears.

1. Consider, That,

1. By how much the more you fear God, by so much the less you will fear men.

2. By how much the more you fear sin, by so much the less you will fear
trouble.

3. By how much the less your adversaries fear God, by so much the less need
you to fear them.

2. Believe: Psalm. 27. 13. I had fainted, but that I believed. Faith is a
buckler against fears and faintings; Ephesians. 6. 16. Above all, take the shield
of faith, whereby you shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the Devil.

[ The shield of faith] A shield is a wall of partition, interposed betwixt a
person and harm; It Is only our apprehensions of harm that raise our fear; Faith
will save a Christian harmless, and thereby preserve him fearless. The shield
is ordained for a security to all parts and against all assaults. Some pieces
of our armor are appropriated to one part only; the Helmet is for the head,
the Breast Plate for the breast, the Girdle for the loins, the Shoes for the
feet; but the shield is a moveable, that is to be lifted up, wherever the
blow comes. Faith is an universal security.

Faith may be said to be a Shield,

1. Instrumentally; As it provides us of a shield, as it lifts up a shield and
sets a guard upon the Soul to secure it* It holds up Christ for a shield; it
holds up the Promises for a Shield: the very Commands and Institutions of God,
for a Shield and Safeguard to the Soul.

Sometimes the sense of guilt assailes and weakens the heart: It is not so much
any thing without us, as something within us, that raises our fears. How small
a matter will fright a guilty Soul? Guilt will make every stroke a stab. It Is
the barb of the arrow, the venom on the dart, or the sore of the heart, that
makes every stroke formidable and terrible. It Is the guiltless Soul that has
courage, and boldness. Hic murus ahoeneus esto -- Now against this dreadful
dart, Faith holds up a Buckler, with a Crucified Jesus upon it; and so that is
quenched.

Sometimes darkness and uncertainties, about the way that we are in, raises our
fear. A Christian that knows himself in his duty, in his way, is out of fear.
Clearness gives boldness. Whilst we question the warrantableness of the way we
are in, every shadow of danger will shake us: Against such fears, Faith holds
up a Buckler with this inscription, Have not I commanded thee? It shows the
Command, and in that, our warrant, and in our warrant our security.

When we question whether our Worship, for which we are like to suffer, be
right or no, Faith holds up an Institution for our Shield.

If this Fear (oh I shall not hold our, I shall deny my Lord, and his faith, if
put to it) assailes the Soul; here faith holds up the Promise for a Buckler: He
has said, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, so that we may boldly say,
The Lord is my helper.

2. Formally; Faith not only lifts up a shield, but is our shield; The very
believing in a crucified Jesus; the very believing the Command, the
Justification, the promise, stays and supports the heart against whatsoever may
befall it; I had fainted but that I believed.

Christians, whatever your duties, difficulties, despondencies, straits,
temptations, afflictions, weaknesses are; believe, and you shall be carried
through; believe, and you shall be established: Believe in Christ, and you
shall dare to follow Christ; believe in Christ, and you shall go through with
Christ, and hold out to the end. Believe, and you shall neither fear, faint,
nor fall. Your Faith will both keep you faultless, and save you harmless, and
thereby secure you from sinking, and fainting in your minds.

If this be not enough, let me add, that Faith will yet farther scatter all
your fears, by this double Act: 1. It will put your reward into your hands. 2.
It will put all your troubles to a present end.


1. It will put your reward into your hand; it will set the Crown on your head,
even whilst the Cross is on your back. Faith makes things to come present,
Heb. 11. 1. It is the subsistence, or being, of things hoped for; it gives
being to the good things promised, before they are. Hope carries the eye to the
object; looks on things to come, as to come; Faith b^ings the object to the
eye, looks on things to come, as com^* it looks on distance of time, as God
looks on it; on a thousand years but as one day. It looks on Gods saying and
doing, on Gods promising and performing as all one. It antidates Glory, and
gives a kind of present possession of it in hand, Romans 8. ( In) all these
things we are more than Conquerors: In Tribulation, in Per^ecution, in Famine,
in Nakedness; (In) all these things we are more than Conquerors: Not only
afterward we shall be, but in all these things, even whilst we are under
them, we are more than Conquerors: The conquest is obtained in the very
entrance of the Combat. This is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our
Faith. Believe Christian, and thy Faith will be thy Victory, thy Shield will be
thy Palm.

2. It will put all our troubles to a present end: Faith looks on things to
come as present, and thereby, on things present as past: It looks on all
things, according as they will be in their issue and end: It looks on things to
come, according to what they will be, when they are come. It looks on things
present according to what they will be, when they are past. It sees all
passing, and considers it as past already. It sees all passing, the World upon
its wing, the Fashion of it passes away. It sees the Riches of the world upon
their wings: the Pride, and the Pomp, and the Gallantry, and the Glory of the
World, upon their wings: And it sees the Poverty of the world, the Troubles of
the World, all upon the wing. It looks on the blackest Clouds, as flying
Clouds, and it considers all as gone already. It looks on the clear that is
beyond the Clouds; it says, as God says, Babylon is fallen, is fallen: Not only
it shall fall, but it is fallen, and shall not be able to rise.

Aed what place can there be then left for fear or fainting? Was the Red Sea a
Terror to Israel, when they saw themselves gotten to the other side? Did
Sampson's [dead] Lion fright him? Will the Remembrance of what you [have]
suffered be a Terror to you, when you are gotten through and are come out of
Tribulation? Why, open the E^e of your Faith, and see the Coast already clear;
You will see the Red Sea behind you, the Wilderness behind you, Jordan behind
you, and your selves gotten safe on the banks of Canaan.

Come on Soul, what should hinder thee? May be, thou supposest, thou have a
great fight of affliction to endure; grant thou have, yet fear none of those
things [thou shalt] suffer, till thou can fear those things thou have
suffered. Though thou be now putting on thy Armor, believe, and thou may
boast as if thou had put it off: Death, where is thy sting? Grave where is
thy victory? Where is the Fury of the Oppressor? Thine enemies are already
under thy feet man, Death it self is swallowed up in Victory.

Christians, Cherish, improve, increase your Faith, and this will clear your
way of all you^ fears. Wherefore did thou doubt, oh thou of little faith? Oh
it is a sign our faith is but low, when our fears are so high. The day the Lord
hears you in this Prayer, Lord increase our Faith, he delivers you from your
fears: Wax strong in faith, and you will wax bold in your God.

3. Be humble; 'twill be your advantage, that you stand on the lower ground: he
whose heart has already laid him in the Dust, will not fear how low his
enemies can lay him.

4. Be peaceable; your Preces and Lachrymae, will be your best weapons; the
guilt of your unquiet and unwarrantable resistance, will weapon your hearts,
more than all your partakers will strengthen your hands, Prove. 20. 22. Say not,
I will rec^mpence evil, wait on the Lord, and he will save thee. Patient and
peaceable suffering, will be the best way to abash your Persecutors, and
embolden your Souls.

Now gather up ^ll these Particulars, and you have the conversation that
becomes the Gospel; wherein that I may persuade as well as direct you*
consider these following Arguments;

2. This is to them, to your Adversaries, an evident token of perdition; this
united, humble, peaceable, unanimous boldness, in your holy course, whereby you
walk in the Spirit and power of the Gospel, and are not frighted or terrified
out of it; this is, and will be to your Persecutors, an evident token of
Perdition. The falls and flaws in the Lives of Saints, and their Quarrelings
and Divisions amongst themselves do strengthen the hands and the confidence of
sinners against them: The fears and faintings of Saints are the flushings of
sinners; when Saints hang the wing, sinners lift up the head.

The Majesty and Beauty of an holy life, joined with and humble and patient
Magnanimity and undantedness, will be a dart in the Liver of the Enemies of it.
It is an evident token [to them] of Perdition: It is not only a Death-Token
[upon them,] Persecution is a black mark of a Son of Perdition; but it is an
evident Token [unto them]: It will read them their Doom; it will make their own
hearts to fall upon themselves, and their own consciences to give them their
Sentence.

2. This is to you an evident Token of Salvation, [ but to you of Salvation]
The word is sure* To him that orders his Conversation aright, will I show the
Salvation of God. If we be dead with Christ, we shall also live with him; if we
suffer with him, we shall also be glorified together with him. To him that
overcomes, will I give to sit with me on my Throne, even as I have overcome,
and am set down with my Father on his Throne. Fear none of those things which
thou shall suffer. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a
Crown of Life.

[Salvation, and that of God] There Is much in that Addition [and that of God]
it notes, that the Salvation of the suffering Saints shall be Sure, Great.


1. It notes, That their Salvation shall be sure: You shall certainly be saved,
for God has undertaken for it; that is the import of the expression. If it be
God that justifies, who shall condemn? If it be God that will save, who shall
destroy? The matter is sure, you shall be saved, and that of God. It may be
Satan will promise, Hearken to me, and I will save you harmless. But he is a
Liar and a Deceiver; he is weak and cannot, false and will not. It may be the
evil World will tell you, If thou will cast in thy Lot with us, take our
Advice, follow our Example, come along with us, thou may save thy self all
this harm and loss. But there is as much trust to the children, as to the
Father of Lies: But if the Lord God, the God of Power, the God of Truth, says,
I will save, who will say nay?

2. It notes, that their salvation shall be great: The great God will do for
them great things; He will save them by a mighty Salvation. He will save them
against all those mighty hindrances that lie in the way. Who art thou, O great
Mountain! before Zerubbabel; thou shall become a plain. All the difficulties
and unlikelihoods, all the astonishing, and fleshnon-plus-ing Obstacles, that
stand in the way of their Redemption will be nothing before the mighty God. He
will save them from their mighty sins, sufferings, and fears; from the vanity
and vexations of this Earth, and from the vengeance of eternal fire.

Christians, Do but go on, walk with Christ, suffer with Christ, and ^ear none
of those things, which you shall suffer: and this shall be to you an evident
Token of Salvation, and that of God.

3. Consider again* the Argument of the Text; These things do, and the God of
Peace shall be with you.

What encouragement there is in this promise, I have already showed you.

Two things I shall only mention here, one of which has been insisted on
already.

Consider,

First, If God be with you, all shall make for you.

Secondly, If God be with you, you shall shortly be with God.

1. If God be with you, all shall make for you: Remember what you have heard
out of Romans 8. 28, 31. Christians, perhaps you will not know, how to make a
good Construction of some Providence that may possibly befall you, before you
dye. Such Cases there may be* that Providence may seem to be a plain
Contradiction of the Promise. Suppose the People of God, in any Nation under
Heaven, should at any time have, not only an I^undation of temporal Calamities,
Famine, and Pestilence, and Sword, Oppression, Rapine, and Cruelty; but a Flood
of Spiritual Judgments also, breaking in upon them; a Famine of the Word, an
Eclipse of the Light of the glorious Gospel among them; their green Pasture
trodden down, their pure Waters puddled, God's Spiritual Worship made to give
place to Will Worship, Superstition and Idolatry; the Institutions of God, to
the inventions of Men: his House made an Habitation for Dragons, for the
Scritch-Owl, and Bittern* for Ziim and Jim, and every unclean thing.

And that, in such a time, when they had given themselves to more than ordinary
praying, and fasting, and humbling themselves, and repenting of their
iniquities; when they had set their faces toward Sion, and were full of hopes,
that the Lord was about to build, and to plant; to cast out their rubbish, to
repair their ruins, to bring in their peace like a River, and to establish his
Tabernacle amongst them. Suppose that in such a time, the Lord should even spit
in their faces, should dash all their hopes, and put into their hands a cup of
trembling* should bring trouble upon their loins, and cause darkness to cover
their faces; should expose them to sco^^ and contempt, make them a reproach,
and a byword; should suffer them to be trampled upon, as the filth of the
World, and the offscouring of all things.

Suppose you should have lived in such times and places, and have heard them
complaining thus; All things work for good, why we see all things fall out for
the worse; so far are our evil things from working for good, that our good
things have wrought our hurt. Not only our outward good things, our peace, and
our plenty, but our spiritual good things, have undone us; our spiritual
Liberties, and Privileges, our Ordinances, our Duties, our Prayers, our
Fastings, our Zeal for the Lord of Hosts; not only our sins, but our Prayers,
our repentings, our reformings have undone us. We have prayed, and fasted, to
good purpose; we have even prayed our selves into poverty, contempt, darkness,
confusion; into the snares that have been laid for us, and into the hands of
those that hate us. All these things are against us; all our fears are come
upon us; all our comforts, yea, and our hopes too* are running from us; the
whole course of Providence, seems to be driven on to our utter ruin; every
day, every hour, it grows darker and darker, worse and worse; every spoke of
the Wheel, every turn of the wheel, renders our condition more helpless and
hopeless. Our adversaries are become rampant; our Soul is filled with their
scorn and fury; our friends, are as a broken tooth, or a foot out of joint; our
hopes are a Spiders Web, or as the giving up the Ghost; the Almighty causes all
his storms and billows to pass over us; one day tells another, one night
certifieth another, and prophesies to us nothing but destruction upon
destruction, desolation upon desolation; and where is the promise of his
coming? the hope of Israel is asleep, her Savior is a stranger; the Ark of God
is taken, the glory is departed, yea, and God himself seems to be gone over to
the Camp of the Philistines, and marching against us; we have waited for light,
but behold obscurity; for brightness, but we walk in darkness; the Harvest is
past, the Summer is ended, and we are not saved, neither is there yet any to
tell us how long.

Suppose you should have stood by, and have seen or heard any such things any
where in the World, would you not have said, can any good come out of such a
dark abyss? out of such a concatination of so many dreadful and dismal
Providence? Why, by what has been already said, you might have answered thus,
Stay but a while till the whole wheel be come about, till God has brought off
his work from the wheel; and then you shall see, Providence and the Promise
meeting together, and kissing each other, and shall be able to say in this
case, what Solomon did in Isreal's, 1 Kings 8. 56. Blessed be God, that has
given rest to his People Israel, according to all that he promised; there has
not failed [one word] of all his good promise, which he promised by the hand of
his Servants.

Christians, whatever may come upon you, at any time while you live in this
World, di^trust not your God, nor be at all dismayed; you shall see the day
either here or hereafter, and 'twill be never the worse, if it be not till
hereafter (take it upon the credit of this word, All things shall work together
for good) You shall see the day when your hearts shall rejoice and say, O^
'twas happy for us, that matters went so cross with us; 'Twas happy we were so
poor, and brought so low, and laid in the dark, and stripped so naked, of all
that we either took pleasure or put confidence in.

Now we see that the Lord has a more glorious design, that he was carrying on
for us step by step, by every thing that came upon us, than we were aware of,
or could have imagined. It Is true, the Shimei's have been cursing, the
Ishmael's have been mocking, the Rabshaka's have been railing, the Ploughers
have been ploughing, the Hunters have been pursuing, and had almost overtaken,
overcome, and swallowed us up quick; but blessed be our God, that has not
turned our captivity, and saved us by a mighty Salvation; but has done us
good, by all their mocking, and cursing, and raging against us: Now we see,
there was such light sowing in our dark days; such a Peace a sowing in those
deep furrows; such an Harvest of joy sowing in the days (...) watch is over,
your race is run, come and enter into my rest.

The first Come is, Come down with me, from the pride, from the pomps and
jollities, of this present World; come with me into the Wilderness, into the
valley of tears, come and suffer with me, come and dye with me.

The second Come is, Come up with me, up out of the Wilderness, up out of your
Prisons, up from your bonds: your Jubilee is come; come up with me: Come, put
off your prison-garments, and put on your robes; shake off your fetters, and
take up your palms; lay down your Cross, and take up your Crown: from your
Prisons to your Palace; from the Stocks to the Throne: You that have descended
with me, are the same who shall now ascend with me to my Father, and your
Father, to my God and your God.

The first Come, is the Come of a Suitor; Come, grant me your love; give me
your hearts, and accept of mine: This is the Errant upon which his Ambassadors
are dispatched; As Abraham's servant to take you as a Wife for your Lord. This
is the meaning of all those Jewels, and the Bracelets, they bring in their
hands; the Lord sends Servant upon Servant, Epistle upon Epistle, Token upon
Token, and all speak the same word, Come, come, come away and accept of your
Lord, and be married to him.

The second Come is, the Come of the Bridegroom* Come home with me, into my
holy City, into my Royal Mansion; come into my Chamber, come into my Bosom;
come and lodge between my Breasts, live in my presence, and rest in my love for
ever.

Christians, my business while I have been with you, has been to bring you to
God, to espouse you to Christ; and you that have already* or will yet at last
be persuaded to give your consent, and will give me leave to make up the Match,
I can give you assurance, That he will shortly come and make up the Marriage;
and must say to you, as Naomi to Ruth, Ruth* 3. 10. Sit still my Daugther, till
thou see how the matter will fall; for the Man will not be in rest, till he
have finished the thing this day. Sit still Christians, till you see how
matters will fall, and however they fall, know, your Lord will not be in rest
till he have finished this thing, and brought you home to be with him where he
is.

I am now parting from you in this confidence* that however, after a few days
I shall see your faces no more in this world* yet I shall shortly meet you in
the Bride-chamber of Glory* where we shall ever be with the Lord.

Beloved in the Lord, I must now leave you, but give me leave e're I go, to
deal freely with you, and yet a little farther, in the close of my day, this
once more to open my heart to you; and to tell you, 1. What my parting Fears,
2. What my parting Wishes for you are, which I carry upon my spirit.


1. My parting Fears I go off from you with, are especially these:

1. I am afraid, that there are many of you, upon whom I have bestowed my
labor in vain: I am afraid that I have instructed you in vain* exhorted*
persuaded, beseeched, and reproved you in vain: 'Twas the Apostles case, and
his fear concerning the Galatians, Chap. 4. 11.

It is my grief, that when I would have no more to speak, but an healing word,
a comforting word; I must yet drop down a bitter word on some of you; that when
I would speak only from Mount Gerizi^, I must yet again speak to some from
Mount Ebal; that when I would leave a Blessing behind me upon you all, I am
like to leave some bound under a Curse. It Is grievous to me thus to speak; yet
for the discharge of my duty, and for your own necessity, bear with me: I am
afraid, that whilst I have been preaching to you, of an incorruptible Crown, of
an everlasting Rest, a Kingdom of Joy and Glory: I am afraid there are many of
you, That have no part nor lot in this matter, but are still in the gall of
bitterness; and bond of iniquity: If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that
are lost. And are there none among you from whom this Gospel is hid? hid as to
the light of it, hid as to the saving power and efficacy of it? I am afraid
there are too many; I am afraid there is many a blind eye, many a hard heart,
many a Spirit still in Prison, under the Power of their Lusts, and Brutish
Sensuality: I am afraid there are many such among you, and are not you afraid
so too? Oh that you were!

2. I have a greater fear than this; I am afraid of some of you, that not only
all my past Labor, but this last will be lost also. Those that stand it out to
their last day, do usually stand it out in their last day. Blessed be God that
there are amongst you those, over whom my Soul is comfo^ted: To whom I can
speak in the words of the Apostle, Rom* 6. 17. God be thanked, that ye were the
Servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart, that from of Doctrine that
has been delivered unto you, and being now made free from sin, you are become
the Servants of Righteousness. Oh that I could thus speak! Oh that I could thus
rejoice over you all! But as the Apostle said to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12.
20. I fear, left when I (come) I shall (find) you such as I would not. So must
I say, with a grieved hear^, I fea^ that now I am going I shall leave you such
as I would not. I would not leave one blind person, one vain person, one loose
liver, not one unbeliever, or impenitent, amongst you an. Oh what a good day
would this day of my departure be? what Light would there be in this dark
Evening, were it thus with you? If I might see you all recovered out of the
Snares of the Devil, every man's Eyes opened* every man's Fetters off, every
man's Prison broken, and his Soul escaped from that deadly bondage: if every
poor deadly Creature among you, who yet lies bound hand and foot in his Grave
Clothes, might now at last stand up from the Dead, and live the Life of God,
this would be mine and your great rejoicing* But oh I fear with this Apostle, 2
Cor. 12. 21. My God will humble me, and grieve me, and afflict me, to see in
what a woeful plight, I must leave diverse of you.

Oh ye sons of the Night, you poor, ignorant; and dark Souls* upon whom the
Light has shined; but your Darkness comprehends it not: Oh you poor,
obstina^e, and hardened Souls, upon whom I have been ploughing, as upon Rocks,
and hewing as upon Adamants, who still remain under as great hardness, as if no
Dew nor Rain had ever fallen on you. Oh you poor, half-bak^ed, almost
Christians, that have taken up your stand in your present Seize: my Soul
is under great fears, and must weep in secret for you, whilst my Tongue must be
henceforth silent: Oh every Soul, that is without fear of himself, my Soul is
afraid for you, the fearless Soul, is in a fearful state.

Sinners, let my fears be your fears: What, is there such astonishing guilt
upon you, and yet not afraid? Such a dreadful Roll writ against you, and yet
not afraid? So many Sabbaths, Sermons, Warnings lost, and never to be recalled;
nor any Assurance left of one Sermon* or Warning more, and yet not afraid? Such
a subtle Devil, such a deceitful heart, such a tempting world that you have to
deal withal; such a black and bottomless Pit into which you are falling, and
yet not afraid? Oh what Stocks and Stones has the Gospel to deal withal^

Beloved, have labored much with you, both publicly, and from house to house,
to bring you under a due fear and jealousy of your selves; but hitherto your
hearts have been too hard for me: Oh yet for trembling hearts, tremble and sin
not; fear and pray, fear and hope, fear and repent; Work out your Salvation
with fear and trembling! Oh if my fears were once become your fears, your fears
would become my hopes! Oh what a Dayspring of hopes, would arise from the
shaking of secure hearts! These fears would be as the thicker Darkness,
forer^nners of break of Day.

2. My parting wishes, and desires for you, are,

1. That the good Seed, which has been sown amongst you, were well rooted in
every heart: I wish that my Twenty years Ministry among you, may not be lost
labor, to any of your souls.

2. I wish that your next Seeds-man may be more skilful and successful: that
the good Lord will provide you a man, that may teach you in wisdom, gain you in
Love, lead you on to life by an holy Example; and if the Lord grant you this
mercy, I wish that such a one may be dearly prized and cheerfully accepted by
you. God keep this Flock from a Ravening Wolf, and a deceitful Shepherd.

3. I wish that there may be no Root of Bitterness springing up amongst you;
that there be no Divisions or Contentions, but that you may live in peace and
love, that the God of peace and love may be with you.

4. I wish that this place, where so much good Seed has been sown, may become
a fruitful Field, that the Fruits of Faith and Repentance, the Fruits of
Righteousness and Holiness, may be in you, and abound; that you may be neither
barren, nor unfruitful; that Religion, in the power and practice of it, may so
visibly flourish, in the several persons, in the several Families of this
Congregation, that they that go by, may see and say, This is the Field which
the Lord has blessed.

5. I wish, that whatever Clouds may at any time gather over you, may not fall
down in a withering Storm, or a sweeping Flood, but may pass away in a Mist, or
dissolve into a fruitful Dew; that no Persecutions or Temptations may ever
carry you down the Stream with evil men, nor blight any hopeful beginnings,
that are budding forth in any of your Souls. If Tribulation should be any of
your Lots, I wish that it may not be to you, as the Hail of Egypt, but as the
Dew of Hermon.

6. I wish you a joyful Harvest, that you may reap in Eternity, what has been
sown in time; may you now sow in Righteousness, and therefore reap in Mercy:
May every one of you that is now sowing in Tears, for ever reap in joy: May you
that go on your way weeping, bearing precious Seed, return with joy, and bring
your Sheaves with you: May the Showers of this day, be the watering of your
Seed, that it may spring up to Eternal Life.

Brethren, My hearts desire for you all is, that you may be saved; and if there
be any persons that bear evil will to me, my particular wish for them is, The
Good Will of him that dwelt in the Bush be those Men's Portions for ever.

These are some of my Wishes for you; will you join your Wishes with mine: will
you turn your Wishes into Prayers, and let this be your prayer; The Lord grant
thee thine hearts desire, and fulfill all thy Mind.

Brethren, do I wish you any harm in all this? If not, if it be to be wished,
that the word of Christ were rooted in your hearts, and your Souls thereby
rooted in the Grace of God; if it be to be wished, that your Lusts were rooted
out, your sins dead and dried up, your foot gotten out of the Snare, your Souls
brought into the Fold, your fruits of righteousness and holiness abounding, and
growing up unto eternal life: If all this be to be wished, then give in your
votes with mine; wish and pray, pray and press on, press on and wait for the
accomplishment of this grace in you all. I tell you again* I wish you well; and
not only I, but the Lord God that has sent me to you: The Lord Jesus wishes
you well; he wishes and wooes, woes and weeps, weeps and dies, that your Souls
might live, and be blessed for ever: He has once more sent me to you, even to
the worst amongst you, to tell you from him, that he is unwilling you should
perish; that he has a kindness for you in his heart, if you will accept it: He
has Blood and Bowels for your Blood to expiate you; guilt, to wash away your
filth; and Bowels to offer you the benefit of his Blood; with this wish, Oh
that it were theirs! Oh that they would hearken and accept! Only I must add,
That the Lord has two sorts of Wishes concerning sinners: The first is, Oh
that they would hearken! Oh that they would come in, be healed, and be saved!
Deuteronomy. 5. 29. This wish is an Olive Branch that brings good ^idings, and gives
great hopes of Peace and Mercy.

His last Wish is, Oh that they had hearkened! that they had accepted! Ps. 81.
13. O that my People had hearkened to me! Luke 19. 42. Oh that thou had known
in this thy day, the things that concern thy peace! This Wish has nothing but
Dread and death in it: it is the Black Flag hung out, that proclaims External
Wars. The sense is, Israel had once a fair time of it; a time of Love, a time
of Grace, a time of* Peace: Oh that they had hearkened then, that they had known
the things that concern their peace! But woe, woe to them, it is too late, the
door is shut, the Season is over, the Day is past; But now they are hid from
thine Eyes.

There are three deadly darts in this Wish [oh that thou hadst] it includes in
it these three cutting words, Thou have not. Thou might. Thou shall not for
ever.


1. There is this in it, [Thou have not.] What have I not? why, thou have not
known the things that belong to thy peace. Thou have had the door of Glory, the
Gate of Heaven open to thee, and have been called for, and invited in, but thou
have lost the opportunity. Thou knew not when thou were well offered, nor
would take notice what a day was before thee, what a price was in thine
hand; thy peace, the Gospel of peace, the Prince of peace, a Kingdom of peace
was set open, offered, and brought home to thy doors, but thou had so many
other matters to look after, that thou tookest no notice of it, but have let it
slip. There Is one Dart. [Thou have not known.] There Is a Gospel gone, there is a
Christ gone, there is a Soul, a Kingdom lost.

2. There is this in it, [Thou might.] Oh that thou had? why, Might I? Ye,
thou might, if thou would thou might. Thy God did not mock thee, when he
preached peace to thee; he was willing, and wished it thine, if thou would,
thou might have made it thine own; but whilst he would, thou would not.

There Is another Dart. [I might have known] I have none to thank but my self
for the loss, mine undoing was mine own doing. There are no such torments as
when the Soul flies upon it self, and takes revenge on it self; oh the gashes
that such self reflections make! Soul, how came thou in hither, into all this
misery? oh it is of my self* my self, that my destruction is! The door was open,
and I was told of it, and was bid come in, but I would not. That I am lost and
undone, was not my Fate, which I could not avoid, but my Fault and my folly. It
seems to give some ease of our torment, when we can shift off the fault. It was
not I, but the Woman, said Adam; It was not I, but the Serpent said the Woman;
if it had been true, it would have given ease, as well as serve for an excuse.
This thought ['Twas mine own doing] tears the very caul of the heart. Oh I have
none to blame but my self, mine own foolish and froward heart. This is my
ignorance, this is my unbelief, this is my willfulness, my lusts, and my
pleasures, and my Idols, that I was running after, that have brought me under
this dreadful loss. 'Twas my own doing.

3. There is this in it, [Thou shall not for ever] Oh that thou had! why, may
I not [yet?] Is there no hope of recovering the opportunity? not one word more,
not one hour more; may not the Sun go [one] degree backward? No, no, it is too
late, too late; thou have had thy day, from henceforth no more for ever.
There Is the last Dart, [Time's past] there is the death, the Hell, the anguish,
the Worm that shall gnaw to eternity.

This one word [Time's past] sets all Hell a roaring; and when its once spoken
to a sinner on Earth, there is Hell begun. Go thy way wretch, fill up thy
measure, and fall into thy place; The Gospel has no more to say to thee, but
this one word, Because I have called, and thou refusedst, I have stretched out
my hand, and thou regardedst not, but have set at naught all my Counsels, and
would none of my reproofs; I also will laugh at thy calamities, and mock when
thy fear comes; when thy fear comes as desolation, and thy destruction comes
as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon thee, then shall thou
call, but I will not answer, thou shall seek me early, but shall not find me.

Beloved, my hopes are, and I am not able to say but that you are yet under the
first wish; Oh that they would. Christ is yet preaching you to faith, and sends
his Wish along with his Word, Oh that they would believe! Christ is yet
preaching Repentance and Conversion to you, and wishes, O that they would
repent, that they would be converted; and to this wish of my Lord, my Soul and
all that is within me says Amen.

Brethren, will you yet again say your Lord nay? shall Christ have his wish?
shall your Servant for Jesus sake, shall I have my wish? will you now at last
con^ent to be ^anctified, and to be saved? let me have this wish* and I dare
promise from the Lord, you shall have yours, even whatever your Soul can desire.

Brethren, this once hear, this once be prevailed upon; be content that your
lusts be rooted out, and your Lord planted into your Souls. Be content to be
pardoned, content to be converted, content to be saved. This once hear, lest if
ye now refuse, ye no more be persuaded with, oh that they would! but be for
ever confounded with, oh that they had! Lest all our wishes and wooings of you,
be turned into weepings and mournings over you; this once hear; Oh that you
would.

I heartily thank you for your good wishes, and good will toward me; for your
willing and cheerful entertainment of my person, and attendance on my Ministry;
and particularly, for your passionate desire of my longer stay among you: Which
desire if God had not, my Soul could not have denied you. Though the Almighty,
to whose pleasure it is meet that we all submit, has said nay to that wish of
yours; yet let your Souls say Amen, to this last of mine, that the Lord God
would dwell among you, and in you, both now and for ever.

And having thus finished my Labors among you, I shall now close up with this
double account.

1. Of my discharge of my Ministry in this place.

2. Of my deprival. And shall so commit you to God, and to the word of his
Grace, which is able to huild you up, and to give you an Inheritance amongst
all them that are sanctified.

1. Of my discharge of my Ministry. What my Doctrine and manner of life has
been, is known to you; and what my aim and intent has been, is known to God.
The searcher of hearts, knows, that it is the salvation of Souls, that has been
the mark at which I have levelled. My way has been to use all plainness, that
I might be made manifest in your Consciences: Weaknesses and infirmities, both
natural and sinful (the Lord pardon it) I have had many. I am sensible that
much more might have been done, both in public and in private, had it not been
for a weakly body, and a sloathful heart.

I repent that I have had no more zeal for God, no more compassion to Souls; I
repent that I have been no more constant and importunate with you, about the
matters of Eternity. Oh Eternity, Eternity, that thou were no more in the heart
and Lips of the Preacher, in the hearts and ears of the hearers. But while I
thus judge my self for my failings, Blessed be God for any sincerity to his
name, and good will to your Souls, that he has seen in me. Blessed be God, I
have a witness in my Conscience, and I hope in yours also, that I have not
shunned to declare to you, the whole Counsel of God. Brethren, I call Heaven
and Earth to witness this day, that I have set before you life and death, good
and evil, and have not ceased from day to day, to warn you to choose life, and
that good way, that leads to it; and to escape for your lives, from the way of
sin and death. Oh remember the many instructions I have given you, the many
Arguments whereby I have striven with you, the many Prayers that have been
offered up, for the guiding and gaining your Souls, into the path of life, and
the turning your feet out of the way of destruction. Oh might I be able to give
this Testimony concerning you all, at my departure, they have trodden in the
right path, they have chosen the good part that shall not be taken from them.

Beloved Brethren* with whom I have traveled in birth, that Christ might be
formed in you; I must shortly give up my account in a more solemn Assembly:
will you help me to give it up with joy, by showing your Souls before the Lord,
as the Seal of my Ministry. Every sincere Convert among you, will be a Crown of
rejoicing to me in that day? So let me rejoice, and let my joy be the joy of
you all.

What shall I say more? If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort
of love, any bowels and mercies; if the Glory of the Eternal God, the Honor of
the everlasting Gospel, the safety of your immortal Souls, the incorruptible
Crown, the exceeding, eternal weight of glory, weigh any thing with you, then
once more let me beseech you, by all this to hearken to that word of the
Gospel, which God has spoken to you by me.

2. Of my deprival. The most glorious morning has its evening; the hour is
come wherein the Sun is setting, upon not a few of the Prophets; the shadows of
the evening are stretched forth upon us, our day draws, our work seems to be,
at an end: Our Pulpits and our places must know us no more.

This is the Lords doing, let all the earth keep silence before him.

It is not a light thing for me, Brethren, to be laid aside from the work, and
cast out of the Vineyard of the Lord; and it must be something of weight, that
must support under such a severe doom.

I know there are not a few, that will add to the affliction of the afflicted,
by telling the world, it is their own fault, they might prevent it if they would:
whether this be so or no God knows, and let the Lord be Judge. Blessed be
God, whatever be, this is not laid to our charge as the reason of our
seclusion, either insufficiency or scandal.

You are not ignorant, what things there are imposed on us, as the condition of
our continuing our Ministration; which how lawful and expedient soever they
seem in the Judgment of many, yet have the most specious Arguments that plead
for them, left me utterly dissatisfied in my Conscience about them.

I must profess before God, Angels and Men, that my non-submission is not from
any disloyalty to Authority, nor from pride, humor, or any factious
disposition, or design; but because I dare not contradict my light, nor do any
thing concerning which my heart tells me, the Lord says, do it not.

After all my most impartial Enquiries, after all my seeking counsel from the
Lord, after all my considering, and consulting with men of all persuasions,
about these Matters, I find my self so far short of satisfaction, that I am
plainly put to this choice, to part with my Ministry or my Conscience. I dare
not lie before God and the World; nor come and tell you I approve, I allow, I
heartily consent, to what I neither do, nor can; but must choose rather* that
my Ministry be sealed up by my Sufferings, than lengthned out by a Lie: Through
the Grace of God, though men do, yet my heart shall not reproach me while I
live; If our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and knows all
things. But however, though I must now no longer act as a Minister, I shall,
through the Grace of God, endeavor peaceably, and patiently, to suffer as a
Christian.

I should, to testify my Obedience to Authority* have become all Things to all
Men, to the uttermost that I could with any clearness of heart: But since
Matters stand so that I must lose my place, or my peace, I cheerfully suffer my
self to be thrust off the Stage.

And now welcome the Cross of Christ, welcome Reproach, welcome Poverty, Scorn,
and contempt, or whatever else may befall me on this account. This Morning I
had a Flock, and you had a Pastor; but now behold a Pastor without a Flock, a
Flock without a Shepherd: This Morning I had an House, but now I have none;
This Morning I had a living, but now I have none: The Lord has given, and the
Lord has taken away; Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

Beloved, I am sensible of my Weaknesses and Disadvantages I am under, which
may render a suffering state the harder to be born; help me by your Prayers;
and not me only, but all my Brethren also, with whom my Lot must fall; Pray for
us, for we trust that we have a good Conscience, in all things willing to live
honestly. Pray,

1. That God would make our Silence speak* and preach the same holy Doctrine
that we have preached with our Lips.

2. That he would give Supports answerable to our Sufferings; that he who
comfort those that are cast down, will also comfort his Servants that are
cast out.

3. That according to our earnest expectation, and our hope, as always, so now
also, Christ may be magnified in us, whether it be by Life or Death.

And thus, Brethren, I bid you farewell, in the words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.
11. Finally, Brethren, farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace; and the God of Peace and Love shall be with you.

And that God of Peace that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the Everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work, to do his will; working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory, for ever
and ever, AMEN.

FINIS.

