AN ANSWER TO Mr. J. G. his XL. Queries, Touching the Lawfulness, or
unlawfulness of holding Church Communion, between such who have been Baptized
after their Believing, and others who have not otherwise been Baptized, then in
their Infancy.

As likewise touching Infant, and after Baptism.

In which Answer, the undueness of such mixed Communion is Declared, the
Unlawfulness of Infant Baptism, and the necessity of after Baptism is Asserted.

By W. A.

GAL. 6.4, 5. But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself alone, and ^ot in anot^er: for every man shall bear his own
burden.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by H^n. Crip^ L. Lloyd, at
their shop in Popes head A^^y

To the Reader.
HAd not the Truth been dearer to me then any man, I should not have appeared
so publicly opposite to one, whom I so much love and honor, ac^ I do my
worthy good friend the Author of the Queries. But considering that Christ must
be followed, owned, and pleaded for; in every Doctrine, dispensation, and
command of his, when Providence puts men upon it, though in so doing they are
many times forced to break Company, as to some ways, with dearest Relations,
and persons of their greatest respects: and considering also, that my self as
probably occasioning the birth of the Queries, have a greater engagement upon
me then another, to anticipate as much as in me lies, the dis-service they may
do to the truth of Christ; I have therefore the rather thought of returning
some Answer to them. In which Answer, my respects to the Querist have caused me
to decline all things that might bear hard upon him, so far as my faithfulness
to the truth, would well bear at my hands.

There is almost no end of Disputes, and it is not to be imagined what the wit
of man can do, toward the making of things which are not, to seem as if they
were, and things which are, to appear as if they were not: therefore was it, as
it should seem, that Paul was jealous with a Godly jealousy over the
Corinthians, lest the subtilty of men should carry off their minds from the
plainness of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 11.3. For however there are deep things of God,
that are not obvious to every eye; yet doubtless for things that concern even
the meanest Babe in Christ, to believe and practice in order to his being
numbered with the Saints, such as are the beginning Doctrines of Christ, as
Repentance from dead Works, faith toward God, the Doctrine of Baptisms, and the
like; God has not been so sparing of his mind hereabout, as that men must
make a journey from the one end of the Scriptures to the other, and lay both
ends together, before they can discover the mind of God, as a ground of their
faith and practice, as some would bear us in hand, even in the business of
Baptism it self; as if Christ had made one of the first things a Christian
should do, one of the hardest for him to know, whether he should do it so or
so: but as concerning the principles of the Gospel, which every Christian must
believe and submit to, What says the Scripture? The word is nigh thee, even in
thy mouth and in thy heart, that is the Word of Faith which we Preach, Romans
10.8. Which words (I pray you note) are spoken by the Apostle in opposition to
them, who held That the Gospel was not a perfect Rule to a Christian without
the Law; as they also do in effect who think the Gospel Rule for Baptizing
Believers, is not a perfect Rule to us, but that we must be beholding to the
Law of Moses for the Circumcising Infants, to direct us about the Baptizing of
children: as if we should ask the twilight in the evening, whether it were
light at noon day.

Therefore Reader, let me persuade thee whosoever thou art, not to spend thy
precious time and thoughts in following the Wilde-goose-chase of men, in their
Meanderous disputes about these things of common observation and practice; but
believe, and act, according to what thou find plainly written in the New
Testament of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has not left his last Will and
Testament behind him in any such dubious Words, as might occasion his children
to fall out about it, but that an evil spirit many ages ago got into the
Churches, (of which many good men, perhaps scarce any, are totally disposessed
unto this day) which for some carnal respect, turned them aside from the plain
way of the Gospel, into ways and practices of their own choosing; which that
afterward they might make good and justify, they, and those that tread in
their steps, have strained their wits to find out Arguments and Plea's, that
have so darkened and obscured things that otherwise of themselves were lightsome
and plain, that it now proves a hard matter for many, to discern what is of
Christ, and what is but of man.

And this if thou do, thou shall not need to burden thy self with far fetched
Arguments, to prove that to be lawful, which thou do not find plainly
written as many do; for thou will not need to Question at all, whether that way
is lawful or no which thou find beaten by the feet of the Saints of old,
with the high approbation of heaven: and why should any man go about, when a
nearer way presents it self to him?

Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning: if
that which ye have heard from the beginning remain in you, ye also shall continue
in the Son, and in the Father. 1 John 2.24.

A Word to such as are offended at the Way of Baptizing Believers, because of
that disunion and disturbance it occasions, even among Believers themselves.
Let such consider,
1 THat One-ness in mind and affection, is as well the sin of the
Antichristian party in one respect, as it is the Duty of Christians in
another: Rev. 17.13. These have one mind, and shall give their strength and
power unto the Beast. 2. It is only one-ness in the truth then, that is
commendable and desirable. If so, then, 3. It is not those that keep close to
the Doctrine of the New Testament and the laudable practice of the Saints, as
at the beginning, as the Baptists do, that are to be charged with division
making, but those that divide from the plain way of the Gospel, and those that
walk in it. Romans 16.17. Mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary
to the Doctrine which ye have LEARNED, and avoid them. 4. Truth is to be
preferred before peace; and heavenly wisdom is more, and better known by
Truth, then by Peace: Jam. 3.17. The wisdom that is from above is first pure,
then peaceable. Truth may not be balked, or sold at any rate, no not for peace
it self: Pro. 23.23. Buy the truth and sell it not: Gal. 2.5. To whom we gave
place by subjection, no not for an hour, that the truth of the Gospel might
continue with you. 5. Such whose ground on which they stand, is truth, though
they ought with all sweetness, love, and meekness, to invite and persuade
others to come over to them, yet may by no means depart thence, or remove their
standing, no though it were to gain others to them. 1 Cor. 9.21. To them that
are without Law, as without Law (being not without Law to God, but under the
Law to Christ) that I might gain them that are without Law. Ier. 15.19. Let
them return to thee, but return not thou unto them. Phil. 3.15, 16. If in any
thing ye be otherwise minded God shall reveal even this unto you: Nevertheless,
whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind
the same thing. 6. Though endless Genealogies, and striving about the Law, and
the eating of meats and herbs, are but such things, and the truth concerning
them, but of that nature, as that for the sake thereof, peace must not be
broken (Tit. 3.9. 1 Timothy 1.4. Romans 14.) yet first, such points or questions, as
concern the fulfilling of any righteousness (of which those that concern the
essentials of Baptism are, Mat. 3.15.) are such as of which the Kingdom of God
does consist, and in the defense of which, men serve Jesus Christ, and are
accepted with God, and ought to be approved of men, Ro^. 14.17, 18. Secondly,
not only Gospel Doctrines about matters of faith, but also matters of Gospel
order, such as the Apostle calls Ordinances, appointmen^s, or traditions* 1 Cor.
11.2. even these are truths to be contended for, and not to be let go for peace
sake. And the Apostle thought this a sufficient answer to such as should
contend against these viz. that they had no such custom, neither the Churches
of God, ver. 16. with ver. 2, 3, 4 5. etc. And if the Churches of God, then,
had no such custom neither, as to sprinkle or Baptize little children, or to
admit members to Church Communion without Baptism, does not the Apostles
saying, here, though produced upon another occasion, evince their contention,
sinful and unreasonable likewise, that shall plead for and practice such things
as these, contrary to the custom of the first Churches, which in all laudable
things were patterns to al succeeding Churches? The Apostle having in 2 These.
2. given notice of the Mystery of iniquity it^ b^gining then to work, ver. 7.
and the coming of the man of sin, with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness,
ver. 10. which we know in the Papal Apostasy, has fallen out as well in matters
of Gospel order, as in points of faith; he to prevent a defection in both,
exhorts them ver. 15. to stand fast and to hold the Traditions which they had
been taught; yea and in chap. 3. v. 6. counts that a disorderly walking, which
was not after the Tradition which they had received from the Apostles. And if
it were the wisdom and duty of the Churches then, to stand fast, and to hold
fast the Traditions which they had received from the Apostles, as well touching
matters of Gospel Order as otherwise to prevent their falling into
Antichristian pollutions, then doubtless, the way for men now, to recover
themselves and others from under those pollutions, is by returning back to
these Apostolical traditions, and standing fast in them, which doubtless is
their duty, what disturbance soever may follow thereupon.

ERRATA.
PAge 9. l. 15. r. those particular cases, p. 25. l. 21. r. neither, p. 44. l.
13 r. a, p. 49. l. 25. r. supposing, p. 52. l. 1, r. formally, ib. l. 4. r. is.
p. 55. l. 16. r. such as have, p. 55 l. 24. r. the time of his Baptism, p. 57.
l. 25. r. and p. 58. l. 24. r. of. 59. l. 4. r. describe, p. 59. l. 32. r.
those, p. 60. l. 6, r. words, p. 61. l. 16. r. line. p. 61. l. 26. r. of p. 61.
l. 28. r. when, p. 63. l. 3. r. 2, p. 64. l. 14. r. unreasonable, p. 66. l. 1.
r. much, ib. l. 2. r. bapti. ib. l. 14. r. meet, p. 69. l. 26. r. about, p. 72.
l. 12. r. charging, p. 72. l. 19. r. those p. 72. l. 19. r. practices.

An Answer to Mr. I. G. his XL. Queries, touching Church Communion between such
as have been Baptized after they have Believed, and others who have not
otherwise been Baptized then in their Jnfancie. As likewise touching Infant and
after Baptism.
THe thoughts of the Worthy Author of the Book Entitled Philadelphia, touching
the subject matter of that Book, being propounded Queri^-wise, there is I
suppose little Question to be made, but that it was with an expectation on his
part, to receive a return from the hand of some friend, or other, in order to a
further Discovery of Truth in that particular Case of Conscience, about which
the Queries are employed. And therefore rather then ^he desire of this worthy
friend, should in this behalf be kept too long fasting, I have resolved (having
first waited a while for some more able hand to have undertaken it) through the
assistance of God, to offer my mite toward this service, to which I adress my
self as follows.

Querie. I.
Whether is there any Precept or example in the Gospel of any Baptized Person,
his disclaiming of Communion in Church Fellowship, with those whom he Judges
true Believers upon account only of their not having been Baptized?

Respondant.
As for matter of Example for such a practice, there is I suppose none in
Scripture, no more then there is of disclaiming communion with the Church of
Rome, as now it is, or with the the Parochial Churches in England or elsewhere;
and yet it will not follow, that the one is any more unlawful then the other.
For Scripture examples are matters of Fact, and therefore, there having been no
such corrupt practice crept into the world, till after all the books of the
holy Scriptures were finished, as is the constituting of Churches without
Baptism, or upon Infant sprinkling in stead of Baptism, which in true
construction is not only no Baptism at all, but even worse then none, as much
as to commit an evil action is worse then to omit a good one; there being, I
say, no such corruption as this then on foot, no more then there was the now
Romish, the National, or Parochial Church-constitution then in being, there
could be no occasion for any truly Baptized person, to disclaim communion,
either with the one or with the other; and consequently no such matter of Fact
to be Recorded, of which to make an example.

But then it no more follows, that it is unlawful to refuse communion with the
one Church, then it is with the other, if there be no more ground in Scripture
to constitute Churches without Baptism, then there is for the Romish, National,
and Parochial constitution. The Querist then having himself disclaimed
communion with the Church of Rome, and the Parochial Churches in England,
though he have no example in scripture so to do, and yet has done it, because
there is no example in Scripture for such Church-constitution as that of Rome
and England is, he might as well disclaim communion with Churches built upon
Infant Baptism too, since there is no more example in Scripture of such a
Church constitution, then there is of the constitution of those Churches, with
whom he has disclaimed communion; especially considering, that there is
example in abundance in Scripture of Churches of a better constitution, and
that is of Saints Baptized after they had Believed.

2. As to matter of Precept; though there be no litteral or sillabical Precept
for Baptized persons to disclaim communion in Church Fellowship with unbaptized
ones, no more then there is for disclaiming communion with the false Churches
before mentioned; yet if the Querist will say, that there is Precept in
Scripture, which does virtually require him to disclaim communion with the
Church of Rome, and the Parochial Churches in their way, then I will say the
same concerning Baptized Believers, their refusing communion with unbaptized.

If it be demanded, what precept does virtually require such a thing as
non-communion of Baptized with unbaptized?

I Answer, 1. For those that plead the Precept of circumcising Infants under
the Law, as virtually requiring the baptizing of Infants under the Gospel, me
thinks this should be satisfactory as to them, and so to the Querist himself,
as touching the Case in hand, viz. where God requires Circumcision under pain
of being excluded communion with the Church, saying, the uncircumcised
man-child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be
cut off from his people, Genesis 17.14. for what less can be meant by that
expression, shall be cut off from his people, then that such an one should be
deprived communion with the people of Israel in Church Fellowship? If it be
said a cuting off by death, is thereby intended, then I say, that is exclusive
of Church Communion likewise; for the Major includes the Minor, and it is more
to be cut off by the hand of death, from all oppertunity of future communion
with the Church, then it is for a man to be debarred present communion, only
in order to his repentance, that he might be regularly capable of communion
afterward.

But whether such a cuting off be in that place intended or no most certain it
is, that such a cuting off is enjoined, Exodus 12.48. where its said, speaking
of the Passover, That no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.

And therefore, if it be good reasoning from circumcision to B^ptism, (which if
it be not, let the Pedobaptists bid adieu to their cause of Infant Baptism,
which is built and bottomed thereupon) then it follows undeniably by way of
Analogy, that as uncircumc^sion by the command of God, did deprive persons of
communion with the people of God in Church Fellowship, then, so non-Baptism
does debar persons of Church Communion now. And now which of the horns of this
dilemma, will the Pedobaptists suffer themselves to be gored by? Will they say
the consequence is not good, to argue the exclusion of unbaptized persons from
Church Communion, from the exclusion of uncircumcised persons from acts of
Church Communion, while circumcision was in force; if so, then how can the
consequence be good, to argue the Baptism of Infants from the circumcision of
Infants; for the same things have the same consequences; and to things alike,
belongs the like reason and judgment, and therefore let them either grant my
inference, or for ever cease any more to infer from Infants circumcision, to
Infants Baptism.

2. I would argue further thus: the same Law which enjoynes the learned
Querist, and others of his way, to deny the privilege of their Churches to
other Believers that are not of their Churches, but do scruple their way, and
cannot submit to their order, the same Law does enjoin baptized believers, not
to admit into fellowship with them in Church privileges such persons, though
believers, as do scruple their order and way of being baptized in order to
Church communion, and will not submit thereto. For the Scripture is every whit
as express for Baptism to precede the enjoyment of Church privileges, as it is
for a voluntary consenting to Church order and government, to precede the same
enjoyment. Nay I am confident, that the Arguments and Plea's, brought to prove
it lawful to admit Believers to such communion without Baptism, if admited as
good, would overthrow and level the Order and Discipline of particular
Churches. For if one single person may be admited to Church Priviledges without
Baptism, or without submiting to the order and rule of the Church, both which
are previous to acts of Church Communion, and I affirm the case is more clear
for Baptism in this behalf in Scripture, then it is for that submission and
consent I speak of; I say, if one person may be admitted upon such terms, then
why not two? if two, why not ten, and so a hundred, or a thousand? and
consequently such Gospel order laid totally aside?

3. If these things serve not turn, yet those precepts, exhortations, or
doctrines, by which men stand enjoined to observe Gospel Order (1 Cor. 14.40. 2 Timothy 1.13. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. 1 Cor. 11.2. Titus 1.5. Col. 2.5. Romans 6.17.) do
virtually prohibit men Baptized, communion with unbaptized in Church
fellowship, as that which is contrary thereunto.

1. That this was the order of the Gospel, yea and an order enjoined by Christ,
viz. that Believers should first be Baptized, before admited into
Church Fellowship, will sufficiently appear, if duly considered, from that
Commission of Christ to his Disciples, Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore teach all
Nations Baptizing them. Where we see, that the very next thing they were to do,
after they had taught men ( viz. so, as to make them willing to obey the
Gospel, Acts 2.41.) was to Baptize them: which injunction therefore, as some
well observe, is put by a participle of the present tense; Teach all Nations,
Baptizing them, etc. i. e. presently upon their being taught, as all examples
of that nature in the Acts of the Apostles do declare. And if this were the
very next thing in order to be done, after men were instructed to the belief of
the Gospel, then an admiting them into Church fellowship without this, could
not be without a deviation and turning from the rule of Christ in this behalf;
which transgression to suppose the Disciples of Christ admiting, or the
Disciples admited, to be guilty of, is a piece of uncharitableness, more then I
am willing to communicate in.

2. The Apostles, according to the Commandment of Christ, beginning first at
Jerusalem to put this Commission of his into execution, Luke 24.47. did act
accordingly. And doubtless their acting upon this Commission, ought to be taken
by us, as an interpretation of this Commission, and their actions relating
hereto, to be in pursuance of, and correspondent to this Commission; unless we
will suppose them to stumble at the threshold, and to begin to depart from it
as soon as they began to act upon it; which would be too great an audaciousnes
in any man once to imagine. If so, then what is more plain, then that the
Commission of Christ to them, was to teach and baptize first, and to admit into
Church fellowship thereupon, and not otherwise; as is visible in that prime
example of theirs, Acts 2.41.42. Then they that gladly received his Word, were
Baptized, and the same day there was added unto them, about three thousand
souls. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship,
and in breaking of bread, and in Prayers. Where you see, they were, first,
taught by Preaching, secondly, did gladly receive the Word by which they were
taught, thirdly were baptized, fourthly, were added unto them, viz. the Church,
ver. 47. fifthly, continued steadfastly in the Apstles Doctrine and fellowship,
etc. Addition to the Church then, and fellowship in it, did follow baptism, and
not go before it, according to the actuated commission of Christ Jesus. And why
should any servants of his, then, desire to vary from it, unless they presume
themselves wiser then he, and hope to find a greater good in their own way,
then in his?

3. Baptism must needs precede the enjoyment of Church privilege, in Church
fellowship, in the Apostles days, because it was then, as it ought still to
be, a means of planting men into Christ, or into the body of Christ the Church.
Hence they were said to be Baptized into Christ, Galathians 3. verse. 27. and to
be baptized into his death, Romans 6. v. 3. and to be planted together into the
likeness of his death, upon that account, ver. 5. of the same chapter. And what
does a planting and a planting together import, but the first putting together
of Christians, in order to their growing together in Christ? and yet all this
is done by Baptism. And may you not therefore, as well suppose trees to grow
together, before they are planted together, as to suppose Christians to grow
together before they are planted together, and yet planted together they are by
Baptism: not into this or that particular Church, but into that one Church of
Christ, which is distributed into several parts and particular Societies.
Hereupon it is, that Baptism is called one of the Principles, or beginning
Doctrines of Christ, and likewise part of the Foundation, Heb. 6.1, 2. And what
house stands without its Principles, or is built without a foundation?

Nay the Apostle 1 Cor. 12, 13. does plainly declare Baptism, to be of so
constant and universal a use as to the inchurching of persons of all sorts,
ranks, and degrees, that were incorporated at all in his time, as that none
came into the Church, but through this door. For he says, they were all
Baptized into one body, (i. e. Church body) whether Jew^ or Gentiles, bond or
free. And if any man can name any persons, that were neither Jews nor Gentiles,
neither Bond nor Free, then I will confess, those possibly might be brought
into the Church without Baptism. But otherwise, though they were Jews, and had
been formerly entered in their Church by circumcision; yet when they became of
the Gospel Church, it was not without Baptism. Or if Gentles, a people
sometimes a far off, yet by Baptism upon their believing, were brought into
capacity of the same enjoyments with the Jews. If free, as Masters, yet not
admited without Baptism: if bound as servants, yet made equally capable of the
same Church privileges by Baptism: For so he says again, Gal. 3.27, 28. As
many of you as have been Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; there is
neither Jew nor Gentle, bond, nor free, male nor female, for ye are all one in
Christ Jesus, i. e. all having thus put on Christ, are become all one in him.

Some indeed seem somewhat to doubt, whether the Apostle speaks of water
Baptism, when he says, That by one Spirit we are all Baptized into one body;
or whether he does not rather speak of the Baptism of the Spirit without water.

Though these indeed are the doubtful thoughs of some, contrary to the
generally received opinion of men upon the place, yet I must do my honored
Querist that right, as to quit him from fellowship in that opinion, and to
acknowledge that he not long since in a discourse upon the same words, did
teach the Auditory to understand, by being Baptized by one Spirit into one
Body, and by being made to drink into one Spirit, (as is expressed in the latter
part of the verse) that the Communion which Believers have with the holy Spirit
in the two Ordinances, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, is intended by the
Apostle; and this he did, without doubt to me, according to the truth. For what
else can be intended by drinking into one Spirit, but the Saints communion in
Spirit in and by the Supper? drinking by a Synecdoche, being put both for
eating and drinking. If so, why should we not as well understand the first
Ordinance Baptism, in its proper sense for water Baptism in the former part, as
the latter Ordinance the Supper, in its proper sense in the latter part of the
verse? Neither can we reasonably unde^stand the same thing to be intended by
being Baptized by one Spirit, and by drinking into one Spirit, (which yet we
must do, if a being endued with the Spirit were all that is here meant,) for
they are said to be Baptized into one body, but to drink into one Spirit; and
surely Baptizing and drinking here, are no more the same, then the Body and the
Spirit are the same, into which they are said respectively to be Baptized, and
to drink. But clearly the Apostle seems hereby to intend to mind these
Corinthians, how that by means of the same spirit working upon all their
hearts, they became members of the same body through Baptism, and that being of
the Body, they came to have communion in Spirit, or with the Spirit in the
supper. And that which will yet further serve to evince, that it is not a
Baptism with the spirit, but a Baptism with water that is here meant, is this,
because the spirit is here set forth by the Apostle as the Agent or working
cause, and Baptism as the effect; and it is ridiculous to make both cause and
effect the same thing. It is true indeed, the scripture does speak of a being
Baptized with the spirit; but when ever it does so, it still declares either
Jesus Christ, or God the Father, as the Agent Baptizing with the spirit; but
never as making the spirit both the subject matter wherewith, and also the
Agent whereby men are Baptized in the same Baptism. See for this, Mat. 3.11.
Mark. 1.8. Luke 3.16. Act. 1.4, 5. with Luke 24.49. Acts 11.16.

The premises therefore considered, I hope it will sufficiently appear and that
to the satisfaction of any indifferent man, that in the primitive times, none
were admited to Church Communion without Baptism; and if so, have we in these
days reason to do any other wise? Ought not that which was a reason to them
not to admit Church Members into Church Fellowship without baptism, to be a
reason unto us likewise to steer the ^ame course? unless we will say, those
Gospel rules by which ^hey ordered themselves in those times, were binding
only to Christians of the first ag^ of the Gospel, but not to us now; and if
so, then farewell all Go^p^^^ Obligations; for if we may ^ake liberty to cast
away one Law of Gospel Order; and Worship, then why not two, and so three, and
in the end all? ^o which indeed these l^sser beginnings do truly tend, and I
would to God it might be more considered, and laid to heart.

Querist.
How can this ever be proved, that there were no believers unbaptized in the
Apostles days?

Respon.
I know none that does affirm any such thing, as that a be^ever was not at any
time while he was a believer unbaptized; any doubtless men were believ^rs
first, and then were bapti^ed after they began to believe. But if the Querist
intends ^hus, how will it be proved, that no believer in Church-fel^owsh^p was
unbaptiz d? Th^n the answer is, that it is proved by those and the like
Scriptures lately quoted, where its said in ^ffect, that all of all ^orts,
^^^ks and d^gr^^s, that were of the ^ody, were baptized into that body, and if
^ll were of the body by it, then none were without it.

Querist.
Be it granted, that th^re w^^^ no believ^^^ (...) the Apostles days, upon
what ground n^^w^^^ (...) practice ^ow queri^^ be justified (...) maintained.
(...) certainly know, and can satisfy themselves, (...) had been such
believers in these times (...) unbaptized, or un^^^^ baptized ^y those ^^ly
(...) have declined such communion with them, as that spe^^^^^.

Respon.
Believers now, are doub^^^ no (...) believers were then; (I do not mean (...)
nu^^^^) and if so, then the same ground that did satisfi^ ^ap^^z^^ believer,
then, in not joining in Church fellowship (...) unbaptized, though they di^
be^^eve (...) (for they did believe before they were baptized, and yet were not
admitted into Church communion till after baptized, as was proved above) will
serve to satisfy baptized believers now, touching the lawfulness of the same
practice, which is the will and appointment of Jesus Christ that so it should
be; for in that we find such a thing practiced with approbation of the
Apostles, we may well conclude it to proc^^d from their directions and
instructions, and consequently from the Lord himself, as we are taught to
infer, 1 Cor. 14.37.

II. Query.
Whether can it be pro^ed from the Scriptures, or by any argument like to
s^tisfie the conscience of any tender and consider^ng Christian that the
Apostles, or other Christians in their days, would have d^clined Church
communion with such persons, whom they judged true believers in Christ, only
because they had not been baptized after a profession of their believing?

Respon.
It does not only appear, that the Apostles and other Christians would have
declined Church Communion with believers, because not baptized, but it appears
they did do it; for it sufficiently appears that men and women did believe
before they were baptized, Act. 2.41. and 8.12.37.38. and 18 8. with many other
places: And I hope it is proved to satisfaction, in my answer to the first
Query, that believers were not admitted to Church fellowship then, till after
baptized, their believing notwithstanding; if so, what is a not admitting
less, then a refusing to admit them to such communion?

The reason why the Querist seems to conceive, that the Apostles and other
Christians would not have declined Church Communion with believers, only for
their want of baptism, runs thus:

Querist.
Considering that the Apostle Paul expressly says, That in Jesus Christ (i. e.
under the Gospel or profession of Jesus Christ in the world) neither
circumcisi^n ava^^eth any thing, not uncircumcision, but says which works by
love. Gal. 5.6. And again, That circumcision is nothing, nor uncircumcision is
nothing, but the ke^ping of the Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7.19. meaning,
that under the Gospel, neither did the observation of any external Rite or
Ceremony, Circumcision by a Syneedothe Specie, being but for all kind of
external Rites or ceremonies, avail or contribute any thing toward the
commending of any person unto God, nor yet the want of any such observation
discommend any man unto God, or prejudice his acceptance with him; but that
which was all in all unto men, and which availed any thing in and under the
Gospel, that which being found in men, rendered them accepted and approved of
God and the want of it disapproved, was such a kind of faith (not such or such
a kind of ceremony, or such or such a kind of baptism) which by the mediation
or intervening of that heavenly affection of love, utters and expresses it
self in keeping the Commandments of God.

Respon.
1. What does the Querist mean, when he says, that under the Gospel the
observation of any external rite or ceremony, avails a man nothing toward the
commending of him to God, nor does the want of it prejudice his accep^ation
with him; does he mean, that it does not avail him in any sense? (as one would
suppose, that were minded to take him in the worst sense, since his assertion
is indefinite) but surely this is not his meaning, since this would render the
Ordinances of the Gospel, Baptism and the Supper, unprofitable and vain, and
things but of like indifferency, as were those meats of which the Apostle
says, That if a man eat of them, neither is he the better, or if he eat not,
neither is he the worse, 1 Cor. 8.8.

But I presume rather that he means, that they avail not comparatively, or
else in the business of justification; our what then, will it follow, that
because these external rites, baptism and the like, do not avail unto men's
Justification when they are observed, that therefore they are not necessary
unto Church Communion? for did the external Rite of Circumcision under the Law
(which is the thing by which the Querist calculates the validity of baptism
under the Gospel) avail any more to justification, th^n baptism does now; and
yet how irrelative soever it was to justification, yet it was so necessary as
to Church Communion, as that Church Communion wa^ not to be had w^^hout it,
Genesis 17.4. Exodus 12.48. if so, then how can the Querist estimate the
usefulness and disusefulnesse of baptism, as to Church Communion by
Circumcision, as he does, and not conclude it necessary to Church Communion as
well as Circumcision was?

But I demand how the Apostles or other Christians in their times would have
known, or have been able upon good ground to have concluded, that such persons
had truly believed in Christ unto justification, and had been meet to be
admitted to communion with them, who should (if any such had been) have refused
to obey Christ in submitting to baptism, whereby they were to make proof that
they did believe in him in good earnest: Sure I am, that a refusing of John's
baptism was taken for a declared rejecting the counsel of God in the Gospel,
Luke 7.30. and how a refusing the baptism of Christ, could by the same rule be
deemed less, I understand not, unless you will suppose that the counsel of
God was not in the baptism of Christ, as well as in the baptism of John.

2. Why should our Querist estimate the Apostles judgment of Gospel Rites by
what he speaks of Circumcision? since the one was abolished, and the other
^stablished by the same Gospel; or does it follow, that because the Apostle
does oppose Faith to circumcision, that therefore Faith must be opposed to
Gospell-Ordinances, or external Rites, as he calls them? does not a Gospel
Faith exclude circumcision, and yet include baptism, as it does all other
precepts of the Gospel? and therefore pity it is, that such friends as Faith
and Gospell-Rites are, should be set together by the ears.

3. Why does the Querist make circumcision a Gospel-Rite, which is indeed a
Rite abolished by the Gospel? or does not he account it a Gospell-Rite, when
he says, that under the Gospel, circumcision by a Synecdoche Specie, is put
for all kind of external rites or ceremonies; or which I think is the same,
that under the Gospel, and the prof^ssion thereof, neither did the observation
of any external rite or cer^mony, circumcision by a Synecdoche Specie, being
put for all kind of external rites and ceremonies, etc. and if for all kind,
then certainly for Gospell-Rites and Ceremonies, for they are some of all;
neither surely would any man (much less the Querist) be so impertinent, as to
assert no external Rite available under the Gospel, because circumcision is
not, unless he held circumcision to be as much a Gospell-Rite as any other,
since it is against common sense, to say that which is greater is not available
to such or such an end, because that which is less is not; and yet more
irrational would it be, to assert the non-availablenesse of that which is,
from the non-availablenesse of that which is not, which yet would be the trip
of the Querist, if he should not hold that circumcision had some manner of
institutive being, yea and as eminent a being under the Gospel, as any other
Rite of the Gospel has.

But if it be the judgment of the Querist indeed, that circumcision is put by
the Apostle as a Synecdoche Specie of Gospell-Rites, i. e. of the same kind
with them, and as a part of them, then why does he not practice it as such? or
if he judge it to be none of them, then why does he make it a Synecdoche Specie
of them? or why does he estimate all Gospell-Rites and Ceremonies by that, and
by what is said by the Apostle concerning that? I conf^sse I should as well as
the Querist hold it an unreasonable thing for any baptized believer to
disclaim Church Communion with those that are unbaptized, only because
unbaptized; if I deemed a man's being unbaptized of no worse consequence then
his being not circumcised. Truly I cannot but think that cause hard-bested,
that is fain to beg its bread out of such desolate places, as is that of
circumcision for one, whose foundation was long since rased by the hand of the
Gospel to the very ground.

4. And lastly, but why also does the Querist oppose the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Gospel, or under the Gospel, to the keeping of the Commandments of
God? or does not he do so? who makes the observation of the Rites or Ceremonies
of the Gospel to avail nothing toward the commending of a man to God, and yet
withal, does make the keeping of the Commandments of God, as proceeding from
Faith available hereunto, which constructively, clearly supposes the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Gospel to be none of the Commandments of God. That the
Querist makes the keeping of the Commandments of God, as proceeding from
Faith, available as to a man's acceptance with God, in that very sense in which
he had utterly denied the obs^rvation of Gospell-Rites and Ceremonies to be
available, appears plainly in these words of his, viz. But that which was all
in all unto men, and which availed any thing in an^ under the Gospel, that
which being found in men ^endred them accepted and approved with God, and the
want of it disapproved, was such a kind of Faith (not such or such a kind of
cer^mony, or such or such a kind of baptism) which by the mediation or
intervening of that heavenly affection of love, utters and expresses it
self, in keep^^g the Commandments of God; so that the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Gospel (baptism being there named for one) according to the tenor of this
writing, must be none of the Commandments of God; (which yet I dare say is
none of his opinion) or else the keeping of them, as produced by Faith and love,
must be available to a man's acceptance with God, as well as the keeping of any
other his commands, which yet to say, and it is the truth, does utterly
contradict what was said before, in denying the observation of the ceremonies
of the Gospel to be available unto any such purpose.

III. Query.
Whether can it be proved by any text or passage of Scripture, either directly,
or by any tolerable consequence, that Christian Churches were in the Apostles
days constituted by baptism, or that none were reputed members of Churches, or
admitted into Christian communion with those who were baptized, but only such
wh^ were baptized likewise?

Respon.
It has been already proved (as I conceive) in the answer to the first qu^ry,
by some text or passage of Scripture, either directly, or by some tolerable
consequence, or rather both directly, and also by clear and pregnant
consequence, that Christian Churche^ were in the Apostles days constituted, if
not by baptism, yet ^ut without baptism, and cons^quently that none were (...)
into Church fellowship but such as were baptized; a^^ (...) before having
proved this already, it is not necessary to (...): But because such a thing as
this, is not so (...) i^ the eyes of those that plead it, as the Que^ (...) in
those words following, where he says, that that text Acts 2.41. is commonly,
and only so far as he knows, prece^ded for proof of such a thing; I shall
briefly point to several other texts, by which it will appear, that the
Churches i^ the Apostles days were not constituted without baptism.

That the Church of Rome was baptized, and therefore not constituted without
baptism, appears Romans 6.3. And so the Church of Corinth: the first beginning of
that Church, so far as we read of its beginning, was laid in baptism, Acts 8.8.
1 Cor. 1.13.14.15.16. and 12.13. So the Churches of Galatia, Gal. 3.27. the
Church of Ephesus, Acts 19.1.5. was surely begun by those twelve Disciples whom
Paul baptized, or some that were with him. So also the first foundation of the
Church at Philippi, was laid in baptism; for Lydia and her household, the Jailer
and his household, as you will perceive by that part of history, Acts 16. from
ver. 12. to 34. who were the first fruits of the Gospel there, were baptized.
The like may be said of the Church of Colosse, chap. 2. ver. 12. and so of the
Hebrews, Heb. 6.1.2. Acts 2.41. and therefore surely the Querist did not need
to challenge us upon tolerable consequence, to make proof that Christian
Churches were constituted by baptism, or by baptized persons in the Apostles
days, nor yet to presume, that Acts 2.41. was all the Scriptures that could be
pretended to prove such a thing.

The Querist therefore supposing all our strength for this cause, to be in that
one Scripture of Acts 2.41. he tryes sundry ways (I will not say, as Delilah
did with Sampson) to bereave us of this our strength, as follows.

Querist.
Considering that that Text Acts 2.41. (commonly, and only, so far as I know
pretended for proof of such a thing) does not ^o much as color, much less
cotton with such a supposall or conclusion, viz. That Christian Churches were
constituted be baptism (...) the Apostles days, the tenor of the place being
only this, then they that gladly received his word were baptized, and the s^^e
day there were added unto them about three thousand souls.

Respon.
However this text does not now seem to the Querist, either to color or to
cotton with the conclusion now oppos^^ by him; yet let me make bold to remember
him, (because I judge his first thoughts his best thoughts, as unto this) that
it is not many years since it did cotton well enough with the foresaid
conclusion, in the judgment and apprehension even of the Querist himself, who
in an Epistle to a friend, a copy whereof I obtained) had this saying upon this
very text, viz. Evident it is, that those that were added to the Church were
baptized before this was affirmed of them ( viz. that they were added) now
being baptized, and that in an orderly and right way, (as ye will not deny)
this did immediately qualify them for Church Fellowship, according to your
own grounds, and the truth it self. And again a little after, speaking of a
Church covenant, he thus says; That it is not lawful before baptism is
evident, because it is not lawful for a church to receive the unbaptized in to
fellowship with them, as members of their body, neither is there appearance,
example, or warrant in the Scripture for such a thing.

But it may be the Querist upon second thoughts has found cause to alter his
former opinion hereabout, (and a man may at any time with honor change for the
better) and therefore let us weigh and consider his reasons, why he is of
another mind now, which he delivers, as follows.

Querist.
For 1. It is not here said, That all they that gladly received the Word, were
baptized, but indefinitely only, they that gladly received, etc. Now indefinite
expressions in Scripture, are not always equipolent to Vniversalls, but
sometimes to partitives or particulars.

Respon.
1. Though indefinite expressions are not always equipolent to Universalls,
yet many times they are, as the Querist does tacitly grant, in saying only,
that they are not always equipolent, implying, that many times they are, which
indeed is a truth obvious in these Scriptures (and as I conceive hu^dreds more)
Mat. 20.23. Mark 2.17. and 8.9. Joh. 5.25.^9. and 17.2^.23.24. Romans 8.8. and
11.23. 1 Cor. 7.29.30.31. and 15.18.48. Gal. 3.7.9. and 5.21. and therefore it
in no wise follows, that because ^uch an indefinite expression as is here u^^d,
is not always of an universal import, or signification, that therefore it is
not so here.

But 2. The coherence of the words considered, it cannot reasonably be
otherwise conceived, but that they, is all they, that gladly received the word
were baptized: For the Apostles exhortation and counsel to the whole multitude
was, that they would repent and be baptized EVERY one of them for remission of
sins, ver. 38. and therefore if their receiving his Word gl^dly, import nothing
el^ but their believing, embracing, and willingly obeying his Word, (as I
suppose nothing less is hereby meant) then it is impossible reasonably to
conceive, but that every one of those who gladly received his Word were also
baptized, because that word which they did receive enjoined them so to be; and
for the^ not to have been baptized, as the case then stood, they would have
been so far from receiving his word gladly, as that it must have been said of
them, instead of that which is said, as it wa^ said of the Pharisees and
Lawyers, That they rejected the counsel of God against themselves, and were
not baptized, Luke 7.30.

Querist.
2. Whether is it here said, nor is it a thing in it self much probable, that
ONLY they who were baptized, were added unto them, ( i. e. to the pre-existent
number of Discirles) but only and simply, that there were the number of three
thousand added the same, day.

Respon.
1. It is to be noted, that the Querist says only thus much; that it is not
much probable etc. it should seem then in his opinion, it was somewhat
probable, though not much, that only they that were bap^ized were added to the
church; and if it be something probable, though not much in his opinion, whose
endeavor it is to render it improbable, I believe it will be found much
probable in their thoughts, that shall be indifferent Judges of the case.

For 2 Of whom does Luke here speak, when he said, that the same day there
added unto them about three thousand souls: Have we any reason in the world to
imagine that he intends any other persons then those of whom he is speaking, to
wit, those that gladly received the Word, and were baptized? For what occasion
is here ministered to any man's thoughts, by any thing mentioned in or about the
text, to pitch upon any other then those very persons, the mention of whom does
next and immediately precede the words in question? and which looks like the
most genuine and least strained sense, either to say, Then they that gladly
received his word were baptized, and the same day there was added [of them]
about 3000. souls, or to say, there was added of them, and some others (of whom
yet there is no mention made) about three thousand souls? But it seems we must
expect to have nothing granted, though never so probable, that favors our
cause, unless every word and tittle amount to the evidence of a demonstration:
It were well indeed if our friends would themselves walk by the same rule, and
give to us the same measure they require of us.

But I pray, who, or what should they be, besides those that gladly received
the word, and were baptized, that you suppose were added to the church?

Querist.
Within which number, viz. of 3000. it is the probable opinion of some, that
the children and families of those, who are said to have gladly received the
word, are comprehended, it being no ways likely, scarce possible, that 3000.
men should distinctly hear the voice of a man speaking, especially unless we
should suppose, that those 3000. stood nearest unto him that spoke, and with
best advantage to hear, there being many thousands more present, which can
hardly be the supposition of any considering man in the case in hand.

Respon.
Not to take much notice how far the probable opinion of some will be accepted
for proof against us, when nothing but demonstrations will be accepted on our
behalf, I shall first demand of the Querist, that if the children and families
of those that gladly received the word, and were baptized, were indeed part of
that number of 3000. that were added to the church; or to the Discsples, (as he
says it is the probable opinion of some that they were) then I demand, I say,
whether these children and families were baptized or no? If he shall say they
were not, then he puts to rebuke another of his opinions, which is, that when
believers themselves were baptized, their children were baptized also; to the
belief of which he would persuade us, at least as probable, in his 24. Quaere
from Acts 16.15.33. 1 Cor. 1.16. If he say they were baptized, why then, though
it should be granted that these were some of the number, yet how would this
prove, that others besides those that were baptized were added to the church,
which yet is the thing he was to prove?

But then 2. to put the matter quite out of doubt, that none of the children of
those that gladly received the word, were part of the 3000. that were added to
the church, (if by children, he mean little children, or infants; for else if
they were adult ones, they might gladly receive the word, and be baptized as
well as their parents) it sufficiently appears, in that it is said, They (i.
e. they that were added, as well as they to whom they were added) continued
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread,
and in prayers: and I presume the Querist will not say, that little children,
infants, did continue steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and
in breaking of bread and prayers; and if not, then they were none of the number
of the 3000. that were added to the church: and so I think by this time the
probable opinion of some in this behalf, is rendered more then probably, to be a
weak, groundless, and erroneous opinion.

3. To remove that doubt touching the improbability, that 3000. men should
distinctly hear the voice of a man speaking, unless we will suppose them to
stand nearest to him that spoke. 1. Evident it is, that they did hear, and so
hear, as to receive the word gladly, but whether they were nearest to him that
spoke or no, is more then he or I can tell, or need to know. But 2. There is no
necessity to suppose that all the whole 3000. did all of them hear and convert
in the self-same hour or juncture of time; for one while the Apostle might
preach to one company of them, and another while to another company, and yet
this would not hinder, but that they might all be converted, baptized, and
added to the church the self-same day.

3. Neither do I see any necessity to hold, that all these 3000. that were in
one day converted, baptized, and added to the church, were thus converted and
baptized by Peter only, but by him and the rest of the Apostles, or by them and
the other Disciples also. For 1. it is said, that Peter standing up with the
eleven, lift up his voece, and said unto them, etc. and does not this employ,
that the eleven did take part with him, and assist him in the work? 2. These
men of Israel being pricked at their hearts, they do not cry out to Peter only,
but the text says, They said to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, men and
brethren, what shall we do, ver. 37. and therefore it should seem, the rest of
the Apostles, as well as Peter, had ministered occasion to them of this demand.
Nay 3. which is yet more, its said ver. 4. that they all (to wit the whole
number of Disciples that were present together, being filled with the Holy
Ghost) began to speak with tongues, as the spirit gave them utterance; which
certainly was to the understanding of the multitude, and also about such things
as did much affect them, for its said, the multitude were confounded at it, and
marvelled, saying, we do hear them speak in our own tongues, the wonderful
works of God, ver. 6.7.8.11. All which things considered I think it will not be
irrational to suppose, that others besides Peter might be isntrumental in the
conversion of those 3000.

Querist.
Nor 2. is it said, or so much as intimated or hinted in the least, that any of
the whole number of the 3000. who were added unto them, were added by means, or
upon the account of their being baptized, although this addition be not
mentioned till after their baptizing. It is ten degrees mere probable, that
their believing or Discipleship, which were precedent to their baptizing, and
not their being baptized, were the reason and ground of Lukes saying, they were
added to the Church; considering first, that the original, main and principal
foundation of the holy brother hood amongst the Saints, is not the ceremony of
their baptism, but their fellowship and communion in the divine nature, and
inward relation to the same Christ, by one and the same precious faith.

Respon.
We do not affirm, that they were added to that particular church by baptism
immediately, without any other act intervening; but we say, they were not added
without baptism, and so much is in effect acknowledged by the Querist himself,
in that he says, this addition is not mentioned till after their being
baptized, and therefore their baptism must needs go before their addition to
the church, unless we will suppose Luke to have begun at the wrong end of this
part of his Narrative, in mentioning that first, which was last done, and that
last, which was first done, and if so, then according to the order of things
done, they were first added to the church, and then afterward did gladly
receive the word to conversion, and were baptized, which I suppose no man is so
void of common sense as to believe.

And if their baptism did precede their addition to the church, then why does
the Querist strive so as he does, to interesse their believing or Discipleship,
with exclusion of their baptism, as the reason and ground of Lukes saying, they
were added to the church? For if he does not exclude baptism in recounting the
reason of that addition, then we are agreed; for there is no question, but that
their gladly receiving the Word, or believing the Word, or becoming Disciples
by the Word, was one reason or ground of their addition to the church, but not
the only one, f^r Luke mentions their being baptized, as well as that; and why
should any man go about to separate them? The question is not, whether faith or
baptism is the original, main, and principal ground of the holy brotherhood
amongst the Saints, as he calls it; we willingly grant, (and therefore could
have spared him the labor of proving) that faith has the precedence herein:
But what will it therefore follow, that because believing is the original and
principal ground of the holy brotherhood, or church-relation, that therefore
baptism is none at all? does he not know, that though the Apostle gives
repentance from dead works, and faith toward God, the first place in the
foundation, yet he assigns baptism its place, and standing next to them in the
same foundation, Heb. 6.1.2.

Querist.
2. That it cannot be demonstratively proved from the Scriptures that those
hundred and twenty Disciples, Acts 1.15. unto which it is here said, that 3000.
were added, were or had been all of them baptized; nor can it any whit more be
proved, that the Apostles themselves mentioned Acts 1.13. had been baptized,
then that John the Baptist was baptized.

Respon.
1: Suppose the Scripture no where mentions where, when; or by whom those 120.
Disciples were baptized, is this any good reason to conclude therefore, that
they were not baptized at all, or will the Querist think, that becaase we do
not (a^ to the best of my memory we do not) read in Scripture of the baptizing
of the Church of Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and
Laodicea, that therefore none of these Churches were baptized? or because we
read only of the baptism of 3000. of the Church at Jerusalem, that therefore
all the rest, when that Church increased to the number of 5000. Acts 4.4. yea
to many thousands Acts 21.20. were unbaptized? Is it not enough that the
Commission was to baptize all of all Nations, who were first made Disciples by
teaching, Mat. 28.19. and that we have frequent mention in the Scriptures, of
the Apostles and other Disciples, their walking and acting according to this
Commission; I say, is not this enough to cause us to conclude, that all those
that were Disciples indeed, and knew it to be their duty to be baptized, were
baptized accordingly, unless we will be so uncharitable toward them, as to
conceive them guilty of living in the breach of one of the known precepts of
the Gospel: Neither can we reasonably imagine any of them to be ignorant of
this, viz. that submitting to baptism was their duty, inasmuch as this was one
of the first things they were directed to do, in order to their becoming
Christians, Acts 2.38. and 8.12. and 16.33. and 22.16.

2. It should seem that these 120. Disciples had continued with Christ, and
kept company with the Apostles, all the times that Jesus went in and out among
them, beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day, in which he was
taken up from among them, as we have it, Acts 1.21.22. and if so, is not their
being baptized sufficiently signified, where it is said of Christ, that he
baptized, and all men came to him, John 3.26.22. unless we will suppose, that
he caused others to be baptized that did not follow him, and did excuse those
that did?

3. As for the Apostles themselves, who were mentioned Acts 1.13. to suppose
them not to be baptized, is to suppose them to be Pharisee-like, who as our
Savior says, did bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and lay them on
men's shoulders, when they themselves would not touch them with one of their
fingers: for we see they imposed baptism as a duty upon other men, Acts 2.38.
and therefore how can we think so evil of them, as not to conceive that they
had begun to them in the same way themselves, or if they had not, might not
that multitude at Jerusalem, upon whom they urged it as their duty, have said
unto them, Physicians heal your selves? or was it any less the duty of such
men, who became Apostles, then of other men? since we find Paul that great
Apostle pressed to it by direction from Christ Jesus, before he was to act as
an Apostle, Acts 22.10. compared with ver. 16.

4. Suppose the Apostles had had no more opportunity of being baptized, then
John Baptist had (which yet cannot reasonably be supposed, nor is it certain
that John himself was not baptized, since he said to Christ, I have need to be
baptized of thee, Mat. 3 14.) yet what is this to an ordinary case, or how
would this excuse them of baptism in order to Church Fellowship, who want no
such opportunity.

Querist.
3. (And lastly) That had the Church, or persons, to whom these 3000. are said
to have been added, been estimated by their having been baptized, (which must
be supposed, if those who are added to them, are said to have b^ene added upon
account of their being baptized) their number must needs have far exceeded an
hundred and twenty, considering the great numbers, and vast multitudes of
persons that had been baptized by John, Matthew. 3.5.6. compared with Mark 1.5.
Luke 3.7.21. as also by Christ himself, and his Disciples, John 3.22.26. yea,
had the Church been estimated, or constituted by baptism, the Evangelist Luke,
intending (questionless Acts 4.4.) to report the increase of the Church, and
progress of the Gospel, with as much advantage as truth would afford, had
prevaricated with the cause which he intended to promote, in reporting their
number to have been about 5000. only, when as upon the said supposition and
tenor of the late premises, he might with as much truth have reported them
about 40000. yea and many more.

Respon.
All that is argued by the Querist in this particular, is built upon a wrong
ground, or rather upon a supposed ground, which is indeed supposed by him to be
held by us, but is not; and that is, that the Disciples or Church, were in
respect of their number, estimated by their being baptized, that is, only by
their being baptized, for if he do not mean so, he cou d not suppose that Luke
might have reported the number of Disciples to be forty thousand, instead of
that he does report them to be, upon such an account. But the truth is, we do
not estimate the Church or number of Disciples, only by their being baptized,
but by their being baptized in conjunction with their professed believing in,
and owning of Jesus Christ crucified, and risen again, as the Son of God, and
Savior of the world. And accordingly the 3000. that are said to be added to
the Church, Acts 2. are described, not by their baptism only, but by their
gladly receiving the Word, and their being baptized too, ver. 41. and what word
was it that they did gladly receive and believe, but (together with others)
that word of the Apostle, by which he declared Jesus whom they had crucified,
to have been raised from the dead, and to have been made both Lord and
Christ, ver. 24.32.33.

Both these qualifications then being requisite to denominate persons of the
number of the Church, Luke could not have duly estimated the number of
Disciples, or of the Church only by that baptism which persons had received
before Christ was crucified (though its true also on the other side, that
neither could he truly estimate them to be of that number without any baptism
at all) because the greatest part of those that were baptized by John, into the
expectation of Christ to come, yet d^d not believe in him, or own him as the
Christ of God when he was come, much less they, and many who had been
baptized by the Disciples of Christ, did believe in him, his being crucified
notwithstanding; Luke had no reason to number them with the Church, though
bap^ized, who had fallen from the Faith into which they were baptized, and
c^nsequently had denied their baptism it self.
so that all the account that Luke could truly give of the number of the
Church, or of Disciples, was only of such baptized persons, who after the death
and Resurrection of Christ, did believe in him, which it seems amounted to no
more then about an hundred and twenty.

And as for those who had been baptized by John into the expectation of Christ
to come, and yet did not own him when he was come; or else if they did believe
in him for a season, yet did afterward renounce him, either before, or upon his
being crucified; these were so far from being reputed of the number of the
Gospell-church, upon account of their baptism received formerly, either from
John, or Christ, as that they were directed and exhorted by the Apostle, as
well to be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, as to repent for the
remission of sin, before they could be admitted into the Church, or be counted
of its number, their former baptism notwithstanding, Act. 2.38 41. For who can
imagine, but that if not all, yet that many of the 3000. that were baptized
upon the preaching of Peter and the rest, had been baptized before by John; or
who can conceive, but that if not all, yet that many, at the least, of that
great multitude unto whom the Apostle preached at that time when the 3000. were
converted, had been baptized by John, those Scriptures considered, cited by
the Querist, Mat. 3.5.6. Mark 1.5. Luke 3.7.21. where it is said, that all the
Land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, were ALL baptized. And again, that ALL
the people were baptized; and yet the Apostles exhortation to these inhabitants
of Jerusalem, that were now gathered together to the number of many thousands,
was, that they would repent and be baptized EVERY ONE of them, and as many as
did receive this word, were baptized accordingly, and so added to the church.

Since then the owning of Christ crucified, together with a being baptized in
his name, was requisite to render men of the number of Disciples, as a Church:
Hence it came to pass, that Luke could not estimate their number to be more
then 120. Acts 1.1.15. nor above about 5000. Acts 4.4. notwithstanding more had
been baptized by John, unless more of them had adhered to Christ crucified, as
these did; so then, though baptism be one of the requisites, not without which,
yet it is not the only requisite, by which the number of the church is to be
estimated. By this time therefore I hope it does appear, that this Acts 2.41.
does both color and cotton (to use the Querists own words) with the supposal
or conclusion, viz. that churches, or at least the first Gospell-church, (a
Sampler to the rest) was not constituted without baptism, notwithstanding all
that by the Querist has been offered to the contrary.

And if the first church or churches might not be constituted without baptism,
then neither may those that succeed them, because the same reasons that made
baptism necessary hereunto with them, makes it necessary also unto us; for
Gospell-order, settled by Apostollicall authority and direction, as this was,
has not lost any of its native worth, efficacy, or obliging virtue, by disuse
and discontinuance, upon occasion of the Papal defection, but ought to be the
same to us now, who are studious of a thorough reformation, as it was unto them
in the first beginning of such order, or rather according to David's resolution
upon a like occasion ( Psalm. 119.126.127.128.) to be the more closely adhered
to; and the vindication and observation of such Gospell-rules to be managed
with so much the more zeal, after the example of Christ himself, who as well as
the Psalmist, was even eaten up with the zeal of his fathers house, John.
2.16.17. when he found corruption crept into it.

IV. Quaere.
Whether did not the Church at Rome, in the Apostles days, and so also the
Church in Galatia, hold Church Communion with some who were not baptized,
considering 1. That the Apostle to the former writes thus; Know ye not, that
so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death?
Romans 6.3. and to the later (after the same manner) thus; For as many of you as
have been baptized into Christ, Gal. 3.27. 2. That this Particle as many as
(used in both places) is in such constructions as these, always partitive,
distinguishing or dividing the entire number of persons spoken of, some from
others by the character or property specified, or at least supposes a
possibility of such a distinction.

Respon.
1. I cannot grant the Querist his assertion, viz. that this particle as many
as, is in such constructions as these always partitive, though I grant that
many times it is; for when the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6.1. Let as many servants
as are under the yoke, count their own Masters worthy of all honor; does he
thereby suppose or imply, that there were some servants, who were not under the
yoke, or that there were some servants, who were not to count their own
Masters worthy of all honor? both which must be supposed notwithstanding, if
this form or manner of speaking, as many as, be always to be understood
partitively, or as dividing the entire number of persons spoken of, which yet
to suppose, who sees not how absurd it would be?

Object. If it be said, this exhortation, Let as many servants as, etc. does
intentionally respect so many believing servants as were under the yoke, and
that therefore in respect of other servants, who were not believers, it is
partitive.

Answ. If so, then the answer is, that so do those expressions used Romans 6.3.
Gal. 3.27. intentionally only respect those at Rome, and in Galatia, who did
believe, and were baptized, and therefore is partitive, in respect of others
the Inhabitants of those places, dividing those of these churches, from others
dwelling in the same places, who were not of these churches; so that if that
objected should be granted, yet we shall gain as much or more by it one way,
then we shall lose by it in the other.

2. The coherence consulted, will evince the expressions so many of us as, and
as many as, to comprehend all those persons of whom those churches did consist:
For consider unto whom does the Apostle speak, Romans 6.3. does he not speak to
the whole church, and every individual soul of them, in the 1.2. ver. when he
says, What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that grace may abound?
God forbid: How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? And if
these words in the 1.2. ver. respect the whole church, as they must be supposed
to do, unless you will suppose that the Apostle did grant a liberty to some of
the church to continue in sin, and to live therein; then those words ^n ver. 3.
Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death? are interrogatively propounded, not only to the same
persons unto which the former words relate, but also as an argument or reason
why none of them should live any longer in sin, which is the thing from which
he was dissuading, not only some of them, but even all of them, in the
foregoing words, and which he improves in an argumentative way, throughout the
greatest part of the chapter. And it would not befit the wisdom of any
ordinary man, much less of a great Apostle, to make choice of a reason or
motive to enforce his exhortation or persuasion, which is of less extent in
the tendency and concernment of it, then are the persons which he does exhort,
or dehort, which yet is a piece of weakness, of which you must suppose this
Apostle to be here guilty, unless you do conclude, that all those of the
church at Rome were dissuaded from continuing any longer in sin, upon this
ground, because that they had all been baptized into the death of Christ, viz.
a conformity to his death, as well as a belief of it: In a word, if the whole
church had not been under the motive, the whole church could not be pressed by
it, as here you see they are.

And for that other place Gal. 3.27. the Apostle in ver. 26. had asserted them,
viz. those to whom he now writes, To be all the children of God by Faith in
Christ Jesus, i. e. were now looked upon as children of God, by their
confessing and owning of Christ Jesus, of which he gives this account, ver. 27.
because they had put on Christ in baptism; ye are all the children of God by
Faith in Christ Jesus; for, or because as many of you as have been baptized
into Christ, have put on Christ; as if he should say, if the owning and
professing of Christ, does denominate men to be the children of God now under
the Gospel, as indeed it does, then ye are all the children of God, because by
being baptized into Christ, ye have all of you put him on, that is so, as to
appear with him where ever you become, as you do appear with the clothes you
wear. But now most certain it is, that they could not all of them have been
denominated the children of God by faith in Christ, upon account of their being
baptized into Christ, which yet we see they are, unless they had been all of
them baptized into Christ ind^^^.

Besides, does it not appear in the return that is made to the first and third
Quaeries, that in the Apostles days none were inchurched without baptism; and
if so, then these places cannot import the contrary.

V. Query.
Whether did not the Church at Corinth, in the Apostles days, entertain
members, and hold communion with those who had not been baptized, considering
that he demands thus of this Church, else what shall they do which are
baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized
for the dead? 1 Cor. 15.29. Or does not this imply, that there was a corrupt
and superstitious practice on foot in this Church, to baptize one or other of
the surviving kindred or friends, in the name of such persons respectively, who
died unbaptized, and if so, is it not a plain case, that there were some of
these members, who lived and died unbaptized?

Respon.
1. Though it should be granted (which may not) that there was such a
superstitious thing practiced, by some of that church, in the behalf of some of
their friends, who died unbaptized, yet it is not necessary at all to suppose
those dead friends of theirs to have been of the church whilst they were
alive, but much more probable it would be, (if the practice it self were
probable) that the dead, in behalf of whom such a thing was performed, were of
the Catechumeni, or others, who were not of the church, but such, who though
they were under some Nurture, and in a way of learning somewhat of the Gospel,
yet died before they were either baptized, or admitted as Members of the Church?

But 2. It is but a mere conjecture (and as will be found, not only without
ground, but against reason) that the Apostle in the forecited words, should
have respect unto such a superstitious practice, as that specified.

For 1. Its no ways probable, that Paul would argue this great Article of the
Gospel, the Resurrection, from a superstitious custom, or would draw such a
clean thing, out of that which was so unclean.

2. Much less is it probable, that he should do so without taxing th^^ by way
of reproof for it; for might not they have been very apt to have concluded the
Apostles approbation of their practice, should he have produced it as useful
to convince them of the doctrine of the Resurrection, without declaring his
dislike of it? 3. Paul's interrogatory indefinitely propounded to the whole
church, supposes them all to have been baptized, 1 Cor. 1.13. were ye baptized
in the name of Paul? and that saying of his does assert it, 1 Cor. 12.13. we
are all baptized into one body.

3. Is it not far more probable, and more agreeable to other Scriptures, and
with the coherence of the Text, to suppose: 1. That the Apostle should herein
mind them of their baptism in water, wherein the Resurrection is figuratively
represented, ( Romans 6.4.5. Col. 2.12.) and by which when they first received
the Gospel, they made profession of their Faith, touching the Resurrection. Or
else 2. That hereby is intended the baptism of afflictions, (elsewhere mentioned,
Mat. 20.22. Luke 12.50.) considering that the Apostle immediately subjoyns the
mention of his own and others hazzards and sufferings, saying, And why stand we
in jeopardy? I protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus, I die
daily: if after the manner of men, I have fought with beasts at Ephesus; what
advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? let us eat and drink, to morrow we
shall die, ver. 30.31.32. as if he should say, why have ye suffered trouble and
persecution for the Gospel (which is a kind of death, for he here says of
himself, that he died daily, meaning his sufferings) if ye do not believe the
Resurrection? and why do we stand yet in further jeopardy? nay then rather let
us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die.

These interpretations surely carry a far greater probability to answer the
drift of the Apostle, then that given by the Quaerist: But surely there is
little edification or satisfaction, when only one doubtful thing is brought to
prove another, or rather when one improbable thing must serve instead of a
proof, to make that seem probable, which of it self is altogether improbable:
But is not that cause barren of proofs, and destitute of friends, that must be
beholding to such strangers to stand by it, and succor it?

VI. Query.
Whether when Paul soon after his conversion, assayed to join to the Church and
Disciples at Jerusalem, (Acts 9.26.) did this Church make any enquiry after his
baptism, as whether he had been baptized or no, in order to his reception among
them; or did they know he had been baptized? or did Barnabas in giving
satisfaction to the Apostles and Church, concerning his meetnesse to be
admitted into communion with them, so much as mention his being baptized, but
only declared unto them, how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had
spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus,
Act. 9.17.

Respon.
1. We have no good reason to suppose, much less conclude, that Paul was
admitted to communion with the church, until the church had knowledge, either
from himself, Barnabas, or some other, of his having obeyed the Gospel, in
embracing the first principles of it, of which baptism is one; for how should
they know him to be a Disciple of Christ, and so meet for communion with them,
but by knowing that he had at least done the first things of a Disciple, of
which we find all along this history of the Acts of the Apostles, a being
baptized to be one; and doubtless less satisfaction would not serve them
concerning him, then would concerning another Disciple, who had never appeared
in that height of opposition against them, as he had done:

2. When Barnabas declared to them, how he had seen the Lord in the way, and
had spoken to him, did he not declare what it was that the Lord spoke to him?
if so, then how can it be thought, but that the relation of his being baptized
must come in at the one end of his report, inasmuch as that direction which the
Lord gave Saul, about his going into straight street, in order to his further
information touching the will of the Lord concerning him, led him to rehearse
the carriage of Annanias toward Saul, and consequently his baptizing of him,
unless you will suppose Barnabas to have made a broken and imperfect relation
of the Lords dealing with him, which you cannot lightly do, without supposing
Barnabas, either weak, or careless in the business. But surely the Querist
does not think that Barnabas used no more words in his relation, then what are
here recorded by Luke, since we have frequently, if not for the most part, but
the brief heads of things recorded, that were done and spoken by Christ, the
Apostles, and other Disciples, John 21.25. Acts 2.40.

3. Might not the Quaerist with as much reason have quaeried, whether the
church (upon Paul's assaying to join with them) did make any enquiry at all,
whether he were converted to the faith or no, as whether he was baptized or no;
for indeed here is no express mention made of the churches enquiring after the
one, any more then the other, only its said, They were afraid of him, and
believed not that he was a Disciple. But what, shall we therefore think, that
the church did not at all enquire of these things concerning him, in order to
their receiving of him into communion with them?

4. We do not find here, that Paul himself spoke any one word to them, when he
assayed to join himself with them, only its said, That when Saul was come to
Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself to the Disciples: But what shall we
therefore think that Paul made no relation to the Disciples, of the Lords
dealing with him, in order to their receiving of him? or if we will suppose he
did, (as no one, I think, is so void of sense, as to suppose otherwise) can we
suppose less, then that he should declare to them, what the Lord had done for
him by the Ministry of Annanias, and if so, his being baptized? especially
considering, that where we find Paul upon another occasion, not greater then
this, making the relation of that great providence of the Lord toward him in
his conversion, he does particularly mention his baptism, Acts 22.5. to 16.
There being then so little in this Quaere, as you see, I confess I have not a
little marvelled, to see some make so much of it as they have done.

The substance of the seventh Quaere being only this, viz. Whether many things
may not lawfully be done, for which there is no example in Scripture, of like
action in all circumstances, and whether therefore it is not lawful for
baptized, to join with unbaptized persons in Church Communion, though it should
be granted that it cannot be proved that ever they did so in the Apostles days.

For answer to this, I shall refer to what is giv^ (...) answer to the 1.
Quaere, this only I shall add, that many things may lawfully be done, for which
there is no example in Scripture of like action in all circumstances, yet it
does not therefore follow, that such an action may be lawful, which is
contrary to such examples in Scripture, which are Recorded for our direction
and imitation, which yet is the thing the Querist is to make good, before he is
like to satisfy me in this particular, what ever he may do to others.

QUERIE VIII.
Whether is an Action or Practice, suppose in matters relating to the Service
or Worship of God, upon this account evicted to be unlawful, becaause it has
neither Precept (I mean no particular or express Precept, wherein the Action
or Practice it self, with all the Circumstances under which it becomes lawful
is named) or Example to justify it?

Respon.
An action relating to the worship of God, is not to be concluded unlawful,
though it have no particular nor express precept or example in so many words,
upon which to bottom it, if there be any general rule which will safely
warrant it, as there is for admitting women to the Table of the Lord, or for a
Ministers preaching, though to young men only, from Rev. 22.3. or 4. which are
two of the Q^erists instances. But if such an action be not only void of
particular precept or example, yea and of general precept too, but is also
contrary to, and a transgression of a general rule and precept, and a swerving
from particular example stamped with Divine approbation; then I hope it is not
lawful, but unlawful, which yet clee^ly is the case of Baptized persons
holding communion with unbaptiztd, in as much as it crosses that holy order of
the Gospel, commission of Christ, and constant practice of primitive
believers, Recorded in Scripture for our learning, and which is ^o be observed
and kept inviolably by all those servants of Christ, who are not willing to
exchange Christ's own Order and Method, for that which is but of Man; and who
are not willing to give way to Antichristian obtrusions, to justle out ways
sanctified by the Lord Jesus for the feet of his Saints. See more for this in
the answer to Queries 1. and 3.

QUERIE IX.
Whether when God has by Faith purified the hearts of a people walking in
Christian brotherhood and fellowship together, has he not Sanctified them? And
in case any person shall now despise or decline their fellowship as unholy,
does he not sin against that Heavenly admonition delivered by special
Revelation unto Peter; Act. 10.15.
What God has cleansed (i. e. Purified or Sanctified) call not thou (or make
not thou) common? Or can a man lightly call, or make that common, which God
has sanctified in a more opprebrious and contumelious way, then by flying from
it as polluted or unholy?

Respon.
If this Querie suppose that Baptized believers withdraw Communion from
unbaptized believers, as judging them unholy, common or unclean, as it must
suppose, or else its nothing to the purpose, then there is a great mistake in
the Querist. For I for my part, do judge many persons who are not Baptized,
Holy and clean, and their hearts purified to a good degree, and yet I cannot
but judge withal, that the way of holding Church Communion with these, without
their being Baptized, a common way (too common indeed) and such as God has not
Sanctified. And therefore the question is not touching the state and condition
of their persons, Godward in resp^ct of justification, but of their way of
holding Communion without Baptism; and whether this be as well approved by
God, as their persons are accepted with him upon their believing; if not, we
may love and honor their persons, and yet disl^ke their way of Communion,
without offense to God.

Communion with them then, is declined for their way-sake, because we cannot
have Communion with their persons, in a Church Way Behold Israel after the
flesh, are not they which eat of the Sac^ifice, partake^s of the Alta^? etc. 1
Cor. 10.18.
without having Communion with their way it self, which I must witness
against, as that which God has not sanctified by any word of his, that I know
of. And therefore our declining Communion upon these terms, is not a calling,
or a making of them, but theirway-Common or unclean.

The 10. and 11. Queries importing much what the same thing, I shall make the
same answer serve both.

X. and XI. Queries contracted.
Whether need a man contract guilt of sin, by walking in a society of men
Christian and holy, though they have some practice among them which he cannot
approve of, in case he openly declare his dislike of it, and be not constrained
to communicate in it? Or whether a difference in judgment, in or about a
matter of doubtful disputation, be a sufficient bar to Church Communion?

Respon.
1. There is little question to be made, but that persons who are in and of a
Church duly constituted, may continue their Communion there, notwithstanding
there may be some opinion or pract^ce among them of a doubtful disputation;
yea, though there be something a mong them which are certain to them to be of
an evil import, provided they faithfully witness against such evils: Nay
surely it is not only lawful, but it is the duty of men in such cases to
continue their Communion; that they that are stronger, might help the weaker,
and be a means of purging the Church from that which does defile.

But then 2. Though this be true, yet what is this to warrant a man's holding
Communion with a company of believers, and acting with them as a Church, when
he knows they are no Church according to Gospell-rule? It is not a company of
Stones and pieces of Timber lying on a heap together that make a House, till
they are put in order, and into the form of a building: nor can you properly
and truly call that heap a House, till the Foundation be first laid, and then
the superstructure set upon it. In like manner, neither are a company of
Believers a Church, because they are a company of Believers, nor can they duly
act as such, or be called or accounted such in a Gospel sense, and according
to order thereof, (which is the rule by which we must judge) till they are
built together in an orderly way, the Foundation first (which in primitive
Churches was never laid without Baptism) and the superstructure after. Ye also
as lively stones, are built (or be ye built) up a spiritual House, 1 Pet. 2.5.
They were first lively stones, and then built up a spiritual house, they were
not a spiritual house because living stones, until these living stones were
built up: and can any man think that there was any one spiritual house in the
New Testament, whose Foundation was laid without Baptism? If not, as it is
most certain he cannot reasonably so think: then give me leave to think, that
they build without their rule, and not according to the method of the wise
Master-Buliders of the first Churches, who both lay Foundation, and put on the
Top-Stone too, without Baptism.

For a man then to hold communion with a company of Believers, not in Gospel
order, and to act with them as if they were, and yet to witness against such
practice of theirs too, what is it else, then for a man to condemn himself in
that which he allows, Romans 14.22. yea and to make himself a transgressor in
building what he destroys? Gal. 2.18. This error then of non-baptisme, being
an error, not of Believers in a Church, duly so called, but an error against
the way of their becoming a Church according to Gospel form; it is not a
man's reproving this practice in them will justify his holding communion with
them as a Church, no more then a man's reproving a woman for living with
himself as his wife, because not duly married to him, will privilege him in
that communion with her. If this be not so, I demand of the Querist, why he and
others could not have held communion with persons Episcopal and Presbyteriall
in their judgments, if Believers though in no such Church State and order as
he now judges necessary, if his declaring his d^sl ke of their neglect of that
Order he now holds necessary, would have excused the matter?

QUERIE XII.
Whether did the Lord Christ, pointing to any River or Water, say, Upon this
rock will I build my Church?

Respon.
I would also querie (since I know no reason why such a Querie should be put)
why or for what cause the Querist should make such a Querie as this? and
whether he did ever hear, or does expect ever to hear such a senseless
assertion from any the Baptists whom he thus interogates? or does any thing
they say amount to as much? if not, why should it be insinuated as if their
opinion or practice held confederacy with such a piece of ridiculosity as this?

Querist.
Or is there the softest whisper, or gentlest breathing in Scripture, that a
true Church of Christ cannot be constituted, no not of the soundest Believers
in the world, unless they have been baptized after their believing, how or
after what manner soever they have been haptised before?

Respon.
If Baptism have been administered according to Gospel-rule to men who by
profession appeared or seemed true Believers when they were baptized, though at
the time of their baptizing they were not so indeed in the sight of God, it is
not (so far as I know) necessary to their being of a Church, to be baptized
again when they come truly to believe. But if persons before they did believe,
have not been baptized at all, with any Baptism that will hold weight in the
balance of the Sanctuary, but only with such which essentially differs from
Scripture-Baptisme, both in respect of the Subject, and external form of
Administration, (as Infant Baptism does) in which respects it is of no more
validity then no Baptism at all; then it is necessary that such persons should
be baptized after or upon their believing, in order to their Union and
Communion with the Church. And that this was the constant, and for ought
appears to the contrary, the universal practice of the Apostles and Primitive
Believers, and that in pursuance of the comm^ssion of Christ (and therefore
ought to be the resolved practice of Believers now, from which no pretenses
should turn them aside) is not only whispered and gently breathed, but loudly
declared by many Scriptures, lifting up their voice together in this t^stimony,
as you may see in my answer to the first and third Queries.

QUERIE XIII.
Whether is an error or mistake about the adequate or appropriate subject of
Baptism, of any worse consequence or greater danger, then an error or mistake
about Melchisedech's Father, as viz. in case a man should suppose him to have
been Noah, when as he was some other man?

Respon.
I would likewise demand of the Querist, whether there would be any more danger
for a man to list Soldiers in the name of the Parliament of England, who has
no Commission so to do, then there would be for him to mistake the name or
person of a man, the knowledge of whom does nothing at all concern him? If
there be, then I shall not doubt to affirm, that there is more danger for a
man to invocate the name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and in their name to
say, I baptize thee such or such a one, when neither Father, Son, nor Holy
Ghost have given him Commission so to do, (which yet is the case (indeed the
crime) of mistaking the true or right subject of Baptism) then there is in
mistaking the man that was Melchisedechs Father. For the one is a
counterfeiting or feigning of a Commission from Heaven, and the fathering of an
untruth upon, or the speaking of an untruth in the name of the Lord to provoke
him to anger: and the other, viz. to suppose Melchisedechs Father to be Noah,
in case he were some other man, would be an error only of less import, as,
viz, for a man to go about to make himself wise above that which is written,
in a business that concerns him not to know, and wherein his ignorance would
not prejudice him, but help him in the application of that resemblance which
the Apostle makes between Christ and Melchisedech. Heb. 7.3.

QUERIE XIV.
Whether may not the question, about the appropriate subject of Baptism, as it
is stated by the brethren of new Baptism, in opposition to the judgment and
practice (almost) of the whole Christian world, justly be numbered amongst those
questions, which the Apostle calls foolish, and unlearned, and advises both
Timothy and Titus to avoid, as being questions which engender strife, and are
unprofitable and vain? 2 Timothy 2.23. Tit. 3.9.

Respon.
1. If the Querie had been, whether such a question as this, viz. who was
Melchisedech's Father, whether Noah or some other man: or whether the law of
Circumcision in the equity of it be not yet in force as to the intituling of
Infants to Baptism, and to be as a Standard by which to judge the observation
of Gospel Rites unavaileable as to the commending of a man to God; I say if the
Querie had been, whether such questions as these are not to be numbered with
those that are unlearned, unprofitable, and vain? I could easily have
consented in the affirmative: because the Apostle in that place quoted by the
Querist, Tit. 3.9. does point at these questions about Genealogies, and
strivings about the Law, as specially intended by him. And what questions or
strivings about the Law, if not whether Circumcision were not yet in use under
the Gospel, since the same Apostle in the same Epistle, chap. 1.10. calls those
of the Circumcision vain talkers; and vain talkers, or vain talk, or such
questions, as were unprofitable and vain, agree well enough to meet in the
same persons.

2. But that the question about the appropriate subject of Baptism, if stated
according to truth, though in opposition to (almost) the whole world called
Christian, or if but agitated and debated in order to the finding out the mind
of God thereabout, should deserve to be numbered with those foolish and
unlearned questions which are unprofitable and vain, I cannot believe: Because
the appropriate subject of Baptism is essential to the Ordinance it self;
neither is that any more the Baptism of Christ, which is applied to any other
subject then he has appointed, then that would be the punitive, or
remunerative Justice of the Parliament, in case another man should be punished,
or rewarded by him, or them, whom they entrust with the executive part, instead
of him whom the Parliament has commanded to be so and so dealt withal: or
then that would have been Gods Circumcision, if any instead of his Males,
should have circumcised his Females. And surely if the true being and
administration of Baptism, and the fulfilling of the command of Christ
thereabout, does depend upon the knowledge of the appropriate subject of
Baptism; then doubtless, an earnest enquity after, and serious debates about
the appropriate subject of Baptism can be no foolish or unlearned question,
neither unprofitable nor vain; unless we will suppose true Baptism it self,
and the command of Christ thereabout, to be unprofitable and vain; which to
question whether it were, would be indeed a question unprofitable and vain,
whatever wisdom or learning otherwise might seem to be in it.

But as touching the reasons, which seem to induce the Querist to conceive,
that the aforesaid question ought to be numbered with transgressors: 1. It does
not follow, that the question about the appropriate subject of Baptism is
therefore unprofitable, unlearned, foolish and vain, because upon debates
about it, strifes, contentions, evil surmisings, divisions, and revilings, and
the like, have occasionally taken place in the world; no more then it will
follow, that because such things as these were occasioned by Christ Jesus
himself in bringing his Gospel into the world, Luke 12.50, 51. and by the
Apostles preaching of it, 1 These. 2.2. that therefore the doctrine of that
Gospel ought justly to be numbered with the aforesaid vain questions.

Nor, 2. can I be of opinion with the Querist, that the said question (rightly
understood) in the nature and tendency of it, leads but to very little that is
considerable, or of consequence for a Christian to know, at least so little, as
to make it unprofitable and vain: because the knowledge of the Ordinance it
self, and of its nature, use, and tendency, depends upon the knowledge of the
appropriate subject as one of the essentialls of it: and I cannot judge the
knowledge and understanding the counsel of God in that Ordinance, a matter of
so little moment, as to render the question about it, the enquiring after it, a
vain thing. Nor do I understand how the knowledge that comes by the
ventilation of it, might arrive at the understandings of men, in a more
peaceable, and less troublesome way, then by pleadings, arguings, and
debatings, unless every man would of himself fall in with the truth, which if
they would, there would then be no need to contend earn^stly for the faith once
given to the Saints, as now there is.

Nor yet 3. can I jump with that conjecture, that those who are confident they
have found the treasure of truth, viz. the appropriate subject of Baptism
(especially if upon that discovery, they have in conscience to God, acted
according to their light) are rather impoverished, then spiritually enriched by
it; because I suppose that which makes the Querist thus to judge, is but his
mistaking one thing for another, viz. their former tamenesse and silent
submission to the judgment of their guides, for their sweetness, meekness,
humility, love, patience, and soberness of mind, and likewise their present
activity and zeal for the truth, and the propagation of it, and the drawing of
others into the same participation, and their impugning that by which they have
found themselves deceived, for rashness, pride, frowardness, conceitednesse,
and the like. For otherwise (except some (as in the best Churches of old) by
whom offenses will come) I trust, in their own cause, and in the tenor of
their lives, he may discern the same humility, meekness, sweetness, love,
patience, soberness of mind, mortification to the world, heavenlinesse of
disposition, endeavors of doing good, which was found in them before, not to
boast of what additions God has thereupon made to their spiritual store;
unless his judgment concerning these, should be prejudiced by some alteration
in his affection to the persons themselves, and then it is an easy matter
indeed, to be so taken up with that only which is troublesome, as to neglect
and overlooke that which would be more lovely in his eye, if minded.

XV. Querie answered.
This Querie runs upon a like mistake with the tenth Querie, as supplying that
departure he speaks of, to proceed only from a conceit that the Church
departed from, does not in all things walk according to Gospel-rule: whereas
the separation proceeds not from the manner of their walking, supposing them to
be a Church, but from the apprehension that such and such persons, though
Believers, are no right constituted Church according to Gospell-rule; and
therefore cannot by walking with them, own them for such, without approving in
act what is disallowed in judgment. This Querie might be retorted upon the
Querist for his excommunicating the Church of England from his society; but I
shall now intend brevity.

XVI. Querie answered.
To this Querie I shall say, That the Commission of Christ to baptize upon
their believing, all that by teaching were brought to believe, and the series
of examples in Scripture answering this Commission, and other Scriptures
importing all of the Church to be incorporated by Baptism, as in our answer to
the first and third Queries is more particularly declared. This is sufficient
ground for us to conclude, that the converts at Antioch in Pisidia, and
Iconium, Acts 13.43. and 14.1. were baptized by Paul and Barnabas, who
converted them, before such time they departed and left them; unless you will
suppose Paul and Barnabas to neglect their duties toward those converts, which
if it could be proved they did, yet would be no ground for Believers now to
neglect theirs.

But why should the Querist presume any more of Paul and Barnabas their holding
Church Communion with these converts, then of their being baptized, the one
being no more mentioned then the other? or why should he suppose that they had
more opportunity to put them into Church Order, and to join in communion
thereupon, then to baptize them?

XVII. Querie answered.
This Querie being much of the same import with the tenth and fifteenth
Queries, the same Answer will serve. For the Querist both in this and several
other Queries, mis-represents and mistakes the case in question: for the
question is not whether a Member of a Christian Church may withdraw his
communion because of some defect or error in the Church, (which yet is the
thing queried, and I have elsewhere answered that he may not) but the question,
if rightly stated, would be, whether a company of Believers, though unbaptised,
either are, or may become, whilst such, a true visible Church according to
Gospel Order? or whether a man, who upon satisfactory grounds, does verily deem
them not so to be, may yet hold communion with them as if they were such,
until he has with long suffering endeavored to convince them that they are
no Church indeed according to Scripture-account? For otherwise, the Querist
does but beg the question, and then taking it as granted him, (which is utterly
denied) proceeds to render a separation unreasonable upon account of this or
that failing in the Church, as indeed well he might, if that were true which he
supposes, touching the constitutive being of the Church.

And therefore the business may be brought into a narrower compass, then so
many queries extend to as are employed hereabout. For let the Querist prove us
from the Word of God (which is that which only ought to sway us in this
matter) either, 1. That a company of Believers without Baptism, may become
truly, and according to Gospel Order, a Church of Christ visibly constituted,
or else 2. That a man who knows, or upon Scripture grounds does believe a
company of men and women to be no Church, according to such order, though
Believers, unless they were baptized into Jesus Christ, may notwithstanding
this his knowledge or persuasion, hold communion with them as if they were such
a Church, until he has convinced them that they are not: and then these
things being proved, I suppose the contest will be ended.

For had the Querist himself been satisfied touching the due constitution of
the Church of England, of which he once professed himself a Member, I suppose
he would not have deemed the errors in it to have been a just ground of his
separation from it, since we read of very foul evils in some of the primitive
Churches themselves, but do not find the sound party exhorted to separate
from the corrupt, but to proceed against them in a Church Way for their cure,
by admonition, conviction, and excommunication in case of obstinacy.

XVIII. Querie answered.
What is said to the next precedent Querie will be a full and pertinent answer
to this, and therefore shall say no more to it.

XIX. Querie answered.
To this I say, that whatever else a company of true Believers have done, yet
if they have not done that which is necessary upon Scripture-account to render
themselves a true Church according to Gospel order, then it is not unreasonable
for a Christian to deny them to be such a Church. But yet for all that, it does
not follow that such a denial renders them but as a rabble rout of the world;
because unbaptised Believers are a third thing, neither prpoerly of the rabble
rout of the world, nor yet formerly of the Church, (as a man that having served
an apprenticesh^p, and is not yet made free of the Company of which his Master
is, neither servant, nor freeman in the interim) but have so far left the
world, as that they want nothing but an orderly induction to be of the Church.

Nor can it be concluded, that because such have diligently enquired after the
mind of God, and have sought direction from him hereabout, that therefore the
way they are in must needs be right, any more then that those that practice
contrary to them in this particular, upon like diligent search and seeking of
God, must needs upon that account not be in the wrong: for they cannot both be
in the right, and yet both search and seek; for the rule remains the same, and
will not bow at any man's entreaty, and that is it by which the one and the other
must be tried.

XX. Querie answered.
To this I answer, 1. I have already said, and now say it again, that a man
may not depart from, much less bid defiance to a Church, because that Church
cannot say Amen to every notion or conceit of his; Nay I will say more, he may
not, though that Church does not agree with every sober and savory apprehension
of his, supposing them still to be a Church, duly so called, from their due
constitution:

2. Though there is no example in Scripture of any man's being baptized after
the profession of his faith, who had been baptized before in his infancy,
because when the Scriptures were written, there was no such thing as the
baptizing of Infants practiced, by which to give opportunity of such an
example; yet if Infant Baptism cannot be proved to be that Baptism which
Christ requires his Disciples to submit to, and consequently is none of his
Baptism, but the Baptism of Man, then Infant Baptism and no Baptism are of
one and the same consideration; and if so, then there is example and precept
enough in Scripture for such Believers to be once baptized, who never have been
baptized before; and therefore the case is not so plain, as the Querist
supposes, that there is no precept or example which warranteth the practice of
the Children of after-Baptisme, as he calls them.

But the Querist has given himself an Answer to this Querie, by the matter of
his 7. and 8. Queries, to which I refer him for further resolution in this.

XXI. Querie answered.
Answer, 1. If by Christians, the Querist means no more then true Believers in
Christ Jesus, then I know none that so magnify the Ceremony or external Rite
of Baptism, as to judge none Christians without it; nay the truth is, it is
because we judge the Querist and others true Believers, that we do persuade
them to be baptized.

But if by Christians he means such as according to the Word have put on
Christ, then we must say, that those that by being baptized into Christ, have
not put on Christ, are not yet such Christians as they ought to be. Gal. 3.27.
And yet it does not follow, that they who so say, do stumble at the same stone
of danger, and peril of soul, at which the Jews stumbled (if they were Jews)
when they urged and pr^ctised circumcision as necessary for justification, Gal.
5.2. because they urged and practiced that for necessary which was now
abolished; we that which is commanded and remains in force, we urge Baptism
to be necessary as a precept of Christ, and necessary as a means of salvation;
they perhaps judged Circumc^sion as other works of the Law, meritorious,
according to the Querists own declared judg-ment upon another occasion. And
therefore I doubt the Querist does not deal so kindly with the Ordinance of
Baptism, nor the Baptists themselves, as he should do, in that he puts the
one but much what in the same capacity with Circumcision, as it was at that
time when Paul said of it, If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing; and in that he yokes the Baptists, who only urge Baptism as one of
the precepts of Christ, and a means of salvation, as the Scriptures themselv^s
do, with those that urged the abrogated Ceremony of Circum^^sion, as necessary
unto Justification, as the Querist himself supposes. Truly I doubt the
comparison in both respects, is odious with God, whatever it is with Men.

XXII. Querie answered.
That which will be very well worth our noting here in the first place, is, how
the truth which we plead has gained a fair and ample acknowledgement, even
from the Querist himself in this Querie, though he oppose it in others. For he
does not only demand whether there be any precept or example in Scripture for
the baptising of any person after many years profession of the Gospel; but
also, whether there be any precept or example in Scripture for the baptising of
any person, at any other time, SAVE AT, OR ABOUT their first entrance upon a
profession of Christ? And not only so neither, but farther demands, Whether
there be any competent ground, either in Reason or Religion, why either such a
thing should have been practiced by Christians in the Apostles days, or why
it ought to be practiced by any in these days? By which I am sure he says as
much to the condemnation of Infant Baptism, as lightly can be spoken in so few
words; and in substance as much as ever any man did say in opposition to that
practice.

For if there be neither precept nor example in Scripture, for the baptising of
any person, at any other time SAVE at or about the time of their first entrance
upon the profession of Christ; nor yet competent ground in Reason or Religion,
why it should otherwise be practiced: then certainly there is neither precept
or example in Scripture for the baptising of Infants, nor yet any competent
ground why such a thing should be practiced; and the reason is, because Infants
in their infancy can make no profession of Christ, nor do they in their
infancy make any entrance upon a profession of Christ.

Neither let any man think that I wrong the Querist in wresting his words
contrary to his intention: For though I believe that which I infer from them,
was no part of his intention, yet I do not wrest his words, but only infer
from them that which must be true, if that which he lays down querie-wise for
a truth, be a truth. And it is a thing not unusual for persons who plead the
cause of any error in Religion, at one turn or other, to utter that which
cuts the throat of their own tenent.

But now to answer to that which the Querist intends indeed.

1. If there be no example in Scripture of any man's being baptized, after many
years profession of the Gospel, it is because there is no example in
Scripture of any such sinful negligence in Believers, as to continue many
years in the profession of the Gospel without being baptized: if there were
any lingering and delaying in this case, they were awakened to their duty, as
many Believers have now need to be: And now, why tarryest thou? Arise and be
baptized, Acts 22.16. If then Believers in these days have been more remiss
and negligent in yiedling obedience to Christ in this command of his, then
Believers were in the Apostles days, well may it serve to humble and to shame
them, but by no means to encourage them to persevere in that neglect.

2. Christ Jesus himself would be baptized, because he would fulfill that law
of righteousness which enjoined B^ptisme, ( Mat. 13.15.) though oth^rwise he
had as little need of it as the greatest he, that thinks his long standing, and
great seize in Christianity should privil^dge him from it: and therefore
methinks as such have any tenderness in them, lest they should be found
neglecting any righteous precept of the Gospel, or any of that zeal that was
in Christ to fulfill all righteousness, or any such love to Christ as to tread
in his steps, should not have their hands out of this business upon any
pretense whatsoever.

3. Cornelius had been a long time a fearer of God, and it is probable had
knowledge of John's baptising, or of Christ's baptising long before, in as much
as he was famously known among the Jews; for he is said to have a good report
among all the nation of the Jews, Acts 10.22. and therefore it is not unlike,
but he might as well know what was done among the Jews, as they know what was
done by him: besides, Peter speaking to him, and those with him, says, That
word (I say) you know which was published throughout all Judea, and began from
Galilee, after the Baptism which John preached, etc. Acts 10.37. and yet
notwithstanding his long profession of the fear of God, and notwithstanding he
had not been baptized when he had knowledge of others being bapt^sed; yet such
were Gods respects to this upright man, that rather then he should be any
longer without a more particular knowledge of the Gospel, and without that
Ordinance of the Gospel-Baptisme, he spares not to send an Angel to him, to
direct him to Peter, Acts 10.4, 5, 48.

4. He that is baptized, though not till long after the time in which he began
to believe, does not by being baptized, then fall back from perfection to
imperfection, from that which is more spiritual to that which is more carnal,
as the Querist supposes; because he shall not thereby lose any thing he had
before of that which is spiritual, but shall be sure to make a fair addition
thereby unto his spiritual stock, if he do it heartily, as unto Christ, and
afterward make that spiritual improvement of it, of which it is very capable.

5. The Ordinance of Baptism is as well matter of obligation, as
signification; to oblige and hold a man fast to the service of Jesus Christ, as
to instruct him in the things of the Gospel: upon which account Paul presses
the improvement of it upon the believing Romans, (Romans 6.3.4, 5.) so long after
they had begun to believe, as that their faith by that time was grown famous
throughout the whole world, chap. 1. ver. 8. And what, has not even the
strongest Christian himself, need of all the holy bonds and engagements of the
Gospel, to engage and bind him faster and faster to Christ, and to press him
more and more forward in his way?

6. Baptism as well as the Table of the Lord, is rememorative, yea in some
respect more; for the Supper properly is but rememorative of the death of
Christ, whereas Baptism is rememorative, and declarative of the Death,
Burial, and Resurrection of Christ. And therefore the Q^erists reason being
built upon this mistaken supposition, that Baptism is not rememorative as well
as the Table of the Lord, is invalid, as to tender Baptism any more
unnecessary to men of long profession, then the Supper it self is unnecessary
for them.

7. What ever else they have professed, I am sure they have not professed so
much, and so far as they ought, who by being baptized into Christ, have not
professed the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ, and their own Death,
Burial, and Resurrection with him.

8. There can no more reason be given (as I conceive) why Baptism should cease
to be a duty to a believer because he has omitted it in the properest season
of it, viz. the time of his new birth, then why Circumcision should cease to be
a duty to the Israelites, having omitted it many years after the eighth day of
their Age, which was the proper time for it; and yet we see such an Omission in
them, did not cause Circumcision to cease to be a duty to them, though perhaps
the ground of their Om^ssion, was much more approveable, or at least excusable
before God, then the ground of that Omission of Baptism, of which we speak,
can well be conceived to be, Josh. 5.7.

9. An Omission or negl^ct of Baptism by the Believers, let it be under what
pretense soever it will, is guilty of an unkindnesse to God, and to Jesus
Christ, in that they do not Justify God in the face of the World, in that as
well as in any other way and in that they do not put on the Lord Jesus in
Baptism, as the first and best approved Believers did, Luke 7.29. Gal. 3.27.

10. Such Believers as n^glect Baptism, upon a supposall they have no need of
it, because of their long-standing in Christianity, are unmercifull to their
own souls, in cutting themselves short of such a means or spiritual
accommodation as Baptism is, and do offer injury both to that Wisdom and
Goodness of God, which consulted their good in that Ordinance: They reject the
Counsel of God against themselves in not being Baptized, Luke 7.30.

XXIII. Querie Answered.
1. If the Law of Edification, ought to overruled all Laws and Precepts
concerning spiritual Church-administrations, as the Law of Salus popul^ ought
in things civil, as the Querist supposes, and takes for granted from Cor.
14.26. Then the Administration of B^ptisme ought rather to be appropriated to
persons professing the Faith, then unto Infants, and not the contrary as the
Q^erist would have it: and the reason hereof is, because Baptism is more
edifying both to the B^ptized themselves, and also to others, when administered
to persons professing the Faith, then when to Infants. And this must needs be
so, because Infants by reason of their want of understanding and Faith, are not
capable of receiving that Spiritual edification by Baptism; not of improving
it unto their Spiritual advantage, as those are that have the Use and Exercise
of understanding and Faith too. Nor is the administration of Baptism, like to
be so taking with others that are but Spectators, either as to the informing of
their judgments, or moving of their affections, when applied to a Creature (as
an Infant is,) expressing no knowledge of God, or Jesus Christ, nor Love or
Obedience to him, or any desire to his ways, as the same would be, when
administered to a Believer, who by his voluntary submission to that Ordinance,
Preaches to men his belief in Jesus Christ, as Dead, Buried, and Risen again;
And his exepectation of Remission of sins through Faith in his Name, and their
own desires, and resolutions, of giving up themselves wholly unto Jesus Christ;
unless you will suppose, there is no difference between zeal and no zeal in
this behalf, which cannot be supposed without contradicting the Spirit of
those and the like Scriptures, Mat. 21.32. with Luke 7.29, 30. 2 Cor. 9.2.

2. I cannot be of the Querists mind (I confess) that Circumcision and
Baptism are the same in Spirit and Substance, though differing in the Letter;
Because circumcision was no sign or resemblance of the Death, Burial, and
Resurrection of Christ, and of Men's Death, Burial, and Resurrection with him,
which yet the Scripture makes to be the spirit of Baptism, Romans 6.3.4, 5. Col.
2.12. And therefore this reason, is no reason, either why Baptism should
rather appropriately belong to Infants, rather then any others, or indeed that
it should belong to them or all, though Circumcision did.

3. Whereas the Querist directs us, diligently to compare, Romans 4.11. with
Mark 1.4. Luke 3.3. etc. out of which to find that Baptism and Circumcision
are one in strength and substance of Spirit; I confess I have diligently
considered these Texts, and till I did diligently consider them, was of the
Querists mind herein, but by a diligent considering of them, am now of another
mind.

I suppose the Querist would have us to conceive from these Scriptures, that
Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness which comes by Faith, and
Baptism a Seal of the Righteousness which comes by Repentance, and therefore
the same Spiritually. But what relation soever Baptism has to Repentance (as
indeed I no where find it called a Seal of the righteousness of Repentance)
yet confident I am, that when the Apostle calls Circumcision, A Seal of the
Righteousness of that Faith which Abraham had before he was circumcised, he
does not describe the common nature of Circumcision, as he had done in those
words imediately before, where he calls it a Sign, which agrees with Gods own
Denomination of it when he first instituted it, and therefore most likely
adequately to answer the common end and use of it; But he describes
Circumcision in these words, A Seal of the Righteousness, etc. as that which
it was peculiarly to Abraham. For 1. It is not called a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith indefinitely, but only A Seal of the Righteousness
of the Faith which HE HAD. And 2. A Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith
which he had, being yet uncircumcised. And then 3. The end wherefore
Circumcision became such a Seal of the Righteousness of Abraham's Faith, and
it was this, THAT he might be the Father of all them that believe.

And were not these things, in respect whereof Circumcision was a Seal,
peculiar unto Abraham only? Or did God ever give Circumcision (as is said, he
gave to Abraham the Covenant of Circumcision, Acts 7.8.) to any other as the
Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith which he had before he was
Circumcised, or to ratify and establish him the Father of all that should
afterward believe? If not, why should we think Circumcision was in common a
Seal of the Righteousness of Faith to other men, as long as the reasons
wherefore it is so called, are peculiar unto Abraham alone?

The Apostles scope here, was, (as will appear in the Context) to prove that
Circumcision did contribute nothing in the business of justification: and this
he proves, in that Abraham was justified before Circumcised; and not only so,
but his very receiving of Circumcision from God upon these terms he did
receive it, was an evidence or demonstration, that Abraham was justified in the
sight of God before he received it, and that he did receive it for such an
end, as that he might stand declared under this Seal of God, as a Man of such
high acceptance with God, as to be thereupon called and accounted the Father,
the famous example and pattern of all those that should believe. And if
Abraham did receive Circumcision, as a Testimonial of that love which God did
bear to him before, (as Nehemiah says, that God found his heart faithful
before him, and entered into Covenant with him thereupon, Neh. 9.8.) then it
could not be the procuring cause of Abraham's acceptance with God. This
construction of the word then, so directly answering and accommodating the
drift and Scope of the Apostle, I see no reason to embrace any other that is
contrary to it.

For to understand the Apostle as speaking of Circumcision in the common nature
of it, as a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, seems to me rather to
disaccomodate the Apostle in his intendment then otherwise; Since those with
whom Paul here disputes, might rather thereby be confi^med in their Opinion of
the nec^ssity of Circumcision unto Justification, since things (writings for
example) are not authentic till they are Sealed, and therefore should Paul
have told them, that Circumcision had been the Seal of Justification, might
not they have inferred, that therefore justification could not be complete
without it?

3. Should we grant that which the Querist would have, viz. That Circumcision
and Baptism were the same in Spirit and Substance, (which yet we may not grant
yet that would by no means follow thereupon, which the Querist supposes, viz.
That Baptism is, and Circumcision was, most edifying when administered to
Infants; Or else that Circumcision was ordered by God, unto the Spiritual
loss and detriment of those to whom it was enjoined. For this Assertion cannot
be true, unless you will suppose that which is manifestly untrue, viz. That
there is no mean between most edifying, and none at all; or which is more,
that there is no mean between MOST edifying, and Spiritual loss and
detriment. For Circumcision might have been edifying as administered to
Children) to the first or second degree of Edification, and yet neither be most
Edifying, nor yet matter of Spiritual detriment; unless the comparatives of
Less and More, were not in use in those days. I will willingly grant, that the
whole ministration of Moses, was edifying to a degree, and therefore
Circumcision also, though administered to Infants, in some respect or other; but
I shall withal deny, that it or Circumcision as administered to Infants, was
Most edifying; for then it should have remained still as the Apostle says,
Heb. 8.7. If that first Covenant had been faultlesse, then should no place have
been sought for the second.

It was then because of that little, low, and mean degree of Spiritual
benefit or edification that was to be had by Circumcision as administered to
Infants, or by other Rites or O^dinances of the Law, that the same were
abrogated and made void, as is most evident also by that other saying of the
Apostle, Heb. 7.18.19. For there is verily a disanulling of the Commandment
going before, for the weakness and unprofitablenesse of it: for the Law made
nothing perfect. If so, is it not most unreasonable to say, that the Law, or
any part of it, and particularly Circumcision as administered to Infants, was
most edifying? Or if it were most edifying according to the (...) of Gods
Dispensation for the time then being, is there any show or appearance of reason
in it, that an administration to Infants must be most ed^fying now under the
Gospel, because such a thing was the most edifying way which God was pleased
to vouchsafe the Church in her nonage under the Law? when as it is plain that
as edifying as it was, it was disanulled for the unprofitablenesse of it.

4. What ever the confidence of the Querist is to the contrary, yet there is
not only a color of reason, but the substance or reason also why Baptism
should not be so edifying as to its end, ^hen administered to Infants, as
Circumcisian was and might be, as to its end, when it was administered to
Infants; because Circumcision was no such transient act as Baptism is, but
such as remained a permanent sign in the flesh as a visible matter of
signification and instruction to the party circumcised all his days, ( Genesis
17.13.) which is a thing, that no man can affirm of Infants Baptism.

XXIV. Querie Answered.
That the Baptizing of Infants in the Apostles days, is not sufficiently, or
at all signified by those Scriptures which mention the Baptizing of households,
Acts 16.15.33. 1 Cor. 1.16. will sufficiently appear. 1. Because the households
whose being Baptized, is recorded, being only but three, it may with as good
probability be affirmed, that there were no little Children in them, as that
there were, and in that respect we are upon equal ground with our friends, in
denying, what they take liberty only to suppose. 2. If there were Infants in
those households, yet the word House, or Household, in Scripture frequently
imports, not all and every individual Soul in the house, but either the major
part, or so many of the house, which according to common reason, are to be
supposed capable of those affirmations that are made concerning them. 1 Samuel
1.21, 22. Genesis 50.4. and 35.2. 2 Samuel 3.1. Jer. 35.3.18. Mat. 10.13. and 12.35.
John 4.53. Acts 18.8. and 10.2 Josh. 24.15. 2 Timothy 4.19. Romans 16.10, 11. And
accordingly must those Scriptures be understood where households are said to be
Baptized. 3. In that it is said concerning one of the three households whose
Baptism is recorded, That the Word of the Lord was spoken to them, and that
they believed, Acts 16.34. and of another, that they addicted themselves to the
Ministry of the Saints, 1 Cor. 16.15. with Chap. 1. v. 16. It is evident, that
either there were no Infants in those households, or else that when they speak
of households, they mean only such of them, as had attained the age of so much
understanding, as to do, hear, and believe such things, as were incompetible
to the capacity of Infants or little Children.

To the reasons moving the Querist to think Infants were Baptized, when these
households were Baptized, I answer,

1. That God has not left the Precept, and perpetual example of Circumcising
Infants as a pit uncovered, (for Believers to fall into by Baptizing their
Children) by giving no hint of the alteration of his mind in that behalf: For
in that he has in the New Testament, abolished the use and practice of
Circumcising Infants, its clear he has abolished the Law by which
Circumcision of Infants was enjoined. But he has done the former, Acts 21.21.
1 Cor. 7.19. Gal. 5.2. Therefore the latter. And therefore considering that the
Law of Circumcision, as all other Mosaicall Rites, being disanulled, I cannot
but wonder, that any man should build any thing upon it for the Baptizing of
Infants: Is not a repealed Law, and no Law, of the same consideration, as to
its being any ground of practice?

But may we not much rather conceive, that since God did make a Law against
man's opening, or digging a pit in his field, and not covering it, to prevent
the miscarriage of Man or Beast, in falling into it, Exodus 21.33. that then
surely, he himself would never have left the Precept, and perpetual example
of Baptiz^ng Believers, as a Pit uncovered for Christians to fall into, by
n^glecting to Baptize their Children till they repent and believe, without
giving the least notice of his mind and will to have any other then such
Believers to be Baptized, if yet it had been his mind that Children should
have been bapt^zed?

2. That which the Querist offers to render children to be Believers in
Scripture-sence, is insufficient as to the entitling of them to Baptism, or to
cause us rationally to conceive them included in their number, who in the
households aforesaid, are said to have believed. For 1. If it should be granted
that children may be called Believers, not because they do believe indeed, but
because they are in like state and condition with Believers, in respect of the
love and favor of God, and their Title to the Kingdom of Heaven, which yet is
all the Querist argues from Mat. 18.6. Yet what is this to the proving of them
actual Believers, or such as embraced the Gospel, or were made to believe by
teaching? which yet were that kind of Believers only, unto whom Baptism was,
or was to be administered, for so much as appears throughout the whole New
Testament. But 2. The truth is, the little ones which are said to believe in
Christ, Mat. 18.6. cannot with any congruity of reason be supposed to be any
such little ones, as Infants are: Because they are described by an Act which
presupposes, not only the Faculty, but the Use, Act and Exercise of the
understanding; for so the Act of believing in Christ does, by which they are
described, which yet as all men know, is incompetible to Infants. And therefore
we must suppose, either 1. That the Child which Jesus called to him, Ver. 2.
was of so much understanding as rendered him capable of believing, (and it was
such a Child as came upon the call of Jesus:) or else 2. That the little ones,
ver. 6. which are said to believe, are not the same with that little Child
mentioned, ver. 2. And there are these two reasons why they should not be
thought the same. 1. Because ver. 2. speaks of one Child only in the singular
number, but ver. 6. speaks of little ones in the plural number, and that too,
not under the appellation of Child or Children as before, but of little ones.
2. If we compare this passage with the other Evangelists, as Mark. 9.42. Luke
17.2. It will be evident (as it is rendered by them) that little ones, were not
little Babes, or little Children properly so called, but the D^sciples of
Christ, whom he frequently calls little ones, and sometimes little Children,
John 13.33.

2. But that which is further added by the Querist, why Infants can upon no
tolerable account be excluded, when it is said of whole Households or Families,
that they were dipped, though it should be supposed, they were in no sense
capable of believing, is I confess to me seasonable, and it is, because they
were as capable, and in some respects more capable of being dipped, then Men: as
if their being capable de facto to be dipped, must needs argue them capable de
jure of the Ordinance of Baptism as well as Men: Such a capac^ty, not only
Infants, but other Creatures also have as well as Men: and if this had been all
the capacity requisite, no doubt but Children had been as capable as any, yea
and other Creatures too.

3. Is that a good reason why we should think Children were Bapt^z^d with the
households before mentioned, because we ought not to contend with God, or
reject any part of his Counsel or Will because only somewhat sparingly, and
with some scantinesse of evidence discovered in his word? Nay rather, since the
Will of God is herein manifest, that persons professing the Faith, were the
subject of his Baptism, all the while the Scriptures, and the H^story of
things then, were in composing, let no man contend with God, because he has
not framed the Scripture to his mind or opinion, nor go about to force the
Scripture to speak that they have no mind to speak, or suppose when God has
delivered his Mind plainly; That yet he has thoughts and counsels of another
nature, more comporting with his mind, (as Baalam sometime thought in another
case.)

4. The Q^erist supposes several other Tenants to be embraced, upon weaker and
less lightsome grounds, then such as are given for Infant Baptism: but that
he should mention the admission of women to the Lords Table for one of these
tenants, is I confess matter of wonder to me; for there is both precept and
example, upon which this tenent is grounded, but neither the one, nor the
other, for the baptising of Infants; and therefore how the ground for this
should be more lightsome, then for the other, is that which passes my reason to
comprehend.

For matter of precept, for admitting women to the Table of the Lord, we have
it in these words, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
Bread, and drink of that Cup, 1 Cor. 11.28. For I doubt not but the Querist
well knows, that Man in this place is the common gender, and signifi^s the
kind and not the sex, and therefore women to be every whit as much concerned
therein, as men.

For example, we have it Acts 2.42. compared with Acts 1.14. and 2.16.18. For
in the former place we find the three thousand that were added, together with
those to whom they were added, continued in fellowship and breaking of bread.
In the other places, we find that among those Disciples, to whom the three
thousand were added, there were Women, and Handmaids of the Lord, and
therefore it is every whit as plain from this place, that women did break
bread, as that men did. And when it is said Acts 20.7. That the Disciples came
together to break Bread upon the first day of the week, why should it be
understood of men any more then women? in as much as women are Disciples as
well as men, unless happily it be said, there is particular mention made of Paul
and Eutychus.

And now let the Q^erist produce us more lightsome grounds, then precept and
example for his sprinkling of Infants, or else forbear this comparison.

XXV. Querie answered.
If a baptismall sprinkling of an Infant (as the Querist's expression is, which
is as much as to say, a sprinkling by dipping) b^ no more the Ordinance of
Baptism, then another common action is, (as I verily presume it is not, till
it be proved to be of a divine appointment) then the baptismall sprinkling the
Querist speaks of, varies the case of baptising one after this sprinkling, no
more then the baptising of one after the doing of any Ordinary and common
action: and therefore it might with as bapti-reason in my opinion, have been
demanded, whether the much sing of one who has been so and so nursed, so and
so attended, so and so attired in his infancy, be any where countenanced in
Scripture, by particularity or expressenesse of precept or example, as whether
the submitting to a baptismall dipping, after a baptismall sprinkling, be so
countenanced. But as touching particularity of precept or example in such
cases, I have answered more largely to querie 1.7.8.22.

And whereas the Querist further demands, Whether they do not presume as much,
or rather more upon their own judgments and understandings, in making
Infant Baptism a mere nullity, the Scripture giving no such sentence against
it, as they do who make it an Ordinance of God, or a mere and necessary
administration of an Ordinance? I answer, No, they do not: Because they do
not proceed upon their own judgment only, but upon Scripture-ground, who
rej^ct every administration which is obtruded as necessary, which has no
footing in the Word of God: For every Plant which the heavenly Father has not
planted, is to be plucked up, Mat. 15.13. though every such Plant which men
have, or shall plant, upon their own judgments only, as Infant Baptism,
cross in B^ptisme, Surplice upon the Priests back, and many others, be not
particularly mentioned in Scripture; yet it is sufficient that we have that
general warrant to reject a^l that is not of Gods planting. But now, they that
shall pract^se Infant-sprinkling as an Ordinance, or as a necessary
Administration of an Ordinance of God, without warrant from God, they plant and
not God, which plant is to be rooted up, and rejected by those that will side
with God, against the corruptions and superstitions of men. And therefore
whereas the Querist makes that a reason of the practice of Infant Baptism,
viz. because, as he says, Infants (at least of Believers) are no where
excluded by God from part and fellowship in that administration, it is nothing
but what has been, and with as good a show of reason may be pleaded by the
Papists, for many of their superstitious customs and traditions; for neither
are they by name excluded the parts of Gods worship. But we say, that
Infant Baptism and what ever else is obtruded as necessary in the Worship and
Ordinances of God, which he has not made so by some word of his or other, is
by virtue of that general rule which warrants the plucking up every Plant that
is not planted by God, to be rejected by men, as will worship, and the serving
of God, according to the precepts of men. Col. 2.18.23. Isa. 29.13.

XXVI. Querie answered.
1. I might here observe the discordancy and incongruity of this Q^erie, with
several that have gone before it: For whereas this renders the neglect of
Baptism so dangerous, as that the heavy hand of God may well be feared as the
punishment of such a sin, yet several other precedent queries have rendered
it so venial a sin, as that it would be unreasonable for the sake thereof,
to bar any from Church Communion.

2. But to answer directly; I suppose it will not be denied by the Baptists
queried, but that Baptism is as necessary, and of as high esteem with God
under the Gospel, as Circumcision was under the Law; and that they who neglect
it whose duty it is to submit to it (the Q^erist I mean, and other Believerrs)
have cause to fear the displeasure of God, as well as those who neglected
Circumcision under the Law. But where there is no Law, there is no
transgression, and where no transgression, no fear of wrath: if then there is
no command from God to baptize Infants, as there was to circumcise them, (or if
there be, the Pedobaptists were never yet so kind as to show it us) then there
is no cause to fear the like danger for the forbearing of the one, as there
was for neglecting of the other.

3. But though there be no cause to fear the displeasure of God for forbearing
to baptize Infants, yet if there be the same cause for us to fear the
displeasure of God for doing that which he has not commanded, as there was for
his people under the Law in like case, then there is just cause for those to
fear the displeasure of God in one kind or other, who though they do not
offer strange fire which God commanded not, as did N^dab and Abihu, whom the
Lord slew, L^vit. 10.1, 2. not transgress the Order of God as Vzza did, who
dyed before God, 1 Chronicles. 13.10. with chap. 15.13. yet do as truly and really
do that as a service to him in sprinkling their children which he has not
commanded, as they did the other.

XXVII. Querie answered.
Whether the Israelites were blameless under the omission of Circumcision for
forty years together, upon account of that bodily inconvenience or danger the
Querist speaks of, I know not, I leave it to him to determine: But that a
being dipped over head and ears in water, in obedience to a command of Jesus
Christ, should be a tempting of the providence of God, as to the endangering of
either life or health, I cannot believe; because more then frequent, even
constant experience, teaches the contrary. Nor do I believe there is the like
danger or difficulty attends this dipping, as did the circumcising of those
Israelites, Josh. 5. after they had omitted it forty years: and yet the danger
and difficulty notwithstanding, God would have it done. What ever the danger
might be for a man to be dipped upon his own account, I shall not speak; but I
am very confident, God has not made a snare of Baptism; and unless we will
conceive, that God takes less care to preserve his people now in the times of
the Gospel, from such inconveniences as these feared, in the way of serving and
obeying him, then he did to preserve his people from those hazards they exposed
themselves to in obeying him under the Law, Exodus 34.24. there will be no cause
for any man to fear the miscarriage of his life or health in the hand of Jesus
Christ, and in the way of obeying him; he that rebuked the Winds and the Seas
for his servants sakes, can rebuke the feared cold: and though ease slays the
foolish, yet whosoever harkeneth unto me (says God, Prove. 1.32, 33.) shall dwell
safely, and shall be free from the fear of evil. And how can he trust God
with the keeping of his soul in well doing, 1 Pet. 4.19. that cannot trust him
with the keeping of his body in well doing? Little does he think who ever is
turned aside by this Lion in the way, what peace and satisfaction a man's
experience of the uprightness and cordialnesse of his heart to God will
produce him, when notwithstanding the danger which flesh and blood will suggest
in the case, he can in love and obedience to his Lord and Master Jesus Christ,
throw health, and life, and all into the hands of God.

XXVIII. Querie answered.
1. If the Querist will suppose that those Scriptures which require faith, or
the profession of faith in those that are to be admitted to Baptism, are to be
understood only of men and women who are capable of making such a profession,
and that they are no more exclusive of Infants, then the Apostles Injunction, 2
These. 3.10. If any will not work, let him not eat, is exclusive of Infants in
the point of eating, wherein he intends men only and not children; then I
desire him to show us what Scriptures those are, that do speak of the
baptising of infants and not of men and women professing the faith if those do
not: for if such Scriptures as require faith in those that will be baptized,
do no more intend children, then the foresaid Injunction of the Apostle does,
then there must be some other Scriptures that do intend Infants, when they
speak of baptising, or else there are no Scriptures at all that do speak of
Childrens Baptism: if there be any other, why are they not produced? if there
be not, why is the world troubled with these disputes as if there were?

2. Why does not, or may not the Querist as well suppose, that those words of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him
eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup, are no more exclusive of Children
then those are, He that will not work, let him net eat; or then those are,
which require a profession of faith before Baptism? For may not any man that
will give himself liberty and scope to puzzle men's understandings without
plain Scriptures, as well deny that children are debarred Communion at the
Table of the Lord, by this Text which requires a man to examine himself in
order to his approach thereto, as to deny that children are debarred Baptism
by those Scriptures that require faith in men and women to render them capable
of Baptism? if there be any difference, let us understand it; or if children
be not here excluded the Supper, then show us by what other Scripture they are:
or if the Querist will grant that children are hereby excluded Communion in the
Supper, then we desire him, if he can, to show reason why such a requiring of
faith in persons to be baptized, does not as well exclude children from
Baptism, as from the Supper, there being no other Scriptures that do any more
warrant the baptising of children, then the admission of them to the Supper of
the Lord.

XXIX. Querie answered.
That dipping is of the essence and necessity of Baptism, I conceive there is
good reason to believe; But that they are selfe-Baptisers, who by going into
the water, dispose their bodies for a burial under the water, by the hands of
the Baptiser, I do no more believe, then I believe they are selfe-Murderers, or
selfe-Slayers, who lay their bodies down, and their necks upon the block when
they are to be executed.

Nor have I seen or known any to convey all but the head under water in order
to their being baptized, or dipped, nor do I judge it convenient so to do,
unless a shallower water cannot conveniently be come at; though I believe
withal, that so the body of him who is baptized, be buried under water by him
that does baptize, it does not at all vary the case as to the thing of
Baptism, whether a man go less or more into the water; the Scripture placing
the thing, not in a man's going to the knees, or neck, in water, but in his
being baptized, or buried in water.

XXX. Querie answered.
I demand of the Querist, whether God in the institution of Circumcision, Genesis
17. did any more prescribe or determine all circumstances essential to
Circumcision, then God, then Christ have determined all circumstances requisite
to Baptism in the Commission given by them to baptize? John 1.33. Mat. 28 19.
Did God command Circumcision? So God, so Christ have commanded Baptism. Did
God appoint what persons should be circumcised, viz. every male child among the
Jews? so has Christ who shall be baptized, viz. such of the nations as shall
be taught or made Disciples. Did God appoint the eighth day for Circumcision?
Christ has appointed the time of Baptism, viz. though not such or such a day,
yet that it should follow men's being discipled or taught, without any long
intermission, as the very words of the Commission do import, and Scripture
examples conform to this Commission, do show. Did God direct what part of the
body should be circumcised, viz. the flesh of the foreskin? So Christ he has
appointed the subject matter to be Baptized, under this word or expression
THEM, Baptizing them. i. e. Such persons of the Nations as shall be taught; not
this or that part of them, but THEM, even them themselves; by which personal
expression when applied to washing or dipping, in Scripture, is wont to be
signified, not the washing of this or that part, as Hands, Face, Feet, or the
like, which are wont to be particularly mentioned, when no more is intended,
but a total washing or dipping, as very many learned Men, though friends to
Infant Baptism, do also render the word Baptize to signify.

Did God declare for what end circumcision should serve, viz. For a token
between him and his people? So Christ in Commissionating his Disciples to
Baptize, in, or (as it is rendered from the Greek) into the Name of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, declared that Baptism should be a solemn
putting, or planting of Men, into the Father, Son, and Spirit, or into a
professed expectation of Salvation from, and of the service of, and subjection
to, the Father, Son, and Spirit. Nay, I may say, the Commission for Baptiz^ng,
is more particular and express then that for circumcising: for here it is
directed by Christ, by whom, or by what hands Baptism shall be administered,
viz. D^sciples; but it is not prescribed by what hands the Males should be
Circumcised, nor yet with what instrument, as viz. whether with a Knife, or
sharp Stone, or the like.

And therefore, there being in the Commission of Christ to Baptize, as much
(yea in some respects more) particularity of subject, and manner of
Administration, as was in Gods Command to Circumcise, (and the same might be
said if compared with the Passover or Supper of the Lord,) the Querist
doubtless had no reason rashly to charge those, with making themselves wise
above that which is written, or with obtruding upon the consciences of men, an
institution of their own, in the name of the Ordinance and Institution of God.
Who undertake to determine particularity of subjects or manner of
Administration in Baptism, which yet he does.

But I would demand of the Querist, whether he does not determine particularity
of subject, and manner of Administration in Baptism, when he Sprinkles such
and such Infants in that form and manner which he uses therein? and whether
he do this of his own head, or by virtue of any Institution or command of
Chirst? If he will say, he does it by verture of an Institution or Command from
Christ, then at least in his opinion, there must be a commission from Christ
found in Scripture, which prescribes such circumstances as he Judges
essential to that administration, as well as there is for the essentialls of
Circumcision, Passover, and Supper of the Lord; if so, why does he suppose
there is no such thing to be found in Scripture? Or if he will say there is no
such Commission in Scripture, as does determine particularity of subject, and
manner of Administration in Baptism, as he must hold, or else he is to blame
for changing those who ever they be, with making themselves wise above that
which is written, etc. That do prescribe and determine, particularity of
subject, and manner of Administration in Baptism; But as I say, if he will
say there is no such Institution, or Commission, (which is equivalently the
same) then does not he make himself wise above that which is written, and
obtrude upon the consciences of these that join with him, an institution of
his own, in the Name of an Ordinance and Institution of God, when he
undertakes to determine Infants particularly to be the subject of Baptism, and
Sprinkling in the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be the manner of
Administration, and accordingly practice the same?

XXXI. Querie Answered.
1. Though it should be granted, That many, if not the generality of those that
have entered into the way of new Baptism (as the Querist miscalls it, it being
indeed the old way of Baptizing) Have received their precious Faith, and other
Graces, under the d^spensation of their Infant Baptism, yet this would be no
more a reason obliging their continuance in their old wonted form, (supposing
there is yet a more excellent way) then it was or would have been to those who
were wrought upon in a saving way, under the Popish, and after that the
prelaticall form, to have continued still their abode in their Tents.

2. It is like no good use would be made of it by some, should I become so much
a fool, as to glory of what I assuredly know, touching the Spiritual increase
which God has vouchsafed many of his servants under this Dispensation. But
this I may say, that more then one of a thousand (though I believe the Q^erist
does not know one of a thousand of them, and therefore can be no competent
Judge of the growth of their thousands; but that more then one of a thousand)
engaged in this new, Alias old way of which the Querist speaks, have since
their entrance into it, added much more then the breadth of the least hair of
their head unto their former growth or stature in Christ, is a truth, of which
the Querist would make no doubt at all, as now he does, had he but taken
their former, and present Spiritual Dimensions, with such a measuring Reed as
that wherewith John did measure the Temple of God, and them that worship
therein, Romans 11.1. But however, it is good for every Man to think soberly (as
the Apostle speaks in an other case) both in commending, and discommending,
and not to stretch himself beyond his own line in measuring.

3. To the Querists further demand, I answer; that possibly some may be worse
since they came under this D^spensation then before, though I must say I know
not one such, except such who have quite forsaken the way, and it is no marvel
if they are grown worse: nay this rather turns to a Testimony for that way,
then against it, in that when Men grow bad, the yoke of Christ becomes too
strait for them any longer to wear, and the company too holy for them to
endure. But as for the decays of some in the way, if it strengthen not its
claim as to be from God, so neither does it at all weaken it any more, then
those unruly and disorderly walkings of some in the Apostolical Churches, did
argue the way of those Chu^ches not to be of God. Alas if such pleas as these
were valid, where are there Men of that order and form, that could avouch
their way to be of God? But if the old way of Independency be indeed free from
all spots of this kind, they shall by my consent, throw the first stone at the
Men of this new way. Well may this way of managing the controversy between us,
occasion indeed those evil surmisings, alienation of affection, and
vilifyings, of which the Q^erist speaks. Q 14. but will contribute little
toward the finding out the truth, but rather the contrary; upon which account
I shall forbear what otherwise might have been retorted.

XXXII. Querie answered.
What the Learning, Worth, and Humility was, of Johannes Oec^lampadius,
Johannes Denkius, and Johannes Gaster, in Luthers time, I know not, who as the
Querist informs us, repented of their weakness, as having been surprised
with a religious conceit of the necessity of new, alias old Baptism: But this
I know, that it is a very rare thing for men of such great learning, as these
are represented to have been, merely by a su^prisall with a Religious conceit,
so far to deny themselves of the accommodations of their former way, wherein
they inherited the respects of Men, and the warm influences of the World, as
to expose themselves to the hatred, opposition, and persecution of the times,
except their convictions from the Word of God, have been very potent and
operative upon the Conscience. And whether these men did return back to their
former form, accompanied with the same humility and worth, with which before
they left it, is more then I know, or then the Querist does inform us in, or
then I am bound to beleev^, since learned men (as experience of all Ages
shows,) have been no more temptation-proofe, and free from backsliding to
embrace this present World, then other Men.

But as for those of late among our selves of like Character, except it be such
as have repented of their worth and humility, as well as of their new Baptism;
as the Querist does not name any, so I have not known or heard of any, except
one or two Ministers, who have repented for a good living sake, (as possibly
those other learned men might do) and yet I am given to understand, that one
of those has again repented of that his Repentance.

XXXIII. Querie answered.
Here the Querist supposes, that Baptism is no more the Baptism of Repentance
for the Remission of sins, then Circumc^sion was the Circumcision of Repentance
for Remission of sins, or at least, that the one may be truly so called as well
as the other; and that therefore, though Infants cannot repent, that yet they
are no less capable of Baptism, then they were of Circumcision.

But I deny that which the Querist supposes, viz. that Circumcision might as
well and truly be called the Circumcision of Repentance, as Baptism, the
Baptism of Repentance.

1. Because his reason upon which he builds his Supposition is unsound, being
this, viz. because according to the Apostles definition of Circumcision, Romans
4.11. it is for substance and import of matter, the same with Baptism. But
that neither Circumcision and Baptism, are for import of matter the same, nor
yet that Rom 4.11. does import any such thing, is that the demonstration
whereof I have briefly asseyed in answering the 23. Querie, where the same
thing was alleged by the Querist, to which I refer the Reader.

2. If well observed, it will appear, that the reason why Baptism is called
the Baptism of Repentance for Remission of sins, is such as would by no means
suit with such a denomination of Circumcision, and consequently that Children
are not as capable of Baptism, as they were of Circumcision. For the reason
why John's Baptism was called the Baptism of Repentance for Remission of sins
as in the place quoted by the Querist Mark. 1.4. was, because Repentance was
the qualifying term upon which John prached Baptism as meet to be received,
and upon which those received it accordingly that were Baptized by him. As the
Covenant given Abraham is called the Covenant of Circumcision, Acts 7.8.
because probably Circumcision was the term by and according to which the seed
of Abraham were to be adjudged in the Covenant, and rightful partakers of the
benefits and privileges of it, and therefore called the token between God and
them, of his being in Covenant with them, and they with him, Genesis 17.11. and
the uncricumcised of Abraham's Seed are said to have broken the Covenant. Ver.
14 or broken it down, or made it frustrate, as Ainsworth renders it, i. e.
dissolved the terms or conditions of it; upon which account God would have them
cut off from his people, i.e. at least excluded the privileges of those that
kept his Covenant by making good the condition on their parts. But that
repentance was the qualifying term of John's Baptism, as Circumcision was
visibly the qualifying term of Gods Covenant, appears both by John's Preaching,
and the peoples receiving of Baptism: By John's preaching; for its said that he
Preached the Baptism of Repentance, Luke 3.3. Acts 13.24. Now what was it for
him to preach the Baptism of Repentance, but to preach that men ought to
repent, and so to be Baptized? Which that it was, also appears in that those
that did receive Baptism from him according to his preaching, did profess
Repentance; for its said, they were Baptized of John in Jordan, confessing
their sins, Mat. 3.6. Mar. 1.5. But the Pharisees who trusted in themselves
that they were righteous, and Justified themselves Luke 16.15. and 18.9 11.
though many of them came to John's Baptism, Mat. 3.7. yet it seems, disowning
the terms on which it was to be administered, viz. repentance for remission of
sins, they are said to have rejected (or made frustrate, as the word is) the
Counsel of God against themselves, not being Baptized of him. Luk 7.30.

But because the right understanding of the carriage of things here about in
the very beginning of this Ministration of Baptism, is of great use by which to
judge how it ought to be used now, the Ministration remaining still, though the
first Ministrators are dead, Therefore I shall desire these two things may be
well minded.

1. That John's Ministry by Preaching and B^ptizing, was that from which the
Gospel Ministration began to take its rise or beginning, and which began that
great turn which was made in the World by abolishing the legal way of Worship
and Ordinances, and of bringing in the Evangelicall. Hereupon its said; The Law
and the Prophets were till John, since that time the Kingdom of God (i.e. the
new and Gospel state) is Preached, and every Man presses into it. Therefore
also is the Ministration of John called the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ the Son of God. Mark 1.1, 2. By the way then, if God was pleased to
honor the Ordinance of Baptism with the ushering in of the Gospel
Ministration into the World, and to cause it thus to march in the front when he
brought his first begotten into the World, had not they need to consider
whether they do it right or no, who cause it to march in the Rear of all the
things of the Gospel, in their Opinions of it, and affections to it?

2. That as Baptism (except it were John's Preaching) was the first Gospel
Ordinance by which the change began, so the terms of the Administration and
Reception of this Ordinance now varied from the terms of the administration
and reception of Ordinances under the Law, as well as the Ordinance it self
varied from those. That which gave men right and title to the Ordinances of the
Law, Circumc^sion and the rest, was their having Abraham to their Father: That
which now gave men right to John's Baptism, was not this, but their
repentance; and this John sufficiently signifies Mat. 3.8, 9. Luke 3.9. when in
his preaching to the people that came to his Baptism, especially the
Pharisees, he said, Think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to
our Father, but bring forth fru^ts meet for repentance: as if he should have
said, Do not think that plea will now serve your turn to render you capable
of this Gospel-Ordinance, viz that you have Abraham to your Father, though it
has served your turn heretofore as to your partic^pation in Mosaicall
dispensations, but now if you w^ll be b^ptised indeed, and enter upon the
Gospel Worship, then bring forth fruits meet for, or becoming repentance.
Whereupon we shall find that he did instruct them how they should live for the
time to come, as well as to repent of, and confess their sins that were
past, Luke 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

And now if Baptism were called the Baptism of Repentance, because none but
repentant persons, or such as so professed themselves to be, were to partake
thereof, then I am sure there is neither the same reason why Circumcision might
be truly called the Circumcision of Repentance, nor yet that Infants are as
duly capable of the Baptism of Repentance, as they were of Circumcision.

XXXIV. Querie answered.
1. Whether those words Acts 2.38.39. Repent and be baptized every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive
the gift of the holy Ghost; for the promise is to you, and to your children and
to all that are a far off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call; I
say, whether these words did so much enjoyne those to whom spoken, to repent,
in order to their being baptized, as encourage them both unto the one duty, and
the other, upon account of the promise relating to them, I shall not need to
determine: But surely the Querist does not think but that their Repentance was
enjoined in order to their being baptized as well as for other causes; unless
he will say, they were to be baptized first, and then to repent after,
according to his own Method of baptising children.

2. If the Parents Title to the Promise was a ground or motive unto them to be
baptized, but not be baptized without Repentance, but both to repent and to be
baptized, as the Querist himself supposes it was; then why should the Promise
be any more a ground to the children to be baptized without repentance, then it
was to the Parents? or how, or by what passage, word, or syllable in the Text,
does the Q^erist discern, that the Promise was made upon any other terms to
the Children, then it was to the Parents?

3. Is it not most apparent, that the whole tenor of the Promise here made, in
respect of the persons to whom it is made (expressed in these words, you, your
children, and all a far off) is governed and limited by that last clause of the
39. ver. even as many as the Lord our God shall call? If so, then the Promise
did belong unto the children no otherwise then to the parents, nor had they any
interest in the promise of remission of sin, of gift of the holy Ghost until
called by Repentance and B^ptism^, the terms here proposed, to render them
capable of it, no more then their parents had.

4. If we consider what the Promise is which is here said, to be made to them
and to their children, it will evidently appear, that it, i.e. the good
promised, belongs to none but repenting persons, The Promise in a sense is made
to all the world, that is the publication and offer of it. Mark 16.15. but
Baptism does not hereupon belong to all the world, but only to such as do
believe the Promise: Faith being the condition of the good promised, Baptism
is made by God, to be as an Appendix to that condition: Go preach the Gospel
to every creature, i.e. offer them Salvation by Jesus Christ: but upon what
terms shall they receive this Salvation offered? These, [He that believes and
is baptized, shall be saved:] so that Baptism comes in upon the promise
embraced, not upon the offer of the promise. Now when Peter says, the promise
is made to you and your children, the meaning is that the offer and tender of
Salvation did belong unto them and their children, and to all a far off, and
the good of it to as many as God should call. Though there be in Scripture
several Discovery of the gracious council of God concerning little children,
yet where ever any terms of grace and salvation are offered, or promised, upon
the taking place of something to be believed, or done by the creature, there
the Promise, or Offer of Grace, is always to be understood to respect, not
Infants, but persons having the use and exercise of their reason and
understanding, Deuteronomy. 11.1, 2. Mark 4.9, 23.
and consquently not to Infants: and if the Promise did not belong to Infants
as Infants, then no Baptism upon account of the Promise. The things here
promised, are the rem^ssion of sins, and gift of the holy Ghost: for those
are the things the Apostle does ascertaine them by the Promise.

Now this Promise of remission of Sins and gift of the holy Ghost, is either
absolute and without condition, or else it is only conditional; for between
these there is no mean. If absolute, then the remission of Sins and gift of
the holy Ghost were promised to all the Jews, and their children, without any
condition at all, whether they did repent and were baptized or no; but this I
think no man will affirm. If the Promise then was conditional, as you see it
must needs be, then none had right to the Promise, that is to the things
promised, but those that had performed the condition, for take away the
condition of the Obligation or Promise, and the Obligation ceases to be: now
the condition of the Promise is here clearly set by the Apostle to be, if not
Repentance and a being baptized in the name of Jesus Christ (for if any knows
how upon good ground to divide them herein, let it so be) yet I am sure
Repentance is: Repent and be baptized, etc. and ye shall receive, etc. that is,
and thereupon ye shall receive, etc. And if Repentance was the condition of the
Promise here mentioned by the Apostle, then I am sure the children of these
Jews could no more have right to the Promise here made until they did repent,
then the parents themselves could, and consequently no more right to Baptism
upon account of the Promise, then they had.

Which thing is so evident and clear, that I shall wonder if any rational man
shall not discern it, if he will but give his reason and judgment full scope
to consider it.

XXXV. Querie answered.
Here the Querist demands, Whether God does smell in the assemblies of those,
which he says judge themselves the only duly baptized persons under heaven,
with any such pleasure or delight, as he smells many the Assemblies of those
who are called unbaptised? or are they filled with the glory and presence of
God at such a rate? or are there any such manifestations of the spirit there?
or are the powers of the world to come, so active and busy in the Church
meetings of the one, as they are in the other?

Had the Querist given us to understand in what respects he speaks these
things, and by what he makes judgment, when, and when not, such appearances of
God as he speaks of, are vouchsafed men in their Assemblies, we might have
known the better how to have satisfied his demand. If he judge of the presence
of God, and the activity of the powers of the world to come in this case, by
those effects which the ministration of the Gospel in such or such Assemblies
works in men, in causing them to deny themselves in their worldly interest, not
seeking the great things of this world, but being content to lose the favor
and respect of men, the love of relations, and to expose themselves to the
censures, hard thoughts, evil speakings, reproachings, revilings, scoffings,
laughings, and oppositions of men, that they might approve themselves faithful
to God; and likewise in causing them to seek the honor of God, and good of
Men, in dispensing the Gospel freely, and persuading all to a close and entire
conformity thereto, both in their drawings nigh to God in the matters of his
house and worship, and in their deportment and carriage toward men in common
conversation; I say, if judgment shall be made of the presence of God with his
people by such eff^cts as these, which yet were the great tokens of the
presence of his grace in the first times of the Gospel, then doubtless the
Querist needed not to have made a question of it, where these are most visible.
Or if he will estimate the presence of God we speak of, by those glorious
successes which he is pleased to give unto the meetings, Ministry, and
endeavors of his Servants in bringing in great numbers and multitudes both of
men and women, to be obedient to the Faith, according to the Doctrine and Order
of the Gospel, then I shall desire him to cast his eyes abroad in the Land, and
then tell us, by whose hands the greatest part of those many Churches that are
separated from the national way, have been planted, especially in those
places, where not long since, scarce so much as a face of Religion was to be
seen.

As concerning many of those of whom such Churches do consist; it is very true
that that which our Savior speaks of the Ministry of the Prophets disposing
and preparing a People for the hands of the Apostles, and for that Gospel-mould
into which they were to cast them, may aptly enough be applied to the Ministry
of the Baptists in planting and building of Churches of such materials, as
were in part prepared to their hands. John 4.37, 38. Herin is that saying true;
One sows, and another reapeth: I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no
labor: Other men labored, and ye are entered into their labor. But the Lord
has been pleased not only to use them as his workmen to polish some living
stones which were in part hewne before, and for the building them up into
spiritual houses, putting them into the right order and way of worshipping
God, perfecting as to this, that which was lacking before, but has also so
wonderfully prospered his word in their mouths, in turning of men from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, in several the dark
places of this Nation, that I confess I have not heard of the like testimony
given by God to the endeavors of any other sort of men in these days: and
surely such things as these, were wont to be accounted signs of the presence
of the Lord with his people, Acts 11.21. And the hand of the Lord was with
them; and a great number believed, and turned to the Lord. Neither can it
reasonably be thought, that the Scriptures are as a sealed Book among these
Men whilst such effects are produced by their opening and pressing of them:
Well may it be indeed that the Scriptures are not dished and carved out by
these men, with such strains of humane Art and Oratory as they may be by some
others; but we know who it was, who though he had as himself says, Tongues
more then many others, yet did decline ^he perswasible words of Men's Wisdom in
his Preaching the Gospel to men, lest their faith should have stood in the
Wisdom of men, and not in the Power of God, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. And I am sure that
may be tru^y said in the vindication of these, which Paul was feign sometimes
to speak in his own vindication when disp^raged by some of the flanting
Preachers of those Times, 2 Cor. 11.6.
viz. But though I be rude in Speech, yet not in Knowledge. I should not have
mentioned any thing of this nature, but that there was a kind of necessity for
it, but if I have played the fool in this confide^t boasting, as the Apostle
speaks, you know who has compelled me to it.

XXXVI. Querie answered.
Here I confess I cannot but wonder at the oversight of the Querist, in that
he brings Mark. 6.44. John 6.10. compared with Mat. 14.21. to prove that both
Women and Children are to be understood, when men only are named, when as
indeed his quotations serve to prove the quite contrary. For whereas Mark and
John in the places before mentioned, report the men that did eat of the five
Loaves and two fishes, to be about five thousand men; Matthew he reports the
persons eating hereof to be about five thousand men, besides Women and
Children. So that Mark and John take notice only of the number of the men in
their relation of the Miracle, whereas Matthew though he does exactly agree with
them as touching the same number of men, yet he intimates that there were Women
and Children that did eat, besides the five thousand men. By which it
evidently appears, that though Women and Children were joined with the men in
the same action, yet that where John and Mark mention the men only, the Women
and Children are not to be understood as comprehended in that number, which as
I say is the contrary to that for the proof whereof those Texts were alleged.
And therefore this is so far from being any ground to conceive that Childrens
being Baptized, is meant when Men and Women's only is mentioned, as that it is
a ground to conceive the contrary.

XXXVII. Querie answered.
Here the Querist supposes that though it should be proved that there were no
Children Baptized during the Apostles days, that yet it would no more follow
from thence that Children ought not to be Baptized now, then it would have
followed, that because the Israelites omitted to curcumcise their Children for
forty years, Josh. 5. that therefore it was not lawful for them to Ci^cumcise
them afterward. To which I answer, that it is granted, that the one would no
more follow then the other, if there were a like command for the one as there
was for the other. And therefore I marvel that the Querist should so contrary
to this, in other Queries, argue the non-necessity of a man's being Baptized, if
he have but passed the time of his first entrance upon the profession of
Christ, as he does Qu. 22. But why the Querist should suppose that the
Baptizing of Children now, should be more necessary then it was in the Apostles
days, I know not, neither does he (nor as I believe can he) give us any
account.

Something indeed he alleges as a reason such as it is, why possibly Christ
and the Apostles might omit the Baptizing of Children in their time, though
otherwise lawful, and that which they had been bound to do, had not such a
reason interposed, and it is this, viz. Because Paul said, I was not sent to
Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel: meaning, as he expounds this saying, that
Baptizing was not only not the Principal, but not any considerable end of his
sending, but the publishing, of the Gospel. Which reason he further amplifies
thus: If he were not sent to Baptize neither one age, nor one Sex or other,
neither could he be sent to Baptize Children, and if not he, then neither
Christ nor the rest of the Apostles, in the sense declared; and then what
marvel if whilst sent about matters incomparably greater, they should not be
so intent upon things of a secondary and lighter consequence as to persecute
them to the uttermost of what they lawfully might. To all which I answer.

1. I cannot consent to the interpretation which the Querist gives of those
words, Christ sent me not to Baptize, etc. When he thereby would have us
understand, that for Paul to Baptize, was no considerable end of his being sent
of Christ, if by Baptizing we understand Baptizing either in his own person or
by seeing it done by some other hands; Which latitude notwithstanding the
Querist allows. For there is no doubt but that for him to cause Baptism to be
administed to men when they did believe, was a considerable end of the Apostles
sending, as well as his preaching the Gospel that men might believe, and
therefore they are joined in the Commission thus: go ye therefore teach all
Nations, Baptizing them, etc. When therefore he says, Christ sent him not to
Baptize, doubtless he means, that the injunction did not lie upon him so much
to administer Baptism with his own hands (for that is the thing of which he
was speaking) as to Preach the Gospel, because that being a work that might
be done by an ordinary Disciple, he was not otherwise obliged in that case but
to take care that it should be done, if not by himself, yet by some other,
Acts 10.48. Peter commanded them to be Baptized in the Name of the Lord:
possibly by such assistants as the Apostles were wont to take with them, and
not unlike for that very purpose as well as for other causes, Acts 13.5. and
15.38. Just as it was in the case of Ministering to the poor; it lay upon the
Apostles, as the care of all the Churches did, to take care that Deacons should
be chosen for that work, but that they should be burdened with a personal
attendance upon that service (though sometimes they undertook it seemed to
them an unreasonable thing, seeing they had other work to attend which could
not so well be done by other hands as that might, Acts 6.2, 3 4 But if Baptism
had been so inconsiderable a business, and so little concerning the Apostles
to take care of, as this reason of the Querist imports, one would think they
should not have made such have as Paul and Silas did to Baptize the Jailer and
his house, not only the same hour of the night, but even whilst those cutting
lashes and stripes which they had newly received, were fresh upon them. Nor
would Annanias have hastened Paul as he did to be Baptized before he did eat
or drink, when as he had now fasted three days, Acts 9.9.18, 19 and 22.16.
Surely if the like case should fall out in our days, we would say God will
have Mercy and not Sacrifice.

2. That the B^pt^zing of Children was not so necessary in the Apostles days,
but that the Apostles did defer the Baptizing of them if not so long as the
Israelites did defer Circumcision, Josh. 5. yet that they did defer it till
they came to give account of their Faith I willingly grant; but that they did
so long suspend the Baptizing of men after they believed, I cannot believe,
because I find the contrary: and yet if you observe, the reason is no
otherwise a reason why though if Childrens Baptism had been lawful, the
pract^ce of it might have been forborne in the Apostles days, then that the
Baptizing of Believers themselves might have been forborne, and yet it seems
that could not be forborne upon any such pretense. For can we lightly imagine
that the Apostles hands should at any time be fuller of work, then when they
had those many thousands before them, and such an advantageous opportunity of
Preaching the Gospel as then presented it self, Acts 2. and therefore if they
might have used such a liberty of deferring Baptism as the Querist imagines,
upon account of more impo^tant affairs ly^ng upon their shoulders, why should
they have put themselves upon any such straits, as to Bap^^z^ three thousand
the some day they converted them? Doub^^e^t the opportunities of ma^y weeks
would have been little enough according to the z^ale of ou^ Age, especially if
Baptism be thought so inconsiderable a thing as to be done by leisure.

3. If the Baptizing of Infants had been any part of the Will of God or of his
institutions in the Apostles days, I cannot so easi^y think, but that the
Apostles notwithstanding their more weighty affairs, would in some time of
their lives or other have found time and opportunity of fulfilling that part of
righteousness as well as others, or how ever, would have enjoined others this
pract^ce, or else surely they would not have answered the Commission of their
Master, whose injunction was, that they should teach the Believers to observe
whatsoever he had commanded them, Mat. 28.20.

And therefore to what purpose is there in this case, mention made of those
cases wherein a man may break a Law and yet be blameless? or will any of
those Scripture instances the Querist points to, agree any better with the case
in hand, then harp and harrow? Mat. 12, 3, 4, 5.
The Priests in the Temple killed Beasts for Sacrifice on the Sabbath because
commanded, which otherwise had not been lawful, Ergo; The Apostles might
lawfully forbear Baptizing all their days though a duty commanded, having
other work to do of greater moment, though they had opportunity of doing both
this and that. The Discipl^s plucked Ears of Corn on the Sabbath, and David
did eat the show bread in case of necessity to sustein hunger and save life,
Ergo, Christ and the Apostles might omit B^ptizing all their time, though they
had no such necessity of other engagements upon them, but that they might
either do it themselves or command it to be done by others; unless we will
suppose they had not time and leisure to give out such a command where they
came, which yet we find they sometimes did Acts 10.48. John 4.2. as they did
also in other cases, in appointing that to be done by others, which they could
not so well attend themselves Tit. 1.5.

Without peradventure, the misunderstanding the Apostles intendment in that
expression of his, Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel,
has proved a snare to many in these days, to think more m^anly of the
Ordinance of Baptism, then ever the Apostle thought. For doubtless it was not
the Apostles drift in those words to bring down the esteem of baptism and to
magnify Preaching, but partly to show how little reason any had to glory in
that they had been Baptized by his hands rather then by such and such; but more
especially to satisfy them as touching the reason why though he converted all
or most of them to the Faith, as 1 Cor. 4 15. that yet he himself Baptized so
few of them as he had said, 1 Cor. 1.14.16. and his reason is not fetched from
the non-nec^ssity of Baptism (for we shall find that he took care to have
them B^ptized presently upon their believing, Acts 18.8.) but from the non
necessity of having it dispensed by his hands: and he further gives this
account why he did not Baptize them himself, but set others to do it, not
because he wanted time and opportunity to do it, but lest any should say that
he Baptized in his own Name.

XXXVIII. Querie answered.
1. Whether the Principle of the Children of new, alias old Baptism, which
puts them upon Baptizing, believers as the Apostles did, be a By-way, or the
Principle of the men of old alias new B^ptisme, which puts them upon Baptizing
Children, be the By way, let the Scriptures judge, or at least be the Rule to
judge by: there I am sure the Children the Querists speaks of, find that
practiced which answers their Principle; if the Querist, and the Brethren of
his way, cannot find theirs there too, but only fancy to themselves they can
fetch it about with a long Arm, let them look to it, lest their way do not
prove at last a By-way, and in the mean time that which leads them into many
other By-ways, By-thoughts, By-sayings, which will be found too light in the
balance of the Gospel, and which will turn to no good account in the day
when God shall try every man's work of what sort it is, 1 Cor. 3.13.

2. As for counting all persons not of our way, unclean and unholy, I have
already accounted with the Querist in some other Queries for those expressions,
and have showed him how he has miscast the reckoning: I would feign have him
to know that we can call and count some of men's ways and practices unclean and
unholy, and yet not so judge of their persons as to a total uncleanness. Do
we not know that Asa and Jehosophat were Servants of the Lord in their times,
and did approve themselves to a good degree of uprightness toward God in
taking away the high places and the groves of the Idols, 2 Chronicles. 14.5. and
17.6. and yet for all that, were to blame, and it is left on record as their
blem^sh, that they did not also take away the high places which the people had
erected for the worship of the true God, 2 Chronicles. 15.17. and 20.33.
to save themselves the labor of going to Jerusalem, the place which God had
chosen to place his Name in, whither they ought to have gone, Deuteronomy. 12.5. In
like manner we do acknowledge that ye have well done, and doubt not but God
has taken it well at your hands, in that ye have advanced to that degree of
Reformation at which ye have arived; but I must needs say, it yet remains a
blem^sh upon you, that you suffer amongst you any of those ways which men have
formerly devised to make the way of the Gospel more easy and plausible, as to
the flesh, then Christ has made it; and these blots are so essential to
Communion, as that we know not how to eat of your Sacrifice, and not be
partakers of your Altar, i.e. to hold Church Communion with you, and not make
our selves guilty of that which we condemn in the way of your Communion.

2. As for the crime laid to the charge of this humor (as out friend is
pleased to call it) of the Baptists, viz. the breaking the Bonds of Unity,
Love, and Peace, by which they were bound up with other Churches before, it is
nothing but what the Protestant Bishops underwent from the Pap^sts when they
went off from them; and the P^esbyterians from the Prelates; and the
Independents from the Presbyterians, when they separated themselves from them:
and therefore I hope no wise man will be much startled with such scare-crowes
as these, in his eying a work of Reformation, or think the worse of the
baptismall way, because it carries men yet a little further in reforming, upon
which account they are constrained to leave their friends behind, that will not
go with them, as they themselves also have done those from whom they have
departed.

3. But as for estimating Christianity it self, and acceptance with God by
this despised way of Baptism, surely if any do estimate Christianity by this
only (for otherwise I hope it may bear its part, and signify its numb^r in
the r ckoning as well as other Christian duties) they are much to b^ame; but
that the Querist did ever know, or has ground to believe that any the men he
speaks of, much less all, have or do make such an estimation, I cannot easily
conceive; sure I am such a thing is far from their frequent Declaration of
themselves as to this particular: and therefore how duly or unduly, the Querist
has coupled these poor Baptists with men of such unworthy strains and
tempers, as those are represented to be with whom they are compared, and into
whose company he has put them (for what cause he best knows) we must leave to
God and sober men to judge.

XXXIX. Querie answered.
1. That Mr. Philpot spoke or wrote, as he thought, in affirming Auxentius an
Arrian to be the first, and Pelagius the second, that nyed the Baptism of
Children, I will not deny, but that he had any good ground so to think or so to
say, is that which I do deny: for as Mr. Philpot did not speak this of his own
knowledge, so neither could any Author whom he must credit herein, be able to
affirm any such thing, unless he had been more then a man, and had known
what, and when every man in the world that discoursed these things, had
affirmed or denied concerning them. Besides, were not Authors of Books in
former times, at least some of them, men of like infirmity with several in
these times, who have written and affirmed things of the Independents
themselves, not so much out of knowledge and judgment, as out of disaffection?
if so; are not, or may not they be abused or misguided in their apprehensions,
that take all historical relations and representations concerning the
Anabaptists (falsely so called) for truth, as well as they are, and are like to
be, who accordingly do, or shall credit all that is written of the
Independents, by men disaffected to their way? Besides, what credit can be
given to ancient Authors hereabout, when many ancient Books are acknowledged
to be spurious, and others to be corrupted by the Papists, who have put in, and
put out, (in their long reign of darkness) what would best serve their
interest.

And that which is yet more considerable, is, that if it should appear by
unquestionable History (which for ought I could ever learn does not, but the
contrary) that the baptising of Children had been practiced in the next age
after the Apostles, yet unless it could be made appear that it was practiced
by approbation of the Apostles in the Apostles times, or that by some
injunction it ought so to have been, it would not at all be any ground to
warrant such a practice now, because as the mystery of iniquity did begin to
work in the Apostles days, so there was a departing in part from the purity
and simplicity of the Gospel, and an introducing of the inventions of men,
whilst it was yet but early. I know, says Paul, that after my departing,
shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock, also of your
own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples
after them, Act. 20.29, 30.

But 2. If the Querist thinks Mr. Philpot is worthy of credit in his foresaid
report, though he produce no Authors, may not the Authors of a Book, entitled
A very plain and well grounded Treatise concerning Baptism, be rather
credited in their allegation of Authors that assert the contrary to Mr.
Philpot? Amongst very many Authors which they produce on this account, I shall
instance in some few.

In page 19. of the said Book thus:

Tertullian in Libro de Baptismo: That Infants or young Children should not be
so speedily baptized: and upon the saying of the Lord; Suffer little Children
to come unto me and forbid them not: he speaks thus, Let them come when they
are grown, and are able to be instructed: when they can learn to know Christ,
then may they be Christians. For if youth be not so hastily to be put in trust
with earthly goods, why with heavenly? Let them therefore know first how to
desire that which is for their good, to the intent that it being desired, it
may be given them.

And now I doubt not but the Querist well knows, that Tertullian lived long
before Auxentius and Pelagius had a being in world, and therefore by this it
will appear, that Mr. Philpot was not worthy of credit in reporting them to be
the first that denied the baptising of Chi^dren.

Page 28. Erasmus in annotationibus supra, 5. cap. ad Romans Baptising of young
Children was not as yet in use by S. Paul's time. Roffensis contra cap. Babylon.
The first Rulars in their Church have used such manner of b^ptisme, as Christ
never used in his Church. Dr. Eckius against the new Church orders in the upper
Marquisdom and Territories of Noremburg, writes; That the ordinances
concerning the baptism of children, is without Scripture, and is found to be
only a custom of the Church.

Page 30. Bucerus in his book entitled the groundwork and cause, etc. In the
Congregation of God, confession of sins is always the first, the which in
times past went before baptism, for commonly children were baptized when they
came to their understanding. And again, in the beginning of the Chu ch, no man
was bapt^z^d and received into the congregation, but those that through h^aring
the word, wholly gave ov^r and submitted themselves to Christ. And again, in
annotationibus super 4. John. So much as in the Apostollicall writings are
written of baptism, is apparent that Baptism was Administered to none by the
Apostles, but those of whom they (concerning their regeneration) made no doubt.

Page 21. Cassander in libello de infantium Baptismo: It is certain that some
believers in time past, have withholden baptism from their children until
they were grown, and could understand and remember the mysteries of their
faith; yea also counseled not to administer baptism, as by Tertullian and
Gregory Nazianzen appears.

In same Page Zwinglius in his Book of Articles, Artic. 18. In the old time,
children were openly instructed, who when they came to understand, were called
Catechumens, i.e, such as are instructed in the word of salvation; and when
they had imprinted the faith in their Hearts, and made Confession thereof with
their Mouths, they were admitted to Baptism.

Page 25. Lodovicus vives in Augustinum de civetate dei. Lib. 1. Cap. 26. No
man in times past was brought to be bapt^zed, but those who were come to their
full growth, who having learned what it concerned, of their own accord desired
the same.

Page 31. Luther in his book of Annabaptisme acknowledges, that it cannot be
proved by sacred Scripture, that Childrens baptism was institut^d by Christ, or
begun by the first Christians after the Apostles. Page 20. Rupertus Tuitienfis
lib 4 de divinus officiis cap. 18. In former times, the custom in the Primit^ve
Church was, that they admin^stred not the Sacrament o^ Regeneration, but only
at the feast of Easter and Penticost, and all the children of the Church which
throughout the whole year, through the word were MOVED, when Easter came, gave
up their names, and were the following days till Penticost, instructed in the
rules of Faith, rehearsed the same by their baptism, and dying thus with
Christ, rose again with him.

Page 15. Justin Martyr in oratione ad Anthonium Pium: I will declare unto you,
how we offer up our selves to God, after that we are renewed through Christ.
Those amongst us that are instructed in the faith and believe that which we
teach them is true, being willing to live according to the same, we do admonish
to fast and pray for the forgiveness of their sins, and we also fast and pray
with them: And when they are brought by us unto the water, and there as we were
new born, are they also by new bi^th renewed: And then in calling upon God the
Father, the Lord Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost, they are washed in water.
Note that this Author is one of the first extant after the Apostles days.

Take also a few instances of such who though borne of Christian Parents, yet
were not baptized till instructed in the Faith.

Page 16. Erasmus and Wicleuius in vita Hieronomi ex ipsis Scriptis collecta
Hieronimus, borne in the City Sydon, of Christian Parents, and brought up in
the Christian Religion, was baptized at Rome in the 30 year of his age. Also,
Paulinus de vita Ambrosij and Nauclerus Chror. Gener. 13. Ambrosius borne of
Christian Parents, his Fathers Name was Ambrosius, and his Mothers Name
Marcelina remained instructed in the faith unbaptized till he was chosen Bishop
of Millain, at which time he received Baptism of a Catholic Priest.

Likewise Nauclerus Generat. 14. Anno Dom. 391. Augustinus the Son of the
virtuous Monica, being instructed in the Faith, was baptized, when he was
about 30 years of age, at the Feast of Easter. Moreover, Idem Generat. 14.
Constantinus the Emperor, born of Helena the Christian Queen, was by Christian
Priests converted to the Faith, and was baptized by Pope Silvester. Historia
tripartita, lib. 1. Bibliorum de Trinitate. Theodosius the Emperor borne in
Spain, his Parents being both Christians, was even from his youth instructed
and educated in the Catholic Faith, who faling sick at Thessalonia, was by
Achalio Bishop of the City, baptized, and thereupon recovered of his sickness.

Page 21. Pontius the Son of Markus a Christian, was Catechized and instructed
in the Christian Religion, and afterward was baptized by Pontiano the Bishop.

Page 22. Nazarius the Son of a Christian woman called Perpetua, embraced and
followed his Mothers Religion even from his tender age, who being Catechized
and instructed by Lino the Pope, received also Baptism. Also, Tecla and Erasma,
Daughters of Valentinian a Christ^an of Aquilea, were in the days of Nero the
Emperor inst^ucted in the Faith by their Father, and brought up in the Fear
of God, who being Catechized by Harmagora, were baptized in a running water.

And now let the Reader judge, whether these Testimonies against the practice
of baptizing Infants of old, have not much more in them, and are worthy of much
more credit the^ Mr. Philpots Testimony for it, together with Austin and Ierom
to help him.

XL. Querie answered.
1. Whether faith or the profession of Faith be the only or best ground whereon
to build a Baptismall administration, we shall not need to dispute; it is
sufficient that according to Scripture, it is such a ground, as without which
baptism was not administered to any (that we can find) in the Apostles days,
and therefore we say, neither ought it now so to be.

2. If the Querist thinks that the Apostles did insist upon believing, or a
profession of believing, in such men and women as were baptized by them, only
for want of better grounds, as supposing there were better to be had let him
but prove it, and I will think so too; Or else for my part I think they had no
reason to expect better then those which were every way sufficient, or then
such as God had appointed for that pu^pose; or if God did appoint any other,
why does not the Querist produce us a copy of that order or Appointm^nt of God?

3. The Querist puts the Question, whether Faith, or a Profession of Faith in
order to Baptism, were insisted on merely as, or because such in their
absolute or possitive nature, or whether not rather in respect of their
relative natures and properties? To which I answer, that for my part I am of
the Querists mind as unto this, that it is altogether irrational, yea indeed
I think a thing so irrational as never entered into any man's head to think,
that Faith or a profession of Faith, should be required of men in order to
Baptism, simply for Faith sake or merely for profession sake.

4. But though we are not so absurd as to hold Faith necessary to Baptism only
for faiths sake, yet it does not follow that then we must needs hold with the
Querist, that Faith is no otherwise, or in no other respect to be insisted on
as n^cessary to Baptism, but only as it is Significative or Declarative unto
the Baptizers and others, of the happy estate of those in whom Faith is, as
being persons in the Grace and Favor of God. For if persons being in a happy
condition as touching Gods love to them, be not the adeq^ate reason why he
wou^d have them B^ptiz^d, then the knowl^dge of this that they are in such a
condition, cannot be the adequate reason of Men's admitting them to Baptism;
because the reason of the ones participation, must be the reason of the others
admission of them to that part^cipation, and Gods reason of appointing Baptism
to be administered to men, must guide and limit men in their administration of
it in resp^ct of the persons to whom they do administer it.

But now that persons being in a happy condition already, is not the full and
adequate reason why God would have them baptiz^d, but rather that they might be
yet in a better and more happy condition, is most apparent from the end of all
Laws and Ordinances of God g ven unto men, and therefore this among the rest,
viz. the further good and benefit of men to be promoted by them; for otherwise
they would be no argument or token of his love to them: And why else should God
impose the use of them upon his Creature? Certainly it is not because God
stands in any need of them, or of their using of them, but because his Creature
has need of them, and may be bettered by them. Deuteronomy. 10.13. Mark. 2.27 Job
22.3. and 35.7 8.

If then the good of men, that is a further good, be the reason why God would
have them Baptized, then Faith becomes requisite here unto upon th^s account,
viz. not to declare them in good condition already, but because it is that
qualification or mean, without which the ordinance will do them no good,
without which the end of Baptism is not attainable, unless we will needs be
of that Popish Opinion, to think that the Grace of God and good of the
Ordinance, accrues merely by the work done, which opinion, its very probable,
g^ve the first being unto Childrens Baptism.

Faith then is to be insisted on in persons to whom Baptism is to be
administered, not for Faiths sake, nor yet simply as it is declarative of their
being in a happy condition in whom it is, but rather as it is declarative of
this, viz. that those persons in whom it is, and that by means of it are in a
due capacity to receive that good by baptism which God intends men in it, and
so the proper subjects of it.

5. That, it seems, which much inclines the Querist to think that Faith was
insisted on by the Apostles as necessary to be found in those to whom they
administed baptism, only as declarative of their being in a good and happy
condition, and which would not so have been insisted on by them, could they
have come to the certain knowledge of that their good condition any other way,
I say that which it seems inclines him thus to think, is this, because
otherwise he cannot tell how to conceive that Christ should be a meet or duly
qualified subject for this administration, he having no such Faith as the
Apostles requ^red in those whom they baptized, nor does he think that any man
will presume to say, that he was bapt^zed either contrary to, or besides the
rule or mind of God touching persons meet to be baptized, esp^cially
considering that himself renders this account of his desiring of and
submitting to baptism, viz. because it became him to fulfill all
righteousness, Mat. 3.15. To which I answer.

I will not indeed presume to say, that Christ was Baptized, either contrary
to, or besides, the rule given by God, touching persons meet to be Baptized:
But yet it will not therefore follow, that John's knowledge, of the good and
happy condition that Christ was in, in respect of Gods love to him, was the
only and adequate reason and ground of his administering baptism to him. For
though all the ends and reasons of administering Baptism to others, did not
meet, or were to be found in Christ, to render him a meet subject of
Baptism, as viz. Repentance for Remission of sins; yet there were several
things in Christ, obvious to John, besides his being in the favor of God,
which in common with others, rendered him a meet and capable subject of
baptism. As

1. The confession of his Faith, or which is the same, the declaration of
himself to John after such a manner, and upon such terms, as by which John did
perceive him a person meet to be baptized: for otherwise how should John come
to know that he was such an one? for till he came to be baptized of him, it
seems he did not know him to be the Son of God, as he himself test^fies John
1.31.33.34. And how^ver, if John knew that Christ was the Son of God, either by
his confession or otherwise, he knew also, that he did believe himse^fe so to
be: which very faith being found in another, viz. of believing Jesus to be the
Son of God, rendered him a meet subj ct of baptism according to common rule,
as we see in the Eunuch, the profession of whose faith, and upon which Philip
did b^p^^z^ h m was but this; I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
Acts 8.37. And why should not the same faith which rendered another duly capable
o^ baptism, render him capable of it in like manner?

2. Another common reason of adm ssion to baptism found in Christ, was his
professed desire to ob y the righteous Law, institution, or declared Will of
God, in being bapt^zed, though perhaps in other respects, he had not that need
of it, as others that received it had: Suffer it to be so now, says he to John
i.e. form to be baptiz^d by thee, for thus it becomes us (i.e. himself and
others) to fulfill all righteousness, or every L^w, or Precept of God, whereof
this of B^ptisme was one. And though John as it seems otherwise judg^d Christ
to have no need of his baptism, yet upon this profession of Christ's desire to
obey God therein, and his declaring it necessary, and comely for him so to do,
John did baptize him; for the Text says Then he suffered him, Mat. 3.15. And I
desire it may be observed, that the true reason of Christ his being baptized,
is here rendered, and that is, not his being in the love and favor of God, as
the Querist supposes, but partly his desire to fulfill and observe the same l^w
himself, which was imposed upon other men; and partly because of that
meetnesse, or comeliness that was in such an act of obedience or conformity to
the Will of God as that was: which may w^ll shame those, who think themselves
exempt from water baptism, because they have attained more otherwise, then
those newborn babes in Christ, were wont to have attained, at the time of
their taking up baptism: Christ, though he had not that need of Bap^^sm as
others had, yet he d^sired to show himself as obedient as any in stooping,
though it had been to the lowest ordinance, and least command of God.

3. That account which Christ had now given, of his knowledge, faith, and
desire to obey God, might well be a reason for John to conclude, that some good
and blessed effect would redound to Christ upon his taking up that Ordinance of
baptism, as indeed there did; for there upon the holy Ghost descended upon him
in the likeness of a done, and likewise a voice from the Father, declaring his
high contentment in him, saying, this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased, Mat. 3.16.17. And this reason of John's administering baptism to Christ,
was much of the same nature with that ground upon which other men and women
were wont to be baptized: For their declared qualification, of their Knowledge,
Faith and Desire to obey God, was still a ground to him that did administer
baptism, to believe that the ordinance would not be in vain to them, but a
means of much blessing.

And therefore, unless some such qualifications as these, could in some
measure be found in Infants, to render them capable su^jects of baptism, as
well as Christ, theris nothing at all to be inferred from Christ's being
baptized, to justify the administration of baptism to them. Neither on the
other hand, is there any thing duly to be argued from John's adm^nistering
baptism to Christ, to prove that a profession of faith, and a willingness to
obey God, is not necessarily required in all persons whatsoever, to whom
baptism ought to be administered.

The premises then considered, it is so far from being as evident as the Sun
at noonday, that all persons, and particularly Infants who may be known to be
in the love and favor of God without a profession of faith, are without faith,
or a profession of faith, as regularly and completely quallified for baptism,
as the loudest professors of their faith under Heaven, as that the quite
contrary thereunto is evident, if not as evident as the Sun at noonday, which
any but those that are blind may see, yet evident enough to be discerned by
considering men.

And thus, though I have not said all that might have been given in by way of
answer to these Q^eries, (for then perhaps as much might have been bestowed
upon one, as now is upon them all;) yet I hope by what is said, there are such
hints of light delivered, as by a rational improvement whereof the Reader may
easily come at ample satisfaction touching the cases of conscience therein
debated.

FINIS.

