A Glass of Justification, OR THE WORK OF FAITH WITH POWER. Wherein the
Apostles Doctrine touching Justification without the Deeds of the Law, is
opened; and the sense in which Gospel-obedience, as well as Faith, is necessary
to Justification, is stated. Wherein also the nature of that dead Faith is
detected, by which multitudes that hope for Salvation are (as is to be feared)
deceived; and the true nature and distinguishing properties of the Faith of
Gods Elect, is handled. Finally, the Doctrine of the imputation of Faith for
Righteousness is herein also briefly discussed; and the great wisdom and folly
of men about the proof of their Faith, touched. Published on purpose to
rectify some dangerous, and other damning mistakes of Men about their Faith,
and expectation of Justification thereby; and to awaken and quicken all to the
Work of Faith with Power. By William Allen, a poor Servant to the Lord Jesus.

What does it profit, my Brethren, though a man say he has Faith, and have not
Works? Can faith save him? James 2.14. LONDON, Printed by G. Dawson, for
Francis Smith, and are to be sold at his Shop, in Flying Horse Court in
Fleetstreet, near Chancery Lane end. 1658.

To that small Remnant of Christ's Little Flock which are wont to wait on him in
his PUBLIC WORSHIP, at their place of Assembly in Loathbury, London. The
Author truly desires a being filled with all the fullness of God: As he does
also to all the Churches of like constitution, for whose use this Address is
secondarily intended.
Dearly Beloved Brethren,


You that have had so great a desire hereby to promote the good of others, will
I hope, and am persuaded, be very careful to improve this new opportunity of a
further enriching your selves with the knowledge, sense, and savor of the
Doctrine contained in this Book, as a thing then which I know not wherein you
are more concerned. But Experience shows, that it is not an overly hearing or
cursory reading though of things of highest import to the Soul; such as are the
way, means, method and terms of man's Justification before God, and of the
apparent danger that men are in of being mistaken hereabout; and through this
mistake, of missing Justification it self: I say it is not a perfunctory doing
of these matters, that will fill the soul with any due sense of these things.
For how many are there that frequently hear, and sometimes read things that for
the nature of them make the spirits of others to burn and boil within them, and
yet they themselves hardly at all moved thereby? or if they do for the present,
just while they are under the immediate force of them, work some little
relentings and faint wishes that things were better with them, yet such motions
soon vanish like a dream when a man awaketh, which while he was dreaming of it,
did somewhat affect him. If then you would have this labor of mine (which yet
is not so much mine as Gods, by whose help you have it) truly to serve you, not
only by informing you more perfectly about the terms of your Justification,
but also in quickening you to more abundant care and diligence about the making
good your title to the promise of Justification it self; Then in reading hereof
let your mind be as much upon the temper of your heart and tenor of your life,
as your eye is upon the Book; and compare the Work of the one, with the
Doctrine of the other. And be often making a pause, and putting the question to
your Conscience; are things so and so with me? or does my Faith work thus and
thus as there you will find in the discovery of the living and dead Faith. The
effect of which carriage of yours according to this counsel of mine, you will
find through the blessing of God to be, that when you find the evidence of your
faith (which is your title to life) not to be so clear, nor of so perfect an
appearance in this and that, as in a matter of that consequence were to be
desired, you will thereby be stirred up to give all diligence to make your
calling and election sure, by amending what is amiss about the proof of your
faith, and by adding what is lacking to it.

And when you shall feel the lively impressions, which it may be a close
consideration of the Doctrine of this Treatise has wrought in you in the
hearing of it, or shall work in you by the reading of it; I say when these
impressions decay and want reparation, your wisdom then will be, to get close
to that fire again where you had your former heat, and that will warm you
again: stand by those words of eternal life, and hear them talk to you a while,
(Prove. 6.22.) When thou awakest, it shall talk with thee) and they speaking
with fiery tongues, will kindle upon you, and put you into a flame, Luke 24.32.
Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while
he opened to us the Scriptures? And this do as often as there is need, by calling
to mind what you have heard, or what you shall have here read in this kind: for
as the often rubbing of one hand against another, will keep them warm in cold
weather; So the frequent exercising of the mind with this holy and heavenly
Doctrine, will preserve the spirit from growing chill, and more especially from
freezing. And if the particulars of matter which have, or which shall have
affected you in this kind, shall at any time escape your memory, as
Nebuchadnezzars dream did his, with which he had been so much affected, ( Dan.
2.5.) you have here put into your hand that which will be a present help to you
at such a pinch: So that God has one way or other abundantly provided you with
means for your furtherance in grace in reference both to the information of
your judgments, quickening of your wills and affections, and the helping of your
memories, and all in order to your godly conversation and Saintly walk.

We seek not yours but you, (2 Cor. 12.14.) But that which puts you under the
greater obligation to usward in respect of Office, is that relation in which
we stand between the Lord and you, as being those vessels, earthen ones indeed,
by which Jesus Christ is sending and ministering to you from time to time,
nourishment and Food for your Souls. And what ever gifts we have, or what ever
labor we bestow among you, they are not so much ours, as the Lords, it is not
so much from us, as from the Lord from whom we receive all, and by whom we are
enabled to do all: and it is his care and love toward you to furnish you with
any that have a mind carefully to watch for your souls. From whence it is that
the Lord expects fruit from you as due to him upon account of our labor and
service among you: and for the same reason it is that in his name I demand it
of you: and upon the same account that saying of the Apostle will take place, 1
These. 4.8. He therefore that despises, despises not man, but God, who has
also given unto us his Holy Spirit.

But that which may well render this demand of mine as acceptable unto you as
it is reasonable in it self, is this; that though I demand Fruit, yet I demand
fruit that may abound to your account, Phil. 4.17. For however the Lord by your
yielding fruit will be well pleased, and his holy name and truth glorified, and
you shall thereby become to us also a Joy for the present, and a crown of
rejoicing in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming (1 These.
2.19.) yet in the issue, all the glory you shall bring to God, and all the good
you shall procure to men by rendering unto the Lord fruit in season, will
return into your own bosom; you shall eat of the fruit of your doing: if you
have your fruit unto holiness, the end will be to you everlasting life: (Romans
6.22.) and the more fruit in holiness now, the more fruit in happiness then
when you shall be rewarded by him who will render to every one according to
their works, both for kind and degree: if thou be wise thou shall be wise for
thy self, Pro 9.12.

Every branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more
fruit, says Christ the true Vine, John 15.2. It encourages a man to bestow
more and more cost upon his Vineyard, or upon his land when he finds it to quit
his cost in an answerable return of fruit. And so will the Lord rejoice over
you to continue and increase the means of your growth, and to prosper them more
and more for your increase in grace, if you be but found fruit-bearing
branches. As he will then delight to go down into his garden to gather fruit
among you, so he will blow upon his garden too with a heavenly breath to cause
the spices thereof to flow out, and your savor shall be as the smell of a
field which the Lord has blessed.

I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment; lest any hurt it, I will
keep it night and day, Isa. 27.3. And I hope you are sensible that its no small
privilege for you to have God to set a hedge about you, and to watch over you
in times of such spiritual danger as these are in which you live.

You know there are beasts of prey that are seeking to break in here, and to
creep in there; Foxes, little Foxes that seek to spoil the Vines that bear
tender Grapes, Cant. 2.15. Among which the Quaker is not the least active, who
under a pretense of singular holiness, and with two faces under one hood, have
overthrown the faith of some, touching the excellency and necessity of the holy
Scriptures, touching the Resurrection of the body of our Lord, and his personal
session at Gods right hand, and his coming again in person at the end of this
world to judge the quick and the dead, and in many other things: this you or at
least some of you have proved and found though their equivocations, subtle
evasions, and reservations of their particular and punctual opinions, hereabout
under general expressions have rendered their heretical deceit herein of a
harder preception and a more difficult discerning: which many unstable souls
abroad in the world, not having been able to discover, have taken the hook,
while it has been covered with a tempting bait of some deceivable appearance.

And if I am not much mistaken in scriptural prophesies, and predictions
touching the events of these last times, the Churches of Christ are like to be
tried with more and more subtle, refined, soul-insnaring temptations, such as
if it were possible should deceive the very elect. For as the devils policy
by longer experience, is and will be more and more improved, so his snares,
stratagems, and methods of deceving, will be carried on with more art and
plausible appearances: his former wiles having by experience been pretty well
discovered and laid open, he will come forth with new devices and cunning
fetches, and tricks of deceiving more sublime and spiritual: so that he must
have a good eye, that shall not take him for an angel of light, and his
Ministers for Ministers of righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.14, 15. we see already
that he does frequently and familliarly cheat men and women of their faith, and
in exchange for it gives them some new devised forms of notion, expression, and
action, by which they fancy themselves to have attained the end of their faith,
and to be now in the resurrection and to have passed the Judgment, and to be
now in the actual possession of eternal life. And to make his counterfeit coin
the more passable, what does he but mix it with some current money? (allows, yea
prompts his deceived ones, in their conversation among men in some things to
wear the sheeps clothing) that whilst men's eye is upon that he may secretly
insinuate to them that all the rest is of the same stamp and metal, which many
that are easy of belief, thereupon take by content, and so are cheated. And he
finely covers over all with Scripture expression, as if he were a Friend to
Christ, and would build with him, whilst he teaches unlearned and unstable
souls to wrest those Scriptures to their own destruction, and to carry them
quite from the mark at which they aim. And as he finds his time of deceiving
and doing mischief to grow shorter and shorter, so you may accordingly expect
to be put so much the more to it, by all and all manner of temptations and
assaults, which either his policy or restless rage can set on Foot, Rev. 12.12.

the feet of his Saints, and that by his own strength no man shall prevail: (1 Samuel 2.9.) and I hope you can truly say, My defense is of God which saves the
upright in heart, Psalm 7.10. He that is strongest among you, and most like a
Champion of the Lord to fight his Battles, would soon become weak as a Child in
the hand of strong Temptations if God should but a little leave him. Remember
Hezekiah, who though for the general bent of his heart it was said of him, That
he trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after him was none like him among
all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were before him, (2 King. 18.5.) yet at
one turn when God did but leave him to try him, that he might know all that was
in his heart, he fell till God helped him up again, 2 Chronicles. 32.25, 31. Ahd
when that servant of God, Psalm. 73.2. says, But as for me, my feet were almost
gone; my steps had well nigh slipped: what was the reason I pray you why his feet
were not altogether gone, and why his steps did not wholly slide? He gives you
the reason, verse. 23. in these words, Nevertheless I am with thee: thou have
holden me by my right hand: God held him by the hand, and therefore though he
slipped, yet he did not fall.

Sirs, Would you then be such a People which the Lord your God cares for, and
upon whom he sets his eyes from the beginning of the year, even unto the end of
the year? (Deuteronomy. 11.12.) Would you have neither the Boar of the Wood to waste
you, nor the wild Beast of the field to devour you? Would every one of you be
as a Branch which the Lord has made strong for himself, ( Psalm. 80.15.) by
fencing it for his own peculiar use and delight? then be sure you bring forth
fruit unto God answerable to that cost and care which he has bestowed upon
you; like the Earth that drinking in the rain that comes often upon it, brings
forth Herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, and so receives blessing from
God? Heb. 6.7. This is the way, and there is not another without this to be
kept from being preyed upon, either by those lying Spirits that are gone out
into the world to deceive, and which are like to go out, or by some fleshly or
worldly lust or other, (for one lust, as one Soldier, may take a man Prisoner
as well as a whole Army) unto one or more of which God has been wont to
deliver those that have not liked to have God (in respect of what he has
graciously bestowed upon them) in due acknowledgement, Romans 1.28, 29. 2 These.
2.11, 12. Psalm. 81.11, 12. Do you but remember to keep the word of the Lords
patience, and he will not forget to keep you in or from the hour of temptation
that shall come upon all the world to try them, Rev. 3.10.

Isa. 5.) or an empty Vine like Ephraim, bringing forth Fruit unto your selves,
( Hos. 10.1.) or like the barren fig tree ( Luke 13.6. Matthew. 21.19.) bearing
only the fair green leaves of Form and Profession without the savoury Fruit of
Righteousness and power of Godliness, such as the Lord looks for and loves, I
say if thus it should be; by that light which God has given me from the
Scripture, I cannot but Prophecy sad things unto you, such as are the
withholding of those spiritual showers which you have had to make you
fruitful, and the plucking up your hedge, and breaking down your wall of
Defense, and the cutting of you down from being any Church that Jesus Christ
will own.

Gods severity against the Old Testament Church upon this account, happened
unto them by way of type or example unto the New Testament Churches, for whose
admonition his severe proceedings in this kind are written and recorded, 1 Cor.
10.6.11. Romans 11.22. And we see that when God had first planted the house of
Israel and men of Judah a choice Vine and pleasant Plant, and had built a Wall
of partion about them, viz. his Ordinances, to distinguish them from the
Nations of the Gentiles, and to make them as a Garden enclosed; and had also
set a Hedge of his special Providence and Protection about them, and had
watered them with Rain from Heaven in the Doctrine of the Law and Prophets,
whose Doctrine did drop as the Rain, and whose speech did distill as the dew;
and then according to his cost, looking for the good Grapes of Judgment and
Righteousness, yet instead thereof meeting with the unsavory and wild Grapes
of Oppression and Crying, what does he do with his Vineyard in this case? What?
He commands the Clouds that they rain no rain upon it, (Isa. 5.6.) So that the
Complaint was, The Law is no more, her Prophets also find no Vision from the
Lord, Lam. 2.9. Whereupon followed a Famine, not of Bread, nor thirst for
Water, but of Hearing the Words of the Lord, Amos 8.11. The partition Wall
also, to wit, the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances ( Ephesians. 2.14,
15.) he brake down; upon which this Lamentation was taken up, saying, He has
violently taken away his Tabernacle, as if it were of a Garden, he has
destroyed his places of the Assembly: the Lord has caused the solemn Feasts
and Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and has despised in the indignation of
his anger the King and the Priest. The Lord has cast off his Altar: he has
abhorred his Sanctuary, etc. Lam. 2.6, 7. Finally, The Lord plucked up and brake
down the Hedge of his Protection which had been a Defense to them in their
enjoyment and solemnization of his Public worship, and exposed them unto the
grievous molestation and oppression of the enemy: upon which followed that
doleful Complaint, Psalm. 80.12, 13. Why have thou broken down her Hedges; so
that all they that pass by the way, do pluck her? The Boar out of the Wood does
waste it; and the wild Beast of the Field does devour it.

Behold here you have a taste of Gods sore displeasure against his own and only
Vineyard of old when unfruitful, after sufficient cost and care bestowed on it
to make it fertile. And if God spared not the natural Branches, take heed lest
he also spare not thee, was the Watchword of the great Apostle of the Gentiles
to a Gentile Church at Rome, Romans 11.21. And I beseech you Brethren let his
Admonition sink down into your ears, and take warning betimes. For where are
now I pray you those once famous and flourishing Churches of Corinth, Galatia,
Philippi, Colosse, Thessalonica, the seven Churches of Asia, yea, and of Rome
it self, which were planted and watered too by the Apostles themselves? Are not
those golden Candlesticks removed out of their place? Are not those Vineyards
laid waste? Are not those Fig Trees cut down as cumbering the ground? And
what is the reason of all this? Of a truth unfruitfulness has been the cause of
all, and the true reason why the Lord has let forth his Vineyard to other
Husbandmen, to see if they will render him fruits in their season, Matthew.
21.41. And you my Friends, among others, are those other Husbandmen unto whom
the Lord has how for the present let forth his Vineyards, expecting that Fruit
from you which those other Churches, now desolate, withheld from him. He is
now proving you by frequent dressings, prunings, waterings, rainings upon, and
watchings over, to see if you will bring him forth fruits meet for Repentance,
and worthy amendment of life. And if not; remember that word; And now also is
the Ax laid to the root of the trees: Every tree therefore which brings not
forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire, Matthew. 3.10. And again,
Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away, Joh. 15.2. And a
third time also, Luke 13.7. Then said he unto the Dresser of his Vineyard,
Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none:
cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground? Upon how many Churches have these
words taken hold, since they first came forth from the Lord? And the edge of
them is not at all blunted with cutting down so many, but is as keen and as
ready to do execution now as at the first; and will first or last cut down all
unfruitful Churches, and take away all unfruitful branches. And therefore it
exceeding nearly concerns you (my dearly beloved) and so it does all the
Churches, to take special care that you bring forth fruit, and that your fruit
may remain, according to Christ's word, John 15.16.

fruit remain, except you be as a tree planted by the waters, which shall not
cease from yielding fruit, Jer. 17.8. For how did the Apostles many times glory
over those first Churches that were planted by them, because of the first
fruits of their Faith, love, and patience, wherein they did for a time richly
abound? Romans 1.8. 2 Cor. 9.2. 2 These. 1.4. and yet how soon was the glory
departed? especially from among some of them, as if their goodness like
Ephraims had been but as a morning cloud, or as an early dew that goes away,
(Hos. 6.4.) And the Apostles even while they were yet among them, had too much
cause to change their voice concerning them, Gal. 4.20. For many there were
then while the Apostles had the dressing of them, who lead the way of that
dreadful decay first, and apostasy after, in which the Churches themselves (as
the event gives cause to fear) following in time, came to utter desolation.
They were as Jude describes them, Trees whose fruit withered, without fruit,
twice dead, plucked up by the roots, Jude 12. The foundation of their utter
eradication and final desolation was laid we see in the withering of their
fruit, first: I I pray you observe it and fear. It should seem at the first
they were not altogether without fruit, but their misery was, they fell into
spiritual decays, their Fruit withered, grew harsh and unkindly, thin,
shriveled and blasted. And that which in a short time followed this was, their
total barrenness, being without fruit, by which it being manifest they were
stark dead, and so no hope left of their bearing Fruit any more, the sad
conclusion was, plucking up by the roots.

There were at the first, excellent good things found in the Church of Ephesus,
for which Christ commended her, Rev. 2.2, 3. but having lost her first love,
and fallen into some decay, he threatens her, that except she were made
sensible of her sinking condition, remembered from whence she was fallen, and so
repented, and did her first works, and recovered her self again, he would come
unto her quickly, and remove her Candlestick out of its place, which since has
come to pass.

Behold then my Brethren, and be astonished and fear, lest you at any time
expose your selves to like danger by like declinings: Look to your selves, that
we loose not those things which we have wrought, but that we receive a full
reward, 2 Jo. 8. Do not bear upon what you have been, and what you have done,
but forgetting those things which are behind, be reaching forth to those things
which are before, and pressing on toward the mark for the price of your high
calling, Phil. 3.13, 14. Remember that better is the end of a thing, then the
beginning of it, Eccles. 7.8. For that dissolution and death which is come upon
those Churches, recorded both in Old Testament and New; which at the first, and
for some time were so promising, and so flourishing, plainly evinceth it to be
a far harder matter to hold on well, and so to make a good conclusion, than it
is to set out well, and to make a good beginning. What not one of those
Churches but miscarried first or last! good Lord what Church, what Christian
shall not tremble at the consideration of it! Sirs, you have begun in the
Spirit, I beseech you take heed of ending in the flesh: let that never be said
to you which Paul spoke to a people to whom the Gospel was so precious at the
first, as that for the sake of it they received him as an Angel of God, yea
even as Christ Jesus, and could have plucked out their eyes to do him good: Ye
did run well, who did hinder you, that ye should not obey the truth? Gal. 4.14,
15 and 5.7. If the Scripture had said nothing to inform you touching your
danger of cooling and declining, yet this present age in which we live has
furnished you with so many sad precedents and examples of the withering of such
whose hopeful beginnings in Christianity promised very much, as may
sufficiently admonish you to take heed of the like miscarriage. Yea the general
decay of that spirit of tenderness, sobriety, and close engagement of Soul to
God, which was found in Christians twenty or thirty years ago, when there was
less light, and more heat, may well inspire you with a spirit of fear, lest you
should be infected with the epidemical disease of this Age.

have a far more light and low esteem of the form and fashion of Gods house,
then in truth of right belongs to it. But that which I esteem the greater
danger by far, and of which in love and tenderness I warn you, is the placing
of Religion chiefly in Form, and men's valuing the goodness of their condition
by that, though a lively and fresh savor of the greater things of the Gospel,
such as are the daily work of mortification, self-denial, living by Faith,
humbleness of mind, sweetness of behavior, secret and close communion with
God, fear of grieving the Spirit, Righteousness, Mercy, Love and Bounty, be
wanting. For at this door as may be conceived, destruction entered upon the
former Churches; and I pray God it prove not the bane of many now in being.

At that very time when God by his Prophet Esaiah threatened his Vineyard,
saying, I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break
down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down. And I will lay it waste: it
shall not be pruned, nor dug, but there shall come up briars and thorns: I
will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it, (Isai. 5.5, 6.) I
say at this very time when God thus threatened that Congregation and chosen
people of his for their unfruitfulness, they did abound in the form, and placed
much confidence therein. They had a multitude of Sacrifices, and did abound in
Oblations, Incense, New Mons and Sabbaths: they frequently called Assemblies
and solemn Meetings, yea they spread forth their hands, and made many prayers,
Isai. 1.11, to 15. The Lord as he says, Psalm. 50.8. would not reprove them for
their Sacrifices and Offerings, for he did acknowledge them to have been
continually before him, and says that he was full of them, Isa. 1.11, to 15.
Yea they did seek God daily, and had a delight to know his ways as a Nation
that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinances of their God, and took
delight in approaching to God, Isai. 58.2. And such was their confidence of
their acceptance with God upon this account, and for that they added unto all
the rest Fasting, as that they wondered that God should not hear them, and
readily help them. And therefore they are brought in expostulating the matter
with God thus, Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not?
wherefore have we afflicted our Soul, and thou take no knowledge? They were
otherwise unworthy in their ways, as touching Judgment, Mercy, and the love
of God, and yet verily thought themselves to be the only people of God, and in
Covenant with him, and his promises to be theirs, because of that Form of Gods
Worship and service which was amongst them. Which way of waiting upon God, and
worshipping him, though of his own appointment, when found in company and
conjunction with a carnal and unholy life otherwise, is mentioned by God as if
it were every whit as provoking to him as the great abominations condemned by
his Law. And therefore he does not only say that it was iniquity indifinitely,
and that he could not away with their devotions, and that his soul hated them,
and that they were a trouble to him, and that he was weary to hear them, (Isa.
1.13, 14.) but compares them with the most provoking sins, Idolatry and Murder:
He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a man: he that burns Incense, as if
he blessed an Idol? and why? they have chosen their own ways, and their Soul
delights in their abominations, Isai. 66.3. Just as if God should now compare
Preaching, Hearing, Baptism, Prayer, Breaking of Bread, and the holding all
the principles of the Doctrine of Christ in opinion and notion, with
worshipping of false gods, and murdering of men, while used, held and
practiced, by men whose conversation is of a carnal and unholy cast. And
therefore no marvel if Churches Formality in Religion hastens their
destruction; their being Spewed out of the mouth of Christ.

The Law (says the Apostle) is good if a man use it lawfully, 1 Timothy 1.8.) and
so I say of all the Ordinances of Gods House from the greatest to the least of
them, they are all good, i. e. a means of good to you, if duly used and kept
within their own bounds, there is a blessing in every one of them; and
therefore to loose any of them, is to loose so much of the blessing of God as
he has put into them for your good, and to slight any of them, is to reproach
the wisdom and goodness of God which contrived them for your benefit. But if
you shall invert the proper order and use of them, if when God has made them
servants as it were to the life of holiness and power of godliness, if you now
shall cause these to sit above, and the other to stand below in your hearts; if
your heart be more upon them, if your care be more to promote these, if more of
your zeal be spent about these then about your own and other men's conformity to
Jesus Christ in the inward frame and heavenly temper of the mind, and lowly and
lovely deportment in life, for the sake whereof all the Ordinances were
ordained: or if you shall value your selves by what you are in these rather
than by what you are in that which is the end to which these tend, then shall
you put a bar to your spiritual growth in grace and holiness by them, and loose
the end for which they are designed by God, and render your selves such as in
whom his soul, his spirit will take no pleasure. Circumcision verily profits
if a man keep the Law, to wit, conscionably in all other things: ( Romans 2.25.)
and so Baptism verily profits if a man keep the Gospel faithfully in all
other the holy enjunctions of it to which his Baptism obliges him; but if thou
be a breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made uncircumcision: if you be
breakers of the Gospel, the Statutes of Jesus, your Baptism shall be made no
Baptism to you: and as the Children of Israel were counted but as Ethiopians
unto God, for all their Circumcision, so shall you be as Indians unto him, for
all your Baptism, Amos. 9.7. You know of what it was a sign in the Scribes and
Pharisees, to be more zealous of the lesser matters of the Law, than of the
greater, Mat. 23.23. And truly I can judge it no better a sign for men to be
exact, strict, and punctual in matters of Form, and to be indulgent to ways
and things, which entrench upon the power of Godliness, like them which strain
at Gnats, and swallow Cammels, keeping a stir about that which costs them
little, but favoring themselves in what would try their Christianity indeed.

These things I say, not to teach you in the least, to have a slight opinion of
any of the Ordinances of the Lord Jesus; no let my tongue rather cleave to the
roof of my mouth, than that I should move it or my pen to the disparigement, or
against the honor of any of the sacred Ordinances of the New Testament. But as
it is no disparagement to the Female Sex to say, that the Man was not created
for the Woman, but the Woman for the Man, (1 Cor. 11.9.) so is it no dishonor
to the external Form of the Christian Religion and Worship to affirm it to be
made for the Power sake: howbeit this I say also, that as the Man is not
without the Woman, nor the woman without the man, in the Lord; so neither is
the power of Godliness without the Form, nor the Form without the Power, in the
Lord, but both mutually helpful one to another, 1 Cor. 11.11.

My aim and scope then is, to arm you against degenerating into mere Form and
Carcass in Religion, without the spirit of life and power, as that which will
betray you should you be guilty of it, into the same, or as bad a condition as
befell the Apostolical Churches, whose glory was long since laid in the dust.
For as this very thing was that which prepared the Congregation of Israel for
casting out of Gods sight, as a dead and unsavory Carcass, (as I showed before)
so without question it was the same thing which brought the Primitive Churches
themselves to nothing. Take the Church of Sardis for an instance, who while she
was in the Wane, and her Sun going down, but not quite set, received a rouzing
admonition from Christ, as you may see Rev. 3.2, 3. But what was her Fault, and
what was her charge? verify it was this; Thou have a name that thou live, and
art dead, verse 1. Her Fault was not that she had a name to live, but that she
had the name without the thing. And what was it that gave her the name to live,
or to be alive, but the Form? And what was it that denominated her to be dead,
notwithstanding the name she had to live, but the want of spiriritiul life and
power to inspire her?

And truly Friends we had need the best of us all to set these cautioning,
wakening, quickening considerations before our eyes, seeing the danger specified
is so great, that few of the ancient Churches have been able to hold out and
bear up against it; and how far prevalent upon the present Churches, I leave to
you and to themselves to judge, and seriously to lay to heart: And O that there
were not too much cause of lamentation and sorrow on this account! But
whosoever under our Form and Way of Profession, shall be found tardy herein,
has the greater sin.

their fruitless and scandalous walking, have been a scab and scandal to our
way, and have laid a stumbling block of their haughtiness, disdain, presumption
and rashness, and sometimes of looseness too, in the way of other men? By which
they as once Elie's Sons, have caused the way of God to be abhorred by some, to
be vilified and set at naught by the tongues and pens of others, and the light
and beauty of it to be hid and covered from many who otherwise would I am
confident have seen and embraced it. And by which also they have filled their
faces with shame, and souls with sorrow, who have designed nothing but
peculiarity of Honor to the Gospel, and edification to men by engaging in that
profession: after the same manner as some in the Church of Corinth, were
sometime an humbling to holy Paul, by their Debates, Envyings, Wraths, Strifes,
Back-bitings, Whisperings, Swellings, Tumults, and other enormities that were
among them, 2 Cor. 12.20, 21. I write not these things to shame you, but as my
beloved Brethren I warn you, (1 Cor. 4.14.) lest any of you should cause the
way of truth to be evil spoken of, as some others have done.

But ye Beloved, if ye have any mind to lift up the head of your way, which the
weakness of some, and wickedness of others in it have caused to hang down, and
to complain of being fallen into too many ill hands: if you have any desire to
open men's eyes to see that which you say you see, and to commend your cause to
their Consciences as that which is of God, then labor to outstrip and excel
all that dwell about you, in humility, sobriety, meekness, patience,
long-sufferance, gentleness, goodness, injustness and fairness of dealing, in
love, mercy, and bounty, and in your readiness to every good work. For the most
of men are sooner persuaded to think well of this or that way which comes forth
in the Name of God, by the goodness of their behavior that profess it, than by
the strength of their Arguments by which they assert it; and better understand
the plain language of a good life, than the subtilties of Disputation. Men may
talk over their way long enough before they get any ground of men, unless the
goodness of their cause be made to shine through the goodness of their
conversations. I nothing doubt but that if the Argument from Life in the
Anabaptists (as they will needs call us) did but as far excel those that are
contrary minded, as their Argument from Scripture for their way, does excel
theirs for their way that oppose them, there would be but few that truly fear
the Lord, would be able to hold it out against them. But the unhappiness is,
there is some unlovely thing or other, which some that are weak, and others
that are unworthy, lay as a stumbling block in their way, and their eye is so
much upon this, as that it causes them to suspect there is somethng worse in the
Argument for our way, then they can see.



For would it at all follow, that because the sins and abominations that were
found among the children of Israel, were more and greater than those in Sodom
and Samaria, (Ezekiel. 16.47, 48, 51.) that therefore the external Form of Worship
amongst them, and professed by them, was not of God? Or that because in the
Apostles time there was such Wickedness among the Christians, as was not so
much as named among the Heathen, and many walking in pernicious ways, (1 Cor.
5.1. 2 Pet. 2.2.) that therefore the Christian Religion and Profession was but
a delusion? Or might they not as well conclude, that because such strange and
fearful judgments, one in the neck of another pursued the Congregation of
Israel first and the several primitive Churches after, as broke both the one
and the other in pieces, and left them at last dreadful spectacles of the Lords
sore displeasure, that therefore the Form of Religion and Worship amongst the
one people or the other, was not in their respective times and seasons of God,
but the contrivement of men? Would it be worthy wise men thus to argue? Or is
their arguing against our way from the aforesaid premises, of any better
import? I would pray them to judge.

I will not deny but that possibly the Judgments of God may have at times
pursued many under our Form, both particular persons and whole Churches, when
they have corrupted their ways, and turned Religion into mere Form and prided
themselves in the Form, as if this of it self would exalt them above all others
in Gods favor: and this is nothing but what I have now been foretelling from
Scripture grounds, shall yet befall more of them, if they bring forth no other
fruit to God but leaves. But this severity of God against particular persons,
or Churches that have been under our Form upon the account before specified, is
so far from being an argument that our Form is not of God, that it rather turns
to an excellent testimony, and amounts to a kind of demonstration, that it is
of God.

For by how much the nearer any fort of men have been wont to draw unto God in
the Form of his Worship, and yet have been tardy in some extravagances or other
that have profaned or brought disgrace upon the way of God professed by them,
by so much the severer has the Lord still been found in the way of his
proceeding against them. When the Lord in an unusual way of Judgment smote
Nadab and Abihu, Priests of the Lord, for their unworthy act, this was the
account of it, Levit. 10.3. This is it that the Lord spoke, saying, I will be
sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be
glorified. Upon which account, above fifty thousand of the men of Bethshemesh
and Uzza also, were handled more roughly for being so bold with the Ark, than
the Philistines were, 1 Samuel 6. 1 Chronicles. 13. And its very probable that
Annanias and Saphira, had never fallen in this world by so severe a stroke as
they did for telling a lie, had they not made their approach so near to God as
they did, in the Form of their Profession, Acts 5. And in that the Lord was
more quick in his Judgments inflicted on Israel, and sometimes more severe,
than he was in his proceedings against the heathen round about, it was because
their sins were so much the more provoking, by how much they were a people
nearer to God in Form of Profession, and by special obligation, then others
were, Amos 3.2. And when the Lord Christ threatens to spew the Church of
Laodicea out of his mouth, for her luke-warmness, Revel. 3.16. he presently
adds; as many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, be Zealous therefore and repent,
verse. 19. the nearness of relation hastens the rod. Is it any argument that the
Church of Rome is the true Church of Christ, Or that the Form of her Worship,
is of the best kind, because she sits so long as a Queen and sees no mourning,
Or because it is so long before her desolation comes? Surely no. For the tenor
of Christ's threatenings against Churches under the true Form when once they grew
Formal and carnal, run thus; I will come unto thee QUICKLY and will remove thy
Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent, Rev. 2.5. Repent or else I
will come unto thee QUICKLY, and will fight against them with the sword of my
mouth, Rev. 2.16. In that God therefore is wont to be so swift a witness
against a people under the right Form of professing his name when provoked by
unsuitable walking, and yet is so slow as experience proves to take vengeance
of the Harlot Church who has broken the everlasting Covenant, and changed the
Ordinances, (the Church of Rome I mean which has now stood undemolished for
many ages,) well may the examples of Gods severity against some of your
Profession, be a rouzing admonition to you my brethren to fear and tremble
before the Lord, and to take heed of Formality in Religion, of unfruitfulness
in your way, of scandalous walking, and of espousing any tenent or practice
dishonorable to the Gospel or prejudicial to the glorious propagation thereof,
the usual forerunners of Church Desolation, but may not as I conceive, by any
means be received as any valid argument against that part of the Form of your
Profession it self, wherein you differ from other Christians; I mean of
Baptizing after profession of Repentance and Faith, as the only Scriptural way
of entering and admitting persons into visible Communion with the Church, but
rather as a proof of the divine original of it.

who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not:
(1 Pet. 2.23. and of them who when they were defamed, entreated, (1 Cor. 4.13.)
and when they had mischievous things spoken against them, were as a deaf man
that hears not, and as a dumb man that opens not his mouth, and in whose
lips are no reproofs, Psalm. 38.12, 13, 14. And the injunction is strong upon
you, 1 These. 5.15. See that none render evil for evil unto any man: and again,
be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good, Romans 12.21. And I must
needs warn you against the use of those unhandsome reflections and that broad
language which I find some too apt to use toward their antagonists in their
controversal writings, which I utterly dislike, and bear my witness against, as
that which is unbeseeming the sobriety and humility of Saints, and which does
greatly wrong and prejudice the cause they plead, in the minds of sober people.
Its no matter how sharp and cutting your arguments be, but let them always be
wrapped up in soft words. And if ever you would have truth to gain upon men by
your mannagement of it, let the manifestation of love and good will to the men
themselves, prepare them to consider and receive what you have to offer. And
let it be, and be made appear to be matter of real grief to you that darkness
on either side should make you and other good men to differ. Avoid as muuh as
in you lies both heights and heats of spirit and language. Speak evil of no
man, but be gentle, showing all meekness unto all men, Tit. 3.2. and remember
that the servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt
to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, 2 Timothy
2.26, 25.

Luke 18.31, 32, 33, 34. Then he took unto him the twelve, and said unto them,
behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all things that are written concerning the
Son of Man shall be accomplished. For he shall be delivered to the Gentiles,
and shall be mocked, and spitefully entreated and spitted on: and they shall
scourge him, and put him to death, and the Third day he shall rise again. And
they understood none of these things: and this saying was hid from them,
neither knew they the things which were spoken. Why did they understand none of
these things? Was it because the Doctrine was obscurely delivered? certainly
no; for neither that nor any other Doctrine could lightly be more plainly
delivered then it was. Or did they wilfully shut their eyes against a plain
truth? that I suppose no Christian can imagine. But the true reason doubtless
was, because they were pre-possessed with a contrary notion and opinion, as
their Brethren the Jews amongst whom they lived, and with whom they had been
trained up in the tradition of their Fathers, generally were, and that was,
that the Messiah should not dye, and consequently not Rise again, as you may
see John 12.34. and 20.9. And therefore while this was rooted in their minds,
and their thoughts ran strongly upon it, the plainest words of a contrary
import, could not enter into their Soul. And wherefore do I present you with
this? but to let you know, that its not only possible, but greatly propable,
and to me unquestionable, that the disagreement of many in Judgment with you,
proceeds from the like cause of a preintanglement of mind; and that the true
reason why many who do truly fear the Lord (as the Disciples under the foresaid
mistake did) do not receive your Allegations and grounds for your way, in
opposition to Infant Baptism, nor can understand them to be of God, though as
we think plainly enough built upon the Scripture, is, because they are deeply
prepossessed with the contrary opinion, which they have drunk in under the
approbation and authority of an ancient Tradition, and recommended to them, not
only as a common custom of the most that profess Christianity, but also by the
concurrent consent of many both learned and godly men, both heretofore, and now
pleading its cause; which may as well make your Doctrine touching your way, as
inaccessible to their Judgments, and as incredible to their minds, as Christ's
Doctrine touching his Death and Resurrection was to his Disciples, while
fore-stalled with a deep impression of a contrary opinion, ushered into the
mind, and rivited in the Soul, by the seeming authority of the Tradition of the
Elders. The zeal to which Traditions, was such a block in Paul's way, as ( Gal.
1.13, 14.) though he served God with a pure conscience from his forefathers, as
he himself testifies, (2 Timothy 1 3) and so had a zealous mind both to know and
do the will of God, profiting in his Religion above his equals, yet his mind
being swallowed up with zeal of those traditions that were contrary to the main
Principles of the Gospel, touching the Death and Resurrection of Christ, John
12.34.) he could not by all that light which shone in the Doctrine and Miracles
of the Apostles, see the truth to be the truth, till an unusual light from
Heaven which shone to him in the way to Damascus, delivered him from being any
longer captive to those Traditions. And that which has been the case of some,
may be, and doubtless is the case of others; For the thing that has been, (as
the Wiseman says, Eccles. 1.9.) It is that which shall be, and there is no
new thing under the Sun.

And therefore you see there may be reason and cause enough for you to fix men's
dissenting from you, upon, another ground than want of integrity, and truness
of love to the Truth, so far as discerned. And truly Sirs, where there is a
better Foundation for you to fix their dissenting from you on, the Law of
Charity forbids you to seek a worse. And I nothing doubt, but that there are
many, concerning whom you have sufficient cause to judge, that if they saw as
you see, would readily do as you do, in that wherein you do worthily. Do you
not remember that your hearts, (for many of you) were sincere to God for many
years, whilst you were of their persuasion? And would not they have made a
wrong judgment if any should then have questioned your integrity upon account
of you not seeing what they saw? And therefore surely your own experience
herein, obliges you to judge the best of others, who now are what you once
were. And therefore my exhortation is, that with all Christian respect and love
you own and honor such, so far as they and you have attained the same thing.
There will many be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, that have built upon
Christ the only Foundation, some of whose works notwithstanding shall burn,
that have been unduly built on that Foundation through misprision, and they
themselves suffer loss upon that account, 1 Cor. 3.14, 15. And therefore though
it will be very safe for you to reject those works, when yon discover them to
be such as will bring loss with them to those that embrace them, yet it will be
your wisdom to receive and embrace those persons themselves in the arms of
Christian love, whom the Lord will receive, and with whom you hope to triumph
in bliss for evermore.

our souls, (which we have cause with thanksgiving unto God for ever to
remember) may also prosper their endeavors with like success to many others.
And God forbid that any of us should by any indiscreet zeal, hinder the
salvation of men, while we design the promotion thereof. Remember that the
souls of men are precious things, and that it becomes you to act with fear and
trembling in things wherein they are much concerned; else you may like an
unskilful Midwife, destroy them, whilst you design to deliver and save them.
Edification and Salvation is the end of Ordinances and the orderly
Administration of them, and the means are to be more or less strained so as the
end may best be provided for, not to the laying of any Ordinance or Gospel
Order totally aside, but in urging them as men are able to bear them with
safety of the edification of their souls in the main, Romans 14.1. For look what
the safety of the people is in Civils, that Edification is in Spirituals, to
wit, the supreme Law to which all must stoop. And therefore when the strict
observation in the letter of such or such a Law, falls out to cross the end of
its own institution, as sometimes it may; whether it does not so far and in
that case, and for that time, loose its power of obliging to the letter, is a
thing worthy your serious consideration. Especially considering that Christ
seems to excuse a litteral breach of the Sabbath in his Disciples, upon a like
ground, saying, the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath, Mark
2.27. The Sabbath was made for man; that is, for man's ease, rest, and
refreshing: for this plainly was one end of the Sabbath, Exodus 23.12. Deuteronomy.
5.14. And therefore when the forbearance of such an act of bodily labor as the
gathering of ears of corn, and preparing them for food (which bodily labor in
the strictness of the letter in ordinary cases, would have been unlawful, Exodus
16.27, 28, and 35.3.) crossed that refreshing of nature for which God intended
the Sabbath, the Law of the Sabbath prohibiting such labor, lost its force in
that case, and for that time. I confess it requires much skill and judgment to
make this practicable in particular cases; but I offer it that you might be
thinking of it.

Let the answer of Christ to his Disciples in another case, satisfy you in
this, Mark 9.38, 39. verses, And John answered him, saying, Master we saw one
casting out Devils in thy Name, and he follows not us, and we forbad him,
because he follows not us. But Jesus said, forbid him not, for there is no
man that shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me.
Though this man did not concur with the Disciples in that orderly way of
following Christ, yet as long as he did men good by using his name, Christ
would not have him taken off, or to be prohibited to act. If any the Ministers
I now speak of, have so much faith in the name of Christ, and love to the souls
of men, as to be casting the Devil out of their souls by the word of Christ,
its ten thousand pitties to hinder them. If you can by any means be an help to
them to do it better, as Aquilla and Priscilla were to Apollos, (Act. 18.26.)
well and good, but never forbid any man the doing good because he does not do
it in the best way. Paul's temper is your safe pattern, who rejoiced that Christ
was preached and the Gospel spread, although not always by the best and purest
hand. What then? (says he) notwithstanding evary way, whether in pretense, or
in truth, Christ is preached, and I therein do rejoice, yea and will rejoice,
Phil. 1.18.

labor in the word and doctrine, not only by a frequent preaching of it, but
also by a diligent meditation and study in it; So that when they preach, they
may preach upon the most edifying and quickening terms. Which yet what is it
more than Paul's exhortation to Timothy? whose gifts doubtless, might better
have exempted him from that charge than any of ours can: Give attendance to
reading; meditate on these things: give thy self wholly to them: Study to show
thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of truth: take heed unto thy self and to thy doctrine,
continue in them, and the like, 1 Timothy 4.13, 15, 16. 2 Timothy 2.15. You cannot be
ignorant what advantage is made of it against our way, when any opportunity can
be taken hold of to object the lowness of parts, and rawness of matter, among
those of our way, that undertake the great work of teaching. And I am very
sensible that too much advantage in this kind is given by some, who out of an
odd conceit and humor (for it is no better) of declining the way of the
National Ministry, decline also the best way of edifying the people.

I know very well that there has been wont to be a great deal of vain
curiosity used many times among many of the National way; as if they bestowed
more thoughts upon method and quaintness of expression, than upon matter; more
cost upon the triming, than upon the garment it self: as if they designed more
to take the ear of their auditory, then to touch the conscience: a vanity,
shall I say to be laughed at, no, but to be lamented, that ever such should
undertake the feeding of souls, that have no more sense of what belongs to it.
But where any out of faithfulness to men's souls, and out of an earnest desire
to convince, convert and edify them, shall soberly and gravely contrive their
Sermons into such a Form, as by which the understanding may be most fed, and
the conscience best come at, and the sense and majesty of the Scriptures in
their scope and coherence, in their consociations and emphasis, rendered most
lightsome, cutting and quick; it would be a lamentable weakness for any to take
another course, not because its better, but because it is another, or to think
it better because another. For one Christian to differ from another where there
is cause, is commendable, but to affect to differ more than needs must, argues
a frame of spirit far different from blessed Paul's, who became all things to
all men, (so far as possibly he might with a good Conscience) that he might by
all means save some, 1 Cor. 9.22. Edification is the end of preaching; that
course therefore in preparing to preach, and that way and method in preaching,
that tends most to edification, and so reaches its end, is certainly the best.
But all experience proves against all contradiction, that as the case is with
us, who speak not upon like terms of special inspiration as the Apostles did;
laborious study, with prayer in preparing to preach, and an orderly proceeding
from one thing to another in preaching, is most edifying and profitable, both
to the Preacher himself, and they to whom he preaches; and being so, it becomes
a duty, by virtue of that general rule, 1 Cor. 14.12. Seek that you may excel
to the edifying of the Church. Who ever has the best gift of speaking
extempore to the edification of the People, (as some do much excel others
therein) shall yet much improve his ability of speaking more to their
edification by a due and convenient proportion of premeditation and study. And
therefore when men may do better, and do not; that Scripture would be thought
on, Mal. 1.4. Cursed be the deceiver, that has a Male in his Flock, and voweth
and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing.

Neither is it my intent at all that any man should so lean upon his studies
and preparations, as to tie himself to any Form of words and expression, or in
the least to lessen his humble and hearty dependence upon the Lord for
assistance; but that he should in a deep sense of the weightiness and wonderful
concernment of the work, and of the vast disproportion that is between the
service in the glory of it, and his abilities that undertakes it, entirely
depend upon the Lord for largeness of heart toward the People, for freedom of
mind, and clearness of thoughts, for wisdom, courage, and liberty of speech,
to declare the matter prepared upon the plainest, clearest, most affecting and
most edifying terms, together with what else the Lord shall bring to mind to
accommodate and issue the discourse. Nor does the promise which God has made
of giving his spirit, and of pouring out gifts, or the like, render the
diligent labors and studies of the Ministers of the Gospel needless, any more
than Gods promise of the earths bringing forth her increase, does excuse the
Husbandman the diligent labor of plowing and sowing, which as the Prophet
observes is the fruit of the instruction or teaching of God, Isa. 28.24, 25,
26. When God made promise of giving unto the Preacher, such wisdom as none had
before him, or should have after him, (1 King. 3.12.) he did not thereby exempt
him from, but rather oblige him to the utmost search, labor, and travel in
getting wisdom, and methodical contrivement of things in the improvement of
it, for others instruction. To his obtaining of what God had promised in this
kind, see his behavior, as he himself expresses it, Eccles. 1.13. The
Preacher was King over Israel in Jerusalem, and I gave my heart to seek and to
search out by wisdom, concerning all things that are done under heaven: This
sore travel has God given, (mark that) unto the Sons of men to be exercised
therewith. And for his improvement of his great wisdom upon the best terms for
others instruction, and this as a fruit of his wisdom too, see what he did,
Eccles. 12.9, 10. Moreover, because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the
people knowledge; yea he gave good heed, and sought out and SET IN ORDER many
Proverbs. The Preacher sought out the matter, and disposed that matter into
order, by which he taught the people. And therefore let the Quakers baul
against this way of proceeding, as if an argument of the spirits absence (the
spirit of whose way is to undermine the way and means of sound knowledge, and
to introduce gross ignorance, as may easily be discerned by those that have
their eyes in their heads) but let those that are studious of the peoples
edification, make conscience of it, as that in which the spirit is delighted,
not limited.

When the Apostle says, Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto
him that teaches, in all things, (Gal. 6.6) and that the Lord has so
ordained, that they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, (1 Cor.
9.14.) and the like; upon what account may we think is it so ordained? but as
for other reasons, so especially because a due attendance upon the work of that
Office of Teaching, will in great part take them off who are faithfully engaged
in it from those secular employments, by which others get their livings. Which
yet it would not do, if a great deal more time were not to be taken up in
premeditation and prayer, preparation-wise, then is wont to be expended in
preaching at the times of Church Assemblies, in which the whole Church do or
ought to spend as much of their time in hearing, as they do in preaching. Which
consideration alone, if there were not many more, methinks is enough to
persuade all those that take upon them the weighty work of preaching, to make
it matter of conscience, to spend much of their time in making provision for
the work.

Cor. 9.6, to 14. Gal. 6.6. Matt. 10.10. Luke 10.7. 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. And
therefore in the name of God let none that seem to be tender in some things,
have no sense of others which are as plain as those; for that's an ill sign.
Would those Elders, would those Churches where those neglects are I now speak
of, take Gods way in this as well as in some other things, I doubt not but a
little time through Gods blessing, would render them (other things concurring)
far more flourishing (provided meet instruments be pitched upon) than now they
are, or are ever like to be, without it.

viz. the little and low esteem which the people have of their Pastors, to
their own great detriment and spiritual loss. For while the Elders shall but
observe the common course of daily meditation in the Word, which is every
common Christians duty, they will be able to speak but little more to the
edification of the People, than other common Christians which are in no such
Office, can do. And if the Elders preaching, prove little more to the
edification of the People than the common exhortations of Brethen do, which
cost them little or no study, (not to mention the mischief of such Brethrens
being sometimes puffed up hereby, to their fall,) it will be a hard matter to
raise an extraordinary Building upon a common Foundation; it will be hard for
the People in this case to vouchsafe those extraordinary respects of singular
love and double honor, which the Scripture with a loud voice calls for from
them toward those that are over them in the Lord, and which labor in the Word
and Doctrine, 1 These. 5.13. 1 Timothy 5.17. For it is not to be imagined that that
extraordinary debt of love and honor which the Lord has imposed upon the
People as due from them toward those that feed the Flock of God, above what is
due from them to other of their fellow brethren, should be founded upon any
thing less, then the extraordinary benefit they may or do receive by their
Ministry.

Whiles then a course is taken, either by Pastor or People, or both, to keep
the gifts and parts of the Pastor under, and his way of teaching but of a
common growth; a ready way is taken, not only to defeat and disappoint the Will
and Purpose of God, in not casting that honor upon those which are sent by
him, which he designs them, but also to hedge up the way of the peoples
edification, by his Ministry. For where the peoples affections and respects to
their Leaders and Guides run low, there their edification and profiting by them
cannot possibly run high. Christ himself could not do those mighty Works, nor
advantage the people in his own Country, as he did in other places more remote,
because they had a lower esteem of him there (occasioned by their knowledge of
his lowness of breeding,) then others had in other places. Mat. 13.54, 58. And
when Paul's esteem fell among some of the Churches (though through no fault of
his) upon how great a disadvantage were they cast of profiting by him! And it
is not to be doubted, but that when the Lord so frequently calls upon the
Churches to obey those that have the rule over them in the Lord, (Heb. 13.17.)
to have them in singular love for their works sake, (1 These. 5.13.) and to
count them worthy of double honor, (1 Timothy 5.17.) and the like, but that
therein he had an eye as much if not much more, to the Churches advantage and
benefit which they should receive thereby, then to the personal accommodation
and comfort of their Officers themselves. And accordingly the Apostle valued
his own esteem in the Church, but little, farther then it might truly serve
them. 2 Cor. 13.7. Not that we should appear approved, but that ye should do
that which is honest, though we be as reprobates. It mightily concerns
therefore all Teachers that truly desire to profit the people by their
Ministry, diligently to labor to keep up the reputation of it amongst them, by
magnifying their Office, and making their utmost and best improvement of it for
their good, as well by such studies as otherwise, by which they may come forth
to them from time to time, with a greater fullness of the blessing of the
Gospel, then otherwise they are ever like to do. And surely it little less
concerns the people, for their own edification sake, with like care to keep up
and maintain their true and entire respects unto their Teachers, so far as
they can possibly come at any foundation of real worth and service in them to
bear it, and to be contributing what is due from them toward the supporting of
it. For for them to be accessory to any weakness or defect in the way of their
Ministry, and to despise them for it when they have done, would be a double sin.

Corinth were, to esteem the Gospel the less, because so cheap to them, 2 Cor.
11.7, 20. But by how much my Brother and I remit to you in this behalf, by so
much the more would I have you reckon your selves debtors to the poor. And by
no means to make our present practice in this; a president to those that shall
come after us, without a great deal of liberty in it, and largeness of capacity
on their parts. As it will be the wisdom of Elders, as much as in them lies,
to free themselves from suspicion of serving for filthy lucre, as a thing
exceeding hurtful to their Ministry one way, so it will be comely in the
People, as much as in them lies, to render their Pastors free from the burden
of troublesome and intangling cares, as very prejudicial to their Ministry
another way.

I have been large in this Address, and should be sorry if having herein eased
my self, I should burden others. I judge that what I have said is not without
cause, and am inwardly glad of this opportunity of declaring my mind thus
freely to my Brethren; and am persuaded I shall lie down to rest when the hour
comes, with so much the more satisfaction of mind. And O that God would render
my counsel herein acceptable to all that are concerned in it!

I shall now have done: will you remember, Sirs, that you are the Epistle of
Christ, to be known and read of all men, (2 Cor. 3.2, 3.) So that whoever reads
the history of your life, may therein read the holiness, the humility, the
meekness and gentleness of Jesus; the Lamb-like innocence and harmlessness, the
love, mercy, and compassion, the unwearied industry and devouring zeal to do
your Fathers will in serving the necessities of men, which shined forth so
gloriously in Jesus Christ. O take heed I beseech every one of you, of abusing
the World, yea of abusing Christ, in making any wry and wrong representation of
him to the World by any undue or unchristian behavior in word or deed. Let
none get any occasion to think the worse of Christ or of his holy ways,
because of you that belong to him: Be far from laying any stumbling block in
their way, but be removing as fast as possibly you can, such as others have put
there, that so the way to Christ being made plain and lovely, they may be
invited to come to him, who hitherto have kept at a distance. It would be sad
in the Judgment day, if any condemned person should say to Christ, I verily
thought that I might have used such strains of covetousness on the one hand, in
getting and holding, and of pride and luxury on the other hand, in excess of
food and raiment; that I might have spent so much time vainly and idly, that I
might have kept such ill company and have sat so long at the Tavern or
Alehouse, that I might have taken so much liberty to scoff and jeer, rail, and
revile, to use vain talking and foolish jesting, for which thou now condemnest
me, because I saw such and such which professed to know thee, and thy mind a
great deal better than I, did so: if I had known as they did, I would have done
better, it was their ill example that misled me. O Sirs, can you bear the
thought of it that the matter should be so much as in doubt whether it may not
possibly be so said of some of you though but in respect of some one or other
of these or otherlike unholy things!



This whole World is running apace to mine, and the dissolution of it draws
nigh, it will be your wisdom, and for the Lords sake let it be your care to be
removing your hearts and souls out of it before it fall upon your heads, or
before you be removed out of it whether you will or no, by the hand of death.
You have your day now, make much of it, when the sun of it is set upon those
that have trifled in it, it will rise no more, an everlasting night of darkness
follows. It is now but a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and
will not tarry: if you love him, or rejoice under the expectation of that day,
be not behind hand in your preparations. The marriage of the Lamb draws nigh,
and his Wife has made her self ready; be sure you be not at any time found
without your Wedding garment. By Faith draw nigh to the Judgment Seat of
Christ; imagine your selves at the next door of being encompassed with the
majesty of that day. Let thoughts of it and of your accounts then to be taken,
keep you company all the day long, in your buying, selling, eating, drinking,
yea in all your converse and communication with men. Follow God with incessant
prayer to fill your souls brim full with a lively sense of these things, whose
weight is not to be expressed. Hold much communion with your own weakness, and
do not trust your selves at the least distance from God; abide under his shadow
and in an humble way of pleasing him, be always confident of his strength to
subdue your spiritual enemies, to uphold you and keep you from falling, and to
carry you on from strength to strength, until you appear before him.

That these and such things as these in the glory of their perfection, may be
your present portion from the Lord to prepare you upon the best terms for
future glory, is the true desire,

Of him, who longs for more strength from Christ to serve you upon yet better
terms, in the dear Concernments of your precious Souls, whilst he is WILLIAM
ALLEN.
April 13. 1658.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Am not unsensible but that the very name of Works as any ways interressed or
concerned in men's Justification before God, may possibly prejudice this work in
the minds of some good people, as if it were no good friend to the free grace
of God; especially considering that Grace and Works are so frequently opposed
one to another in the Scripture, as inconsistent in the business of man's
Justification. To prevent which, I shall entreat thee to understand, that this
Treatise does not in the least interess those Works in man's Justification,
which the Scripture opposes to Grace, which are sometimes called (and are
usually if not always to be understood as meant of) the Works of the Law, or
deeds of the Law. Nor yet does it interesse any other Works (I mean the most
evangelical Works) in the office or service of justifying, in that sense in
which Works are opposed to Grace, and were asserted by the Jews, and rejected
by the Apostle, to wit, as doing that to justify, which is proper and peculiar
only and alone to Christ Jesus. For to hold any thing, whether Works or Faith,
necessary for the doing of the same thing which Christ does in Justification,
would render Christ's undertaking in that behalf incomplete and imperfect, and
disparage the sufficiency of his saving Grace, and so lay the hope of salvation
built thereon in the dust; which yet it should seem was the error into which
the Galatians were running, Gal. 5.4. and 2.21.

And therefore all care must he had not to give ought of that to Works or Faith
either, which is the incommunicable prerogative of Christ's blood. Though if it
were possible that you could from this instant, unto the end of your life,
become as holy in nature and life, as the holy Angels themselves, yet it would
be damnable folly and wickedness in you, if you should in the least depend
upon this holiness for the benefit of atonement for the sins that are past,
which is to be had only by Christ's blood. And therefore he that has the most
and best of Gospel Works of any man living to commend him to God, can
reasonably expect no more benefit by them as to this, nor may with safety any
more depend upon them for this, then he that has none at all, but must and
ought to cast himself as entirely upon the blood of Christ for the grace of
atonement, purgation from sin, and justification, as the Theif upon the cross
did, or as any poor forlorn and miserable sinner does at his first coming to
Christ, before he has actually accomplished any works of sanctification.

But now because Christ's blood does not actually justify men, though never so
full of virtue and power to justify, till they do believe, God having
suspended their personal interest in his blood for their Justification upon
their believing; hence now in another respect Faith is necessary to
Justification in its place, and for its use, as well as the blood of Christ it
self is in that superior respect which is proper to it.

And because Faith also without works is dead,) Jam. 2.17, 26.) and so is
altogether unserviceable to justify, and that that Faith only has the honor
conferred upon it by God to avail men to justify and save, which works by
Love, and no other; (Gal. 5.6,) Hence the works of a holy life are as necessary
to render Faith a living Faith, an availing Faith, and so a Faith that will
justify, or which will interesse men in Christ's blood, which does Justify, as
the Grace of Faith it self is necessary in order to such an interest. Which as
it is the utmost which I assert touching the necessity of Gospel-Obedience unto
Justification, so it is that, which if found true, which will avouch this
necessity with a high hand. For as a man may as soon be Justified without a
Savior, as without Faith, which gives him an interest in him, so he may as
soon be Justified without Faith, as without those Evangelical Works, the
absence of which will render Faith incapable to Justify: And to have no Faith,
and to have a Faith in no capacity to do the work or business of Faith, will
be found the same thing in conclusion. So that if the one be necessary, so is
the other, but in different respects.

All that I shall further add, is to desire thee to lay aside prejudice, and so
proceed to the perusal of the Work it self: And as thou find things built
upon the Word, and substantially backed by evidence of Scripture Light fairly
treated, so and no otherwise would I have thee to receive them. For I assure
thee my design toward thee is, to make a match between thy Soul and Truth, not
my Opinion, further then under the countenance of Truth. And should count it a
happiness, if as a recompense of this labor, I should hereby deliver though
but one Soul from any longer contenting it self with that dead and barren
Faith, by which too many are, and are like to be deceived. And that the Lord
may give thee a right understanding in this and in all things, has been, and I
hope (the Lord assisting) shall be the Prayer of him who loves and longs after
the health and prosperity of thy soul,

W. A.

A Table of the principal Matters touched or handled in the precedent Epistle,
and subsequent Treatise.
A
ARgument of good life, most taking generally, Ep. S. 10 Argument against the
form of profession, from the miscarriages of professors, not good, Ep. S. 11
Assent to the Doctrine of the Gospel as true, touching Christ's being the Son of
God, and Savior of the world, (alone) not justifying faith; and the reason
why, 44 Antinomian Doctrine touching sins past, present, and to come, being
pardoned upon men's first being in Christ, decryed as erroneous and dangerous,
95 Apostasy and decay, the cause of it, what, 122 Almsgiving must answer the
Estate of the Giver, and what to be thought thereabout. 145
B
BLood of Christ, nothing to be joined with it in merit, or atonement making,
25 Believing and obeying, put one for another, 70 Believing and receiving of
Christ equivalent, 73 Bounty, where wanting, an argument, there is no right
Faith, 143 Badness of men's condition, no reason why it should not be looked
into. 160
C
COntinue; to continue well, is harder than to begin well, Ep. S. 17 Covenant;
Attributing that to the blood and obedience of the first Covenant, which
properly belongs to the Blood, Faith, and obedience of the Second Covenant, was
the Jews grand mistake, 21, 22 Christ, in what respects he is the object of
justifying Faith, 37 Confidence of Salvation without ground, whence it
proceeds, 49, 51 Confidence of being saved, may be strong in men, both while
they live, and when they dye, and yet suffer disappointment in the Resurrection
and judgment day, 64 Conquer, to conquer, and more what, 134 Conscience
Christ's Delegate, and how to have it on ones side in time of trial, 166
D
Decays of spiritual sense and affection, how repaired, Ep.. 1 Deceive, the
Devils craft to deceive, Ep.. 4. Dead, Faiths being dead, what? 54
E
Esteem, of People to their Pastors, the mischief of it when it grows low, Ep..
17 Epistle of Christ, how the Church is so, Ep.. 19
F
Fruit, upon what account due to God as procured by the labors of men, Ep.. 2
Fruit, Being yielded to God, comes home to ones self, Ep.. 2 Fruit, yielding
fruit the way to enjoy more cost and care from God, Ep.. 3 And to be fenced
from devourring temptations, Ep.. 4, 5 Fruit, the want of it the cause of
Apostasy and Church desolation, Ep.. 6, 7. Form, the danger of turning Religion
into Form, Ep.. 8, 9 Father, how and in what respects Justification is ascribed
to God the Father, 33, 154 Faith, as it Justifies has three acts, credence,
adherence, and confidence, 43 Faith, how acted on God the father in relation to
Justification, 36 Faith, how acted on Christ's death and blood, in relatioa to
Justification, 38 Faith, a reprobate Judgment concerning it, and a Form of
godliness, often found in the same person, 57 Faith and Love their near affinity,
71 Faith without repentance, cannot justify, 76 Faith without Love, cannot
justify, 77 Faith when found in Abraham's seed, walks in the steps of Abraham's
faith, 84 Faith magnifies the word and power of God, though crossed with
greatest unlikelihood and humane improbability, 84 Faith of right kind,
engages to obey the hardest precepts, 87 Faith eyes and adheres to Gods
counsels for the way, as well as his promise for the end, 98 Faith depends on
the Lord for supply of strength to do his will, 109 Faith derives from Christ
the power by which the Christian life is led, 110 Faith, how supported in
dependence for supplies, 114 Faith works by Love, and how? 127 Faith, how it is
not, and how it is counted for Righteousness, 150 Faith in its justifying
office or power, depends wholly on Gods will; and its matter of great comfort
that it does so, 154 Faith not strictly and properly a man's Righteousness, but
does him the service of a Righteousness in the account and imputation of grace,
156 Forgiving of wrong, want of it an argument such have no justifying faith,
148
G
Grace, the womb that bears justification, 33 Ground, what faith is resembled
by the thorny ground hearers, 59
H
Holiness in men as well as the happiness of men, Gods aim in contriving the
terms of salvation, 68
I
Integrity not to be questioned merely for difference of judgment in the point
of Infant Baptism, Ep.. 13 Justification without Works, the danger of mistaking
the Scripture thereabout, 2 Justification by Works, in what sense opposed by
the Apostle, 12, to 17 Justification, the necessity of Works thereunto, not
opposed by the Apostle no not among the Jews in all respects, 21 Justification,
depends upon after acts of faith as well as the first, 90 Justification
attributed not only to faith, but also to those works that flow from faith, 94
Justification from eternity or before faith, disproved, 156 The ill consequence
of that opinion, touched, 158 Judgment day, the issue of that days proceeding
in relation to ones felf, to be known now, 162
L
Love to the Lord how known, 121 Love, how it casts out fear, 133 Love to
men, how known, 137
M
Ministers of the Nation, how to be treated by the Baptists, Ep.. 14.
Maintenance for Gospel Ministers, in what respect necessary, Ep.. 16
Miscarriages in life proceed from want of faith, 106
N
Negative Christianity, not to be rested in, Ep.. 20
O
Opinions, four Opinions of the Jews contradictious to the Gospel, opposed by
Paul in opposing their seeking of Justification by Works, 7, to 11 Opinion that
holds Justification by Faith to be Justification not before God, but in men's
conscience, proved rotten, 157 Offense giving when shunned, an argument of
what, 138
P
Power to justify by what means soever, depends on the will of God 33, 35.
Promises indefinitely made to believing, how to be understood, 67, 70.
Perseverance in grace why found in persons of weak parts, when many times those
of greater parts fall, 123 Power of the creature, undue thoughts about it very
dangerous, 127
Q
Quakers, how deceitful, Ep.. 4
R
Reading or hearing, how to profit by it, Ep.. 1 Reflections unseemly and
provoking, in controversies, condemned, Ep.. 12. Relyance on Christ for
Salvation, not justifying without obedience, 49 Resurrection of Christ, how
excellently it contributes to our Justification, 39 Receiving Christ, what it
imports, 73 Result of Scriptures duly compared, a wise man's guide, 79
S
Scandals, the mischief of them, Ep.. 10, 19 Study, the necessity of it in
order to the most profitable preaching, Ep.. 15. Steps of Abraham's Faith, what
84 Supplies from Christ how received by Faith, 112 Spirit, how received by
Faith, 118
T
Terms of Salvation, the danger of mistaking them, 2, 25 Trial of ones state in
Faith, backwardness therein an ill sign, 159 Temptations about ones present and
future good condition not to be vanquished but by substanal evidences of a holy
Faith, 163
W
Works that are the same in themselves, differ in respect of different
Covenants enjoining them in different respects, 19 Works of what sort they are
that accompany true Faith in its first justifying acts, 27 Works evangelical,
in what sense necessary to Justification, 26, 55. Works evangelical, their
necessity to Justification, a Protestant Doctrine, 28, 30 Word or Gospel, how
the object of justifying Faith, 36, 41 Wresting the Scriptures to destruction,
what? 3
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 27. for, for us, read far as. page 11. line 31. for Jews r. Jew.
page 12. line 5. blot out, as.

A Glass of Justification. Wherein the Apostles Doctrine touching JUSTIFICATION
without the DEEDS of the LAW is opened; and the sense in which Gospel-Obedience
is absolutely necessary to Justification, is stated.
CHAP. I. Containing an Introduction to the following Treatise.
Romans 4. Ver. 5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted unto him for Righteousness.


AMongst other things in Paul's Epistles, which (as the Apostle Peter observes,
2 Pet. 3.16.) are hard to be understood, and which they that are unlearned, and
unstable wrest to their own destruction; there is too much cause to suspect the
Text now before us, to be one. For whoever shall but judiciously consider the
Epistles of the Apostles, James, Peter, John, and Jude, besides other
Scriptures, may easily perceive, that many professors of the Gospel then, did
so bear themselves upon a me form of knowledge and Faith, as if the promise of
Salvation had been entailed to that alone, without respect had to that holy
life enjoined in the Gospel, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb.
12.14. Into which most dangerous and deadly snare its like enough they might be
brought, by misunderstanding and wresting such Scriptures as my Text, which
makes the man that Works not, but Believes, the capable subject of
Justification.

And is there not cause to fear, that multitudes of poor Souls to this day, are
still under the same desperate and destructive mistake? Whence else proceeds
that high confidence in the most amongst us, of their being saved by Christ,
although but strangers to the life of God? having this saying to defend
themselves against the reproof of their sinful life; no man shall be saved by
his Works; or else; not by the works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us: leaving out that which follows, viz. by the
washing of regeneration, and renewng of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. Whence is it
also that multitudes of Professors under various forms, as well that which is
right as those which are wrong, take themselves to be rich, and to have need of
nothing more than they have, to entitle them to remission of sins and
Salvation, when as they are mere beggars and bankrupts as to a humble, sober,
self-denying life? Is it not that they value themselves by that stock of
brain-knowledge, and barren Faith which they are sure they have, and thereupon
think themselves sure of those promises which are made to those that know and
believe the truth?

Nay has not the doctrine of Justification without Works, as commonly asserted
from that Text which I have chosen, on which to found my present Discourse, and
other of the like nature, proved a Temptation even to many good men, to have a
lighter and lower esteem of good Works, and of the necessity of them to
Justification and Salvation, than of right belongs to them? Yea I am persuaded,
that the strenuous urging of such Texts against the Papists in disputes about
Justification, without that due care which ought to be had in distinguishing
the works which my Text speaks of, from those of another nature, has
occasioned many honest hearts to content themselves to write but fifty, which
otherwise would have subscribed an hundred, toward the promoting of the Gospel
design in themselves and others, had they clearly understood the mind of God
in this business.

What shall I say, Christ Jesus himself though sent on purpose to save and not
to destroy, and not only to show but to be the very way unto life and glory;
yet the ignorance and misunderstanding of the counsel of God touching the
terms how and after what manner he is so, has rendered him to very many a
stone of stumbling, a rock of offense, a snare and a gin; a means of a more
dreadful condemnation, than ever they should have fallen into, had Christ never
been offered to them as a Savior. But to whom is he so? but as Peter tells us,
to those that stumble at the Word, 1 Pet. 2.8. not understanding, but mistaking
the nature and temres of the doctrine of grace, and the Scripture expressions
thereabout; either thinking that Faith will save without Works, otherwise than
the Scripture intends, or that this or that Belief is the Faith unto which
Justification and Salvation are promised, when as it is neither this nor that,
but another. So that when Peter says, that such as are unlearned and unstable,
wrest the Scriptures of Paul and others to their own destruction, (2 Pet.
3.16.) it is not meant of such as are unlearned in humane arts, but unlearned
in the method and terms of Gods proceeding with men, to bring them to
Salvation: being carried away with a sound of letters and words, not being
careful to order themselves in their understanding of Scripture expressions,
by those principal heads and veins of Doctrine which are but few, unto which a
great variety of words and scripture expressions do relate.

A piece of unlearnedness, unto which the wise and prudent of the world,
Doctors and Rabbis of the times have been, and may be more liable, and in
which more entangled, than others, who in comparison of them have been but
Babes and sucklings; as these and the like Scriptures do witness, Mat. 11.25.
John 7.48, 49. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. one main reason whereof is this; because they,
(I mean the wise and learned of the world) by their wisdom and learning being
vessels better fitted and prepared for worldly glory than others are, are in
that respect under the greater temptation to seek and receive honor one of
another, and not that honor that comes from God only; and consequently by
their greater parts, to over-master, bend and bow, wring and wrest under
plausible pretenses and fair flourishes, the holy Scriptures, in their several
forms of expression, so as that they may not so much as seem to contradict, but
to countenance their design of worldly glory and interest: and their worldly
honor and interest likewise as intermixed with their Gospel profession, not so
much as seem to obstruct, but to accomodate the design of God, and the affairs
of the Gospel, in themselves and others. The prevailing of which carnal device
of corrupting the Word, reducing and accommodating the pure Gospel doctrine and
life, unto a nearer compliance with the principles of worldly wisdom and
interest than would consist with the simplicity which is in Christ, was that
which proved the bane of those flourishing Churches, which were planted by the
Apostles, and at this day is the great enemy of the life and power of
godliness, and such as betrays men into a soul-deceiving way of professing the
Gospel; as might easily be showed, might I now stand upon it.

On the other hand, whereas the babes and sucklings; I mean persons who by
reason of their natural capacities, education or rank in the world, are but of
weak and low parts, and in that respect but vessels of dishonor in the worlds
eye; are not in that danger to be courted by the world, nor under any
probability or hopes of obtaining honor from the world, though they should
seek it; thence it comes to pass, that their minds are more at liberty to look
after glory and greatness in the next world, since they neither have, nor are
like to have any in this, and so to fall in with the doctrine of the Gospel
which both offers and opens the way to the glory to come, but makes little of
this world, calls men's minds off it, and teaches self-denial about it. And then
when such have actually embraced the truth as it is in Jesus, though they
themselves are but poor and mean in parts and humane abilities, and of shallow
capacities; yet the Spirit of God now becomes their guide, and he takes of the
things of Christ, viz. his Doctrines contained in the Scriptures, and shows
them unto them, John 16.14. And what ever parts and humane abilities men may
have, by the power of which they may go for us to the Grammatical sense of the
Scriptures, yet as to the spiritual design of them, whilst they themselves are
strangers to the sense of such a thing upon their own hearts, and consequently
have not that presence of the spirit of truth who keeps at a distance from the
high-minded and worldly-wise, they must needs be in greater danger of wresting
the Scriptures as unto the spiritual design of them, then the poor, humble, and
meek Soul, with whom God delights to dwell, and whom he has promised to guide
in judgment, and teach in his way ( Psalm 25.9. Isai. 57.15.) though very far
inferior in humane accomplishments.

But since the misunderstanding of the Scriptures about the doctrine of
Justification by Faith without the works of the Law, has proved, and I
exceedingly fear does still prove a snare of death unto vast multitudes of poor
souls (as I intimated before) therefore to awaken men who have been but in a
spiritual dream about this important business, and to undeceive many poor souls
who are in extreme danger of perishing eternally under a mistaken confidence of
Salvation, I shall as of the ability which is of God, by comparing the
Scriptures hereabout, endeavor to open, and further to clear this mighty
point, upon the practical understanding of which does depend even the salvation
of all our souls.

CHAP. II. Showing of what sort or kind of Works those are which Paul in his
Epistles excludes in the point of Man's justification before God.
Romans 4.5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies
the ungodly, his faith is counted unto him for righteousness.


as works not; so says the Text; To him that works not, etc. 2.
Affirmatively, he is such a one as does believe on him that justifies the
ungodly: for the Text tells us concerning him, that his faith is counted to him
for righteousness.

I shall God willing speak something to both parts of the description, and
shall begin with that first which is first in the Text.

How then is the Apostle to be understood when he affirms the man that works
not to be the capable subject of Justification? provided otherwise he be such a
one as does believe? what kind of Works are they which he shuts out from having
part and fellowship in this matter? and in what respects?

1. Whatever they are, it is not the presence of them which he excludes, as if
a man that has the works he here speaks of, could not be justified; but it is
such a justifying virtue, power, and property which some supposed to be in
them, but were deceived, which he excludes, as having no hand less nor more in
any man's Justification; for otherwise Paul, though whilst he was a Pharisee,
and to the very time of his believing, was such a worker as that he could say,
that as touching the righteousness of the law he was blameless, Phil. 3.6. yet
this was no obstruction to his Justification when he did believe indeed.

2. But the Apostles meaning is, that the absence of the Works here spoken of,
would not at all hinder a man's Justification in case he did believe, but that
he was in as good a capacity of Justification upon his believing, though he had
none of the works he here speaks of, as he would or could have been in case he
had them all.

3. But then in the next place the main question will be, what and what manner,
sort, or kind of Works it is, without which a man if he believe shall be
justified? and whether he intends to exclude all, and all manner of works in
this case, or some one sort or kind only.

For the resolution whereof, we must consider upon what occasion these words of
the Apostle are here brought in; and what people, and what opinions they are
against which he is here disputing: the knowledge of which will be as a key to
open the door of this Text, and to give us clearly to understand what Works
they are, without which a man believing, may be justified.

That it is not against any such opinion as reckons a Gospel conversation
consisting of self-denial, mortification of worldly lusts, and sinful
affections, the love of Christ above all, and the preferring other men's
spiritual interest and profit before their own temporal; and a tender caring
for others temporal good as well as their own, I say that it is not any such
opinion against which the face of the Apostles present argumentation is bent,
will evidently appear.

1. By the carriage of other Scriptures, which are so far off from affirming
any man to be justified by Faith without these Works, as that contrarily they
do positively and peremptorily conclude and declare, that Faith to be dead,
unprofitable, and vain, and such as shall never save, that is without these.
And therefore we may by no means understand the Apostle in any such sense, as
would make him clash with and fall foul upon the general current of the
Scripture elsewhere. But the further opening and handling of this, I must
respite unto its proper place afterward.

Romans 3.28. viz. Mosaical ordinances and services, especially such as were
Circumcision, and Sacrifices, and the like, which were Works required in the
Law of Moses, I come now to demonstrate. And for the clearing of our way to
this, we will as I said, consider the persons and their opinions, against which
the Apostle disputes.

The persons against whom the Apostle was engaged in this dispute of his, were
the unbeleeving Jews, or at least such as did judaiz it, that is, in a great
measure comply with them in their opinion touching the necessity of
Circumcision, and other Mosaical Rites, to Justification. For the Jews then
being scattered among the Gentiles here and there in the Roman Cities and
Provinces, and particularly here at Rome, Acts 28.17.24. did vehemently oppose
the doctrine of the Apostles, especially in their preaching Salvation to the
Gentiles upon their believing, without the works of the Law; forbidding them to
speak to the Gentiles, or to declare unto them, that they might be saved upon
any such terms. 1 These. 2.16. forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they
might be saved, etc. To fortify the believers whether Jews or Gentiles against
their insinuations and oppositions in this kind, the Apostle at large debates
the case in difference between them, both in this Epistle to the Romans, and in
that to the Galatians; which Churches, viz. of Rome, and Galatia it is like
were then pestered more than others in this kind.

The unsound opinions held by them, and which this Apostle in his doctrine of
Justification does oppose in this and other of his Epistles, were such as these.

John 12.34. We have heard out of the Law (say they) that Christ abides for
ever; and how say thou the son of man must be lift up? This was a doctrine
which it seems past for current among them, their guides mis-interpreting some
one or more passage in the Old Testament to that purpose, that the Messiah
should never dye, but abide for ever without any change by death: which
doctrine they took as inconsistent with Jesus his being the Christ indeed, and
yet suffering death by being lift up upon the Cross, which he Prophetically
foretold, 1 Cor. 2.7.8. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the
hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world unto our glory. Which none of
the Princes of this world knew: for had they known it, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory. What was that wisdom of God in a mystery which he
says they preached? why it was this, that God had offered Salvation to the
world by Christ as crucified, which both to the Jews and Greeks was such a
mystery, as but few of them understood, but was their occasion of stumbling at
Christ, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called
both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. Which
mystery says he, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8. viz. that the counsel of God was so laid, to
bring about the life of men by the death of the Messiah, None of the Princes of
this world knew, (viz. the chief of those that had their hands in his death;)
for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. No
surely they would not; but it was their ignorance touching those Scriptures
which foretold his humiliation and death that proved a snare to them, first to
reject him because of his low condition, and afterward to crucify him: so
says the Text in effect, Acts 13.27. For they that dwell at Jerusalem, and
their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the Prophets
which are read every Sabbath day, they have fulfilled them in condemning him.

Cor. 1.23. it was his being crucified that caused them to stumble at him, and
not believe him to be the Christ, as it is still unto this day. In opposition
to which opinion it is, that the Apostle has that saying, Heb. 9.16. For where
a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the Testator.
Where he argues the necessity of the death of the true Christ for the
ratification of the New Testament of which he is Mediator, in opposition to
some of another mind. Therefore we shall find that to prove the necessity of
the Death and Resurrection of the true Christ, as also to prove that Christ his
being Crucified did not at all argue him not to be the true Christ but the
contrary, was a great part of the Apostles dispute against the Jews, who as it
thereby appears held the contrary, Acts 17.2, 3. And Paul as his manner was
went in unto them (viz. the Jews in their Synagogue, ver. 1.) and three Sabbath
days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, opening and alleging that
Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead, and that Jesus
whom I preach unto you is Christ.

Heb. 10.3. In those Sacrifices there is a remembrance again made of sins every
year. 2. In that they held the true Christ should never dye, as we heard
before, they must therefore needs hold withal, that sin was not to be purged
by his death and Sacrifice. And then 3ly. If not by that, by what then? but by
those very Sacrifices of Bulls and Goats which were offered for sin, which
indeed was the naughty opinion against which the Apostle says so much in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 10.1. For the law having a shadow of good things
to come, and not the very image of the things, can never with those Sacrifices,
which they offered year by year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect;
as some it seems on the contrary did hold. Again ver. 4. For it is not possible
that the blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away sins. What, shall we
think that the Apostle sets up a man of Straw, and then fights with it? or that
he beats only the air with his word? shall we think that he so solemnly over
and over, and over denies that which no man affirmed? or would he make such a
business of it to argue the inefficaciousness, the unavailablenes of those
sacrifices to take away sin, if no body had asserted their power and efficacy
in that behalf? surely he would not; such a thing is much below the wisdom of
an ordinary man, and much more below the wisdom and gravity of a great Apostle.
It is a good rule by which to make judgment of the ill opinions and practices
then reigning among men in the Apostles times, viz. by their zealous and
faithful engagements against them, as declared in their Epistles, though they
do not in so many words, charge such and such men with holding or practicing,
such or such things.

And so when we find the Apostle ( Heb. 10.) so mightily laboring in this
business when he has to do with the believing Jews, that were under
temptations of looking back, arguing from the Old Testament, that it was never
Gods intent to set up those Sacrifices under the Law to take away sin, or to
purge the conscience, but that they served only unto an outward purification,
and to be as a Schoolmaster to bring to Christ, by the offering of whom once
for all, are perfected for ever those that are sanctified, it may be easily
collected, that certainly the unbeleeving Jews did firmly hold the contrary,
and that the believing Jews were in danger of being shaken in their Faith
hereabout; to prevent which, and to establish them firmly in the truth, is the
prize for which the Apostle runs, as in the Epistle in general, so more
especially in those passages of it in the ninth and tenth Chapters, which do
more immediately concern this business. See more particularly hereabout, Heb.
10.1, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14.18. and 9.12, 13, 14, 22, 25, 26. and 1.3. Acts
13.39.

These three now mentioned, most erroneous and highly dangerous opinions held
by the obstinate Jews, I take to be wrapped up by the Apostle in Romans 9.31, 32,
33. But Israel which followed after the law of righteousness, has not
attained to the law of righteousness, wherefore? because they sought it not by
faith, but as it were by the works of the law: for they stumbled at that
stumbling-stone; as it is written; behold I lay in Zion a stumbling-stone and a
rock of offense, and whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed. That
Christ was and is a stumbling-stone unto the Jews, because of his being
Crucified, is that I showed before: such a thing falling cross to their
received opinion, that the true Christ should never dye; they thereupon thought
they had good reason to reject him, and those that taught in his name, as being
confident for that very reason he could not be the Messiah. So that those two
opinious, 1. That the true Christ should never dye; and secondly, That Jesus
was not the true Christ because he did suffer death, are both employed in that
saying, ver. 32. They stumbled at that stumbling-stone; and then the third
thing, viz. their expectation of remission of sins and acceptance with God by
the legal Sacrifices, and other Mosaical observances, is that which in the 31,
and 32. verse. is called their following after or seeking the law of
righteousness, i. e. as I conceive, that Law or Covenant by which God has
promised to count men righteous: this indeed they sought to come under, but
missed it, because they sought it not in Gods way of believing in Christ Jesus,
and him crucified, (for they stumbled at that stumbling-stone) but as it were
by the works of the Law, i. e. I conceive they so sought it, as if the terms
of attaining it appointed by God, had been the doing those works of the Law.

Moses, Acts 15.1, 5. And certain men which came down from Judea taught the
brethren and said, except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses ye cannot
be saved. Which yet is more fully expressed verse. 5. But there rose up certain of
the Sect of the Pharisees which believed, saying that it was needful to
circumcise them, and to command them to keep the Law of Moses. Which dangerous
opinion being obtruded upon the believing Gentiles, to the great unsettlement
of many of them, thereupon the Apostle Paul (who was the Apostle of the
Gentiles) to the end he might undeceive such as had been surprised with it, and
strengthen the Brethren against the infection of it, wrote, as to the Churches
in Galatia, so to this at Rome, in both which Epistles he does at large
counter-argue this, together with the other forementioned soul-destroying
opinions.

That to him that works not; that is, to the Gentile who never had observed
or kept the Law of Moses, who never had followed after righteousness, Romans
9.30. but had lived without God in the world, and as an alien from the
Commonwealth of Israel: But believes on him that justifies the ungodly: That
is, though he do not nor have done the former, yet if he do the latter; that
is, if he shall believe on him that came into the world to save sinners, and
which in due time dyed for the ungodly. His Faith, that is, this faith of his,
and not those works of the Law shall be counted to him for righteousness: This
then is clearly the doctrine of the Text, that a poor Idolatrous Heathen, that
had no precedent Works of the Law to commend him of which the Jews boasted, and
in which he trusted, and though such as should never after his beginning to
believe, be either circumcised, or offer the Sacrifices for sin commanded in
the Law, or perform other Jewish Rites, yet in case he did but believe, and
should indeed really embrace the Gospel, the doctrine of Jesus, he should most
certainly be justified, and persevering therein, be undoubtedly saved, the
highest and most confident pretention of the Jew to the contrary
notwithstanding.

That the fastening of this nail is the very scope and drift of the Apostle,
not only in the words of my Text, but also in his precedent and subsequent
discourse, as well that which goes before, as that which follows after my Text,
is that which I shall now as briefly as well as I may, come plainly to set
before you.

I shall carry you no further back then to Romans 3.21. But now the
righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law
and the Prophets. The righteousness of God; that is (I conceive) Gods way and
terms of making or accounting men righteous: Without the Law is manifested:
that is, in and by the Gospel it is declared, published, tendered, and offered;
in the believing and embracing of which Gospel, and the terms of grace therein
propounded, a man may attain this righteousness though he had never heard of
the Law. Though its true also, that the same way and terms of Justification,
is witnessed and asserted in the Law and the Prophets, which is now published
and tendered by the Gospel. Which way of accounting men righteous, or the
terms upon or according to which he does so esteem them, and accordingly deal
with them, we have set down in the next verse. 22. which is says he, By faith
of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe, for there is no
difference: that is, this righteousness of God, or this Justification of God,
or which is of God, it is by Faith of Jesus Christ; that is, it does accrue to
men, or is vouchsafed by God unto men, by the Faith of Christ; that is, by that
Faith which men that rightly believe, have concerning Christ. And this is a
privilege (a glorious one indeed) which is vouchsafed unto all men
indifferently who do believe, whether Jew who has followed the Law, or Gentile
who has been without Law; it is unto all, and upon all that believe; for there
is says he, no difference: the Jew by his Law is never the nearer
Justification, nor the Gentile by his living without it, never the farther off
it, in case he do believe, but both in a like capacity, and both actually
justified upon their believing, and neither the one nor the other at all
justified till then. For says he ver. 23. All have sinned, and come short of
the glory of God, both Jews and Gentiles, and therefore both alike are cast
upon the mere mercy and free grace of God, verse. 24. Being justified (if ever
they be justified) freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, ver. 25. whom God has set forth, (both to Jews and Gentiles) to be a
propitiation through Faith in his blood. Upon which the Apostle ver. 27. makes
this demand, Where is boasting then? if the Gentile without the Law be on equal
terms with the Jews under his Law, if there be no difference between them, if
all have sinned, and all to be justified freely by grace; if this Justification
or righteousness be vouchsafed unto all, and conferred upon all that believe,
and not otherwise; and that there is no difference between Jew and Gentile in
these respects; then pray you, where is boasting? what is become of the
boasting of the Jews, who were wont to say we have Abraham to our Father, and
rejoiced in circumcision, and made their boast of the Law, Romans 2.23. if for
all the privileges which in this kind they had enjoyed above the Gentile, yet
if the Gentile by the grace of the Gospel is made equal to the Jew, though he
do not at all come under the Law, where then is there any longer place for
boasting?

And in the 28 verse he draws up his conclusion from his premises, saying,
therefore we conclude that a man is justified by Faith, without the deeds of
the Law: the same in effect with my Text: If there be no difference between Jew
and Gentile as was said before, and that the Righteousness of GOD without the
Law is manifested and tendered to the Gentile, we may well conclude, that a man,
even an ungodly Gentile that has no Deeds of the Law, if he once come to
forsake his ungodliness, and to believe and obey the Gospel which is to be
preached to every Creature, we may conclude that he is indeed; justified, his
sins pardoned, and he accepted in the Beloved, in whom he has believed.

But though the Apostle concludes the thing, ver. 28. viz. that the Gentiles
might as well be justified without the Deeds of the Law, as the Jews with them,
and both alike upon condition of believing, yet he does not there conclude his
discourse of this matter, but is at it again and again. And therefore in ver.
29. he begins again, demanding as it were with authority thus; Is he the God of
the Jews only? is he not also of the Gentiles? yes of the Gentiles also. As if
he should say, what do you think that God only takes care of the Jews, and of
their Salvation, and that he has no regard at all to the Gentiles, let them
sink or swim? Is he not the God of the Gentiles also? is he not willing to
bring them to Salvation as well as the Jews? To which interogation he returns
this answer; yes he is the God even of the Gentiles also: one propitious and
favorable to them as well as the Jews, which appears in this thirtieth verse,
Seeing it is one God, which shall justify the circumcision by faith, and
uncircumcision through faith: the same God has vouchsafed the same means, and
proposed one and the same way of justification and salvation both to those that
are circumcised, and to those that are not, and that is the Faith of the
Gospel. Where there is neither Jew nor Greek, circumcision, nor uncircumcision:
i. e. no difference between these, but as the Scripture says, They are all one
in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.28. Col. 3.11.

viz. that men without Circumcision, and the rest of the Jewish Ordinances, may
upon their cordial embracing the Gospel, attain justification in the sight of
God. This he makes plain, and proves against all contradiction from the example
of Gods proceeding with Abraham in the matter of his justification, who as he
was the Father of the Jew, and one in whom they gloried, as counting themselves
the only people of God upon the account of that Covenant which God made with
him and his seed, whose seed according to the flesh they were, so also was he a
Father of many Nations, even of as many as should believe, in all Nations of
the world, and why so? but because God was intended to justify them upon the
same terms as he justified Abraham.

Romans 4.1. The Apostle begins thus, What shall we say then, that Abraham our
father, as pertaining to the flesh has found? In which affirmative
interrogation, we have laid down a vehement negation of the thing interrogated,
according to the usual custom and dialect of the Scriptures in that kind. As
if he should say, look now upon Abraham our Father, and consider Gods
proceeding with him, and the terms upon which God conferred righteousness or
justification on him. And what then? shall we say or think that Abraham our
Father according to the flesh has found? has found what? namely justification
in the sight of God; for that is the thing in question, the subject of his
present discourse, and that which he presently mentions verse. 2. as that to
which the interrogation relates. Has he found it as pertaining to the flesh?
what is that? has he found it in that way in which the Jews boastingly think
they have met with it, and urge the Gentiles to seek after it, viz.
Circumcision and other works of the Law, which in opposition to the Gospel-way
of Justification, is called flesh, Phil. 3.3, 4, 5, 6. Gal. 3.3. has he found,
or did he meet with justification in this way? no certainly he did not. This he
proves, first by a clear Text of Scripture out of the Old Testament, verse 3.
For what says the Scripture, Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him
for righteousness. If his believing God was the thing that was counted to him
for righteousness, (which is the thing the Scripture affirms, Genesis 15.6.) then
Circumcision and the rest of the Ceremonies of the Law could not be it, and
therefore could be no more necessary in the Gentiles to their justification,
than they were to Abraham, but that they without Circumcision, believing as
Abraham did, they also without cir: cumcision might be justified as Abraham
was. And therefore accordingly from this example the Apostle does assert in the
words of my Text (which are brought in upon this occasion.) That to him that
workeeh not, but beleiveth on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted to him for righteousness. Which doctrine of imputation of Faith unto
men for Righteousness without Works, the Apostle in ver. 6, 7, 8. makes
clearly agreeable to that passage of David in Psalm 32.1, 2. where he says,
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered:
blessed is the man unto whom the Lord will not impute sin. Whereupon the
Apostle to draw home this part of his discourse unto Abraham's case, which is
the chief thing he prosecutes throughout this Chapter; in the ninth verse he
makes this demand: Comes this blessedness then upon the Circumcision only, or
upon the uncircumcision also? for we say that Faith was reckoned unto Abraham
for righteoasness. V. 10. How then was it reckoned? when he was in Circumcision
or in uncircumcision? not in circumcision but in uncircumcision. Which way of
arguing here used by the Apostle, is of mighty force to evince the
non-necessity of Circumcision unto justification, a thing which the Jews would
have imposed upon the Gentiles in order thereunto, as I have often said. For if
Abraham's Faith was reckoned to him for righteousness before ever he was
Circumcised, then was not his Circumcision necessary unto his justification
which he had without it. And if it were not necessary hereunto in Abraham their
spiritual Father, neither was it now necessary among the believing Gentiles,
his spiritual children. For the Apostle seems to intimate in ver. 11, 12. that
God had this design in it, that Abraham should receive his circumcision, not
before, but after his justification, to wit, that he might be the Father, the
great exemplar, copy or pattern, how or after what manner God would justify the
uncircumcised, or Gentiles in time to come, viz. by or upon their believing in
him without Circumcision. I might likewise show you farther, how the Apostle in
ver. 13. argues the non-necessity of keeping the Law of Commandments contained
in ordinances in relation to salvation upon this ground, because the promise of
heirship was not made to Abraham or to his seed through the Law, or upon
condition of observing that, but through the righteousness of Faith, or upon
condition of believing unto Justification. Of which wise and gracious
disposition of these things by God, that the promise should be entailed upon
believing rather than upon the observation of the Jewish Law, the Apostle gives
this account ver. 16. It is by Faith says he, that it might be by grace, to
the end the promise might be sure to all the seed, to wit of Abraham, not to
that only which is of the Law, such as the Jews his Seed according to the flesh
were, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, to wit, the believing
Gentiles, who otherwise would have been excluded. So that the grace of God, and
the good of men, are best provided for in this way, and that is the reason why
God has chosen this, and not the other.

Acts 15. where this very question is solemnly debated among the Apostles and
Elders for that very purpose assembled at Jerusalem, viz. to resolve and
determine this case, whether it were necessary for the Gentiles that believed
to be Circumcised, and to keep the Law of Moses or no, ver. 1.5, 6: And when
there had been much disputing (touching this question; at last) Peter rose up
and said unto them, men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago God
made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the
Gospel and believe. And God which knows the hearts, bare them witness,
giving them the Holy Ghost even as he did unto us: and put no difference
between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith, ver. 7, 8, 9. Where he
gives this undeniable reason why this question should be resolved in the
negative, why Circumcision and the Law should not be imposed upon the believing
Gentiles in order to their justification and salvation, viz. because God by his
giving the holy Spirit to the Gentiles ( Cornelius and the rest) Act. 10. that
were uncircumcised; upon the same terms as he did unto the believing Jews that
were Circumcised ( Acts 11.17.) did bear them witness that he accepted them as
well without the Law upon their believing, as he did the Jews with their Law;
he bare them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us. And
that God made no difference at all between Jew and Gentile, as to give the Jew
more because he was Circumcised, and kept the Law, or the Gentile less because
of his uncircumcision, but their hearts and lives being purified, reformed by
Faith, by their cleaving to Christ's Doctrine, God bestowed the same pledge of
his love upon the one as upon the other; the Law did not set the Jew higher in
his savor, nor the want of it keep the Gentile under in his love, but being
equal in Faith, they were equally accepted and beloved of God: He put no
difference between us and them says Peter who was a Jew.

And when Peter at another time was found by his Brother Paul, not acting so
evenly, according to this his present Declaration, but contrarily compelling
the believing Gentiles to walk as did the Jews, Gal. 2.14. he reproves him for
it upon this ground, that Peter himself knew this, that they themselves who
were by nature and birth Jews, and not sinners of the Gentiles, could not for
all that be justified by the Law, which they as Jews observed, but must be glad
to come by it in the same way, and upon the same terms in which the sinners of
the Gentiles did obtain it, to wit, the Faith of Jesus Christ, Gal. 2.14, 15,
16. If thou being a Jew, live after the manner of the Gentiles, and not as do
the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? We who are
Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a man is not
justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we
have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of
Christ, and not by the Works of the Law; for by the works of the Law shall no
flesh be justified. By which the Apostle plainly intimates, that it was so far
from being necessary to compel the believing Gentiles to keep the law of the
Jews to make them capable of justification; as that the Jews themselves who had
the Law and the works of it, must needs lay aside the consideration thereof in
their coming to God for justification, and must be content to receive it upon
like terms of grace with the Gentiles themselves, as Paul himself did, Phil.
3.9. who desired to be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness which
was of their law as he was a Jew, but that which was through the Faith of
Christ, as he was a Christian.

CHAP. III. Showing how Love, Justice, and Mercy, though commanded both in Law
and Gospel, are to he rejected in the Jewish sense, and yet embraced in the
Christians, as necessary unto Justification. Showing also in what sense Works
are necessary unto Justification.
viz. such Works as were proper to the Jews, in contra-distinction to the
Gentiles, which are in Scripture usually called the works of the Law; for about
them did the controversy grow, as we have seen before: all that I shall now
add by way of use as to this matter, shall be for caution: To take heed how we
oppose Faith to Works, and that when we do so, be we sure to keep the Scripture
road, which I have been now tracing out.

It is true, Faith and Love, are often in the New Testament, distinguished, or
mentioned as things distinct, in a strict sense, Ephesians. 6.23. 1 Timothy 1.14, and
2.15. 2 Timothy 1.13. Philem. 5. etc. but I am not without much confidence, that
they are never opposed, as Faith and the Works of the Law are: as if a man that
has no Love might be justified by his Faith, as he that works not, or which
has no Works in our Apostles sense, may. It is no where neither in words nor
sense said; But he that loves not, but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly, his Faith is counted to him for righteousness: but the contrary in
substance is flatly affirmed by the Apostle James, chap. 2. besides other
Scriptures, as I shall God willing come afterward to show. And therefore I do
think that our Protestant Writers have given too much advantage to the Papists,
whilst in asserting justification by Faith alone without any Works at all, they
have in the mean while chiefly if not only, built this their assertion upon
such Scriptures as my Text, with others of like nature, which treat, not of all
Works in general, but of such as did belong unto the Jews in special; and
therefore are usually called the Works of the Law; or the Deeds of the Law.
Works of what Law I pray you? but of that Law which as the Apostle says
pertained to the Israelites, Romans 9.4. and which as the same Apostle says also
the Gentiles had not, Romans 2.12.14. 1 Cor. 9.21.

Objection.

Answer. This indeed is an Objection that deserves consideration; but for
answer take it thus. Though it be very true, that the same Works of Love,
Justice, and Mercy, be enjoined, both in Law and Gospel, yet it will not follow
that when the Apostle opposes the Works of the Law to Faith, that then he
opposes Gospel-works to Faith likewise, for these two Reasons.

1. Because those Works as they were enjoined the Jews in the Law, were part of
the first Covenant, but as they are enjoined in the Gospel, so they are part of
the second Covenant. But now the Law or first Covenant, (in the letter of it)
was not of Faith, says the Apostle: the things promised in it, were suspended,
not upon the condition of believing, but of doing: But the man that does them
shall live in them, Gal. 3.12. Upon which account, and in respect whereof, the
Works even of Love, Justice, and Mercy, as enjoined under that Covenant, may
possibly be opposed to Faith. Whereas the Gospel or new Covenant, which also
contains in it precepts of Love; Equity, and Mercy, as well as promises of
pardon, acceptance, and salvation, and not promising the enjoyment of the one,
without obedience in the other; (as is further to be showed afterward) I say
this Gospel or New Covenant is so of Faith, and all the conditional part of it
so relating to, and depending upon Faith, as that it is so far from being
opposed to Faith, as the other Covenant is, as that the whole Gospel,
New Testament or Covenant, both in its precepts and promises, bears the
denomination of Faith, being sometimes styled the Faith, Gal. 1.2, 3. and 3.23.
Acts 6, 7. Romans 1.5. Jude 3. Sometimes the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27.

And when we suppose the duties and Works of Love to be opposed to Faith under
one Covenant for reasons proper to it, and yet yet the same Works not to be
opposed to Faith in the other Covenant for reasons peculiar to it; let it not
seem strange to any man; for it is no new thing to affirm and deny the same
thing, under several circumstances, and different considerations; As the
Apostle John for example, touching this great Commandment of Love, of which we
now speak; he affirms it to be no New Commandment, but an old, and yet
presently again says the same is a New Commandment, 1 John 2.7, 8. Brethren,
I write no new Commandment unto you, but an old Commandment, which ye had
from the beginning: the old Commandment is the word which ye have heard from
the beginning. Again, a new Commandment I write unto you, which thing is true
in him and in you; because the darkness is past, and the true light now
shines. The Law of Love is an old Commandment as it is part of the old
Covenant, and yet the same is a new commandment as it is part of the new
Covenant, being given a new by Christ, the Mediator thereof, and now upon new
terms too, not as opposed to Faith, as in the former, but as in a collateral
and subservient way, joined with it in the latter. And besides this, the same
Commandment under this new edition of it, comes out with enlargement, which
makes it new: Which thing (says the Apostle) is true in him, and in you. In
him, who has not only given this new command, John 13.34. A new Commandment
I give unto you, that ye love one another as I have loved you; but also has
given us the pattern of it in his own example, having so loved us as to lay
down his life, and to give himself for us, Gal. 2.20 Which thing as it is true
in him, so in you says he, 1 John 2.8. because we ought therefore, not only to
love our Neighbor as our selves, as before it was commanded; but now even to
lay down our lives for the brethren; 1 John 3.16. as he has done for us. Of
all which, viz. that the same command though in one respect it was old, yet in
another it was new, and truly verified both in Christ, and in the Saints, the
Apostle gives this reason in the forementioned place, 1 John 2.8. Because the
darkness is past, and the true light now shines: the different dispensing of
the same thing, has made this difference in it: it was an old Commandment as
it was once enjoined under the old Covenant, but now the darkness and obscutity
of that Covenant and dispensation being past (as when once it grew old it was
then ready to vanish, Heb. 8.13.) and the true and new light in the Gospel and
new Covenant, now shining, under which the same duties of Love are enjoined
upon other terms then before, it might upon this account be well styled a New
Commandment, which yet in substance was an old one.

Romans 2.13. For not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers
of the Law shall be justified. It was no more men's hearing of the Law, and
leaning upon God (as some did Mic. 3.11.) without sincere obedience to the Law
in one thing as well as in another, that would render them acceptable to God
then, than men's barren, formal, and dead Faith, under the profession of the
Gospel, will without an upright and careful conformity to the doctrine of
Christ, render them acceptable to God now.

As concerning that sense in which the Jews asserted, and the Apostle denied
the necessity of the works of the Law to justification, take it thus. They
being ignorant of Gods Righteousness ( Romans 10.3.) and of his design to teach
men by the types and figures of the Law as by a schoolmaster, to expect
justification by the death of Christ, and Faith in his blood, ( For by reason
of the vail that was upon their hearts, they could not see to the end of that
which is abolished, 2 Cor. 3.13, 14, 15.) I say, they being herein altogether
ignorant, were on the other hand highly confident, that God had ordained their
legal Sacrifices to purge them from their sins, and their obedience in them and
other points of the Law; to be the only means to invest them with all the good
that ever the Lord intended them, not only in things temporal, but also
spiritual and eternal. So that that which the Gospel attributes to the New
Covenant, to the blood of it, to the faith of it, to the obedience of it; they
attributed and ascribed all of it to the blood and obedience of the Old
Covenant.

So that the question between the Apostle and them, was but this: Whether
Eternal Redemption were to be had upon the First Covenant terms, or the
Second; whether by the Works of the Law, or the Faith of the Gospel, the
believing in, and subjecting to the Lord Jesus as that only name, way and
means, in which Salvation is to be had. The Apostle he affirms, that Salvation
is to be had by the latter without the former, by the New Covenant terms
without the Old; the Jews on the contrary they held that Salvation was to be
had by the former without the latter, by the Works of the Law without believing
in or obeying of Jesus. It is most evident and certain that thus and thus as
has been declared, is the true sense in which the Jews held the Works of the
Law available to justification and salvation, and it is as clear likewise, that
in the very same sense the Apostle does deny and reject them, charging the
whole stresse of all upon Christ, and believing in, and following of him.

Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for
Christ; yea doubtless and I do count all things but loss for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of
all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and be found in
him not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is
through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith. He
had showed before what the Jews trusted in, boasted of, and which he himself
also whilst he was as they were, did count his gain, viz. Circumcised the eight
day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the
Hebrews, touching the righteousness of the Law blameless. But when he became
a Christian, he let go all these things which he held so fast before: took off
and removed that confidence and stresse which he had placed in these, and now
lays all upon Christ, and Faith in him. That which he now expected by Christ,
he did indeed expect by his righteousness in the Law before; but that which was
his hope and his confidence, his joy and his glory before, is now but loss and
dung with him, when once the excellency of the knowledge of the way of
Salvation by Christ, does appear. Now all his desire is to be found in Christ,
rejoicing in Christ, trusting in Christ, cleaving to Christ; not any more to be
found in the dress of his own righteousness which was of the Law, the first
Covenant righteousness, that righteousness in the Law, touching which as he
says he was blameless, verse. 6. Which whilst he expected Salvation by it, was
a righteousness or way of justification of his own setting up, never of Gods
appointing. In opposition whereto, he desires now to be found in that
righteousness which is of God through Faith; in that state of justification and
salvation, which God in the Gospel has settled and established upon believing
in Jesus. So that here in this Contexture of Scripture, you have the Jews
righteousness or justification, and the Christians; through both which this
Apostle had passed, and of both which he had made trial: the Jews claim was by
the Law, and the works thereof, but the Christians by the Gospel, and the
Faith, and obedience thereof: the act of his conversion was his renouncing of
the former, and cleaving to the latter.

Romans Chapter 9. Verse 30, 31, 32. What shall we say then, that the Gentiles
which followed not after righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even
the righteousness which is of Faith: but Israel which followed after the Law
of righteousness has not attained to the Law of righteousness; Wherefore?
because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the works of the Law;
for they stumbled at that stumbling-stone. Here we have two manner of people,
the Gentiles and the Jews; and two sorts of righteousness, the one of the Law,
the other of Faith, or of the Gospel. The Gentiles who had not followed after
righteousness, but lived in Idolatry, Sin, and Wickedness, and without God in
the World, being altogether strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, and that
Covenant of Promise, yet attained to righteousness, a state of justification
and acceptance before God, upon their receiving the Gospel, the doctrine of
life and salvation, when it was brought among them. The Jews though they
followed after the law of righteousness, those laws wherein a righteous
conversation was commanded by God, and did many of the things that were
commanded therein, having a zeal toward God, yet for all that, did not arrive
at that justification and acceptance with God, which the Gentiles attained,
and the reason was, because they did not seek it in the Gospel-way in which the
Gentiles found it: they should have let go the doctrine of Moses, and have
embraced the doctrine of Christ, and have reckoned themselves but in the same
capacity with the Gentiles for all their Works of the Law, and have said as
some of them did, We believe that through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
we shall be saved even as they, Acts 15.11. But instead of this they stumbled
at that stumbling-stone, Christ Jesus and him crucified, and the offer of
salvation by him, and did adhere unto the works of the Law for all things
pertaining to salvation, and would have Justification upon the Law terms; this
ran in their mind, if a man do those things he shall live in them, and so
ventured all upon that score. It was quite beyond their expectation that the
Messiah when ever he should come, should turn them out of their way of
Sacrificing, by becoming a Sacrifice himself, or that their expectation of
remission of sin, should be taken off the former, and placed on the latter: and
therefore they cleaving to the letter of the Law for eternal salvation, which
so far was ordained by God but for a temporal, and rejecting Christ and the
terms of salvation by him which the Law pointed them to in the spiritual
signification of it, of which they were wholly ignorant, hence it came to pass,
that for all their laboring, seeking, and striving after righteousness,
justification, and salvation, yet they missed it, as seeking it out of Gods
way, upon their own terms, not Gods.

Gal. 2.21. For if righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain.
How could that be? but that they did attribute and ascribe the same attoning,
virtue, and sin-purging efficacy unto the works of the Law, which the Gospel
does attribute unto the blood of Jesus. And then indeed if it had been so as
they supposed it was, that sacrifices or any other works of the Law, could have
purged sin so as Christ does by his death and blood, then the death of Christ
would have been in vain, God would never have put himself to that charge as to
give his Son to death to take away the sin of men, if the works, of the Law had
been a competent means to bring it about. If there had been a Law (says the
same Apostle) which could have given life, verily righteousness should have
been by the Law, Gal. 3.21. If the Law and the Wotks therein commanded, could
have done the same thing toward the conferring of life and salvation upon men
which is now brought to pass by the coming and dying of Jesus, then
righteousness and life should have been by that. But now inasmuch as that God
has given his Son to dye, (for here he writes to those that did acknowledge
Christ and his death, but withal inclined to that opinion Acts 15. that except
men kept the law of Moses they could not be saved) since God has given his Son
to dye, it is (as if he should say) manifest that the Law fell short in ability
of doing that for men, for the doing of which God sent his own Son, Romans 8.3.
For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God sent
his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin, (or by a sacrifice
for sin as it is in the margent) condemned sin in the flesh. What the Law could
not do in that it was weak through the flesh, that is (I conceive) through or
by reason of the sins of the flesh; the sinful condition of man was so great,
as that it quite over-topt the purging power of the Law, the disease was too
strong to be cured with such a purge, the sins of the flesh overmatched the Law
in this kind, and rendered it weak: and therefore God was fain to send his own
Son to condemn sin, to take away the destroying power of sin by the sacrifice
of himself, for that the Law could not do it by its sacrifice.

In that the Apostle writes so much and in so many places (for there are many
more besides these) touching the weakness and dis-ability of the Law to do
that for men which God sent Christ to do for them, it is in opposition to those
who magnified the Law as if it had been able to do all that for them, which the
Apostle does ascribe to Christ as done by him.

By what has been now said I think it does fully appear in what sense the Jews
asserted the Works of their Law in the point of Justification, and likewise in
what sense the Apostle denies them.

Love, Justice, and Mercy, yea or the act of Faith it self, or any other work
commanded in the Gospel, does justify as Christ's blood justifies, by way of
atonement for sin, let him be accursed. It is the prerogative royal peculiarly
and alone belonging to Christ, thus to justify, in which no creature in Heaven
or Earth, or any action of any creature, bears any the least share, Heb. 1.3.
When he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the
majesty on high. To purge from sin is the self-work of Christ, Heb. 7.27. and
9.26, 28. and 10, 12, 14. When some of the Galatians were but about to
attribute the same justifying power unto the Law, which they had acknowledged
to be in Christ, Paul testifies to them that in doing so they would render
Christ of none effect to them, and fall from grace, Gal. 5.4. So dangerous a
thing is it to join any in competition or co-partnership with Christ in this
work, or to attribute the same justifying virtue to any beside him. And if any
among the Papists should ascribe any such operation or virtue to any of their
works, though as dipped in the blood of Christ, and receiving their virtue from
that, it would doubtless be found a piece of high presumption, and a sin of a
daring nature before the Lord.

But alas how far off are we from ascribing any such power, operation or
virtue unto any work which a Christian can do Nay Faith it self, though it be
so necessary unto justification, as that without which the blood of Christ will
not justify and save men, yet it is far from being necessary upon any such
account as if it could in the least operate as Christ's blood does, or add any
thing unto the saving virtue thereof; and yet necessary it is, because such is
the Will of God, as that the saving benefit of that blood shall not be made
over unto any man, but upon condition of his believing. So I say of Works (I
mean Gospel-obedience) though we say they are so necessary as that no man's
Faith shall justify him that is void of them, or which is all one, that no
man's Faith shall justify him without them; yet we say also, that they are far
from being necessary upon any such score as Christ's blood is necessary, or as
if they could contribute any thing unto its atoneing virtue. Nor is it
necessary in this case to suppose them to be formally of the nature of Faith,
nor to be essential to the act of believing; nor that the same justifying act,
office, or power is placed in them by God, as is in Faith: Yet necessary they
are unto justification, because such is the will and good pleasure of God, as
that though he will have Faith to entitle men to the justifying and saving
benefit of Christ's blood, yet he will not interess an unprofitable, dead,
barren, fruitless, formal Faith in that saving benefit and privileges of the
New Covenant, but reserves this honor for that Faith only which is an active
lively working Faith, and which makes a man as well ready and desirous to give
honor and glory unto the Lord in doing his will, as to receive honor and
glory from him in the way of believing his promise. This God willing I shall
make fully evident, when I come to treat of the doctrine of Faith and
Justification by it, in the handling of the second part of my Text.



There are two sorts of Works.

1. Such as consist in will, purpose, and desire. 2. Such as consist in the
actual execution of those resolutions and desires.
That those motions, resolutions, and desires that are transacted in the will,
by way of preparation of turning them into actions of another nature when
opportunity shall serve, I say that these are works in Gods account, who is as
well privy to them as to external actions, is most evident. Mic. 2.1. Woe to
them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds: when the morning is
light they practice it, because, it is in the power of their hand. Their
devising and resolving upon evil in the night, in order to the practice of it
in the day, is called a working of evil upon their beds. Again Psalm 58.2. Yea
in heart ye work wickedness: you weigh the violence of your hands in the earth.
The evil actions and motions of the mind and will, are called a working of
wickedness in the heart; as the looking on a Woman to lust after her, is
called the committing adultry with her in the heart. Mat. 5.28. All which is as
true of good intentions, resolutions and desires, as of evil; the resolving
upon good when opportunity presents, is a working of good in the soul as well
as the resolving upon evil upon like terms is the working of evil.

Now then that Faith which is not accompanied with good Works of this kind in
the souls first fastening upon Christ by Faith for salvation; I say, that soul
that does not come to Christ with a sense of such worthiness in him, as to
desire and resolve through the strength of his grace to give up it self to him,
and to be commanded by him, that Faith, that soul, by all the light that I can
get from Scripture, is never like to be accepted, or to pass for current in
Christ's account. Nor will such desires and resolutions do it neither, that are
but airy, and of the nature of false Conceptions, and which spend themselves
and languish and vanish in desiring and resolving, like the sluggard Solomon
speaks of, Prove. 13.4. Whose soul desires and has nothing: No; unless they
have that truth and reality, that strength and substance, as to be delivered of
such conceptions, and to bring forth fruit to perfection when opportunity
comes, and not like that corn that grows upon the housetop, that withers
before it come to maturity, they are never like to obtain the honor and
reputation of such desires and resolutions as will pass for good works in Gods
account. But if the soul in its first closing with Christ by Faith, go armed,
and the Faith of the soul attended with real, hearty, and unfeigned desires and
purposes to render unto the Lord in love, honor, and service, according to the
benefit it expects to receive from him, and that nothing but lack of
opportunity, hinders the real acting and executing these desires and resolves
with suitable endeavors, doubtless that soul, that faith, is accepted with
the Lord, as well as if all those purposes, inclinations and desires of the
soul, were so many visible works, so many actual performances. For if there be
first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has; and not
according to that he has not. 2 Cor. 8.12. If it has but passed the will in
good earnest, it is not the want of more ability, or more opportunity, that
will hinder the man's acceptance, but accepted he is and shall be with the Lord
with what he has in this kind, be it more or be it less.

And now having showed you both in what sense the unbeleeving Jews did, and in
what sense we do hold Works necessary unto Justification and salvation; I now
pray you to make judgment upon the whole, and let your own conscience speak,
whether there be the least or lightest probability, that when the Apostle
rejects the works of the Law from Justification, in the sense in which the
Jews asserted them, that then and therein he should also reject the christian
resolutions and endeavors commanded in the Gospel upon pain of damnation, from
justification in the sense in which I have supposed them absolutely necessary
thereunto.

Paul's saying in my Text, have adventured to do. Otherwise, though there seems
to be an over-tenderness and shiness in our Protestant Authors, while engaged
against the Papists, to say in plain words that any Works are necessary to
justification, yet in the mean while they confidently and boldly assert in
other words that which amounts to as much, and signifies the same thing. For
that they might not be thought by denying the necessity of good works unto
justification, to open a gap unto carnal liberty, and to lay a temptation upon
men to be less careful in the great work of Sanctification, they are wont to
assert over and over, that though they do not hold good Works necessary to
justification, yet they do hold them necessary unto salvation, so that though
men may be justified without them, yet they cannot be saved without them.

But I demand, what Justification is that which will not put men into an
immediate capacity of salvation? but that there is a necessity of Works to do
this for men? Can any call this a justification unto life, as the Scripture
calls that justification which is of the Gospelkinds, Rom: 5.18. And does it
not come to the same issue to say that Faith without Works will not justify,
and to say that justification without works will not save? for is justification
any thing else then a discharging or setting a man free from condemnation, and
consequently bringing him into a condition of life? so that whether the defect
lie in the Faith that should justify, because of the absence of Works, or
whether in the justification it self, because of the absence of Works, it
matters not; for it seems there is the same necessity of Works unto Salvation
on which side soever it fall: with the sense of which necessity, to fill the
hearts and souls of men, is the thing I drive at in this discourse.

But that to grant Works necessary unto salvation, is all one in effect as to
grant them necessary unto justification; and that there is no more danger in
the one then in the other; and that the difference between the one and the
other is but in a sound of words, and not in substance of matter, and
consequently that they that deny the necessity of Works in the one sense, and
yet grant it in the other, do but restore with the right hand, what they unduly
took away with the left, is a thing clear and evident from the Scriptures as
well as from the reason of the thing which I thus declare.

1. Our Apostle Paul uses these two phrases, to be justified, and to live, as
words equivolent and importing the same thing, and reckons it a good
demonstration to prove that men are not justified by the works of the Law, but
by Faith, inasmuch as that the Scripture says, The just shall live by Faith,
Gal. 3.11. But that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God it is
evident: for the just shall live by Faith. Which would be a defective way of
arguing, if to be justified and to live were not the same thing with the
Apostle. So again verse. 21. of the same Chapter: For if there had been a Law
given which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by
the Law. Here we see again that righteousness and life are convertable terms
with the Apostle; if life, then righteousness, if righteousness, then life by
the Law. And so to be justified, and to be blessed, is all one thing with the
same Apostle, Gal. 3.8, 9. Romans 4.7, 8, 9. And to be saved, or to be justified,
is the same thing which the Apostle James, according to the tenor of his
reasoning, James 2. from verse the fourteenth, to the four and twentieth.

2. Justification and condemnation are in Scripture put in direct opposition
one to another, Romans 5.18. and 8.33. So that he that is justified, is free from
condemnation, and to be free from condemnation, and to be in a state of
Salvation, is as much one, as not to dye, is to live.

3. Salvation as well as Justification is promised to believing, John 3.16.
Acts 16.31. Heb. 10.39. therefore to be in a salvable condition is the
immediate effect of Faith, as well as to be justified, and consequently that a
man is as soon in a salvable condition as in a justified condition; and if so,
then look what is necessary to the being of the one, is necessary to the being
of the other also, with a necessity sine qua non, without which neither will be.

And now what does all this prove? but that if men cannot be in a salvable
condition without Works, (which is the thing granted) then neither can they be
in a justified condition without them, because there is no separating of these.
But I still desire you, that when I thus speak of the necessity of good Works
unto Justification, that you will do me and your selves too that right as to
understand me in the sense in which I have explained my self before, viz. that
they are necessary so, as to render that Faith by which men are justified to be
of the right kind, and such unto which Justification is promised. Under which
sense I am far enough from complying with the Papists, who (if they be not
wronged) hold Works to be satisfactory, Propitiatory, and meritorious; for
that is their charge; see Dr. Downam's Treatise Justi. lib. 7. cap. 1.. 1. And
as I am far from complying with them, so am I far enough from differing from
those that oppose them, if their own concessions about the necessity of Works,
may be but fairly construed and argued upon. This by what I have but newly said
does plainly appear, and might be further evinced by other of their sayings
wherein they do acknowledge, That that Faith which is alone, severed from
charity, and destitute of good Works, does neither justify nor save, but that
there is a necessity of them, a necessity of presence, though not of
efficiency, and that they must concur with Faith in the subject or party
justified, though not in the act of Justification. And what is all this less
than that which I have said? I say Faith void of Works will not justify, They
say that Faith which is alone severed from charity, and destitute of good
Works, will not justify nor save. I say it is not necessary to hold or say that
the same justifying act, office, or power is placed in them as is in Faith.
They say they are not necessary by way of efficiency. I say God denies the
justifying privilege unto a barren, dead Faith, and reserves it only for a
lively working Faith; they say there is a necessity of presence, and that they
concur with Faith in the subject or party justified, though not in the act of
justifying.

So that a necessity of Gospel-obedience to accompany that Faith which shall
justify, is acknowledged on all hands.

And if men had but laid out themselves as much to possess the people with a
through sense of this, as they have to preserve them from the errors of the
Papists on the other hand, it might I conceive have been much better with their
Souls, then now it is. For while their ears and eyes have been filled so much
with the doctrine of Justification by Faith without Works (when they have meant
it only in opposition to the Popish sense) and so little with the Doctrine
touching the unavailablenesse of that Faith unto Justification, that does not
knit the Soul to Christ with such love, as by which men deny themselves of
their Lusts and sinful pleasures, and follow after righteousness and holiness
with them that call upon the Lord with a pure heart; hence I fear it has come
to pass, that the generality of men among us have had so little sense of the
necessity of a godly life, and have presumed so much upon their Faith touching
Christ, (which yet has been but the dead Faith James speaks of) as that they
have to the sad deceiving of their own Souls, thought themselves in safe
condition, although they have lived sensual and carnal lives, and have been
strangers to the work of the new Creature, the power of Godliness, and the
life of Holiness, without which for all their Faith, no man shall see the Lord.

But alas how should it be otherwise, when as it is too manifest, that the
Leaders and Guides of the people themselves, except here and there one, have
had little of this sense and savor, but have built so much upon the act of
believing, and so little upon a faithful subjection to Christ's Doctrine (which
for ought I can see, is as necessary to render Faith available in its place, as
Faith is necessary to render the blood of Christ available in its place, as to
a man's personal Justification) as if that subjection were not at all necessary
unto the being of a man's justification before God, but useful only to declare
him to himself, and unto men to be justified. And under this Soul-deceiving
apprehension, and mistaken notion and principle, the Ministers, too many of
them have indulged themselves and people too, in a dull, heavy, cold, partial,
flat, and less than formal way of professing the Gospel, to the hazard of
their precious Souls. And O that this might but awaken any of them that take
upon them the care of Souls, to lay this matter more to heart, before it be too
late, and the opportunity past.

And thus I have now done with the first part of my Text, wherein I have showed
in what sense Paul makes no reckoning of Works in the point of Justification.
Come we now to the handling of that which remains touching the imputation of
his Faith for righteousness, who believes on him that justifies the ungodly.

CHAP. IV. Setting forth the object of justifying Faith, and showing the
believing in whom, and the believing of what it is, that will be counted for
Righteousness.
But to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly,
his Faith is counted for righteousness, I would open these three things.

1. The believing in whom, and the believing of what, it is, to which the
promise of Justification or the Imputation of Righteousness is made.

2. What, or what manner of believing it is, that has the great promise of
Justification annexed to it.

3. How, or in what sense this Faith in men, is counted unto them for
righteousness. Which three things I conceive contain the sum and substance of
the Doctrine of Justification.

Let us now begin with the first of these, and see from the Scriptures who and
what is the right object of saving Faith. Him, whom the Apostle here in the
Text propounds as the object of this belief, is said to be him who justifies
the ungodly. Whether by him that justifies the ungodly we should understand
God the Father distinctly, or his Son Jesus Christ, it will not be so needful
to enquire; since as both concur in justifying the ungodly, so both are the
object of justifying Faith. For as in due time Christ dyed for the ungodly,
(Romans 5.6.) that he might justify them by his blood, so God the Father has
set him forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. And
as to understand the Apostle as meaning the Father, seems to suit best with the
precedent verses, so to understand him as not excluding the Son, will well
answer his general design in asserting atonement, remission of sins, or
justification by Christ for the ungodly Gentiles upon their believing, in
opposition to those who appropriated these to the Works of Moses Law. It Is
true, there is a great variety of expression used in Scripture to set forth the
object of Faith; sometimes making God the Father, and his record concerning his
Son, the object; and sometimes Christ as Messiah promised, as Son of God, as
dying, as rising again; and sometimes the word or doctrine of Christ or his
Apostles; but all relating to, and depending originally upon the Father. I
shall touch each of these particularly, but with much brevity, because I hope
you are not so much unacquainted with these things, as I fear you are in that
upon which I principally intend enlargement.

Romans 8.33. and 3.30. Gal. 3.8. Hence justification is called the
righteousness of God, and the righteousness which is of God, as he being the
Author and founder of it, Romans 3.21. and 10.3. Phil. 3.9.

1. It was found out and contrived by his infinite wisdom, Ephesians. 1.7.8.11. and
therefore Christ whom he sent to put in execution that wonderful, profound
contrivance of his, is called the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1, 24. Christ the power
of God, and the wisdom of God.

2. God the Father is the Author of it, and object of our Faith about it,
because it issues and proceeds out of the womb of his grace, where this blessed
design was first conceived, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his grace. The
goodness and compassionateness of his nature, meeting with the misery and
necessity of his poor creature, inclined him to set such a thing on foot,
disposed him to use both his Wisdom and Power to contrive and bring it to
pass. The creature neither did nor could put any obligation upon him to do
this thing for him, but by sin and unworthiness, provoked him to that which was
quite contrary, and therefore the more wonderful, that it should make its way
through so many, and so mighty contrary provocations which it meets with from
men. This grace of God is so great a doer, has so mighty a hand, so potent an
influence in the whole and entire business of Man's Election, Redemption,
Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, Eternal Life and Salvation, that all
from first to last, from the beginning to the end, is worthily ascribed to the
riches of his grace, both in the things themselves, and means of their
accomplishment; as might easily be shown from Scripture; but I will hasten on
my way.

3. The means by which this justification is effected and brought to pass, are
of and from God the Father, and their power to justify depends upon his will
appointing them to that end. 1. Christ is the great means of bringing this
about, but yet is given and sent by the Father for that purpose: Whom God
(says he) has set forth to be a propitiation for sin, Romans 3.25. In that
Christ becomes righteousness or justification to men, it is because God would
have it so, 1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made
unto us wisdom, righteousness, etc. Again, it is God that was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing trespasses, 2 Cor. 5.19. It is
he that has made us accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. Then said he, lo, I
come to do thy will, O God: by the which will we are sanctified through the
offering up of the body of Jesus Christ once for all; Heb. 10.9, 10. Though we
are sanctified by the offering up of the body of Jesus, yet it is by virtue of
the will of the Father, which the Son came to do, and to fulfill. According to
these Scriptures, the attoneing, purging power and virtue of Christ's blood,
seems to depend upon the Divine will and good pleasure of the Father. Else if
it did not, why should not the whole world be justified? for Christ is the
propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. and why then is not
the whole world justified? Surely it is not because the Sacrifice of Christ is
not as sufficient to justify all, as some, the whole world, for whom he dyed,
as a few only, which shall actually be justified and saved; but it is because
the Fathers will is such, that the justifying, saving benefit of his death,
shall be limited unto such only as do believe, John 3.16. God so loved the
world as that he gave his only begotten Son. (viz. to or for the world, or
whole world, 1 John 2.2. but yet so, and upon such terms, as) that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, The will of the
Father piches the bounds how far the justifying virtue of his Sons blood shall
extend, and determines the terms upon which it shall be actually enjoyed. And
so 2. It is in respect of Faith, (another, and compared with Christ, an
inferior means of man's justification) it does not justify in its own name, or
by its own power or virtue, but its ability in this behalf to justify and
save, depends merely upon the will of him that has appointed it to this
office: but of this afterward.

So then the grace, power, and authority to justify, recides originally in the
Father, and what force and power there is in Faith, or more remotely in Works,
to justify, they have it by way of designation, and act what they do act in
that kind, not out of any intrinsical worth or merit, but merely in the
strength, and by the authority of the will of God. And however there is in the
blood of Christ a richness of intrinsical worth and virtue, of it self to
justify, (as is clearly intimated when it is said, We are bought with a price,
1 Cor. 6.20. Purchased with his blood, Acts 20.28. etc.) yet since Christ did
not glorify himself to be made an High Priest, and to offer himself a
Sacrifice, but was made so by the Father, ( Heb. 5.5.) thence it is that the
Priestly offering and sacrifice it self in the effecting of that thing to which
it is appointed by the Father, viz. the purgation of sins, and justification of
sinners, has a dependence upon the Fathers will. And therefore when men do
believe in, and depend upon Christ for justification, they do ultimately
believe in, and depend upon the Father for it, John 12.44. Jesus cried, and
said, he that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me. 1
Peter 1.21. Who by him do believe in God that raised him up from the dead, and
gave him glory, that your Faith and hope might be in God. The Father has the
power of life and death, has the power of giving Laws to his Creature, ( James
4.12.) it is his Law that is transgressed by Sin, and against him that the
offense is committed, ( Psalm. 51.4.) and therefore it belongs to him to forgive
sin, ( Isai. 43.25. Luke 5.21.) and accordingly Christ directs us to pray the
Father to forgive our Trespasses, Mat. 6.12. It Is true also, that the Son has
the same power of life and death, of giving Laws, and forgiving sins, For all
power both in Heaven and earth, is given unto him, that all men should honor
the Son, even as they that honor the Father. But this he has according to the
order of his being, from the Father, Mat. 28.18. John 3.35. and 17.2.

Faith acts it self upon the Father as its object in three respects especially;
First by believing him to be the true God in opposition to Idols, and all false
gods, John 17.3. This is life eternal to know thee the only true God, etc. 1
Cor. 8.6. But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things,
and we in him, Ephesians. 4.6. One God and Father of all.

Secondly by believing that notwithstanding the sin of men, that he (having
received an atonement in his Sons blood) is most willing to be favorable and
gracious, not only in forgiving, but also in rewarding such who duly and
diligently seek his favor, grace, and love, in such ways, and by such means,
as he himself has appointed for that end. Heb. 11.6. But without Faith it is
impossible to please him: for he that comes to God must believe that he is,
(there is the former act of Faith touching the truth of his being,) and that he
is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

Thirdly by trusting in and relying on his might, mercy, grace, and love, for
pardon, justification, and eternal salvation, Psalm 52.8. But I will trust in
the mercy of the Lord for ever, Romans 4.5. But believes on him that justifies
the ungodly, John 5.24. But all this (at least since God was manifested in the
flesh) in and by Christ, there being no coming to, or believing in the Father
but by him, John 14.6. 1 Pet. 1.21. Though formerly he was worshipped and
served under the name and title of the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob, yet now in the New Testament under the Name and Title of the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.17. and 3.14.

Abraham's justification is cast upon his believing this word of God; So shall
thy seed be. For Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness, Genesis 15.6. Romans 4.3.18. Gal. 3.6.8. James 2.23. Now the record
which the Father has given of Christ in the New Testament as the object of
Faith, is twofold. 1. That he is his beloved Son in whom he is well pleased,
and that he ought to be heard and obeyed, Mat. 3.17. and 17.5. And 2. That in
him is life, and that salvation is now offered to the World by believing in,
and obeying of him, 1 John 5.9, 10, 11, 12. If we receive the witness of men
the witness of God is greater: for this is the witness of God, which he has
testified of his Son. He that believes on the Son has the witness in
himself: he that believes not God has made him a liar, because he believes
not the record which God gave of his Son. And this is the record which God has
given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. He that has the Son
has life; and he that has not the Son of God has not life. This testimony
which the Father gave of his Son, was partly by voice from Heaven, 2 Pet. 1.17,
18. and partly by those Works which he gave him to finish, by which men saw his
glory as the glory of the only begotten of the Father; John 5.36. I have
greater witness then that of John; for the works which the Father has given
me to finish, the same works that do I, bear witness of me, that the Father
has sent me, John 10.37, 38. If I do not the works of my Father believe me
not: but if I do, though ye believe not me, yet believe the works; that ye may
know and believe that the Father is in me; and I in him.

Acts 16.31. And they said believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved, and thy house. Now ye must know, that Christ is propounded as the object
of Faith in several respects, and under several considerations.

Moses and the Prophets wrote and said should come. And therefore is Christ
called the He that should come, Mat. 11.3. Art thou he that should come, or do
we look for another? John 13.19. Now I tell you before it come, that when it is
come to pass, ye may believe that I am HE. It was one thing to believe in
general according to the Prophets that Messiah should come, (which was the
common Faith of the Jews, and as it should seem of the Samaritans too, John
4.25.) and another thing to believe in particular, that Jesus which is come is
the Christ. This was the Faith of such as did receive him, and cleave to him
when he did come, John 11.27. She said, yea, Lord, I believe that thou art the
Christ the Son of God which should come into the world. The want of which is
the destroying sin that lies so heavy upon the Jews, John 8.24. For if ye
believe not that I am HE, ye shall dye in your sins.

2. Christ as he is the Son of God is made the object of Faith, Joh. 20, 31.
But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son
of God, and that believing, ye might have life through his name, Acts 8.37.1
John 5.1, 4, 5. and 4.15. By Faith he is believed to be the Son of God, not as
Adam was the Son of God, viz. by Creation, Lu. 3. last, in which sense we are
all his Offspring, Act. 17.28. Nor yet as the Saints are the Sons of God, to
wit by Adoption, Gal: 4.5. but that he is the begotten, yea the only begotten
Son of the Father; so the Son, and so begotten of the Father; as none else is
among all the creation of God, John 1.14. and 3.18. He that believes on him,
is not condemned; but he that believes not is condemned already, because he
has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.

Romans 5.9. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved
from wrath through him. Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation
through Faith in his blood. Faith eyes the blood of Christ as its object, under
a threefold consideration.

First it believes that Christ did dye and shed his blood for our sins, 1 Cor.
15.2, 3. If ye keep in memory what I preached unto you, unless ye have
believed in vain. For I delivered unto you first of all, that which I also
received, how that Christ dyed for our sins according to the Scriptures, Mat.
26.28, For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for
the remission of sins.

Secondly, that this death and shedding of this blood of Christ is both the
only and the all-sufficient means appointed by God to make an atonement for,
and to purge away sin, Heb: 1.3. When he had by himself purged our sins, sat
down on the right hand of the majesty on high, Revels 1.5. Unto him that loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, etc. Heb. 10.14. For by one
offering has he perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 9.14. How
much more shall the blood of Christ who through the eternal spirit, offered
himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the
living God.

Thirdly, as it believes the blood of Christ to be it, and it alone that is in
it self, and by the ordination of God, fully sufficient to take away sin, the
guilt of it, or the condemning power, or destroying nature of it, so
accordingly does it rely upon this blood of Christ under the gracious
appointment of the Father, to do this great thing for him to particular, in
whom this Faith dwells. Rom: 8.25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation
through Faith in his blood. In this Scripture there are three things that are
especially to be marked in relation to the point in hand. 1. That Christ's blood
is the blood of propitiation, or that Christ himself is the propitiation by
means of his blood, i. e. the reconciler, the procurer of savor, in pardon or
remission. 2. That God has ordained him in his blood thus to be, and
accordingly has proposed and offered him to all the world as a public
propitiation, but yet so, and upon condition that men have Faith in his blood,
i. e. do believe it to be of it self, and by the appointment of the Father, of
sufficient efficacy, force, and virtue, to purge them from their sins. Which
Faith also must be of the right kind, or else it will not interesse any man in
this great benefit. 3. That which is moreover employed, is, that the Faith of a
man feeling so good a foundation and ground under it, as is the blood of Christ
in conjunction with the Fathers will, as by which to be confident of a plenary
purgation from all sins, how great, or how many soever they have been, does
accordingly safely and securely build thereupon.

Romans 10.9. If then shall confess with thy meuth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved,
Romans 4.25. Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
Justification. And no marvel that the Resurrection of Christ should be the
object of saving Faith, inasmuch as in it is included the belief of the main
foundation Doctrines of the Gospel, and without it Faith could have no firm
footing to rest upon touching other great Gospel Truths. As,

1. The believing of him to be the Son of God (which is an ingredient
absolutely necessary in the Gospel-faith) does at least in great part depend
upon the Faith of his Resurrection. For Faith can ground its belief touching
his being the Son of God, upon nothing else than that which declares him to be
so. But now he is declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the
Spirit of holiness, by the Resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.4.

2. The keeping promise and Covenant with the holy Patriarchs and their Seed,
(which Faith must needs eye) did depend upon Gods raising Christ from the dead,
Acts 13.32, 33. And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise
which was made unto the Fathers. God has fulfilled the same unto us their
children in that he has raised up Jesus again as it is also written in the
second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And again, Acts
2.30, 31. Therefore being a Prophet, and knowing that God has sworn with an
Oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, he would
raise up Christ to sit upon his throne; he seeing this before, spoke of the
Resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in hell, neither his flesh
did see corruption.

3. The Resurrection of Christ is so necessary to Justification, and to the
Faith of it, that take away this, and Justification, and the belief of it are
all laid in the dust, 1 Cor. 15.14, 17. And if Christ be not risen, then is our
preaching vain, and your Faith is also vain. And again verse. 17. And if Christ
be not raised, your Faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins. Without believing
is no justification, and if there had been no Resurrection of Christ, there
could have been no Faith touching that atonement that is now made by his
death. For could men have believed that the death of Christ had been of
sufficient force and virtue to expiate sin, had it not been manifested by his
Resurrection? surely no. For so long as he was under the power of death, he was
under the power of sin, of which death is but the wages, For in that he dyed,
he dyed unto sin (says the Apostle,) Romans 6.10. The sting of Death, (to wit,
that which gives it power of prevailing over the creature) is sin, 1 Cor.
15.56. And the time when that saying, O death, where is thy sting, O grave,
where is thy victory, shall be brought to pass, is not till the day of
Resurrection, When this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this
mortal immortality, 1 Cor. 15.54. And therefore as the Saints shall not
actually and perfectly be delivered from all the effects of sin till the day of
their Resurrection, so neither was Christ delivered from that burden of other
men's sins which he bore in his own body, until he rose from the dead. And if
sin had been too hard for him in keeping him under the power of death, it would
much more have been too hard for us.

But in that God raised Christ from the dead, he did as it were thereby
acknowledge satisfaction for the debt of men's sins, which he by his death, as a
surety had discharged. While he lay in the grave he was detained as a prisoner
for other men's debts, but when the prison doors were opened and he let out, the
Father acknowledged satifaction, and did as it were seal him in the behalf of
those for whom he undertook, a release and discharge. By his entering into
suffering, he took the sins of the world upon him, but by his Resurrection by
which he came out of his suffering-state, he put them off. As in his suffering
he was made sin for us, and dealt with as if he had been a sinner, so by his
Resurrection he was justified from those sins which were imputed to him. And
unless he had been first justified from our sins, which were imputed to him
all the while he suffered, we could not have been justified from them our
selves. And therefore no marvel that the Apostle should attribute our
Justification with a Rather, unto the Resurrection of Christ, than to his
Death, as he does, Romans 8.33, 34. Who is he that condemns? it is God that
justifies: it is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again. He seems to
feel a firmer footing for his Faith in the Resurrection of Christ, than in his
death; more to bear him out against the accusations of any that had a mind to
condemn him: the answer which a good conscience makes, it is by the
Resurrection of Christ from the dead, 1 Pet. 3.21.

4. I might here add; that the belief of the Resurrection of our bodies at the
last day, and the eternal judgment that will follow thereupon, (which are two
great Arricles of the Christian Faith, and fundamental Doctrines, Heb. 6.2.)
does depend upon our belief of the Resurrection of Christ. For if Christ the
Son of Gods love, him in whom his soul delights more than in any man; should
not have been raised by the glory of the Father, there would have been little
reason for any other man to expect so great a favor. But now is Christ risen
from the dead, and is become the first fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15.20.
as a pledge of their Resurrection also. In that any have a lively hope of being
raised again to an inheritance uncorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades
not away, they are thereunto begotten by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead; so says the Apostle 1 Pet. 1.3, 4 And again verse 21. In that God
raised him up from the dead, and so gave him glory, it was that our Faith and
hope might be in God, that he will do so to us likewise. For God has both
raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by his own power, 1 Cor. 6.14.
For if we believe that Jesus dyed, and rose again, even so them also which
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. 1 These. 4.14. Because I live, ye shall
live also, says he who is the Resurrection and the life. John 14.19. and 11.25.

And that there shall be a righteous Judgment following the Resurrection, and
that Christ Jesus shall be the Judge, is such a thing of which the Father has
given assurance, or offered Faith unto all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead, Acts 17.31.

Mark 16.15, 16. Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every
Creature: he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. 2 These. 2.13.
Because God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth. 2 These. 1.10. When he
shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that
believe, (because our testimony among you was believed) in that day.

The Doctrine of Christ and of his Apostles, may well be counted the object of
Faith: inasmuch as to believe it, is all one as to believe that the Father has
set forth his Son to be a propitiation for sin, through Faith in his blood; and
so it is to believe that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures,
and that he rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures; because the
Doctrine of the Gospel, is a testimony and declaration of these things, and he
that believes the one, believes the other also. Gods giving his Son to dye, and
Christ's dying, and rising again, without a declaration of the mind and counsel
of God thereabout, as viz. for what cause, upon what account, and for what end
he did so: as also upon what terms and conditions, men shall reap the fruit of
his Death, Resurrection and Intercession; I say the one without the other does
not seem to be the adequate object of Faith, but both together are. For which
cause the Doctrine of the Gospel in its Enunciations, Precepts, and
Threatenings, as well as in its Promises, is the object of Faith. And because
the Doctrine of the Gospel, contains, declares, and amply sets forth all these
things, together with those things which are to come, viz. the Resurrection of
the Dead, and Eternal Judgment, in order to which the former, first take
place, as being all of them matters about which Faith is busied, therefore is
it, that the Doctrine of the Gospel, is frequently called the Faith, Gal. 1.23.
and 3.2, 5, 23. Acts 6.7. Romans 1.5. 1 Timothy 4.1. Jude 3. And so now I have
done with my first point touching Faith, viz. the object of it, or the
believing of what, it is, that shall be imputed for righteousness.

CHAP. V. Showing that that Faith which consists only in assenting unto the
truth of that report which the Gospel makes touching Christ his being the Son
of God, and of his coming into the World to save Sinners by dying for them,
will not avail to Justification and Salvation, as a Gospel-Faith of the right
kind will do.


If I mistake not, all the acts of a saving Faith may be reduced to, and
comprehended under these three heads: The first I call an act of Credence, the
second an act of Adherence; and the third an act of Confidence: in the exertion
of which three acts of Faith, having Christ for their object, the whole soul,
mind, will and affections, are engaged, which make up the believing with all
the heart which the Gospel calls for, Acts 8.37. By that act which I call an
act of Credence, I mean the assent of the mind unto the truth of what the
Gospel reports, especially touching Christ, (and Gods love to mankind in him)
as that he is the Son of God, and Savior of the world, that he was sent of God
the Father to show unto men the way of salvation; and then to dye, rise again,
and after his ascension, to make intercession to bring that salvation about,
and that remission of sins, is to be had through his name.

By that act of Faith which I call an act of Adherence, I understand the souls
fast cleaving unto the Lord Jesus in affection and subjection, as counting him
more worthy of both, than any Creature or thing in all the world; as also
taking hold of that grace and strength which is in Christ, for deliverance from
the power of sin, and of bringing the soul back again to God in point of
holiness.

And lastly, by an act of Confidence, I mean the Souls relyance, rest, or
dependence upon Christ, or on the Father through Christ, for remission of sins,
acceptance, and eternal salvation; the committing of the Soul to his mercy;
the throwing it upon his grace.

These three acts of Faith relate to each other by way of dependence; the
second depending upon the first, as the acts of the Will do upon the
Understanding; and the third upon both the former; and all acted upon the same
object. Now that which I shall endeavor, is, to show that the first and last
of these acts, the assent of the mind unto the truth of things that are to be
believed, and the confidence of the soul to meet with salvation from the Lord,
may be found in such men in whom the middle act of a loving and loyal adherence
to the Lord, is not found, and that the other two without this, will not avail
to Justification and Salvation.

Ioh. 12.42, 43. compared with other Scriptures. The words are these:
Nevertheless among the chief Rulers also, many believed on him; but because of
the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the
Synagogue; for they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God. That
these men did believe Jesus to be the Messiah, the Christ of God, is most
evident, in that upon conviction by his Miracles and Doctrine, which declared
him so to be, they believed on him, and consequently must believe in the
general, his Doctrine to be true. And yet that whilst they did thus believe,
they were in an unsafe condition as touching the salvation of their souls, will
appear by two material circumstances in the words. The first is this, That for
all their Faith they durst not confess him, lest they should be put out of the
Synagogue: which unworthy deportment of theirs, put them under that threatening
of Christ, Mark 8.38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my
words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of
man be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels.
And John says, that every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh, is not of God, 1 John 4.3. And confessing with the mouth is as
well required unto salvation, as believing with the heart, Romans 10.10.

The second is this, that while they thus believed, they loved the praise of
men more than the praise of God: which whosoever does, cannot believe savingly,
according to Christ's own words, John 5.44. How can ye believe, which receive
honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only?

Such believers likewise surely were they, John 2.23, 24. Who when they saw the
miracles which Christ did, they believed in his name: but Jesus did not commit
himself to them, because he knew all men; he knew that for all their Faith of
assent that he was indeed the Messiah, of which they were convinced by his
miracles, yet there was not in them the Faith of adherence, in a constant and
an affectionate sticking to him, and therefore would not trust himself with
them. Which is argument enough that their Faith was not saving, nor such as
would denominate them faithful Disciples unto Jesus, whose property it is to
forsake all rather than to forsake Ghrist, ( Luke 14.33.) which had it been
their case, Christ would not have been shie of betrusting himself with them.

It Is probable that Simon Magus was a believer of this kind, one whose Faith
was right as touching the object of it, and as touching this first act of it
also; for the Scripture says, Then Simon himself beleeveh also, Acts 8.13, And
what did he believe? that is expressed in the former verse, where it is said, that
when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God,
and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women. Then Simon
himself believed also; that is, as well as they or the same things which the
others believed, viz. Philips doctrine concerning the kingdom of God, and the
name of Jesus. And yet for all his persuasion of the truth of the doctrine of
the Gospel preached by Philip, his heart was not purified by his Faith (as the
hearts of all are by Faith of the right kind, Acts 15.9. for Peter told him:
First, that his heart was not right in the sight of God, verse. 21. Secondly,
that he was in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, verse 23. and
consequently was in danger of perishing, as the Apostle intimated to him,
saying, Thy money perish with thee, verse 20. There was in him the Faith of
Credence, but not of Adherence, the assent of the mind unto the truth of
Philips Doctrine, but not the powerful consent of the will unto the superlative
goodness of the way to the Kingdom, taught by him.



1. This assent; as it is but one single act of Faith, and therefore
comprehends not the whole general nature of that grace, so it is but the act of
one single faculty of the soul, the mind or understanding, and so is not that
believing with all the heart which is the right christian Faith ( Acts 8.37.)
which consists as well in the consent of the will touching the goodness of the
thing believed, as the assent of the mind to the truth of its being. For as the
object of the Christian Faith, (the Gospel) bears the relation, and carries as
full a proportion of goodness, as of truth in it, so does the believing soul
accordingly by the faculty of the mind assent to it as true, and by the faculty
of the will accept of it as a sovereign good. And under this twofold
consideration, is the Gospel propounded as the object of Faith. 1 Timothy 1, 15.
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners. It Is a saying faithful in respect of its
truth, and worthy of all acceptance in respect of its goodness.

James 2.19. but that they also believe Christ to be the Son of God, the Christ
of God, is evident Luke 4 41. And Devils also came out of many, crying out and
saying, thou art Christ the Son of God, If any shall here object and say, that
we have but the Devils own word for it, who was a liar from the beginning: The
answer is; that we have more than their word for it, we have this Evangelists
word for it, as appears by the latter part of the forecited verse, where he
says that they, viz. the Devils knew that he was Christ. If any should think
that possibly the Devils may have the same faith that would justify men if it
were in them, though it will do them no good, as not being in the like capacity
of grace as men are, yet that passage in James 2. 19. will oppose such a
thought. For wherefore does the Apostle mention the faith of Devils there? but
to disparage the unprofitable and dead faith of some Christians, and to give
them to know that if their faith rested only in the belief of things, and did
not carry out the soul in love both to God and men, it was even no better a
faith than is in the devils, and consequently would save them no more than it
would save the devils.

John 2.23. and 12.42. had that Faith which they had concerning Christ, forced
upon them by the hand of those miracles of Christ, in conjunction with his holy
life and doctrine, which were too hard for their consciences, and evinced with
power, him that wrought them, to be the Son of God. And it may be they might
have a desire to have stifled that light, and to have overcome that conviction
which they had, as that which did oppose that carnal interest of praise which
they had with men, which it seems they loved more than Christ, and therefore
would not let it go for his sake. And is not this the case of such who hold the
truth in unrighteousness; (Romans 1.18.) when the light of divine truth breaks
into the mind, and cannot be kept out, but convinces the conscience that things
have been so and so done by the Father, and by his Son Jesus Christ in favor
to mankind, and that therefore men ought to love the Lord, and in love to obey
him, and that it is the way to be happy so to do, and yer for all that, this
truth, which has thus far compelled the conscience to assent to it, is detained
and held as prisoner in the mind by the power of lust, so that it does not walk
abroad in the life of such a man; the thorns spring up with the seed and
overtop it, the seed springs up in the mind by its power of conviction,
showing what should and ought to be, but the thorns of lust spring up in the
affection, and determine what shall be, and what shall not be in such a man's
life. Such a man indeed has received the truth, as he assents to it to be
truth, but has not received the love of the truth by consenting to, and
affectionately embracing what it enjoynes.

And shall we think that God will reward with the great and unspeakable
blessing of Justification and Salvation, such an act of the Creature as is not
voluntary, but forced from him whether he will or no? surely he will not. 2
These. 2.10. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved, etc. No other receiving of the truth then, will be rewarded with
Salvation, but the receiving it in love, and what is more voluntary than love?
If a man had all faith, never so strong a persuasion touching the virtue and
power of Christ, So that he could remove mountains, and have not love, it would
profit him nothing. 1 Cor. 13.2. If there be first a willing mind, it is
accepted, etc. 2 Cor. 8.12. that is surely a necessary ingredient to render any
act of the creature acceptable to God, and consequently rewardable by him, 1
Cor. 9.17. For if I do this thing willingly I have a reward. Take heed then of
venturing your precious souls upon this Faith, that lies but in a naked and
bare assent to the general truth of the Gospel.

CHAP. VI. Further discovering that neither the act of Relyance or Dependence
upon God or Christ for Salvation, without the concurrence of a loving and loyal
adhesion to him, will avail to Salvation.
etc. prove effectual to justify and save, unless it be found in conjunction
with an obediential, cleaving to Christ, to be delivered by him from the power
and dominion of sin, as well as the guilt and condemnation of it.

That there may be found in men a presumptious leaning upon the mercies of the
Lord, and his promises, and acts of grace, and an expectation of being
thereupon secured by God from destruction, while in the mean time they cut off
their claim and title to those promises and acts of grace, by loving of and
cleaving to their inward lusts, or outward enormities, instead of cleaving to
those precepts and promises touching holiness, which would carry them out of
those sins, is a thing very visible in the Scriptures, as well as obvious to
experience.

It was so with men under the Old Testament; Mica. 3.11. The heads thereof
judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets
thereof divine for money, yet will they lean upon the Lord and say, is not the
Lord among us? none evil can come unto us. The Lord had indeed made many
gracious promises to that people of his being their God, of his dwelling and
walking among them, of saving them from those evils which he would bring upon
their enemies; but all upon condition that they would be to him a people, in
love, loyalty, and obedience, as he to them a God, in protection and blessing.
( Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.) but these men, Judges, Priests, Prophets, Sinners of
sundry sorts, eye the promises, over-looking the condition upon which they were
made, and would needs lean upon these, as if God were obliged to them by these,
to secure them from those evils which the faithful Prophets of the Lord
threatened them with, for transgressing the Covenant of the Lord, and living in
disobedience thereto. Just as foolish men now do, who because they find by the
Scriptures, that Christ dyed for sinners, and has commanded that remission of
sins and salvation be preached in his name to every creature, and has given
many precious encouragements for sinners of all sorts to look unto him from all
the ends of the earth and be saved, but with this Item, that they repent and be
baptized every one of them in the name of the Lord Jesus for the remission of
sins, that they be born again of water, and of the Spirit; that they deny
themselves, take up their Cross, and follow him, and forsake all that they have
for his sake (if they cannot faithfully obey him upon cheaper terms) without
which they cannot be his Disciples, and that they diligently hearken to, and
carefully observe whatever Jesus that great Prophet has spoken and commanded,
upon pain of being cut off from the number of the Lords redeemed ones; they
little minding or regarding the terms and conditions of the grace offered, or
thinking a few outward performances (as the Jews aforesaid did of Circumcision,
Sacrifices, and the like) will serve for all, when indeed the main of the
matter (the renewing them to God in the disposition and frame of their hearts,
and a faithful laboring to please the Lord in all all things, and striving
against all contrary motions and temptations) is wholly wanting; yet as if all
the grace in the Gospel were theirs, and designed for all those that will lay
hold of it right or wrong, they confidently persuade themselves, or endeavor
so to do, that they are built upon a sure foundation, that Christ, remission of
sins, and salvation, are all theirs, and that they do them a great deal of
wrong that offer but a word to shake this confidence of theirs.

Again, see the like in another passage, Isai. 48.1, 2. Hear ye this, O house
of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the
waters of Judah; which swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention of the
God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in righteousness. For they call
themselves of the holy City, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel, the
Lord of hosts is his name. This people you see mention the name of the Lord, as
being called by it, look upon themselves as his people, call themselves of the
holy City, and thereupon stay themselves upon the God of Israel, depend upon
him for all good, as their God, and upon his promises, as if made to them; and
thus they did, but not in truth nor in righteousness; for this profession and
this confidence of theirs, was accompanied with unfaithfulness in the main, and
therefore their dependence upon God was irregular and deceitful, God having no
where engaged to stand under such a trust, but the contrary, Job 8.13, 14, 15.

other sin, and are unrenewed in will and affections, or if there be any
change, it is not so much as will turn the scale, and give them in of the
victory against the flesh, on the Spirits side; but though there be so much
light as that they can talk of good things, and so much conviction as in the
general to approve of them, yet the interest of the flesh clearly carries it,
when things come to be done, and when temptation is upon them.

And the main reason, I conceive, why persons upon their general belief of the
Gospel, have this confidence of Salvation, though otherwise they are as yet but
in the flesh, and so cannot please God, ( Romans 8.8.) is this, because they are
partial in the Scriptures, and do not give one Scripture as well as another
room in their judgments and affections: their minds run upon such Scriptures
as declare Christ Jesus to have come into the world to save sinners; that God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, that he that
confesses with his mouth the Lord Jesus, and believes in his heart that God
raised him from the dead, shall be saved, and the like; and so far they do very
well. But then there are other Scriptures that declare that except men repent
they shall perish; that except they be born again, they cannot see the kingdom
of God: that without holiness no man shall see the Lord; that the Lord will
come in flaming Fire, rendering vengeance to those that obey not the Gospel:
that those that live after the flesh shall dye; that if any man love the world,
the love of the Father is not in him: that tribulation and wrath shall be upon
every soul that does evil, with many the like; which they slightly pass over,
and are not thoroughly possessed with an apprehension, that those other Scriptures
that entaile the promise of life to be believing, are so to be understood, as
that these others must stand with them, or to be understood of such a kind of
believing, as has the substance of these other Scriptures working in the
bowels of it, which they must believe, that will not deceive themselves in
their Faith: and is there not the same reason to believe the one as well as the
other? does not the water of both sorts of Scripture proceed out of the same
hole, from the same fountain? But now the carnal believers of whom I speak,
fansying to themselves that the promise of Salvation is made to believing
indefinitely, not considering that it is tied up to that special kind of
believing which works by love, as other Scriptures interpret; and they knowing
in themselves that they do believe in one sense, (for so indeed they do, with
that general Faith of assent) thence they conclude confidently, that they are
heirs of promise, and heirs of salvation as well as any, and do as verily think
they are going to Heaven, whereas indeed they are in the way to hell, as ever
the Syrians thought they were going to Dothan, while they were blindly led to
Samariah, 2 King. 6.19.



This is the business in which the Apostle James labors so mightily in his
Epistle. And we may easily perceive what Disease was among the Christians, by
the remedies which this servant of the Lord applied for their cure, viz. an
inordinate love of the world, which manifested it self in an adulterous and too
near a compliance therewith, Chap. 4. beginning. And thereupon they despised
the poor Saints, and preferred men less worthy if they were rich, chap. 2.
Their want of the true christian humility and love, brake out into bitter
envying and strife, and an undue judging and censuring one of another, chap. 3.
throughout. And yet for all these unchristian, and unsaint-like deportments,
they were ready to glory as if they were the knowing men, and men of the right
Religion wherein salvation was to be had, and that it did belong to them. In
opposition to which vain-confidence, and confident boasting, he expresses
himself thus: chap. 3.14, 15. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your
hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth: this wisdom descends not
from above, but is earthly, sensual, develish. For them to glory of their
Religion, and of their wisdom and knowledge. and yet to be men of such an
unchristian carriage, they did but lie against the truth which they pretended
to have on their side, but indeed was point blank against them. But if any man
would approve himself a wise man indeed, endued with the christian knowledge of
the right kind, the Apostle tells them, it must be, by showing out of a good
conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom, v. 13.

Again chap. 1.26. he had likewise encountered that vain-confidence that was
built upon a form of Knowledge, Faith, and Profession, without the life and
power of it, saying; If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth
not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain. Men
that should give way to the flesh, though but in one thing, as for instance, a
licensious liberty to the tongue, not endeavoring by watchfulness, heed, and
circumspection, to conform to the doctrine of the Lord, which forbids, not only
lying, reviling, backbiting, slaundering, corrupt and unclean communication,
but also foolish talking and jesting, yea every idle word; how religious soever
they might otherwise seem to themselves upon account of their formal knowledge
and Faith, of external devotion to the Ordinances, yet the Apostle testifies
as from the Lord that such do but deceive their own hearts, befool themselves
with a vain confidence of being religious men, and of being accepted with God
as such, and that such men's Religion is vain, that is as to the end for which
the true Religion serves. Not as if all their Religion were made up of vain
notions, but though they had never so sound a knowledge and right belief of many
excellent Gospel Truths, and though they added thereto the doing of many
things, yea how seemingly religious soever they were, upon what account soever,
yet the want but of this one thing, a care to bridle the tongue, would render
all a man's Religion, and all his confidence of salvation built thereupon, but
vain and unprofitable touching the end of Religion, the end of Faith which is
the salvation of the soul, as if he had never had any Religion, nor seeming
show of it at all.

Yet once more James 2.14. to the same purpose thus: What does it profit my
brethren, though a man say he has Faith, and have not Works? can Faith save
him? that is, can such a Faith save him? a form of speech emphatically denying
the thing interogated, like unto that afterward chap. 3.11, 12. Does a
fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter? Can the
fig tree, my brethren, bear Olive berries? either a Vine Figgs? Why no it
cannot; no more can that Faith save, that has not Works. Though a man may say
and say truly, though a man be able to say he has Faith, yet if he have not
Works, can his Faith save him? do you think it can? He is not blaming their
Faith, as if not placed upon a right object, or as if there were not a real
closing with that object in point of assent: in the beginning of this Chapter
he clearly supposes them to have the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, only
there cautions them not to yoke or couple their Faith with an unchristian
carriage, assuring them by the tenor of his discourse throughout this Chapter,
especially from the fourteenth verse to the end, that a Faith so yoked, and
wanting its true yoke fellow and companion, the Gospel conversation, which he
calls by the name of Works, will not profit him that has it. Which
unprofitableness of that Faith which has not Works, he further illustrates by
way of comparison, verse 15, 16. If a Brother or Sister be naked or destitute
of daily food, and one of you say unto them, depart in peace, be ye warmed and
filled: notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the
body: what does it profit? Nothing at all; that is to the filling or warming of
the necessitous person. Even so says he ver. 17. Faith if it has nor works,
is dead, being alone. Though a man should give God, Christ never such good
words, though he shall be able to speak at never so high a rate of the grace of
God, of the love of Christ, of the power of his death, of the efficacy of his
blood, and prevalency of his intercession, and shall have some kind of belief
of what he says; yet if it do not sincerely engage the soul to serve the
interest of the glory of God, in a virtuous life, answerable to such a
profession and Faith, it will no more profit to the justification of the Soul
in the sight of God, than a parcel of good words would feed and cloth, fill
and warm the needy Brother, and indigent Sister, when a contribution of a real
relief is wanting. Though I could speak with the tongue of men and Angels, and
had all Faith so that I could remove mountains, and have not Love, it would
profit me nothing, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2. And whereas he says that Faith is dead
being alone, he plainly supposes that Faith may be alone without the company
of Works; a Faith that is truly so in its kind; a Faith that is acted on a
right object. But where ever it is alone, there it is dead, that is, it is
unprofitable as to the end for which Faith is appointed, viz. to justify, or
(as he had said verse. 14.) to save. For that clearly is the sense of Faiths
being dead, in this place, and not its barrenness of good Works. Though that is
true likewise, that Faiths being dead in another sense, i. e. void of spiritual
vigor, force, and power, is the cause why it is alone, and not accompanied
with the goodness of conversation, yet here in this place, the deadness of
Faith is the effect of its being alone, and not the cause of it; the deadness
of Faith proceeds from the absence of Works as here spoken of, and not the
absence of Works from the deadness of Faith: Faith is dead being alone (says
he) that is, because it is alone; for so it is plain, that its being alone
carries the force of a reason why it is dead. And therefore Faiths being dead,
here, notes it utter inability to justify or save, which answers the scope of
the Apostle, which is, to convince the carnal professor that his Faith without
Works would not save him, as is manifest by the fourteenth Verse, upon which
the following Discourse to the end of the Chapter depends. He says after Verse
26. That as the body without the spirit is dead, so Faith without Works, is
dead also. In which comparison or similitude, as the body answers Faith, so the
Spirit answers Works; and as the absence of the spirit from the body is the
cause why the body is dead, and does not the service unto which a living man is
appointed, so the absence of Works from Faith, is the cause why Faith is dead,
and does not him in whom it is, the service unto which the true Faith is
appointed, to wit, to justify or save him that has it.

James 2.22. that is (as I understand) put into a complete capacity of
attaining its end, which is to justify: as a house is then said to be
perfected, when nothing is wanting in it, as to the end and service for which
it is built, 2 Chronicles. 8.16. So is Faith, when nothing is wanting to it to
answer the end whereto it is to serve. But now as long as Faith is alone, or by
it self, without Works, it is dead, (as we heard before) and so in no capacity
to justify, or reach its end. Nor does it come under the saving influence of
the Promise, till it Work by Love, that being the only kind of Faith that has
the promise to avail, ( Gal. 5.6.) and therefore Works added to Faith as
children are added to their Mother, being the same thing that makes the
difference between that Faith that will justify, and that which will not, and
which brings that kind of believing under the promise, without which all other
believing is excluded; hence it is I conceive, that Works may well and truly be
said to perfect Faith, as putting it into a right capacity of reaching its end.
But thus much on the by in this place.

James, so John opposes the vain confidence that is built upon the dead Faith,
1 John 1.6. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
we lie, and do not the truth. This doubtless he wrote in opposition to some
professors of the Christian Faith, who though they walked in darkness, led
lives disagreeing to the light of Christ's Doctrine, yet said, professed, and were
confident, that they had fellowship, partnership with God, and with his Son
Jesus Christ in his Love, Saving-mercy, and promises of Grace, as if, as these
were Gods to give, so they were all theirs to enjoy. But as he would take them
off their vain confidence in this, so he directs them how to be better built,
in the next Verse. 7. saying, But if we walk in the light as he is in the light,
we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son,
cleanses us from all sin. Meaning, I suppose that if that persuasion which
they had of fellowship with God, interest in his Grace, Love, and Mercy, and
share in Christ's blood, were but accompanied with an upright endeavor of
purifying themselves as he is pure, and of being holy in all manner of
conversation, as he that had called them is holy, (which I think is the same
thing as to walk in the light, as he is in the light) then they might be
confident indeed, that they had fellowship with God in his Grace and Love, and
share in Christ's blood to cleanse them from all sin. But otherwise and without
this, what ever their opinion, pretense, or confidence was of their good
condition, they did but lie, and falsify the truth.

Of which delusion and dangerous deceit he admonishes the Christians, Chap.
3.7, 8. saying, Little children let no man deceive you, he that does
righteousness is righteous as he is righteous, he that commits sin is of the
Devil. By which saying he suggests that there were some amongst them of another
opinion and persuasion, and that they were in danger of being deceived by them,
to think that though they did indulge themselves in some sin, yet they might be
counted and dealt withal as righteous persons, as being in Christ, and knowing
of him as they supposed. In opposition to which vain conceit, and lying
imagination, he had said in the verse before, Whosoever abides in him sins
not, Whosoever sins has not seen him, neither known him.

The like admonition ministered by Paul to the Ephesians implies like danger
from men of the same profession, Ephesians. 5.6. Let no man deceive you with vain
words; for because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience.. Implying that there were some among them that were otherwise
persuaded, than that those unholy ways from which he had newly before dehorted
them, would expose them to the wrath of God, who trusted in Christ for
salvation. For of such he prophesied, whilst he was yet with them, Acts 20.30.
That of their own selves should men arise, speaking perverse things; wrested or
swerving things, to draw away Disciples after them. Men professing the same
Faith, and expecting salvation by the same Christ, should make such swerving
inferences from the Doctrine of Grace that offers Salvation upon believing in
Jesus, as tended to looseness of life, and that they would labor to propagate
their distorted notions, and to make a party of the same mind with them.
Against whose dangerous insinuations he faithfully now again in his Epistle
warns them to take heed of being deceived with such men's vain words, and impure
pretensions, as if any Faith they had in the grace of God, or merit of Christ's
blood, could secure them from the wrath of God, whilst they lived in
uncleanness and covetousness, and indulged themselves in a way of foolish
talking and jesting, for of such sins he had spoken before.

Paul speaks, 2 Timothy 3. concerning whom he informs us of these three things
amongst others.

First, that they had a form of Godliness, Verse. 5. and therefore were
professors of the Christian Faith and Worship, the Doctrine of Grace, and
Ordinances of the Gospel, Baptism, Supper of the Lord, etc.

Secondly, that in themselves they were men of an un-Gospel like temper and
behavior, Lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemous,
disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that
are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of
God, ver. 2, 3, 4. Some of these bearing sway in some of them, and some in
others. And that they were industrious to increase their party, and to draw
Disciples after them appears, in that they crept into houses, and led captive
silly Women that were laden with sins, and led away with diverse lusts; who
doubtless were glad of any notion about free Grace that would put them under
hope of Salvation, though under the power of diverse Lusts, which probably those
men did instruct them in.

And Thirdly, that from which this ill life under a form and show of Godliness
did proceed, was their great mistake about the doctrine of Faith, either as
touching the nature of the Grace, or the terms upon which Salvation was
promised to it, for he says, that they were reprobate concerning the Faith; or
as the margent reads it, Of no judgment concerning the Faith, verse 8. they
made no right judgment of the Gospels promising salvation upon believing, but
as Peter expresses it, Stumbled at the Word, and wrested it to their own
destruction, 1 Pet. 2.8. 2 Pet. 3.16. thought the promise of a larger extent
than it was; were not aware it was such a kind of believing only, as gave a man
victory over such Lusts and pleasures as in which they lived, unto which the
promise of life was made.

These things may well make the most of men called Christians to look about
them, who by their lives proclaim themselves to be believers but of the same
rank with those marked out by the Apostles of our Lord as men whose Religion is
vain, whose Faith is dead, whose confidence of salvation is built upon mistakes
of the Doctrine of Grace, whilst destitute of the life and power of Godliness
(which subdues the heart and life to God) to answer that form of profession
which they make of the Christian Faith. But because it is a matter of such
moment, and so little laid to heart by those whom it so much concerns,
therefore do I dwell upon it the more, if peradventure any may be awakened by
it. And therefore, having heard something of that which the Apostles of our
Lord have said to this important point, for a close of this matter, let us also
a little weigh a passage or two spoken by the Lord himself relating to this
business.

Luke 8. And begins with the lowest and worst sort, and from them proceeds
gradually to the best of all. The first sort resembled by the seed that fell by
the ways side, are such as neither understand nor believe the Gospel, Luke
8.12. Mat. 13.19. The second sort go beyond these, for they do believe the
Word, but it is but for a time; for in time of persecution for the Words sake
they fall away, having no root, verse. 13. Now the third sort, as they are
placed in the middle between such as do receive the word, and believe and
rejoice in it only for a season, and such who with an honest heart having heard
the Word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience, so they do accordingly
go beyond the temporary believer, and yet fall short of the honest-hearted doer
of the Word, resembled by the good ground. And that wherein they do exceed the
stony-ground hearers that believe only for a time, is this, that they persevere
in their believing, such as it is, unto the end of their lives. And that
wherein they fall short of the good-ground hearers, is this, that they do not
with honesty or integrity of heart keep or do the Word, and patiently bring
forth the fruit of it, as do the good-ground hearers. For they when they have
heard, go forth, and are choked with cares, and riches, and pleasures of this
life, and so bring no Fruit to perfection, verse 14. It Is said verse 7. that
the seed falling among thorns, the thorns sprang up with it, and choked it: by
which it is evident, that the seed of the Word, does in a sense grow up in these
Men, they may grow to have a great deal of knowledge of the Word, and some Faith
in it, and they may bring forth some fruit too, do many things as Herod and
others did; but the only fault is, that they do not bring forth fruit to
perfection, they do not carry it quite through: if they have a blade of
profession, yet they have not the ear of practice, or if something of that, yet
they have not the full Corn in the ear, a sincere respect unto all the Lords
commands. But the thorns of some Lust or other grow up with the Word, and choke
it, and overtop it, have more interest in the heart than the Word has, draw
the affections of the Soul more to them than the Word does, as the thorns many
times draws the nourishing moisture of the ground, more to them then the Corn
does that springs up with them, and so prevents the perfect growth of the Corn.
The Word does grow in such men to a certain degree; the Word as it brings
glad-tidings of salvation to sinners by the Death and Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, has some rooting in the heart, and is received with joy; and as it
promises salvation upon believing, as they understand believing, so it is a
welcome Word, which they will by no means let go; and as it enjoins easier and
cheaper duties, so far it has the heart to; and thus far the Word may grow up
and the Thorns, Lusts and sinful Affections may grow up too, and dwell together
in the same man. But then there are other words of the same Lord, and of the
same Gospel of Salvation, which put men upon denying themselves to please the
Lord, and crossing their own sinful inclinations and wills, that they may
fulfill the will of the Lord; there are words that enjoin us to crucify the
Old Man with the affections and lusts, to mortify our members which are upon
the earth, to cut off the right hand, and pluck out the right eye, to put our
selves to the utmost extremity of suffering and distasting the flesh, rather
than to harbor any guest in the soul to distaste our dear Lord. But now here
the word is encountered by sinful affections, the love of men's own selves, their
ease, their pleasure, their reputations with men, and for the maintenance and
support of these, the love and desire of riches takes place with them, and
their desire and love to these puts them upon many unlovely strains to compass
them: in a word they love to please and to be pleased of men, and to have all
things go on smoothly with them; and here the word of Christ and their wills
fall cross; his honor to be by them upheld in a close following of him, and
the upholding of their own honor among men, clash; Christ's spiritual interest,
and their carnal interest, will not consist, but one must give way; if they
will please the Lord, they must many times displease themselves and others too,
and to enjoy his love and keep a good conscience, must be content to be without
much, and sometimes to loose all those worldly accomodations which the flesh
priseth very much. And however the other part of the Word and lust might grow
up together, yet this part of the Word and lust cannot remain in any power and
operation in the same subject but will be fighting; and if the affections as a
third party side with lusts against the Word, or if more corditially adhere to
them than to the Word, the Word is presently choked and overborn by the power
of the flesh, as the Corn by Thorns, and brings no fruit to perfection.

These are the Men, and this their character, who are the hearers and
professors of the Word of the Gospel resembled by the thorny ground, which as I
intimated before, go a step further than those that do believe for a time only,
and consequently must not only be such as do in a sense believe as the others
did, but also such as hold out and persevere in their Faith unto the end.
Neither probably is that the reason why their Faith holds out rather than the
others, as if it were a Faith of a better kind or constitution, or stronger
than theirs, but rather because it is not put to that stress and trial which
the others Faith could not endure, it is very like that if the Faith of the
thorny-ground hearer should be put to it by persecution, as the Faith of the
stony-ground hearer is said to be, his Faith might give in and fail as well as
the others. For the reason why the stony-ground hearers Faith failed him, is
because it is not rooted and grounded in love; he loves his Honor, his Estate,
his Relations, or at least his Life more than Christ, (which whosoever does,
cannot be his Disciple, or be deemed worthy of him, whatever his Knowledge or
Faith otherwise may be) and therefore when by the trial of persecution, he is
put to his choice, to renounce his Faith, or his Life, or other Enjoyments, he
adheres to that which he loves most, to wit, his outward enjoyments, and
declines the Lord, in his Word, Worship, and Ways, which he loves less. Though
it does not always follow that those who upon a carnal account will not
publicly own the Lord, when the confessing of him and his truth proves so
costly to them, do at the same time let go that inward persuasion which they
had of him and his truth before the trial came; the Rulers at the same time
while they durst not confess Christ openly, yet then inwardly believed on him,
John 12.42. A practice set on foot by some in the Apostles times, and as it
seems, avouched as lawful by some, outwardly to deny Christ in time of
persecution, if they did in the mean time inwardly believe in him, which surely
is one of those damnable heresies Peter speaks of, privily brought into the
Church by false Teachers, 2 Pet. 2.1. There shall be false Teachers among you,
who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. If they had taught Men not
to believe at all on Christ, it would not have been called heresy, but either
infidelity, or apostasy; nor could they lightly have privily brought such a
Doctrine into the Church, but would easily have been discerned by all
Christians to be Enemies to Christ; besides, those that followed their
pernicious tenants and ways, did occasion the way of truth to be evil spoken
of, verse 2. Which would not have been, if they had been professed Enemies to it;
the pernicious ways of a Man, after he is turned Jew or Turk, though once a
Christian, does not cause the Christian Religion to be Evil spoken of. But
however, whether Men fall away totally, both from the inward persuasion, and
outward profession of the Faith they had once embraced, or only in part from
the public profession of it, so far as to secure themselves from persecution,
it proceeds from the same cause, and that is the want of that ingredient in
their Faith which is the peculiar property of the Faith of Gods Elect, to wit,
an affectionate cleaving to Christ as more desirable than life.

There Is the same reason as to the internal cause, why the Faith of the thorny
ground-hearer falls short of Salvation, and that is the want of that mixture of
Love I speak of. For though they may believe Christ to be the Savior, and
expect Salvation by him, and for that cause bear some good affection to him,
yet their Love working stronger to Riches, Honors, and Pleasures, and for
their sakes, to ways and things by which these may be enjoyed, thence it comes
to pass, that the Lusts of these things carry it against Christ and his Word,
who draw another way. Now because this sort of men may hold that dead Faith
which they have, and the profession of it too, and yet retain their Worldly
Lusts also, yea and make an outward and fleshly advantage of such a Faith and
profession many times; thence it comes to pass, that they do not fall away as
the other, but persevere herein unto the end: the difference of the ones
falling, and the others standing, does not lie in the difference of their
Faith, but in the different nature of their temptations; the one is
necessitated to part with his Faith or Lusts, the other is not.

This latter sort of ground therefore clearly resembles the state and condition
of sensual and carnal Christians, who live in such times and places as we now
do, in which Men may believe in Jesus Christ, and publicly own their Faith,
especially if it put them upon no extraordinary strains of self-denial, without
running any hazard of persecution, but shall rather expose themselves to
suffering in case they should not own the Faith, which is the Religion of the
Country. And in such places, Faith such as it is, is as common as silver was in
the days of Solomon. All men in a manner do believe that Christ dyed for
sinners, and that Salvation is to be had by believing in his Name, and that
their believing will justify them, and without Works too, as they have been
generally taught, which is their snare. Hereupon they live, they dye in hope of
salvation, upon this very account that they do believe, though there is too
much cause to fear, that the conversations and tempers I would I could not say
of far the greatest part, even of these, do give too loud a testimony that
their Faith is but the dead Faith, they being not renewed to God, and born
again by it, and consequently that their confidence of Salvation by Christ, is
but a vain confidence, and such as will deceive them. I profess it is a very
sad thing so to say, and that which occasions many a sorrowful thought to my
Soul: and my love to Men, and my desire after their Salvation exceedingly
inclines me to hope better things concerning these men of whom I speak, if I
had but any Scriptural ground to relieve such a hope. But I am either quite
mistaken in the nature of holiness, and of the New Creature, or else such
Scriptures as do positively affirm, that without holiness no man shall see the
Lord, and that except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God,
that neither Circumcision nor uncircumcision avail, but a New Creature, with
many the like, I fear do fast bar the door of life against the confidence of a
vast multitude of professors of belief in Jesus, unless the generality of those
I know not, be better than very many of those I know.

Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in
Heaven. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in
thy Name? and in thy Name cast out Devils? and in thy Name done many wonderful
Works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me ye
that work iniquity. By Luke thus, chap. 13.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Then said one
unto him, Lord, are there few that be saved? And he said unto them, strive to
enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in,
and shall not be able. When once the master of the house is risen up, and has
shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door,
saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know
you not whence you are: then shall ye begin to say, we have eaten and drunk in
thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets. But he shall say, I tell
you, I knew you not whence you are, depart from me all ye workers of Iniquity.

That which I first observe from these wakening words of our Lord, as to this
present occasion, is, that the persons of whom Christ here speaks, had Faith;
which appears by this, in that (as they themselves will plead) they cast out
Devils in the Name of Christ, and in his Name did many other wondrous Works,
which according to Christ's words, were signs which he promised should follow
those that should believe, Mark 16.17. Though all that did believe did not do
such wonders, yet none but such as did believe, did. Neither is it any wise
likely, but that they whose Faith was so strong as in the Name of Christ to do
such wonders, had a particular knowledge and belief that Christ was the Son of
God, and Savior of the World. Neither was this Faith of theirs wholly
destitute of Works you see, they made such a profession of Christ as that they
instructed others in his Religion, they Prophesied in his Name, and did Works
which caused Men to wonder, they heard Christ preach, and had so much
familiarity with him as to eat and drink in his presence; greater matters than
I fear thousands of thousands will have to plead for themselves, who now bear
the Name of Christians, and profess belief in Christ, and hope of salvation by
him.

Secondly, that which I further note hence is this, that these men of whom
Christ speaks, because of this Faith they had, and those Works which proceeded
from it, take unto themselves a kind of confidence that they shall be admitted
by Christ into his Kingdom. For though they are brought in by Christ here as
pleading for admittance at the last day, and not taking Christ's first denial;
but following him with earnest, vehement solicitations, backed with arguments
and pleas from what they had received from him, and done for him, as if they
wondered that Christ should refuse them, yet it is not to be thought, but that
in their life, and at their death, they were possessed with hopes of being
owned by Christ at the Last day, upon these very grounds upon which they are
brought in as building their plea. For surely they do not meet with any new
confidence or grounds of hope in the Grave, or state of Death! Me thinks these
words of Christ give a kind of cast, as if many Men shall dye with so strong a
confidence of being owned and received by Christ at the Resurrection and
Judgment day, as that they shall exceedingly wonder, and stand amazed to find
themselves so strangely deceived and disappointed as they will be, when they
shall be turned off by Christ with I tell you I know you not, I profess I never
knew you. As if Christ could hardly possess them with such a thought that he
should not acknowledge and own them, and therefore he is fain, not only once
plainly to tell them I know you not, but again with more earnestness to affirm
the same thing, and to say, I tell you I know you not whence you are; as if he
should say, will you not believe me? I tell you again I know you not whence you
are. Yea as Matthew has it, he will then profess unto them that he never knew
them; which still argues how hard a matter it will be to beat them out of their
confidence of being owned by him, that he will be fain not only to tell them
again and again I know you not, but at last to profess to them, that he never
knew them, no not then in your life time, (as if he should say) when you
thought your selves cock-sure of my approbation, I then knew you not to be any
true Friends of mine, but you loved your selves, and Relations, and loved the
world more than me, you loved your own wills more than mine, and your own
honor more than mine; and entertained motions from the flesh, and from the
Devil sooner than from me, and therefore now without any more ado depart from
me all ye workers of iniquity; a sad parting! Who shall not say with David
whilst he is under the contemplation hereof, My flesh trembles for fear of
thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments, Psalm 119.120.

That which I further note in the third and last place, from this Doctrine of
Christ (which (with the rest) astonished those that heard him preach it, Mat.
7.28.) is this, that the true reason why these men's confidence, and all that
upon which it is built, and all their pleadings, beggings, and mournful
supplications added thereto, will all fail them, and fall to the ground, is in
short this; they were workers of iniquity; as men work at their Trades to bring
them in what they lack and love, so these men work iniquity, that is, commit
sin, do and speak things contrary to the Laws and instructions of Christ, to
bring them in that present carnal content which they love and prefer before
that future happiness, upon those self-denying terms, without which it is not
to be had. That Faith which they had, was not of that kind which purifies the
heart, and renews the Soul to God, but for all it the flesh still retained the
commanding interest in the Soul; and therefore as they had in their life time
sowed to the flesh, so of the flesh they must now reap corruption. They were
told that if they lived after the flesh they should dye, as well as they were
told that Christ came into the world to save sinners, but they would not
believe the one, though they did the other; but now they must find and feel
that which they would not before believe. These things considered, I heartily
beseech all those into whose hands this shall come, to take warning now it is
given, and not to deal slightly in the business of their Faith, or to dally
with their precious Souls: take heed of that vain confidence of many, which you
see will be all turned into disappointment, and confusion of face, when the day
of trial comes; and be working out your salvation with fear and trembling: with
fear lest you should be mistaken about the ground of your confidence and
evidence of your hope. It Is a thousand pitties that men should be so wary and
solicitous lest they should be deceived with a trackt title in their outward
Estates, and so presuming and careless about rheir title to the next World, as
generally they are; as if the eternal Estate of their Souls, were but a trifle
to the momentary enjoyment of a little spot of this World. If the inconvenience
of a mistake herein, could be born without any considerable breach upon ones
comfort, or could afterward be rectified, though with some loss, as in
externals it may well be, a man's folly would be the less; but to be slight, yea
not to be exceeding curious, solicitous, and thoughtful to prevent a mischief
that for nature is intolerable, and for duration eternal, and the loss
irrepairable, argues the extremity of sottish madness, which yet O that it were
not the case of all men, a few only excepted, Mat. 7.13, 14.

CHAP. VII. Showing that that Belief unto which the Promise is made, though
indefinitely expressed, is to be understood of Belief of a special kind: and
that it is no ways safe to notion it in the lowest, narrowest, and meanest
sense of the Word, but to frame our notion of it according to that result which
the Scriptures compared do give of it: under which notion of it, it will be
hard for any man to retain a confidence of Salvation, without an holy
conversation.
Salvation in it. For whereas I have asserted in the two former Chapters, that
neither the assenting to the truth of that report which the Scriptures make,
touching Christ his being the Son of God, and Savior of the World, etc. nor
yet the relying on him as such for Salvation, will indeed avail a man unto
Salvation, without a loving, loyal, and obediential cleaving to him, it may be
some will be ready to object and say; Does not the Scripture plainly say, That
these things are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son
of God, and that believing ye might have life through his Name, John 20.31. and
was not the acknowledging of this, the very form of the Saints Faith in the
first times of the Gospel? John 4.42. and 6.69. and 11.27. Acts 8.37. Mat.
16.16. and does not the Scripture also expressly say, That if thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that
God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved? Romans 10.9. and again; every
spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God, 1
John 4.2. and whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God
dwells in him, and he in God, verse 15. and whosoever believes that Jesus is
the Christ, is born of God, 1 John 5.1. These things being so, if I do both
believe and confess Jesus to be the Christ, and Christ to be the Son of God,
and that he dyed and rose again, why may I not be confident of Salvation? can I
have any better security than the plain letter of the Scripture, that promises
salvation upon these terms?

strait gate straiter than it is; or the narrow way to life, narrower than it
is; all my design is to preserve my self and others from conceiting this
strait gate to be wider, and this narrow way to be broader than indeed God has
made them; as knowing an error herein, is of a dangerous tendency, and such as
in all likelihood has betrayed many a man into the broad way of death, whilst
he has strongly fancied himself to be in the path of life.

The safest and best way therefore to be kept from stumbling at the Word, and
from wresting these promises of grace to our own destruction, will be, to
understand all Scriptures that promise justification and life to believing
indefinitely, as still meant of such a Faith for kind, as does directly fall
in with, and not cross Gods general design in offering Salvation to men by
Jesus Christ. For it is not to be imagined that the Lord will prevaricate his
own scope and drift, or clogg his design by any the least overture that may
leave men under hope of attaining Salvation in any way, or upon any terms,
which do not directly comport with his design: that reverence which we owe to
the wisdom of God, does with a high hand prohibit any such thought. All the
words of God in the Scripture, in all the variety of expression, whether they
be promises, or precepts, or threatenings, they all wait on Gods great design
toward man, and they all march on the same way; like the living Creatures in
Ezekiels vision, who went every one straight forward whither the spirit was to
go, and turned not when they went; (Ezekiel. 1.12.) they do neither justle nor
hinder, nor turn one upon another, but strengthen each other in seeking the
prize for which they run: the Word of God in the several parts of it as
relating to the Lords design, is not yea and nay, (2 Cor. 1.18, 19.) but all
agreeing to serve the great purpose of God. And what is this general design of
God I speak of? Surely ultimately it is his own glory in the Salvation of men;
his honor, and the Creatures good in conjunction. And if his design had been
to provide only for the magnifying of his grace and mercy, without respect unto
his holiness, it is like he would have saved all men without any more ado, for
the same ransom, to wit, Christ Jesus, would have been, and is sufficient for
all. But then would not wretched sinners have thought God to be like them?
according to that in Psalm 50.21. These things have thou done, and I kept
silence, and thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self:
would they not have thought that he could endure wickedness well enough in his
Creature, and hold fellowship with the workers of iniquity? and what then would
have become of the glory of his great Name? how would he have been known to be
glorious in holiness as well as in grace and power? And therefore that he
might bring such a people unto himself, in whom he might delight, and whom he
might prefer to glory with himself without disparagement unto his holiness, he
has in his infinite wisdom so contrived the method and terms of bringing men
to his Salvation and glory, as that thereby his love of holiness in the
Creature might be conspicuous and visible, as well as his love of the happiness
of the Creature. And therefore all the means set on foot by God to bring about
the salvation of men, do all tend to promote holiness in men, as well as the
happiness of men. The whole and entire body of means of man's salvation, is
called the Mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. Christ the principal Agent, or
rather author of eternal salvation, the holy one, Acts 3.14. the Gospel which
is the Word of Life, or glad tidings of salvation, is called the doctrine
according to godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. Tit. 1.1. The Covenant of grace, an holy
Covenant, Luke 1.72. the Faith by which men embrace the Prince of Life, the
promise of Life, and Word of Salvation, is called the most holy Faith, Jude 20.
the calling of christians an holy calling, 2 Timothy 1.9. for they are called unto
holiness, 1 These. 4.7. the Spirit by which the means are made effectual, and
through which by his Workmanship men are formed into vessels of glory, is the
holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. In a word, the very end and scope of Christ his
giving himself for his Church, and vouchsafeing all the means of Salvation, is,
That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish,
Ephesians. 5.27. meet for the company of the holy God, and the holy Angels, in the
most holy place, the holy Jerusalem, as it is called Rev. 21.10. Now this is
that which I say then, that seeing Gods design is to magnify his holiness as
well as his mercy in men's salvation, and to show that he as well desires and
loves their holiness as their happiness, and that all subordinate means are
appointed and shaped to reach the one as well as the other: hence we may well
conclude that the believing unto which God has made promise of life, however
indefinitely expressed, is yet no other than a most holy Faith, and such as does
dispose that soul where it is, unto holiness; because salvation being the great
motive to persuade men unto holiness, God would loose that part of his design,
if he should make promise of life unto any other than the most holy Faith.

And therefore it is neither prudent nor safe for any man to understand or take
the word BELIEVING (to which the promise is made) in the narrowest and
strictest sense, or lowest signification of the word, as it imports a naked,
bare, and barren assent; for if it might, the Faith of the Rulers that durst
not own Christ; the Faith of Simon Magus; yet such a Faith as the Devils have
(of which you heard before) would carry salvation before it. But if you would
lay a sure foundation, then understand the word BELIEVING, or the phrase
believing Christ to be the Son of God, in a more copious and comprehensive
sense, for such an assent of the mind as carries the will and affections along
with it, to reverence and love him as such; as a Wife who believes her Husband
to be her Husband, or as a Child who believes his Father to be his Father. For
whosoever believes Christ to be the Son of God, if his Faith be not
contradictious in it self, does believe all his sayings as certain verities,
whether precepts, promises, or threatenings, and consequently his Faith does
dispose the soul to love and fear him, and hearken to him. In this large sense
I conceive, Christ is to be understood, John 5.44. when he says to the Jews,
how can ye believe which receive honor of one another, and seek not the
honor, that comes from God only? For in that lower sense which imports only a
bare and barren assent, they might, and some of them did believe, and yet did
receive honor one of another, and did not seek that honor that comes from God
only; for some did believe, and yet loved the praise of men, more than the
praise of God, John 12.43. But by this saying of our Savior it appears, that
when men do believe rightly and savingly, that belief of theirs carries the
affections more to Christ than to men, as valuing and preferring his
approbation before theirs, and consequently engaging the man to please Christ
rather than them. In which better sense, the Apostle John is also to be
understood when he says, Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born
of God, 1 John 5.1. That is whosoever believes effectually and affectionately,
is thereby turned into another man; which is done, not by an idle and an
opinionative assent, but by an operative belief.



1. To believe and to obey the Lord or the Gospel, are in the Gospel account so
much of the same general and common nature, as that they are frequently
indifferently put the one for the other, and so are their contraries, unbelief,
and disobedience. Hence it is, that those words which the translators of our
Bible, have in sundry places rendered belief, or unbelief; the Dutch Translation
Englished, renders obedience, or disobedience: Yea our own Translators, finding
the Original words so indifferently to import either, have according in several
places, given us both, in the double reading of Text and margint, as you may
see Romans 11.30, 31. and 15.31. Acts 5.36. Heb. 4.11. and 11.31. When the
Apostle would show, that the Prophecy of Isaiah was fulfilled in the
unbelieving Jews, which says, Lord, Who has believed our report? he does it
by saying, they had not obeyed the Gospel, Romans 10.16. But they have not all
obeyed the Gospel, for Esaiah says, Lord, who has believed our report? So
that with this Apostle, not to believe, and not to obey the Gospel, is the same
thing. And Peter another Apostle of our Lord, puts believing and disobedience
in direct opposition one to another, as if the word Disobedient were as much
the contrary to believing, as the word unbelieving is, 1 Pet. 2.7. To you that
believe he is precious, but unto them which be disobedient, the stone, etc. 2
These. 2.12.

Matthew and Luke, recording the same saying of Christ for substance, yet so
far vary the expression, as that that which the one calls Faith, the other
calls the Love of God. See the passage, Mat. 23.23. And have omitted the
weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, Luke 11.42. thus: Ye
tithe Mint and Rue, and all manner of herbs, and pass over judgment, and the
love of God. That which Christ here charges the Pharisees with, that whilst
they were zealous for the lesser, they neglected the weightier matters of both
Tables of the Law, Judgment and Mercy toward men, the great Duties of the
Second Table, and Faith in, and Love to God, the great Duties of the First
Table, and which are more than all whole burnt Offerings, and Sacrifices, which
yet were Duties of the First Table also, Mark 12.33. I know that some are of
opinion that the Faith mentioned Mat. 23, 23. is meant of fidelity to men, and
so a Duty of the Second Table, but considering that the Pharisees and Scribes
were not only guilty of the neglect of the weightier matters of the Second
Table, but of the First also, much of their hypocrisy lying in this, that they
would be deemed great Friends to God upon account of their zeal for some lesser
matters of the external and ceremonial part of his Worship, when in the mean
while they faultered with God, and grossly neglected the Spiritual, Internal,
and substancial part thereof, it cannot reasonably be thought, but that Christ's
charge and reproof must reach them in this neglect, as well as the other, which
yet cannot be, unless by Faith, which they were charged to omit, we understand
Faith toward God; for that Judgment and Mercy the other part of their
omission, are by general agreement understood of duties toward men commanded
in the Second Table: so that they must be taxed with their neglect toward God
in this behalf in that reproof for omitting Faith, or else not at all. But
besides, that which I think puts the matter out of doubt, is this, that Luke,
instead of Matthews saying that they omitted Faith, affirms that, they passed
over the Love of God, which according to Christ's own words, is the First and
great Commandment, Mat. 22.38, 39. and so in this as in many other
particulars, Matthew is expounded by Luke.

This passage of our Savior mentioned by these two Evangelists being thus
understood, there is one thing as to my present purpose which I would have
observed from hence, and that is: That the right Faith commanded by God, in the
nature of it, is a fiducial loving of the Lord, such a believing him to be what
he is, and such a depending upon him as such, as is accompanied with, or which
carries in it unfeigned love, or true affection to him, which interpreted, is
the keeping of his Commandments, 1 John 5.3. According to 1 Timothy 1.5. The end
of the Commandment is love, out of Faith unfeigned. If that Love which is the
end and scope of the Law, be such as proceeds out of an unfeigned Faith, then
the unfeigned Faith must in the Nature of it, in the Womb of it, needs
comprehend and contain that Love which is the end and scope of the
Commandment; it could not proceed out of it, if it were not first in it. It Is
true indeed, this act, or this ingredient of Faith which affectionately carries
the Soul to God, bears another denomination different in sound from that of
Faith, and is called Love; as the different operations of one and the same
soul, give a different denomination of faculties; and as the same body of
Waters which make the Sea, receive other Names when they come to be distributed
into several Rivers; but it will no more follow that Faith does not originally
contain a divine Love in the nature of it, because when produced into act it is
called by another name, then it will follow that the different acts of the Will
and of the Understanding, are not acts of the same soul, because they pass
under different denominations, or that the Waters in Rivers are not the same
which were in the Sea, because now called by another Name. When the Apostle
speaks thus concerning the communication of Philemons Faith, Phil. 6. That the
communication of thy Faith may become effectual, by the acknowledging of every
good thing which is in you in Christ Jesus: does he not plainly suppose that
every good thing was in his Faith before it was communicated? though when
communicated, called by as great a diversity of Names, as the things themselves
were diverse. But every good thing, and every good thing acknowledged, was but
his Faith effectually communicated, distributed into acts: all the good things
of his life, were but the births of his Faith; as Waters issuing out of a
Fountain, some running one way, and some another, some serving for one use, and
some for another. All which considered, it need seem no strange thing that Luke
should call that Love, which Matthew calls Faith: for Love is but Faith once
removed as it were; Faith drawn out into act; as Faith also is dispositively
and in the first habit, Love.

John 1.12. As many as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons
of God, even to those that believe in his name: the former expression of
receiving him, is expounded by the latter of believing in his Name. By which we
may gather, that it is the nature and property of the true Faith to receive
Christ, which is the act of Adherence I spoke of before. Men by the first act
of Faith believe Christ Jesus to be what he is, and to be so and so related
both to God and unto men; but by this second act which always accompanies the
first where the Faith is saving, they receive and embrace him, and cleave to
him as such. And in this lies the formal act of man's striking Covenant with the
Lord, and interessing himself in the grace and blessing of the Gospel. For all
good, present, and future, is entailed on Christ, as being Heir of all things,
and as having all things put into his hand by the Father; so that he that has
the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son has not life, 1 John 5.12.
receive him, and receive all; the whole inheritance goes along with the Heir;
but nothing short of this will invest us with the Inheritance.

What is the meaning then of receiving Christ?

1. To receive, whether understood of men's receiving the Lord, or the Lords
receiving of Men, or of Men's receiving of one another, is still in Scripture
taken in the best sense for receiving with affection and acceptance, 2 Cor.
6.17. Romans 14.1. and 15.7. Gal. 4.14. Philem. 12.17. And so in this place of
John 1.12. Those that receive Christ, receive him with affection and
acceptance; yea with such affection and acceptance, as by which they prefer
him above all other, both persons and things; for otherwise they will not be
deemed worthy of him: a wise man will not bestow himself upon a Woman that he
knows loves another better than himseif; and I am sure the Lord in this sense
will not give himself to any man that loves any thing more than him. Mat.
10.37. He that loves Father or Mother, Son or Daughter more than me, is not
worthy of me; much less he that loves any sinful lust or way more. It is true,
to give Men and Women a proof of his good will to them, and as an argument to
draw their affections to him, Christ has given himself a Ransom for all, his
flesh for the life of the World; but he having done this, those that shall not
hereby be moved and drawn to forsake all to follow him, cannot be his, and
consequently he not theirs; They shall not taste of his Supper, Luke 14.24, 26,
27, 33. That Is one thing then which is to be understood by Men's receiving of
Christ.

2. Another is this; he that receives Christ indeed, receives him for such as
indeed he is, and in that capacity in which he is sent, offered, tendered by the
Father, and given by himself, and that is, not only as a Savior, but also as a
Lord; and as a Savior by delivering him from the dominion of sin, and bringing
him under his own Rule and Government, as King and Lord, as well as by
delivering him from the guilt of sin by the Sacrifice of himself. How often does
the Scripture call him our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? 2 Pet. 1.11. and 2.2.
and 3.18. with many more. And again, Him has God exalted with his right hand
to be a Prince and a Savior, Acts 5.31. The Father gave him to be head over
all things to the Church, and to be a Ruler of his people, Ephesians. 1.22. Mat. 2.6.
And whosoever does not receive him as such, does not receive that gift of God.
For Christ is not, nor cannot be divided, (1 Cor. 1.13.) you cannot separate
the Lord from the Savior, and take the one and leave the other. Among all
other Lords and Rulers, which in Scripture are also called Saviors, ( Nehem.
9.27.) protection and subjection go together: Does any rational man expect
protection from the chief Magistrate upon any other terms than his due
obedience to all his lawful commands? And shall any man be so mad as to expect
protection, and deliverance by Christ from the wrath to come, upon any other
terms? Will not Christ say to such as shall cry to him, Lord, Lord, open to us,
who yet never made conscience to do all his commands, as the Lord said unto a
people that cried after him in their distress, and yet served other Lords in
the time of peace? Go cry unto the gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver
you in the time of your tribulation, Judges 10.14. Ier. 2.28. Where they
yielded subjection, thither they are sent for protection: if sin can save those
that serve sin, they shall have salvation, and if Christ can save those that
serve him, they shall have salvation; Where I am, there shall my servant also
be, says he, John 12.26. Christ is and will be the author of Eternal
Salvation, but to whom? To all those that obey him, (Heb. 5.9.) But to those
that be disobedient and which stumble at his word, he is and will be a stone of
stumbling, and rock of offense, the same to them as a Rock is to a ship, a
means of swift destruction, 1 Pet. 2.8. He will be so far from saving them, as
that he will say, But those mine enemies that would not that I should reign
over them, bring hither and slay them before me, Luke 19.27. A folly it is then
for any Man to think that he can take hold of Christ as his Savior; and so
receive him and salvation by him, that does not willingly embrace him as his
dear Lord, in which capacity he is given as well as that of Savior: in a moral
sense, he does not at all receive him, that does not receive him in that
capacity which is proper to him; no public Ambassador would judge himself
received by him to whom he is sent, in case he should be received in the capacy
of a private person only, when he is not sent as such.

Neither let any deceive their own souls, and think that they do receive him as
their Lord, because they are wont to call him so as frequently as any, unless
they make it their design, and the care and business of their Lives to wait for
his counsel, promote his interest, faithfully to do his business, fulfill his
Will, and do his commands. Why call you me Lord (says he to such) and do not
the things which I say? Luke 6.46. As if he counted himself but wronged and
disgraced by such a claim: what he to be their Lord that have this vile sin,
and that base Lust to be their Lord, yea more their Lord than Christ, and more
observed and obeyed than he: He only their titular Lord, but their worldly and
fleshly Lusts their real. And is not that a horrible disparagement to Christ,
for him to be joined with such Masters, and to be made one of the number, yea
inferior to them, as having less command over such persons than their Lusts
have? Do you not know that the Father designed as well the glory and honor of
his Son in your salvation, and in the way of bringing you to it, as your
Salvation it self? That all men might honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father, John 5.23. and do you think then that he will suffer his Son to be
dishonored and disgraced by you, while you do but mock him in calling him
Lord, but denying him your faithful obedience, and yield your subjection to his
utter Enemies? like those that crucified him, who indeed bowed the knee before
him, and cried hail King of the Jews, as well as you. Do you think it will
serve your turn to neglect Christ all your days (as you do if you do not serve
him in holiness and righteousness) and then think he should save you when you
can serve his enemies no longer? O I beseech all such to consider it betimes,
for God will not be so mocked by you.

3. A receiving of Christ clearly implies in it a receiving of his Word and
Doctrine, for whoever does not receive that, does not receive him, but whoever
does receive that, does receive him, 2 John 9. Whosoever transgresses and
abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God; he that abides in the
Doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the Son, John 12.48. He that
rejects me, and receives not my Word, has one that judges him: where not
to receive the Word of Christ, and to reject him, is constructively the same
thing. Whereto that also agrees Psalm 81.11. But my people would not hearken to
my voice, Israel would none of me: in refusing his voice, God took himself to
be refused, as any King would do, whose Laws and Commands should be refused.
Look then into the Scriptures, the 5, 6, and 7. Chapters of Matthew, and
elsewhere, and see what holy and strict injunctions the Lord has laid upon his
Disciples, and then look into your hearts, and see if you can find them there,
not only in the notional knowledge of them, but as having begotten principles,
dispositions and affections in their own likeness, and from thence proceed to
your conversations, words, and ways, and see how they answer the pattern in
the Mount; and if World and Lust abide there with more authority and command
than the Doctrine of Christ, you may be confident you have not yet received
Christ; for he is King, and his Laws in chief regard, where ever he dwells. And
thus you see what receiving of Christ that is, which is interpreted to be a
believing in his Name, and consequently what a true and sincere belief in
Christ's name carries in it, to wit, a loving and loyal cleaving to him, and an
embracing of him and his Word.

Acts 10.43. and so is it the next and immediate effect of true Repentance,
Luke 24.47. Acts 2.38. and 5.31. and 3.19. yea Pardon does so depend upon
Repentance that it is not to be had without it, Luke 13.3, 5. Except ye repent
ye shall all perish. And so actual Salvation which is the last and completing
effect of Faith, (1 Pet. 1.9.) is likewise the finishing effect of Repentance,
and therefore called Repentance unto life, Acts 11.18. and repentance unto
salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10. If then Repentence begins and ends with Faith, sets out
with it, and runs along with it to the end of its race in the effects produced
by both, impossible it is that any Faith should justify or save, but such as
has the nature of Repentance in it, or which does inseparably accompany it. By
which consideration alone their Faith is detected of invalidity and
unavailableness, what ever the object of it may be, whose hearts and lives are
not reformed by it, but still remain under the power of some thing or other
condemned by the Word of the Lord, and their own Consciences enlightened by it,
yiedling themselves rather unto the impositions of fleshly Lusts in some way of
pride, covetousness, or carnal pleasure, than unto the sweet motions of the
Holy Spirit calling to humility, sobriety, temperance, love, mercy, serious
devotion, and holiness toward God. As it is true, that Men shall be saved by
Christ, and justified by Faith, so it is as true that that Faith by which they
shall be justified, does purify the heart, (Acts 15.9.) i. e. work out evil
affections, sinful motions, and unclean inclinatinations; as nature where it is
not overcome by the strength of a Disease, by degrees works out those malignant
humors which do ill affect the body, and which otherwise would be the
overthrow of it, as the other of the Soul: and therefore where Faith does not
work this way, there is the same reason for a Man to be confident that that
Faith is not right, as there is to be confident thar a right Faith will save,
having the same word for the one as for the other.

James 1.12. and 2.5. 1 Cor. 2.9. Nay the want of this does as well render a
man unworthy of Christ, and that which comes by him, and lays him as open to
the curse, as Infidelity it self does. Mat. 10.37. 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man
love not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema, Maranatha, By which it is evident
that all the while this Love is wanting, he is under the curse that wants it,
whatever his belief otherwise may be, and consequently that no Faith in Christ
but such as knits the Soul in unfeigned Love to him, will deliver a Man from the
curse of God, and consequently nor justify. And alas how manies Faith is
hereby manifested to be merely counterfeit? Who are lovers of pleasures more
than lovers of God, which appears in that they follow them rather than God;
lovers of the World more than the Lord, which appears in that they choose to
please the Men of the World rather than him, and are more intent and thoughtful
about getting the World, than honoring of him, and will rather run the hazard
of displeasing him in holding fast the things of the World, than part with them
upon his call. For it is not every degree of Love to Christ that will
denominate a Man a true Lover of him; but Love in such proportion, and to such
a degree, as prevails against all other objects that stand in competition with
Christ, and carries away the Soul from them all to Christ, Mat. 10.37. He that
loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me, and he that loves Son
or Daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. It Is not only lawful for a Man
to love his Father and Mother, his Son and Daughter, but it is his duty so to
do, yea and to love them much more than others that are not so related, and yet
for all that, if his Love to Christ do not exceed in proportion, that Love and
strong affection which he may, and ought to bear to such Relations, Christ you
see has already judged him unworthy of him. A Man though he love his Wife
better than most other Women, yet if he love but one Woman more than his Wife
with that affection that is proper to his Wife, will be judged by sober men, no
true Lover of his Wife. In like manner though you should love Christ more than
many other enjoyments, or many other sins which you have parted with for his
sake; yet if you retain but any one sin, or sinful lust, and are tender of it
for the profit or pleasure that comes into you by it, and will harbor it to
the offense and provocation of the Lord, and choose rather to run the hazard of
loosing his company, and all the comforts of it, than to turn such an offensive
guest out of doors, assuredly the Lord who does always judge according to
truth, will judge himself despised and unworthily rejected by you. He you see
then that wants this prevailing degree of Love to Christ, is still under the
curse, and therefore no belief in Christ whatsoever that has not this Love in
it, or is not certainly accompanied with it, can be any sufficient ground for
any Man to be confident of his Salvation. Nothing less avails, than that
Faith which thus works by Love, Gal. 5.6.

By all these considerations then you may see, that when Promise of Life is
made unto believing in Christ indefinitely expressed, it is no wise safe to
understand the Scriptures as intending any other lower kind of Faith than that
definitively which is of power and force to change the heart and life of him
that has it, and to renew him to God in holiness; Jesus Christ himself in his
words to Paul, having plainly declared this to be the true nature of the Faith
that is in him, Acts 26.18. That they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified by Faith that is in me. And
therefore John the bosom Disciple of Christ (as was noted before) says,
Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God, 1 John 5.1. which
as you see must be understood of that vigorous belief that gives a man a new
being, furnishes him with new principles of motion and action, new thoughts,
new affections, a new life; that gives him victory over the World, as it
follows verse 4. Whosoever is born of God, overcomes the world, and this is
the victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith: Christ's proffers, and
the Worlds proffers, Christ's threats and the Worlds threats, striving which
shall carry the Man to follow their ways, Faith steps in, by which the Man
believes; that as Christ is the Son of God, so he is more worthy to be
followed, and his proffers infinitely more worthy to be regarded, and his
threats dreaded, than the World with all that she can do or say, and so
delivers the Man out of the Worlds hand, that he is at liberty to attend the
Lord.

John 9.22. and 12.42.) and consequently manifested his effectual Faith in an
unfeigned Love to the Lord Jesus: and thus to call Jesus the Lord, no Man could
do but by the Holy Ghost, and his special assistance, 1 Cor. 12.3. But now in
times wherein to deny him to be the Lord, would sooner expose a man to
suffering, than the confessing of him so to be, the bare confessing of him will
not invest him with the great privileges that then were promised unto the
confessing of Christ, according to that Mat. 7.21: Not every one that says
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will
of my Father which is in Heaven.

its every Man's wisdom to do, as it is not safe, so it is impossible for him
then to be confident of his salvation merely upon account of his believing
Christ to be the Son of God, unless this Faith of his be proved to him to be
the Faith of Gods elect, by some good degree of those holy affections, and that
christian demeanure which the holy Word and Doctrine of the Lord calls for. And
the reason hereof is, because such Scriptures as I have been now insisting on,
that curse all those that do not love the Lord Jesus, that sentence with
eternal death, all those that live after the flesh, that exclude all such the
blessed Vision of the Lord that have not holiness, that shut the gates of
Heaven against all such as do not make conscience to do the will of the Father;
I say such Scriptures stand up to oppose such a Man in his confidence of
salvation, like as the Cherubims with the flaming sword kept the way of the
Tree of Life against Adam: though he have never such a desire to be confident,
he cannot; such Scriptures meet him, and will not let him; they knock him off
from taking hold of eternal life; this confidence it is not able to subsist in
any other element than that of holiness, 1 John 3.18, 19, 20, 21. Little
children let us not love in word and in tongue, but indeed and in truth. And
hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before
him. For if our heart condemn us; God is greater than our heart, and knows
all things, Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God. That by which the Apostle says, men know themselves to be of the
truth, one in heart and design with it, of the same party as it were, in
Friendship, and fellowship with it, is this, viz. their loving, not in word and
tongue only, but indeed and in truth: when Men do not only talk, but act and
live the things of the Gospel. And hereby (says he) we shall assure our hearts
before him, or persuade our hearts before him, (as in the margint.) Implying
that without this, for a Man that knows and considers the terms of the Gospel,
it is impossible to persuade his heart before God, to appear before God with any
confidence. For says he, if our heart condemn us, viz. of unfaithfulness and
faultering with God in the main, that our Love and our Religion has been but
in Word and in Tongue, have contented our selves to talk of, and speak well of
good things, but have left the doing of them to other folks, like the Pharisees
that by their Doctrine would bind heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders, and
yet themselves not touch them with one of their fingers; if our heart condemn
us of such a thing as this, God is greater than our heart, both in knowledge
and discerning of this deceit, and in righteousness of sentence, and proceeding
against it, and therefore he will condemn much more. But if our heart condemn
us not in this behalf, but bears us witness that it has been our earnest
desire, care, and faithful endeavor to be that which the truth teaches us to
be, then have we confidence toward God of our acceptance with him, all the
Scriptures being on our side to abet and back us in this confidence; but on the
contrary, all against us.

The Apostle says, He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he
is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. Mark: Its matter of
a man's Faith as well to believe that the men whom God will reward are such as
diligently seek him, as it is to believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder
of men. So that where this diligent seeking of the Lord is wanting, there is no
place for any man to be confident of receiving that blessedness from God which
is called the recompense of reward, and the reward of the inheritance. And what
is it for a man diligently to seek the Lord? but earnestly to seek his Favor
and Love by a diligent and careful endeavor to please him always, and in all
things. By Sin and Unrighteousness man lost God, and lost his Love: and however
it is by the Blood of Christ that a new and living way is now prepared and made
for man to come to God again, and to regain his love, yet he is not actually
possessed of it but by going back again to God, by returning to him in the same
way in which he departed from him. All the while man was in the way of
Righteousness, he was with God and enjoyed the comfort of his company and
presence; but he no sooner left that way, but he lost God; and there is no
finding him again without geting into that way again, and there you may meet
with him, find him, walk with him, and enjoy the comfort of his love and
presence again through the mediation of our good friend his holy Son Jesus.
Only here is the difference indeed, the way of Righteousness is now new made, a
new Covenant struck, new Terms propounded of coming into possession of God
again as a happy portion, a diligent seeking of him by believing in him,
sincerely loving of him, and faithfully endeavoring to please him, being the
condition of this new Covenant, and the new way of Righteousness in which God
is to be found if therein diligently sought. And we desire that every one of
you do show the same diligence to the full assurance of Hope unto the end, Heb.
6.11. This diligence you see is the medium of this confident Assurance.

Men can have no other foundation for their confidence than what God himself
has laid, I mean proposed; it is not of him that wills in this kind, nor of
him that runs, but of God that shows mercy; he gives the reward, and he
gives the laws and terms of obtaining of it: and therefore as long as the
Declarations of Gods mind in the Scriptures compared touching the
qualifications of such whom he receives into Covenant and designs unto life, do
oppose men's confidence, so long they have no foundation to build upon, and
consequently no confidence of Salvation at all, or as good as none. For that
which is not built upon Gods ground which is all rocky and substantial, but
upon men's own deceiveable thoughts and imaginations, and mistakes of Gods mind
and declaration, as upon the sand, will sail them, and fall in that very hour
in which it should do them service, and they have most need of it. Job. 8.13,
14, 15. So are the paths of all that forget God, and the Hipocrites hope shall
perish: whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a Spidersweb: he
shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand; he shall hold it fast, but
it shall not endure: Their hope (Job 11.20.) shall be as the giving up of the
Ghost; like a man who though he have never so great a desire to live, yet must
yield up his breath when Death comes: and so must men be forced to part with
those hopes which they have made to themselves, but not received from God; and
instead thereof embrace everlasting despair, to the horrible confusion of their
miserable Souls when the time of trial comes; their house of confidence that
was built upon the sand, will then fall, and the fall of it will be great,
Matthew. 7.27. It may stand and do them the service of a house of hope, protect
them from many sad fears till the storm arises and beats against it, but then
down it comes, and the poor Soul is then to seek, and there is no shelter to be
found. And does it not then concern men to be often prying into the grounds of
their Hope, and to view them over and over with a jealous eye? to the end that
if a man have but cause to suspect those he has, he may provide himself of
better before it is too late: it will be no time for the foolish Virgins to
seek to provide themselves of Oil for their Lamps, when the very pinch of time
comes that they should use it.

CHAP. VIII. Showing that the Faith which shall justify as Abraham's did, is a
Faith that walks in the steps of the Faith of Abraham. Showing also what those
steps were, and that Abraham was justified by the latter of them as well as the
former; and that the justification of his spiritual seed stands upon the same
terms: contrary to the Antinomian Doctrine, and Libertine Principles.
the Faith of Gods Elect, (Tit. 1.1.) then it will work after the same manner
as theirs generally has been wont to do; but if you cannot find your Faith to
be of that kind by working as theirs did, you will have small reason as yet to
conclude your self one of their number.

I shall begin with Abraham, who as the Scripture says was Father of all them
that believe; and so he was, because all true believers do partake of the same
kind of Faith that dwelt eminently in him, and are thereby justified and saved
as he was: He is the great instance, pattern or example, both in his Faith and
Justification; of Gods resolved method of saving all men that shall be saved,
whether Jews or Gentiles. As a Son who succeeds his Father comes to enjoy the
same Inheritance and privilege as his Father did, so he that shall succeed
Abraham in his Faith, shall enjoy the same spiritual and eternal inheritance
which was entailed on his Faith: So says the Apostle, Gal. 3.9. So then they
which be of Faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham. The same Apostle in
another place declares them to be his spiritual Children, and he a Father to
such as walk in the steps of his Faith. Romans 4.12. And the Father of
circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision only, but also to those
that walk in the steps of that Faith of our Father Abraham which he had being
yet uncircumcised. Where note first, That the Faith which Abraham had, and by
which he was Justified, was a Faith which had steps in it: it did not consist
in one transient act only, but of a series of acts, one following another; and
that he was Justified by the latter of these as well as the former, I shall
(God willing) afterward show. That which I would further note in the second
place, is, That the Faith which will render them that have it Children of
Abraham and inheritors of the same blessing with him, is such for kind as is
found walking in the steps of his Faith; influencing the life and disposing the
heart in particular occurrences, as his did. It may well be indeed that every
Child of Abraham may not be able to keep pace with their Father in this walk of
Faith, nor to follow him close at the heels; nor are all his Children of the
same growth or same strength, but yet all following their Father in the same
way, though at some distance; all treading in his steps. It is most certain
that the true Faith by which they become his Children, will guide them into the
same way, put them upon the same behavior for kind in which he was found. Joh.
8.39. Jesus says unto them, If ye were Abraham's Children, ye would do the
works of Abraham.

For a trial of our Faith therefore whether it be of the right breed and of the
stock of Abraham, let us a little trace out the walk of Abraham's Faith, and see
what the footsteps of it were, as we have the print of them in the Scriptures,
and then see whether our Faith walk in the same path, or tread in the same
steps or no.

Romans 4.18, 19, 20, 21. Who against hope, believed in hope, that he might be
the Father of many Nations; according to that which was spoken, so shall thy
seed be. And being not weak in Faith, he considered not his own body now dead,
neither yet the deadness of Sarahs womb: He staggered not at the Promise of God
through Unbelief, but was strong in Faith giving glory to God: and being fully
persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able also to perform. The word
Promise, or saying of God, carried it in his soul against all contrary
reasonings. Sarah being old, and it ceasing to be with her after the manner of
Women; and Abraham himself also being as good as dead ( Heb. 11.12.) this
encumbered the belief of the Promise in Sarah, and at first set her Faith, Genesis
18.11, 12. But the Text says Abraham considered neither the one nor the other;
he considered not his own body now dead, nor yet the deadness of Sarahs womb;
Gods Promise did so wholly take up his soul, and was of so great authority with
him, as that he did not judge the great improbabilities in Nature, worthy in
this case to be so much as considered, nor at all to be heard when God had
spoken. Afterward God tryes his Faith again: he had not only in general
promised him a numerous Posterity like unto the stars for multitude, as before,
Genesis 15.5. but now more particularly had told him that in Isaac should his seed
be called, Genesis 21.12. and yet for all this commands Abraham to slay and offer
in Sacrifice to God this Son of his, and how then should God make good his
Promise? might Abraham think? Abraham here again measures Gods Word and
Promise, not by this and that difficulty, but by his irresistible power,
Accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead; from whence
also he received him in a figure, Heb. 11.19. You see he had so high an esteem
of the goodness and truth of God, that if he had but power enough to make good
his word, he made no question of his performance; and was so all thoughts made
touching the sufficiency of his power to go through with whatever he had a mind
to, or had undertaken to do, as that though one difficulty after another rose
up to encounter his Faith, yet they could not so much as make him to stagger,
so mighty was Gods Word in his soul! And therefore was this Faith of his imputed
to him for Righteousness. Now this was not written for his sake alone that this
Faith of his was imputed unto him, but for us also, to whom it shall be
imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead,
says the Apostle, Romans 4.23, 24. It was written to give us to understand, That
if God be so magnified in the soul as that no difficulty or unlikelihood
whatsoever can stand before or carry it against the Word and Promise of God
there, but believing first that God raised Christ from the dead for our
Justification, after he had been delivered for our offenses; and then believing
also, that God by the same power and grace by which he did that, will certainly
fulfill and perform all his Words and Promises in due time, and according to his
own terms: and that this Faith do but dispose the frame of the heart Godward
as it did in Abraham, that then this Faith of ours shall as assuredly be
imputed to us for Righteousness, as his was to him. Has God then Promised a
free and full Pardon of all your sins upon your unfeigned Repentance and
turning from them to God, and taking hold of his Grace in Christ, how great or
many soever they have been, and how unworthy soever they have rendered you of
such a favor? Has he promised to such as have begun thus truly to turn to
God, that he will give them his Spirit to help in the Work, to make them new
hearts, and to write his Law there, and that humbly waiting and depending upon
him in his own way and means, he will keep them from falling, and preserve them
to his heavenly kingdom? See then whether you do steadfastly believe these great
and precious Promises, and are encouraged and enabled by your belief of them to
turn again to God from all your transgressions, and in thus turning,
confidently to expect by degrees a real and faithful performance of them all,
notwithstanding the great distance you may possibly for the present perceive
your selves to be from much of what is thus promised; and notwithstanding those
great, mighty and violent oppositions which you do and are like to meet with
from flesh, World, and Devil to encounter your confidence of these things.
Though difficulties in this kind are many, great, and sorely threatening your
falling short of the enjoyment of these mighty Promises; yet if your Faith be
but firmly bottomed and built upon them, and that the faithfulness and power of
God to make them good, be so eyed by you, and your souls so centered therein,
as that all the difficulties and unlikelihoods that rise up in your way from
what quarter soever, cannot prevail in your soul against the Word of God, but
that you do indeed believe that the might and power of his Grace will make its
way through them all, and perform to a tittle what he has promised, and that
this confidence of yours does but engage you still to be following of God step
by step in his way, method, and means of fulfilling his Word, as Abraham's Faith
did; then you may confidently assure your selves that your Faith is of the
right breed and kind, and of the same nature with Abraham's, and walking in the
same steps, and such as will entitle you to, and possess you of the same
blessing which he attained by his Faith.

Heb. 11.8. By Faith Abraham when he was called to go out into a place which he
should after receive for an Inheritance, obeyed, and he went out not knowing
whither he went. An excellent grace indeed, that is molded and cast in the
Will of God, and receives its form and figure from thence! The Word of God had
the same force upon Abraham's soul by means of his Faith, as the Wind has upon
a Weathercock, it still made it to stand with it: If he promised him any
thing, his soul did securely acquiess in his Word; if he commanded him any
thing, he readily obeys; the Word of the Lord carries him before it. He only
depended upon the divine Will by his Faith; what that gave him, he received:
what that would have him do, that he did. He believed, its like, That the Lord
was so good in himself, and so much a friend to him, as that he would not put
him upon any thing, command him any thing, but what in the issue should clearly
tend to his good; and therefore upon this persuasion resolves to deliver up
himself wholly to the Will of God, and to be an absolute Servant thereunto, and
to wait upon it whither ever it would carry him. He knew his Happiness was in
Gods hand, and was confident that the way to be possessed of it, was still to
wait upon God in believing what he said, and in doing what he bade him. The
Will and Command of God then, was the constant walk of Abraham's Faith.

Self denial, wherein he crossed his own will to comply with the Will of God,
therein doing God that right (which but few in the world do) as actually to
acknowledge the Lord and his most holy Will to be absolutely sovereign and
supreme, and that his own Will must stoop to his without all disputes, how
contrary soever thereunto. The Command of God comes to Abraham, Genesis 12.1, 2,
3. saying, Get thee out of thy Country and from thy Fathers house, unto a Land
that I will show thee: and I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will Bless
thee and make thy Name great, and thou shall be a blessing. And I will bless
them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee: and in thy Seed shall
all Families of the Earth be blessed. Here are great things promised indeed, as
an Argument and Motive to persuade him to obey this Call and Command of God,
which he confidently depended upon; but in the mean time he must quit his
Country, bid a-dieu to his Kindred, depart from his Fathers house, make himself
a laughing stock (it is like) to Neighbors, Friends, and Acquaintance, as if
some strange Chymera had struck his brain, and must go he knew not whither; So
says the Apostle, He went out not knowing whither he went, Heb. 11.8. Let Us
make it our own case, and we shall easily perceive that thus to do was a piece
of great Self denial. And yet his Faith led him out from amidst these ancient
enjoyments; the Command and Promise of God went before, and he followed close
after. And this wonderful piece of Obedience is attributed to his Faith, Heb.
11.8. By Faith Abraham when he was called to go out unto a place which he
should afterward receive, obeyed.

Another like, or rather more wonderful piece of Self denying Obedience which
was acted by the power of his Faith, was his carriage about the offering up of
his Son Isaac in sacrifice unto God at his command. Heb. 11.17, 18. By Faith
Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac: and he that had received the
Promises, offered up his only begotten Son; of whom it was said, That in Isaac
shall thy Seed be called. Behold Abraham's will, desire and delight, swallowed
up in the Will and good pleasure of God by means of his Faith! His Son that had
been so much desired and longed for before he had him, that all he enjoyed in
this world seemed little to him in the absence of such a Mercy: Lord God, what
will thou give me, seeing I go childless? (Genesis 15.2.) That Son whom he so much
loved when he had him, yea, and his only Son too; and that Son in whom the
Promise was made of the great things which God would do for Abraham; this Son
does God command him to offer for a burnt Offering; this Son of his hopes; this
Son of his delights: an action than which, what lightly could be imagined more
harsh and highly repugnant to his own will? And yet notwithstanding all Debates
and Reasonings of flesh and blood about this matter, which one would think
should be many and high, and such which one should have much ado to get over;
yet so mighty was his Faith in God, and confidence of a good issue of whatever
he should do at the appointment and command of God, as that he appears as
forward in it as if it had been the most acceptable service which God could
have put him upon: For the Text says, That Abraham rose up early in the
morning to go about it, Genesis 22.3.

And upon account of this very thing was he esteemed the friend of God, ( Jam.
2.23.) one that would forsake all, and part with the dearest friend he had in
all the world, rather than not stick close to him in whatever he would have him
do; a true sign indeed of friendship to the Lord, Joh. 15.14. Ye are my
friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Mark; whatsoever I command: not
only commands which it may be may bear little upon the flesh, easy and cheap
duties, but such as will try a man's affection to the uttermost, as this to
Abraham did; such as call for the cutting off the right hand, and plucking out
the right eye; the parting with things that are as grateful to the flesh, as
these Members of the body are to Nature. And not only so, but such things also
as are as useful and desirable as the right hand and right eye are, as Isaac
was to Abraham; when the holding and enjoying of them will not consist with our
entire love to the Lord, to be expressed in the most difficult and most
self-denying piece of Service when he calls for it. He that loves Father or
Mother, Son or Daughter, yea, or his own life more than Christ, is not worthy
of him, (Matthew. 10.37, 38.) as he does which chooses rather to displease Christ,
and dishonor his Truth in keeping these, than to displease himself or them in
parting with them.

This task which was put upon Abraham was indeed very hard, and directly of the
nature of that in the Gospel mentioned before, and yet as hard and as difficult
as it was, if Abraham had stuck at it, he could not have approved his Faith to
God, no more than such as love Son or Daughter more than Christ, and thereby
prove themselves unworthy of him, can approve their Faith in him to be right,
or their Love to him to be true. And therefore if you mark it, Abraham was said
to be justified by Works when he had offered Isaac upon the Altar, Jam. 2.21.
Implying, that as this high act of his Obedience proceeding from his Faith,
rendered him highly approved in the sight of God, Genesis 22.16. So by the rule of
contraries, had he bogled at this command, his neglect herein would not only
have deprived him of that high approbation of God which by his fiducial
Obedience he had now obtained, but also have gone very far in contributing
toward the loss of those degrees of Gods approbation whereto he had before
attained, if not wholly bereaved him thereof until he had repented and done his
duty.

Abraham's offering Isaac was an act of that Faith by which he was justified,
yet it was not that act of Faith by which he was justified; it was an act of
his Faith it is true, but not such a one as was essential to his justification:
and the reason hereof seems to be this, because Abraham was justified by, or
upon his believing long before this: it is said, Genesis 15.6. And Abraham believed
in the Lord; and he counted it to him for Righteousness. And this was before
Ishmael was born unto Abraham, at whose birth Abraham was but 86 years old,
Genesis 16.16. But when Isaac was born he was an hundred years old, Genesis 21.5.
which clearly proves it to be fourteen years, or more, from that time in which
Righteousness was imputed to him upon his believing, to the time of Isaac's
birth. And yet this act of his Faith did not take place till some years after
the birth of Isaac neither, for the Lad by that time Abraham was called upon to
offer him, was so far grown in years, stature, and strength, as that Abraham
made him carry the Wood for the burnt-Offering, Genesis 22.6. Now then if Abraham
were justified by that act of his Faith which was found in him it may be twenty
years before, How could it be that be should be justified by another act of his
Faith, viz. This by which he offered Isaac, so long after?

To which I Answer, First; That this act of his Faith by which he offered Isaac
did concur to his Justification, is very plain and manifest by that of Jam.
2.21, 24. Was not Abraham our Father justified by Works when he had offered
Isaac his Son upon the Altar? As if he should say, Is it not manifest he was?
Do you not know this? And after he had amplified this Instance a little,
concludes upon it thus, verse. 24. Ye see then how that by Works a man is
justified, and not by Faith only. By which it is manifest, That this was not
only an act of that Faith by which he was Justified, but that this act of his
Faith was, that by which he was justified as well as that precedent act before
mentioned, and was not irrelative to his justification, as the Objection
supposes.

Abraham's Faith could not do that for him which was done long before by a
former and precedent act; To this I likewise Answer: That Justification taken
in a large sense, for a man's constant standing acceptable condition before God,
depends not only upon the first acts of a man's Faith when he begins to believe,
but upon the continuation and reitteration of the same, and multiplication of
the like, and sometimes higher acts all along a man's life unto the end of his
days; which being a point of much consequence, I pray you mark how I make it
good:

1. This clearly appears in Abraham's case; for neither was that believing of
Abraham of which we read, Genesis 15.6. which was counted to him for
Righteousness, the first act of his effectual Faith, and consequently not that
which began his justification: For this act of his Faith was the closing with a
Promise which God made him after he had dwelt some years in the Land of Canaan,
probably near upon ten years, as you will have cause to conceive, if you
compare the process of the history touching his leaving Charon and sojourning
in the Land of Canaan, with Genesis 16.3. where a period of time is mentioned, at
which he had dwelt ten years in the Land of Canaan, and which so far as
appears, extended it self very little beyond that time when God appeared to
Abraham after his slaughter of the Kings and made that Promise to him, the
believing of which is said to be counted to him for Righteousness. But Abraham
had a great measure of Faith before ever he left his native Country, Vr of the
Chaldees, first, and Charon after, to come at Gods call into Canaan; as we
heard before from Heb. 11.8. where it is told us, That it was by his Faith that
he obeyed God therein. And by Faith he after sojourned in the Land of Promise,
Heb. 11.9. wherein by virtue of his Faith he devoutly worshipped and served that
God which had called him thither, building Altars for his Worship at several
places where he pitched his Tent, and there called on the Name of the Lord,
Genesis 12.7, 8. and 13.4, 18. And all this before that particular act of his
Faith mentioned Genesis 15.6. which is there said to have been counted to him for
Righteousness. And can any man so much as imagine, That Abraham having such a
Faith so long before, and making such proof of the life and power of it in his
Love, Obedience, and Devotion to God as he did; and God back again declaring
his high approbation of him, by a frequent appearing to him, and making,
repeating, and enlarging his Promises of the great things he was resolved to do
for him, that yet he all this while should not be justified and accepted with
God upon his believing? I say, Can any such thought possibly enter into any
man's heart? If not, then it is manifest that that act of Abraham's Faith, Genesis
15.6. which was counted to him for Righteousness, was but an after-act, not the
beginning-act of his Justification, and consequently that a man's Justification
does not depend only upon one transient act of Faith when he begins to believe,
but upon a continuation, renewing, and multiplication of the same, or like
acts. Abraham though he believed in God before, and was accepted with God
before, yet his after-Faith is imputed to him for Righteousness as well as his
former: and if he should not have believed God upon this renewing of his
Promise, as well as at the first making of it; I see not how Righteousness
could at this time have been imputed to him upon account of his former
believing: No, it was imputed upon his present believing.

And seeing that we find that Abraham's justification is here in Genesis 15.6.
attributed to an after act of his Faith, there is the same reason why his
justification should again be ascribed unto that act of his Faith by which he
offered up his Son, though it be supposed to follow twenty years after the
other, as that did many years after the first. These things considered, it need
not be looked upon as any paradox or wonder that James should attribute
Abraham's Justification before God unto an act of his Faith which took not place
till many years after he had been in the Faith of God. We heard before from
Romans 4.12. that the Faith by which Abraham was justified was a walking Faith
and had steps, and now we see that the latter steps of the same Faith were
necessary to his justification as well as the former, he having and enjoying
means, motives, and opportunities of exerting these latter acts as well as of
the former.

And it is of special note to this point, That the Lord casts the performance of
a Promise which he had made to Abraham many years before, upon that act of his
Faith and Obedience which took place but now when he would have offered Isaac,
Genesis 22.16, 17, 18. By my self have I sworn says the Lord, for because thou
have done this thing, and have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son; that in
blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the
Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand which is upon the Sea shore: and thy seed
shall possess the gate of his enemies: and in thy seed shall all the Nations of
the Earth be blessed; because thou have obeyed my voice. Mark how God grounds
this Promise noted in these two expressions; because thou have done this thing:
and, because thou have obeyed my voice. And yet this Promise for substance had
been made him more than once before he had done that thing, and before he had
herein obeyed his voice, as is evident Genesis 12.2, 3, and 13.15, 16. and 15.5,
6. From which I gather, That collateral or after acts of Faith and Obedience,
are as necessary to continue and make good a man's interest in the Promises for
the future, as the first acts of his Faith and Obedience were to entitle him to
them at the first.

The Lord at the first makes his Promise to Abraham conditionally, that in case
he would get him out of his own Country, and from his Kindred, and from his
Fathers house, unto a Land which he would show him, that then he would make him
a great Nation, and bless him, and make his name great, and make him a
blessing, and bless them that should bless him, and curse them that should
curse him, and that in him should all Families of the Earth be blessed, Genesis
12.1, 2, 3. Afterward when Abraham upon belief of this Promise had actually
obeyed God and was come into the Land to which he led him, then God renews the
same Promise to him once and again without expressing that Condition, because
he had now so far fulfilled it: this we may see Genesis 13.15, 16. and 15.5, 6. As
if he renewed his Promise now by way of reward unto his former Faith and
Obedience; just as in this case of his offering of Isaac, the Lord renews the
same Promise with the addition of his Oath to bind it, by way of reward to this
eminent act of his Faith and Obedience: And when Abraham renews his Faith as
God did his Promise, Genesis 15.5, 6. this was counted to him for Righteousness as
well as his first Faith was. And so again when God by another command of his to
offer his Son, as hard as the first, tryes his Faith whether it would hold out
to carry him through all difficulties to follow and obey him, and finds his
Faith enabling him to depend upon him still and to obey his Will in this as in
his former Commands; hereupon he counts this to him for Righteousness as well
as his former Faith, and graciously grounds his approbation of him from that
act of his Faith which last occurred, Jam. 2.21.

Noah's case as well as Abraham's. Noah we know was a righteous man, before God
admonished him to make an Ark for the saving of him and his household. For the
Scripture says, That Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and
that Noah walked with God, Genesis 6.9. And because he was so, therefore God
directed him to make the Ark for the securing of him and his Family, Genesis 7.1.
And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the Ark; for thee
have I seen righteous before me in this generation. And yet for all this,
though Noah were in a justified accepted estate before God, and highly approved
of him before ever God commanded him to make the Ark; yet his becoming an Heir
of that Righteousness which is by Faith, is attributed unto that act of his
Faith by which he believed God when he declared to him his Resolution to drown
the World, and by means whereof he was moved to obey God in making an Ark for
the salvation of himself and Family, Heb. 11.7. By Faith Noah being warned of
God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Ark to the saving
of his house, by the which he condemned the world, and became Heir of the
Righteousness which is by Faith. A clear proof that justification depends upon
after acts of Faith as well as the first, and is and may be as well ascribed to
the one, as to the other.

And I pray you let it not be passed over un-observed, That though these works,
that of Abraham's offering Isaac, and this of Noah's preparing an Ark, at the
command of God, be attributed unto the Faith of each respectively, yet their
justification before God hereupon is attributed unto these Works themselves as
well as unto their Faith in the Scripture passages: And therefore the Apostle
James speaking of Abraham, says, See thou how Faith wrought with his Works?
and by Works was Faith made perfect, Jam. 2.22. His Faith and Works they
wrought or labored together as two Beasts in a yoke about the producing the
same effect, and that was the rendering him capable of the continuance of Gods
Favor and Approbation; his Faith alone would not have done it if these Works
being called for should have been knowingly neglected.

3. After acts of Faith are absolutely necessary to the continuance and
carrying on of the work of Justification, as the first act was to begin it and
set it a foot, and therefore the Author to the Hebrews speaking of the just man
that lives by Faith, says of him, That if he draw back, the soul of the Lord
shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. As his believing so long as he
continues it, renders him acceptable and well pleasing to God upon Christ's
account, so his withdrawing those acts of Faith which interested him in Gods
favorable acceptance, provoke God to withdraw his delight in him and
acceptance of him. And when Christ in the Parable of the Debtor and Creditor
sets forth this, That a Servant who having had a great Debt forgiven him by his
Lord, yet afterward had it exacted of him again upon his cruel and unworthy
carriage toward his fellow Servant, with this Application of it to his
Disciples to whom it was spoke; So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also
unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every man his Brother their
trespasses. Matthew. 18.35. Does he not plainly teach that if such as do believe
as they did, and thereupon have their sins forgiven as they had, shall yet for
all that afterward come to want those after acts of Faith that should produce a
merciful and loving carriage toward others, (for the right Faith works by
love) that then their Justification should become unjustification to them, the
pardon which till then had continued, should then be recalled and withdrawn?

Antinomians, to be rotten and stark naught, which teaches that when a man is
once in Christ, or which is the same, when he does once believe, all his sins
are pardoned both past, present, and to come, and that he always stands
accepted upon the account of his first believing. A Doctrine which most
assuredly has proved an occasion of manies taking to themselves a great deal
more liberty than that which is Christian, and has betrayed many hopeful Souls
into a broader way than that narrow path that leads to life. A fine Doctrine it
would have been if it had been true, To prove that Paul knew not what he said
when he exhorted the Christians to work out, or to work through their own
Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.

And I do the rather here admonish all in the fear of the Lord to take heed of
this snar, for that I my self having above twenty years ago been taken in it,
did sadly experience the evil tendency of it; and I verily think had not the
Lord in much mercy plucked me out of it, it would have proved no less than
utter ruin and destruction to my poor Soul: and how then should I upon this
occasion refrain to warn all men of this deep ditch! No sure it is not one act
of believing that carries the business of a man's Justification quite through,
if there be opportunity of after acts afforded: The Righteousness of God is
revealed (in the Gospel) from Faith to Faith, Romans 1.17. The Gospel reveals
Righteousness or Justification upon condition of the latter Faith as well as
the former; and therefore let no man think he has done his whole days work,
when as he has but only begun it, for if he do, it is a thousand to one but he
will grow idle and remiss before night.

And therefore as you desire and expect that your Faith should do you the same
service as Abraham's did him, see to it that your Faith be found walking in his
Faiths steps; by which, and not otherwise, you will prove your selves his
Children, and Heirs to the same Inheritance. But alas! If the forementioned
steps of Abraham's Faith, as trodden by his Children, do discriminate the Faith
of the right kind, from that which is of another race, how many men's Faith who
call Abraham Father, will hereby be discovered to be but Bastardly, and such as
will never make good their title to the Inheritance which God has promised to
Abraham and his spiritual seed? Does the Call of God backed with a Promise, by
means of Abraham's Faith taking hold of the Promise with one hand, and of the
Command with the other, draw him out of his own Country from his ancient
Acquaintance, Kindred, and Fathers house, which otherwise were lawful
enjoyments? What then shall we think of their Faith who though the Lord give
forth Command upon Command, backed with great and precious Promises, on purpose
to draw men not out of their own Country, but out of their ill Company, out of
their Intemperance and Excess, out of their Uncleanness, out of their Covetous,
practices, out of their Pride and ridiculous fashions, out not only of profane
Swearing and filthy Talking, but out of light, vain, frothy, frivolous
Discourse and Communication, out of their lukewarmness, heartlessness, and
deadness in Religion; and yet for all that are not drawn out of these
unprofitable, sinful, and vain ways unto this day? Can any thing be plainer
than this, That either they have no Faith at all, or that the Faith they have
is of a bastard kind and such as shall never inherit? Both they and their Faith
must be judged of by their Works: If they were Abraham's Children, they would do
the Works of Abraham; but seeing they do the Works of the Devil, they thereby
plainly prove themselves to be his Children and not Abraham's; as Christ who
could not be mistaken, has told them, Joh. 8.39.44. These as the unregenerate
Jews that lived under the Word and Ordinances of God, and yet were not renewed
to God by them, would needs claim from Abraham; but Christ you see has found
them out another Father. O that all such would therefore be persuaded now while
it is called to day, to take fast hold of the Commands of Jesus Christ made
very pleasant and acceptable by the huge Promises that are annexed to them,
which would then certainly draw them out of their vain Conversation. Shall
Abraham's Faith enable him at Gods Command to offer to him his only and beloved
Son Isaac? and shall not thine enable thee to part with thy only beloved Lust?
Do thou think thou have more to say why thou should not part with thy
sin, than Abraham had why he should not part with his Son? If not; then either
cease flattering thy self as if thou were one of Abraham's Children and Heir to
the same Promise, or else cease from thy vain and sinful ways that thou may
be so indeed.

CHAP. IX. Showing that it has been the common and universal Property of the
Faith of Gods Elect, both in former and latter Ages of the World, as well to
depend upon (and so to be ordered by) the counsels, commands, and directions of
God touching the way to life, as upon his grace, power, and promise, for life
it self: and that it is the highest point of Wisdom in men so to do. And that
men's mistrust of the suparlative goodness of Gods ways, counsels, and
commands, and putting more confidence in their own, proceeds from their
mistrust of his power, wisdom, or good will toward them, in relation to their
happiness.
Abraham's Faith in the Properties and Effects of it, and after what manner it
disposed him in his deportment toward God, and how the same is set forth as a
pattern unto all men of that kind of Faith by which Justification is to be had;
let us now also take a further view of the same grace of Faith, as it has
showed it self acting its part in other of the Saints: always carrying in our
eye along with us, our own Faith, and comparing it with theirs, to see whether
it affects and acts us, as theirs did them; as undoubtedly it will, if it be of
the same nature and kind with theirs. For as all men in all Nations and
Generations, are of one blood ( Acts 17.26.) so all Saints in all Nations and
Generations are in the general of our Faith, Ephesians. 4.5. And as the one has
the same motion and operation in reference to the life Natural in all men, so
has the other the same influence and operation in reference to the life
Spiritual in all Saints.

Now then that which has been in a manner as Natural to the Faith of all the
Saints, as the motion of the blood in the veins is to all living men, is this,
viz. To be verily persuaded, that as happiness and salvation are assuredly to
be had from God, so the certain way not to miss of it but to receive it upon
his Promise, is, and has been, still to eye his counsels, and to follow the
guidance of his directions and commands in all things, as the direct way
leading thereunto.

And the truth is, for the creature man to be thus acted and steered in his
dependence upon his God, is the most rational thing under heaven, and most
connatural to that principle of understanding and light which God has placed
in men. For first, God by his preventing grace, in propounding gracious terms,
and vouchsafing convenient and sufficient means of salvation unsought for on
man's part, has given a plentiful proof and clear demonstration of his love and
good will to men, and of his desire of their salvation. And then secondly,
Having so done, what is more rational than for men to be fully confident that
the Lord will put them upon nothing, advise them nothing, command them nothing,
but what does certainly tend to, and perfectly consist with their chief good?
Will any tender Mother put her dearly beloved Child upon any thing but what
tends to his good? Or if she should, would it not argue either want of Wisdom,
or of Love in her, or both? A want of neither of which are in God.

And then Thirdly, If men are, or have cause to be confident that God will
advise or enjoin them nothing, but what has a true and real tendency to their
salvation, which is his design toward them, and that which he seeks after, Is
it not then most reasonable and the greatest wisdom in men to commit themselves
to the guidance of God, and to acquiess in his wisdom and love? As being
confident that that being truly followed, will lead and bring them to that
salvation which God has offered, and they desire and seek after.

It has been in this Faith and confidence, That the Saints from time to time
have sincerely followed God which way soever he has led them, and not been
turned out of his way by the greatest dangers or sufferings that could befall
them from the hand of men; as judging his Will and Counsel made known to them
as to be observed, to be the direct path, leading to the promised and expected
salvation of God.

Hebrews in his 11 chap. produces, as giving a lively testimony to this Truth;
let us for brevity sake, hear only some of them. And we will begin with Enoch,
verse. 5. By Faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death, and was
not found, because God had translated him; for before his translation he had
this testimony that he pleased God. First we see his translation is ascribed
unto his Faith: though we cannot say that he by his Faith did believe he should
after that manner be translated, yet doubtless by his Faith he did expect to
receive from God first or last, that happy state into which he was so timely
and extraordinarily translated. Secondly we see likewise how and after what
manner this his dependence upon God for happiness did dispose him in point of
behavior toward God, it put him upon pleasing God; that is, of endeavoring
always to do such things as were well pleasing to the Lord; which in Genesis
5.24. is called his walking with God. And what was that? but his being
constantly found in that way and walk which God appointed and approved, and in
which he met with God, and God with him. His Faith dictated that to him, that
the road to that expected happiness which was in his eye, was that walk which
God had appointed him; and that the way to receive it from God, was carefully
to please him in all things, as he did faithfully endeavor to do, for three
hundred or more years together.

Noah's Faith wrought the same way, Heb. 11.7. By Faith Noah being warned of
God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Ark to the saving
of his house. As by his Faith he looked for safety and deliverance from God, so
by his Faith he was taught to observe and do what God appointed and commanded
him in order thereunto: His Faith eyed as well the means as the end, and made
him as careful to be faithful in the one, as confidently to expect the other;
which is indeed the true nature and kindly working of the Faith of all Gods
Elect.

Let us here again take another sight of the Faith of our Father Abraham,
meeting with him in this road. It is certain that his Faith had a perfect
regard both to end and means; he was confident of receiving the blessed
Inheritance promised, but he was also confident that the way to come to it, was
to follow Gods guidance and direction, and that God was as much to be believed
in his showing the way, and therein his counsels and commands to be embraced,
as he was in promising the end. Heb. 11.14, 15, 16. There you have the end of
the Faith of Abraham and Sara, the mark at which they aimed: For they that say
such things, declare plainly that they seek a Country; And what Country? Not
such as they left; For truly if they had been mindful of that Country from
whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned: but now
they desire a better Country, that is an heavenly; wherefore God is not ashamed
to be called their God; for he has prepared for them a City. God had given
them hopes of a heavenly Country, they believed him in his discovery and
promise of this; and therefore when God calls them out of their own native
Country to set forward for this, they presently obey, They went out not knowing
whither they went, (Heb. 11.8.) but were resolved under the hope of the
heavenly Country to follow the conduct of God, and to deliver themselves up to
his counsels and commands, and to follow these whithersoever they would lead
them, as being fully persuaded that these would at last bring them to that
heavenly Country which they sought. Just as the wise men who following the
guidance of the star, were by it brought to the house where the young Child
Jesus was, whom they sought.

Moses running the same race, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. By Faith Moses when he was
come to years, refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter: choosing
rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures
of Sin for a season: esteeming the reproach of Christ greater Riches than the
Treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward.
First, That which his Faith had in its eye as the mark at which he aimed, was
the recompense of the reward, the great prize for which all the Saints run: he
believed there was such a thing to be had from God. Secondly, The same Faith by
which he depended upon God for this blessedness, enabled him to wait upon God
in his own way to be led to it. And therefore rather then he would by sin
displease him from whom he expected the recompense of reward, he at once turns
his back upon the honors, pleasures, and treasures of Egypt. And seeing he
could not join himself unto the People of God, and with them to Worship the
Lord, but that in embracing them he must embrace reproach and affliction with
them; therefore rather than he would lose the advantage of the one in relation
to his expected happiness, he chooses and espouseth the inconvenience of the
other. He by his Faith, puts into the one balance the Recompense of reward as
the end, and his Communion with the People of God in his Worship and Service as
the way and means, and together with these the Reproaches for Christ and the
Affliction of the People of God: And into the other balance the Honors,
Pleasures, and Treasures of Egypt, but with them that Sin which the retaining
of these would draw along with it, and which would cut him short of the
Recompense of reward: and comparing his present enjoyments with his future
loss, and his present sufferings with his future gain, he comes to this issue,
to prefer afflictions and reproaches as attending the right way to the
Recompense of reward, before the treasures, pleasures, and honors of Egypt,
when attended with that sin which would deprive him of it. Behold here a lively
Instance of Faiths overcoming the World! His Faith carries him out of the midst
of all the glory of the Court of Egypt, and from thence into the midst of the
scorn, dirision, oppression, and persecution of the poor People of God; And
why? But because this was the ready road to the Recompense of reward.

That which is noted Heb. 11.33. touching the power of Faith, as that by it
some have stopped the mouths of Lions, respects Daniel the Prophet, who was
taken up out of the Lions Den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him,
because he believed in his God, Dan. 6.23. That which I would note concerning
him as to my present purpose, is first this; That his Faith fixed him upon God,
to depend upon him for whatever was good in his eyes. Secondly, That in order
to his receiving his expectation from God, his Faith kept him tite and close to
God in the way of his Worship and Service, so that he would not be turned out
of this a hairs breadth for all the dread of the Lions Den; but though he knew
the snar that was laid for him, that in case he prayed to his God as formerly,
he must be offered up in Sacrifice to the devouring Lions, yet for all that the
Text says, That he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and Prayed, and
gave thanks before his God, as he did afore-time, Dan. 6.10. As he depended
upon God and not on Darius the King for his happiness, so he was resolved he
would faithfully cleave to the Lord and please him, whoever was displeased, or
whatever it cost him. If his way, his direct way to his future happiness, lie
through the Lions Den, he does not seek to go about; if the pathway of Gods
service leads thither, then thither his Faith carries him. His Faith we see
brought him into the Lions Den, but it did not leave him there; as it brought
him in, so it brought him out too: He was taken up out of the Den, and no
manner of hurt was found upon him, because he believed in his God.

The like we see of them whose Faith quenched the violence of fire, Heb. 11.33.
As their Faith quenched the violence of fire when they were in it, so it was
their Faith too that brought them into it: But how? viz. By engaging them fast
to God, his Worship, and Way, keeping them in an hour of temptation from being
shaken in their loyalty and fidelity to God, for all the formidable pomp of
Nebuchadnezzar, and the horror of his hot fiery Furnace, Dan. 3.13. -- 28.
They trusted in God for Salvation, but would have no other, but what the holy
Commandment of God faithfully stuck to, would bring them to. The Word of the
Lord will try men as it did them, if they take hold of it by Faith and will not
let it go: it will sometimes draw them into the fire, and into the water; but
if they still hold fast by it, it will at last bring them out into a wealthy
place, Psalm. 66.10, 11, 12. But you see the Saints confidence of its being a
certain and most infallible guide to conduct them to their desired and expected
felicity, has still caused them to trust themselves with it, and to follow it
through thick and thin, foul way as well as fair.

David, the man after Gods own heart, and one of those Worthies mentioned Heb.
11.32. was notable this way also, Psalm. 62.5. My Soul wait thou only upon God,
for my expectation is from him. Where note first, That his expectation, to wit,
of Salvation (as in the next verse; he only is my Salvation) it was from God,
and from God only. Secondly, This his dependence upon God for Salvation as
knowing it was to be had from him only and from none else, drew him to wait
only upon God in order to his receiving of it. And what is that? but his
attending upon God always to do his Will, as a Servant that waits upon his
Master, as ready always to be at his beck. As the eyes of Servants look unto
the hand of their Masters, and as the eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her
Mistress; so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, Psalm. 123.2. Just as it is
between great men that are able to prefer others, and those that expect to be
preferred by them; is it not common for such to be cast into the very mould of
the will and pleasure of such from whom they expect advancement? Are they not
glad of any opportunity of gratifying and pleasing them? Every man (says
Solomon) is a friend to him that gives gifts, Prove. 19.6. And thereupon it is
that we use to say they are their creatures. And most certain it is, that the
Saints expectation of being preferred by God to endless dignity and glory,
works alike deportment in them toward God, as we see here in David with the
rest beforementioned. If he expects only from God, he resolves to wait only
upon God: Since God only can do for him that which he desires more than all
things, his care is to be sure to please him whoever he displeases. Whatever
temptations he met with to the contrary, whatever his constant waiting upon God
cost him, yet this expectation of his from God held him close to God; as well
it might. And therefore we have him often expressing himself thus: They had
almost consumed me upon earth; but I forsook not thy Precepts, Psalm. 119.87. My
Soul is continually in my hand; yet do I not forget thy Law, verse. 109. Many
are my persecutors and mine enemies; yet do I not decline from thy testimonies,
verse. 157. Princes have persecuted me without a cause; but my heart stands in
awe of thy word, verse. 161. Why did David stick so close to Gods Word, whenas
we see his so doing procured him so many enemies, and exposed him to such
dangers from men? Surely because his expectation was only from God, and
therefore he judged it most reasonable to forsake all to wait on him: his heart
stood more in awe of his Word, than of the frowns and malicious practices of
the greatest of men.

Psalm. 119.57. Thou art my portion, O Lord, I have said that I would keep thy
words. When he said Thou art my portion O Lord, it was the voice and language
of his Faith, for without that he could claim no such interest in God. But mark
this; that the same Faith which enabled him to say unto God Thou art my
portion, enabled him also to say unto him, I will keep thy words: when once he
comes to depend upon God as his portion, and to expect the whole of his
felicity from him, he presently comes to this resolution, That he will be ruled
by his advice, and ordered in all things by his words. We have the same
spiritual breath in Psalm. 119.166. Lord, I have hoped for thy Salvation, and
done thy Commandments. All men in a manner hope for Salvation, but few do the
Commands; and that is the reason why so many shall be disappointed of their
hope: but the hope and confidence of the right kind, still puts them in whom it
is upon doing the Commandments; reason and ingenuity requiring, That such
should fulfill the Lords Will, who expect to have their will and desire
fulfilled by him in granting them Salvation. Besides the order and relation
which God has established between Salvation as the end, and the walk in his
Commandments as the way, lays a regular necessity upon every man's Faith, to
believe it to be every whit as necessary for a man to be as careful to keep the
right way, as to be confident of coming to the desired end; and so was the
Psalmist we see, whose hope of Salvation and doing the Commandments went hand
in hand. Therefore wait thou on God and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee,
says he, Psalm. 37.34. Here he is teaching other men the trade which he himself
had learned, viz. Waiting on God for exaltation, but still in keeping his way.

John affirm to be the tract of the Saints hope and confidence under the New. 1 John 3.3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself even as
he is pure. Mark it; he says every man, none excepted that has hope of being
like Christ in glory, endeavors for the present to be like him in purity;
which is but the same thing with walking in the path of Gods Commands, the way
that is called holy, or the depending wholly upon his counsel, will, and
pleasure, Psalm. 119.1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the
Law of the Lord. 1 Pet. 1.22. Seeing ye have purified your Souls in obeying the
truth, etc. And the same Word of grace that ministers any ground of hope to men
of being like Christ in glory, does declare that they are the pure in heart
that shall see God, and that no unclean thing shall enter into that glorious
state, and that without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Mat. 5.8. Rev.
21.27. Heb. 12.14. And therefore all they that are not Reprobate, or of an
injudicious mind concerning the Faith, have respect to both parts of Gods
declared Will, and do believe it is as necessary for them to be holy, as
possible for them to be happy, and accordingly do depend upon the Lord for the
one, in a faithful prosecution of the other.

And accordingly does the Apostle Peter from the Lord, advise and persuade the
Christians to exercise their Faith or dependence upon God in the way of
well-doing, as that which would secure them indeed; 1 Pet. 4.19. Wherefore let
them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their
Souls to him in well-doing, as into the hands of a faithful Creator. To commit
the keeping of the Soul to God, is certainly an act of Faith, respecting both
the ability, grace, and fidelity of God, to secure, save, and make happy the
soul so committed to him. 2 Timothy 1.2. For I know whom I have believed, (or
trusted) and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which is committed to
him against that day. The believing or trusting God, and the committing to him
the keeping of the soul against that day, is the same thing: in which act the
power of God, and his trustiness, is mainly eyed. But then that which I would
have especially noted also, is, That the sphere in which this trust and
confidence is to be acted, is well-doing: let them commit the keeping of their
souls to him in well-doing; which is the proper element of Faith, out of which
it is not able to live, having no Promise to feed and support it.

And Paul expresses the natural and common working of his, and others of the
Saints Faith, thus: For therefore we both labor and suffer reproach, because
we trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, especially of those
that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. Their trust and dependence upon God as Savior, as
offering Salvation to the Believers, caused them both to labor and suffer
reproach, i. e. diligently to labor in the Lords Work, and carefully to please
him in all things, though their doing so exposed them to reproaches and
persecutions: their painful laboring to approve themselves in faithfulness to
God always and in all things, did grow out of their confidence in God, and in
his Salvation. The same which this Apostle Paul expresses concerning himself
singly in another place, Acts 24.15, 16. And have hope toward God, etc. and
herein do I exercise my self to have always a Conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward men. His hope toward God touching the Resurrection and
the glory that shall follow, put him upon this continual labor and exercise,
of having always a Conscience void of offense toward God and men; that is of
carrying the matter so, and that always, in his behavior and discharge of his
duty to God and to men, as that he might not give his Conscience the least
occasion of being offended. And he says it was his exercise so to do, that is,
the labor and business of his life: the same to which he exhorts his beloved
Timothy, saying, And exercise thy self rather unto godliness, 1 Timothy 4.7. A
word as it is rendered by some, properly importing to strip himself: A Metaphor
taken from Harvest-labourers and other workmen, who to the end they may effect
their business upon the best terms when they are very intent upon it, are wont
to cast off their upper garments that they might have no encumbrance upon them.
This you see was the way of the working of the hope and confidence which
blessed Paul had in God.

And the same Paul shows that the twelve Tribes (as many of them as truly
feared the Lord) expected the Promise of future happiness upon no other terms
than upon their instant serving of God day and night, Acts 26.7. Unto which
Promise our twelve Tribes instantly serving God day and night, hope to come. As
they believed the promise of future bliss, so they believed it was not to be
had but upon a faithful serving of God; and therefore the same Faith which by
one act took hold of the Promise, by another act took hold of the Precepts, and
in order to their coming into their hope, they steered the course, and
traveled the way that directly led thither; and that is an instant serving God
day and night. To name no more Instances of this kind but only that Heb. 10.34,
35. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of
your Goods, knowing in your selves that you have in Heaven a better and an
enduring substance: Cast not away therefore your confidence which has great
recompense of reward. Mark; Their confident persuasion of that better and
enduring substance in heaven as promised by God, and as expected and desired by
them, caused them closly and entirely to adhere to the Doctrine and holy ways
of the Lord, though their doing so cost them the loss and spoiling of their
Goods: they were confident the Doctrine of Christ stuck to, would bring them to
the enjoyment of that better and enduring substance; and therefore they
followed that, though it led them out of the midst of what they possessed and
enjoyed for the present.

And thus now we have seen the common nature and working of the Faith of Gods
Elect from age to age, both under the former and latter dispensation of things
appertaining to eternal life; by which a just ground is ministered of suspecting
their Faith to be none of the Faith of Gods Elect, that does not carry them the
same way in which the Elect have been all traveling toward that heavenly
Country which is the hope of all the Saints.

This Doctrine touching the Saints dependence upon Gods Counsels and Commands
for a guide, as the proper effect and inseparable companion of their dependence
upon his grace and power for the upshot of their desires, might be further
exemplified by its contrary; viz. That men's turning aside from Gods Counsels
and Ways, has been wont to proceed from a secret jealousy and mistrust
either of Gods power or love; and that a mistrust of Gods way in which he has
enjoined men to walk, as if that were not the very best, but another of a man's
own choice to be preferred before it; clearly argues a mistrustful opinion of
God, as if either there were not so much love in him to men, as is in men to
themselves; or so much wisdom, care, and providence in God to direct them the
best way to happiness, as is found in their own heads; or so much constancy or
power as to carry through his design of Grace toward them in his own propounded
method and way.

All the turnings aside, runings out, lustings, temptings of God, murmurings,
complainings; and rebellions of the people of Israel in the Wilderness, are
charged upon their unbelief, Deuteronomy. 1.32. Yet in this thing ye did not believe
the Lord your God. Though God had gone before them; though he had born them as
a man bears his Son; yet when they came but a little into straits, they had so
ill an opinion of God, were so void of confidence of his care and love, as that
they rather inclined to think that because he hated them and bore them
ill will, that therefore he had brought them out of Egypt to deliver them into
worse hands: and that which followed hereupon, was, their refusing to venture
themselves under Gods conduct: they refused to go up when God commanded them so
to do, verse. 26, 27, 31. The spring of all is this: Yet in this thing ye did
not believe the Lord your God. Again, Deuteronomy. 9.23. Likewise when the Lord sent
you from Kadesh-Barnea, saying, Go up and possess the Land which I have given
you; then you rebelled against the Commandment of the Lord your God, and ye
believed him not, nor hearkened to his voice. Either they did not believe that
God could, or else that he would carry them safe into the promised land: they
distrusted his power, or love, or both, and therefore durst not trust
themselves in his hands; which appeared in this, That they hearkened not unto
his voice to do what he bid them do in order thereunto. See the like Psalm.
78.17, 19, 22. In short; the whole of the mis-carriage of that people in the
Wilderness, for which God destroyed them, though it consisted in a great
variety of faults, is summed up in their unbelief, Jude 5. I will therefore put
you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the Lord having saved
the people out of the Land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them that believed
not. All their other sins it seems were in the bowels of this, and did indeed
proceed from it as we heard before. See 2 King. 17.14. Heb. 3.17, 18. Numb.
14.11.

Which things are not written for their sakes only, but recorded for admonition
to the Churches now under the new Testament, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Moreover
brethren, I would not have you ignorant, how that all our Fathers were under
the cloud, and all passed through the Sea; and were all Baptized unto Moses, in
the cloud, and in the Sea; and did all eat the same spiritual meat; and did all
drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that
followed them, and that Rock was Christ. But with many of them God was not well
pleased; for they were over-thrown in the Wilderness. Why would not the Apostle
have the Church of Corinth ignorant of those things? Surely he well knew, That
there is too much aptness in very many Professors of Christianity to bear so
much upon the external Privileges of the Gospel, as because of them to think
themselves in good condition, though otherwise indulging themselves in some
un-saint-like behavior or other in their lives. And therefore to the end none
might think that because they have been Baptized, are Members of the Church,
have some knowledge of Christ, have been partakers of the Supper of the Lord,
that therefore they must needs be the favorites of the Lord and the people of
his love; he gives them to understand that the Israelites who were Gods people
by Profession, enjoyed that Privilege than to which our Baptism answers now,
did eat and drink of that which was then a Figure of Christ, as we now do in
the Supper; that yet for all this God was not well pleased with many of them,
but that because of their lusting after evil things, their communion with
Idolaters, their defiling themselves with Fornication, their tempting of
Christ, their murmuring and other like provocations, they were so over-thrown
in the Wilderness, as that of six hundred thousand, and three thousand and five
hundred and fifty of the men of War that came out of Egypt, there were but only
two that entered the Land of Canaan, Numb. 1.46. and 32.11, 12. And that which
is much to be heeded is this, That all these things happened unto them for
ensamples (or Types; as in the margin) and are written for our admonition upon
whom the ends of the world are come. Wherefore let him that thinks he
stands, take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10.11, 12. And let us therefore fear,
lest a Promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem
to come short of it: for unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them;
but the Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them
that heard it, Heb. 4.1, 2. Wakening items, and loud warnings to carnal
Gospellers and formal Churchmen: the Lord grant that such may be rouzed by
them out of their drouse of death.

CHAP. X. Showing, That the power of Gods grace, the strength and fullness that
is in Christ, the presence, power, and influence of the Spirit, being that by
which the new and spiritual Life in a Christian is maintained, it is the
Property of true Faith to depend upon the Lord for these. And herein is an
excellent difference to be seen between the Living and the dead Faith. The want
of this, the cause of manies Apostacy. A great defect in this, the cause of
manies dryness and barrenness in grace.
without the preventing or concurrent grace of God, or both, Joh. 15.5. 2 Cor.
3.5. 1 Cor. 15.10. and 12.3. Gal. 2.20. But on the other hand they ascribe both
will and deed, purpose and performance unto Gods working them in men of his own
good pleasure, Phil. 2.13 2 Cor. 8.16. 1 Chronicles. 29.14. 2 Chronicles. 30.12. Ezra
1.1, 5. and 7.27. Nehem. 2.12. and 7.5. Hag. 1.14. Prove. 16.1. Heb. 13.21.

It would be beside the business I have in hand, here to enquire how far the
Lord has prevented all men with that which is called common grace, and in what
capacity they are thereby put of receiving special grace: but that which
concerns what I have in hand, is to show, That as no man has power of himself
to walk in that way which he is convinced to be the way of life, but that whosoever has it, has it of Gods special gift and working in him; so the way of
Gods communicating this ability unto the Soul, is by Faith exercised on himself
thereabout, and consequently that it is the property of their Faith who have
this power, to be thus exercised. And this I would show in some Particulars.

Col. 2.12. Buried with him in Baptism; wherein also ye are risen with him
through the Faith of the operation of God, who raised him from the dead.
Observe here on the by; that men's burial with Christ in Baptism, pre-supposeth
their being dead with him, or made conformable to his death, by their being
dead unto sin before; even as Christ's burial pre-supposed his death, which went
before. And therefore to bury such by Baptism who are not dead unto sin, (and
death unto sin, pre-supposeth a living in sin before) is in common cases as
incongruous in reference to the right use of Baptism, as it would be to bury
men alive, in reference to the right use of civil burial. But this I note only
by the way, as most worthy their consideration, whom it most concerns to take
light from it touching the right subject and form of the New Testament
Baptism. But that other thing signified by the baptized parties rising out of
the water, is a living a new life unto God, in conformity to Christ's new life
after his resurrection, to which the Christian solemnly engages by his
Baptism. But the power and ability (mark this) thus to live, is through the
Faith of the operation of God who raised Christ from the dead: not through the
operation of God simply, but through the Faith of it. Though a man, were he not
releeved by this Faith, might think it an impossible thing for him having been
so long accustomed to vain company and vain courses, and an enemy to the strict
lives and holy ways of the Saints, that now he should be able to throw off all
those vanities which he esteemed the joy and pleasure of his life, and to
subject himself unto the self-same course which was to him a scorn and dirision
before; yet when he remembers that that which is impossible to men, is possible
with God, and that the same power which raised up Christ from the dead and put
him into possession of immortality, now no more to return to corruption, can
with like ease raise him up from that sinful condition into which he was sunk,
and strengthen him with strength in his soul to live that Gospel-life, that
life of God to which he is called by the Gospel, and now no more to return to
his former corrupt state; and shall thereupon depend upon that grace and power
of his for this very thing, and under an expectation of divine assistance, and
armed with resolution, shall humbly undertake this new life; he shall certainly
meet with power and strength from God to effect and carry through this great
and notable change. Christ Jesus himself who in his death, burial, and
Resurrection is the Christians pattern, is prophetically brought in rejoicing
under the hope and confidence he had in his Fathers power and love, as that he
would not leave him in the grave, under the power of corruption and death. Acts
2.25, 26, 27. For David speaks concerning him; I foresaw the Lord always
before my face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.
Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad: Moreover also, my flesh
shall rest in hope: because thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thine holy One to see corruption. And in this confidence he
undertaking the work which his Father had given him to finish, all came to pass
accordingly: as the new life and deliverence from the old state of corruption
and death, is accordingly effected and accomplished in all those that in
dependence upon the divine power and grace, undertake it. It is the operation
or working of God, that raises up the poor creature from his impotent state of
spiritual death, unto spiritual life; and yet this great effect is attributed
to the Faith of it; And why? But because it then works actually this way, when
the creature once depends upon it for this end.

2 Pet. 1.3. According as his divine power has given us all things pertaining
to life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us to
glory and virtue. The Lord he calls, he invites to glory, but it is by the way
of virtue: and therefore he exhorts them afterward verse. 5. To give all
diligence to add to their Faith Virtue; to their Faith of Salvation by Christ
as the end at which they aimed, the virtue of a godly life, as the direct way
thereto. And the divine power (says he) has given us all things pertaining to
both; both to glory and virtue, both to life and godliness; it has made such
provision, and put things into such a way, as that all things may be and are
had of him by the Saints, that necessarily appertain to both: but mark how;
through the knowledge of him that has called us to glory and virtue. He does
not communicate the spiritual strength and vigor by which the godly life is
maintained, but through the knowledge of himself, the exercise of that
spiritual principle, which the Lord confers for that end. Which is not to be
understood neither only of a naked and bare act of discerning how great and
gracious the Lord is in making so liberal a provision of all things pertaining
to life and godliness, nor of a discerning of the nature of the things
themselves, nor of Gods method and terms of conferring them; but also of a
practical improvement of such light in such a dependence upon, and application
to the Lord for them, as puts a man into a regular capacity of receiving them,
and under the powerful influence of the Promise. And so knowledge is not taken
here as a thing distinct from Faith, but as comprehending it, as the Scripture
elsewhere also sometimes uses it, Joh. 17.3. Isa. 53.11. 1 John 5.20.

John 15. The same to them as the head is to the several members of the body,
from which nourishment and growth, is ministered and conveyed, Ephesians. 4.16. But
yet Faith is the great instrument of this spiritual communication and
conveyance: as the influence of the Sun which draws the sap out of the root
into the branches, or as the Pump between the Well and the Vessel, so is Faith
in deriving that grace and strength by which the spiritual life is maintained,
from Christ the Fountain of it. The poor Soul sees a great prize set before it,
and that a race is to be run to obtain it; the hope of their calling high, but
the duties and engagements of it great and many; and strength little to make
them good: but with all learning that grace and truth are in all their fullness
in Christ, and that of his fullness the Saints have all received, and Grace for
Grace, (Joh. 1.16.) and that the invitation is general for every one that is a
thirst to come; hereupon it runs to Christ for supply of strength, and depends
upon him for it, and so accordingly speeds. And as the bucket of every man's
Faith is larger or lesser by which these waters are drawn out of the Wells of
Salvation; ( Isa. 12.) or these wells more or less frequently visited, so
proportionably does every true Believer receive more or less of that fullness
which is in Christ.

See this property in the Apostle Paul's Faith, Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with
Christ, nevertheless I live: yet not I but Christ lives in me; and the life
which I now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God who loved
me and gave himself for me. Mark; he says that he lived, and yet he says too,
that it was not he that lived, but Christ that lived in him: meaning I suppose,
That his conversation which he had here in the flesh, was so ordered by the
commands of Christ, and so influenced by the grace and power of Christ, that
Christ was more visible in Paul's life, then Paul was himself. But then the
question is, How he came to have such a presence of Christ, and his life so
ordered and influenced by Christ? The account of this you have in the next
words (I conceive:) and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
Faith of the Son of God: not only as being thereunto led motive-wise, from the
consideration of the worthiness of his person, and profitableness of his
service: nor yet only direction-wise, according to the tenor of the Doctrine of
the Gospel, which is the Doctrine of Faith; but also by his Faith as deriving
that power and strength from Christ by depending upon him for it, by which he
was enabled so to live and to make Christ so visible in his life, as that he
could say, Not I, but Christ lives in me: I can do all things through Christ
which strengthens me, said he in another place, Phil. 4.13.

And what shall we understand by Christ's dwelling in the heart by Faith? The
thing for which this Apostle so earnestly prayed in the behalf of the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.17. Christ in the heart where he dwells, he dwells not only
to command and rule by his authority, but also to support, quicken, and
strengthen by his grace, and comfort with his love; to furnish that soul with
what it wants; for where he dwells in this kind, he dwells to bless. But this
presence of his reviving, quickening, strengthening grace in the soul, is
brought thither, abides there by Faith. Faith goes to Christ in the heavens as
having all power in his hands, and tells him (as it were) that though he have
laid the foundation of eternal salvation for the poor soul in his own blood,
yet considering what enemies are to be conquered, and what services to be
performed, the work is never like to be carried through, unless he furnish with
supplies of Grace and strength for that purpose. And then having this
encouragement to strengthen it self in this address, that this supply of Grace
which is desired, does not amount to more than what he has already freely done
for the soul, in laying down his own life for its ransom, before such a favor
was sought at his hands; and that those treasures of spiritual life, strength
and power which are in his hand, are placed there on purpose to supply every
needy Soul that thus seeks them; and that they will never turn to such an
account of glory to him, while kept there, as when delivered out to every soul
that in a true sense of its own want of them and their worth, unfeignedly
desires them: And considering withal, how agreeable it is to the goodness of
Christ's own blessed nature, and the general design of his Mediatorship, and his
faithfulness to that trust which is committed to him by his Father, to carry
forward the begun work of saving the Soul, and to be furnishing forth strength
for the doing of what he gladly would have done, and which he knows cannot be
done without it: I say Faith being supported with such like considerations as
these in its application to Christ for supplies, is confident of obtaining, and
never leaves him, till it brings down the virtue, strength and power of Christ
into the Soul, to supply the wants thereof.

Romans 6.14. Mic. 7.19. 1 These. 5.23, 24. Ezekiel. 36.25, etc. Isa. 57.18. Hos.
14.4. 2 Pet. 1.4. And yet this grace of God is not wont to make any great or
considerable progress in this work, till Faith in men draw this mortifying
power and healing virtue from him. And therefore the purification of the Soul,
and sanctification of the person, is sometimes ascribed unto their Faith, as
well as unto the power of Gods grace, Acts 15.9. and 26.18. And that it is so,
is not only because it is instrumental in the hand of Gods grace to effect it,
but also because it is a powerful means of atracting and drawing the virtue,
power, and grace of God to engage in this work, God so pleasing that it should
so do.

It fares with the Soul in respect of spiritual Diseases, and the cure of them
now Christ is in heaven; as it did with the bodies of some in respect of
natural Diseases and the cure of them, when he was on earth. There was always
power and virtue enough in Christ to heal them, and yet the cure was not
wrought until Faith was set on work to draw out virtue from Christ. The Woman
that had an issue of blood twelve years, though she had used many means, and
spent all upon the Physicians, yet was never cured, no not by Christ himself
neither, until she came to touch his garment, and by her Faith drew virtue from
him, and then the cure was soon wrought. Christ casts her cure upon her Faith,
saying, Daughter, thy Faith has made thee whole, Mark 5.34. Certainly it was
the power of Christ, and the virtue that went out of him, that made her whole,
verse, 30. but in as much as this was not drawn out into act, till her Faith was
active in it; therefore is the cure ascribed unto her Faith. And upon like
account is it, that we meet with such passages as these; If thou beleevest, all
things are possible, Mark 9.23. According to your Faith, be it unto you, Matthew.
9.29.

What is the reason may we think, why so few of those vast multitudes in the
world that languish under their spiritual Diseases, are cured, but that for the
generality of them they are like to die eternally of them? Certainly it is not
because there is not virtue enough in Christ to heal them all; but the reason
is, because there is so few that touch him by Faith to draw virtue out of him
for their cure. Nay, they are afraid of being healed, like some Beggars who
keep their Sores open and unhealed on purpose, because they make an advantage
of them, as they do of theirs, such as it is, Matthew. 13.15. They have closed
their eyes, etc. lest they should be converted and I should heal them.

And what is the reason why many that are in part healed, yet are not more
thoroughly cured? But that there are too many signs and symptoms of their old
Disease still hanging upon them, and many grudgings of their old fits, so that
the Case remains in doubt with them, whether they shall live or die? Surely it
is because though they have some kind of Faith, yet they do not exercise it
about this thing, or but very little. It may be they may have more communion
with the riches of Gods grace, the value and efficacy of Christ's blood in
relation to pardon, and Gods unwillingness to destroy, and readiness to forgive
poor sinners; but have not acquainted themselves much with that heavenly art
and method of Faith, by which the Saints depend upon the Lord for his
communication of virtue and strength for the healing of their Souls of
spiritual distempers, and restoring them to a spiritual health and soundness.
There Is no doubt but that the Lord Jesus is as much affected with the diseases
that annoy men's Souls, as ever he was with those that afflicted the body, and
delights every whit as much in the cure of the spiritual, as ever he did in
healing the corporal, in as much as his own glory and his creatures good, are
more concerned in these, than in the other. But that which obstructed the cure
of men's bodies (and Souls too) by Christ when he was on earth, obstructs the
perfect cure of men's souls by him now he is in heaven, and that is the want of
Faith in them that should be cured: Christ could do no mighty works in this
kind in some places where he came (save on a very few that did believe) because
of their Unbelief, Matthew. 13.58. compared with Mar. 6.5, 6. As it was in the
days of Eliseus (as Christ observes) when there were many Lepers in Israel
needed cleansing as well as Naaman the Syrian, and yet none were cleansed by
the Prophet but Naaman, for that none but he had Faith to seek it and qualify
them for it: so was it with many in Israel in the days of Christ, who though
they had as much need of healing as any that were healed, yet went without it,
for that they had not that Faith in the Lord by which those that were healed
drew virtue from him for their cure, Luke 4.23. with 27. and 6.19. And so it is
now; the true reason why the Leprosy of the Soul is not cured in all as well
as in some, is because they do not by Faith draw virtue from Christ in whom it
is, for their cure. It is not because Christ is not as sensible of the
condition of men now he is in heaven, as he was while he was on earth; For we
have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, Heb. 4.15. Nor is it because he is not as able now both to
compassionate and succor them as ever. For in that he himself has suffered,
being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18. But as I
say the reason of men's languishing under their spiritual diseases, either
without any cure at all, or that which is very imperfect, is either because
they do not come to Christ at all for cure, or but very faintly, either not
knowing where it is to be had, or not truly and thoroughly desiring it of him, or
not having confidence enough of obtaining it from him. Ye will not come to me
(said he) that ye might have life, Joh. 5.40. and therefore they go without it.
And so if men will not come to Christ for health and cure, no marvel if they
remain unhealthful in their souls.

The Lord makes Promise, it is true, of taking away the old heart and of giving
a new (which is but the removing of the disease of the soul, and giving it
health and soundness) but yet so, as that he will be sought unto by men to do
it for them, Ezekiel. 36.26. with 37. So that if they do not make their serious
and hearty applications to him for it upon the terms he has appointed, they
may well go without it, for all his willingness to give it. It is most sure,
that Christians are more or less healthful in soul and spiritual condition, as
they do more or less depend upon the Lord for his saving health, for the power
and presence of his grace and Spirit to renew them unto God. If men had but
Faith enough, they might have what they would in this kind from the Lord. When
there was but once ground for Christ to say, O Woman, great is thy Faith; he
presently says also, Be it unto thee even as thou will, Matthew. 15 28. And
therefore such as have but little Faith, had need to make the best use and
improvement of that little, by depending upon the Lord for the perfecting of
that which is lacking in their Faith, as well as any other grace. Men receive
but little of this healing virtue from Christ, but little hatred of sin and
strength to overcome the flesh, but little of the power of love and of an
humble mind, but little of the quick and lively savor of spiritual things,
because they expect but little; if they were larger and stronger in their
expectations from God, they should have more from him; he does not love to
disappoint his servants of this hope especially: Open your mouth wide, and I
will fill it, (says he) Psalm. 81.10. And those that hunger and thirst after
righteousness, shall be filled, Matthew. 5.6. If Righteousness were but desired
and sought at the hands of God, and he depended on for it, as meat and drink is
wont to be desired and sought by those that are ready to famish for want of
food (in which case no other thing but food will satisfy) there would not be
such a spiritual leanness and emptiness found among Christians, as too commonly
there is. No, it is men's indifferency about matters of this mighty moment, that
causes them to fall so short, and to be so scanty in their receptions from God.
The Lord does not care to pour out abundance of inward grace, and health, and
strength upon the soul, until the soul knows the worth of them, feels the want
of them, and desires them more than any thing in the world besides. And
therefore men may ask them, and seek them, and yet go without any great
measures of them while but cold and indifferent in their desires this way; but
when their desires are strong, their confidence strong, and their requests
fervent, and God can (as it were) have no rest for them, but they are still
following of him night and day, and will have no nay; then does the Lord
rejoice over them to Answer them in the joy of their heart, and to cause them
to inherit substance, and to fill their treasures. For he waits to be gracious,
and is always ready, and never unprovided of the greatest measures of grace
and spiritual strength, and is more desirous to give, than the best of men are
to receive, if they would but come up to his terms, which are established by
him in wisdom and counsel: but surely, when he has first given men Faith, he
does not use to bestow upon them any great addition of spiritual ability, but
upon the improvement and exercise of that Faith in a way of dependence upon
himself for it: nor does he give much in this kind to those that are but of
little Faith; but increases their spiritual revenue, as they increase in the
measure and degree of their relyance upon him for it.

Ephesians. 3.16.) and by whose Workmanship they are formed, fashioned, and fitted
for that glory which is prepared for them: (2 Cor. 5.5.) This great gift is I
say received also by Faith, and consequently it is the property of true Faith
indeed, to be busied about the receiving of it. I shall not so much stand to
make this out by showing you how the Scripture speaks of men's receiving the
Spirit after they believed, as consequential thereunto, Ephesians. 1.13. In whom
also after that ye Believed, ye were Sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise,
Joh. 7.39. This he spoke of the Spirit which they that Believe on him should
receive. Acts 19.2. Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? Though
this also is worthy consideration hereabout. For though it is true, That Faith
it self in it is first act, is raised by the holy Spirit in the Soul (1 Cor.
12.9. Gal. 5.22. Acts 18.27. Ephesians. 2.8.) so as to furnish it with this divine
Principle and Power; for where else should man have it? And so in this respect
the Spirits work upon the Soul, goes before the Spirits being received by that
divine principle which is wrought by it; yet the giving and receiving of the
Spirit to remain and abide as a constant nourisher, supporter, comforter,
guide, leader, or teacher, follows believing. I know not how better to
illustrate this thing, than by this similitude: A man by visits, addresses, and
applications of Love to such or such a Woman, raises in her such Affections
toward him, as by which afterward he is invited and drawn to become her
Husband and constant co-habitant, and to take upon him the care and management
of her household affairs, which he would not have done, had he not been
thereunto encouraged by those Affections which were but the fruit of his own
Applications. Even so the Spirit by his applications and visits, first raises
in the Soul that Faith, by means whereof his company and presence is so valued
and desired, as that thereby he is strongly invited to come and dwell in that
Soul, and to undertake the management of the spiritual affairs thereof, and
upon which he does accordingly.

But that by which I would more expressly and particularly make out, how the
holy Spirit is by Faith invited to come and to make his usual and constant
abode in that Soul that does believe, I shall present to you under these three
Heads:

viz. That act of Faith or Divine light by which a Christian sets a holy and
very high esteem of the Spirits presence, as not knowing how to live the
Christian life, or to do the Gospel-work without it. For when the Soul
enlightened and converted to God, is made to know that there is no inheriting
without overcoming; ( Rev. 21.7. and 2.7, 11, 17.26. and 3.5.12.21.) and that
the reason why any do overcome, is, Because greater is he that is in them, than
he that is in the world; (1 John 4.4.) and is made to know likewise, That men
cannot mortify the deeds of the body but by the power and strength of the
Spirit, and yet mortified they must be, or else they must die; ( Romans 8.13.)
when they shall perceive, That they know not how to Pray as they ought, or to
do other Christian duties as they should, but that it is the Spirit that helps
the Saints infirmities; ( Romans 8.26.) I say, when a Christian upon the
knowledge and sense of the absolute necessity of the Spirits presence and
assistance, is made to value and desire him more than any thing, than all
things in this World; then is the Spirit given, and then does the Spirit
delight to join himself to such a Soul, and to make his constant abode there.
But as for the men of the world on the other hand, because they are under no
such sense, they know him not, nor the necessity and worth of his presence, nor
are under any longings of Soul after him for those and the like spiritual ends
before mentioned; therefore is it that they are in no present capacity of
receiving him.

See both these things set forth in Joh. 14.16, 17. And I will pray the Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever:
even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it sees him
not, neither knows him: but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall
be in you. Why cannot the World receive the Spirit of Truth which Christ
promises? Even because it sees him not, neither knows him: The antecedent
being (as I conceive) here put for the consequent of not seeing and knowing
him; and that is, Their not prizing nor desiring him. For the men of the World,
who contrary to the Saints, walk by Sight and not by Faith; do not value and
esteem such things whose worth and use are not discerned but by Faith, (1 Cor.
2.14.) and such is the gift and presence of the Spirit of God; but such things
are matters of their esteem, as do accommodate the natural senses. And because
they do not thus desire him, out of a sensible knowledge of his worth and
excellency, and their want of him, therefore is it that they cannot receive
him, he being not otherwise given than upon such terms. But why then do the
Saints receive him? So that he dwells with them, and shall be in them. The
Reason is, Because they know him, and so highly prize him, and thoroughly desire
him. For the Particle FOR in this place, (but ye know him, FOR he dwells with
you) has not I conceive the force of a Cause, but of an Effect: not as if the
Reason why they knew him, is because he dwells with them, but the Reason why
he dwells with them, is, because they know, or have known him. The same
Particle being used in this sense, Luke 7.47. And indeed the words are thus
translated by Dr. Hammond; But ye know him, therefore he abides with you, and
shall be among you. And besides all this, the antithesis that lies between the
reasons, why the World cannot and the Saints can and do receive him, evidently
gives this to be the right sencing of these words. For if that be the reason
why the World cannot receive him, viz. because it knows him not, as it is,
then the reason why others do receive him, is that knowledge they have of him,
for the want of which the World cannot receive him.

That (we see then) which is said of Wisdom, Prove. 8.17. is most true of this
holy Spirit, which is the Spirit of Wisdom: I love them that love me, and those
that seek me early, shall find me. Those that so love him out of a deep sense
of their extreme want of him and his incomparable worth to them, as to seek him
early, in the first place, and before all other things, with the first of their
strength and desire, he loves them, and loves to be found of them, and loves to
dwell with them, and to be every good thing to them.

Gal. 3.14. That we might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith.
Through Faith: not only concerning other Promises, but also and especially
touching such as concern the Father and the Sons giving the holy Spirit: who
because he is given and received by virtue of Promises made and embraced, is
therefore styled, The holy Spirit of Promise, Ephesians. 1.13. And Faith eying Gods
knowledge and sense of the Creatures condition in making such a Promise, and in
what need he was of the thing promised, and his love and friendship to him by
engaging himself in such a Promise which he needed not to have done, had not
his good will been great to him, and that therefore his intendment of doing the
thing must needs be very through and real; and eying also his faithfulness in
keeping, and power of performing Promises, hereupon leans, and depends upon the
Lord for this Promise of the Spirit, and so accordingly receives it from him.

inhabitant to the Soul; for so has our Lord assured us, saying, If ye then,
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children: how much more shall
your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? Luke 11.13.



But on the other hand, the living Faith being the heaven-born principle of the
new creature, which is it self born from above, does still dispose and incline
it to look up to God the same fountain of grace for daily supplies, from which
it at first received it is new and spiritual being. As God has placed in Nature
a certain instinct among the Creatures, by which as soon as they are brought
forth, they do with a kind of dependence, seek their nourishment from their
Dams; so has he likewise placed a spiritual instinct in the new Creature,
which enclines and guides it to himself as soon as it is born from above, to
seek its food from God.

from spiritual enemies; they have not had, or have lost the sense of their own
weakness, and what Children they are in the hands of their spiritual enemies if
God should but a little withdraw and leave them; but having received (it may
be) many spiritual gifts, and many favors from God, they have grown confident,
bold, and presuming upon the stock they have already received; and being a
little spiritually intoxicated with drinking too deeply of their own cup, and
fallen too much in love with themselves by viewing their beauty in their own
Glass, have forgotten themselves, and their own weakness, and forgotten God
their strength, and so have come down wonderfully, God taking no pleasure in
them, but leaving them to fall and to be an admonition and warning to those
that yet stand, to take heed lest they also fall.

Psalm. 63.8. My soul follows hard after thee, (And what of that?) thy right
hand upholdeth me: If the Soul follow him for it in good earnest, it shall have
it. They are kept by the power of God (says the Apostle) through Faith unto
Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. Mark it; They are kept by the power of God, and yet
through Faith. Why is Faith joined with the power of God? Alas! it is but a poor
weak feeble thing of it self; but it is happiness is, it lives in the strength
of another, it carries the Soul out of its own shelter, and leads it unto a
Rock that is higher than it; it takes hold of Gods almighty strength, and
interesseth it self and the poor creature in that: and the power of God is well
content that Faith should be busy with it, and as confident of it, and of it is
improvement for such a Souls good, as if it were in it is own possession, and
under it is own disposal. Though it is the power of God by which the Soul is
kept, yet it is the power of God leaned upon through Faith, which is the
leaning and depending grace. The power of God could uphold all, but it is not
it is pleasure so to do, but only those that through Faith hold by it.

And as by how much the more men live out of themselves and depend upon the
Lord, by so much the safer are they, and at the greater distance from falling;
so likewise by how much the more entire and close men's dependence is upon God
for spiritual supplies, for a spiritual frame of mind, for God to write his Law
in the heart, and to maintain a good Savor in the Soul of God and all good
things; for a spiritual liberty and enlargement of Soul in Gods ways, for to
be strengthened with all might by his Spirit in the inner man, and the like; by
so much the more does the Lord give forth of these and like good things, unto
such. The closer they lie, and the more they draw at those spiritual breasts,
the more they receive; the more they thrive. Blessed is the man (said he) that
trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is: for he shall be as a tree
planted by the waters, and that spreads out the roots by the River, and shall
not see when heat comes, but her leaf shall be green, and shall not be careful
in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit. Where we
clearly see, That Faith, trust, dependence on God, puts a man under a like
capacity for the flourishing estate of his Soul in respect of spiritual
loveliness, beauty, and fruitfulness, as a Tree is of the utmost prosperity
such a creature is capable of, by being planted by Waters, and Rivers, in those
dry Countries.

And as the more men thus depend on God for supplies the more they receive, and
the more spiritual they grow; so on the other hand too, the more spiritual and
the more strong in the Lord men grow, the more sensible do they grow of their
own frailty and weakness, and the more emptied of all self-confidence, and
their thoughts running more upon the grace of God and strength of Christ, and
presence of the Spirit, and the necessity of these; prizing these more,
desiring these more, following God more for them, depending on him more to
receive them at his hands. And so proportionably are they the more ready and
the more enlarged, to attribute and ascribe all spiritual in-comes, all
spiritual endowments, all operations of grace, all strength and ability of
acting and doing in the Lords work, unto the Lord from whom all comes, and to
say with him, 1 Chro. 29, 14. But who am I that I should be able to offer so
willingly after this sort: for all things come of thee O Lord, and of thine own
have we given thee.



Which if such a thing be (as is too much cause to fear) then I am persuaded
that this is the true reason why many whose judgments run too much this way,
are less spiritual, are flatter and duller Christians, less versed in the Work
of God upon the heart, whose Religion lies more in matters of a Controversal
and Disputable nature, or in matters of external Form and Order. And while men
are busied and taken up with the skirts and borders of Religion, and in the
mean while neglect their inward and close communion with God, and study of
their own hearts, and their spiritual trade and intercourse with God, it is no
marvel if they be found but huskish, dry, and barren in the power of holiness,
and experimental part of a Christian. For surely the Spirit of God does not
take pleasure in this or that opinion which men hold in Religion, but as it
serves them in bringing them nearer to him, and causing them to prize him, his
grace and presence more, and working in them a greater love of his likeness,
and longing after the power of his grace to conform them to it.

Nor is the other extreme Opinion touching men's being mere Passives in the hand
of Grace, and that Grace always works it is effects in men in an irresistible
way, any better friend (I conceive) to the thriving way of depending upon God
for more grace in a due use of what they have alreay received. For as the
Opinion of men's having more power than they have, or that that power which they
have, is more conducible to the principal end, Salvation, then indeed it is,
obstructs their applications to, and dependence upon God for what is indeed
necessary on this behalf; so does an Opinion of having received no power at
all, freez the Soul, and bind up the faculties of it from using and improving
that power which it has from God, in seeking of more, and consequently
deprives them of receiving more, or at least of so much more, as otherwise they
might have.

Caution, lest while men are striving who shall approve themselves the greatest
friends to the grace of God in point of Opinion, they should in the mean while
fall short of the powerful and saving effects of it in their own hearts. And
since the end of all Doctrines and Ordinances in Religion, and consequently of
every particular Branch, Point, and Opinion concerning them, is to bring men
back again to God, and to restore them to his likeness and similitude, it
concerns every man therefore in his holding and managing any matters of
Controversy hereabout, to be so true to his own and others Souls, as thereby
to drive on the principal end of all, and to steer himself in holding or
letting go Opinions, as they appear consonant or repugnant to that end.

CHAP. XI. Showing how Faith works by Love, both to God and Men.
Gal. 5.6. For in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love. As the Apostle shows that not
circumcision but Faith avails men under the Gospel, so he shows too, what
manner of Faith it is that does so; namely, such as works by love: not every
Faith that is so called, but that Faith which is thus distinguished. So that it
concerns every one as he desires to have something that will avail him in the
sight of God and in the great concernments of his Soul, not only to prove
himself to be in the Faith, but to prove his Faith to be that Faith which will
avail him, by this operation of it here specified. When he says that Faith
works by love, I take it for granted that he means love both to the Lord and
unto men; for they go together as inseparable companions: Every one that loves
him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him, 1 John 5.1. And he
that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has
not seen? 1 John 4.20.

But then the Question will be, How Faith works by Love? And the Answer is, It
does so: First, by working this grace, heavenly qualification, spiritual
affection or principle in the soul; and so in the second place, disposing the
man in whom it is, by means of this principle, unto a deportment and actions
suitable to such an affection. And this I would set out in Two things
especially:

to poor man, is the very element in which Faith lives, the food and
nourishment upon which it continually feeds, the lovely and most beautiful
object which it delights continually to behold; lodges in the bosom of it, and
finds no rest but in this bed of Love. Faith is wonderfully intent on it,
exceeding busy with it, and mavelous curious in its inspections into, and
enquiries about it, 1 John 4.16. We have known and believed the Love that God
has to us. And by means of Faiths free, frequent, familiar, and intimate
converse and delightful communication which it has with this Love of the Lord,
it comes to contract a habitual similitude of it in the soul; by degrees to
change the soul into the same image. Solomon says, He that walks with wise
men, shall be wise, Prove. 13.20. Which thing doubtless proceeds from a great
aptness that is in men, to be transformed into the disposition, temper, and
quality of those persons with whom they much converse, and delight so to do,
especially if superior to themselves, and judging what they see in them worthy
imitation. And so Faith keeping such constant company with the Love of Christ
to the poor soul, and being so much taken with it as it is, and having it self
such an influence upon the soul as it has, does by degrees fetch over the soul
in conformity of disposition to it.

This is sweetly set out by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open
face, beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same image, from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord. The glory of the
Lord he here speaks of, is doubtless amongst other things, the grace or love of
the Lord to men, which is indeed his glory; that by which he has made us
accepted in the beloved, being called the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1.6. and
is that thing which in the Gospel ministration here spoken of, shines forth
with greatest luster and brightness. But mark now: The souls intent and earnest
beholding of this glory of the Lord by the eye of Faith, as it is visible to it
in this glass of the Gospel, works this effect, The soul it self is hereby
changed into the same image, transformed into this likeness of the Lord, step
by step, degree by degree, from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord,
by whose influence Faith does this thing. For so Christ foretold, Joh. 16.14.
He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you.
Like as the flocks which Jacob kept, by their looking upon the streaked rods in
the time of their conception, came to conceive and bring forth Cattle that were
ring-streaked, ( Genesis 30.37, 38, 39.) even so the soul by Faith dwelling in the
serious and pleasant contemplation of the glory of this love of the Lord,
conceives and brings forth affections and actions in the same likeness.

The very reason why any man comes to love God, is the belief, knowledge, and
sense which he has of Gods love to him first, 1 John 4.19. We love him,
because he loved us first. Which is to be understood of Gods love believed and
perceived; for till then it does not work this reciprocal affection in the
Soul. And therefore the same Apostle concludes, that if any man does not love,
he does not know God, as he is a God of love, 1 John 4.8. For if he did, and
had the true sense of it in his Soul, he might sooner draw nigh a great fire
and not be warmed, than feel the warming influences of this wonderful Love
playing hot upon the Soul, and not in some measure be transformed into its
likeness. The Apostle Paul well knowing this, made this Prayer for the Ephesian
Saints, That Christ might dwell in their hearts by Faith, that they being
rooted and grounded in love, might be able to comprehend with all Saints, what
is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of
Christ which passes knowledge, that they might be filled with all the fullness
of God. In which Prayer you may observe; first, his end and scope, the thing he
had in his eye, and that which his Soul exceedingly longed after for them, and
that was, that they might be filled with all the fullness of God. Which I
conceive is not to be understood, at least not only to be understood in a
passive sense of having the Soul filled with the knowledge and sense of all the
fullness of Gods love to it; for this he had prayed for as the means of their
being filled with all this fullness of God: but in an active sense, for their
being so filled with their love back again to Christ, as by which to attain the
highest pitch, and utmost perfection of Christianity (which is wrapped up in our
love to Christ,) to which God in Christ designed to elevate and raise the
Christian. And therefore when we love one another as the Lord has loved us,
according to his command, John 13.34. he is said to dwell in us, and his love
to be perfected in us, 1 Cor. 4.12. viz. by way of imitation and resemblance of
that divine virtue, property, or perfection in God, to wit, his love, which is
so wonderfully remarkable in him, as that he is called Love it self, 1 John
4.8, 16. Now for God to dwell in men, and for them to have his love perfected
in them, what is this less than to be filled with all the fullness of God? But
that which the Apostle prayed for in order to this their being filled with all
the fullness of God, was that Christ dwelling in their hearts by faith, they
might be able to comprehend with all Saints, what the breadth, length, depth,
and height is, and to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge. So that
men's being filled with the fullness of that love to the Lord which his love to
them calls for, and designs to procure, depends (we see) upon their
comprehending by Faith the glory of his love set out in the dimensions of it:
upon their knowing very much of that love of Christ, which in the utmost extent
of it, passes knowledge.

ingrafted word, (James 1.21.) as turning the stock into its own nature. It is
by Faith that all that in the Word is discerned and felt, which renders it
acceptable to, and gives it force and authority in the soul. And therefore the
Word is said to work effectually in those that believe. 1 These. 2.13. And
what is that but to produce its effect, reach its end, and to have its errand
about which it is sent? working that love it self in the soul, which is the
business about which the doctrine of Love is sent. And therefore Love is said
to be the end of the Commandment, out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. Love to proceed from unfeigned
Faith, as the end of the Commandment; that is I conceive, it is aim and scope,
the prize for which it runs: and where there is Faith unfeigned first wrought
and procured by the Word, there the Word by means of this Faith, works
effectually to the raising or producing of that love which is the end or design
of the Commandment.

It Is said of some ( Heb. 4.2.) that the word did not profit them, not being
mixed with Faith in them that heard it. The Word is then said not to profit
men, when it looses it is end and design of good toward them; when it does not
work in them, and procure from them that frame and disposition of Soul, and
habit of behavior, which does answer its nature and scope: as when the
Doctrine of Love is preached to them, and yet no such thing is wrought in them.
But the cause of this disappointment, is the not mixing the Word with Faith. If
men do not verily believe it to be a Word from the Lord, or that it comes from
him upon like or far better terms than hearty counsel from a Friend, as both
able and faithful to advise and direct upon the best terms for good; or if
they think themselves and their own good not much concerned in it, and the
like; no marvel if it profit them not, if it procure not that compliance from
them which should give it an abiding place in the Soul, to work there as seed
does which is wont to bring forth Fruit according to its kind. But where the
Word, the Doctrine of Love for example, is mixed with Faith, with respect to
the authority, power, wisdom, design of good in the author, and the
conducibleness of the word it self to the real and substantial happiness and
felicity of the person himself in whom this Faith is, there it prospers in the
thing for which it is sent.



Has then the sight and sense which Faith has given you of the wonderfulness
of the Fathers love, and of the Sons love in doing, suffering, and designing
such mavelous things for Persons so unworthy of them, and so worthy of what
is directly contrary to them as we are, as may well astonish the rational part
of the whole Creation; I say has the sight and sense of this divine fire of
Love, kindled upon your souls? and caused a heavenly burning of affection to
the Lord. Has the sense which Faith has given you of his love to you,
exceedingly endeared your souls by way of return in love to him. Has your
Faith opened such a passage for Christ's love to come at the Soul, as that you
can say with the Saints of old, The love of Christ constrains us, because we
thus judge, that if one dyed for all, then were all dead: and that he dyed for
all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto
him which dyed for them, and rose again, 1 Cor. 5, 14, 15. Has it such a force
and influence upon you in causing you to devote your selves, your lives to him,
as his love to you had upon him, in causing him to give his life for you, and
himself unto you?

effect of that conjugal relation and affection that is between Husband and
Wife, viz. the ones caring to please her Husband, and the others caring to
please his Wife, 1 Cor. 7.33, 34. And there is no doubt but it is so with all
those that love the Lord indeed, the more they abound in that affection to him,
the more desirous, the more thoughtful, and the more careful are they how to
please the Lord in every thing they do, and in every thing he would have done.
And therefore the Scripture measures men's love to the Lord by their care to do
his commands, which are indeed the things that please him. 1 John 5.3. For this
is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments. And again, John 14.15. If
ye love me, keep my Commandments. And verse 21. He that has my Commandments,
and keeps them, he it is that loves me. And again, verse 23. If a man love
me, he will keep my words. And yet again, verse 24. He that loves me not,
keeps not my sayings, 1 John 2.5. But whosoever keeps his word, in him verily
is the love of God perfected. And therefore when men are not full of thought
and care about what will please, and what will displease the Lord, and desirous
and industrious to come at his mind hereabout, but are untender, and do things
at a venture, either in his Worship, their own calling, or in their converse
with men, not laying it close to the heart to give glory to God in all, it
argues that things are not yet as they should be with them in their love to the
Lord.

Pet. 2.3. If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious,) and is thereby
brought in love with his love, as highly prizing it, and the sense of it, there
the soul will be wonderful fearful of acting or doing any thing that might make
any breach between the Lord and it, that might offend or grieve him, or that
should cause him to turn away in displeasure, or to hide his face, or to
withold the influences of his quickening and comforting grace. And if at any
time through want of care and watchfulness, such a soul has been surprised and
drawn to speak or act, yea though but in the in most parts of the soul, that
which tends to grieve the Spirit, to provoke the Lord, and to work any
estrangement; O what humbling is there! what taking of shame! what begging,
crying, and earnest entreating that God would pass it by that it might not
obstruct the course of their communion with the Lord! And if it has wrought
any distance, and the Lord has hereupon withdrawn himself a little; O how the
poor soul is cast down! how earnest in her pursuit after her Beloved that has
withdrawn himself, and is gone! and how restless till the breach be made up,
and the Lord has smiled again upon the soul by some gracious effects of his
presence there! Such things as these are undoubtedly found in greater or lesser
proportion, where true and entire love to the Lord, has been raised by Faith
in the Soul, Ps. 51.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Cant. 5.2. -- 8.

John 4.18. There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear:
because fear has torment: he that fears is not made perfect in love. It Is
true where love to Christ is not predominant in the Soul, but though a man has
some love to him, yet has more to himself, Relations, and worldly interest,
there when Christ and these come in competition, the fear of the loss of these
will cast love to Christ out of the Soul, Mat. 24.12. Because iniquity (to wit
of persecution) shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold, viz. to Christ
and to his Gospel. But where a man loves Christ more than all other things
which he has loved, or does love in this world, (as he that loves Christ
sincerely and savingly does, Mat. 10.37.) there his love prevails against his
fear, and casts it out of possession. Not that he that loves Christ truly and
sincerely, is not troubled at all with fear of loosing that which is dear to
him in the world, for Christ's sake; for something in that kind is surely
incident to the best of men; (1 Cor. 2.3.) but such a man's love to Christ gets
the mastry of his fears, is stronger to hold him to Christ, though in danger of
loosing all in this world but him, then are his fears of loosing all for his
sake to cause him to desert him. If fear in this kind do arise in the Soul, and
work trouble, and torment there, and fill the heart with divisions of thoughts,
and some degrees of feebleness and fainting for a little time; yet by that time
love to Christ has but mustered up its forces, and called in and strengthened
it self with considerations near at hand, and ready to offer themselves to such
a ones service; fear is driven out of the Soul, and the tumult which fear had
caused there is appeased, the storm laid, and all things reduced unto a
peaceable calm; and then Love begins to triumph and to say, Who shall separate
me from the love of Christ, Romans 8.35. But if a man so fears as that his fears
drive him from his duty, hurry him into acts of disloyalty to his Lord, and put
him upon disgracing Christ and his truth; such a man's love to Christ whatever
otherwise it may be, is not (according to Saint John's phrase) made perfect: He
that fears, is not made perfect in love; his love is not of the perfect and
right kind.

But where love to Christ is prevalent and predominant, there it is strong as
death, ( Cant. 8.6.) which we know is so strong, that all the opposition that
men by their wit and wealth, policy and power, can make against it, will not
turn it out of its way. Of which conquering strength in Love, proof has been
made many and many a time by the faithful Martyrs of Jesus, whose love to him
has held it out against all manner of enticements and allurements on the one
hand, and all the variety of the most horrid and dreadful torments on the other
hand, which the wit and malice of men assisted by the policy and rage of Hell,
could invent, whereby to take them off their entireness of affection to their
Redeemer. Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: if a
man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be
contemned, Cant. 8.7.

Neither does this love to Christ when thus proved, only conquer and barely get
the victory over the world, as it does when it holds its own against all its
attempts; (1 John 5.4.) but it makes a Christian more then conqueror, when his
love shall hereby get more strength and vigor than it had before, as it does
when Christ giving a clearer vision, and more lively taste of his Love at such
a time, than at any other (as usually he does) shall thereby indear himself
further to the Soul, and render himself more precious, and the world less
desirable than ever before. Nay, in all these things (says he) we are more
than conquerors through him that loved us, Romans 8.37. Men by this manifestation
and proof of their love to the Lord (I mean in suffering for him) shoot
themselves further into his love, and consequently draw forth richer
discoveries of it to themselves than formerly; according to Prove. 8.17. I love
them that love me. And John 14.21. He that has my commandments, and keeps
them, he it is that loves me, and he that loves me, shall be loved of my
Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him. Where we see the
proof of a Christians love to the Lord, is answered with a gracious return of
the Lords love back again to him: He that loves me, shall be loved of my
Father, and I will love him. And the Lord is so well pleased herewith, that he
must needs let the poor Soul know how he is taken with his love, and how his
Soul is as it were more knit to him: for he does not only say that he will love
him, but that he will manifest himself to him, viz. in clearer discoveries of
his Love than formerly; which we know too is wont greatly to increase the
Christians love to the Lord. So that sincere love to the Lord, when it is thus
put upon the trial, does not only cast out fear, but does more too, it gathers
and contracts an additional strength and increase.

Which consideration, that Love does not only cast out fear in the time of
fear, but prefers a man both in the Lords love to him, and in his own love to
the Lord, serves not only for a proof and trial of the sincerity of our Faith,
(which yet is one thing which it does, (for it is Faith that gets the victory in
this kind, 1 John 5.4. only it works out this victory by love) but also is an
excellent encouragement for men, not to be afraid and shie of suffering for
Christ, or any truth of his, in which he may be owned. Let it not seem a small
thing in any man's eye, that he has hereby (when it comes) a special
opportunity and advantage ministered unto him, of being enlarged in the Lords
love to him, and in his love to the Lord, and in the evidence of both unto his
own Soul; which is indeed a privilege to them that know the worth of it, of no
mean account. And as you would have the proof and evidence both of your Faith
and Love, and of your Faith by your Love come fairly out, so take heed of all
undue and carnal compliance with worldly-minded men, either in saying or doing
any thing that may bear hard upon the honor and interest of Christ, his
People, Ordinances, or holy ways, out of design to preserve your own
reputation or worldly interest with them, and to defend your selves from their
frowns and contempt, and from the scourge of their tongue: for a compliance in
such things as these where it is found, argues falseness of heart to the Lord
Jesus.

they shall be ever with the Lord. For while men are better pleased with his
absence, and to remain at this distance, it argues little love in them to him.
For it is the nature of Love where it is true and entire, to incline and
dispose a Man or Woman to desire the presence of those they love, and all
neerness of converse and communion, and to have all means of distance to be
removed. And if that spiritual and invisible presence which the Lord vouchsafes
of himself to his Servants in his Ordinances, and in their way of worshipping
and serving him, (which yet comparatively is but a being absent from him, 2
Cor. 5.6.) is to those that love him so exceeding precious and desirable, as
that their sense of the want of this has made their flesh and their heart to
cry out for the living God, and to say, When shall I come and appear before
God? (Psalm 84.2. and 42.2.) then certainly that presence of his in which he
will be seen face to face, in which his face shall be beheld in righteousness,
and his servants satisfied with his likeness: that presence of his when neither
weakness nor temptation shall obstruct, interrupt, or disturb their full and
perfect communion with the Lord; that presence of his which will perfectly
deliver them from all fears of being cast out of his presence, or of suffering
any suspension in the effluxes of his love, is much more desired and longed
for, by those that unfeignedly love the Lord.

This loving and expecting the blessed and glorious appearance of our Lord
Jesus Christ, is noted in Scripture, not only as a sign of men's love to him,
and Faith in him, but as a general character of those that shall be then saved
by him, Heb. 9.28. And unto them that look for him shall he appear the second
time, without sin, unto salvation. Tit. 2.13. 2 Pet. 3.12. Henceforth is there
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love
his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8.

By these and such things as these, you may try the truth or feignedness of
your love to the Lord, and consequently the soundness or unsoundness of your
Faith in him, which when it is true, works more or less, according as it is
stronger or weaker; in those, and like ways of expression of love to the Lord,
which have now been laid before you: and therefore as you love your souls, be
not partial, but strict and through in proving your Faith and spiritual
condition by them.

Ephesians. 1.15. and 6.23. Col. 1.4. 1 These. 1.3. and 3.6. and 5.8. 2 These. 1.3. 1 Timothy 1.14. and 2.15. 2 Timothy 1.13. and 2.22. Tit. 3.15. Philem. 5. 1 John 3.23.
And since they are such inseparable companions as they are represented to us to
be in these and other Scriptures, we may well conclude where the one is, there
the other is, and where the one is missing, there the other is wanting. And
therefore since our love to men is more visible, and a thing nearer at hand
then our Faith, and a proof of a true Faith where it is of an Evangelical kind;
therefore let us now try our Faith by our love to men, and our love to men by
the standard of the Scriptures.

1. I showed you toward the beginning of this Chapter, that Faith beholding as
in a glass the glory of the Lords love to men, changes the soul into the same
image; men by it viewing the promises and proceedings of God toward man, are
made partakers of the divine nature; (2 Pet. 1.4.) contract a similitude of
Gods love upon the Soul.

See then if you can find any such working in your Souls, any such compassions
and longings of soul after men's salvation, as does really and truly (though
infinitely inferiorly) hold some resemblance of those ardent desires and
longings which are in God after the salvation of poor miserable men, which are
to be seen in these and otherlike Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Psalm 81.13. Isa.
48.18. Jer. 44.4. Ezekiel. 18.23, 32. 2 Chronicles. 36.15. Luke 19.41, 42. Mat. 23.37.
2 Pet. 3.9. Hos. 11.8, 9. Or, are your affections and compassions over the
precious souls of men, so stirred within you, as that they put you upon action,
as you have opportunity, to deliver them from going down into the pit? of
rescuing them out of those wicked ways, by admonitions, instructions, and
affectionate persuasions, which unless they be fetched off from by some means or
other, will certainly ruin their poor souls? For after this manner Gods love
and compassion wrought toward sinful men; it put him upon giving his only
beloved Son Christ Jesus to dye for them, and by his death to make and procure
gracious terms of Salvation, and by himself and servants whom he has gifted
for the purpose, to publish those terms of Salvation, and earnestly to
persuade all men to embrace them, he himself seconding these with many visits
of his Spirit, and acts of grace and providence to render these means
successful. And however, every Christian is not an Apostle, nor endued with
that power from on high for the work, as the Apostles were, and therefore it is
not expected nor required of them that they should make it their constant work
and business as they did, to go up and down to warn and persuade men that they
might be saved; yet undoubtedly, to what degree this love to men which the love
of God has begotten in them in its own likeness does dwell in them, to the
same degree does it put them upon applications of a soul-saving tendency to
Family-relations, Church-relations, to Neighbors, Friends, and acquaintance,
yea and strangers too, as ability, convenience of opportunity, and men's
necessity do concur in the case. And the less men are affected with, or the
more careless they are of the spiritual condition of others, the less is their
love and Faith, and the darker their evidence of them. The Scriptures say, that
love covers a multitude of sins, Prove. 10.12. 1 Pet. 4.8. and so it does, as
in other respects; so when such applications proceed from Soul-love, as by
which a man is converted from the error of his way, and so his sins come to be
covered, or not imputed by God, James 5.19, 20.

Knowledge puffs up, but love edifieth. 1 Cor. 8.1. Knowledge where it is
alone by it self without love, makes men lofty and disdainful toward others.
But love edifieth; that is, it disposes the person in whom it is, to use his
knowledge in such a way, as will tend to, or at least consist with the
edification of others, and not their prejudice. It is a fine expression which
we have to this purpose, 1 Cor. 13.4. where he says, that Charity is not rash
(so it is in the margin) is not puffed up. It is not rash: no it is a tender
grace, it makes a man look about him before he does many things, and to
consider where they may light, and whereto they may tend, and what use may be
made of them, and is wonderful fearful of doing any body any harm in the
affairs of their souls. Upon account whereof their own liberty and outward
accommodation, many a time suffers suspension, as it fell out in the holy
Apostle Paul's case, who would take no money of some Churches, but rather labor
with his hands, when he perceived his taking of money (which was otherwise
lawful for him) would not tend to the furtherance of the Gospel in men's souls,
1 Cor. 9.14, 15, 18. 1 These, 2.6, 9. 2 These. 3.8, 9. The like was about eating
and not eating of meats, while the lawfulness and unlawfulness thereof was
under disputation, and is concluded to be against the law of love for men to
use their known liberty in such things, when the use of it shall endanger a
Brothers edification, or probably betray him into any sin. I may not insist at
large on these things, or descend further to particulars, but only give general
hints. See 1 Cor. 8.9, -- 13. and 10.23. -- 33. Romans 14.13. -- 23.

Psalm. 149.4. The Father he loves the Saints, because they love his Son, which
is the delight of his soul, Joh. 16.27. For the Father himself loves you,
because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God. And
without doubt, every one whose Soul cleaves to Christ out of the knowledge and
sense he has of the worth and loveliness of him, and of the great benefit that
comes by him, cannot but take pleasure in all those that are true lovers of
him, and faithful and cordial Friends to him. As it is the property of Saints
to love the Saints, so it is upon Christ's score they do it, because they love
him, and Christ loves them. Mark 9.41. For whosoever shall give you a cup of
water to drink, in my name, because ye belong to Christ, verily I say unto you,
he shall not loose his reward. Plainly implying, that expressions of love from
one Christian to another, where the love is right Christian indeed, proceed
toward them upon the account of that near relation they have to Christ; because
they belong to Christ. When men are loved because they do what they do for
Christ's namesake, or out of Friendship to him, then are they loved with a
right spirit of love indeed, 3 John 6, 7, 8.

It Is common among men where one does truly and entirely love another, there to
love and respect the Children and Friends of such for their sake. And so it is
in these matters of spiritual affection and relation: He that loves him that
begat, loves him also that is begotten of him, (1 John 5.1.) the child for the
Fathers sake, and because of that resemblance of the Father which is found in
the child. And if the love which is wrought by Faith, be delighted with the
Saints, because of their friendship to Christ, then the more any man shows
himself a friend to Christ, in keeping his commands, showing forth his virtues,
pleading his cause, and propagating his truth, the more is he prized and truly
esteemed by such as have this love truly wrought in them. 2 Jo. 1.2. Whom I
love in the truth; and not I only, but also all they that have known the truth,
for the truths sake which dwells in us, Mark It Is the property of all that
have known the truth, to love such as are the friends of Christ's truth, for the
truths sake whose part they take.

A loving not in word and in tongue, but in deed and in truth; by which men may
know themselves to be of the truth, and shall assure their hearts before God. 1
John 3.18, 19. If they want brotherly admonition, reproof, instruction,
exhortation, or comfort for the healthful and flourishing estate of the inner
man, they are ready to minister to them in these, according to their ability.
Which when faithfully done, Christ takes as a real demonstration of love, not
only to them, but also unto himself, as that which contributes toward his
design of saving men, and nourishing and cherishing his Church, and the
supplying of his absence, and the doing of that for him, which he would do
himself if he were present. John 21.15, 16. Love thou me? feed my lambs.
Love thou me? feed my sheep. As if there were no way wherein he could better
express his love to Christ, then by ministering soul-food to his sheep that
follow him. The lips of the righteous feed many, etc. Prove. 10.21.

Sam. 25.27, 41. 2 King. 5.17. And so it is with those that truly love and
honor the Lord Jesus: He indeed is exalted above the contributions of their
worldly substance, but yet is well contented that such of his poor servants as
have need, should partake of it, and will take it every whit as kindly as if it
had been given to himself: ( Mat. 25.40.) hereupon they express their love to
him, by their love to his Servants for his sake, by refreshing their bowels
when hungry and thirsty, and clothing them when bare and naked; dispersing
that among them, which they would have been ready to have offered unto him if
his condition now as sometime, had made him capable of it. Psalm. 16.2, 3. My
goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to
the excellent in whom is all my delight. When he could not reach the Lord with
his goodness, benefit, or bounty, then he applies himself to his Servants,
Friends, and Favorites whom he could reach, and communicates to them.

Men may talk of their love to Christ, and how much they are beholding to him,
and how ready they would be to dye for him if called to it, but if in the mean
while they see the true Friends and Servants of Jesus Christ in need of relief,
and yet shut up the bowels of their compassion against them, it may well be
demanded, How dwells the love of God in them? 1 John 3.17. There Is neither
resemblance of that love which is in God, who when the worlds necessity called
for it, parted with his Son to supply their need; nor yet any true sign or
token of love to God, when those whom he loves so well as he does his Friends,
shall not be regarded, pityed, and supplied, in their need, when power and
opportunity to do it are present. Indeed such a bowel-less, hard-hearted,
close-fisted temper, is that which renders men very unlike to God, very unlike
to Jesus Christ, who though he were rich, yet became poor for our sakes, that
we through his poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. And it is a plain
argument, they never had much to do with the love of God, the love of Christ,
as to come under any strong sense, or powerful influence of it, for if they
had, it would have transformed them into its own likeness. Let them talk what
they will of their trust in God, and Faith in Christ, yet this merciless temper
lays them open to that judgment which shall be without mercy, ( James 2.13.)
and consequently their Faith will be far from interessing them in the pardoning
mercies of God, or saving merits of Jesus Christ.

I cannot now stand to show how much the heart of Christ is in this Christian
work of bounty and beneficence, nor how much of the Christian Religion lies in
it, which if I should undertake, the Scriptures would be found to speak much
this way: only let this be remembered, that as love to one another is the badg
of Christ's Disciples, ( John 13.35.) so their bounty and readiness to give
according to their ability, is the proof of the sincerity of this their love. 2
Cor. 8.8, 24. Where the Apostle encouraging these Corinthians to be bountiful
in ministering to the Saints, says, he did it to prove the sincerity of their
love, verse 8. Wherefore (says he again) show ye to them, and before the
Churches, the proof of your love. Verse 24.

Ephesians. 5.1, 2.) and therefore finding that God is not only loving, kind, and
bountiful to the good and to the holy, but that his tender mercies are over all
his works, and that he is kind to the unthankful, and to the evil; and that he
makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the
just and on the unjust (Psalm 145.9. Luke 6.35. Mat. 5.45.) it inclines and
draws the man in whom this Faith is, in imitation of his Heavenly Father, to
love enemies, to bless them that curse him, to do good to those that hate him;
to feed them when hungry, to give them drink when thirsty, according to the
mind of the Lord in this behalf, Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.20. And because Faith thus
works where it is in truth and power, as being nothing less then what is
expressly commanded of the Lord, (all whose commands Faith makes men very
careful to observe) therefore are the Christians (that they might show forth
their Faith by their works) so frequently provoked and exhorted to do good, to
be merciful, charitable, and compassionate to all, only with this item, that
the choice and chief of their contributions of relief, must be reserved for
such as are of the household of Faith, Gal. 6.10. As we have therefore
opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the
household of Faith, 1 These. 3.12. And the Lord make you to increase and abound
in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you, 1
These. 5.15. See that none render evil for evil unto any man: but ever follow
that which is good, both among your selves, and to all men. 2 Cor. 9.13. Whilst
by the experiment of this ministration they glorify God for your professed
subjection unto the Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto
them, and unto all men.

James 2.18.) then carefully see to it that your bounty and your ability hold
some good proportion. For if a man be niggardly and sparing in his Almsgiving,
and makes a little go a great way, is able to do much, and yet does very
little, he will not be able to discern whether what he does, proceed from any
inward principle of love and good affection, or from-some motive from without,
as viz. because others do so, or to get himself eased of the trouble of being
solicited, (the case of the unjust Judge in doing that which was just, Luke
18.5.) or at the best to allay the clamor of Conscience. The Apostle clearly
supposes that men may give Alms upon such terms, that their very giving shall
rather demonstrate them to be covetous men, than charitable, else what does he
mean when he says, that he took such and such course about the Collection in
the Church of Corinth for other poor Saints, that it might proceed from them as
matter of bounty, and not of covetousness, 2 Cor. 9.5. And that he had herein
an eye upon niggardliness in giving, we are induced to believe by the very
next words, verse 6. But this I say, that he which sows sparingly, shall reap
sparingly, and he which sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. And
therefore when there is so great a disproportion between men's giving, and their
ability to give, both in respect of number and quantity of their gifts, as is
too common among men: their Alms-deeds will never amount unto a proof of the
truth, reality or sincerity of their Christian love, but rather on the
contrary, prove an argument of the want of that grace. For whence proceeds this
straitness of hand if it be traced, but from narrowness and straitness of
heart? and that from want of love; for it is the very nature of love where it
is, to open and dilate the heart, (as the Sun does the pores of the earth)
which till it comes is contracted and shut up.

And this illiberal temper in men, as it argues want of love in them, so it
argues want of Faith too, the mother of love. For whence proceeds that undue
sparing and saving, and lothnesse to part with any thing considerable, but from
a secret distrust of wanting that themselves which others call for from them?
If men could but believe and be thoroughly persuaded that it is the surest way,
not only to provide themselves baggs that wax not old, a treasure in Heaven,
but also to secure themselves and Children too from want and poverty here on
earth, they would as freely part with their money in a way of charity for so
much as were meet for them to give, as now they do in their Trades, in hopes of
defending themselves from want. If such Scriptures were but turned into Faith
which declare the man blessed that considers the poor, and that the Lord
shall deliver him in time of trouble, and preserve him alive, and make him
blessed on earth, Psalm 41.1, 2. that say the liberal man devises liberal
things, and by liberal things he shall stand, Isa. 32.8. The liberal soul shall
be made fat, and he that waters shall be watered himself. Prove. 11.25. He
that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord: and that which he has given,
will he pay him again. Prove. 19.17. He that gives to the poor shall not lack,
Prove. 28.27. Thou shall surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved
when thou give unto him, (viz. the poor) because that for this thing the Lord
thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put thy
hand unto, Deuteronomy. 15.10. And God is able to make all grace abound toward you,
that ye always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good
work, 2 Cor. 9.8. I say, if these and many like Scriptures were but turned into
Faith, they would be counted being lived to in a way of mercy, liberality, and
bounty, a thousand times better security against want, than all men's pinching
and sparing in their deeds of charity, is like to be, Prove. 11.24. There is
that scatters and yet increases; and there is that withholds more than is
meet, but it tends to poverty. It Is certainly men's unbelief that binds their
hearts, and binds their hands from bounteous acts; they must have Gods to go
before them, something to trust to which they see, and therefore they think the
deminishing of their wealth by giving, will be a weakening of the prop upon
which they lean. And therefore these lean, starved Sacrifices, and niggardly
Alms-deeds, proceeding as they do from men's diffidence and distrust, can never
possibly amount unto an evidence of the goodness of their Faith.

It concerns every one therefore as they prize the clear evidence and proof of
the sincerity of their Faith and Love, to proportion their Alms-deeds in some
good measure suitable to their estates, as that without which such evidence and
proof is not to be had. Nor do I say that it is the only thing by which such
assurance is to be had; for the Apostle supposes that men may possibly cut
large morsels out of their estates to supply the poor, and yet be void of true
Christian charity when he says, Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor,
and have not charity, it profits we nothing, 1 Cor. 13.3. But that
proportionate distribution I speak of in conjunction with other effects of
those graces, will reach it, though nothing that I know without this will, it
being an express duty; Him to whom much is given, of him much is required, Luke
12.48. But rather give Alms as you are able, (so it is in the margin) and
behold all things are clean unto you, Luke 11.41. Upon the first day of the
week, let every one of you lay by him in store as God has prospered him, 1
Cor. 16.2. Then the Disciples, every man according to his ability, determined
to send relief unto the Brethren which dwelt in Judea: which also they did,
Acts 11.29.

answering all a man's truly necessary and convenient occasions, according to
the rules of Christian moderation and sobriety, for them still to be every year
making their heap higher, Joining house to house, and laying field to field,
the thing of which the Lord complains, Isai. 5.8. Surely when Christ says, Lay
not up for your selves treasures on earth, where moth and rust does corrupt,
and Thieves break through and steal. (Mat. 6.19.) He would have men to set some
bounds unto themselves in heaping treasure together for the last days, ( James
5.3.) And therefore it may be necessary for one whose Estate is of competent
growth, to dispose in a way of charity so much of his yearly Income as is found
to be the whole surplusage of necessary expenses in a sober way of living,
though it should amount to as much or more than the whole of his expenses do;
when the same thing cannot be thought to be the duty of another, whose
occasions as a Christian may call for some augmentation of his Estate, if
providence vouchsafe opportunity. As for those who when they have more then
enough already, and so much as proves far more frequently a sad occasion of
destruction to their Childrens souls, (as there is cause to fear) and many
times of bodies too, than of any spiritual advantage to them, shall yet make it
their business to their dying-day, to be heaping up more and more, while in the
mean time many Families are in great distress through want, and they
contributing little to their relief; I dread to think what account they will be
able to make unto the Lord, who has directed them to make themselves Friends
in a spiritual sense of their unfaithful Mammon, and charged them to be rich in
good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate; and has declared them
stark Fools that lay up treasures for themselves, and are not rich toward God.
Luke 12.20, 21. and 16.9. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18.

But now since the different circumstances of men's cases, do render any one
rule of proportion as unlike to suit every man in this case, as it is impossible
for the same shoe to fit every man's foot, therefore we must leave this matter
of proportion to every man's Conscience, which faithfully consulted with (it
having it self first faithfully consulted with the Word of God, and the
arguments and motives unto bounty which are there) will be a competent guide
unto a man herein. Only let it be remembered to take aim by, that before the
Law, the principles of Love and Godly devotion, dictated to the Patriarch
Jacob, to give the Tenth of what God gave him, unto God, Genesis 28.22. And under
the Law. 1. Every third years tenth was to be put apart for charitable uses,
Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29. and 26.12, 13. 2. Part of the corners of the fields were
purposely to be left unreaped, Levit. 19.9, 10. and 23.22. And 3. Besides this,
a certain proportion for gleaning was to be left for the poor, both in the
field and Vineyard, Levit. 19.9, 10. 4. The forgotten sheaves in the Field,
Deuteronomy. 24.19. And 5. Besides all this, a special Law for Relieving with that
which was sufficient for his need, any poor Brother that was fallen to decay,
Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8, 9. All which put together, did arise to a considerable
proportion of a man's yearly increase, which was also deeply charged with a
Tenth for the Priests, and with Sacrifices and oblations otherwise. And the law
of Love under the Gospel is not lessened, but rather much improved and
heightened by the great example and obligation of Christ's signal love, which is
propounded as our pattern, John 13.34. 1 John 3.16. And therefore Christ's
precepts for charity, run very high, saying, Sell that ye have, and give Alms,
Luke 12.33. And again, Give to every man that asks of thee, and from him that
would borrow of thee, turn thou not away, Luke 6.30. Mat. 5.42. Yea as the case
may be, our very Lives which are more than Estates, must be laid down for the
Brethren, 1 John 3.16. All which considered, though a just proportion cannot be
set, as a Tenth of the whole proceed of the capital stock, or the like, which
is the rule of proportion which some Christians of a middle rank in the world
do set unto themselves; yet in ordinary, less than a liberal, free, and
frequent distribution of Alms according in proportion to every man's ability,
cannot be understood to be the express will of our Lord, besides what is to be
done extraordinarily, in extraordinary cases.

I cannot stand so much as to touch the variety of motives, and great
encouragements that belong to this duty. But if such as profess themselves to
be Christians indeed, and would be thought to be none of the lowest rank of
them neither, would but convert their superfluous expenses upon back and belly,
and other bravery and vain delights, (wherein too too many of the professors of
this Age do abound, to the great scandal of Religion) into works of charity and
mercy, it would turn to a thousand times better account, both in point of
evidence of the goodness of their Faith and Charity, and in procuring
reverence and respect to their profession in the Consciences of men, and as
being that also which would abound to their account ( Phil. 4.17.) in that
great day of account which is shortly to come, wherein what good soever any man
has done, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.
But while their superfluity and vanity instead of their moderation, ( Phil.
4.5.) is made known unto all men; and their worldly glory instead of the light
of their good works, shines before men, ( Mat. 5.16.) I am sure they make but
bad provision for that spiritual assurance of the soundness of their title to
the promise of Justification by Faith, and Eternal Life, the worth whereof when
they come to dye will be discerned, and the vanity of the other discovered to
the Conscience, and their present folly in sowing so liberally to the flesh,
and so sparingly to the Spirit, will then be lamented and bewailed.

But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive
your Trespasses, (Mat. 6.15. and 18.35.) He does as good as tell all such in
plain words, whose hearts serve them not to forgive Trespasses, that their
Faith whatever otherwise it be, is not of the right kind, neither such as will
avail them to Justification: for where there is no forgiveness from God (as
there is not where there is not forgiving of men) there is no Justification, and
where there is no Justification, there is no justifying Faith. How then will
they be able to evince their Faith to be of the justifying kind who are apt to
render evil for evil, and to bear grudges one against another upon account of
injuries received, and to ease themselves by throwing the burden of others
weaknesses wholly upon them, by spreading and aggravating them and that too
before all due means on their part have been used to cure them. I might, but I
will not enlarge this.

viz. by doing to all men in point of Commerce and Dealing, as they themselves
would be done unto in like case, ( Mat. 7.12.) not using any deceit or fraud,
not taking advantage of others weakness, not cruelly working upon others
necessities; for men would not be so served themselves; but setting the law of
Neighbourly and Brotherly love before them in all their civil transactions and
affairs with others. But I shall not enlarge further upon this Doctrine of Love
as it is an effect of Faith, having already dwelt longer on it, than at first I
intended. Only let it be remembered for a close of this matter, that men's love
to God and men in these and other-like ways of working, holds proportion with
their Faith, so that where they are rich in Faith, they abound in Love, and
where they are poor, and low, and narrow-spirited in acts of Love to God, and
of kindness, mercy, and bounty to men, it is a sure sign their Faith is not
well thriven, 2 These. 1.3. We are bound to thank God always for you, Brethren,
as it is meet, because that your Faith grows exceedingly, and the charity of
every one of you all toward each other abounds. Mark, if you hear of their
Faith growing exceedingly, to be sure you will hear also of their love
abounding also.

And thus I have now dispatched also the handling, not only this property of
Faith, but also this branch of the Doctrine of Justification, which concerns
the nature of that Faith which shall be counted unto men for Righteousness.

CHAP. XII. Showing that Faith is counted for Righteousness, both as it
entitles men to the justifying virtue of Christ's Blood, and as it puts them
under the protection and promise of the Gospel, as it is a fulfilling of it.
And so discovers the opinion of Men's being justified before Believing, and of
being justified by believing only in the Court of Man's Conscience, to be
unsound.
But to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly,
his Faith is counted for righteousness: Or which is the same, is reckoned to
him for righteousness, Romans 4.9. Or imputed to him for righteousness, Gal.
3.6. Romans 4.22, 23, 24. For our Apostle uses this threefold variety of
expression, to set out the same thing. For the better understanding of this
point, I will show you,

1. Negatively how it is not counted for Righteousness; or which is the same,
how it does not justify. It does not justify or is not reckoned for
Righteousness, as Christ, his Death, and Blood is, viz. by way of atonement,
Romans 5.9, 11. for that is the incommunicable property of Christ's blood, Heb.
1.3. which is reckoned to us for Righteousness too in a sense proper to it:
for Christ is said to be made unto us righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. and so he
is, when the attoneing virtue of his Blood, the power and efficacy of his Death
and Resurrection is made over, conveyed, reckoned or imputed to us for our
Justification. But this in a way infinitely superior to the Imputation of Faith
for Righteousness; for Faith it self, and the activity of that and all other
Graces in their Sphere, become acceptable with God as built and bottomed upon
that sure foundation Christ Jesus. And therefore I exceeding much desire, that
the Lord Jesus may have all the glory of your confidence touching the merit of
Remission of your sins; and that your confidence about Justification, have
nothing to do with Faith, but as that thing which God has ordained to entitle
you to the other, and the gracious privileges annexed to it; nor with works
further than they are appointed by God to render your Faith a substantial, and
not deceitful title.

2. But come we then to show in the affirmative, how Faith is counted for
Righteousness: and this I shall according to my understanding, lay out to you
in two things.

Christ gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. and tasted death for every
man, Heb. 2.9. yet all are not thereupon delivered from their sins, and why?
but because they have not that Faith which should give them a right and
propriety in the justifying virtue of his Death. For Christ was not given to
dye for men upon such terms, as that they should reap the benefit of his Blood
in the pardon of their sins; however, they should carry themselves toward him,
well or ill. And therefore the Apostle plainly declares how men by miscarriage
toward Christ, may cut themselves short of the benefit of his death, Gal. 5.2,
4. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing. And again, verse 4. Christ is become of none effect unto you,
whosoever of you are justified by the Law. Which could not be, if Christ were
not given, if Christ did not dye for men conditionally. See 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 Cor.
8.11. Heb. 10.29.

John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son: (but
with this proviso, mark it) that whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life. Though Christ be given for the World, yet men's not
perishing by means of this gift, but enjoying eternal life, is suspended upon
their believing in him. So that it is men's believing, that does enstate them in
the justifying, saving virtue of Christ's death. Another like place is that Romans
3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood.
1. God has set him forth as a public propitiation unto all; there is the
extent of the offer and tender of grace. But then 2. He is set forth as such
through Faith in his blood; there is the limitation of the propitiating virtue
of his blood, viz. to such as have Faith in it.

The Author to the Hebrews says, chap. 13.10. We have an altar whereof they
have no right to eat, that serve the Tabernacle; meaning Christ; of which they
had no right to partake, that did Judaiz it, adhere to the Mosaical way, and is
parallel with Gal. 5.2.4. But that which I note hence, is, that men in order to
their partaking of Christ, must have a right to him. Now what is that which
gives men a right to Christ, his Death, Blood, Resurrection, and Intercession?
is it not this Faith of which I have been speaking so much? surely it is. Hence
the Apostle suspends the believing Hebrews being made partakers of Christ, upon
their holding the beginning of their confidence steadfast unto the end, Heb.
3.14. It was that Faith and confidence which they had, by which they were made
partakers of Christ, when they first believed; and they were to continue their
right by continuing their Faith; for thereto did his Exhortation tend.
Another-like place is that Cel. 1.21, 22, 23. And you who were sometimes
alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled, in the body of his Flesh through death, to present you holy and
unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight: if ye continue in the Faith
grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel. If
their final reconcileation by the death of Christ, so, as to be presented
unreproveable in his sight, depended upon their continuing in the Faith, then
certainly that which first invested them with that privilege in which for the
present they stood, was their believing.

John 4.22. 2 Pet. 3.15. For that now I conceive may be a reason of the phrase,
counted, reckoned, or imputed for righteousness, as it is applied to Faith,
viz. because by it, as it has to do with Christ, a man though he be not
formally righteous with a personal and sin-lesse righteousness, yet becomes
possessed with the same privilege of enjoying Gods favor and love, and the
blessed effects of it, (in respect of Justification) which a personal and
sin-less righteousness in the formality of it in case he had it, would invest
him with. And therefore may well be said to be reckoned for, or put to account
instead of Righteousness, because it does a man the self-same service as that
would do.



For the Gospel declares who and what manner of persons shall have their sins
pardoned for Christ's sake, shall be accepted and approved of God, and are by
him designed to eternal life, viz. Believers: no man by name, but all under
this qualification of effectual Faith: For therein is the righteousness of God
revealed from Faith to Faith, Romans 1.16, 17. And whoever does accordingly
believe, does fulfill the Gospel, and so is righteous in the account thereof.
As any man that lived under the first Covenant (I mean the Mosaical Covenant)
had he but observed and kept the terms of it, ( the man that does those things
shall live by them, Romans 10.5.) he should have been righteous in the eye of
that Law or Covenant, Deuteronomy. 6.25. even so, he that does but observe and keep
the terms or condition of the Gospel or New Covenant, which is, Believe in the
Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved, Acts 16.31. he also is righteous in the eye
of that.

As it is in the common Law of Nations; those that are justified, are justified
by that, and those that are condemned, are condemned by that, if there be
righteousness of proceeding; John 7.51. If men be cast, they are cast by the
Law, and if they are acquitted, they are acquitted by the Law: the Law cannot
justify the guilty, nor condemn the innocent, whatever men may do that have
the handling of it. Just so is it with the Gospel, and those that are under the
administration thereof: all such shall be cast as guilty, or acquitted as
righteous by it. The word that I have spoken (said Christ) the same shall judge
him. Jo. 12.48. The Doctrins of Christ, are his Statute-laws, which whosoever
believes, and sincerely obeyes, shall be justified by their sentence. All the
holy word is on such a man's side: against such (as the Apostle says) there is
no Law, Gal. 5.23. but he has as Demetrius had, a good report, even of the
truth it self, 3 John 12. Mica 2.7. As he has been a true Friend to this, to
believe, love, and obey it in truth and uprightness, (though not without
weakness) so will it be a true Friend to him, to stand by him, to vindicate
and justify him against the accusations of the enemy.

So that mark we then, Faith in the latitude of it, being that very thing which
does answer the very mind and scope of the Gospel, which is the Law of Faith,
(Romans 3.27.) it must needs be counted to them for Righteousness that have it;
because by it they stand right in the eye and account of this law of life. And
indeed it is this heavenly and divine Law in the promisory part of it, which
furnishes Faith with that power which it has to justify. As on the contrary,
the Law is said to be the strength of sin, 1 Cor. 15.56. It arms sin with that
power which it has to condemn the Creature; so is the Gospel the strength of
Faith, that which invests it with a power to justify. The efficacy, justifying
power and virtue of Faith, depends not upon, nor rises out of the excellency or
dignity of its own nature, but it depends upon and proceeds from the will, good
pleasure, ordination or appointment of God digested and put into the Gospel, as
a standing Law and unchangeable decree. As it was not the naturalness of
proportion between the Israelites looking up to the Serpent of Brass, and that
effect of healing that was procured thereby, ( Numb. 21.9.) that brought the
thing to pass; but the production of such an effect by such means, depended
upon the operativeness of Gods will; so in the antitype of this, ( Jo. 3.14.)
men's being healed, justified, by looking up to, and believing in Jesus as lift
up upon the Cross; this is not brought to pass neither merely by the act of
Faith it self as such, but by the efficacy of the divine will which has
ordained it to that end and use. And therefore is it I suppose, that the
Scripture so frequently, casts this great effect of men's being justified, upon
God, as his act, grant and gift, though by or through Faith as subservient to
his will herein; calling it, The righteousness of God which is by Faith: and
saying, That it is one God which shall justify the Circumcision by Faith, and
uncircumcision through Faith. Romans 3.22, 30. Phil. 3.9. And if Christ himself
is said to be unto us Righteousness, because made so of God, 1 Cor. 1.30. and
salvation to be had through his Name, because given for that end, Acts 4.12.
then much more certainly does the justifying office or work of Faith depend
upon the divine will. John 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me, that
every one that sees the Son and believes on him, may have everlasting life.
This might be further argued from Romans 3.25. John 1.12. and 3.16. but I forbear.

vastness of reward, might have rendered the confident expectation of so great a
benefit upon such terms, matter of greater difficulty. But now seeing that the
weight and stresse of this great effect which is produced by or through Faith,
as that without which God will not have it take place, does depend upon the
powerful and operative will of God, which is infinitely full of Grace and
Kindness to the poor Creature, and upon the everlasting and unalterable
Covenant of his Grace and Love, the confidence of Justification by Faith now
becomes much more easy and pleasant, as feeling firmness, rockiness,
substantiality of ground under the feet of it. He that holds an estate worth a
thousand pounds by the year, by Lease or Charter, though he pay but a
Pepper-corn by way of acknowledgment, has as good a Title in Law to that
Estate, as another that holds the like Estate from the same Landlord, though he
pay a thousand pound Rent by the year for it; because the one Lease is the
voluntary act of the Landlord as well as the other. Even so, though Faith
amount but to little in comparison of that absolute perfection of holiness,
love, and obedience that was found in Adam while he stood; yet considering that
the same Lord has now graciously by an unchangeable act of his own will,
settled and entailed Justification and eternal life upon men's unfeigned
believing in his Son Jesus Christ, which once settled ever-living upon Adams
absolute perfect holiness, love, and obedience, it hereupon follows, that
whosoever does in truth unfeignedly believe, has therefore as real, as sure,
and as certain a title to eternal life, as Adam himself had, and would have
kept, in case he had kept his first integrity.

But then that which is the amountment of all this, is, that seeing there is
now a new Law given by God, a new Covenant established, and that the sum and
substance of it is this; that God having sent his Son Jesus Christ into the
world to save sinners, he requires and enjoins men to receive him, and believe
in him, in that capacity in which he is sent: and upon their so doing, promises
Justification and eternal life; as on the contrary, threatens eternal death to
those that do not; hereupon it follows, that those that do thus believe in
Christ, do fulfill the terms of the Gospel; and fulfilling the terms of it,
must needs be righteous in the account of it. For what else is a man's
righteousness, but his conformity to that Law under which he lives, or which is
given him to live by? As transgression of it is sin, (1 John 3.4.) so
conformity to it, is righteousness. And therefore since Faith bears such a
proportion of conformity to the Gospel as it does, when it is sound and
sincere; well may it be counted for Righteousness to them that have it.

Ephesians. 4.32. 1 John 2.12.) thence it may well be, that though Faith be really
and truly a man's righteousness in the Gospels account, yet it is so only in the
way of imputation, reckoning, or account of grace. Which is a thing I would not
have slightly passed over, but diligently and carefully observed, as having
much of the Spirit of the Gospel, and Doctrine of Grace in it. For Faith,
though it be rich indeed, and has glorious things in it, and signifies much in
the reckoning or account of the Gospel, yet it is rich with the riches of
another: Faith it is the borrowing Grace; as the Moon borrows its light from
the Sun, so Faith borrows that by which it does such great things for the Soul,
from another, from Christ. It is true, Faith is a worthy thing, as it gives
glory to God in believing all that he says; as it carries the Soul, and unites
it to him; as it purifies the heart, and works by Love, and the like; but
alas, what would all this do toward the making of atonement for sin, without
which the Creature is undone, and without which Faith cannot justify. And
therefore that which is impossible as to it self in this respect, it has from
another, from Christ, Who is the propitiation for our sins. So then,
righteousness coming upon, or accruing to men upon, or by means of their
believing, and yet proceeding or issuing principally by way of result from that
which is extrinsical to Faith, to wit the blood of Christ, and unspeakable
grace of God, there is good reason, why Faith, though it be a man's
righteousness, or that upon or by means of which he enjoyes the privileges of
a just and righteous man, yet he should have and hold this great and blessed
benefit, by way of imputation, or altogether upon the account of Grace, as
having that transferred to his account in the result of it, which resides in
another, and which indeed has the greatest stroke in his Justification.

needs be false. For if there be no Justification but by the blood of Christ,
and no application of this blood in the justifying virtue of it to persons of
years of discretion, (for of such I speak) but by Faith, which is the thing
ordained by God to interess them in the justifying virtue, and saving benefit
of it; then there can be no actual justification of men till they do believe:
but that there is no Justification by the blood of Christ, nor right to, or
saving application of that Blood without believing, is that which from the
Scriptures has been asserted in the first head of explanation, and might be
abundantly further made out from the Scriptures, if what has been already said
on this behalf, were not sufficient.

And so again; if that be true, that whosoever shall be justified must be
justified (declaratively or sententially) by the Gospel, and acquitted by that;
and that the Gospel acquits no man, but such as perform the terms, and fulfill
the condition of it, upon which its promises of Justification do depend; and
that the Gospel-termes or condition upon which it promises Justification and
eternal life, is Believing; then certainly till men do indeed Believe, the
Gospel does not, will not, cannot acquit and justify any man, but cast and
condemn him. But that no man shall be justified without the acquittance or
discharge which the Gospel gives; and that it gives this acquittance or
discharge to none but such as perform its condition, and fulfill its terms; and
that the said terms or condition, is Believing; are things that lie very fair
and obvious in the Scriptures, and are in part to be seen in the second head of
explanation of the Doctrine of Faiths being counted for Righteousness.

viz. justified in the sight of God; but that then indeed he comes to be that
which till then he was not, viz. a man acquitted and discharged from his sins,
and accepted in the sight of God as one reconciled by the Death of his Son,
which till then who not actually applied for his Justification as one under the
protection of the Gospel, which till then thundered out wrath and judgment
against him, as it does against all, while in the state of unbelief, ( Mark
16.16. John 3.18, 36.) Which threatenings would be really inconsistent with
their safe condition by Justification in the sight of God, if there were such a
thing as Justification in his sight before Believing. For those threatenings are
true, or else they are false; if true, as most certainly they are, then
whosoever dies before he believes, and so before he is justified by Faith, is
damned, and if damned, then not justified in the sight of God.



CHAP. XIII. Containing an Exhortation by way of use, for Men to behold
themselves in this Glass of Justification, and by the help of the precedent
Discourse, to prove the goodness or badness of their title to life. And showing
the ill abode of negligence, and the real advantage, of care and diligence
herein: and what must be done to obtain a good testimony from Conscience as
Judge Delegate under Christ, touching the goodness of men's spiritual condition
in the eye of the Gospel, and in the sight of God.
Cor. 13.5. You prove your own selves whether you be in the Faith or no;
whether you have that Faith in you, which has been discovered to you to be
that only kind of Faith which will be counted to them that have it for
righteousness. As for such as shall be negligent, careless, and slight in a
matter of this moment, it is a shrewd sign that all is not well with them. When
Tradesmen are backward and unwilling to cast up their Books, and to see how
the case stands with them in point of Estate, it is an ill sign that those men
are behind-hand in the World, and that they themselves are under jealousy and
suspicion, that in case they should narrowly look into things, and come to
balance their accounts, they should not find all things well. And so between
hope and fear, presuming the best; they blindly go on till Suits and Arrests
make them thoroughly sensible of their bad condition. And truly when men are
backward and indisposed to cast up their Accounts, and to see how matters stand
with them in this great concernment of their Souls, and to be curious and exact
in it, but go on from year to year, carelessly, presuming the best, it is a
thousand to one but they are spiritually Bankerupts, in a breaking condition,
which when death comes to Arrest them, it may be they shall perceive, unless
carried away in a spiritual Lethargy, which is worst of all. Solomon says, He
that despises his ways shall dye, Prove. 19.16. He that makes light how things
stand with him which yet do exceeding nearly concern him, such as are matters
of eternal life and death; it is next to a demonstration that eternal ruin and
destruction, are not far from that man, unless he recover himself from that
careless posture. Whereas on the contrary, as men that are thriving in the
World, and in good case in point of Estate, take pleasure in casting up their
Estates; So he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be
made manifest, that they are wrought in God, Jo. 3.21.

But however, let things be how they will be, as bad with you as Jealousy it
self can suspect, yet there is reason why you should make the more have to find
out the worst, because as yet there is opportunity of keeping all from going to
ruin, of mending a bad Estate, of coming to understand things that belong to
your peace: Now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation; (2 Cor.
6.2.) the door is not yet shut, the Market Day of the Soul is not yet over.
Christ is yet calling upon such as have thought themselves rich, and abounding
in Goods, and to have need of nothing, and yet upon trial have been found
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; he is yet calling upon them to buy
of him gold tried in the fire, that they may be rich, and white raiment that
they may be clothed, and that the shame of their nakedness may not appear, Rev.
3.18.

Truly I exceedingly fear that that which was the case of this Laodicean
Church, is the condition of vast numbers of Christians by profession in these
days, who think all is very well with them, in that they have some knowledge of
the Scriptures, and a belief of the Gospel touching Christ's dying for sinners,
and being the Savior of Mankind, and because they frequent the places of his
public worship, and in a formal (though liveless, powerless) way perform some
duties: when as they in the mean time are workers of iniquity, in bondage to
their lusts, have no experience of the new birth, or work of Regeneration in
their Souls, (presuming it may be, to the sad deceiving of their Souls, that
they were Regenerate, and born again, in their Infant Baptism,) but indulge
themselves in such things as please the flesh, thinking that Christ as he is
able, so will be willng to pay all their scores as long as they do but depend
upon him for it. But alas, such if they will be but persuaded to try
themselves by that Doctrine of Faith here laid before them, they will find
themselves in an ill case. O but let not that discourage any to be trying how
it is with them, the Lord is calling upon you, saying, Awake thou that
sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians.
5.14. Though you have been all this while asleep, and have dreamed you have
been believers, and that you are justified, when it is no such matter; like the
hungry man the Prophet speaks of, Who dreameth, and behold he eats, but he
awaketh, and his Soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and behold
he drinks; but he awaketh, and behold he is faint, and his Soul has
appetite, Isai. 29.8. Yet now if with this jogg you may be but awakened out of
this sleep, and so come to see that that which pleased you so was indeed but a
dream, Christ is ready to give you light, not only in making known to you the
true and certain terms of his Salvation, but also in showing you how you may be
endued with power and strength to observe the same; and finally to attain
Salvation it self, which through your mistakes hitherto, you have been in great
danger to miss of: he will guide you with his counsel, and afterward receive
you unto glory, Psalm 73.24.

Only be diligent in this work, make no longer delay, thou art not master of
thy time, and thou know not what a day may bring forth; remember it is for
thy life, the life of thy Soul; there is no dallying and trifling in matters of
this moment. What man is he that expects shortly to be tried for his life, this
mortal life, who out of the sense of the consequence of it, is not restless in
his labors, pains, and endeavors day and night, till (if such a thing be
attainable) he have got together the evidences of his defense, and has put
himself into a good posture of vindication? And shall men be penny-wise, and
pound-foolish? shall they be solicitous about a mortal, temporal life, which
for ought they know shall expire with the day of their trial? and shall men be
rechless, negligent, and careless in their preparations and provisions for such
a trial, wherein their everlasting condition, life, or death, lies at stake?
God forbid! Therefore I beseech you in the Name of the Lord, and for the sake
of your Souls, that you give your selves no rest till you know what ground you
stand on, till you come to know that your plea and defense which you have to
make in the great day of your trial before Christ the Judge of Quick and Dead,
is such as will then carry the Day on your side.

The word which Christ has spoken, the Doctrine which he either by himself or
his Apostles has delivered, the same shall judge you, that is it by which you
shall be tried in that day, John 12.48. That word which you read, that Word
which you hear from day to day, that is it by which you must stand or fall. So
that if you will but make a business of it by laying things together, and
comparing one thing with another, Scripture with Scripture, and the temper of
your heart, and tenor of your life therewith; you may be able to Prophecy
(upon supposition that you remain in the same condition until death) what
judgment you shall have. There Is no fear of the Judges awarding of any sentence
contrary to Law, contrary to the Doctrine of the Scriptures. If your cause be
good by that, you do not need to fear the Judges being made against you; if
your cause be naught in the account of that, there is no hopes of deceiving or
bribing the Judge: as your cause is in the eye of the Law, so and no otherwise
will it be in the sentence of the Judge.

And for your ease and accommodation in this great and weighty affair of your
Souls; and to the end you may not be mistaken in your own cause by mistaking
the nature, terms, and true intent of the rule of your trial, by which you must
be justified or condemned, (ignorance wherein, and mistakes whereabout are
wonderful dangerous;) I have in this Book labored to fit things to your hands
by opening the Doctrine of Justification, especially in those parts of it that
are most liable to men's mistakes, and to deliver it from the incombrance of
those crooked notions, and mis-apprehensions, by which men are in danger of
making that to become a snare to them, which God has prepared for a Table.

That therefore to which I exhort you, is, that you put your selves upon the
trial now beforehand, as men who are to run a race, or to try masteries
otherwise, are wont to be proving their ability by a more private running of
the Race, or enuring of their bodies to other exercise, before the day of
public striving for mastery comes. Deal faithfully with your own Souls, in
trying your selves before the Bar of your own Conscience now for the present,
by that Doctrine of Faith here laid before you. The Conscience is as it were
Christ's Delegate, deputed by him to make Judgment by the rule of his Word of a
man's spiritual condition in the interim, before the solemn Assize, and day of
public trial come. And therefore men's thoughts are said in the mean while,
(mark that word in the mean while) to accuse or excuse one another, ( Romans
2.15.) that is to justify or condemn, as it finds a man guilty or not guilty,
according to that rule by which he is to be tried by Chaist. It is true, the
Conscience does not always make that infallible Judgment in a man's case as
Christ himself will do, either for want of a right understanding of the rule of
Judgment, or the true state of a man's cause, as being defiled and darkened,
and the eye of it made dim by too much communion with sinful lusts, which it
may be have corrupted and bribed it partially to favor the man's cause, or at
least to be neuteral, as not to justify, so not to condemn, but to leave
things in doubt. But to what degree it is truly enlightened in the nature of
Christ's Law, and the nature of a man's cause that is to be tried by it, so far
it will, and can hardly do otherwise than make the same judgment and
determination concerning a man's condition, (if a man will bring his cause
before it) as Christ himself will do. Otherwise there would not be that ground
of spiritual triumph and rejoicing in the verdict of Conscience, which was
found in Paul and his Christian companions upon that account, 2 Cor. 1.12. For
our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had
our conversation in the world.

Rev. 12.10.) so at certain times and seasons which he watches for on purpose,
as after some notable slip in the Christian walk, or in time of some deep
affliction, and especially toward the hour of death, he will accuse them at
the Judgment Seat of their own Consciences, and bring their cause to a trial
there, to force them if possible to despair of any good issue when they shall
come to be tried before the Lord: which he will say hard to, if he can but
confound and puzzle them in the evidences of their Justification and defense,
in the Court of their conscience. And you shall find still in the issue and
upshot, that the stress and pinch will lie upon the evidence of the goodness of
a man's Faith: for if a man be but sure he have a right shield of Faith in the
hand of his Soul, he will easily be able to quench all the fiery darts of the
Devil, Ephesians. 6.16. If he lay to their charge, and set before them the
greatness and multitude of the sins and miscarriages which they have been
guilty of at times, heightened with all the provoking circumstances of
aggravation; the plea and defense will be, that Christ the lamb of God takes
away the sin of the world, John 1.29. That the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. That he is the propitiation for our sin,
and not for ours only, but also for the sin of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. And
that not only few and small offenses, but even all manner of sin and blasphemy
(that against the Holy Ghost excepted) shall be forgiven unto men, Mat. 12.31.

If he tell you though that be granted, yet it will not follow that therefore
your sins are forgiven, or that you are actually cleansed by the blood of
Christ, because though Christ gave himself a ransom for all, yet all shall not
be saved by him, for that wide is the gate, broad the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be that go in thereat; ( Mat. 7.14.) And so put you
upon proving your title to the promise of Remission of Sin by his Blood; your
plea will be your belief in him, as that to which the promise of Justification
and eternal Salvation is made, in whomsoever found, John 3.16. Mark 16.16. Acts
16.31. Romans 3.25. But then its like he will go further with you, and argue
against you; that it does not follow that because you have some Faith in
Christ, as that he is the Son of God, that he dyed, was buried, and rose again,
that therefore you are justified, and shall be acquitted before the Lord;
because there is a certain kind of formal, feigned, and dead Faith, which will
not save, James 2.14. And that Simon Magus did believe, though for all that he
were in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, Acts 8.13. and so did
others, who for all that were in no very good condition, John 2.23. and 12.42,
43. If therefore he shall lay to your charge that yours is but a Faith of this
sort and kind, and consequently that it will not avail you, nor render your
title to the promise valid, you have no other way to deal with him, and so
defend your selves against this Article of Indictment, but by producing such
proofs and evidences of the truness, goodness, and soundness of your Faith, and
thereby the validity of your title to the promise, as will satisfy the Judge
Delegate, Conscience, and make that on your side; and then you have cast your
adversary, and foiled him in his suit; he can proceed no further with you; his
accusation and Bill in this kind being thrown out of the Court of Conscience as
malicious and scandalous.

James 2.18.) as that you may put the Devil out of heart as it were of
attempting you in this kind, or if he do, that you may be sure he shall but
loose his labor. He that is begotten of God, sins not, but keeps himself
that the wicked one touches him not, 1 John 5.18. It Is sinning and matter of
miscarriage, unevenness, and faultering in ones way, that gives the Devil
advantage against one, and power of impleading him: but those that are truly
careful to walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, (mark that, Col. 1.10.)
as those that are begotten of God do, they keep themselves out of the Devils
reach, that the wicked one touches them not, though he diligently seeks it,
yet he cannot get this advantage against them. It Is in vain for the Devil to
bring his accusations against a man at the Bar of his Conscience, if
Conscience it self which is Judge in the case, be able to bear a man witness,
that his Faith is of that kind that in the tenor of his life works by such
acts, which argue unfeigned love both to God and men. This brestplate of
Righteousness, will effectually safeguard the Soul from all the thrusts of the
Devil, that he shall not be able to wound the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.14.
Righteousness keeps him that is upright in the way; (Prove. 13.6.) it is that
to the Soul which a coat of Mail is to the body, it preserves the Soul from the
molestations of the Devil, his weapons cannot enter, his insinuations touching
a man's bad condition before God, cannot take place. The armor of righteousness
is armor of proof on the right hand and on the left: (2 Cor. 6.^7 If a man
have that on, the Devil can find no way to enter, or to draw blood of the Soul:
but let a man leave off that but a little, and he shall soon feel the Devils
darts striking through his Liver, (to allude to Prove. 7.23.) and his Sword
passing through his Soul, and such aches, pains, and gripes occasioned thereby
in the Soul, as sometime caused a stout Soldier of the Lords upon that
occasion, to roar for the disquietness of his heart, (Psalm. 38.8.) and to
complain of broken bones, Ps. 51.8.



And therefore if you would have Conscience to pass the sentence on your side,
and against the impleadings of your enemy, and to be a witness for you in your
cause, be you sure you do nothing at any time to offend Conscience, and to
disoblige it, or to make it a witness against you. For if the Devil shall
appeal to Conscience it self which is the Judge, whether it be not able to
witness that at such and such a time, such and such offenses and transgressions
of the holy Law were committed and done in word or deed, not only in its sight,
but contrary to its items and checks, and the Conscience knows it to be true;
can the Conscience think you in such a case, vindicate a man's cause against his
Enemy? surely no; but must give the Devil his due, and say as he says, so far
as he speaks true. And how far a few instances of this nature will go toward
the spoiling of a man's cause, when he comes to be tried for his integrity, I
leave to every Soul seriously to consider. A few acts of this nature will go
further to evince a man to be unfaithful and false to God, and under the
condemnation of his Law in the maine, than a great many good actions in company
of these will do, to prove him to be faithful, and under the protection of the
Law, Ezekiel. 33.12, 13. The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him
in the day of his transgression. Again, When I shall say to the righteous, that
he shall surely live: if he trust to bis own righteousness, and commit
iniquity, all his righteousness shall not be remembered, but for his iniquity
which he has committed, he shall dye for it. Which surely remains in force,
where true Repentance, which consists of contrition and reformation, has not
altered the case; which otherwise is indeed a remedy against the Sin of
backsliding as well as against other evils where it takes place.

London at the Sessions of Peace, an inferior Court, things are prepared and
made ready for trial at the Grand Sessions, so that a man may guess by the
verdict of the petty Jury in the lower Court, how things are like to go with
him in the Upper Court; even so may a man be able to make a kind of certain
Judgment how things are like to go with him touching his final Justification
in the grand Session of the Judge of all the world, by that preparatory trial
which has been impartially made in the Court of a man's own Conscience, as I
noted before. If he be acquitted, justified here, by the testimony and verdict
of Conscience grounded upon the Statutes of Christ, and agreeable to matters of
Fact, he will be full of a comfortable confidence of speeding well at the
Judgment seat of Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.21. Beloved, if our heart condemn us
not, then have we confidence toward God. But if a man's conscience which if it
err on any side, it is like to be in favor to the man himself, if this find a
man guilty and obnoxious to the condemning sentence of Christ's Law, there is
small hopes for that man to expect a sentence of Justification and absolution at
the tribunal of Christ, (unless he can upon the sense of what condition he is
in, bestir himself in the mean time to procure his pardon, by taking such a
course of amendment as by which through infinite Grace it may be had,) 1 John
3.20. For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knows
all things; has a more piercing sight to discern a man's guilt, than Conscience
it self has, and therefore will condemn much more.

Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith,
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience: Mark, to the drawing near
to God in full assurance of Faith, with boldness and confidence of being
accepted with him, this we see is absolutely necessary, viz. that the heart be
first sprinkled from an evil conscience; that that be taken away which made the
Conscience evil while it was there, and what is that but sin? So long as the
guilt of sin, and filth of sin remain upon the heart, the Conscience will be
evil; if sin trouble the Conscience, Conscience will trouble the man, and fill
him with those fears as that he will be far from drawing nigh to God with
confidence and full assurance of Faith, but rather like Adam in that case, run
away and hide himself from God, if it were possible.

Paul no doubt well knowing this, to the end he might maintain his hope and
confidence in God touching the Resurrection-day in good plight, and might
always have his Conscience on his side, and ready to present him unto God with
a good testimony, what did he do? What! Herein (says he) do I exercise my self
to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men, Acts
24.16. In all his behavior Godward, Men-ward, and that always; he was so
intent upon this thing of gratifying his Conscience, that he made it his
constant exercise, was wonderful fraid of giving his Conscience any offense, of
offering any injury or wrong to that; for he knew if he did, that would spoil
his hope toward God. As the mystery of Faith, (2 Timothy 3.9.) so the confidence
of Faith, must be held in a pure Conscience: indeed it is able to live in no
other air. A pure heart, a good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned, these are
linkt together, (1 Timothy 1.5.) where you find one, there you will find all, and
where any one is wanting, to be sure there the other will be missing. If a good
Conscience be once put away, as it is where a pure heart is not kept, it is in
vain for men to boast of their Faith and confidence in God, 1 Timothy 1.19.
Holding Faith and a good Conscience, which some having put away, concerning
Faith have made shipwreck. If a good Conscience be once put away, the next news
you hear, is the shipwreck of Faith. Men may have a liveless form of Faith, as
the body and bulk of a Ship sometimes remains after a Wrack, but is rendered
useless and unserviceable; and so is Faith when once a good Conscience is gone;
it is of no use to entitle a man to the Promise, and consequently of no use to
give a man confidence toward God, or to imbolden him to come before him.

If therefore to have Conscience which is Judge under Christ to be your Friend,
be any thing in your eye: if to have that to plead your cause, and to be a
witness for you against the subtle insinuations, malicious accusations, and
violent prosecutions of the Devil, be a thing desirable to you: if to have
Conscience to send you to Christ's Bar with Letters testimonial in your hand,
signifying that your cause has been tried in that Court, and evidences and
witnesses impartially heard and considered on both sides, and your cause found
good, and you your selves under the Justification and protection of Christ's
Gospel; I say if such things as these be any thing worth with you, then be sure
you use Conscience well which has its eye upon you always; do not trouble it,
do not provoke it, do not disoblige it at any time by any means, and then the
peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds
through Christ Jesus.

Friends; these are great matters, and you your selves every one of you greatly
concerned in them: if you have not the sense of it now, yet know ye that the
time is coming apace, wherein ye will better understand what these things mean.
But take heed this sense come not upon you too late, when the opportunity of
acting the part of a good Conscience is over: remember how the foolish Virgins
were then to provide themselves of Oil for their Lamps, when the wise by the
light of that which they had provided in due time, entered in with the
Bridegroom, and the door was shut against the other.

I have now done with giving this piece of instruction, caution, and advice,
and the good Lord prosper it to those that have heard it, and to those that
shall read it: it remains on our part every one of us, that we be presently up
and doing according to it, or else it will be a witness against us in the day
of the Lord. And I my self who have been holding forth to you these great
things, am very sensible, God knows, that I am but a very poor and weak
Creature, and have had many a trembling of heart for my self as well as others,
whilst I have been writing these matters of mighty moment, lest I should strike
upon any of those Rocks, whereof the troublesome sea of this sinful world is
very full, and of which I have been warning others, before I make the fair
Haven toward which I am steering. And I dare say, you will be never the near
the danger, if you be under the same sense and fear too. But O then set us all
away to God, and follow him day and night with our fervent supplications, to be
upheld and kept by him, taking hold of his strength, trusting under the shadow
of his love, depending upon Christ for supplies of all necessaries for the
Christian life, carefully avoiding all things that might distaste or grieve him,
and cause him to withdraw and leave us; and with like care to do always those
things that please him; so may we be certain that his eye will be always on
us, and his heart toward us for good, and his right hand shall uphold us and
preserve us to his Heavenly Kingdom, Amen.

THE END.

