SEVERAL CASES of Conscience, CONCERNING ASTROLOGY, And Seekers unto
Astrologers, ANSWERED. Collected and Gathered out of the Works of our most
Judicious, Experienced and Orthodox English DIVINES.

By a Friend to the Truth.

Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. Lev. 20.6. Esa. 2.6. Esa. 47.13, 14. Jer. 10.2. Esa. 44.25.
Acts 19.18, 19, 20.

LONDON, Printed for, and are to be sold by John Allen, at the Rising-Sun in
Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

Judicious Reader:
IN this little Treatise there are several Cases of Conscience, concerning
Judicial Astrology, answered, both from the Word of God, and from the
Testimony of those who in their generations were bright and shining lights. All
that I shall say concerning it, is briefly this; that to my knowledge there is
not any one particular thing, that strikes more at the Providence of God, then
this abominable practice of Judicial Astrology does: As I could instance in
many particulars, but I shall leave you to the diligent Reading over of this
ensuing Treatise: and that you may get some profit and benefit by what you
read, my desire and prayer is, that the God of truth would by his Spirit of
truth lead you, and guide you into all Truth: to whose care and providence I
commit you, and subscribe my self,

Thy Cordial Friend, J. A.

Questions, and Cases of Conscience about Astrology, and Seekers to Astrology.
Quest. WHo are Astrologers?

Answ. Such as gaze on the Heavens to read the fates and fortunes (as they term
them) of men and States, persons and people in them, and to foretell from thence
what good or evil shall befall them; such were of old held in high esteem with
the Babylonians, Dan. 1.20. and 2.2. and 4.7. and 5.7, 11, 15. Also with other
Nations, Dan. 2.10. and with the ungodly Jews, Isai. 47.13, 14, 15. with whom
they did consult about their weighty affairs, because they took upon them to
foretell things to come. They are called Star-gazers, and monthly
Prognosticators, Isai. 47.13. They are joined with Magicians, Sorcerers,
Chaldeans, Dan. 2.2, 10. Soothsayers, Dan. 4.7. Wise men, Dan. 5.15.

Quest. How may it be proved that this kind of Divination is unlawful?

Answ. First, That which the Word of God condemns as a grand offense, is not to
be practiced, countenanced or tolerated: But divining by the stars is condemned
by Gods Word: as Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. There shall not be found amongst you any one
that uses Divination, or an Observer of times, or an Enchanter, or a Witch, or
a Charmer, or a Consulter with familiar spirits, or a Wizard, or a Necromancer:
for all that do these things are an abomination to the Lord. And the looking
after them is expressed by going a whoring after them, Lev. 20.6. So Isa. 2.6.
Thou have forsaken thy people, the house of Jacob, because they are replenished
from the East, and are Soothsayers like the Philistines. And Isa. 47.13, 14.
Thou art wearied in thy counsels: Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the
monthly Prognosticators stand up, and save thee from those things that shall
come upon thee: Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn them. God
forbids his people to learn these Arts, Jer. 10.2. Thus says the Lord, Learn
not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at them. They are called liars,
Isa. 44.25. That frustrateth the tokens of the Liars, and makes the Diviners
mad. Such are reckoned up with other Diabolical Arts, as being of the same
kind, Dan. 2.2. and Acts 19.18, 19, 20. -- Many which used curious Arts (such
as this is) brought their books, and burned them before all men, and counted
the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver, etc. and this
is ascribed to the power of the Gospel, verse. 20.

Secondly, That Art whereby men assume to themselves what is peculiar unto God,
must needs be sinful, neither to be practiced, countenanced, nor tolerated: But
this is done by such as take upon them to divine of events to persons and
Nations by the stars: therefore, the Major is clear from Isa. 41.22, 23. Show
things to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods: where we see that
knowing, and declaring things to come, is as peculiar a prerogative of God as
to know men's hearts.

Thirdly, Isa. 5.12. and the Apostle is as severe against every one that
withdraws from Christ, Col. 2.8, 18, 19. Now that these Prognosticators
withdraw men's minds from Christ, may be gathered from that opposition that is
put between them by Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.10, to 16. where they must not hearken to
Sorcerers, that they may hearken to Christ: and whilst men ascribe successes
good or bad to the stars, they withdraw their minds from beholding God in his
works.

Fourthly, false is clear, Isa. 44.15. that frustrateth the tokens of the
Liars, and makes the Diviners mad. If they speak true at any time, it is more by
hap than any skill. For though Eclipses of the Sun, and Moon, and Conjunctions
of other Planets may be certainly foreknown: yet there is no such certainty of
the effects that we may divine thereby, for they are but general, partial, and
remote Causes of Events in States, and affairs of men: and there is no certain
connection between Causes general, partial, and remote, and their Effects.
Besides, those Effects which depend on other Causes, upon which the Heavens
have either none, or no direct power, cannot be certainly known by the
Positions of the Heavens: but so it is with humane affairs: therefore the
affairs of men depend principally on Gods Providence, and under him on the
wills and minds of men. That Gods Providence orders things concerning Men
and States, is proved, Ephesians. 1.11. He works all things after the counsel of
his own will; and that not always according to the ordinary disposition of
second Causes; but turning and overruling things in a secret way, beyond the
intentions of men, and the ordinary virtue of second Causes: so we see in
Rehoboam's, folly, 2 Chronicles. 10.15. Amaziah's frowardness. 2 Chronicles 25.10.
Hence Eccles. 9.^1. The race is not to the swist, etc. and Psalm. 75.4. etc.
Promotion comes neither from the East, etc. But God is Judge: he pulls down
one, and sets up another. Again, the Stars have no power over men's souls, and
minds: the Heathen could say: Sapiens dominabitur Astris: A wise man will rule
over the stars. At the most, that which they have, is but by way of
inclination; which grace, education, civil wisdom, and many other things may
oversway. Besides, the affairs of men and Nations are prospered, and blasted,
not according to the use of natural means, but according to their carriage
toward God, as they are sinful or obedient, penient or impenitent; and men act
in these moral performances, as they are assisted, or deserted by God: for
which, see Isai. 6.9. etc. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 33, 34.

Object. But though they be not certain Causes, may they not be certain Signs
of things to come?

Answ. No: for if they be signs fore-shewing events, they must either be so by
nature, as smoke is a sign of fire: or by institution, as an Ivy-bush is a sign
of Wine to be sold: but they are so in neither of these senses: therefore they
cannot be natural signs, because there is no natural connection between the
Constellations, and humane Events: and whereas it is said, Genesis 1.14. Let them
be for signs, and for seasons; for days, and for years: the meaning is, they
are signs for the things which they cause, as the seasons of the year which
they do both make, and signify: or if they should be granted in general to be
signs, yet could we not certainly prognosticate any thing by them, except we
had particular Comments on them to declare what they signify, either by divine
revelation, or by solid experience: but no such Comment is to be had, and
therefore we have no certain foreknowledge by them. Divine revelation is not
pretended to, and a certain experience we have not: for experience arises from
often observing the same thing, as a Physician knows by experience that Rubarb
purges Choler, because he has often tried it, and ever finds it so: but we
can have no such experience of the effect of the Stars: 1. Because the Heavens
do scarce ever return to the same Position: for though some great Conjunctions
be the same, yet there are infinite numbers of Stars (which also have their
influences) that agree not with, and so may vary the effects of the other. 2.
When Events follow these Conjunctions, it cannot certainly be known that they
are the effects of them, for that many things fall out together accidentally,
without connection or dependence one upon another. 3. We see experiences
uncertain, for that Twins born under the same constellation differ extremely in
disposition, and event, as we see in Esau and Jacob. And whereas they say, that
by reason of the swift motions of the Heavens, a little time makes a great
difference in their Position; Saint Austin answers, that yet their conceptions
were both in an instant, though their birth differed a little: and Ludovicus
Vives adds, that this overthrows all certainty of divining by the stars,
because by reason of the swiftness of their motion, they suddenly alter their
positions, so that a man can never give an exact judgment of any birth,
because he cannot exactly know the minute of his nativity. 5. Identity of
effects does not only depend upon the efficient, but the matter also: so that
if we could be sure that the Position of the Heavens were the same as they were
a hundred years ago, yet the same events will not follow, because of the
difference of men in diverse ages and climates, of diverse tempers, educations,
moral and intellectual principles, etc. and why may not the influence of the
stars produce diverse effects upon men of diverse dispositions, as we see a hen
sometimes hatches chickens, other times ducks, partridges, etc. because of
different eggs set under her?

Arg. That which nourishes vain, and forbidden hopes and fears, is not to be
practiced, countenanced, or tolerated: but so do Astrological predictions:
therefore, fear, and hope by reason of the signs of heaven, is forbidden, Jer.
10.2. Learn not the way of the Heathen, neither be dismayed at the signs of
heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them.

Object. But Astrologers often hit right in their predictions, therefore it seems
there is certainty in their Art.

Answ. First,

Secondly, tokens of these liars are frustrated. Only this favor they find
amongst the multitude, that their mistakes are not regarded, though they be
many: their predictions that fall out right, are observed, and remembered,
though they be few.

Thirdly,

Fourthly, Augustine, Mr. Perkins, and others tell us of conscientious men who
have been glad to leave off this study, because of the uncertainty they have
found in the Rules of it. And Satan may help curious heads in this way, because
besides his own knowledge, which enables him oft-times to guess shrewdly, he
may be permitted by God in a judiciary way to be a true spirit in the mouth of
liars, as he was a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs prophets. See for it,
Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Object. But it is said, Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians,
Acts 7.22. and Daniel of the Chaldeans, Dan. 1.17, 20. and Astrology was part
of that learning, and fore either it is lawful, or they learned an unlawful. Art.

Answ. There be two things in Astrology. 1. The Theory. 2. The Practice. Now
many have studied the Theory, that have renounced the practice, finding that
nothing could be done by it in a natural way. And it is very probable that all
the learning that these holy men had in this Art (if they had any) was but in a
Theoretical way: there is no footstep of their practice of it in all their
stories, but of the contrary. For we read in the second, fourth, and fifth
chapters of Daniel, that he was never called in with the Magicians, but after
them; which shows that he was not of their society: also when he went about
searching out secrets, he went not to his books, but to his prayers: not to
consult with the stars, but with God, as Dan. 2.17. etc.

Object. But are not the stars very powerful, and causes of many strange
effects? and are not effects known by their causes? why then may we not divine
by them?

Answ. Though they have a great influence upon inferior bodies, yet we cannot
divine by them touching humane affairs; For,

1. They cannot act but within their own sphere, which is in corporeal things:
but humane affairs, though acted by men's bodies, yet they are guided by their
spirits, which in nature are out of the sphere of the Heavens operation: and
their successes and miscarriages are from divine providence: therefore whatever
may be prognosticated by them concerning elementary bodies; yet for men, their
virtue is so short in working on them, that it can give no light to judge of
their future affairs.

2. Where the power of working is acknowledged, yet our knowledge of their
virtues and operations is so dim, that we cannot divine by it: For the
influences of all, or most of the stars are unknown to us; and when all of them
have their influences conjoined, who can say this effect is from the virtue of
this star, and not from another?



That which most godly and learned men upon experience have renounced, and
repented of, that is neither to be practiced, countenanced, nor tolerated: but
godly men have renounced and repented of their study of Astrology: therefore,
the Minor is thus proved. St. Augustine, the glory of his age for piety,
learning, and solid judgment, confesses that he had been addicted to these
vain studies: But by the grace of God he afterward renounced them as an art
condemned by true piety, affirming that it was a great error, a great madness,
and a suspicion that might easily be refelled: He also mentions another on
Psalm. 63. that repented of, and renounced this wicked Art, as being as bad as
Paganism, and Judaism. Aug. de Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 21. So says holy Master
Perkins; I long studied this Art, and was never quiet till I had seen all the
secrets of it: But at length it pleased God to lay before me the profaneness of
it, nay, I dare boldly say, Idolatry, although it be covered with fair and
golden shows: therefore that which I speak with grief, I desire thee to note
with some attention. Mr. Briggs also, sometimes Geometry-Reader at Oxford: a
man eminent for piety, and his skill in the Mathematics, upon a question moved
to him by my Author, touching judicial Astrology, told him, that when he went
first to Cambridge, he thought it a brave thing to be of Gods counsel, to
foresee, and foretell secrets; resolving to attain to that skill, whatever
labor it cost him: so accordingly after a while he fell upon the study of the
Mathematics, laying good foundation by going through Arithmetic, Geometry,
and Astronomy, not resting till he had attained exactness therein: Then he
fell upon judicial Astrology: But there he found his expectation wholly
frustrate, for there was no certainty in the Rules of it: Having therefore
tired body and wits in vain, he at last repaired to a man in Cambridge, famous
in that Art, and a maker of Prognostications, to whom he bemoaned himself, for
that he had bestowed so much pains to be an expert Astrologer, but the
uncertainty of its Rules did now deceive his hopes: whereto the Astrologer
replied, that the rules of that Art were uncertain indeed, neither was there
any cure for it. Whereupon Mr. Briggs left that study. Yea, he affirmed that he
would undertake to the skilfullest Astrologer in the world, that let him set
down any conclusion touching either man or State, yea, or weather, and he would
prove that it would fall out so, and that it would not fall out so, from their
own Rules and Principles: He said also that his opinion was, that they that
addicted themselves to the practice of Divining Astrology, the Devil did at
first lend his secret assistance, and at length by degrees, if God prevented
not, entice them into a contract.

Quest. But who may be said to practice this unlawful Art?

Answ. First, Almanack-makers as take upon them to foretell future contingents,
as what weather it will be every day, etc.

Quest. Who be the countenancers of this unlawful Art?

Answ. First, etc.

Secondly, Lev. 20.6.

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

Fifthly,

Quest. How and when are Astrologers tolerated?

Answ. First,

Secondly, Geree's Astrologomastix.

Quest. How many sorts of foretelling things are there?

Answ. Three: 1 Divine:

Secondly, Humane, and natural;

Thirdly, Diabolical, Witches, Sorcerers, Astrologers, etc.

Quest. Are these diabolical predictions lawful?

Answ. No. For, 1.

Secondly, Witches, Sorcerers, Soothsayers, and Astrologers, to seduce the
world out of the right way. As Cardan, who rose to that height of impiety, as
to calculate Christ's birth; and made his power to work miracles to flow from
the influence of the stars under which he was born. Others have been bad,
though not so bad; as Petrus de Aliaco, who thought that the time of Christ's
birth might have been foretold by the stars: and Kepler contends, that those
Wise men by the Rules of Astrology might have presaged, not only some strange
event, but the birth of some great Monarch: As if Christ were not born after an
extraordinary and miraculous manner. I deny not but that the Heavens have
influences upon men's bodies: hence that man possessed with a Devil was said to
be Lunatic, probably because the Devil took the opportunity at that time of
the Moon, wherein humors do most abound, then to disturb and distract him: but
the Heavens were never made for books to reveal what should come to pass.

Thirdly, Witches, Sorcerers, and Astrologers are often condemned in Scripture,
as Lev. 19.26. and 20.27. Deuteronomy. 10.11. etc. Isa. 45.12, etc Besides, all the
Fathers speak with much vehemence against them: Many Councels have condemned
them: yea, diverse of the wiser sort of Heathens have cried out upon them. Tully
wrote several books de Divinatione, condemning such Diviners. Instancing that
before a great battle the Mice had gnawen the buckler of a soudier, whereupon
the Soothsayer concluded that that war should be fatal and unlucky: as if
(says Tully) because mice did gnaw some books that I have of Plato's De
Republica, therefore I should conclude that our Commonwealth shall be
destroyed. And we read Acts 19.19. of many who being converted, brought their
books about such curious Arts, and burnt them. We may read more hereof in
Pererius, Spanhemius, Zanchy, and others.

Fourthly,

Fifthly,

Sixthly, How could I help it, seeing I am born under such a star? As Saint
Augustine tells us of a servant of a certain Astrologer, who having robbed his
Master, his Master went about to correct him for it; whereupon he cried out
that he could not help it, for that he was born under Mercury, (and the
Astrologers say that such as are born under that Planet, are given to
stealing:) and thus he silenced his Master by the Rules of his own Art.

Object. But we see that many times they foretell the truth.

Answ. First, may chance with one to hit the mark.

Secondly, Augustine observes, it is a just judgment of God upon thee, that
thou should have wherewith to stumble and fall, and undo thy self, as Deuteronomy.
13.1. etc. Thus a wicked Prophet may foretell that which comes to pass: and why?
God does it to prove and try you.

See Mr. An. Burges on John, p. 396.

Quest. What use may we make of this which has been said?

Answ. First, Perkins reckons it up amongst the kinds of witchcraft: Saint
Austin counts it ungodly dotage, and inconsistent with Christianity. Does
profit entice you? it is but Balaams gain, the wages of iniquity, money that
will perish with you.

Secondly, partake in their plagues: Have therefore no fellowship with these
unfruitful works of darkness: abhor all commerce with, and resort to such
persons: fly from them, as from the devil himself: thou breakest thy Baptismal
Vow, if thou renouncest not such Diabelical practices. Shall we countenance
what God abominates, and strengthen men in that which makes both them, and the
Land liable to wrath? Let them not have the countenance of thy cost to buy
them, nor of thy time to read them, nor of thy tongue to mention or applaud
them, nor of thy affections to fear, hope, or rejoice in any thing they say.
Forbidden, Jer. 10.2, 3. If there were no buyers of such Almanacks, there would
be no Sellers; and if there were no Sellers, there would be no Makers, at least
no Publishers of such lying vanities: and truly if the Astrologer be guilty,
the Buyer and Reader cannot be innocent. God has forbidden seeking to such,
under a grievous penalty, Lev. 20.6. -- I will even set my face against that
soul, and will cut him off from amongst my people. Indeed, learned men have
observed that such delusions have prevailed amongst Popish and Anabaptistical
spirits. But that England should countenance such! and in a time of
Reformation! Oh let us blush for shame, etc. How often (said Tully) did I hear
such men promise Pompey and Caesar, that they should live long, and die a
peaceable death! whereas both of them not long after were murdered. And
Coraelius a Lapide the Jesuit, in his Comment on Acts 19. bewaileth, that
whilst he was at Rome, they were so much given to this wickedness, whilst the
Astrologers promised to some long life, to others a Cardinalship, to others the
Popedom, and yet at last all were miserably deluded.

Thirdly, Lillies Almanacks have been vended in a year. If devout men burnt
their own Books of this kind, how should devout Governors see to the burning
of such Books? sure if those Books deserve the fire which derogate from the
honor of Princes, how much more such as withdraw the minds and hearts of men
from God! It were well, if Astrologers were put into the some Catalogue with
other Sorcerers in the Statute of the first of King James, chap 20. and to
suffer the same punishment with the other: for the Scripture makes them birds
of a Feather, etc. See as before.

Quest. But may we not use Charms, wherein there are none but good words?

Answ. No; It Is the usual craft of Satan to present things and ways in
themselves indifferent, to silly minds, which consider not, that the harm
does not consist in using such words or actions, but in ascribing to them an
unnatural virtue, without the warrant of God, who is the Master of nature.

Quest. Is it not lawful to enquire of Astrologers after things to come?

Answ. Certainly, since God has hidden the future time from us, to go about to
lay it open, is a work proper to the professed Undoer of Gods words.

Quest. Why may we not enquire after future times?

Answ. Curiosity to know the future, carries many so far as to make a Covenant
with the devil, who yet stands not so much upon his points, as to refuse to be
consulted with, by those that have made no covenant with him: No doubt but his
pride is tickled with a mischievous delight, when he sees men seeking to him
for that which is proper to God; and thereby yielding him Divine service.

Which service that he may receive in an hidden way from the finer sort of
wits, he has devised some seeming sublime Divinations, persuading them that
the decree of God about humane events is written in the motions, and several
aspects of the stars, and that therefore this kind of Divination is lawful,
yea, Divine.

Quest. What are the evils that proceed from hence?

Answ. First,

Secondly, suspended upon the Dragons tail, and the Ascendent of an Horoscope.

Thirdly, Alexius and Manuel, are lamentable examples how credulous persons are
undone by the Impostures of Astrologers, when they expect from the stars those
successes which should have been wrought out by Piety, Prudence, and Valor.

Quest. What further reason is there against these Astrological Predictions?

Answ. Consider, that all affirmation is grounded either upon Reason, or
Authority. The assertions of Judiciary Astrology are of the last kind: For no
reason can be given of their Maxims. Now the authority upon which these
Maxims are grounded, must either be Divine, or Humane, or Devilish. They are
not grounded upon Divine Authority, but are expressly forbidden by it, Jer.
10.2. Isa. 47.13. And humane authority in this case is of no weight: for who
has given power to men to dispose of the several Offices, and Pre-eminences of
Celestial bodies? It remains then that these Maxims are grounded upon
Diabolical authority. In brief, since they are not grounded upon reason, either
they are forged by men, or delivered by revelation: and if that revelation
comes not from God, it must needs come from the devil.

Dr. du Moulin of Moulin of Contentment.

FINIS.

