SOME Baptismal abuses Briefly Discovered. OR A Cordial endeavor to reduce the
Administration and Use of BAPTISM, to its Primitive Purity; In two Parts. The
first Part, Tending to disprove the Lawfulness of Infant Baptism. The second
Part, Tending to prove it necessary for persons to be Baptized after they
believe, their Infant Baptism, or any pre-profession of the Gospel
notwithstanding. AS ALSO, Discovering the disorder and irregularity that is in
mixed Communion of persons baptized, with such as are unbaptized, in
Church Fellowship. By William Allen.

Romans 14.22, 23. Happy is he that condemns not himself in that thing which he
allows. -- Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Luke 1.6. And they were both
righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and ORDINANCES of the
Lord, blameless. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Cripps, and Lodowick Lloyd,
and are to be sold at their Shop in Pope's Head Alley, MDCLIII.

To His much Honored And Dearly Beloved, Mr JOHN GOODWIN, And the Brethren of
his Society.
THere have now (Dearly Beloved) several years passed over our heads, since I
first obtained that good opinion from you, as to be admitted into your Society.
And sure I am, I shall not flatter you in acknowledging, that if I have not in
all this time improved my Spiritual estate very much; it is not because I have
not had opportunity so to do, but because I have not had an heart fully to
improve this opportunity. And how ever mine own dullness and indisposition,
have obstructed much of that increase which was (as I believe) intended me on
your part, yet this I must acknowledge to the praise of that rich and abundant
grace of God that has uttered it self among you, and has been declared by
you, that your love, diligence, faithfulness, and zeal, and the grace of God
in them, have made such impressions upon me, as by which you may well (as I
doubt not but you will) stand much indeared to me all my days.

As for those Christian respects I have received from you, they have so much
exceeded what I could well expect, as that I have not been under any temptation
of neglect this ways, whereby the bond of my union with you could be loosened.

And yet so it is (Beloved, as ye well know,) that some apprehensions and
impressions of conscience in me, have caused me in some things to differ from
the most of you, and have occasioned some alteration in my fermer practice and
conversation with you; yet not without long consideration, and some
consultation first had with many of you, in order to my satisfaction in that
wherein I do differ. But I trust that the consciences of those who know my
compliant temper, will be ready to witness with me, that my differing from you
does not proceed from a love in me to differ, but from my love to truth as
apprehended by me; my inclination otherwise strongly carrying me to a
compliance with all men, how much more with you, when it may be without a
breach making upon the peace of my conscience.

But since I have taken the liberty to dissent from you, both in opinion and
practice as to some things; I could not but hold my self obliged, to give you
an account of some of the grounds upon which I have done it; which that I might
do upon better terms then otherwise I had convenient opportunity to do, I
have made this public address to you as you see.

And in as much as my intention herein, next unto the service of the truth it
self, is to serve you; my hope is, that you will as seriously and impartially
intend and weigh the import of the matter presented to your view, as I have
with sincere respect unto your benefit prepared it.

It is like the inconsiderablenesse of the author, and the great improbability,
that one far inferior in parts, and gifts, should see further, and discern
more in things of this nature, then those that much transcend him, will be a
great temptation upon you, if not wholly to neglect and despise this piece of
discourse; yet to think it unworthy your serious thoughts.

But I know, you know how to releeve your selves against this temptation,
considering that it is no new thing for God, out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings to ordain strength, as well as out of the mouths of stronger men: nor
for him to put of his treasure into earthen weak vessels, that the excellency
of its power might be the better known to be of God: nor is it any thing more
then ordinary, for him to subject the stronger to supplies from the weaker in
some things; so that the head shall have no cause to say unto the feet. I have
no need of you. Besides, has not the undue admiring of the learning, parts,
and abilities, even of good men themselves in their generations, as if they had
been comprehensive of all truth coming under their consideration, when as they
have been tainted with error and superstition in some things, I say has not
this been a snare by which many have been detained in error and superstitious
vanities, much longer then otherwise they would have been? men of the greatest
parts not being always the forwardest nor foremost in all acts of reformation,
they having more strength to hold out against the truth, and a greater
dexterity to obscure it both from themselves and others, by pleas, objections
and subtle distinctions or involutions rather, For how ever they sometimes
distinguish and divide in things which are of an entire and collective
interpretation, yet for the most part they err on the other hand, by involving
and confounding things together, which are of different nature, and ought to be
distinguished: and this they do in nothing more, then in jumbling together the
Legal and Evangelical administrations, which differ almost as much as night and
day.
then men of lower parts have.

The nature of the subject also (here tendered to consideration) being such, as
tends to persuade men to embrace that despised way, which is generally every
where spoken against, and which is apt to bring the assertors of it into
dis-esteeme and contempt among men, if not to expose them to sufferings of a
worser nature, it may doubtless be a temptation to many, not to be two
inquisitive after things of this nature, but to content themselves, only with
a cursorie and superficial survey of them, lest otherwise by a more intent and
impartial consideration, and a more narrow scrutinie into, and through
examination of matters, they should discover so much light, as by which they
must be necessitated, either to hazard much of their outward honor, peace, and
prosperity in the world in following that light, or their inward peace and
tranquillity in not obeying it.

But as concerning you my friends, who have despised this temptation in other
cases, which otherwise would have deprived you of some other great truths of
the gospel, with which you are now enriched; my hope is, that you will be the
better prepared to resist it at this turn also. For know ye for a certainty,
that the conscience never has so rich a taste of the sweet and pleasant fruit
of righteousness, as when a man in conscience to God, and love to truth, is
willing to suffer, and does suffer from the world in the practice of it: this
hidden Manna is not tasted, save by those that overcome temptation. But why
should not those that are Godly wise indeed, overshoote the devil in his own
bow? and rather be encouraged to, then discouraged from searching into those
doctrines and ways, which are discountenanced by the world; since they are so
much the likelier to be of God: for if they were of the world, the world would
love her own.

It is also a thing very ungrateful to the flesh, and hardly attained without
much spiritual ingenuity, for men who have for a long time, and with great
confidence, owned, asserted, and pleaded the cause of an erroneous way;
afterward to acknowledge their mistakes, and turn Advocates for that, which
with a high hand they have sometimes opposed.

But he that knows not how to deny himself in such things as these, upon
conviction sof light; knows not how to approve himself a man worthy the name of
a Disciple of Christ; who, as the Master says, cannot be such, except he deny
himself. And had not ye (Beloved) learned this spiritual art long before this
in other cases, you had never made so happy an exchange of Error for Truth, as
now I esteem you to have done.

We have hitherto been coming out of darkness, error, and superstition but by
degrees, and not all at once, now discovering one error, and then another; and
why then should not our former experience this wise, admonish us still of not
being too confident of our having now discovered all Satanical, Papal, and
antichristian deceits, in doctrine and worship unto the bottom; but rather to
be jealous over our own hearts and judgments, lest some of those old dregs
should yet be left behind? Solomon says, that the path of the just is as the
shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day: and yet where
would there be place and opportunity of growing in knowledge and understanding,
if there were not occasion even for Christians themselves, ever and anon to be
changing their dark and crooked thoughts, for more lightsom and well rectified
apprehensions?

It is a thing doubtless too to incident also even to otherwise good men
themselves, not only to put much of that affection they bear to the erroneous
things they practice, into the balance with the reasons upon which they act;
by which means that seems to them ponderous, which otherwise in it self is as
light as vanity; but also to presume and hope, that those seeming grounds which
they have, will excuse them before God in their way and practice, though their
confidence concerning them, suffers many a rebuke from the truth when it is
laid close to the conscience by the Spirit of God. But the Spirit of truth,
which loves and desires truth in the inward parts; though he patiently bears
and indures much disingenuitie of this kind in the minds of men for a time,
yet if his applications for cure hereof be always slighted and neglected, it
many times provokes him at last to leave them under the power of their own
deceivings, and to say; But if any man be ignorant (viz. upon such terms) let
him be ignorant, 1. Cor. 14.38.

The day is now hastening apace, wherein the mighty God will reckon with the
Babilonish whore for corrupting the earth with her deceits; and then the eye of
Jesus Christ will be upon those, who have thoroughly pleaded his cause, wholly
followed him, and faithfully born witness to his truth against all her unsound
and corrupt ways, to keep them from the hour of temptation that shall come
upon all the world to try them, whereas those that have been partakers with her
in her corruptions, must then be partakers with her in her sufferings, though
otherwise they be the people of God themselves, unless they have before that
time, obeyed that voice which says, come out of her my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. And therefore
how exceedingly does it concern all those who would be then found pure virgins
indeed, and such as have not defiled their garments, no not with any the least
of those whorish polutions, narrowly to consider such their ways, which are
shreudly suspected for unclean, as they are whose nakedness I have hereby
labored to discover.

Thus having (though not without weakness, yet) with much uprightness and
true affection to you, spread my thoughts and apprehensions before you, as
touching those things wherein I cannot close with you, (being nevertheless not
unwilling to retract any thing I have done, if ever the vanity of it shall be
discovered to me, as loving no way in Religion further then I apprehend it
countenanced by the truth) and having herein satisfied my self in discharge of
my duty toward you, I shall now commend this poor endeavor of mine to the
blessing of the blessed God, and you unto his direction in the perusal of it,
and shall God inabling me still endeavor to approve my self.

May 11. 1653. Yours unfeignedly, to love, honor, and serve you, WILLIAM ALLEN.

A Premonition to the Reader, touching the evil and dangerous effects of
Infant Baptism.
READER,
THou have in the following discourse, together with some other things, some
few of those many arguments that are and may be readily produced against the
practice of Infant Baptism: and such they are for the most part as have not
been insisted on by others; for I would not weary thee with the repetition of
the same Arguments which are extant in other men's labors; for which cause
their number is the less: but thou will do well to estimate the truth in this
particular, rather by the weightinesse then number of the Arguments leavied for
its service.

I would have thee take notice, that where ever thou meetest with any
expressions tending to deny men's visible being in Christ, or their visible
membership in his Church without Baptism, such denial is still intended in
respect of Gospel form and order, according to which men are not regularly
visibly incorporated into Christ or his Church without Baptism. The which holy
order of the Gospel, though I intend no more thereby, ought to be of sacred
resentment to every Christian, in as much as every word of God is pure, and
savours of divine wisdom, Pro. 30.5.

But now as concerning the mischievous effects of Infant Baptism, (not so much
as to touch here upon those which are discovered in the ensuing discourse) I
shall here only hint at two or three of them, which might also have been drawn
up more amply argument-wise.

First, and ten thousands in the world, to neglect that which should have
rendered them worthy the name of Christians indeed, whilst they have fancied
themselves to be such, upon account of their Christendom as they call it, i.
e. that Baptism which they received in their Infancy. For whereas they are made
to believe that they have been Baptized into Christ, and thereby received into
the number of Christ's flock, and incorporated into his Church by that Baptism;
they have hereupon presumed themselves good Christians, and in safe condition,
and have taken it ill that any should make question to the contrary, though
otherwise they have had little more then this upon which to build such a
confidence. Whereas otherwise, if they could not have attained so much as the
name and repute of Christians, much less the hope of that salvation which
belongs to Christians indeed, without a manifestation of repentance and faith
preceding their Baptism, and their reception of Baptism thereupon, which yet is
the Gospel way; there is no doubt but that millions of men and women would
have quit themselves upon far better terms then now they have done, in
laboring after knowledge in the Gospel, and such other qualifications as
would have rendered them meet for Baptism, and consequently for communion in
other ordinances of the Gospel, rather then they would have fallen short of
the confidence of being Christians, and the repute of such, and the hope of
salvation which belongs to those that are such indeed. For men's extreme
impatience of not being reputed Christians indeed upon account of their Infant
Baptism, and that slender and contradictory profession which they make, argues
the name and repute of such, and that hope they have thereby, to be a thing so
dear and precious to them, as that they would do much more then now they do for
the gaining of it, if they had it not upon such easy terms as now they have,
as men have ordered the matter.

Secondly, received into the Church? and if so, why may we not say, that the
national Church officers the Bishops, yea the universal Bishop himself the
Pope, have grown out of the same root? For if there had been no national
Baptism in this kind (as doubtless there would not, if Baptism had not been to
be had but upon Scripture terms, viz. apparent repentance and faith preceding)
then there would have been no national Churches, that being as to outward form
the foundation upon which they are built, and door of entrance thereinto; and
if there had been no national Churches, there could have been no national
Church officers; and if no national Church officers, then surely no universal
officer over all national both Churches and officers: So that Infant Baptism
may well be conceived to be the cause sine qua non, that without which neither
the one nor the other of these would have been as now they are. And therefore
how small a matter or innocent thing soever Infant Baptism seems to most, yet
who may not see, if they will but seriously consider it, that the evils and
mischiefs that have taken place in the world upon the taking place of
national Churches and their Officers, and the head of them all the Pope, may
in great part be charged upon that dangerous error Infant Baptism, of which we
speak? And what a dishonor and reproach has it been to Jesus Christ, that he
should be looked upon as head of such Churches, and that such vile and unworthy
persons should be esteemed members of his body, as those national Churches and
the persons of whom they have mostly consisted have been; as if Christ and
Belial had been well agreed? Besides, these National, corrupt, indeed
Antichristian Churches, have in great part thrust out the true Churches of
Jesus Christ, and his discipline, and the purity of his administration of
Ordinances, and have contempered themselves in constitution, discipline and
worship unto the spirit of this world, by which they have for the most part
been inspired and acted.

And therefore however this After Baptism (as it is called) is charged with
rending and tearing of Churches (which in true construction is but a rending
and dividing of persons from Churches of an undue and humane constitution; that
they might be gathered into the fold of Christ's own making; and such a division
as this the Gospel has always wrought in the world, in respect of some or
other of its truths, Luke 12.51.) yet indeed and in truth it is not fiduciall
Baptism, i. e. the Baptizing of men after they believe, but Infant Baptism that
is truly guilty of rending and tearing, indeed of dissolving the true Churches
of Jesus Christ in the world.

And therefore in the third place, Joh. 3.3. Except a man be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God. And without controversy, those who in reason
cannot on this account be judged in a capacity to see the Kingdom of God,
cannot in reason be judged in a capacity to have communion with God, and with
his Saints in all the ordinances of God. And whether it be not very rare for
persons to be as early in their repentance and faith, as in their actual
sinning, which yet has no promise of pardon without an actual turning unto
God; I leave to themselves to consider, whose experience and observation I
doubt not will incline them to conclude it so to be. And therefore it cannot be
(in all probability) but that such Churches if they should continue for the
space of an age in that way in which they now are, they must of necessity
consist in great part of carnal and unregenerate persons, as the parochial
Churches do.

If any shall conceive this a convenient remedy against this evil, viz. to
Excommunicate children, or youth, about the time in which they come to know the
difference between good and evil, at which time they make themselves guilty of
actual transgression, and consequently put themselves under a necessity of
conversion, to wit, repentance and faith for the obtaining remission of those
actual sins; and therefore in reason cannot be looked upon as regenerate,
until the fruits worthy amendment of life and of faith do appear: though this
remedy I say should be thought on, (which is not likely) yet for them to retain
them in the Church whilst Infants, and to cast them out when they come to years
of understanding, is such a thing which as there is no rule prescribing it; so
I believe (my own observation in some other cases prompting me hereunto) it
will prove a thing of greater difficulty then indulgent parentall members will
know how to overcome.

If any shall think to prevent this more then inconvenience another way, viz.
by Baptizing Infants into the universal Church, and not receiving them into
any particular Church till they can give an account of their repentance from
dead works, and faith toward God; or else if they do receive them into a
particular Church, shall think to prevent this by not admitting them unto
communion with the Church in other ordinances, till they can give the aforesaid
account; herein likewise (besides the evil of unregenerate persons permissive
abode in the Church) they shall give a rule unto themselves, which God has not
given. For whoever are fit to be, and de facto are members of the universal
visible Church, are fit also to be members of particular Churches; and
whosoever are members of particular Churches, cannot according to any rule in
Scripture, that I know, be excluded part and fellowship in any the Ordinances
there administered. For during the time in which God would have Infants to be
members of the national Church of the Jews, and partakers of one ordinance, to
wit, Circumcision; he did neither order their excommunication out of the
Church, upon account of their unregeneration when they became actual sinners;
nor yet debar them communion with the Church in any other ordinance, till
signs of their regeneration appeared; nor were they excluded communion in any
the ordinances of that Church at any time from their very Infancy, otherwise,
or longer then the terms of natural necessity and debility did impose it upon
them.

Nor does it at all follow, that Infants are to be admitted Church members
under the Gospel, because they were so under the Law, as some vainly imagine;
nor yet that persons of like disqualification may be admitted into, or
continued in Churches under the Gospel, as might be both the one and the other
under the Law; no more then it follows, that the Gospel ministration is
carnal, beggarly, weak and unprofitable, because that of the Law was such,
Heb. 7.18. and 9.10. Gal. 4.9. For under the Law, Church membership was vested
in Abraham's natural seed, in which capacity Infants were as well as men; but
under the Gospel that privilege is proper only to those that are, or appear to
be his spiritual seed, to wit, believers, ( Gal. 3.7, 26-29. Romans 9.8.) in
which capacity Infants are not. Under the Law spiritual defilements, such as
were ignorance, unbelief; or moral pollutions, such as are extortion, railing,
covetousness, etc. did not exclude persons from Church membership if they did
but keep the ceremonial Law, which according to the Apostle Heb. 9.9, 10.
stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal ordinances
imposed on them until the time of reformation; which could not make him that
did the service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience, which yet
unregenerate men were in a capacity to perform: But now under the Gospel both
spiritual and moral defilements, such as are ignorance of God and his ways,
unbelief, covetousness, drunkenness, railing, extortion, etc. do de jure
exclude persons from Church fellowship, 1 Cor. 5.11. and 15.34. Under the Law,
as the service and administration of that Church did consist of elements of the
world, beggarly rudiments, and carnal ordinances, (Gal. 4.3.9. Heb. 9.10.) So
the members of that Church that were permitted communion in those ordinances,
Isa. 53.1. and 8, 18. and 10.22. Heb. 4 2. Psalm. 81.11. Isa. 65.2.
were (at least sometimes) for the most part but carnal likewise; in which
respect Infants and youths were not less capable of Church membership then
they. But now under the Gospel, God requires such only to worship him in his
Churches as can worship him in spirit and truth, and will have his Churches to
be spiritual houses, built of living stones, to wit, such as are meet to be an
holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ, (Joh. 4.23, 24. 1 Pet. 1.5.) in which capacity Infants are not.

So that notwithstanding all that can be pretended to the contrary (for other
pretentions besides these I know none) Infant Baptism is in a little time like
to prove a corrupter of the And doubtless that is none of Christ's Church
ways, wherein provision for Church purity is made but only for one age or half
one rather; upon which account among others, the way of Independency seems to
me to fall short of the mark and to miss of Gods way.
Independent Churches themselves, as well as it has been of the National;
which one would think were to them argument enough alone to cause them to lay
aside the practice of it.

The premises therefore considered, Infant Baptism that has proved so great a
snare to men to think themselves secure in an unsafe condition; that has been
as it were the bottom means of erecting Churches contrary to the Gospel
pattern, to the great dishonor of Jesus Christ, unto whom they pretend
relation, and setting of Antichristian officers over them; yea and is likely
also in a little time to leaven even those Churches themselves that have been
looking after some reformation and purity: that Baptism I say, is questionless
no doctrine according to Godliness as true Baptism is, but of ungodliness, of
which to me it is more then probable, it has been a great promotresse in the
World.

And therefore to me it clearly appears to be the duty of all those that love
the honor of Jesus Christ, and the prosperity of his affairs both in his
Churches and in the World, (both which have suffered so deeply by the springing
up of this root of bitterness, as is in part before expressed) to endeavor with
all their might in a Christian way, the extirpation of so evil a custom as
this has been, and the restitution of primitive Baptism as one of those Laws
of our Lord, which corrupt times have made void, as indeed they have done many
other: Upon which account I shall further encounter the one, and plead the
cause of the other in the ensuing arguments, to which I refer thee; with humble
requests to God to give thee an upright heart and single eye in thy examination
of them, and so much light as to discern that which is of him, from that which
is but of men, and so much spiritual ingenuity and candor as to follow the
truth in love when understood.

Some Few ARGUMENTS, Clearly proving the Invalidity of the Administration of
Baptism to Infants.
THat which both busies the minds, and takes up much time among the servants of
God in debates, is that question about Baptism, viz. Which Administration is
most agreeable to the mind of God? whether that which is made to Infants
(especially such who are the children of believing Parents,) or whether that
which is not made, but unto persons who either do indeed believe the Gospel, or
which make such a profession of Faith, which cannot reasonably be deemed to
proceed from ought else then that which is Faith indeed?

The best way (I conceive) to come to satisfaction hereabout, will be, to
observe the footsteps of the flock of Christ in the first seting forth of this
Ordinance of God into the World in the days of John Baptist, Christ, and the
Apostles successively. For that now was the method of the Apostle Paul, when he
found corruption crept into the administration of that other Ordinance, the
Supper of the Lord; to reform the same, he brings those, to whom he writes
hereabout, back to the consideration of the original manner and usage of that
Ordinance, 1 Cor. 11.23. So did our Savior likewise, in reforming some abuses
about marriage, Mat. 19.4, 8. And that light, which upon impartial trial of
matters in the holy History, shall appear the most clear and least dubious,
that light doubtless will it be most safe for us to follow.

Now that Baptism was administered to believing and repentant persons in those
times, is no man's doubt that believes the Scriptures: but that it was
administered to Infants in those days, is that which the divine History no where
reports, nor, as is humbly conceived, can be duly collected from any part,
member, or circumstance thereof.

That therefore shall be the first Argument against Infant Baptism, which is
drawn from the matter of fact in the first Administration of it; and it is this:

If Baptism were not administered to Infants in the days of John the Baptist,
nor of Christ, nor of the Apostles; then ought it not to be administered to
Infants now. The reason of this Consequence is this; Because that which was a
reason to them then to forbear baptizing Infants, and upon which they did
forbear it, is, or ought to be, a reason to all men now to forbear it likewise.
For if they did indeed forbear to baptize Infants, it cannot reasonably be
imagined that they did forbear it merely out of will and pleasure, but out of
Reason and Judgment. And if there be any Reasons that may induce us to practice
Infant Baptism now, which were not obligatory to them then, they must arise,
either, 1. From some new discovery of God to us in this behalf, of which they
were then ignorant; Or, 2. From some greater necessity now lying upon Infants
to be baptized, then Infants were under then: Or, 3. From some better capacity
in which Infants now stand to receive benefit by Baptism, then was enjoyed by
Infants then: Or, 4. From some change or alteration of the Ordinance it self,
by which it is better fitted and accommodated to the condition of Infants now,
then it was then: Or, 5. (and lastly) From some greater necessity and better
capacity, which men and women are now in to receive benefit by the baptizing of
Infants, then any they were then in formerly: for other then these cannot
lightly be supposed or imagined ever to come up into the minds of men. But now
there is no new discovery made to us touching the Will of God to have Infants
baptized, of which John Baptist, Christ, or the Apostles were ignorant; nor are
Infants themselves, or any others, in any greater necessity, or better
capacity, to receive benefit by Infants Baptism now, then they were who lived
in times before specified; nor is there any alteration or change indeed in the
Ordinance it self, by which it is rendered more useful and beneficial to Infants
now, then it could be then: And therefore, what ever the Reasons or
Considerations were, upon which these primitive Baptists did forbear to baptize
Infants, the same are obligatory and binding now, to all men in these days, so
to forbear it likewise: Which might be backed (if needful) from Phil. 3.17. 1
Cor. 11.1, 2.

But Baptism was not administered to Infants, The Assumption.
neither in the days of John the Baptist, nor of the Apostles. This I prove,
first, viz. That which appears not, is not. The denial or removal of which,
what else would it be but an inlet to will worship, and many innovations in the
service of God, as indeed it has proved in the case in hand touching
Infant Baptism? But the Scripture is express against any man's intruding himself
into those things which he has not seen, or of being wise above that which is
written, Col. 2.18. 1 Cor. 4.6. If we had no other proof, yet this Minor
Proposition remains good, until it be proved, that Infants were baptized in the
primitive Times. But besides this, there are other considerations, of a proper
and potent tendency, to carry the minds of men that are at liberty, and not
under the bands of prejudice and partiality, to think and to conceive, that no
Infants were baptized in the days and times before mentioned.

2. Therefore, secondly, When we find the Evangelist Luke, Samaria, by that
effect it wrought, in causing multitudes to be baptized, he expresses those
great numbers by making mention of men and women, ( Acts 8.12. They were
baptized both men and women,) whereas he should better have answered his own
end in this behalf, if he had said, they were baptized both men, women, and
children, if children indeed had been baptized as well as men and women. For,
1. By how many the more persons it appears are benefited by the Gospel, by so
much the more is the power and success of it discernable: and therefore if the
Evangelist, whilst he had gone about to represent the glorious success of the
Gospel in those great numbers of persons that were baptized upon its coming
among them, should have made mention only of men and women, as he did, and have
said nothing of the children, though they had been baptized also, which
probably might be more in number then the men and women were, he should then
scarcely have done that to the one half, which he should have done totally and
entirely in relation to his proposed end. And, 2. By how much the more zeal of
obedience the Gospel does produce in those persons that are wrought upon by it,
by so much the more will the operative influence and success of it be visible
and observable: and therefore if whilst the Evangelist had been going about to
declare how mightily the Gospel prevailed amongst those Samaritans, in
procuring their obedience to it in point of Baptism, he should have made
mention of the obedience of the men and women, as reaching only to their own
personal Baptism, when as indeed they were not only baptized themselves, but
in obedience to the Gospel had caused their children to be baptized likewise,
he should have represented the zeal of these Samaritans raised by the Gospel,
and so consequently the powerful influence and success of the Gospel in raising
that zeal, upon terms of very great disadvantage, in comparison of what he
might have done by making known the Childrens Baptism as well as the Parents.
Moses, when he would set forth what good effect the Word and Command of God
touching Circumcision had upon Abraham's heart, he does not only and barely
declare Abraham's obedience by his own personal Circumcision, when there was a
further and better account thereof to be given in his circumcising his son, and
servants, together with himself: No; but, to make a true and clear
representation of Abraham's obedience and zeal herein, he reports, first how he
circumcised himself, after that his son, and then his servants; yea and that he
did it the self-same day which God had said unto him, Genesis 17.23. In the Old
Testament, when children were brought by their Parents before the Lord in any
solemn Assembly, the Penmen of the Scriptures were as careful to set down that,
as to record the deportment of the Parents, Deuteronomy. 29.11. Josh. 8.35. 2 Chronicles.
20.13. Ezra 10.1. And why should we think the Penmen of the New Testament less
punctual in a thing of as great or greater concernment?
Yea it seems the Holy Ghost thought the noting of these circumstances so
material in relation hereunto, that he repeats them over again, verse. 26, 27.
And how this exactness should be so necessary in Moses his Narrative about
Circumcision, and yet superfluous in Lukes Narrative about Baptism, especially
considering that the thing is no where else reported, is, I confess, a thing,
the reason whereof, as I do not understand, so I shall leave to them to make
out, who do imagine any such thing. Therefore the only way to stand right in
our thoughts toward these two amanuensis of the Spirit, and not to charge
Moses with superfluity, nor Luke with deficiency in their respective
Narratives, is to conclude, that as they were alike directed by the same
Spirit, so they did with like faithfulness directly and plainly report the
matters of fact in both cases; and consequently, that in as much as the Baptism
of Infants is not recorded, as well as is the Baptism both of men and women,
that therefore there was no such thing acted and done in those times, as that
is, which is called the baptizing of Infants.

And that the not mentioning of Childrens Baptism does not proceed from any
omission, neglect or deficiency of this Evangelist in his said Narrative, but
from the non-being of the thing it self, we have the greater reason to believe;
not only because it would be absurd to suppose this Penman of the Holy Ghost
to be so partial and untrue to his own intended and proposed end, as such an
omission would argue him to have been; but also, because we do find him to have
been careful to report even what Children themselves did by means of their
Parents, in a business of far less consequence then this would have been, had
it been at all; and that is their accompanying of Paul out of Tire; for so it
is said, They all (to wit, the Disciples) brought us on our way, with wives and
children, till we were out of the City, Acts 21.5. And why should we think that
he should be faithful in the less, and not also in the greater? or that he
would make himself in this, like unto those who tythed Mint and Annise, and
omitted the weightier matters of the Law?

If it should be doubted, whether it were the scope and intent of the
Evangelist, in those words, Acts 8.12. They were baptized both men and women,
to set forth the great success of the Gospel in Samaria; satisfaction herein
may be received, 1. From the import of the phrase or manner of speaking here
used, being compared with other places of like form of words; as for example,
that of this very Evangelist, Acts 5.14. Believers were the more added to the
Lord, multitudes both of men and women. Here the great numbers that were
brought in unto the Lord by the Gospel, are noted by this form of words, both
of men and women: and in Acts 8.12. the great success of the same Gospel is
noted by those great numbers that were prevailed withal by it to be baptized;
which great numbers are likewise notified by the same manner of expression,
used Acts 5.14. men and women being mentioned in both their sexes: But when
they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and
the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women. 2. From the
scope of the place and Context: in the two precedent Verses 10.11. the
generality of the people, before such time as Philip preached the Gospel to
them, are said to have given heed from the least unto the greatest unto one
Simon who was a Sorcerer, as if he had been the great power of God: But in
Verse. 12. speaking of the same persons, and generality of the people, shows the
wonderful success the Gospel had among them, when it came to be preached by
Philip: for as before they all gave heed to Simon from the least to the
greatest; even so now, they all believing the Gospel preached to Philip, were
baptized both men and women.

3. Mark 10.13, 14, 15, 16. wherein some are said to have brought young
Children (or Infants, as Luke has it, Luke 18.15.) to Christ, that he might
teach them; and wherein the Disciples are said to have rebuked those that
brought them, and wherein also the carriage of Christ thereupon is reported,
both toward the Disciples in reproving them, and toward the Infants
themselves, in taking them in his arms and blessing them, argues there was no
such thing practiced by Christ as the baptizing of Infants. For, 1. The end of
those that brought them to Christ was, that he might touch them, or, as Matthew
has it, put his hands on them, and pray, Matt. 19.13. And doubtless those who
did desire this of Christ, would have desired much more that he should have
baptized them (in such a sense as Christ is said to have baptized those that
came to him for that purpose, Joh. 3. verse. 22, 26. and Chap. 4. verse. 1.) if
he practiced any such thing as the Baptism of Infants is supposed to be: their
non-desiring of it under such circumstances, argues the nonbeing of any such
thing to be had. 2. In that the Disciples rebuked those that brought these
Infants, it argues that it was an unusual thing for such Children to be brought
to Christ, and that the Disciples thought it an impertinent thing to trouble
him with them; which apprehension and carriage of theirs, could not lightly
have taken place with them, if Children had been accustomed to have been
brought to his Baptism. 3. In that Christ did so highly approve of this
application of the Parents of these Children to him, as is declared he did; and
in that he did also embrace the Children and bless them, and yet so left them,
without proceeding to baptize them; it argues, with strength of probability,
that he did not use to baptize any other Infants: for it cannot lightly be
thought but that these Infants were as capable of Baptism as any others. 4.
Since three of the Evangelists do so carefully, punctually, and largely set
down the History of the bringing of these Infants to Christ, and of his
carriage toward them, and yet not any one of them giving the least hint of any
Infants being brought to his Baptism, nor of any being baptized by him or his
Disciples; why should we think, but that if there had been any such matter of
fact, as the baptizing of Infants, that had come under their cognizance and
observation, but that they would have been as careful, if not more careful, to
have recorded that, as well as those things they did record touching them, in
as much as such a thing as the baptizing of Infants, if it had been an
Ordinance of God, the knowledge thereof would have been of as great or greater
use unto the world, then the knowledge of those other things are touching
Christ's embracing and blessing Infants, which yet they have left on record for
our learning.

4 That description which the Scripture everywhere makes, Acts 2.41. and 16.14,
15.) or such as confessed their sins, ( Matthew. 3.6. Mark 1.5.) or such as
believed, ( Acts 18.8. and chap. 8. verse. 37.) or else such as were Disciples,
Joh. 4.1. And as we cannot reasonably suppose, that Infants are by any of these
or the like qualifications described; no more can we rationally suppose, that
they were baptized in those times to which these descriptions relate.

5. Both the instructions given to those who were commissioned to baptize, and
the practice of such persons who did baptize, argue the persons that were
baptized by them to be no Infants. For, 1. The instruction which Christ gave
those which he commissioned on this behalf, was, that they should first teach
persons, or make them Disciples, and then baptize them, Matt. 28.19. 2. The
practice of them who did baptize, was answerable to this commission; they first
instructed persons in the things of the Gospel, and then baptized them: Joh.
4.1. Mark 1.4. Acts 2.41. and 8.12. and 16.32, 33. and 19.4, 5. But now in as
much as Infants, whilst such, are not capable of receiving instruction in the
things of the Gospel, or of being taught, therefore it cannot reasonably be
supposed, that Infants, whilst such, should be of that sort or number of
persons, who were by Christ's commission to be baptized, or who were by any
baptized in pursuance of that commission.

But against this first Argument, Lydia was baptized, and her household, Acts
16.15. That the Jailer was baptized, he and all his, Acts 16.33. and also, that
Paul baptized the household of Stephanus, 1 Cor. 1.16.

To all which I answer, first, That it does not at all appear, Lydia (which yet
will be found the only Text that can colourably be pretended, so much as in
the least to countenance the thing objected) do much rather induce us to
conceive, that there were no Infants in that family: Because she being
described as the head of that family, it is very questionable whether she were
a maid, or a widow, and consequently so much the more questionable whether she
had any children at all; or if she had, and was a widow, it is yet so much the
more doubtful whether her children were Infants, or of riper age.

2. I answer yet further, Synecdoche is frequently put for the whole. Instances
of this nature that might be given are many, in which households are to be
understood according to one or more of the three considerations now mentioned;
as Genes. 35.2. and 50.4. 1 Samuel 1.21, 22. 2 Samuel 3.1. Jerem. 35.3, 18. Matthew.
10.13. and 12.25. In some of which foresaid respects it is, I suppose, that
whole households are sometimes said to believe, as Joh. 4.53. Acts 16.34. and
18.8. sometimes to fear and serve the Lord, Act. 10.2. Josh. 24.15. and
sometimes to be saluted as such, 2 Timothy 4.19. Romans 16.10, 11. And as there is
no reason to conceive, that Infants are intended in those things asserted
concerning these households mentioned in these Scriptures, the things themselves
being incompetible to Infants; so likewise is there no more reason to imagine,
that Infants are intended when households are said to be baptized, they being no
more capable of that regularly, then they are of believing. In 1 Samuel 1.21.
it is said, That the man Elkanah and all his house, went up to offer to the Lord
the yearly sacrifice, and his vow: and yet it is evident, Verse. 22. that
Hannah, Elkanah's wife, and Samuel his son, which were part of his household,
did not then go up to the place of public worship. And therefore when Lydia
is said to be baptized, she and her household, it no more necessary hereby to
understand her and her children, if she had any, then it is by Elkanah, and all
his house, to understand both himself and his young son Samuel.

3. he was baptized, and all his, straightway, Act. 16.33. so also is it said,
Verse. 32. that they spoke unto him the Word of the Lord, and to all that were
in his house: and in Verse. 34. that he rejoiced, believing in God with all his
house. And whereas Paul is said to have baptized the household of Stephanus, 1
Cor. 1.16. in Chap. 16. of the same Epistle, Verse. 15. this household of
Stephanus is said to consist of such persons as addicted themselves to the
Ministry of the Saints: Ye know the household of Stephanus, that it is the first
fruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves to the ministry of the
Saints. If then, it cannot reasonably be thought that Infants heard and
understood the Word of the Lord, or believed in God, or addicted themselves to
the Ministry of the Saints, as those of these households, which were baptized,
did; no more can it, with any color of reason, be supposed, that Infants were
baptized when those households were baptized. And though there be not the same
particular account given of the like qualifications in those that were baptized
of the family of Lydia; yet, according to that rule by which those Scriptures,
that speak of things more generally and briefly, are to be interpreted, by or
according to the tenor of those that treat of the same or like subject more
particularly and expressly, we are to reckon, that the same or like
qualifications were found in the household of Lydia, which were in those of the
households of the Jailer and Stephanus, and upon which they were alike baptized.
And thus much for the answering of this first Objection.

If it be further objected, That this first Argument,

Though it be no where expressly and in so many words said, those that were
baptized, continued, as in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, so in breaking
of bread and prayers, Acts 2.41, 42. But now women were baptized as well as
men, Acts 8.12. therefore women, as well as men, continued in breaking of bread
and prayers. Again, Acts 20.7. it is said, that the Disciples came together to
break bread: but now women were Disciples as well as men, and therefore we have
every whit as much reason to understand that saying of them, as of men, Acts
9.36. Now then, if any thing were asserted in Scripture concerning Infants, by
which it might be as plainly collected and gathered, that they were baptized,
as it may be inferred, that women did eat the Lords Supper, from what is
asserted concerning them; then it might well be said indeed, that this first
Argument is as well against women's having communion with men in the Supper of
the Lord, as it is against Infants Baptism; but till this appear, or something
like it, this Objection is of no force to invalidate our Argument.

ARGUM. II.
MY second Argument shall be taken from the nature of Baptism, and from the
declared ends and uses of it; and it is this:

If that Administration of Baptism, which is made to professed Believers, do
more conduce to, and better answer the ends of Baptism, then that does which is
made to Infants; then Baptism ought not to be administered to Infants, but to
professed Believers. The reason hereof is clear; because it is the duty of men,
to endevor, as much as in them lies, to observe and keep the Laws of every
Ordinance of God in the best manner they know how, and not to content
themselves with a lower and meaner way of doing and performing the same, when
there is an opportunity before them of rising up to that which is more
excellent, and which does more exactly answer the counsel and intendment of God
in it. If this were any man's doubt, it might be confirmed from such Scriptures,
which condemn such practices of men as most unworthy and accursed, who having
an opportunity of presenting God with a better sacrifice or service, do yet
present him with that which is worse: Mal. 1.14. Cursed be the deceiver, which
has in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt
thing. Those Scriptures likewise vote the same thing, which require, That men
seek to excel, to the edifying of the Church, 1 Cor. 14.12. That hold forth
ways that are more excellent then others, as to be more desired and striven for
then others, 1 Cor. 12.31. Phil. 1.10.

But that Administration of Baptism, The Assumption.
which is made to professed Believers, does more conduce to, and better answer
the ends of Baptism, then that which is made to Infants. The truth of this will
appear, by comparing Baptism as administered to the one and to the other, in
relation to the several ends and uses of Baptism.

1. Joh. 1.31. But that he (to wit Christ) should be made manifest unto Israel,
therefore am I come, baptizing with water. For he who is rightly baptized into
Christ, or Faith in his Name, does thereby profess Jesus Christ to be a worthy
person, meet to be believed in, and himself his servant and disciple. Besides,
the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ being represented in Baptism, (
Romans 6.3, 4, 5. Col. 2.12.) it administers an occasion unto men, to enquire
what an one Christ is, for what end he came into the World, dyed, was buried,
and rose again; and so knowledge of him and salvation by him is hereby
propagated.

This manifestation of Christ is better made by the Baptism of Believers, then
by the Baptism of Infants, whether it respects the party who is baptized, or
others who behold it.

1. This is true in respect of him who is baptized, because he is in a
capacity, by reason of the use and exercise of his understanding, to receive
that information and knowledge concerning Christ, which is intended by God in
that Ordinance, of which reception Infants, whilst such, are altogether
incapable, in as much as they have no knowledge between good and evil, as the
Scripture says, Deuteronomy. 1.39.

2. As this end of Baptism respects Spectators, it is more effectual unto them
when administered unto Believers, then when administered to Infants; because the
example of such who are voluntarily and actually obedient, from sound
principles of knowledge, unto the Will of God, in submitting to the Ordinance of
Baptism, and whose Faith in Christ is visible in their being willingly and
desirously baptized into his Name; I say, their example is much more apt, both
to quicken men unto a serious consideration of what is held out in that
Ordinance, as likewise unto the imitation of their Faith and Repentance visible
in it, then is the Baptism of Infants, who are merely passive therein, and who
neither are or can be moved thereunto by any inward principle, nor at all
religiously affected therewith, nor exhibit any example of Faith or Repentance
for others to imitate. As one Cock sets another on crowing, so the devout and
religious carriage of one, in using an holy Ordinance, is apt to take upon the
minds of others, and to kindle the same fire in them: Your zeal, says the
Apostle, has provoked very many, 2 Cor. 9.2.

That the Baptism of Believers has such an excellent tendency in it, appears
from Matt. 21.32. with Luke 7.29. For John came unto you in the way of
righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the Publicans and Harlots believed
him: And ye, when ye had seen it, repented not afterward, that ye might
believe. Here, 1. Our Savior upbraids the Priests and Elders with their
impenitency and unbelief. 2. That by which he aggravates their offense, is
their neglect of that means and opportunity of Faith and Repentance which they
had. 3. The means or motive inducing them to Repentance and Faith, which they
did neglect, it was that practice of the Publicans and Harlots, whereby they
gave account of their Faith: For their Faith was such, in the effects of it, as
was visible to the Priests and Elders: ( And ye, when ye had seen it, viz. the
Publicans and Harlots believing of John, repented not, etc.) 4. That account
which these Publicans and Harlots gave of their Faith, and that in which their
Faith was visible to the Priests and Elders, and by which they ought to have
been moved to Repentance and Faith, it was their being baptized upon their
believing the Doctrine of John. For that which Matthew here calls their
believing of John, Luke speaking of the same thing (as I conceive) calls it
their justifying God, in being baptized of John, Luke 7.29. In as much then, as
the fight or beholding that expression or declaration of the Faith of the
Publicans and Harlots, in their submitting to Baptism, was a great aggravation
of the impenitency and unbelief of the Priests and Elders, in that they having
such an example before them, and such a motive and provocation upon them to
believe, and yet did not believe; evident it is, that there was in the
deportment of the Publicans and Harlots, when they were baptized, something of
the nature of a motive or means, that was apt to prevail with the Priests and
Elders to follow their example; for otherwise it would never have been produced
against them by our Savior as an aggravation of their sin in not doing
likewise: For it therefore became an aggravation of their sin being committed,
because it was a means of preserving them from it before it was committed. From
the whole this is most evident, viz. That the Baptism of the Publicans and
Harlots, and yet not so much that neither, as that Faith and Repentance of
theirs which was visible in their Baptism, was in it self a potent means and
strong incitement to the Priests and Elders, and consequently unto others, to
repent and believe, and to express the same in like manner as the Publicans had
done, their sin in opposition hereunto being their rejecting the counsel of God
against themselves, in not being baptized, Luke 7.30.

But now, there is no such example of Faith or Repentance that is visible in
the Baptism of Infants, and consequently no such incitement unto, or means of
working Faith, in by standers and spectators; and therefore Baptism administered
unto Infants, is no such means of propagating the knowledge of Christ, and Faith
in him, as when it is administered unto professed Believers.

2. Another end and use of Baptism, is, Baptism of Repentance for the remission
of sins, Mark 1.4. Luke 3.3. There are several considerations in respect of
which, or some of which, I conceive, it is so called; all which are better
answered in that Administration of it which is made to men and women who are
Believers, then in that which is made to Infants.

1. If it shall be conceived, that it is therefore called the Baptism of
Repentance for remission of sins, because such who are at any time duly
baptized, do take up that Ordinance out of a principle of Repentance, upon
which they look for remission of sins according to the promise of God in that
behalf, (which if it be, the saying contains a metonymy of the cause for the
effect, a thing not unusual in Scripture,) yet this denomination and use of it,
is better served in men's Baptism, then in childrens; because Infants have no
such principle or act in them as Repentance is, and therefore their Baptism can
neither proceed from, or be declarative of such a cause; whereas the Baptism of
repentant persons, does both flow from, and is expressive of, such a cause.

2. If it be called the Baptism of Repentance, because men, by taking up that
Ordinance, do engage themselves to the practice of repentance and
mortification, (as the Apostle supposes the believing Romans to have done, Romans
6.2-6.) then this end is better provided for in the Baptism of men, then of
Infants. The reason is, because an engagement to practice Repentance, supposes,
1. An end of Repentance, 2. A capacity of performing that to which they do
engage; neither of which are to be found in Infants, and both which are to be
found in men; therefore this end of Baptism cannot be attained in childrens
Baptism, but in men's.

3. If it be called the Baptism of Repentance for remission of sins, because
God thereby signifies and seals unto men the remission of their sins upon their
Repentance; this end and use likewise is better answered in men's Baptism who do
repent, then in Infants who do not. 1. Because men who have begun to repent,
are in a good capacity to receive confirmation and establishment in their hope
and confidence of receiving remission of sins from God upon their Repentance,
and consolation thereby; whereas Infants, whilst such, are altogether
incapable of any such thing, in respect whereof this end is made frustrate when
Baptism is given to them. 2. Because there is a greater appearance both of the
wisdom and goodness of God in vouchsafing and applying such a means as Baptism
is, to strengthen men's Faith in his promise of remission of sins upon their
Repentance, unto such who, 1. Have need of this confirmation, and, 2. Are
capable of receiving it, then there is in that application of it which is made
to Infants, who neither have need of it, nor yet are capable of receiving it.

4. If it be called the Baptism of Repentance for remission of sins, because
the persons who are baptized do thereby profess and declare unto the world,
that they look for remission of their sins from God upon their Repentance, yet
this end also is better answered in men's Baptism, then in Infants: because men
are capable of making such a profession and declaration of themselves to the
world in and by their Baptism, when as Infants are altogether incapable of
doing any such thing.

5. If it be called the Baptism of Repentance, etc. because it seals and
confirms the Covenant or Promises of God made to men, touching the remission of
their sins upon their Repentance, yet this end and use also is attained upon
far better terms in the Administration of Baptism to Believers, and to men of
understanding, then it is or can be when administered to Infants who have
neither. For if this end and use should be the reason of this denomination of
Baptism, yet this must be supposed; That the intent of God, in making Baptism a
Seal of his Covenant and Promise, is not to make his Covenant more sure in it
self, but to give it thereby a more sure, stable, and unquestionable Being in
the minds and apprehensions of men: and if so, this end cannot be attained in
Infants by their Baptism, because they want the use and exercise of their
reason, judgment, and understanding, without which the Articles and terms of
Gods Covenant will never take place, or have a Being in the minds of any, by
way of belief.

3. Another end of Baptism seems to be this, viz. the Baptism of Repentance for
the remission of sins, (Mark 1.4. Luke 3.3.) because men are to take up that
Ordinance upon their first beginning to repent, in order to the remission of
their sins. For like reason I suppose it is called the washing of regeneration,
Tit. 3.5. because men, upon their being born again, are to be baptized,
according to what was practiced in the Apostles times. Hence it is likewise, as
may well be conceived, that men's being born of water, and of the Spirit, (Joh.
3.5.) the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, (Tit. 3.5.)
are joined together; not because the Spirit works Regeneration in and by
Baptism, if we respect the beginning of it; but because the work of
Regeneration by the Spirit, and the Baptism of water, which is declarative
thereof, are nearly conjoined in respect of time, if he who is regenerate by
the Spirit do but what becomes him: And now why tarryest thou, arise and be
baptized, Acts 22.16. -- And was baptized, he and all his, straightway, Acts
16.33. Finally, Believing, and being baptized, are conjoined as relative to
Salvation, ( Mark 16.16.) and Baptism has its rank, place, or standing in
Scripture next after Faith, ( Heb. 6.1, 2. Ephesians. 4.5. Mark 16.16.) because it
was one of the first fruits of Faith, by which they gave account to the world,
that they did believe indeed, and was doubtless esteemed a proof of Faith, and
without which they were not reckoned Disciples of Christ, notwithstanding any
other overtures that ways made.

That both Repentance, and the declaration of it by Baptism, is required on
man's part, to interess him in remission of sins, and sanctification of the
Spirit, the things covenanted or promised on Gods part; is too evident to be
denied by any, but those that will not see, from Acts 2.38, 39. Repent, and be
baptized every one of you in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost: For the
Promise is to you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as
many as the Lord our God shall call. And that God did not intend this way only
for those to whom these words were then spoken, or for the men and women of
that generation only, but that it was to be his standing method through all
generations, appears, in that the Apostle says, that the Promise, to wit, of
remission of sins, and gift of the Spirit, which was made on condition of
Repentance and Baptism, was made, not only to them then, and their children,
but to those that were further remote, to those afar off, even to all whom the
Lord our God shall call. And if this be one end and use of Baptism, as you see,
for persons thereby to enter their public assent and consent unto the terms
of the Gospel upon their cordial embracing of it, then the Baptism of Infants
is voyded as to this use also, in as much as they are incapable of exerting any
act of heart or mind by way of assent or consent to the terms of the Gospel, or
to signify any such thing by a voluntary submission to Baptism.

4. Another excellent effect and use of Baptism, is, Luke 7.29. That all the
people that heard him, and the Publicans justified God, being baptized with the
Baptism of John. When it is said, they justified God, the meaning is (I
conceive) that they declared him, according to the tenor of their Faith, to be
just and true in that Doctrine of Salvation which was preached to them by his
appointment, and which they had embraced; for so to justify God, is to declare
him just and true in his sayings; Romans 3.4. Let God be true, and every man a
liar, as it is written, that thou might be justified in thy sayings, etc.
They are said to justify God in being baptized, because by their voluntary
submission to that Ordinance, they did declare, that they judged the Doctrine
and Precepts of the Gospel, of which Baptism is a part, most worthy belief and
obedience, as coming from God.

But in as much as Infants are only passive in Baptism, and not at all active
or voluntary, they cannot contribute any thing toward the Justification of
God, in their approbation of, and obediential subjection to his Gospel in their
Baptism: and therefore this end of Baptism also suffers disappointment as often
as it is administered to Infants.

5. Lastly, Another great end of Baptism, are baptized into Christ, are said to
put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. they thereby declare themselves to belong to him, as
the servants of great men are known to belong to them, by their badg and livery
which they put on, when they enter themselves servants to them. The Apostle
from Verse. 23. of that Gal. 3. to Verse. 27. shows the use of the Law during the
time of that Administration, and the use of Faith and Baptism now under the
Gospel. He says verse. 23. that they were shut up under the Law until Faith
came, meaning, I conceive, that by the Ceremonies and Mosaical Observations,
they were enclosed about, and distinguished from the rest of the Nations, as
one man's ground is from another by an hedge or wall, or as a garden, by the
wall that does enclose it, is differenced from common ground, according to that
Cant. 4.12. A garden enclosed is my sister, my Spouse, a spring shut up, a
fountain sealed. Hereupon the Jewish Rites are called a middle wall of
partition between Jews and Gentiles; Ephesians. 2.14.

During the time therefore of this legal Dispensation, that which did
denominate them to be the people of God, was their observation and keeping of
the Law of Moses; and uncircumcision is frequently used to note such to be none
of Gods people, but of the profane world, who were under that denomination.

But now this way of differencing men lasted but till such time as Faith came,
as the Apostle notes; But after Faith is come (says he) we are no longer under
a Schoolmaster, verse. 25. i. e. no longer known to be Disciples or Scholars,
as formerly we were by our keeping of the Law. The Mosaical Dispensation
continued till Faith came, i. e. until the time of the Gospel Dispensation; and
then Faith became of the same use to denominate and distinguish who were the
children of God, and who not; which the Law and Ceremonies were of before: for
so the Apostle says, Verse. 26. For ye are (i. e. now ye are) all the children
of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. By faith (which here is said to have come when
the Schoolmastership of the Law ended) is meant, I conceive, the confessing or
acknowledging Christ Jesus to be come in the flesh, and to be the Son of God
and Savior of the world. That this is the Faith here spoken of, and that this
Faith was it by which men were to be distinguished as the children of God, from
those which were not, we have the greater reason to believe, not only because
this best agrees with the Apostles scope here, but also because it exactly
agrees with other Scriptures, where this very Faith, or acknowledgment, is made
the distinguishing character between those that are of God, and those that are
not; as 1 John 4.2, 3. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: every spirit that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: and every spirit
that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God.
Where the Apostle then, in the 26 Verse of this third Chapter of the Galatians,
says, Ye are all the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, and this by way
of distinction from that thing by which men were reckoned to be the children of
God under the Law; I conceive he does not only, if so much, speak of this
Faith, as constituting or making those, in whom it is, the children of God; for
so men were the children of God by Faith under the Law, as well as in times of
the Gospel; they being then justified by Faith in him that was to come, as we
are now justified by Faith in him as being come; so that the Apostle,
differencing Faith from the Law, does not difference Faith under the Gospel
from Faith under the Law; but when he says, Ye are all the children of God by
Faith, etc. he means, that they were declared and known so to be now, by their
acknowledgment of Christ; whereas they were wont to be deemed such by the use
of the Law, to which they were then Scholars. And hereof he gives this reason
or account, v. 27. For, says he, as many of you as have been baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ: So that the Faith, what ever it is, by which they
were said to be the children of God, in Verse. 26. must be the same in effect
with that which he calls the putting on of Christ in Baptism, Verse. 27. because
he asserts the former upon the taking place of the latter. And that this
putting on of Christ by Baptism, is not to be understood strictly of the
internal act of their Faith, but of their profession of this Faith, is evident,
not only from the nature of the service by which men publicly list themselves
the servants of Christ, but also from the import and signification of the
phrase or expression here used, and that is the putting on of Christ, which is
a Metaphor borrowed from the putting on of apparel, or something which men
visibly wear. Besides, their putting on of Christ in Baptism, would be no
reason why they were the children of God by Faith in Christ, if we should
understand their being the children of God constitutively, and not
declaratively, unless we will suppose, that man is the child of God in his
account, notwithstanding his believing in Christ, until he be baptized into
Christ. But if we understand the Apostle here to speak of Faith, that is, the
profession of Faith, or the acknowledgment of Christ, as that which does
declare who are the children of God, then this saying of his, that because they
had been baptized into Christ, that therefore they had put on Christ, was a
good reason or proof of their being known to be the children of God, by their
acknowledgment of Christ; because by their putting on of Christ in Baptism, and
clothing themselves with his Name, they did declare whose children they were,
and who it was they worshipped and resolved to serve, and from whom they
expected remission of sin, and the Salvation of their Souls. For so to be
baptized into Christ, what is it else, but to be baptized into the belief,
profession, and service of Christ? and to resign up ones self to be his. If ye
be Christ's, says he, Verse. 29. (as he supposes them to be, upon that very
account of their being baptized into him, as will appear, if you compare v. 27,
28, 29. together; If ye be Christ's) then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs
according to promise. The upshot or result then of this piece of the Apostles
discourse is, That persons by Baptism do make such a profession of Christ, as
by which they are characterized to be his. If this then be the characteristical
mark to distinguish the children of God from the world, then it will follow,
that no other acknowledgment of Christ without this, or with neglect of this,
is to be looked upon as any other then a partial owning of Christ, and not a
complete putting him on, so as to be esteemed thereby visibly the children of
God.

Which thing may be yet further confirmed by that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.13.
For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to drink into one
Spirit. That it is the Baptism by water that is here spoken of, is the general
sense of Interpreters, so far as their judgment herein is come to any knowledge
and observation. The body into which we are said to be baptized, is the
mystical Body of Christ, made up of Christ as head, and of the Saints as
members. In that by one Spirit they are said to be baptized hereinto, we are to
understand, I conceive, that it is by the work of the Spirit upon their hearts,
by which men are inclined to seek membership, or fellowship with Christ and his
Saints, in this way of Baptism, as being the way of God to attain hereunto. But
that which is principally for our purpose, is, that men and women are initiated
and brought into this Body by Baptism: They are baptized into one Body. And if
their entrance thereinto be made by Baptism, then it is evident, that they are
not to be reckoned to be of this Body till they be baptized, and consequently
that Baptism is the visible door by which man enter into this spiritual
corporation, and a wall of partition between the world and the Saints.

Those Scriptures witness the same thing also, which speak of men's being
baptized into Christ, and of their being planted together with him, Romans 6.3,
5. Gal. 3.27. For can we conclude less hence, then that men's visible being in
Christ is to be reckoned from the time of their Baptism? that being, as it
were, the immediate instrument or means of their visible ingression into him.
For otherwise, if they were to be looked upon as having a visible Being in
Christ, by any act, endowment, or qualification preceding Baptism, why should
their ingression, their entrance into Christ, be attributed unto their Baptism?
If men's owning of Christ, which still did precede their Baptism, had been
sufficient, as God accounts sufficient, to have asserted or declared their
visible or cognisible standing in Christ, doubtless the Holy Ghost would not
have ascribed, or rather appropriated, the same unto their Baptism, as now he
has done. For, as Paul speaks in another case, Gal. 3.21. If there had been a
Law given which could have given life, verily Righteousness should have been by
the Law: If the Law had been sufficient to have given life, God would not have
super-added the promise of the Gospel for the same end, for he makes nothing in
vain: so we may say in this case, if any qualification, action or profession,
preceding Baptism, could have rendered men's being in Christ knowable, upon
terms agreeable to the wisdom of God, he would not have super-added Baptism for
the same end.

But it should seem to be in this case, as it is amongst men; A Major or
Sheriff receives that kind of Civil or Magistratical Being, by which he is
distinguished from other men, from some solemn acts done at the time of his
enstalment into his Office: and as a Husband and Wife receive that conjugal
relation and matrimonial Being, proper to them, from some solemn act done at
the time of their marriage: or as a man receives a relative Being, as member of
such a Corporation, by some solemn act done at the time of his enfranchisement:
even so, according to the import of these Scriptures now insisted on, men and
women receive that relative Being, which they have in Christ, and as visible
members of that spiritual Corporation wherein Christ is head and chief, from
that solemn act of their being baptized into him. And as a Major or Sheriff is
not vested with his authority, or Husband and Wife with that power over the
bodies of each other, of which the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 7.4. nor yet any
member of a body corporate, with those immunities proper to him, by any
prequalification or action preparatory thereunto, until first that be acted and
done by way of solemnity, which appropriately and immediately does invest them
with their several and respective capacities; in like manner, none are to be
esteemed to be in Christ, or capable of those spiritual privileges which
visibly do belong to the body of Christ, the Church, upon the account of any
precedaneous qualification, profession, or action whatsoever, until first they
have passed through those spiritual solemnities in Baptism, by and upon which
they are invested with the denomination and visible privileges which do belong
in common to the members of Christ mystical body.

By the way; I have insisted the more largely upon this particular, to detect
the repugnancy of that Opinion, against the plain current of the Scripture,
which holds Baptism needless, useless amongst those that have long made
profession of the Gospel, though they as yet never were baptized. But it may be
I shall deal further with this conceit in a place by it self, and therefore
shall come to bring home what has been discoursed on this head to our present
purpose.

If then that public owning of Christ in Baptism, by which men put him on,
and by and upon which they are incorporated into Christ visibly, be another end
and use of Baptism, as you see it is, most clear and evident it is, that this
end and use is not to be found in the Baptism of Infants. And the reason hereof
is, because Intants neither do not can put on Christ in their Baptism, i. e.
make an actual declaration and profession unto the world, that they own and
acknowledge Christ to be come in the flesh, to be the Son of God, and Savior of
the World, to be their Lord and Lawgiver, as they do who put him on in Baptism.
If the Apostle had intended to have expressed the incorporation of Infants into
Christ by Baptism, sure he would have said, that Christ had put them on, or had
put himself upon them, and not that they had put him on; or else, that they
were thereby put into Christ by their Parents that offered them to Baptism, or
by him who did baptize them, and not that they themselves had put him on (as
now the words carry it) seeing they are only passive in their Baptism. But now
the words of the Apostle are express, that as many of you as have been baptized
into Christ, have (that is, you, even you your selves have) put on Christ. And
therefore in as much as Infants cannot, with any propriety or truth of
speaking, be said to put on Christ in Baptism, neither can they any whit more
properly or truly be said to be baptized into Christ; because the Apostle makes
the one, to wit, the putting on of Christ, as general and universal as the
other, viz. the being baptized into Christ.

Against this whole Argument,

To this I answer, by way of negation, viz. That there is the same reason to
suppose that Circumcision should less answer the ends thereof as administered to
Infants, then it would have done in case it had been applied to men of riper
years, as there is to conceive the like thing in the Administration of Baptism
to Infants: I say, I do deny there is the like reason for the one as there is
for the other; and that upon these grounds.

1. There is no such accommodation to, or correspondence between Baptism in the
letter of it, and its spiritual ends, when applied to Infants, as there was
between Circumcision in the letter of it, and its more spiritual ends; because
the proper end of Circumcision being by Gods own appointment for a token or
sign of the Covenant between God and that people to whom it was enjoined, Genesis
17.11.
this token or sign was not any transient thing (I mean, as touching the letter
of it) that did pass away in the acting of it, but was permanent and lasting,
so that the sign it self, and the Covenant to which it related, remained in the
flesh of him who was circumcised, all the days of his life, as visible to him,
and as capable of improvement to spiritual ends, many years after it was made,
as if it had been but newly acted and done before his eyes. My Covenant (says
God) shall be in your flesh ( i.e. remain there) for an everlasting Covenant,
Genes. 17.13. Whereas Baptism is a transient act, and leaves no such visible
impression in the Infant, as matter of memorial, signification, or instruction
to him when he comes to be a man, as that of Circumcision did: so that we see
there is not the like reason, but an apparent difference in this respect.

Nor can it be truly said, That either the report of Parents or Neighbors, or
any Parish, or other Register, is or can be equivalent unto the sign in the
flesh before mentioned, as to the ascertaining of men and women of their being
baptized in their Infancy: 1. Because there is not the like certainty nor
satisfaction in reports and hear-says, as there is in seeing and beholding,
which difference notwithstanding we have in these two cases in hand. 2. Because
opportunity of such satisfaction, as these reports, etc. are capable of giving,
may be cut off by the death or other removal of such from whom it is to be
received, or else by the removal of such Infants themselves into places far
remote, before ever they come to age; upon occasion whereof it may well fall
out many times, that persons may be at a great loss as touching any knowledge
they have, or can get, whether they were ever baptized or no: which
inconveniency was not incident to Infants Circumcision. And therefore in as
much as the spiritual influence and operation of such an Ordinance upon the
heart of a man when he comes to age, which he received in his minority (as
touching his personal interest in it) does depend upon his knowledge of the
thing done, as to matter of fact; therefore by how much more evident and
indubitable satisfaction hereabout was exhibited in and by that durable sign in
the flesh, which was made by Circumcision, above what is to be had by any means
to assure persons at age of their being baptized in their Infancy; by so much
the more did Infant-Circumcision answer the ends of that Ordinance, above what
Infant Baptism can be so much as supposed to answer the ends of this.

2. I answer yet further, That the end of Circumcision, The man that does those
things shall live by them, says the Apostle, by way of contradistinction from
the voice of the Gospel, or the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 10.5. And again,
The Law is not of Faith, (i. e. the Promises, many of them at least, were not
suspended on men's believing,) but the man that does them, shall live in them,
Gal. 3.12. Hereupon that Ministration is called the Ministration of the letter,
2 Cor. 3.6. the Ordinances thereof carnal Ordinances, and such as did not make
perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, Heb. 9.9, 10. The Apostle, to show
wherein the Gospel or new Covenant exceeds the Law or old one, says, that
according to this God puts his Laws in the minds of men, and writes them in
their hearts, Heb. 8.10. which implies, that he did not do so under the Old
Testament; or at least but very little comparatively. Again, Joh. 4.23. But the
hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
spirit and truth: implying, that thither-unto, or until then, they had not so
worshipped him; or at least, that there was but little of that found under the
Legal Dispensation. And, according to the nature of this Ministration, children
void of understanding and faith, were capable of holy things, as Circumcision
and Passover, and the like, and consequently of the ends and benefits of them
in part, upon a literal administration and reception of them, Romans 3.1, 2.
Exodus 12.44, 48.

But the case is far otherwise now under the Gospel, which is the Ministration
of the Spirit, (2 Cor. 3.6.) It is not the work done, but the manner of doing
of it in knowledge faith, and fear of the Lord, that entitles men unto the
benefit and blessing of Gospel Ordinances: for so the Apostle affirms
concerning Baptism it self, 1 Pet. 3.21. when he says, that it saves us now, as
the Ark did some in the days of Noah: not (says he) the putting away of the
filth of the flesh, ( i. e. not by the external letter of the Ordinance,) but
the answer of a good Conscience toward God: i.e. when accompanied with such a
frame of mind and conscience, as does answer God in his intendments of Grace in
that Ordinance. So again, Col. 2.12. when the Apostle says, that they were
buried with Christ in Baptism, and that they were therein also risen with him,
yet he says that thus they were by the faith of the operation of God, who
raised Christ from the dead: meaning, such a faith, as was produced by the
operation of God, or else such as had the operation of God in raising up Christ
for its object: however, it was by the interveniency of this Faith, that they
became both buried and risen with Christ in Baptism.

Now Infants, as they are not capable of acting this Faith, or making this
answer of a good Conscience, so they are not capable of those blessings and
benefits intended by God in Baptism; in as much as he has suspended the
donation thereof upon these, in conjunction with Baptism. And where any effect
depends upon the taking place of more causes then one (as it does in the case
in hand) it is not any one of those causes alone that will produce that effect.

3. with their fellows, yet doubtless the Ordinance it self was so much the
less spiritual, and so much the more weak, and savoring of the Legal
Ministration, and suited to the then childish condition of the Church, because
administration thereof was made to Infants. This, I conceive, might easily be
made out from several of those rational principles consonant to the Scripture,
upon and from which I have already evinced Baptism to be more spiritual,
profitable, and edifying, when administered to men professing the Faith, then
when applied to children. Therefore doubtless, what the Apostle speaks of the
Commandment in general (meaning the Law, which, as he says, made nothing
perfect) how that it is disanulled for the weakness and unprofitableness of it,
Hebr. 7.18, 19. may well be understood to comprehend even this part of the
Commandment also, which enjoined an Ordinance, one or more, to be administered
to little children. And how ever such a mean, low way and method of enjoying
Ordinances, as was accommodated to the capacity of babes, was not uncomely
whilst the Church was in the condition of children, as the Apostle speaks, (
Gal. 4.3.) no more then it is for a child, whilst he is a child, to speak and
act as a child; yet to retain this poor, and low, and barren way of
administering a Gospel-Ordinance to Infants, now the Church is raised, both in
capacity and administration to its manly condition, is as incongruous and
uncomely, as it is for one still to speak and act as a child, when he is become
a man. By this time I hope it appears, that there is not the same reason why
Baptism administered to Infants should reach the ends thereof, as there was why
Circumcision, though applied to Infants formerly, should attain its end. For
the nature of the two Ordinances differ, the terms of their Administration
differ, and the respective capacities of the Church then, and the Church now,
differ: and according to that rule in Logic. Where the things themselves
differ, there the reasons of those things differ also.

ARGUM. III.
3. MY next Argument shall be taken from the different nature of the two
Ministrations of the Old and New Testaments, as rendering Infant Baptism, in
that precise consideration of it as applied to Infants, disagreeable to the
Ministration of the Gospel, but withal more correspondent with the
Ministration of the Law: Therefore I thus further argue.

If Infant Baptism be disagreeable to the Ministration of the New Testament,
then Infants ought not to be baptized: The reason hereof is, because so far as
either this or any other way or practice does comply with the Legal
Ministration, and disagree with the Evangelical, so far it does cross or oppose
the design of God, in changing the Ministration of the Law, for that of the
Gospel; and consequently carries in it a spirit of antipathy against the very
spirit of the Gospel Ministration. This, if it were not sufficiently evident of
it self, might receive abundant confirmation from such Scriptures as these, and
what might fairly and plainly be deduced from them: Joh. 4.23, 24. 2 Cor. 3.6.
Gal. 4.9. Col. 2.8, 17. Heb. 7.18, 19. and 8.6, 7. and 9.9, 10, 11. and 10.1.
But I presume of every man's plenary satisfaction as to this: Therefore I
proceed.

But Infant Baptism is disagreeable to the Ministration of the New Testament.
Assumption.


1.

2. principal part of the Legal Ministration, and from that analogy and
proportion that is supposed to be between them: and not only so, but likewise
because such Arguments and Pleas tend to draw down this part of the
Gospel-Ministration, as applicable to Infants, unto the line and level of the
Legal. For such Arguments, and the thing argued, what are they else but such
which are after the rudiments of the World, and not after Christ, i. e. such as
are according to the Ministration of the Law which was by Moses, and not
according to that of the Gospel which is by Christ: of which the Apostle warns
the Colossians to take heed, as such by which they were in danger of being
deceived and spoiled: Col. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoil you through
Philosophy and vain deceit (i. e. through Philosophical and deceitful
reasonings, which are) after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the
world, and not after Christ. Now those reasonings may be said to be after the
rudiments of the world, not only which tend to commend the observation and
practice of those rudiments in all the particulars of the letter of them, but
also when such Arguments and Pleas, for such or such a practice, be derived
from, and grounded only upon those rudiments, and not on the Gospel. And, 2.
When they tend to promote a way or practice which answers the nature of those
rudiments in some one or more particulars proper to them, though otherwise not
the same literally and in all respects. For so Christ is said to be a Priest
after the order of Melchisedec, though he were not specifically such another
Priest in all respects, but such which held some similitude with him, Hebr.
7.15. Now that those Arguments for Infant Baptism, which are as the Axletree
upon which the Controversy on that side turns, and as the warp running all
along that piece of discourse; that these Arguments may be said to be after the
rudiments of the world, or one of the rudiments of the world, to wit,
Circumcision of Infants, and that in both these respects before mentioned, is
easy to conceive. For are not the principal Pleas for Infant Baptism derived
from, and founded on the Circumcision of Infants under the Law? And do they not
tend to promote a way and practice now under the Gospel, of administering an
holy Ordinance unto Infants? which for ought appears to the contrary, was
proper and peculiar to that Administration of the Law?

Nor does that dissolve the strength of what I have now said, viz. That both
our Savior and his Apostles vindicate and assert practices under the Gospel,
from the examples of practices under the Law: as the Disciples gathering ears
of corn on the Sabbath, from David's eating the shewbread; and the Priests
killing of Sacrifices in the Temple on the Sabbath, Matthew. 12.3, 4, 5. The
ministering in carnal things to Ministers of the Gospel, from the not muzling
the mouth of the Ox treading out the corn under the Law, 1 Cor. 9.9 10.

For,

But, Matt. 12.6. But I say unto you, that in this place is one greater then
the Temple: and more plainly, Verse. 8. For the Son of man is Lord even of the
Sabbath day. And so Paul in the other case, he first and principally pleads his
Apostolical Authority, 1 Cor. 9.1, 2. Am I not an Apostle? am I not free? have
I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? are you not my work in the Lord? If I be not
an Apostle to others, yet doubtless I am to you; for the seal of mine
Apostleship are ye in the Lord: but after he has done this, he then proceeds
to illustrate what he pleads, by that which he brings out of the Law, Verse.
8.9, 10. and in fine, does bottom the business on the appointment or ordination
of God, for so he says Verse. 14. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they
which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. 2. The things which both
Christ and the Apostle, in the cases objected, plead from examples out of the
Law, were not merely and barely institutive and positive, but of a moral
consideration, and so of a more ready perception and deduction from those
examples. The Disciples gathering of Corn on the Sabbath, could be supposed to
be a breach but of a ceremonial precept, and yet it was in order to preserve
their lives, health, and strength, a thing enjoined by a moral precept, which
is superior to that which is but ceremonial: in which case the Pharisees might
easily have satisfied themselves from the examples produced by Christ; as he
says, If ye had known what this means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice,
ye would not have condemned the guiltless, Matthew. 12.7. That there was also a
moral equity in the nature of the thing, viz. that they who preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel, (another thing that was said to be pleaded from
examples in the Law) appears plainly; because the Apostle supposes a like
equity in this, as there is, that he that goes a warfare should have his
charges born by them for whom he fights; or as there is that he who planteth a
vineyard should eat of the fruit thereof, or that feeds a flock should eat of
the milk thereof, or that the laborer should have his hire, 1 Cor. 9.7. 1 Timothy
5.18.

But now Infant Baptism has not any express authority of Christ or his
Apostles to back it, or any moral equity in and of it self discernable to
commend it; in both which respects it differs from the instances and examples
objected, and fails of that confirmation it catched at by them. And such a
difference in the nature of things, cannot but make a like difference in those
proper inferences that may be drawn from them. It Is true indeed, it is ordinary
to assert such things as are plain parts of the Gospel, from the prefigurations
and predictions of the Law, ( Acts 26.22. Romans 3.21. Epistle Heb. etc.) but to
assert any thing from the Ceremonies of the Law, which has no footing in the
Gospel, is doubtless that which is after the rudiments of the world, and not
after Christ; which I suppose verily to be the case of Infant Baptism, when it
is pleaded from Infants Circumcision.

3. Another thing, by which it may appear that Infant Baptism is not agreeable
to the Gospel-Ministration, is, in that it differs from it in this property of
it, viz. as it is a Ministration of the Spirit; for so it is called, 2 Cor. 3.6.
It Is the Ministration of the Spirit in two respects: 1. Because in and by this
Ministration the Spirit is given unto men, Galat. 3.2, 5. 2. Because the
worship and service which God receives from men under it, is, or ought to be
more spiritual then that was under the Law; in both which respects
Infant Baptism will be found disagreeable to it.

1. That Baptism, as an Ordinance of the New Testament, and part of the Gospel.
Ministration, when duly administered and received, does contribute toward their
receiving of the Spirit, in respect of a greater presence and operation
thereof, then till then ordinarily has been enjoyed by them who are thus
baptized, may appear from the promise of God made in that behalf, Acts 2.38.
Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name
of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost etc. And that this was not particular and peculiar to those
persons unto whom Peter then spoke these words, but that the same promise is
made to all, in all ages, that shall repent and be baptized, is evident by that
which follows in the next Verse, whereby the Apostle does assure them of the
remission of their sins, and their reception of the Holy Ghost, in case they
did repent, and were baptized, upon this ground; because the promise of God, to
wit, upon the terms before mentioned, was made to them, and to their children,
and not to them only, but also to those afar off, viz. in respect of nation and
generation, even as many of them or their children, or others afar off, as whom
the Lord our God should so call, viz. by Repentance and Baptism. And it is very
like, that it is because of that proximity or neerness of relation that is
between this Ordinance of Baptism by water, and this Baptism of the Spirit,
that men's being born of water and of the Spirit, (Joh. 3.5.) and the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, are coupled together in
Scripture, Tit. 3.5. 1 Cor. 6.11. And it is not unlike neither, but that the
Spirits descending upon Christ immediately upon his being baptized ( Mat.
3.16.) might have this instruction in it, to teach all those that should
regularly be baptized with water as he was, to expect a greater measure and
presence of the Spirit, then before had been vouchsafed to them.

But now that it is not reasonable to expect, that any such effect should be
produced by Infants being baptized, is evident upon this ground, because the
gift of the Spirit is still made in Scripture to follow the act of men's
beleving the Gospel, (of which act Infants are incapable,) Joh. 7.39. Acts
15.7, 8. and 19.2. Gal. 3.14. Ephesians. 1.13. And therefore when I affirm, as
before, That the gift of the Spirit, or some greater measure of the Spirit, is
promised upon Baptism duly received, I would not be understood, as if I meant,
that this promise is made to any merely and barely upon their being baptized,
but to their Baptism in conjunction with their believing and repenting, for so
it is in the forecited place, Acts 2.38. Repent, and be baptized, etc. and ye
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost: The promise of the Spirit is not
made, either to Repentance or Baptism singly, but to both in conjunction. So
that although Baptism be to be received with an eye to the promise of the
Spirit, and under an expectation of a greater presence thereof, yet by such
only who are under that qualification of believing; for where things are
promised upon several conditions, or upon condition of several things in
conjunction, it is not the performance of one of those conditions alone, that
can put a man into a due and well-grounded expectation of the promise.

That Infants are in no present or actual capacity of believing whilst such,
is evident upon this ground, because they have not the use and exercise of
understanding, knowledge, or reason, without which none can actually believe.
For faith supposes an actual knowledge in him who does believe, of these two
things; 1. A notion or knowledge of the thing, matter, record, or testimony, to
be believed; and, 2. A notion or knowledge of him who is to be believed, or who
is the Author of that doctrine or saying which is the subject matter of Faith;
as namely, That he is such an one as may be credited in what he says. These
things are clear from these and the like Scriptures, Romans 10.14, 17. Joh. 9
3, 6. Psalm. 9.10. 2 Timothy 1.12. That Infants have no such knowledge as to make
any Judgment upon either person or thing to be believed, as touching either the
goodness or badness of the one, or the probability or improbability of the
other, appears Deuteronomy. 1.39. Your little ones, which ye said should be a prey,
and your children which in that day had no knowledge between good and evil, they
shall go in, etc. Isai. 7.16. Jonah 4.11.

If Infants then be in no present capacity to believe, and without believing in
no capacity to receive the Spirit, it follows, That Infants, whilst such, are
in no due capacity of receiving Baptism in order to their receiving the Spirit,
and consequently that Baptism administered to them, is disagreeable to the
Gospel-Ministration, as it is the Ministration of the Spirit; where as the
Baptism of Believers is most commodiously suitable thereunto.

Nor can it reasonably be supposed here, that such a notion as this will salve
this fore, viz. That Baptism may be received by Infants in order to their
receiving the Spirit when they come to believe, and so their Baptism be
agreeable to the Gospel-Ministration as it is a Ministration of the Spirit,
notwithstanding it be received in Infancy; Because Baptism has no influence
this way as it is a work done, in which respect only Infants are capable of it,
but as it is done, submitted to, and taken up out of faith, and in obedience to
God, as has been already proved before in part, and will be further confirmed
afterward.

2. Infant Baptism is disagreeable to the Gospel-Ministration as it is the
Ministration of the Spirit, in this respect also, viz. as it requires all
Worshippers, in all acts of worship, in all the Ordinances of this
Ministration, to worship God in Spirit, with the mind, in faith and fear of the
Lord. That these are the terms of the Gospel-Ministration, appears from Job.
4.23, 24. with other places cited formerly upon somewhat like occasion, upon
which account I may spare further insisting on them here. He that makes use of
a Gospel-Ordinance, and does not discern in some measure the nature, tendency
and import of it, contracts sin and guilt to himself thereby, as is most clear
in the case of the Supper of the Lord; he that in eating and drinking does not
discern the Lords body, eats and drinks Judgment to himself, 1 Cor. 11.29. And
because this qualification of discerning is not found in Children, therefore
they are not admitted to this Ordinance. And how they should be incapable of
this Ordinance in this respect, and yet capable of Baptism, I understand not,
especially considering that they both represent the death of Christ, Romans 6.3.
1 Cor. 11.26. both relate to the great benefit of remission of sins by him, and
tend to serve the important interest of men thereabout, Mark 1.4. Matt. 26.28.
Since they both then travel with the same blessing in the main; how comes it to
pass that the blessing of the one accrues not to the receiver but by his
discerning the mind of God in it? and yet the benefit of the other does,
without any such discerning, if that were true which some imagine? Certainly if
plain Scriptures will satisfy hereabout, they do inform us, that it is by
means of Faith, and the answer of a good Conscience, that Baptism becomes
beneficial as to its ends, as well as the Supper by a spiritual discerning as
to its, Colos. 2.12. 1 Pet. 3.21. But I shall not insist again upon that which
I have already dispatched. In a word, the whole Ministration is denominated by
Faith, ( Galat. 3.23, 25.) because Faith, from first to last, from one end of
it to the other, is to steer all affairs under it on man's part, to act every
service, to accompany every Ordinance, to receive every blessing, to render all
actions acceptable, and to make all parts of it beneficial.

Where this qualification therefore is known to be wanting, as it is in
Infants, certainly there Baptism cannot be applied without an apparent breach
of the Laws and Rules of this spiritual Ministration. And thus also have I made
good the premises of this third Argument; the Conclusion will follow of it
self without help, etc.

AROUM. IIII.
MY next Argument shall be this: If none ought to be baptized, but such who
appear voluntarily willing to be baptized in obedience to God, then Infants
ought not be baptized.

The reason hereof is, because Infants Baptism cannot reasonably be supposed to
proceed from any willingness in them to obey God therein, they being no wise
voluntary or active, but altogether passive therein.

But none ought to be baptized, Assumption.
but such who appear voluntarily willing to be baptized in obedience to God.
The reason hereof is this, because without this obediential willingness,
Baptism will be unprofitable and fruitless to them: and where we know the good
of Baptism is not to be attained, there it is not to be administered; for in
case we should, it would be a profanation of the Ordinance, a taking of Gods
Name in vain: Though the sowing of seed be never so necessary, yet it would be
no man's wisdom, but folly, to sow in such a ground, or at such a season, which
he knows will render his seed fruitless.

That there is no reason to expect otherwise, but that Baptism should be
unprofitable to all such who do not take it up voluntarily, willingly, and in
obedience to God, appears upon this account.

1. Because now under the Gospel, this is the standing Rule or Law between
Duties and Rewards, between the using of holy Ordinances, and the benefit that
comes by them, viz. That Duties be done, and Ordinances performed willingly,
and in obedience to God: 1 Cor. 9.17. where the Apostle, speaking of his
preaching the Gospel, says, If I do this thing willingly, I have a reward.
This saying of the Apostle, though it were uttered upon one particular
occasion, yet doubtless it reaches all persons and all duties; If any man do
any duty willingly, as unto God, he shall have his reward. But as Affirmatives
use to include their Negatives by way of implication, so it is here; If I do it
not willingly, I have no reward: For so the particle IF, imports the condition
upon which the reward is to be received or not received: and you will spoil the
sense of the place, if you suppose, that if the Apostle did the thing he there
speaks of, he should receive a reward, whether he did it willingly or no.
Again, 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according
to that which a man has, and not according to that he has not. This also,
though it were spoken upon a particular occasion (as many the great Doctrines
of the Scriptures were,) yet it is a general proposition, which reaches even
all duties. If there be first a willing mind, that is, an obedientious
disposition God ward; and this willingness of mind, and obediential
disposition, is that, both which puts a man upon doing his duty according to
that ability he has, and which also renders the same acceptable and rewardable
with God. Here again this conditional particle IF, If there be first a willing
mind, must needs imply, that if this willing mind be wanting, the man is not
accepted, his action not rewarded, though he do the thing: For so Paul,
speaking of the same duty of giving, 1 Cor. 13.3. says, Though I bestow all my
goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned and have not
Charity, it profits me nothing: Still teaching us, that if there be an inward
principle of a willing compliance with the Will of God wanting in any action,
which in it self is good, and commanded of God; yet for that very cause it
becomes unprofitable to him that does it, in which respect we affirm Baptism of
Infants unprofitable to them.

2. Promises made unto duty, or upon condition of duty, are rewards of that
obedience which is yielded to God in discharge of duty, when they are fulfilled
thereupon. Now it is no wise proper to say, or rational to suppose, that God
rewards his creature, man, for that wherein he is only passive, they being such
actions which we call moral, and which proceed from the motion of the Will
governed by a divine Law, that are rewardable by God. And therefore, unless
Baptism be submitted unto willingly, and in obedience to God, which cannot be
supposed in Infants; the good things annexed thereto, by way of promisory
recompense of such obedience, cannot upon any good ground be expected.

3. I have proved before in another Argument, That now, under the
Gospel-Ministration, there is no benefit comes, either by Baptism, or any other
Ordinance, but by means of his Faith who partakes thereof; Without Faith it is
impossible to please God, (Hebr. 11.6.) i. e. in any service to approve ones
self acceptable to him; For whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. It
then the benefit we speak of comes not without Faith, then neither does it
accrue without that willingness of mind and obedientious disposition Godward
we speak of, because it is impossible this should be separate from Faith; I
mean, a living active Faith, which is the Faith of Gods acceptance: and
therefore, to believe, and to obey, are in Scripture frequently put one for
another, and accordingly indifferently so translated, as appears by the double
readings.

I shall not here again answer the case of Infant-Circumcision, which possibly
may again rise up in the minds of some against what has been now laid down in
this Argument also, but shall refer the Reader, for satisfaction herein, to
what has been already done about that subject in answer to a former Objection,
as judging it sufficient at this turn also.

I shall not proceed further to levy more Arguments to serve in this
Controversy (unless occasionally) though many more, of like import with the
former, might perhaps readily be formed and drawn up, as judging these already
insisted on abundantly sufficient to detect the vanity of Infant Baptism.

Nor shall I apply my self to answer those many contrary Arguments, which are
wont to be mustered up in defense of Infant Baptism; not because I count them,
or any of them, either impregnable, or of hard or difficult attempt; but partly
because in those Arguments I have produced, there is a ground or foundation
laid of answering all contrary reasonings, and which is of easy application
this way: and partly because some of the chiefest Arguments on that side, have
been produced already Objection-wise, and received their answer: and partly
likewise because this has been sufficiently done by other hands: and lastly
for brevity sake, as perceiving copious discourses hereabout to be burdensome.

But because there is one Argument which seems to be much taking with some,
which as it is of a later invention then others, so perhaps has not received
such answer and refutation as others have; therefore as to this, I shall give
in some what by way of answer.

The Argument is this:

If the love of God to persons be the first and original ground of their being
capable of Baptism, then Infants are capable of Baptism: The reason of this
consequence is, because Infants are in the love and favor of God, in as much as
God has pardoned that sin, of which they were guilty in and by Adam, and so
put them into a condition of Salvation by Christ.

But the love of God to persons is the original or first ground of their being
capable of Baptism. Assumption.
To make good this minor Proposition, two things are alleged, 1. That the
reason why Faith is necessary in persons who have not been baptized in their
Infancy, to render them capable of Baptism, is, because it is that mean by
which those that are to administer Baptism come to know that they are in the
love and favor of God: and if such a thing could be known without such a
profession of Faith, as it may in the case of Infants, such a profession of
Faith would not be necessary in order to such an admission. 2. That it was upon
this ground that Christ himself was capable of Baptism; for otherwise he had no
such Faith as is required of men to render them capable of Baptism, viz. a
Faith in God touching the remission of sins through Christ; but as he was a
person beloved of God, upon this account Baptism did belong to him, and
accordingly was administered. And yet that Christ did not receive Baptism upon
any terms extraordinary, though he himself was a person extraordinary, but upon
the same terms upon which others do, and ought to receive it, appears by this,
viz. in that even his Baptism was administered and received, in conformity to a
standing Rule or Law of Righteousness, common to others as well as to him; for
so he himself says to John Baptist, speaking of his own Baptism; Suffer it to
be so now, for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, Matt. 3.15.

Before I come to answer particularly to this Argument, children of believing
Parents: But by this Argument, Baptism is made to appertain to all Infants
whatsoever, whether they be children of believing or unbelieving Parents,
because it supposes all Infants to be in the love of God in the forementioned
respect: and therefore if this be true, the other must be false in its
restrained sense; and contrarily, if the other true, this false: so that you
see the witnesses do no better agree in their evidence in this behalf, then the
false witnesses did, that came against Christ, in their testimony. 2. This
Argument, if it were good, would render, not only all Infants capable of
Baptism, But all men likewise, whether Christian or Pagan, because they are
beloved of God in such a sense as it is said Infants are, to wit, in having that
sin, of which they were guilty in Adam, remitted to them. For if that sin were
remitted to them in their Infancy, surely that act of grace and pardon is not
recalled when they come to be men, in as much as we no where find in Scripture,
that any men's perishing is at all charged upon that sin which they were guilty
of in Adam, but upon their own voluntary neglect of Grace, and on their actual
transgression. And therefore if it be absurd (as I suppose it will be granted
to be) to argue all men's capability of Baptism from this ground, which yet is
common to all men as well as Infants, why should it be thought any other then
absurd likewise, to infer Infants capability of Baptism from the same ground?
Since in things which are the same, or like, there is the same or like Reason
and Judgment, as Logicians speak.

But to come closer to the Argument; I do deny the consequence of the major
Proposition; I do deny that it therefore follows, that Infants are capable of
Baptism, though it should be granted, that the love of God is the original
ground of rendering persons capable thereof. And the reason of this denial is
taken from that difference which is between the original ground of persons
capability of Baptism, and the next and immediate ground thereof: for however
the love of God be the ground of all Dispensations of good to the Creature, yet
it is not some the self same respect; but as it exhibits it self in one
Dispensation of it in one respect, so in another Dispensation thereof it
exhibits it self upon other terms and respects. And therefore we must
distinguish of the love of God as it is the ground of Baptism. The love of God
then is to be considered, either, 1. In the whole entire sum or body of it,
generally and indefinitely considered, as comprehending and enclosing in it all
particular Dispensations of Grace toward the Creature; or else, 2. As it
exerts or puts forth it self in those particular Dispensations themselves. The
love of God in the former sense, though it be the ground of all particular acts
of Grace, and so of that also which appertains to Baptism, yet it is no sound
way of reasoning, to conclude persons to be in an immediate capacity of
Baptism, because they are in the love of God under this general consideration
of it. For upon the same ground one might as well argue Infants to be strong
Christians, or fit to be chosen Pastors, Teachers, or Deacons, as to argue them
capable of Baptism, because persons are in these capacities by virtue of the
love of God to them. And yet who sees not how absurd it would be to reason thus?

If the love of God to persons be the original ground which renders them
capable of being chosen into the office of Pastor, Teacher, or Deacon, then
Infants are capable of being chosen into these Offices, because they are in the
love of God: But the love of God is, etc. If the love of God to persons be the
original ground of rendering them capable of the denomination of strong
Christians, then Infants are capable of the denomination of strong Christians,
because they are in the love and favor of God: But, etc.

Again, to put another case like unto these;

If life be the original ground or cause why persons are capable of speaking,
then Infants are capable of speaking, because they have life: But life is the
orignal ground or cause why persons are capable of speaking, Ergo.

By the light then of these instances, the invalidity, indeed absurdity of
concluding Infants to be capable of Baptism, be cause they are in that love and
favor of God, may you see be sufficiently discerned.

If then we would come to argue steadily, so as to conclude persons capability
of Baptism from the love of God to them, we must consider the love of God under
that particular and precise notion of it, by which persons are put into an
immediate, not remote capacity of Baptism. For though it is true, that that
love of God, which is vouchsafed Infants in the pardon of that sin that
devolved it self on them from Adam, does put them into a remote capacity both
of Baptism and all other consequential acts of grace, which are vouchsafed men
upon their believing and diligent and faithful improvement of all means and
opportunities of grace, etc. yet it does not put them into an immediate
capacity of these, until they do believe, and have improved those means and
opportunities, upon condition of which such additional and progressionary acts
of grace are promised and suspended; no more then a child's ability to read his
Horn-book, or Primmer, puts him into a capacity of understanding his Grammar.

That the Dispensation of Gods grace and love is made to Infants in one
respect, and to persons in an immediate capacity of Baptism in another; and
that that act of grace which is vouchsafed Infants in the pardon of that first
sin, etc. does not put them into an immediate capacity of Baptism, appears upon
these grounds.

1. Because that act of grace, or dispensation of Gods love, unto which Baptism
does appropriately belong, is that which is exerted and put forth in the pardon
of men's actual transgressions, and this too not without their repenting or
believing; whereas that act of grace, of which Infants partake, is such as is
vouchsafed them in the pardon of original sin only, and this too without their
repenting and believing, merely upon the account of the death of Christ. That
that act, or those acts of grace, unto which Baptism appropriately does belong,
is the pardon of sin upon repentance, and such other acts of grace as are
concommitant and consequential thereunto, appears plainly by this, viz. in that
Baptism is called (according to the nature of it, and the intent of God in its
institution) the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins, Mark 1.4.
Luke 3.3. That is, that Baptism which is to be received upon men's repentance
for the remission of sins; or that Baptism, in and by which men profess they
expect remission of sins in the way of repentance: or because the reception of
which Baptism proceeds from a principle of repentance; or else because God does
therein authentically assure men of the remission of their sins upon their
repentance. Take it which way you will, it proves this, That Baptism is
conversant about, and subservient unto that act of Gods grace and love, which
is vouchsafed men in the pardon of their sins upon their repentance: and if so,
then is it irrelative to the grace of God in the pardon of Infants sin, which
is vouchsafed them without, and before repentance takes place.

2. The love of God is the immediate ground of Baptism, so far only as it
relates too, or is effective of the good of men in Baptism; for the reception
of Baptism is not otherwise to be esteemed an effect of Gods love, then as the
good and benefit of men is concerned therein: That which Christ's speaks of the
Sabbath, how that it was made for man, Mark 2.27. i. e. for the good of man, is
true of Baptism, and every other Ordinance and Institution of God. In as much
then as Baptism is not otherwise beneficial unto any, but by means of their
Faith, and answer of a good Conscience; and in as much also, as that Infants
are not under this capacity of means, both which I have formerly evidently
proved; therefore it follows undenyably, that God does not love Infants upon
any such terms as he does those unto whom he commends and communicates his love
in and by Baptism, and consequently, that the love which God bears to Infants,
puts them into no immediate capacity of Baptism.

3. The extent of Gods love to Infants, so far as is pretended in the reason of
the consequence of the major Proposition, consists only in the pardon of
original sin, and the putting them into a condition of Salvation by Christ; all
which love of God they are invested with before ever Baptism can be applied to
them; because the love of God in this respect, is not conditional, nor does
depend upon the action of any creature, or application of any means, but solely
upon the atonement which Christ has made on that behalf: and therefore
Baptism lies out of the verge, compass or circumference of the love of God as
enjoyed by Infants, and contributes neither less nor more in that dispensation
of Gods love to them; in which respect also Baptism is irrelative to the love
of God in that precise consideration of it, in which it is communicated to
Infants.

Whereas it is alleged by way of proof of the minor Proposition. 1. That the
reason why Faith is necessary in persons who have not been baptized in their
Infancy, to render them capable of Baptism, is, because it is that mean by
which those that are to admit them to Baptism come to know that they are in the
love of God; and that if such a thing could be known without such a profession
of Faith, as it may in the case of Infants, that then such a profession would
not be necessary in order to such an admission.

To this I answer likewise; 1. That a profession of Faith in such persons, to
render them admitable to Baptism, is not necessary to inform those that admit
them touching Gods love to them in any respect whatsoever, for this may be
known without such a profession; but in relation to their knowing them to be in
the love and favor of God in that particular respect and determinate
consideration, which renders men immediately capable of Baptism; in this
respect such a profession of Faith is necessary, because without it the love of
God to them upon such terms is not knowable, and consequently they not
admitable to Baptism, as was before proved: by which Infants, as touching their
capability of Baptism, are clearly excluded. 2. The profession of Faith is
necessary in the case in hand, for other causes then merely to inform those
that admit persons to Baptism, of their being in the favor of God in general
whom they do admit, and that is to let them know that such are capable of the
several ends and benefits of Baptism, and so meet for Baptism it self; because
unless they have reason to conceive that they have Faith, they can have no
reason to conceive them in a present capacity of the ends and benefits of
Baptism, and so not of Baptism it self, in as much as these are suspended upon
Faith, as has already been evinced.

Whereas in the second place it is said, that it was upon this ground, viz. of
Gods loving him, that Christ himself was capable of Baptism, and not his Faith,
in as much as he had no such Faith as is required of men to render them capable
of Baptism, to wit, a Faith in God touching the remission of sins through
Christ; and that yet Christ did not receive Baptism upon any terms
extraordinary, but upon the same terms as others do, in as much as it was in
conformity to a standing Law of Righteousness common to others as well as him:

To this I answer; That this reason is built upon a mistaken ground, as
supposing Christ to have no such Faith as might render him capable of Baptism,
at least such as is required of other men in order thereunto. For Christ had
the same Faith which is required of all other persons in that case. For what
Faith was required of other men to render them capable of Baptism, save this?
viz. To believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God? For so when the Eunuch
demanded of Philip, saying, See here is water, what hinders me to be baptized?
then Philip answered and said, If thou beleevest with all thine heart thou
may: and he answered Philip again, and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God: upon which confession Philip baptized him, as counting it
summarily to contain the expression of that believing with all the heart, which
he before had set as the condition of his admission thereunto; and indeed was
none other then the Faith of the Gospel, and the common form of Believers
confession: Mat. 14.33. Joh. 1.49. and 6.69. and 11.27. and 20.31. 1 John 5.5.
Acts 9.20. And I hope none that own the Scriptures, will deny Christ himself to
have this Faith, in as much as it was his own doctrine which he taught, Joh.
10.36. and 19.7. Matt. 27.43. The truth is, Christ himself had a Faith in God
his Father, ( Heb. 2.13. Psalm. 22.8. with Mat. 27.43.) and did continue in his
Fathers love in the way of obedience to his commands, as other the children of
God do, Ioh. 15.10. And therefore well may it be said indeed, that Christ
received Baptism upon the same terms as others did, at least in several
respects, and that in conformity to the same standing Law of Righteousness (to
wit, the institution of God) common to others as well as to him. For doubtless
this was the Will of God hereabout, viz. That at what time men undertake
publicly to profess and assert the Gospel unto the World in word and deed,
then and at that time they are to take up the Ordinance of Baptism; as the
examples of persons, whose Baptism is recorded in the new Testament, do
abundantly witness. And therefore Christ himself, when he also is coming forth
into the world, to profess and publish the Gospel which he had received from
the Father, he also makes a dedication of himself unto this service by the
solemnity of Baptism, as others did, and ought to do.

And we might hence well frame an Argument against Infant Baptism, in stead of
wresting it, as a witness for it, thus:

If Christ Jesus his being baptized at that season, and upon that occasion,
when he began to profess and publish the Gospel, and not before, was in
conformity to a Law of Righteousness in this behalf; then those that are
baptized, who yet make no such profession, as Infants are, are not baptized in
conformity to that Law of Righteousness:

But Christ Jesus his being baptized at that season, and upon that occasion,
when he began to profess and publish the Gospel, and not before, was in
conformity to a Law of Righteousness in this behalf; therefore those that are
baptized, as Infants are, who yet make no such profession, are not baptized in
conformity to that Law of Righteousness.

That which adds weight to the minor Proposition in this Argument (which I
suppose is the only thing that will be questioned in it) is this, viz. That
Christ his fulfilling a Law of Righteousness in his Baptism, did not consist
simply in his being baptized at any time, but in conjunction with his Baptism
it self, in his being baptized at such a time and upon such an occasion as that
was, when and wherein he began to profess and publish the Gospel. For otherwise
it is not to be thought, but that Christ had an opportunity of being baptized
long before, and much sooner then he was, in as much as John had continued
baptizing a considerable space of time before Christ came to to be baptized of
him. For John had traveled much ground, even all the Country round about
Jordan, both to preach and baptize, which must needs take up much time,
especially considering the great multitudes that were baptized of him, even
Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, Luke 3.3. Mat.
3.5. And as it should seem, after this, or at least after a large progress
herein made, Jesus Christ was baptized also, as appears by the order of the
History of the Evangelists: Now when all the people were baptized (says Luke)
it came to pass that Jesus also being baptized, and praying, etc. Luke 3.21.
Now what may we conceive might be the reason why Christ was not baptized rather
with the first then with the last of the people? Certainly, it is not
reasonable to conceive, that it was because he had less zeal to fulfill this Law
of righteousness, then was in the multitude that were baptized before him; and
if not this, what else imaginable but this, viz. that his Jesus said unto them,
My time is not yet come, but your time is always ready. Joh. 7.6.
appointed time and season of his appearing with the Gospel in the world, was
not till then, and therefore not his time of being baptized, in as much as the
one was in order to the other, and was to take its rise and beginning from the
other. And this we have further reason the rather to conceive, because of that
Particle NOW, emphatically here used, as it relates to the fulfilling of
righteousness by that which was to be done: Suffer it to be so NOW (says
Christ to Joh. touching his being baptized) For thus it becomes us to fulfill
allrighteousness, Mat. 3.15. Not only in being baptized of him, but in being
baptized of him NOW, to wit, at that juncture of time in which he was to be
manifested to the world to be the Son of God, and to manifest to the world the
Gospel of God: NOW to be baptized, viz. upon suchterms, it was a thing very
comely, (though John seemed to think otherwise) in as much as that it was a
fulfilling of righteousness, i.e. that righteous law or institution of God,
given in that behalf. And thus we see, that the example of Christ's Personal
Baptism, which was entreated to bless the opinion for Infant Baptism, has
contradicted it altogether.

The Second Part, SHOWING, How necessary it is for persons to be baptized after
they believe, their Infant Baptism notwithstanding: as also discovering the
disorderly and irregular Communion of persons baptized with such as are
unbaptized in Church Fellowship.
HAving in the former part of this Discourse, laid down part of those grounds
and reasons which have swayed my judgment, and satisfied my conscience in the
sight of God, touching the unlawfulness of Infant Baptism; and which I doubt
not will have the like influence and operation upon the unbyassed minds of
other men: It remains now that I come to speak something to these two questions
following.

1. Whether men may not rest satisfied with that Baptism, which was administered
to them in their Infancy, without any further reception of Baptism afterward,
notwithstanding they come to understand the irregularity of their Infant
Baptism?

2. Whether it be necessary for such persons who have for some considerable
space of time, made profession of the faith, though as yet unbaptized; whether
it be necessary for them to be baptized? since the ends of Baptism seem to be
anticipated by such a continued profession.

As touching the former of these Questions; I conceive I may affirm, that none
may safely and without danger of sin, rest satisfied with that Baptism which
they received in their Infancy, they coming once to understand the irregularity
and sinfulness of Infant Baptism: and I do assert it upon these grounds.

1. Because the Apostle Paul (as may reasonably be conceived) did not hold it
convenient or safe, for certain Disciples with whom he met, to rest satisfied
with such a Baptism as had been formerly either erroneously administered to
them, or else which was deficient as touching some special ends of that
Baptism, which was enjoined the Disciples of Christ, but did proceed to baptize
them, or to cause them to be baptized afresh. The Case before us, is touching
those certain Disciples which Paul found at Ephesus, and of whom he demanded,
Whether they had received the Holy Ghost since they had believed? Unto whom
they replied, That they had not so much as heard whether there were any Holy
Ghost. Unto what then (said Paul) were ye baptized? And they said, Unto John's
Baptism. Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the Baptism of repentance,
saying unto the people, that they should believe on him that was to come after
him, that is, on Christ Jesus. When they heard this, they were baptized in the
Name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy
Ghost came on them, etc. Acts 19.1.2.3.4.5.6.

In this passage of Scripture, there are three things which I would have
observed as to my present purpose.

The first is touching the Baptism, which these Disciples are said formerly to
have received.

The second is touching their later Baptism, which they received upon Paul's
instructing them.

And the third is touching the reason why they were now baptized upon Paul's
preaching to them, notwithstanding they had formerly been baptized unto John's
Baptism.

1. That these Disciples had been formerly baptized unto John's Baptism, is that
which they themselves affirm, verse 3.

2. That the same Disciples were now again baptized upon Paul's preaching Christ
to them, I conceive fairly appears by those words, ver. 5. When they heard
this, (viz. that which Paul had declared to them) they were baptized in the
Name of the Lord Jesus.

There are indeed two other Interpretations of these words urged by some, that
do much differ from that sense which I have now given; but are both beside the
Scope and meaning of the place, as I suppose I shall presently make appear.

1. Some by their being baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, as here in this
place, would have us to understand it, not of their being baptized with water,
but of their being baptized with the Spirit; which is Master Calvin's sense upon
the place: and so he takes these words, They were baptized in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and those that follow in the next verse, viz. And when Paul had
laid his hands on them, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with
tongues and prophesied, to import one and the same thing; and that the later
words are only an Explanation of the former, showing after what manner they
were baptized: and he further says, That for the visible graces of the Spirit
which were given by the laying on of hands; for this to be expressed by the
name of Baptism, is no new thing, as he does alledg from Acts 1.5. and 11.16.

But, 1. That their being baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and their
receiving the Holy Ghost upon the laying on of Paul's hands, were not the same
thing as is alleged, may be discerned; 1. By a due consideration both of the
different nature of the actions themselves, and the successive order of those
different actions. For the doctrine, and so the practice of Baptism is one
thing, and that of laying on of hands is another, as is apparent by that of the
Apostle, Heb. 6.2. where the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of laying on of hands,
are differenced by the same note of distinction, by which the Doctrine of the
resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment, are differenced from them both.
And the same thing appears from the order and suecession of these different
actions, as well as from the different nature of them. For we have, 1. Paul's
teaching of these Disciples distinctly mentioned. 2. The baptizing of them in
Name of Christ as following thereupon, as distinctly described. And 3. The
laying on of Paul's hands, and their receiving of the Holy Ghost thereupon, as
distinctly and differentially described as either of the former. The article
AND, which stands between the Description of their Baptism, and reception of
the Holy Ghost upon the imposit on of hands, being a Note here, not of identity
or sameness of things, but of transition or passing from one thing to another,
or else of copulation of things really distinct, but yet relative. 2. This is
further discernable by a collation of this passage of Scripture with others,
where we have the same actions, in the same order described, as Acts 8.16, 17.
where speaking of the Holy Ghost, the holy Historian says, That he was fallen
upon none of them, to wit, the believing Samaritans, only they were baptized
in the Name of the Lord Jesus: then laid they their hands on them, and they
received the Holy Ghost. Whence it plainly appears, that the Disciples were
baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, before they received the Holy Ghost:
and that they did receive the Holy Ghost after their Baptism, upon those
prayers that were made for them, and hands laid on them for that end: so that
these were not one, but two distinct actions. Just so in the place under
discussion: though they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, yet we do
not find, that they received the Holy Ghost, till imposition of hands was
super-added thereunto.

2. Whereas it is further alleged by Calvin, that it is no new thing to
express the gift of the visible graces of the Spirit, by the name of Baptism;
though this is indeed true, in such a sense as the Scriptures to which he
refers intend it, yet I do believe it is a new thing, and not to be found in
Scripture, to express the effusion of the Spirit, as divided from Baptism by
water, under the description of being baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
the form here used in the Text under debate. For both those places produced,
Acts 1.5. and 11.16. speak of the Fathers, or Christ's own immediate act of
conferring the Spirit; whereas to baptize in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
plainly and directly notes the Agency or Ministry of man, managed in the Name
of Christ: the one is the Baptism of Christ ministered by himself, the other is
the Baptism of Christ ministered by man in his Name. And so Master Calvin
himself at another turn will tell you, that, When John said, I indeed baptize
with water, but Christ when he shall come, shall baptize with the Holy Ghost,
and with fire, he meant not to put difference between the one Baptism, and the
other, but he compares his own person with the Person of Christ, saying, that
himself was a Minister of water, but that Christ was the Giver of the Holy
Ghost. Instit. Lib. 4. Cap. 15.5.8. And the baptizing in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, and the pouring out of the Spirit, are not the same individual thing,
but are clearly differenced and distinguished in respect of time, order, and
action, as I noted in part before from Acts 8.16 17. a place in this respect
parallel with this in hand. So that still you will find, that to baptize in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, signifies such a Baptism as is not without water.

But some others, not liking so well this construction of the words, though
they be of the same mind, as to the impugning of that literal sense of them
which I have embraced, have thought of another way to evade this, and that is
by understanding these words, They were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
as the words of Paul recited by Luke, declaring the Baptism of these Disciples
by John, to be the consequent of John's preaching to them, and not the words of
Luke, as recording their Baptism as consequential to Paul's preaching to them;
and so the sense they make to be this: That these Disciples, when they heard
John in his preaching say to them, that they should believe on him that was to
come after him, to wit, Christ Jesus, then they were baptized in the Name of
the Lord Jesus by John. See the late Annotators upon the place for this,

But that neither this is the true intent, and genuine sense of the words, I
strongly incl ne to believe upon these grounds. 1. Because this Interpretation
overthrowes the Grammatical sense of the words, and renders them void of Common
sense. For it is evident, that what Paul is here brought in speaking, he spoke
it to these Disciples themselves; for here is no mention of any other persons
but Paul, and them. Now then what ever words were spoken by Paul to them, must
run in the second Person, if you will suppose Paul to speak common sense;
whereas these words, They were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, are
spoken in the third Person, and therefore cannot be the words of Paul to them,
but of Luke concerning them. For if Paul would have declared such a thing to
the Disciples, as that they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus upon
the hearing of John, then his words should have run thus: When you heard this,
you were baptized, etc. and not as now we have them, When they heard this, they
were baptized, etc. Besides, how uncouth and harsh is it, to make the people
whom John taught and baptized, and those twelve Disciples, to be the same
persons? and to conceive that Paul should tell them what John said to the
people, when all the while he meant themselves; both which you must suppose, if
you take the words in that sense which I oppose; because then the people in the
fourth verse, unto whom John spoke, and those in the fifth verse, which are
said to have heard, and to have been baptized, must be the same persons, and
consequently both of them these twelve men; because as the Pronouns they, and
they, in the fourth, and fifth verse, upon that supposition, that both are
Paul's words, cannot be understood, but of the same persons, so also the same
Pronouns they, and they, which relate both to the persons baptized, ver. 5. and
to the twelve that prophesied after Paul had laid his hands on them, verse. 6.
are undoubtedly meant of the same persons likewise: And therefore that
interpretation now under examination, which runs us upon such rocks of
absurdity, and into such Solecisms of speaking as these, must be rejected; and
consequently these words, When they heard this, they were baptized in the Name
of the Lord Jesus, must be taken as the words of Luke, and not of Paul,
importing the Baptism of these Disciples upon the hearing of Paul, and not of
John.

2. That these words, They were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, are not
a Description of John's Baptism administered to these Disciples, but of that
Baptism which they received upon Paul's Preaching, we have this reason further
to conceive; because it no where appears that John did baptize the people in
the Name of the Lord Jesus. Nay, the truth is, that John says concerning him
that was to come after him, (which was Jesus Christ) that he did not know him
until the time that he baptized him, John 1.30, 31. For he was before me, and I
knew him not: and again, ver. 33. And I knew him not: but he that sent me to
baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit
descending and remaining on him, the same is he that baptizeth with the Holy
Ghost: If John then did not know Jesus, either personally, or by his proper
name, until this time, then we have no reason to conceive that he had baptiz d
any hitherunto in this proper Name of his, and yet before this time he had
dispatched the greatest part of his Ministry, in as much as he was but to
prepare the way for Christ, who upon this Baptism of his, entered into his
Ministry, he then coming on, when John was going off. Acts 10.37. and 1.22.

But to put the business out of doubt; the Apostle Paul here in this fourth
verse of Acts 19. does plainly declare, that John when he baptized did say unto
the people, that they should believe on him that should come after him, which
Paul indeed does here interpret to these Disciples to be meant of Christ Jesus.
But if John had baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus explicitly, why had not
Paul said so? rather then to say that He baptized them, saying unto them, that
they should believe on him that should come after him? Or why should we
conclude, that if these Disciples had been baptized by John into Christ Jesus
expressly and by name, that Paul would have made such a business of it to inform
them of that of which they could not be ignorant, viz. that they were baptized
into Christ Jesus, If there fore we will take the true scope and meaning of
this passage of Scripture, we must I conceive understand it thus. 1. That these
Disciples having been baptized unto John's Baptism, were baptized into one as
yet to come, and to be made manifest unto the world, according to John's
accustomed manner on this behalf. 2. That Paul did now open and declare to
them, who that was that John said was to come after him, and that he did
declare him to them now, not as one to come, but as one already come; for so
that short expository saying of Paul here, THAT IS ON CHRIST JESUS, does
import, as containing the subject matter of Paul's discourse then. And then 3.
That these Disciples hearing, understanding and believing this, viz. That he
who is called Jesus Christ, was he that was now come, and had suffered death,
etc. And was he whom the Baptism of John did then point at more obscurely as
one that was to come, though not then personally and by name known amongst the
people; I say upon their hearing and believing this, they were baptized in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, as acknowledging him to be that Messiah, into the
expectation of whom they had formerly been baptized.

And so we come to the third thing which we were to enquire into out of this
Contexture of Scripture, and that is, why or for what reason it may be
conceived, that these Disciples were now bapt zed again upon the hearing of
Paul, when as they had been baptized unto the Baptism of John formerly. And the
reason hereof must be, either 1. Because, that though these Disciples had been
baptized by John unto the Messiah that was then to come after him, yet this was
not sufficient when once they came to the acknowledgment of Jesus the Son of
Mary to be that Messiah, but that notwithstanding this, they were then to be
baptized into Christ Jesus as acknowledging him to be that Messiah indeed,
which before they did expect: Or else 2. Because there was some error
committed, in the administration and reception of their Baptism: and other
reasons then these, I think will not lightly present themselves to any man's
mind.

For the former of these; some indeed have conceived that such who were
baptized by John unto him that was to come, not yet knowing him personally,
were afterward baptized again when they came to acknowledge Jesus the Son of
Mary, to be the Son of God, and Savior of the world: and truly this opinion is
not altogether to be despised, in as much as there is an appearance of reason,
both that it was so, and why it should be so.

1. That it was so, there is this reason to induce the belief thereof; because
though as it should seem, all the Jews generally were baptized by John, yet
very considerable numbers of them were baptized afterward when they came to
own Jesus for the Messiah. That the Jews generally were baptized by John
appears, in that it is said, There went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea,
and all the region round about Jorden, and were baptized of him in Jorden
confessing their sins, Matthew. 3.5, 6. Acts 13.24. That there were very
considerable numbers of the Inhabitants of these places baptized afterward
when they came to acknowledge Jesus to be the Son of God, and Savior of the
world, appears by Acts 2.41. where we shall find, that at Jerusalem it self,
there were upon the hearing of Peter, and their gladly receiving the word, no
less then about three thousand baptized in one day. Now let it be considered,
how improbable it is; that since the Inhabitants of Jerusalem and all Judea
were baptized of John, that these three thousand at Jerusalem only, and that in
one day, should be converted and bap ized, and yet not any one of them be of
that number which John had baptized before. Besides, whereas it is said, that
they that gladly received his word were baipized, it must be supposed, either
1. That not one of all the Jews which were baptized of John formerly, did now
gladly receive the word; Or else 2. That some of them which had been baptized
by John, were now again baptized upon Peter's preaching. For when it is said,
They that gladly received his word were baptized, we have reason to understand
it of all that did so receive it, for here is no exception made of such as had
been baptized by John, as indeed there is not in any other place. If then it be
no ways probable, that in so great and eminent a coming in of the Jews to the
Gospel, as this was, but that some of those who had been formerly baptized into
the expectation of Christ, did now gladly receive the word of the Gospel, by
which even Jesus stood declared to be both Lord and Christ, then it cannot but
be so probable, that even some of them whom John baptized were afterward
baptized again, that there is scarce place left for any contrary thoughts.

2. As there is this reason to prove that it was so, so there is reason also to
prove why it should be so: For their being baptized by John unto him that was
to come as the Messiah, when as yet not known by them, did not prove, as the
event declares, either any effectual means by which to own and acknowledge him
for such when he was come, nor to distinguish them from such who did reject
him, which yet are two principal ends of Baptism. For whereas all the Jews in
Judea, and those parts, did generally receive John's Baptism, as being under
great expectations of an immediate appearing of the Messiah, and which they
notioned to themselves as one that should come in an outward state and glory;
yet when he was come, und they found him who was presented to them for the
Messiah, to be none other but him whom they called the Carpenters Son, one that
appeared in so mean a Garb, and despecable a condition as he did, contrary to
their pre-received notion of him, and expectation concerning him, then they
generally were offended at him, despised and rejected him, Matthew. 13.55, 56,
57. Isay 53.2, 3. That very few did own Christ Jesus when he came to be made
manifest unto Israel, of those very many that were baptized by John, appears by
that saying concerning Christ, John 3.32. What he has seen and heard, that he
testifies, and no man receives his testimony: meaning that very few did. John
5. Christ speaking to the Jews of John says, that they were willing for a
season to rejoice in his light, ver. 35. but speaking to the same persons
concerning himself, ver. 38. says, For whom he ( viz. God) has sent, him ye
believe not. See Isai. 53.1. John 12.37, 38. Though all the Jews generally did
look for a Christ, yet but few of them did acknowledge Jesus to be the Christ.
If then the generality of those that were baptized by John unto Christ then to
come, did reject him when he was come, then certainly the Baptism which was
received from John, could be no distinguishing mark, or characteristical badge
of the Disciples of Christ Jesus, or that by which their public and professed
owning of him could be reckoned: and therefore by how much it was necessary
that the Disciples of Christ Jesus should be distinguished and known from those
that believed not in him, and should publy profess and own Jesus to be the
Christ in and by Baptism, (which yet will be found to be none of the least ends
of Baptism) by so much it seems necessary, that those that were baptized by
John, should afterward be baptized again when they came to own Jesus for the
Christ of God.

2. Others there are which conceive, that the reason why these twelve Disciples
at Ephesus were baptized again upon their hearing the Gospel from Paul,
notwithstanding they had been formerly baptized unto John's Baptism, was,
because of some error committed in their Baptism. As 1. That they were
baptized into the expectation of Christ to come, after the time in which he was
actually come. And 2. That they had not been baptized in the Name of the Holy
Ghost, as they ought to have been according to the Commission of Christ on that
behalf, Matthew. 28.19. when as they were (as is supposed) baptized after this
Commission was on foot.

1. That they were baptized unto him that was to come as they understood,
appears in that they were baptized unto John's baptism, the tenor whereof was
an inviting them to believe on him that was to come as Paul here asserts, ver.
4.

2. That they were not baptized in the Name of the Holy Ghost, is gathered from
their own words, by which they declare that they had not so much as heard,
whether there were any Holy Ghost, ver. 2.

3. That they were baptized after such time in which Christ was actually come,
had suffered, was risen again, and had delivered that Commission of baptizing
in the Name of the Holy Ghost, as well as the Father and Son, is gathered by
comparing several things together. As 1. That they were Inhabitants of Ephesus,
and therefore probably as John was never there to baptize them, so neither were
they ever where John was, to be baptized of him. But that 2. In probability
they were baptized unto John's Baptism by Apollos while he was at Ephesus, which
was long after the Ascension of Christ, and his Commission to baptize in the
Name of the Holy Ghost: The probability of their being baptized by Apollos is
made out by these things considered coniunctively. 1. That Apollos was a man
who greatly endeavored the making of Disciples to that way which he himself
professed, as appears Acts 18.25, 28. 1 Cor. 3.5. 2. That while he was at
Ephesus, he being fervent in Spirit, eloquent, and mighty in the Scriptures,
taught diligently the way of the Lord, only so far as was agreeable to the
Baptism of John, until after Aquila and Priscilla had privately better
instructed him, Acts 18.25, 26. And therefore 3. It is conceived by some (as I
say) that he did convert these twelve Disciples unto, that way which he himself
so diligently taught, to wit, the Doctrine and Baptism of John, and that he did
thereupon baptize them according to John's manner and form of baptizing.

Now whether you take this to be the reason of their re-baptization, or whether
the former, it will amount much to the same as concerning that which I would
gather from this example.

For 1. If those which were baptized by John himself, were afterward baptized
again when they came to own Jesus to be the Christ, and that because their
former Baptism was insuffient in respect of some important ends of Baptism, and
in particular in respect of asserting Jesus to be the Christ, a principal end
of Baptism, then those that come actually to believe, ought to be then
baptized, notwithstanding any Baptism they received in their infancy, because
such their Infant Baptism, was altogether insufficient as unto several weighty
ends of Baptism, as has been abundantly declared in the former part of this
our discourse. For where there are the same reasons of things as here, there
ought the same things to be done and practiced; I mean in things of this nature.

Or 2. If an erroneous administration and reception of these twelve Disciples
Baptism, was the reason of their Re-baptization, as the other opinion holds,
then there is like reason likewise why those who have been baptized in their
infancy, should notwithstanding that, be baptized when they come to repent and
believe, because that infant-administration, though not in the self same
respects, was deeply erroneous as well as theirs, as has been formerly proved.

But in as much as my judgment does much rather incline to the former opinion
then this later, as touching the reason why these Disciples were rebaptized; I
shall therefore here give this further account thereof. And so far as I can
perceive, upon a serious consideration of things, a re-baptization was
necessary in those that had been baptized by John, (Christ only excepted as a
case extraordinary) in order to their reception of the Holy Spirit. For we
shall find, that not the baptizing of men into the expectation of Christ to
come, had the promise of the Spirit, but the baptizing of them into the faith
and acknowledgment of Christ come, and of Jesus to be that Christ, and so
consequently that John's Baptism had no such promise annexed to it as Christ's
Baptism had on this behalf.

1. That John's Baptism had no such promise of the Spirit, appears by his own
acknowledgment and assertion, in which he makes this very difference between
his own Baptism, and the Baptism of Christ, viz. that his was but a Baptism of
water unto repentance, but that he which should come after him, should baptize
with the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 3.11. Nay, Mark has it thus, which is somewhat
fuller: I indeed have baptized you with water, but he shall baptize you with
the Holy Ghost, Mark 1.8. His manner of speaking seems to import, as if he
intended hereby to beat them off from any expectation of the Spirit, upon the
account of his Baptism now they had received it; and to put them upon the
expectation thereof, from and by the Baptism of Christ when he should come.

2. The Apostle Peter (accompanied with the rest of the Apostles herein)
addressing himself to that great multitude that heard him preach at Jerusalem,
advises them in order to their reception of the Holy Ghost, to repent and to be
baptized, and that every one of them in the Name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 2.38.

Consider now who these were to whom he gives this advice: And we shall find,
that it was the multitude, as they are called, ver. 6. that came together,
flocking doubtless from all parts of the City upon occasion of that miraculous
wonder of fiery cloven tongues, siting upon the Apostles, and of their speaking
with strange tongues, when this was noised abroad, as there it is said. And can
any man imagine, that when as but about four years before this, the Inhabitants
of this City generally went out to be baptized of John, and now as generally
came together to hear and see this wonder, that yet none of them that now came
together, should be of that number that had been baptized by John? Surely such
a thing will not be any man's thought, or if it shall, yet will not be believed
amongst considering men. And yet even these, notwithstanding their having been
baptized by John, are directed and exhorted now afresh, to repent and be
baptized, and that EVERY ONE of them in the Name of the Lord Jesus, for
remission of sins, and are thereupon assured, that they shall receive the gift
of the Holy Ghost: Their being baptized then in the Name of the Lord Jesus, was
necessary to render them meet to receive the Holy Ghost, notwithstanding their
former Baptism by John.

3. If things be well weighed, I conceive it will be found, that these twelve
Disciples at Ephesus were baptized again, though they had been baptized
formerly unto John's Baptism, upon this very account especially, and in order to
this very thing, viz. their receiving the Holy Ghost.

For 1. The manner, form, and import of Paul's questions, or demands to them,
and their answers to him, do imply, that as it was common for the Spirit to be
given upon the reception of Christ's Baptism, so also that it was not wont to be
given upon the administration of John's. For when Paul queries, Whether they had
received the Holy Ghost since they had believed, ver. 2. And so when he again
demands upon their declaring they had not, Unto what then they had been
baptized? it plainly implies, that Paul did verily expect that they should have
received the Holy Ghost upon their being baptized, until he was informed that
they had been baptized only unto John's Baptism. And not only so, but that
question of his, Unto what then were ye baptized, since ye have not received
the Holy Ghost? does also imply, that Paul very well knew, that there was a
Baptism which was not accompanied with the giving of the Spirit: and therefore
the end of his question was to know, Unto which Baptism they had been baptized:
and upon their resolution of the Case, showing that they had been baptized only
unto John's Baptism, the true reason was discovered why they had not received
the Holy Chost; as being that which did not use to follow upon John's Baptism;
the which appears hereby, in that they knew John's Baptism, and the manner of
it, they themselves being baptized thereunto; and yet they had not so much as
heard that there was a Holy Ghost, to wit, extant in the world upon any such
terms, as Paul's question unto them did import; of which surely they could not
have been ignorant, if the Holy Ghost had been wont to be vouchsafed unto men
without any other Baptism save that of John.

2. That their re-baptizing, or their being baptized in the Name of the Lord
Jesus mentioned in ver. 5. of Acts 19, was in direct order to their receiving
the Holy Ghost, the thing first in question between Paul and them, may easily
be gathered from the connection that is b tween the 5. and 6. verses, and the
matters therein related. For that their being baptized as set forth, ver. 5.
and their receiving the Holy Ghost, ver. 6. were nearly related, the later
having a dependence on the former, the Conjunction copulative AND, which knits
both matters together, shows. For so the words run: When they heard this, they
were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus. AND when, i.e. when this was done,
AND when Paul had laid his hands on them: which imports as much I conceive as
if he had said, AND when also Paul had laid his hands on them, the Holy Ghost
came on them; i.e. then or thereupon the Holy Ghost came on them. So that their
receiving of the Holy Ghost relates, both to their being baptized in the Name
of the Lord Jesus, and to the imposition of Paul's hands: both which in their
due order did prepare and dispose them for that reception.

To conclude this therefore: if then, men were to be baptized in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, when they came to believe in him; in order to their receiving
the Spirit of God, though they had been before baptized by John; then surely
have they need to be baptized for the same end, who come to the acknowledgment
of the truth, though they have been baptized (as men call baptizing) in their
infancy, because such their Infant Baptism as has been formerly evinced, does
not operate toward their receiving of the Holy Ghost, as true Gospel Baptism
will do.

Come we now more briefly unto a second reason why it is not safe for any to
satisfy themselves with that Baptism which they received in their Infancy, the
irregularity of it supposed, and that is, because it is none of Gods Baptism,
i. e. it is none of his ordaining, but is the device of man's own heart. As it
is said of that Feast which Jeroboam ordained, though in other respects, it was
like unto the Feast that was in Judah, to wit, of Gods own appointing, yet
because he took liberty to vary the time of its celebration, from the
fourteenth day of the first month, the time of Gods own choosing, unto the
fifteenth day of the eighth Month, which is therefore called the month which he
had devised of his own heart, therefore was this Feast worthily esteemed none
of Gods Feast, but Ieroboams Feast, 1 King. 12.32, 33. And is there not the
same proportion of reason to adjudg Infant Baptism, to have none other Author
but man, and to be a thing devised of man's own heart? Though it should be
granted, that in respect of the outward Element and actions thereto belonging,
it were like unto the Baptism which is from God; yet in as much as man take
liberty to vary the season of its administration, from the time of men's
regeneration, or new birth, the time of Gods own appointment, unto the time of
their natural Birth, which is none of Gods; it therefore worthily deserves to
be called the device of man's own heart. And if it be none of Gods Baptism, then
certainly its no-wise safe to adhere thereto, in as much as Christ has
declared, That every plant which his Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be
rooted up, and that every such worship is vain which is ordered and taught by
the precepts of men, Matthew. 15.9 13. Isai. 29.13.

3. Because if Infant Baptism be sinful; sinful in parents to desire it for
their children; and sinful in those that administer it to them (as it has been
proved to be) then may none when they come to maturity, rest satisfied in that
Baptism, or in the least own it without danger of partaking with them in their
sin, because that which de facto is sinfully done by another, becomes my sin
when I come to own and approve it, 1 Timothy 5.22. Luke 11.48.49, 50.51. which yet
is the case of those which satisfy themselves with that Baptism they have
received in their infancy.

4. Its not safe for any to rest contented with that Baptism which they
received when they were Infants, because that Baptism which is so called, is a
mere Nuility in respect of that thing for which it is taken, i. e. it is not
worthy to be esteemed any such thing as is Baptism indeed, or to pass under
that denomination. And the reason hereof is, because there is that wanting in
it, which is essential to true Baptism. For, 1. There is the right subject of
Baptism, wanting in that Baptism, which is applied to Infants; that Infants are
not the subject of Baptism, is that the proof and demonstration whereof has
taken up the former part of this Treatise, and therefore shall take it for
granted here. 2. As the right Subject matter, so the true external form of
baptismal administration is wanting in Infant Baptism, as it is practiced among
us. For the external form of Baptism, is not a sprinkling of the party baptized
with water, which yet is that which is used in the Baptism of infants, but a
dipping or plunging him under water.

1. This appears at least in the judgment of very many who so render that which
we have translated baptizing or to baptize; in so much as Master Daniel Rogers
in his Treatise on the two Sacraments, says, that dipping is that which
Antiquity constantly and without exception of Countries, hot or cold,
witnesses unto. And as it is to the same import frequently translated in the
Dutch Bible, so it is acknowledged, indeed asserted to be the manner of
baptizing in the primitive time, to dip or bury the body under water, by Calvin
himself on Acts 8.38. and by our late Annotators on Romans 6.4. Matthew. 3.6.
Besides Master Mead on Tit. 3.5. in his Diatribe, and Master Thomas Goodwin in
his Treatise of Christ set forth in his death, etc. with very many others.

2. It further appears by that which Baptism represents, and that is the Death,
Burial, and Resurrection of Christ; and likewise the party baptized his death,
burial, and resurrection with Christ. For the water in which men are baptized
or dipped, is no more an Element for them to live in, then the earth is: Nay we
know the Sea is frequently made the place of burial for the dead as well as the
earth: and therefore a being put under the water, is upon the matter as lively
a resemblance of ones death and burial, as it would be if one were so long put
under the earth, and so consequently a man's coming or rising from under the
water, is upon the matter as clear and lively a resemblance of a resurrection
from the dead, as if he did come out of the grave, and from under the earth
upon like terms. Now then, those that are dipped in their baptism, do if they
answer the nature of that Ordinance, thereby actually profess,

1. That they do believe that Christ Jesus, into whose Name they are baptized,
was as truly and really dead, buried, and raised again in order to the
salvation of men, as they are then figuratively dead, buried, and raised again
in their Baptism.

2. That they do thereby engage themselves to be conformable to the death and
resurrection of Christ, in their being thence forth dead to those sins in which
they formerly lived, and from which their lives were then denominated; as
likewise as concerning their living a new and spiritual life unto God in
righteousness and true holiness. For as Christ when he was crucified, then
ceased to live any longer such a life in the flesh as thither-unto he had done;
and when he rose again, begun that new and spiritual life which before he had
not lived; even so all those that answer their engagement and profession entered
into by baptism, do from the time of this figurative death and burial of
theirs, really cease to live their former sinful life; and from the time of
their figurative resurrection, or new birth, begin to live a new life of
obedience and subjection unto Christ their Lord: These things lie fair in those
Scriptures, wherein such are said to be baptized into Christ's death, to be
buried with him in Baptism, wherein also they are said to be risen with him,
and to be planted together into the likeness of his death, and the likeness of
his resurrection, that thenceforth they should not serve sin, but walk in
newness of life, Romans 6.3, 4, 5, 6. Col. 2.13. These things then being so, the
sprinkling of the party baptized, or the pouring of a handful of water upon his
face, is no more a figurative burial of him, or a true representation of
Christ's death and burial, then the casting of a handful of dust upon the face
of Christ when he was dead could have been a burying of him. And therefore who
sees not hereby, that aspersion or sprinkling used in infant baptism, is far
from the true external form of Gospel-baptism, and that which was anciently
used by the Apostles and other servants of Jesus Christ in the first and purest
times of that administration.

If then the right subject matter to be baptized, and the due external form of
Baptism, be both wanting in that Baptism, which is and has been administered to
infants, then certainly such a Baptism has that wanting in it, which is
essential to the true being of Baptism. For what is more intrinsecally
essential to the being of a thing, then matter and form? Or how is it possible
to define Baptism, or any thing else, without the matter and form which do
intrinsecally constitute the very essence and being thereof? And certainly that
which is absolutely necessary to the true definition of Baptism as of all other
things, is absolutely and essentially necessary to the being of it. And
therefore where either the true matter, or the right form of a thing is
wanting, much more where both are wanting, (which is the case in
Infant Baptism) there doubtless is a total deficiency, or nonentity of the
thing it self; which clearly is the case of Infant Baptism in reference to the
question in hand. And therefore he that thinks to build any such thing upon
that Baptism he has received in his Infancy, which is competent or proper to
true Baptism indeed, has but air and vanity for his foundation.

THe second thing to be enquired into, is, Whether baptism by water ought
necessarily to be received by such persons, who have for some considerable
space of time, made profession of the faith, though it be granted that they
were never duly baptized before; since such a long continued course of
profession preceding baptism, renders such an Administration of that Ordinance
unparallel and without example in Scripture, and since also the ends of Baptism
hereby seem to be anticipated or prevented?

Which question I must needs resolve in the affirmative, and do say, That
notwithstanding all that is pretended to the contrary, it is a thing necessary,
and a duty incumbent on every such man and woman as has not been baptized
before, with a baptism duly so called, to submit to, and take up the Ordinance
of water baptism, though it be not till long after the time in which they first
began a conscientious profession of the Gospel otherwise. Here I take for
granted, upon account of what I have before delivered, that Infant Baptism, and
no baptism, are of the same consideration, this difference only excepted, viz.
That Infant Baptism is a sin of Commission in those that occasion it; and
Non-baptism is a sin of Omission in those that neglect it, when otherwise they
are duly qualified for it.

In the managing of this resolution of the question, I shall endeavor 1, To
lay down some reasons and grounds thereof. And 2. To answer those exceptions
and objections which take place in the minds of some against the practice of
Baptism upon such terms.

The grounds on which I do assert Baptism necessary, though but on the terms
before specified, are such as these.

1. Because it is a duty enjoined every one that imbraceth the Doctrine of
Christ or of the Gospel, to be baptized one time or other. This appears by that
Commission which was given by Christ to his Servants and Messengers, to teach
all Nations (or every creature, as Mark has it, Mark 16.15.) and baptize them
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28.19.
In which Commission there are these two things enjoined amongst others. 1. That
they should teach all Nations, or every creature capable of this teaching, i.e.
should instruct them in the Doctrine of the Gospel, or make them Disciples, as
the word is rendered. Now if we would know what they were to teach, and in what
to instruct them; we may take information here about, from the practice of the
Apostles, when first at Jerusalem they began to put this Commission in
execution; the brief Sum whereof was to this effect. That Jesus of Nazareth,
approved of God, by miracles, wonders, and signs, being delivered by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledg of God, was by wicked hands crucified and
slain; and that God raised him up from the dead the third day, and has made
him the same Jesus, both Lord and Christ. They also further taught the people,
that in order to their being saved by him, they should repent and be baptized
in his Name for the remission of sins, Acts 2.32.28. 2. The other part of
Christ's Commission was, that having thus taught the people, and made them
willing to embrace the Gospel, they should then also baptize them; in pursuance
of which Commission, the Apostles did accordingly, in the place and time, and
to the people before specified, Acts 2. For says the Text, ver. 41. They that
gladly, (or willingly) received his word, were baptized. According to which
beginning, we shall find, that they constantly proceeded afterward, Acts
8.12.35.37. and 10.36.48. and 16, 14, 14.31.33. and 18.8.

Now then, if it were the duty of these Servants of Christ, to teach all
Nations to repent, believe in Christ Jesus, and to be baptized in his Name for
the remission of sins; then certainly it was the duty of all these Nations,
being thus taught, to obey this voice of the Gospel, as well in being baptized,
as in repenting and believing. And by the way, lest any should think the Date
of this Commission lasted but during the Apostles days; the Lord Jesus in
annexing the promise of his presence and assistance to those that should put
this Commission of his in execuon, causes the Date hereof to run along to the
end of the world, Matthew. 28.20. which plainly shows, that he would have this
Commission of his observed and kept on foot, even unto the worlds end.

A second Ground is this, Because Baptism being one of the Doctrines of Christ
which is practicable, ought therefore to be embraced and practiced, by all that
profess themselves Disciples of Christ, and followers of his Doctrine. That
Baptism is one of the Doctrines of Christ, appears by Heb. 6.1, 2. Those things
which in general are called the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, ver. 1.
being afterward particularized, the Doctrine of Baptisms, is set down for one
of those Principles. It Is a Doctrine of Christ, both because it is a Doctrine
concerning Christ, in and by which Christ is set forth, professed, owned,
acknowledged; as also because it is a Doctrine which Christ has enjoined to be
taught and practiced. And whereas the word is used in the plural number,
Doctrine of Baptisms; it does not weaken, but strengthen the authority of
Water Baptism, as being comprehensive of that, and any other Baptism taught by
Christ.

Now that the Doctrine of Christ ought to be obeyed and practiced by all that
profess themselves his Disciples, will not be gain-say'd, in as much as at what
time they give up themselves to him, and in particular make a solemn Dedication
of themselves to him and his service by Baptism; they are said to be delivered
into the form of his Doctrine, (as the Marginal reading imports) Romans 6.17. And
the Apostle cautions the believing Romans, to note and avoid such as cause
divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, Romans 16.17. And
again, Who so transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has
not God, 2 John 9. Though I will not say, that every transgression of the
Doctrine of Christ, rises so high in the evil effect and consequence of it, as
the evils mentioned in these Scriptures amount unto; nor in particular that
transgression of which we now speak, unless after conviction pertinaciously
persisted in; yet the least that we can say, even of the lesser transgressions
in this kind, is, that they have atendency in them hereunto, proportionable to
the nature and delinquency of them.

Baptism then being as we see, one of the Doctrines of Christ, and one of his
Commissional Injunctions: what peace can any man have, whose heart stands in aw
of the Word, (as David's did, Psalm. 119.116.) that shall live in the
transgression hereof, and disobedience hereunto?

3. Baptism is therefore necessary, because it is relative to the salvation of
men. Those in Acts 2.37. being smitten with the sense of their sin and misery,
upon the preaching of Peter, and crying out, Men and brethren, what shall we
do? viz. to be saved, as Acts 16.30. it cannot reasonably be thought, that the
Apostle, being now full of the Holy Ghost, by the newly received power whereof
he then spoke, would direct them to the belief or practice of any thing, but
that which should be very requisite to their Salvation, the thing about which
they with such earnestness enquire; and yet we see, the very first thing he
directs them to, in answer to their demand, is, to repent and to be baptized
every one of them in the Name of the Lord Jesus for the remission of sins, ver.
38. By which we gather, that Baptism as well as repentance, is one of the
requisites to remission of sins, and so unto salvation.

It is the saying of Christ the faithful and true Witness, that Except a man be
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John
3.5. By a man's being born of water, Interpreters understand his being baptized
of water, as by his being born of the Spirit, his regeneration. See the late
Annotations upon the place. Those that are pleased to say, that too great a
Stress is laid upon Baptism by the Abetters of it, and thereupon blame them for
urging and pressing it, as a thing so necessary as sometimes they do, may be
turned over unto Jesus Christ for an answer to their exception; for indeed they
do not so much blame the Servants, as the Master himself, upon the account of
whose Doctrine, they so press this practice. So that each of them in this case
may truly say to their Lord and Savior, The rebukes of them, that rebuked me,
are fallen upon thee. For none I presume ever laid a greater Stress upon
Baptism, then Christ here does, in saying, Except a man be born of water, (i.
e. be baptized) and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

Another of the Oracles of Jesus Christ to the same effect is, Mark 16.16. He
that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, and he that believes not,
shall be damned. Where we see our Savior joins baptism with faith, as
requisite to salvation: and what Christ in this has joined together, who is he
that dares put asunder? If any shall think, that Baptism is left out in the
opposite member here (he not saying, he that believes not, and is not
baptized, shall be damned, but only he that believes not shall be damned,) on
purpose to indulge persons in the hope of salvation who do believe, though they
be not baptized; let such rather judge with themselves, that baptism being so
expressly joined with faith in the former part of the verse, as that upon which
the promise of salvation is made by Christ, to depend as it is, it was less
necessary to mention the want, or neglect thereof, with unbelief on the
contrary, as that unto which damnation is threatened, because frequently in
Scripture dialect, where things are succinctly delivered, the Affirmative
supposes the Negative. And where Christ makes the assurance of salvation to
depend upon faith and baptism jointly, as here, certainly it will be no man's
wisdom, but extreme folly, to venture his salvation upon the one without the
other, upon the account of the afore-suggested presumption.

The Apostle Peter likewise, speaking of that salvation which was vouchsafed
those in Noah's Ark, says, The like figure whereunto even Baptism does also
now, save us, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of
a good conscience toward God, etc. 1 Pet. 3.21. The Negative here, is not
exclusive, but interpretative, i.e. when he says, Not the putting away of the
filth of the flesh, h s meaning is not, that the outward washing or baptism
does not at all contribute toward salvation, which is the effect here
mentioned, for that were to render water baptism wholly needless, an
interpretation which would fall foul on other Scriptures, which speak the
contrary: But his saying, Not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, etc.
is to be understood, as if the Apostle had said; Not by that only, or not so
much by that; but by the inward washing also, and by the answer of a good
conscience in Conjunction with the outward act. It is a like form of speech
with that of Paul, 1 Cor. 1.17. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach
the Gospel: meaning, that he was not sent so much to baptize, as to preach the
Gospel: for otherwise, he was sent to bapt ze, as well as preach, and
accordingly he did baptize, as there he himself acknowledges, ver. 14.16. And
therefore that which the Apostle speaks concerning the man and the woman in
another case, is true concerning the outward and inward baptism, in this;
Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 11.11. So neither is the outward washing without the inward, nor
the inward without the outward in the Lord, that is, by his appointment, and in
order to the Salvation of men. If baptism then be a like figure, or that which
holds an Analogical Proportion with the Ark in point of salvation, we may then
easily guess, how necess ry baptism is to salvation. For if we follow the
Apostles figure, it w ll teach us, That as it was necessary for those that
would escape drowning in that Deluge of waters, to enter into the Ark, which
was Gods appointed instrument of that salvation; so is it necessary for those
that would escape the perdition of the ungodly and unbelieving world, to be
baptized, as being a means ordained by God for such an end likewise.

If then once to be baptized be a duty enjoined every Disciple of Jesus Christ,
or such as profess belief in his Name, as in the first particular; and a
Doctrine of Christ to be embraced and followed, as in the second, and a thing
which so much concerns their salvation, as in the third particular has been
set forth; then how comes any man's long neglect of his duty, and of this
Doctrine of Christ, and of this means of his salvation, totally to exempt him
therefrom? Does a man's doing his duty in other things privilege him in the
neglect of this? Or has any man's long continuance in the profession of the
Gospel, made that which was his duty long since to have done, cease to be his
duty now at all? when as he has neither already discharged it, nor wants
opportunity yet to do it: Doubtless, all such imaginations are but vain
thoughts.

Upon occasion of that which has been said, whereby the salvation of men seems
much concerned in the due use of Baptism, it is like a question will arise in
the minds of some, whether I make Baptism a condition of salvation, or a thing
necessary thereunto? Since so to do is looked upon, as a most importune notion
and conceit, in as much as it is thought a most uncharitable censuring of many
thousands godly persons that have died, and yet were not baptized, with other
then their Infant Baptism; as likewise of many thousands now living, who cannot
be persuaded that it is their duty.

For answer to this question.

1. I desire to make Baptism nothing else then what the Scripture makes it, nor
to put more necessity upon it, then what the Scripture has put upon it, an
account whereof I have in part given, and therefore shall refer those that
desire satisfaction in this particular, to the word of God, to consider what
that makes it, how far necessary, and how far not. Only in reviewing those
Scriptures which have been produced hereabout, I shall desire that it may
seriously be considered by those that think Baptism superfluous where the
Gospel is commonly professed, or at least amongst such persons that have long
engaged in a conscientious profession thereof, as likewise by those that make
light of it, looking upon it, either as a thing indifferent, or else that which
is but little more; I say, I would have it considered by such, whether it would
be handsome, or any whit like conscientious Interpretors, or such that fear to
diminish ought from the word of God, to put such like constructions upon the
Scriptures, which such an opinion concerning Baptism in reference to such
professors does suppose, and which I shall here point at. John 3.5. Except a
man be born of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God; i.e. (according to their opinion) a man may enter into the Kingdom of God,
that is born of the Spirit, though he be not born of water. Again, He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16 16. that is (the foresaid
opinion being Judge) he that believes shall be saved whether he be baptized or
no. So again, when the Scripture says, Repent and be baptized in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, for remission of sins, Acts 2.38. that is, (if the opinion
aforesaid do not err,) repent, and ye shall have the remission of sins,
whether ever you be baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, or no. For either
this mangling of the sacred word of Jesus Christ, must pass for a current
interpretation of these Scriptures, or else Baptism must be necessary in
relation to the salvation of those that will expect salvation in Gods way, and
upon his terms, whether they be such as have long since entered upon the
Christian profession, or whether such who are yet to begin it. This must be so,
unless we will suppose, that God had one method and way of saving men in those
times in which these Scriptures were first given out and delivered to the
world, and another way now; which if any man has a mind to suppose, let it be
at his own peril; for my part, I look for salvation in the ancient Gospel way,
and upon no other terms. For if not one jot or tittle of the Law shall fail,
till Heaven and Earth pass away (which I am sure is not yet) Matthew. 5.18. much
less shall any of the Gospel. For if the word spoken by Angels (as the Law was)
was steadfast, etc. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which
at the first began to be spoken by the Lord himself, and afterward was
confirmed by those that heard him? Heb. 2.2, 3. The word of the Lord endures
for ever, and this is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto you, 1 Pet.
1.25. Therefore, add not thou to his word, lest he reprove thee and thou be
found a liar, Pro. 30.6. nor take away therefrom, lest God take away thy part
out of the Book of life, Rev. 22.19.

2. As for those, otherwise godly persons, that are said to have lived and died
un-baptized, unless you will suppose what they received in their infancy to be
Baptism) I am far from judging them as touching their eternal estate, if this
sin of omission of theirs, proceeded from ignorance and mistake, as I believe
it did; as I would not judge those who lived and died in Episcopal and other
Popish superstitions, whilst otherwise truly conscientious, and men fearing
God: Not doubting but that the most merciful God, winked at the days of that
ignorance, and did consider the great disadvantages they were under, as coming
lately out of that thick darkness of Popish Apostasy and Superstition, and so
did accept them, (finding their hearts upright in the main) according to that
light they had, and not according to that they had not.

Yet thirdly, for those persons fearing God, whether considered as already
dead, or as yet living, that were in their times, or that yet remain
non-obedient, (not to say disobedient) to this part of the Gospel, upon
occasion of some erroneous notion or opinion, by which they have been persuaded
that they have done their duty in refusing Baptism upon the terms in which I
plead it, when they have done the contrary; though I will not say their
salvation was, or is desperately hazarded hereby, yet I do believe it to be
much prejudiced hereby. For to what degree Baptism when duly used, does by the
institutive will and appointment of God, contribute toward the salvation of
men, (the contributions whereof are doubtless very considerable this ways) to
the same degree must they suffer prejudice, loss, and disadvantage in their
salvation, who by any erroneous opinion about Baptism, do wholly deprive
themselves of it, as they do who refuse the Baptism of Gods making, upon a
conceit they have it already, when as indeed they have nothing less, If any
man's work burn, he shall suffer loss, 1 Cor. 3.15. The Apostle Peter speaking
of an abundant entrance that shall be ministered to some, into the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.11. viz. to such as
have quit themselves upon excellent terms of diligence, both to know the utmost
of the will of God concerning them, and to do thereafter, as appears by the
Context, ver. 5, 9. he does thereby imply, that to what degree men are remiss
and negligent in making enquiry after the will of God, touching what they ought
to do, or in doing what they know to be his will, to the same degree their
entrance into the Kingdom of Christ, will be contracted, made narrow, and
straight, for otherwise, if there should not be this different effect following
upon diligence and negligence here about, that would cease to be an Argument or
motive unto this diligence, which here the Apostle uses for one.

4. But as for those that are, or shall be regardless to know the mind of God
here about, not searching after it, nor conscientiously attending to the means
of light and knowledge when offered, or else being under conviction shall
labor to put out the light in their consciences, and upon this account shall
be found disobedient to this Doctrine of Christ, (especially in these times
wherein the practice of it is revived) I shall not judge them, (as Christ
speaks of himself; If any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not,
the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day, John
7.47, 48.) But shall leave them to stand or fall by that word which says,
Except a man be born of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God: and he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. But
because I know some think themselves in good and safe condition upon their
believing, though they be not baptized, I shall thereof desire such to consider.

1. That persons did believe in the Apostles times before they were baptized,
and yet Baptism was not thereupon the less, but the more necessary for them. If
thou believe with all thine heart thou may, to wit, be baptized, says he
to the Eunuch, Acts 8.37. So that faith was then so far from being a reason why
men should not be baptized, as that it was the true reason why they should.

2. Let them further consider, that that believing which is sufficient to ones
present justification when he begins to believe, is not sufficient unto his
salvation, when he has the opportunity of obeying other Commands of God and
does not. For though with the heart man believes unto righteousness: yet with
the mouth confession is made unto salvation, Romans 10.10. Though we shall
suppose then, that a man believes in Christ, and yet shall be ashamed to
confess him before men, (which it seems was the case of many of the chief
Rulers, John 12.42.) Christ Jesus will be ashamed of him before his Father and
his holy Angels. So I say, if you will suppose that any man believes in Christ,
and yet shall refuse to put on Christ (is they put him on who are baptized into
him, Gal. 3.27.) either for the shame and contempt which the world casts upon
such a practice, or for any other carnal respect, he may for ought I can from
any word of God assure him to the contrary, fall short of salvation at the
last, notwithstanding his present belief. James 2.14. What does it profit, my
Brethren, though a man say he has faith, and have not works? Can faith save
him? Christ is author of eternal salvation, but it is to such as obey him,
Heb. 5.9. And therefore says, He that shall break one of these least commands
(as some men notion Baptism to be,) and shall teach men so, he shall be called
the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5.19.

The premises considered, it is to me matter of wonder as well as of offense,
that some (who otherwise are far from being ignorant of the Scriptures) should
compare Baptism now, with Circumcision in the Apostles days, saying, that as
circumcision was nothing, nor uncircumcision nothing, but the keeping of the
Commandments of God; so to be baptized, or to be un-baptized, is nothing, but
the keeping of the Commandments of God is; when as it is the express Doctrine
of the Sciptures, a thing urged and pressed both by Christ himself, and by his
Apostles; and therefore sure the Commandment of God. For I, says Christ, have
not spoken of my self, but the Father which sent me, he gave me commandment
what I should say, and what I should speak. And I know that his Commandment is
life everlasting, (i.e. being observed.) Whatsoever I speak therefore, even as
the Father has said unto me, so I speak, John 12.49, 50. And Paul thus: If any
man think himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge, that the
things that I write unto you, are the Commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14.37.
The Doctrines then of Christ, and of the Apostles, whether delivered in
preceptive form, or otherwise, are the Commandments of God. But now, to put an
Ordinance of God (as Baptism is) which is now in force, and will be, I doubt
not, to the end of the world, into the same capacity with circumcision in the
Apostles days, the Date whereof was then expired, yea, and to compare them
which press the necessity of Baptism now, with those that pressed the necessity
of circumcision then, as if the one would render Christ as unprofitable to them
as the other; what is it else, then to make void the Commandment of God, that
they might establish their own tradition?

But as no man, that does acknowledge the Authority and Divinity of the
Scriptures, can easily satisfy himself in living in the Breach of any of it is
known rules and precepts, without the countenance and protection (such as it
is) of some vain imagination, and deceitful reasoning or other, so is it in
this case with some, who having no mind to this way of God (Baptism I mean)
though otherwise convinced of the nullity of Infant Baptism) have taken hold of
certain delusive Pleas, whereby to justify their nonconformity to this rule
of the Gospel, and Doctrine of Christ. As,

1. That Baptism according to Scripture example, every thing is beautiful in
its season, that therefore much of the beauty and luster of that Ordinance is
lost, when administered to old Disciples, and is a thing as uncomely and
incongruous, as it is for a man to do an action proper to a child.

To all which I answer, 1. By way of concession,

But then secondly, I answer further by way of Exception; 1. That it no ways
follows, that because a man both ignorantly and negligently, however, sinfully
omitted the fittest and properest season of doing that which was his duty in
that season to have done, that therefore he is by that omission of his,
discharged from and disobliged to that duty it self. It is the duty of all men,
to remember their Creator in the days of their youth, i. e. begin
conscientiously to serve God betimes, Eccles. 12.1. but shall we say, that
because youths have let slip this season and opportunity of grace, that
therefore they are ever a whit the less obliged to remember their Creator
afterward, when they come to be old men? Nay, rather on the contrary, does not
the greater obligation lie upon them, then, if possible, to double their zeal
and diligence therein?

Though the fourteenth day of the first month, was the proper time and season
for the celebration of the Passover, by Gods own appointment, as being the
precise time in which that was done, of which the Passover was a memoril, and
from which it tock its rise, Exodus 12.17.42. yet if any had omitted it in that
appointed season, upon occasion of their being in a journey, or of their being
unclean; they were, notwithstanding that omission, to keep it afterward on the
fourteenth day of the second month, Numb. 9.10, 11. Nay, circumcision it self,
which was but once to be received, though the eighth day after the child's
birth, was the proper time of that Ordinance also by Gods own injunction, yet
when this had been omitted about forty years by the Israelites, after the
appointed and proper time, yet it was not uncomely for them to do that then,
which should have been done long before, Josh. 5.2.7.

2. Whereas it is suggested as an uncomely thing for old Disciples to be
baptized, and that which tends to take away much of the beauty and luster of
the Ordinance; I demand, wherein the uncomeliness lies? Is it any disparagement
to the Ordinance it self, that a tall and well grown man in the things of God
otherwise, should stoop down to it to take it up? or is it any disparagement
for him so to do? Indeed it is a disparagement to him, that he has neglected
his duty so long, as all sin is a disparagement to him that defiles himself
with it; but it is his honor, that he remembers himself at last, and obeys his
God: acts of conformity to the will of God, adorn the creature. Yea a
subjection to the will of God in this Ordinance, is a comely thing, even in
persons of the greatest seize in the things of God. Christ Jesus himself,
though he was anointed with this oil of grace above his fellows, yet he counted
it no disparagement to him, or uncomely thing in it self for him to be
baptized: Suffer it, says he, to be so now, for thus it BECOMES us to fulfill
all righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. As long then as it is an act of righteousness,
or conformity to a Law or Institution of God to be baptized, it can be no
uncomely thing, no not in one of the growth of Christ Jesus himself: but
without doubt, it is a fowl disparagement, and a thing very unseemly and
incongruous to the profession of a Disciple of Jesus Christ, out of a conceit
or vain opinion of high seize in Christianity, to refuse to follow his
Lord and Master through the water, whose seize I am sure, were then
greater when he submitted to this Ordinance, then thine are at the highest
pitch, who ever thou art that thus vainly disputest with, and foolishly
rejectest the Counsel of God against thy self.

And because it is said by way of illustration; that for a strong Christian to
be baptized, is a thing as incongruous and uncomely, as it is for a lusty man
to do an action proper to a child; I demand, whether a man having omitted to do
that in his minority, which had been most proper for him then to have done, and
supposing the doing of which, would have had an influence upon him, as unto his
accommodation and benefit, all the days of his life, whether is it an uncomely
thing for such a man now seeing his former folly in his former neglect, to do
that now at last in order to his future good, through the former neglect
whereof he has sustained too much loss already? As for example, we know the
time of childhood, is the fittest time and season for the drinking in the first
rudiments of learning; yet this having been neglected by one in his childhood,
and youth, it is so far from being an uncomely thing in him to learn to read
when he comes to be sensible of his want of skill that way, that indeed it is
his praise and commendations, that he endeavors then to fill up that defect in
order to his future benefit. Even so, Baptism having a spiritual influence upon
a Christian throughout his whole life, and not only at the time of his first
taking it up, it therefore follows, that if a man was so weak and injudicious
in this particular, at the time of his newbirth, as not to judge this Baptism
we speak of necessary, yet for him to see his former error, and to repent of
this ignorance, weakness, and sin of his, when he comes to better
understanding, and resolve to be no longer without the benefit and blessing
which God has put in this Ordinance, for the continual good and benefit of a
Christian all his days, is none of his uncomely things, but that which renders
him truly wise, both in the eyes of God, and good men. It was the duty of the
Church of Ephesus, to repent, and do her first works, having through
backsliding and decay, fallen beneath them, Revel. 3.5. And shall we then think
it an uncomely thing, for a man to repent of his former neglect, and now at
last to do that which should have been his first work?

3. Whereas it is objected, that there is no example in the New Testament, as
to administer Baptism to grown Saints; I answer, that if this be true, then it
is, because there are no examples in the New Testament of grown Christians
their being unbaptized, and so no grown Christians that wanted Baptism. For
that corruption of such a sinful omission of Baptism, was not then crept into
the Church, and so there was no occasion or place for such an example. And yet
this example we have, viz. of Cornelius, his being baptized long after the time
in which he began to fear and serve the Lord; for his religion and devotion
this way, was of that continuance and standing before his Baptism, that it grew
famous, as it seems, throughout all the Nation of the Jews, though he himself
was a Gentile, Acts 10.1, 2.22. And if those who had been long professors of
Christianity, (as it appears they had been of whom the Apostle speaks, Heb.
5.12. in that he says, For the time they ought to have been teachers,) had yet
need, because of their dullness, to be taught again, which were the first
Principles of the Oracles of God; then surely such as yet never learned all
these first prinples, but are un-instructed in the due use of the Ordinance of
Baptism, which is one of them, and that upon occasion of their dullness this
way, have likewise need now to learn it practically, though it be not till long
after their first entrance upon the Christian profession.

4. If because we have no examples in Scripture, of old Disciples, their being
baptized; I say, if this be a reason against ancient professors their taking up
the Ordinance of Baptism, when thitherunto omitted by them, then the like plea,
would be as good an argument against their being Members of Churches, and their
partaking of the Supper of the Lord who are un-baptized; for where is there any
example in the New Testament of any ones being joined in Church Fellowship, and
thereupon partaking of the Supper, who had not been first baptized? So that if
this Argument be good for any thing, it is to beat down both Churches and
Ordinances; a thing which would doubtless much gratify those that already sit
too loose that way, which I believe some that have used this way of reasoning,
did not so well consider, whilst they build up with one hand, what they
endeavor to throw down with the other.

But about a work of reformation after a great Apostasy and general defection
from the purity of Gospel Worship, and Administration, it is no good way of
reasoning, to say, that because we have no examples in Scripture of such and
such endeavors of reformation of abuses crept into the worship of God,
therefore we may not thus and thus endeavor it. In such cases, it is
sufficient that we have the Original rule to direct us, what it is that God did
require of his people when he first delivered them those laws and rules to walk
by, and that we endeavor practically to answer these, as near as the
possibility of our present condition will admit; and not totally neglect them,
upon a pretense of an impossibility in us, by reason of disadvantage
contracted, to answer the first accustomed manner and usage, in such or such
Ordinances and Administrations in all particular circumstances. If the Jews
upon their coming out of their Babylonish captivity, had gone this way to work,
they had never set upon the work of reformation, and restitution of Temple and
Worship, as indeed they did. For they had no example before them, of that which
they were now to do: viz. to re-build the Temple, and restore the Decays of
worship, in those particular cases and circumstances peculiar to them, no, not
any particular direction from the law, in several of their immergencies, but
only general rules of original Order and Institution. And yet upon the
authority of those Laws, by which God at the first enjoined the erection of a
Temple, and the use of such and such Ordinances, they proceed to re-edifie the
one, and restore the other from under their decays and discontinuance, Ezra 3.
though in the doing thereof, they had no more Prophets, or other extraordinary
means to direct them, then we have now in our work of reformation and
restitution of Gospel Worship and order. And yet that in thus doing, they did
nothing but what was their duty, appears by this, in that when they desisted
from the work, and God raised up two Prophets, Haggai, and Zechariah, they
down-rightly reprove them from the Lord for letting their hand slack from the
work, and not proceeding as they had begun, Hag. 1.2.4. etc. Which clearly
argues, that it was their duty to have gone on, as well as to have begun,
though God had raised them up no extraordinary Prophets to assist them; and
that their first endeavors herein, were approved of God, as their after
dealings were reproved by him. And therefore, these things well considered, I
should rather think, that such persons, who having begun, and made some good
progress in the work of reformation otherwise, but in this of Baptism slack
their hands from the work, should much rather expect to be sharply reproved
from God with these Jews, for being partial and remiss in this work of the
Lord, then to be indulged in the neglect of this duty upon a pretense that the
season thereof is over with them. This people say, (says the Prophet) the time
is not yet come, the time in which the Lords house should be built, Hag. 1.2.
But our present Opposers, err on the other hand, saying, the time is now past,
in which the Lords Baptism should be administered to them.

A second Objection against the baptizing of Persons of a long standing in the
Christian Profession.
ANother pretense against their receiving Baptism who have anciently professed
themselves servants to Jesus Christ otherwise, is this, viz. because by such a
long continued course of profession, the ends for which Baptism was wont to be
received, are prevented. For Baptism being a Christians visible transition or
passing from under his former profession, manner of worship, and conversation,
into a new condition in these respects, and that whereby he does engage to
renounce, forsake, and disclaim the former, but to continue constant in the
worshipping, serving and obeying him, into whose Name he is baptized; hence it
comes to pass, that when any men or women have by a continued, constant, and
public profession of repentance from dead works, and faith toward God, and
love toward men, given up their names to God, and to Jesus Christ, and
declared themselves his servants; hence it comes to pass, say they, that the
foresaid ends and uses of Baptism are sufficiently provided for by such a
profession, and consequently Baptism to such is needless, and unnecessary,
because Baptism, as all other things, is necessary only in respect of the ends
whereto it serves; and therefore where the ends of it are attained, it self
being the means, ceases to be any further useful.

The Answer.
To this I answer, 1. By demanding, for he makes nothing in vain. It is upon
this principle of truth I conceive, that the Apostle argues the insufficiency
of the Law to accomplish the same end for which the Gospel is given, viz. in
that he did ordain and make the Gospel, notwithstanding the being of the Law.
If there had been a Law given, which could have given life, verily
righteousness should have been by the Law, Gal. 3.21. And again, If that first
Covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for the
second, Heb. 8.7. Upon the same account may we say, If the same ends which God
intends to bring about by Baptism, could have been attained (upon the same
terms of wisdom and goodness) by the Christian profession mentioned, and by
this only, then he would never have leavied this other means of Baptism too for
the same purpose: it argues weakness and deficiency in those that out-match
their ends with means. And therefore to say, that the ends of Baptism may be as
commodiously attained without Baptism in the Christian profession as with it,
is to reflect a foul disparagement upon the wisdom of God in his instituting
and making Baptism, or giving it any being at all. But let God be true, and
every man a liar, and let the foolishness of God be esteemed (as indeed it is)
wiser then men; and so let the shame and disparagement which some have unawares
thus foolishly cast upon God, fall upon their own hearts and faces in
humiliation before him with whom they have been so un-becomingly bold.

But second. I demand further, how it comes to pass that Baptism and the
profession of Christianity are divided, and that Baptism is excluded the
Christian profession? For what do they else say in effect, who say the ends of
Baptism are attainable by the Christian Profession without Baptism? For hereby
they would make the Christian Profession entirely complete as to the production
of all its ends without Baptism, and so consequently render Baptism no
essential part of the Christian profession; a thing directly contrary to the
stream and current of the Scripture, which derives its petty-gree from the same
Author with, and assigns its place and standing among other the principles of
the Doctrine of Christ of which the Christian profession does principally
consist.

3. I yet answer further, by denying that the ends of Baptism are adequately
attained by any continued course of profession whatsoever without Baptism; and
do say on the contrary, that persons not having as yet been baptized, though of
the greatest seize in religion otherwise, do stand in need of Baptism, as
to the effecting the ends thereof: and this I do assert upon these grounds and
considerations following.

1. Because as well Baptism as a man's entrance upon, or progress in
Christianity, is appointed by God as a means of effecting the same end, to wit,
salvation. This has been already made manifest from those Scriptures, where
persons have been directed to the use of baptism as well as repentance, in
order to their being faved, Acts 2.37, 38. The like conjunction is made between
believing and baptism, Mark 16.16. And between regeneration and baptism, John
3.5. Tit. 3.5. and between a good conscience and baptism, 1 Pet. 3.21. and all
in order to the same common end, salvation. Now where several means are
enjoined men by God in order to the obtaining the same end, there it is not
safe for any that really desire that end, to omit any one of those means upon
any pretense whatsoever, nor in case of such an omission, does God stand
obliged by any promise of his, to confer the grace and benefit of salvation,
nor can such in that case with any sufficient ground of confidence, expect it
at his hands. Effects depending upon the concurrance and cooperation of
several causes, are not to be expected upon the operation of part of them only.
As there are several syllables that go to the making up of one word, so there
are several things which by the appointment of God go to the making of a man
regularly capable of salvation, as repentance, faith, baptism, obedience, etc.
So that as he that propounds to himself the writing of such or such a word
consisting of several syllables, disappoints himself of his end in omitting any
one of them; so he that propounds the putting of himself into a regular
capacity of salvation as his end, and yet voluntarily omits any one of the
means appointed by God for that purpose, takes a like direct course to
disappoint himself of this great and important end of his, viz. his regular
capacity of salvation. If God shall please to save any man upon easier terms
then those which he has set as his ordinary and standing method, and upon
which he has obliged himself by promise and covenant to save men, I shall not
(so far as I know mine own heart) be troubled at it; but shall advise all men
that prize their salvation, not to trust to that, but to expect salvation from
God upon his own proposed terms, that is in a way of doing that which he
requires of men in order thereunto, as David did, saying, Lord, I have hoped
for thy salvation, and done thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.166. Faith obtains at
the hands of God, not simply by believing that God will do this or that good
thing which he has promised, but by putting him in whom it is upon obeying God
in the use of such means, upon the condition or taking place whereof he has
made such promise; as likewise, by depending upon the power, goodness, and
faithfulness of God for performance, in a conscientious and obediential use of
the said means. It is said, that it was by faith, that the walls of Jericho
fell down, Heb. 11.30. but how? not in omitting any one of those things which
God enjoined for that purpose, though otherwise very despicable and unlikely to
produce such an effect. And it may very well be questioned, whether those walls
would have fallen down as they did if they had compassed the City but six times
when he had enjoined seven, or otherwise had omitted the blowing of the same
horns, or any other piece of Solemnity which God had commanded as a Sacramental
means of atchieving that great enterprise, though otherwise, there was no
proportion of natural efficiency in those actions, to produce any such effect,
when entirely performed. But the faith and obedience of men to God, is many
times more seen in doing this or that at his appointment in reference to an
end, which in it self promises nothing toward such a production, then it is in
doing greater matters that seem more proportionate to their end, because in
such cases it is a sign that God is more eyed, then the means. Whereas
doubtless, it is a great temptation upon men, and often proves a stumbling block
in their way, to despise and so to neglect the use of such means as through the
institution of God would richly conduce to their good, because they promise so
little in visible appearance. This was the cause why the Jews stumbled at
Christ himself, when they saw the lowness of his condition in the world; this
likewise caused them to prefer works before faith as to their justification.
This was the stone at which Naaman the Syrian began to stumble, when he was
commanded to wash seven times in Jorden for the clensing of his leprosy,
supposing that to be an unlikely thing to produce that effect: I had thought,
(says he concerning Elisha) that surely he would have come out me, and have
stood, and called on the Name of the Lord his God, and have struck his hand
over the place: are not Abana and Pharper, rivers of Damascus, better then all
the waters in Israel, etc. 2 King. 5.11, 12. And indeed, I much fear, that the
feet of many who other-wayes are godly and wise, are taken in this very snare
of under-valuing and disesteeming the Ordinance of Baptism, because it is a
thing, which according to outward appearance, is despicable, and promises so
little. For from what else can those dimunitive expressions of some concerning
it proceed? who say, that if it be a duty for Christians not to baptize their
children, and to be baptized themselves; yet it is one of the least of duties
among ten thousand. And as it was from that low esteem which Naaman had of his
washing in Jorden seven times, and the improbability of it in his eye to effect
his clensing, that made him to say, Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of
Damascus, better then the waters of Isreal's So doubtless is it from the like
low esteem which they have of this Ordinance of Christ, that some conceive,
that the other parts of the Christian profession, are likelier to produce the
effects assigned to Baptism, then Baptism it self is. But as many times great
weights do hang on small wyers, so, the wisdom of God has put much as to the
good of men, in those very things which many times seem least in the eyes of
men, that the excellency of the treasure and benefit, may so much the more
manifestly be known to be of God, by how much the vessel is earththy and weak,
in which it is brought.

And wherefore have I thus enlarged? but to show, that Baptism by water,
however by men's mis-representation of the matter to themselves, it seems to be
numbered among the least of the Commands of God, or rather excluded their number
as to the professors of these days, yet being enjoined by the same Lord, in
the same Gospel, in order to the salvation of men, as well as repentance from
dead works, and faith toward God; and that God does no more exempt or
privilege any man from the one, then he does from the other, by any word of
his, or does any whit more ascertain his salvation in the neglect of the one,
then he does in the neglect of the other, that therefore it is of man's weakness
and vanity, and not from any wisdom received from God, to make such an election
and reprobation among the Doctrines of Christ as some do, who while they
account the one absolutely necessary to salvation, yet do in the mean while
with another eye, look upon the other as indifferent, needless, and
superfluous, as touching any such need which the salvation of men has thereof;
yea judging them deeply culpable (almost as much as they who said, Except ye be
circumcised ye cannot be saved) that urge the practice of Baptism as necessary
to salvation, though in the doing thereof, they put no other necessity upon it,
then what the Scripture has put.

2. As there is one common end of believing, repenting, Baptism, growing in
grace, and persevering to the end, which is salvation; so there are
subordinately, several different ends of Baptism it self: and there is also a
gradual accession to those ends; in both which respects, Baptism is necessary
in persons otherwise of the largest growth in religion. For though it should be
granted for arguments sake, that some of the ends of Baptism may be prevented,
by a long continued course of profession preceding it; yet that any should
affirm, that all the ends of Baptism are anticipitated by such a profession, me
thinks is strange.

For 1. Baptism in the use, influence, and operation of it, runs parallel with
a man's life and days; so that though the act be transient, yet the Spirit or
obliging power of that act, is or ought to be permanent and lasting. For what
ever a man by his baptism does engage himself to; this baptismal engagement of
his, if the intent of it be observed, has an influence upon him all his days,
to walk answerable to it. And so we shall find the Apostle teaching the
believing Romans, to improve their Baptism which they had received long before,
unto their then present mortification and sanctification, answerable to the
true intent of it, Romans 6.2, 3, 4, 5. As a wife ought all her days, to
remember and keep that engagement of fidelity to her husband, into which she
entered the day of her marriage, so ought a Christian, to make it his continual
work, and daily business, to answer, fulfill, and make good, that engagement of
subjection and fidelity to Christ Jesus, into which he entered at the time of
his Baptism. So that this then running parallel with a Christians profession,
influencing and acting the same, it cannot possibly be prevented by such a
profession.

2. One end of Baptism is to confirm, strengthen and increase in men, that
which in some good measure they had before they were baptized. Men either do or
ought to believe before they are baptized, as has been already showed, and yet
they are to be baptized for the bettering and confirmation of that faith of
theirs notwithstanding. So men have some presence and operation of the Spirit
before Baptism, in as much as they are enabled to believe before. For no man
can say that Jesus is the Lord, (as they do that believe before Baptism) but by
the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. And yet Baptism is to be received for this end
among others, viz. that they may receive the Holy Ghost; i. e. a greater
measure and presence of the Spirit then before they had, Acts 2.38, 39. Now
then, unless that any professors can come forth and say, that they have so much
faith, and so much of the Spirit, that they need no more; I cannot understand
how their profession, though otherwise never so substantial and real, can carry
them above their need of Baptism. Certainly, they have outstript Paul, either
in proficiency, or in opinion of their own worth, who can say they have
attained, to wit, perfection of degrees. Not as though I had already attained,
either were already perfect, says Paul, Philip. 3.12.

Now that Baptism, ought to be received in relation to some of its ends, though
others of them should be prevented by some precedanious work of grace, or gift
of God, will appear. 1. From the example of our Saviors Baptism, who though he
had no need of baptism, in respect of some of those ends for which Baptism was
ordained, and in respect whereof all other men needed it, yet in some other
respects, we see it was necessary even in Christ himself, viz. as it was a
thing, well becoming him to fulfill all righteousness, and to obey God in this,
as in all other his Commands and Institutions then on foot, Matthew. 3.15. 2. It
appears from the Baptism of Cornelius, and his Company. For though one end of
Baptism, is to put men into a regular capacity of receiving the Holy Ghost, as
has been noted; yet God preventing this end of baptism as unto them, in
causing the Holy Ghost to fall upon them extraordinarily, while the word of the
Gospel was in speaking to them, and before they were baptized; the Apostle
Peter hereupon, is so far from making this an Argument why they should not be
baptized, or had no need of Baptism, as that he thence infers the
reasonableness of the thing, why they should be baptized in reference to other
ends, Acts 10.47, 48. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be
baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? And he commanded
them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord.

I might also from what has been now last mentioned,

To this I answer, Cornelius and his Company, it appears that baptism is
necessary for other ends, then to render men capable of those extraordinary
receptions of the Spirit. For we there see, that baptism was necessary to them
though they had been prevented herewith.

2. If this Objection were forcible against the being of true baptism now in
the world, it might be to as good purpose an objection against the being of any
true believers in the world, at least so far as known to us: For there are no
such effects, as a miraculous speaking with tongues, etc. that follow men's
believing in these days, which yet were promised to believers, and received by
them in the Apostles days, Mark 16.17.

But as the ordinary and common effects of believing, to wit, obedience, love,
etc. do now follow men's believing, as well as they did in the Apostles days,
though those extraordinary effects are ceased, or at least suspended, as having
been vouchsafed for a certain time only, by way of special dispensation, and
design for the confirmation of the Gospel-ministration whilst it was but yet
new, Mark 16.20. Heb. 2.4. So do the ordinary, common, and indeed most
salvivical effects of baptism where duly used, now remain, when as those that
were extraordinary, and by way of extraordinary design, and of special
dispensation, for a time voucsafed are now ceased, or at least suspended.

Neither were those gifts which we call extraordinary, extraordinary in point
of saving benefit, above those which we call ordinary, nor indeed equal to
them: for the Apostle having spoken of these extraordinary gifts, 1. Cor.
12.10. concludes thus in ver. last; Covet earnestly the best gifts, and yet
show I unto you a more excellent way: And what was that more excellent way, but
the way of Christian love and charity, of which he speaks in the following
Chapter: the which if wanting, though otherwise a man had the tongue of men and
Angels, and the gift of Prophecy, and faith to remove mountains, yet he would
be nothing, but as a sounding brass, or a tinkling Cymbal, 1 Cor. 13.1.2.

But 3. whereas it is demanded; what have they more of the Spirit who are
baptized, then those who are not? Though I believe they will not boast of their
measures of the Spirit, yet I dare say, that if they have not a greater
presence of the Spirit with them then others have, to acquaint them with the
things freely given them of God, to mortify the deeds of the body, to lust
against the deeds of the flesh, to crucify their affections and lusts to the
old world, to guide them in the ways of truth, to help their infirmities in
prayer, to strengthen them to suffer, and to support them in suffering for
righteousness sake, and to fill them with that joy and peace, which is
unspeakable, and full of glory; it is not because these and the like blessed
effects of the Spirit, are not deducible from God by baptism, if rightly
improved, but it is, because they either rest in the work done, or do not
exercise faith about the Ordinance, and the promise of God annexed to it, or
else do not frequently and seriously apply themselves to God for these supplies
from it, not study how they may all their days make the best improvement of
it: for otherwise, this Ordinance is not barren, nor is that a vain word which
assures men of the Spirit that obey God herein. Indeed Baptism does not procure
these effects by any natural efficiency, or by the work done, neither indeed
does any other Ordinance of the Gospel; but in a moral way. If then there be
that answer of a good conscience, joined with it, of which Peter speaks, it
will doubtless, give a good account of it self, as touching both what and whose
it is. Let any man's heart but serve him to obey God in this Ordinance of his,
and he will find himself upon better terms of confidnce toward God, to expect
larger receptions from him then before he could do, especially whilst he was
under any jealousy of mind, lest he had not as yet sought such and such grace
at his hand, after the due order of the Gospel.

I perceive also,

Toward the removing of which stumbling block, last Will and Testament of the
Lord, and to wipe out Baptism which he has left as part of the Legacy of his
Church and people? The Apostle says, Though it be but a man's testament, yet if
it be confirmed, no man disanulleth, or adds thereto, Gal. 3.15. And should
vain man make more bold with his Redeemer and Sovereign Lord, by whom he must
be shortly judged, then the most ordinary ingenuity will suffer him to do with
men, when they are dead and gone? Or if they will say, that Christ Jesus
himself has made any alteration in this behalf, or that he ever did
appropriate Baptism to the elder brethren, viz. the primitive believers, with
the exclusion of the younger brethren, to wit, those other believers, which in
their successive generations have been, are, and shall be Partakers of like
precious faith, and of the same common salvation with them, let them show it,
before they require our belief of it.

But if they will believe Jesus Christ himself, (which is sure to be believed
before them) he testifies concerning such Doctrines, Rules, Precepts, Laws, and
Ordinances, as those Primitive and Apostolical Churches then had and did enjoy,
viz. that they should be HELD FAST by the Churches, and continued in the
Churches, UNTIL HE COME, viz. until he come again at the end of the world: for
that was his injunction which he laid upon those faithful ones of the Church of
Thyatira in opposition to those, who had begun to decline and degenerate into
corrupt principles and doctrines, Revel. 2.24, 25. But unto you I say, and unto
the rest in Thyatira, as many at have not this doctrine, and which have not
known the depths of Satan, as they speak; I will put upon you none other
burden, but that which ye have already; HOLD FAST TIL I COME. See the like
concerning the Church of Ephesus, Revel. 3.3. and the Church of Philadelphia,
Revel. 3.11. and the Church of the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. However others
were looking after other doctrines then what they had been taught by Christ, or
by his Apostles, yet says he, As for you that have not this doctrine, that are
not yet corrupted with any new doctrine, I will impose no further burden upon
you, then the keeping of those things which you have been already taught, and
have received: but as for these, said he, Hold them fast till I come. As it was
the will and Command of Christ, that that Church in the succession of its
members, should have continued a pure and uncorrupted Church until he should
come again, so it was his will likewise, that what ever Ordinances they then
had, (and surely Baptism was not yet extinct according to our Adversaries own
opinion, the Apostle John being yet alive,) the same were to be held fast by
them, in the pure use of them, even until his second coming also.

For Gospel Ordinances, (among which Baptism at least in the Apostles days, is
acknowledged to be one,) did not die with the Apostles, but as the Apostles
were to teach others the same things they themselves had learned from Christ,
(Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, Matthew.
28.20.) So those that succeeded the Apostles, were to transmit and carry over
the same things to others that should come after them, which they themselves
had learned from the Apostles. And not only so, but those also of the second
remove from the Apostles, were to hand over the same things to the next
Generation to them, and so from one generation to another, till Christ shall
come again to put an end to this Gospel ministration, as at his first coming he
did put a period to the Legal. The things that thou have heard of me among many
witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also, 2 Timothy 2.2. Just as it was in Israel of old, when God had first
given them the Law and the Ordinances thereof by the Ministry of Moses: those
Ordinances did not cease when Moses ceased to be any more among them, but one
generation was to instruct and teach another the knowledge and observation of
those Laws and Ordinances, until the coming of Christ in the flesh, Psalm. 78.5,
6, 7. For he established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel,
which he commanded our fathers, that they should make them known to their
children: that the generation to come might know them, even the children who
should be born: who should arise and declare them to their children, that they
might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his
Commandments. The Will and Testament of Christ then, being ratified in his
blood, and confirmed by his death, 1 Cor. 11.25. Heb. 9.16, 17. He that shall
go about to disanul or alter it, to put out and put in at his pleasure; and to
say this part of it remains in force, and that does not, as touching such
things as at the first were enjoined Christians as Christians; though it should
be Paul himself, or an Angel from Heaven that should do it, the Apostles would
have such an one to be esteemed accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9. Rev. 22.18, 19.

And there is great reason why the Spirit of God, and the Servants of God,
should be so severe against those alterations in the Will and Testament of
Jesus Christ, which perhaps some men may count matters of no great moment,
because by weakening the Authority of any one Ordinance of Jesus Christ in the
minds of men, the whole Gospel is in danger of being thereby undermined, as
touching its credit and authority with them: For as the saying is in the civil
Law, He that has wronged one, has threatened many: Or rather as the Apostle
James has it, Jam. 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in
one point, is guilty of all; So verily, they whoever they be, that deny the
continuation of Baptism in the Church, do in effect deny all the Ordinances of
the Gospel, yea, and the Gospel it self too, (as too many now a days have
done; who at first began, but where those Antibaptists do begin,) because all
the rest, both Doctrine and Ordinances, stand but upon the same foundation, and
by the same authority as Baptism it self does: And he that thinks he may make
bold to slight the one, has as much reason (which is none at all duly so
called) to proceed to despise the other; and it is a thousand to one, but if
the Devil be too hard for him in the one, he will not leave him till he has
brought him to the other.

And therefore to such as are nibling and tampering with this or any other
sacred Ordinance of Jesus Christ, by way of questioning its authority and
perpetuity; my advice to such shall be in this case, the same which Solomon
gives in another, Prove. 17.14. The beginning of strife, is as when one lets
out water; therefore leave off contention, before it be meddled with; Cease
betimes all your questioning of, quarrelling and contending against this
Ordinance of Baptism, or any other divine Institution: For if you once give
liberty and way to your selves, to question the Divinity, Authority, or
Perpetuity of any one Ordinance of Jesus Christ, you no more know where you
shall make an end, then he that opens a little breach to the Sea, knows what
its progress will be, or how far it will spread.

Let this then suffice, as touching the resolution of that question, viz.
whether it be necessary for such persons to be baptized, as have of a long time
been professors of the Gospel, they not having been baptized sooner, as they
ought to have been?

A word of advice to such who are baptized, to incorporate themselves in a way
of Church Fellowship, with such only who are baptized also.
HAving already proved Infant Baptism unlawful, and so a nullity to every one
that in their Nonage have received it; as likewise that it is therefore the duty
of men fearing God, not to satisfy themselves with that Baptism, as if that
would pass for current obedience with God, who requires a voluntary subjection
to his counsel in that Ordinance; and having further evinced, that a man's
pre-ingagement in the Christian profession, is no bat against his taking up
this Ordinance, having not formerly done it; I shall now for a close, offer a
word of advice to those who have listed themselves under the Command of Christ
Jesus in this Ordinance, touching the disposal of themselves for the future in
Church Communion, unto which Baptism has been wont to be preparatory.

Now the question will be, whether persons whose consciences having prompt them
to take up baptism, may not still continue their wonted Church Communion, with
those whose judgments standing engaged another way, will not suffer them herein
to accord with them? I must confess for my own part, should my inclination and
disposition be made Judge in the case, considered by it self, and as
un-influenced by my reason, Judgment and conscience otherwise, it would
rejoycingly, without the least demur, resolve it in the affirmative. Yet when I
consider what reasons and motives are found in the other balance, I must
acknowledge, my reason and judgment carry it against my affection, to give my
advice in the negative: which reasons, motives, or considerations, are these,
and such as these which here follow.

1. Because Baptism is one of the foundation Doctrines upon which a right
constituted Church is built. That the Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets is
the foundation of a Church of Christ, in which himself is the chief
cornerstone, is evident from what the Apostle asserts concerning the Church of
Ephesus in this behalf, Ephesians. 2.19, 20. Now therefore, ye are no more
strangers and forrainers, but Fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God, and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone.

Now if it be demanded, what Doctrines of Christ, and of his Apostles they are,
which are the foundation of a Church? (for it is in respect of their Doctrine,
I conceive, that the Apostles are called, the foundation,) we shall find them
particularly reckoned up by the Apostle, as those upon which the Church of the
Hebrews was built, (which was indeed the first Church of Christ constituted by
the Apostles, whilst they were yet together, presently after the Ascension of
Christ; and therefore a rule and pattern to all succeeding Churches,) and they
are these, Heb. 6.1, 2. Therefore leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, let us go on to perfection, not laying again the FOUNDATION of
repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, of the Doctrines of
Baptisms, and of the laying on of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and
of eternal judgment. Now in this enumeration of foundation doctrines, we have
baptism in the lift, as well as repentance from dead works, and faith toward
God, and so the rest. When the Apostle said, not laying again the foundation of
repentance, etc. It is hereby manifest, that repentance, faith, baptism, etc.
had been formerly laid as the foundation of that Hebrew Church, for so these
Hebrews were, as you may see Chap. 3.6. and 10.24.25. and 13.7.17.24.

If then the Doctrine of Baptism practically embraced, was a part of the
foundation of the first Churches, which were most exactly built according to
the direction of Christ Jesus himself, whose house they were, and that it was
the Doctrine of the Apostles, that so it should be, for so I conceive it was,
in which respect Baptism, as the rest there mentioned, is called both doctrine
and foundation, i. e. a foundation laid according to doctrine: I say, this
considered, it nearly concerns all those that put to their hands to erect and
constitute a Church unto Christ, to do what ever they do there in as much as in
them lies, according to the Original Pattern given by God, and that in building
they leave out no part of his foundation. Other foundations (says the Apostle
speaking of Church-building) can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. that is, Jesus Christ in his doctrine; for he that abides
in the Doctrine of Christ, has Christ, as he that abides not in his Doctrine,
has him not, 2 John 9. According to which, we may also say, that they who lay
not the Doctrine of Christ for a foundation, do not lay Christ for the
soundation, Upon which account, amongst others, the Synagogue of Rome is denied
to be a true Church, though Christ in his Person is owned amongst them. But
when I say, Christ in his Doctrine is the foundation, other then which no man
can lay. I do not mean Christ in all and every of his Doctrines, as if there
could be no true foundation where every Doctrine of Christ is not received I
but according to the Apostle in this behalf, I mean Christ in such of his
Doctrines, which are called the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, or the
beginning Word of Christ; which principles, are called the foundation, Heb.
6.1, 2. This then being the foundation laid by the Apostles, other foundation,
said he, can no man lay, i. e. with any commission or approbation from God.

We know when Moses was to build a Tabernacle unto God, his strict charge from
God, was to do every thing there about according to the pattern which God had
showed him: Look, says he, that thou make them after their pattern, which was
showed thee in the Mount, Exodus 25.40. And so afterward, when Solomon was to
build a Temple to God, he likewise was to do it according to the pattern which
David had received by the Spirit, as it is said, and which he was made to
understand in writing, by the hand of God upon him, 1 Chronicles. 28.11, 12, 19. And
doubtless there is not less exactness, sedulity, and circumspection to be used
now in times of the Gospel in building a spiritual house unto God, then was
under the Law in those that were typical. For as Christ is faithful in all his
house, i. e. in all things belonging to his house, as was Moses, Heb. 3.2. viz.
in his directions how he would have it built, and the affairs thereof ordered,
as he received of his Father, so ought the servants of Christ to be as faithful
also in following their Original pattern. For that exactness under the Law,
served as an example or shadow of Heavenly things, i. e. spiritual or Gospel
things, Heb. 8.5. Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as
Moses was admonished of God, when he was about to make the Tabernacle: For see
(says he) that thou make all things according to the pattern showed to thee on
the Mount.

2. As it was a Doctrine of Christ, delivered by the Apostles, that Churches
should be founded upon Baptism as well as other principles of the Doctrine of
Christ; that is, that men should first be baptized, and then associate
themselves in Church Bodies; so in the second place, we shall find it to have
been the practice of believers, and such as subjected themselves to the
Doctrine of the Gospel in the Apostles time. The first Church that was erected
by the Apostles, I mean the Church at Jerusalem, observed this method, Acts
2.40, 42. Those that gladly received his word, were baptized, and here upon the
same day were added to them, viz. to the Apostles, and other Disciples, about
three thousand souls: and then it follows, that they continued steadfast in the
Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. 1.
They gladly received the word. 2. Were baptized. 3. Were added to the Church.
4. Continued in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of bread
and prayers. So, that as their gladsom receiving the word, preceded their
baptism, so did their baptism in respect of order, precede their addition to
that particular body of Christians, and their communion and fellowship together
in the Ordinances of the Gospel, as breaking of bread, and the like.

The Apostle gives thanks to God in the behalf of the believing Romans: For
that though they had been the servants of sin, yet had obeyed from the heart
that form of Doctrine whereto they were delivered, as it is in the Marginal
reading, i. e. unto the profession and practice of which they were delivered,
when they first turned Christians, and were baptized, Romans 6.17. For that now
is evident, that what ever this form of Doctrine was, it was such doctrine as
was first taught them, and first believed and obeyed by them upon their
becoming Christians. For it was at that time in which they ceased to be any
longer the servants of fin, and did become the Servants of righteousness,
(which must needs be the time of their conversion) in which they are said to
have obeyed that Form of Doctrine. Now what reasonably can be imagined to be
the form of doctrine here spoken of, which was subjected to at their first
conversion, but that which the Scripture elsewhere calls, (as we have already
noted) the beginning doctrine of Christ, or the Principles of the Drctrine of
Christ, or that Systeme, body, or platform of doctrine which was made up of
those six Principles, wherein men were first instructed, and which were laid as
a foundation of what ever might be called a progress in Christianity
afterward? Heb. 6.1, 2. These believing Romans then, did not only obey the
doctrine of the Gospel simply considered, and in the general, but also in the
formality of it, or according to that method and order which does appertain to
the laws and precepts of it, of which an account was before given. That
believers were baptized before their admittance into Church communion, and in
order to it, is clear enough; but that any were admitted to Church Fellowship
before Baptism in the Primitive times, is a thing which to me no where appears
from the Scripture, but is a thing void of precept or example from Scripture,
in those that now practice it.

If then it was the practice of believers in the first times of the Gospel, to
associate themselves in Church Fellowship, with such only who were baptized; a
great inducement doubtless it ought to be, to all Christians now to go and do
likewise. For the Scripture-injunction is, To walk in the way of good men, and
to keep in the path of the righteous, Prove. 2.20. To be followers of them who
through faith and patience inherit the promises, Heb. 6.12. To mark them which
walked as the Apostles walked, as having them for an Ensample, Philip. 3.17. 1
Cor. 11.1. And it was the great praise of the Church of the Thessalonians, that
they made the Churches of Judea, (which were Churches of the first Plantation,)
their pattern and example, 1 Thessalonians. 2.14. For ye, brethren, became followers of
the Churches of God, which in Judea are in Christ Jesus, etc. and what was
praiseworthy in that Church, will be commendable to any Church now.

3. Church Communion with a particular Church in her appropriate privileges,,
who are not regularly visible members of the universal Church: as no man is in
a due capacity of being a member of a particular Corporation in a Nation, who
not being freeborn, is not first made a free Denizen of that Nation. For
particular Churches receive their respective beings from the Universal, as
particular Rivers receive theirs from the Sea.

That Baptism is the Ordinance of visible initiation or admission into the
universal Church of Christ, is a thing which generally has been acknowledged,
and is by Pedobaptists themselves constantly asserted, and is that which I have
already proved in the former part of this Treatise from 1 Cor. 12.13. Romans 6.3.
and Gal. 3.27. to which I refer the Reader for satisfaction herein. What
persons are, or may be in Gods account and acceptance, upon account of their
faith and repentance, etc. preceding their baptism, is not the thing in
question, (if it were, I hope I should not be found too narrow and straight, in
my Christian allowance as unto that,) but the question is, what they are
visibly unto men, when they make a judgment of them according to rule. And if
Baptism be the means of visible admission into the Church, and of visible
ingrafting into Christ, then this end is not to be expected without this means,
where there is opportunity of making use of it; God never being used to
vouchsafe things in an extraordinary way, when ordinary means are at hand, and
neglected; and consequently, that none are to be looked upon as regularly
visible members, no not of the Universal Church, who are not baptized. For men
are not left to their own liberty herein, but are tied up to a rule to judge by.
And indeed should there not be a certain standing rule, such as Baptism is, by
which to determine when men are visibly of the Church universal, and when not,
there would be a great deal of uncertainty, by what, how, and when to esteem
them members thereof.

Should we make any thing else the rule of this Judgment, we should find our
selves at a strange loss to give right judgment herein. For example, Should we
make a man's profession of the Christian Religion in general this rule; then the
question will be, whether every profession of the Christian Religion does
render a man reputably a member of the universal Church? If not (as I suppose
it will not be asserted that it does) then the question will be, to what degree
a man must profess before he be worthy that denomination? And who is able here
to give the rule unto his brother? yea, or unto himself either? but that he
will be in danger of making it too high, or too low, too narrow, or too wide.
But now, if we take the rule which God has fitted to our hands, (Baptism I
mean) we shall then find our selves delivered from those uncertainties,
difficulties, and dis-satisfactions, yea from that un-evangelical arbitrariness
in the things of God, which otherwise will of necessity and unavoidably befall
us herein. For according to Scripture rule, all they, and only they are to be
esteemed visibly of the universal Church, who so far profess repentance from
dead works, faith toward God, and the rest of the foundation principles, as
thereupon to submit to the Ordinance of Baptism, as engaging themselves
thereby, to be no longer the servants of sin, but thenceforth the servants of
Jesus Christ, and of righteousness: I shall not here repeat the proof of this,
you have it already.

If then none are to be esteemed as visible members of the universal Church,
but only such as are baptized, then none but such as are baptized may be
admitted as members of a particular Church. For it is altogether irregular,
indeed absurd, to admit any into particular Church Fellowship, who are not
first visibly members of the Universal; because particular Churches, and so
particular Church Members, receive their right of being such, of and from the
Universal Church, and from that precedent standing they had there as branches
and members of it. As the special must and does agree with the general kind in
the general nature of it, or else it is no special of that general, as
Logicians speak; So must a particular Church agree with the universal, in the
universal nature of it, otherwise it is no particular of the Universal, but is
something of another kind. But now Baptism is so essentially, formally, and
universally necessary to the visible being, (I say visible being) of the
universal Church, and of every member of it, as that it is the distinguishing
mark between those that are, and those that are not visibly of it. For it is
that mean, or only visible door, by which visibly men pass out of the world,
into the Church, from under the dominion of sin and Satan, into the Rule and
Government of Jesus Christ: That the Scriptures do assign this office unto
Baptism, I have formerly proved, as I suppose, and is the vote and concession
of all men generally, a few only excepted of those that profess Christianity.
If the Scriptures do in any other quarters of them repeal this mean, and ordain
another in its stead, or do assign any other besides this to the same service,
I desire to be directed therein that I may know what it is, and where I may
find it; for I must profess my total ignorance of any such thing, though I have
made diligent search for it. Nor is it indeed Gods way and method to leavy more
means for the same end, when one is every way sufficient; as I have formerly
showed.

Baptism then being so much of the general nature of the Churches visible
being, as that no man can according to Scripturerule, esteem any one duly and
regularly a member thereof without it; those particular Churches, or
Church Members then, that partake not hereof, cannot in due form of Evangelical
Law, nor according to the principles of reason, be esteemed particucular
Churches, or Church Members of the universal, but either of some other kind, or
at the best of an un-evangelical form and constitution.

4. This being Gods method, order, and way of bringing men into the enjoyment
of Church Communion, and Church privileges, viz. through the door of Baptism
(as has been already observed) this very method, and order of his, ought to be
very sacred unto us, and inviolably observed by us. For as God is the God of
order, and not of confusion, so he has commanded us to do all things; ( viz.
which he has commanded in Church Affairs,) decently and in order, 1 Cor.
14.40. Now what is it to do all things in order? but to do every thing in its
due place, that first, which in order of institution is first, and that
afterward, which has a relative dependence upon that which goes before.

There is indeed a beautiful harmony, and comely agreement between the ways of
Jesus Christ, Ordinance and Ordinance, when each of them is observed in that
order that is proper to them, in which respect I suppose, the Tabernacle or
House of God of old, was called, the Beauty of holiness, or the Ordinannances
thereof, the comely honors of the Sanctuary, as Master Ainsworth tenders it;
which yet were but a pattern of heavenly, i. e. Spiritual or Gospel things,
Heb. 9.23. and 8.5. The which spiritual beauty, being beheld by the Apostle in
the Church at Colosse, he was much taken there with: Joying and beholding your
order, etc. Coloss. 2.5. i.e. Joying to behold your order: which argues that
this order of theirs was a lovely object.

And doubtless, it is a duty incumbent upon every one of them, who have devoted
themselves to Jesus Christ, and the Affairs of his Gospel, to endeavor as much
as in them lies, the honor of their Master, and of the Affairs of his house:
and therefore if there be any piece of comeliness or beauty more in one way,
then there is in another, (as doubless there is more in God's order and method,
then there is in that which is but of man) it will well become the servants of
the Lord Jesus to be zealous of that. The best way and method of doing the best
things is to be coveted, as well as the best things themselves.

And as it is a thing very well pleasing unto God, to have his own things done
in his own way and order, so it is a provocation to him, to have his way and
order neglected, and another introduced instead of it, yea, though such a
disorder proceed from no wicked intent, out from inadvertancie only, The Lord
our God (says David) made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after
the due order, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. meaning in that stroke upon Vzzah, who did but
touch the Ark, (out of an intent doubtless to uphold it upon the stumbling of
the Oxen,) otherwise then Gods order was. And shall we think that the same
Lord, who has his eyes like a flame of fire, is not as jealous now for the due
order of the Gospel, as he was for the due order of the Law? And is there not
the same reason to fear, that if any Church now shall transgress the Laws of
his House, that they also shall feel his hand in one kind or other, as well as
they did in times past in like case? to the end. That all the Churches may
know, that it is he that searches the reins, and the hearts, and that will
give to every one according to his works: i.e. that they may know, that he is a
narrow Observer of what is done in his Churches, Revel. 2.23.

Since then it was the Original Order of the Churches of Christ, in the midst
of whom Christ himself walked, to admit such only to their Church Communion as
had been baptized, (and that as we have reason to believe, according to what
they had been taught by the Apostles, who did appoint them their order of
doing, as well as the things they were to do, Tit. 1.5. 2 These. 2.15. 1 Cor.
14. and 11.2.) How does it concern such as are studious of reducing things in
the Worship and House of God to their primitive purity and beauty, to tread in
their steps, and not to deviate therefrom upon any pretense whatsoever.

It is true, (as I observed before upon another occasion) that it may so fall
out, that in undertakings of reformation and restitution of ordinances and
worship from under their corruptions and decays, there may be an
impossibility, precisely, and in all things, to answer the original usage, but
that through an indispensible necessity, there will be in these reformers, some
variation either in the Administrator, or in some considerable circumstance of
the administration; in respect of which indispensible necessity, God accepts
men according to what opportunity they have, and not according to what they
have not; when they proceed according to the Rule and Original pattern, to the
utmost of their power and opportunity. But now in the case in hand, no man
amongst us, is staved off from a close conformity to the original Order, by any
absolute and indispensible necessity, or for want of opportunity, there being a
great variety of baptized Churches in these days, amongst whom baptized
persons may cast in their lot, and take out their portion of Christian
Fellowship, and Communion. So that where there is a mingling of persons
baptized, with such as are unbaptized in Church Fellowship now amongst us, the
departing herein from the ancient Gospel Order, is not by way of necessity
(which according to the Proverb has no Law) but is merely voluntary, and of
choice, and therefore (so far as I understand) inexcusable.

I know indeed that such things as these, seem but little in some good men's
eyes, (I fear much less then of right they ought) who count men more nice then
wise, who make a business of it to stand upon such punctillioes. But be it so,
that they are the least of many among the things of the Gospel, yet why should
they not have their share of respect amongst men according to what they be?
What dispensation has any man to despise or neglect the least of the things or
ways of Christ Jesus because they are little? The Jots and Tittles of the Law
(which were the least things of it) were to have sacred respect amongst men,
and to be observed, Matthew. 5.18. And though judgment, mercy, and faith, were
the weighty matters of the Law, and accordingly ought to have been done, yet
the paying tithe of mint, annise, and cummin, which were the lighter matters of
the Law, ought not to have been left undone, Matthew. 23.23.

And was the tithe of herbs, the jots and tittles of the Law which came by
Moses, to be duly kept and observed? and shall any of the things of the Gospel
which came by Jesus Christ, be neglected because of their littleness? This is
the praise of the faithful servant, that he is faithful in a very little. Luke
19.17. And it is the positive conclusion of Christ himself, who knows what is
in man, and what are the principles of his actions; That he that it faithful in
that which is least, is faithful also in much: and he that is unjust in the
least, is unjust also in much, Luke 16.10. And therefore it concerns every man
that has a desire to approve himself a faithful servant in the account of his
Lord and Master Christ Jesus, to make conscience even of these things,
Gospel Order I mean, how little soever otherwise they seem to be in their eyes,
whose sight is so bad as that they cannot feesmall objects, or else they so
in-observant as that they overlook them.

5. Exodus 12.48. And therefore if Baptism bear the like relation to the Supper
of the Lord, as circumcision did to the Passover, (which yet is a thing
generally acknowledged by all,) then it follows, that as none uncircumcised
might be admited to the Passover, so none unbaptized may be admitted to the
Supper of the Lord, and consequently not to Church Communion whereof that is a
special part.

6. I demand, according to what rule or principle of reason, wait for the
twilight, and unto whom the morning is as the shadow of death, as the
Scripture speaks, Job 20.15, 17. Whereas on the other side. He that does
righteousness comes to the light, John 3.21. And whether those that decline a
more lightsome and clear way, and choose that which is more obscure and dark,
may not reasonably be suspected to have some practice to promote which holds no
communion with the light, I leave it to indifferent men to be considered.
Doubtless it argues a distempered mind in a man, (that is the best you can make
of it) when he chooses uncouth ways, and unknown for his journey, when he may
have such as are straight, plain, and well known.

But now that the joining together of baptized persons, with baptized in
Church Communion, was practiced in the Apostolical Churches, is a thing so
evident and clear, that I think none will deny; but that it is as clear, that
baptized and unbaptized persons did in the Apostles times incorporate
themselves into Church bodies, I think none will affirm; however it will be
found there is no reason so to do. And therefore now for any to choose rather to
join themselves in Church Communion with unbaptized persons, when they have a
fair opportunity of associating themselves therein, with such as are baptized,
is at the best to prefer uncertainty before certainty of Scripture-ground, in
so weighty a business as is that of Church Fellowship. And where there is any
flaw in the evidence or ground upon which a man acts in matters of Religion,
there will be a proportionable deduction of comfort and spiritual joy in the
doing of the work; because all the joy and comfort of any man's actions in
Church Affairs, (or indeed in any other) does arise and spring, partly from the
knowledge he has that it is a work of Gods approving, and partly from his
confidence of his being accepted with God in the doing of it; the later of
which takes not place without the former.

But it may be some will here object and say, Galatia, and Rome. For when the
Apostle says, Gal. 3.27. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ. And again, Romans 6.3. Know ye not, that so many of us as
were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? Do not these
Particles of Speech, so many of us, and as many of you, as have been baptized,
imply that there were some in, and of those Churches that were not baptized
into Christ? For the form of Speech, and manner of Phrase, here used by the
Apostle, is partitive, or distributive, and supposes the persons of whom he
speaks, to be part of them baptized, and part of them unbaptized.

To this I answer,

1. That though this form of speaking, As many of you, and so many of us, etc.
is sometime used in a partitive, or distributive sense, and does denote a
manifest difference between the persons of whom the predication is made, yet it
is not always so used, nor does it always import such a thing, 1 Timothy 6.1.
Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count their own Masters worthy of
all honor, that the Name of God, and his Doctrine be not blaspemed. Here we
see is the same form of speaking with that mentioned in the Objection. But if
we should understand it in a partitive, or distributive sense, then we must
suppose, that some servants only were under the yoke of servitude, and that
others were not; and also, that the Apostle would only have some servants; viz.
such as were under the yoke, to count their Masters worthy of all honor, but
that he laid no such injunction upon other servants, both which were absurd to
imagine. But the Apostles meaning, is, that all servants, for as much as they
are under the yoke, should exhibit all respects of honor to their Master,
becoming such a relation.

And therefore in as much as this manner of expression is used, sometimes
distributively, and sometimes collectively, of all particulars to which it is
applied, that light by which we must know when it is used in the one sense, and
when in the other, must be had from the Context and Scope of the Sentence where
we find it.

2. And therefore, I answer further, Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the children of God
by faith in Christ Jesus, those words in ver. 27. viz. For as many of you as
have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, are alleged by him, as the
reason of what he had said before in that ver. 26. as has been opened more at
large upon another occasion, in the former part of this Treatise. But now if
their putting on of Christ in Baptism, was a proof of their relation to God as
children, (as the Apostle you see makes it to be,) then that which he gives in
by way of reason and proof, that they were all the children of God by faith,
would fall very short of this end, if only a part of the members of these
Churches had been baptized, and not all. For though they who are baptized into
Christ, and have thereby put on Christ, are thereby evidenced to be the
children of God; yet how would it have followed, that they had been all the
children of God by faith upon that account, when only but a part of them had
been baptized? So that indeed, if you will understand this Scripture, as
supposing some part only of these Churches to be baptized, and another part
unbaptized, you force and fasten upon the Apostle a Solecism in reason, a gross
absurdity, and piece of ridiculosity in his way of reasoning, as you will
easily perceive, if you do but put the matter of his words so understood, into
a Syllogism which then must run thus.

If some of you only have been baptized into Christ, and have thereby put on
Christ, then you are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. But some
of you only have been baptized into Christ, and have thereby put on Christ,
Ergo, you are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. To understand
then the Apostle in such a distributive sense as that is for which the
Objection pleads, is to deal by the Apostles argument and reason, as Hanun did
by David's Messengers, when he cut off their garments to their buttocks, and to
render it altogether inadequate to his Scope and purpose. Whereas to understand
his as many of you, etc. in a collective sense for all the individual and
particular members of those Churches, is to render the Apostles argumentation
comprehensive of its end, correspondent to its Scope, and as hitting the mark.
For if their being baptized into Christ, was a proof of their Sonship to God,
(in the sense formerly declared) then he might well conclude them all, (and not
some of them only) to be the children of God by faith in Christ, in as much
they had been all baptized into Christ Jesus.

The Scope of that place likewise, Romans 6.3. will not admit of a distributive
sense of those words, Know you not, that so many of us, as were baptized into
Christ Jesus, were baptized into his death? For the Apostles pressing the great
duty of Mortification upon this whole Church at Rome, he is to make his
exhortation the more effectual, remembers them how they engaged themselves to
the practice thereof by their Baptism, upon which account he does enforce it
upon them as you may perceive, if you carry your eye along from ver. 2. to the
13. So that you must suppose the Apostles ground or reason of his Exhortation,
to be of as large an extent as his Exhortation it self, otherwise you reflect
disparagement upon the wisdom of the Apostle, that would use such an Argument
to persuade the whole Church, which concerned only but a part of them. But now
if you will suppose the Apostles foundation suitable to his building, and such
as would bear it; then you must conclude, that as the whole Church of Rome is
persuaded to mortification upon the account of their engagement thereunto in
and by their Baptism, so also that the whole Church had formerly put themselves
under such an engagement by their Baptism, and consequently that the whole
Church was baptized.

3. Lastly, besides all this, such a supposition that these Churches did
consist partly of persons unbaptized, as well as of those that had been
baptized, does cross those other Scriptures, by which we have proved that none
do duly in a visible way enter into the universal Church, much less into a
particular Church, which is subordinate thereunto, but by the door, or through
the water of Baptism: The Apostle does not say, that some are, but that all are
baptized into one body, i.e. into one Church body, 1 Cor. 12.13.

2. Others they object further thus: are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to
be Saints, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. and sometimes the faithful in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 1.1. and the faithful brethren in Christ, Col. 1.2. And therefore, in as
much as many of those, who though they have not been baptized since they
believed, yet being godly sanctified persons, and in that respect fit matter
whereof to make Church Members, ought to be admitted into Church Fellowship
upon their desire, their non-Baptism notwithstanding.

To this I answer by distinguishing of fitness in men to make Church Members,

That which I call an immediate fitness, is such a qualification, which does
directly dispose a man for, and render him regularly capable of admission into
Church Fellowship, without any other thing intervening or coming between.

That which I call a mediate fitness, is such a qualification, by which a man
is remotely and to a degree, (yea it may be in all degrees, one only excepted)
rendered capable of such an admission as that is of which we speak; but yet so,
that something else, some other qualification then any yet he is invested with,
must intervene, before he be regularly, completely, and according to
Gospel Order, capable of that admission. According to this latter acceptance
or notion of fitness, I do with all my heart acknowledge, that very many
unbaptized persons (as I count unbaptized) are fit to make Church Members, that
is, they are so fit for it, that there wants nothing else to make them fit, but
only their Baptismal obedience, to wit, their subjection to that part of the
Gospel which requires them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus; unless
it be the Imposition of hands also with prayer in order to their receiving a
greater presence of the Spirit, which according to the Primitive practice, was
wont to follow Baptism, Acts 8.15, 16, 17. and 19.5, 6. Hebr. 6.2. We may well
suppose the persons we speak of, to be as fit for Church Communion, as those
converted Jews were, Acts 2. and the Eunuch, the Jailer, and others, were upon
their repentance and belief, before they were baptized.

But that they are immediately fit for admission into Church fellowship by
virtue of their repentance, faith, or sanctification without Baptism, is that
which has been, and is still denied, there being no ruled case in Scripture to
justify such an admission. Whatever the faith or holiness of any man was
before, yet his Baptism did still precede his Church Membership in the
Primitive times, as has been before declared. Let a man in all other respects
imaginable, be as fit as fitness it self can make him, to be the husband of
such or such a woman, yet he may not enjoy her as a man enjoys his wife, this
his fitness notwithstanding, until the solemnities of Marriage are passed
between them. In like manner may no man regularly and in due form of Gospel
proceeding be admited into Church Fellowship upon any account of fitness
otherwise, if this fitting and preparatory qualification of Baptism be wanting;
in as much as God has as well instituted Baptism as a means to bring men into
visible communion with the body of Christ which is his Church, (1 Cor. 12.13.
Gal. 3.27.) as he has instituted marriage as a fitting means to bring man and
woman into that civil Communion which is proper only to man and wife.

And whereas those Churches to which the Scripture quotations mentioned in the
Objection relate, are described, not by their being baptized into Christ, but
by their faith in him, and by their Sanctification or Saintship; I would to
this say these three things briefly, by way of answer.

1. Though they are not described by their being baptized, yet the persons so
described were baptized, as appears by other passages in those very Epistles
where the said descriptions are, as Romans 6.3. 1 Cor. 12.13. Col. 2.12. Ephesians. 4,
5. and 5.26. compared with Acts 19.1.5.

2. When they are said to be sanctified in Christ Jesus, they are inclusively,
or by way of implication said to be baptized; as the mentioning an effect
supposes its cause, so does their sanctification suppose their being baptized;
because their Baptism was a special means of their sanctification. Ephesians.
5.26. The Apostle speaking of Christ giving himself for his Church, says, he
did it, That he might sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing of water (i.e.
Baptism) by the Word: They Word and Baptism then, were two great Instruments of
their Sanctification. And if you understand by their being sanctified, their
being separated from the rest of the world, and set apart or dedicated unto God
(which most properly answers the notion of sanctification) then their being
said to be sanctified, may be understood in respect of their Baptism in
special, though not that only, because by their Baptism they were visibly put
into a new condition, and into new relations, being thereby transmitted or
carried over from the fellowship of the world, into the fellowship of Christ
and of the Saints, and solemnly set apart for the service of Christ.

3. The Reason why the Apostle describes those of the Churches aforesaid,
rather by their sanctification, then by their being baptized, was not (as may
well be conceived) because Baptism was not positively necessary as to their
Church being, but because sanctification was more comprehensive of all
particulars requisite, not only to their being a Church simply considered as
such, but also as unto the excellency of such a being. For their sanctification
(the thing by which they are described) includes in it, both their Baptism, and
all other parts and degrees of that qualification, by which they were, or might
have been, eminently the Churches of God: Whereas Baptism being one of the
principles or beginning Doctrines of Christ, and such as which the Apostle
leaves behind as it were, when he endeavors to advance the Hebrew Church to
higher perfections ( Hebr. 6.1, 2, 3.) if the Apostle had described them by
this, his description of them would have fallen beneath their qualifications,
they having now made some progress in Christianity when those Epistles were
written to them.

These things then considered, the Apostle his describing the Churches to whom
he wrote, by such qualifications wherein Baptism is not particularly mentioned,
will not minister any ground of making Church Members of such who are not
baptized.

3. Rome was, that they would receive such as were but weak in the faith, to
wit, such as erroniously held it necessary to abstain from such meats which in
themselves were indifferent and lawful to be used, Rom, 14.1, 2. and if their
weakness in the faith, or error in their knowledge hereabout, was no sufficient
bar against their admission into Church fellowship, then why should a like
error and weakness in men now about Baptism be counted a sufficient, and just
impediment to their admission into Church Communion?

For answer to this,

1. That as on the one hand, it is not every weakness in faith, or error in
knowledge about the things of the Gospel, that does exclude a man from
Church Fellowship, as appears by the Scripture now mentioned in the Objection;
so on the other hand, it is not every profession of the faith neither which men
make, that does render them duly capable of it. For then the worst of men, if
but making any kind of profession of the Christian Religion, should be
admittable into the Communion of Saints, which yet is a thing altogether
dissonant unto the Laws of Church Communion. Some errors then must be
acknowledged to be in some men professing the Gospel, which do justly debar
them from Church Communion.

2. This being granted, in the next place, to the end men may be upon terms of
certainty, is to know what errors they be, which do de jure exclude men from
Church Fellowship, and what do not; recourse must be had to some fixed standing
rule, by which to make a right judgment in the case; otherwise men will but
rove at random, and be in danger of making such errors exclusive of men's
Church Membership which are not, as likewise of making the door of this
admission wider then God has made it.

3. That then which must be the standard, by and according to which to make a
right judgment in the case, must be that thing what ever it be, which is
appointed by God as the next and immediate means appropriately of men's visible
union with the Church: and the reason hereof, is, because as on the one hand,
less then a man's coming up to that mean what ever it be, which is the immediate
inlet into the Church, cannot minister either a right or opportunity of his
being of the Church; so on the other hand, nothing more then this can be duly
insisted on as absolutely necessary to make a man capable thereof: and
therefore who ever attains thereto, cannot upon any account of infirmities
otherwise, be justly debarred his communion with the Church.

4. That thing then which is the appropriate and immediate means of a man's
visible entrance into, and union with the Church, is Baptism, it being as the
Bridge over which, or as the Gate through which men declaredly pass over from
the friendship of the world, into the fellowship of the Saints: this has
formerly been proved, and therefore needs not here to be repeated. It is true
indeed, Baptism is properly the immediate means of admission into the universal
Church, but whoever is by it duly made a member of the universal Church, has
thereby a right of admission into a particular Church, and not otherwise.

5. Therefore in the last place; If Baptism duly administered and received, or
men's coming up to the laws and terms of its due administration, be the standard
according to which men are to be judged meet, or unmeet for Church Communion,
then it follows, that whatever errors or infirmities are in men, yet if they
be not of that nature as to detain them from embracing Baptism on Scripture
terms, those errors do not, cannot justly debar them of Communion with the
Church; and on the other hand, whatever other quallification there is in men
toward the disposing and fitting of them for Church communion, yet if they be
under the power and command of any such error, which causes them to refuse
baptism upon those terms, according to which, upon Scripture account it ought
to be administered, and so causes them to fall short of the formal and
immediate mean of their regular union, and visible conjunction with the Church,
that error does necessarily deprive them both of right and opportunity of
being of the Church visibly.

These things then being duly considered, we may easily come to a resolution
about the two Cases mentioned in the Objection, viz. Whether this error about
Baptism, of which we speak, does no more deprive men of a right of admission
into Church Fellowship, then that weakness in the faith did of which the
Apostle speaks. For that error about abstaining from meats (which is the
weakness in the faith, of which the Apostle there speaks) being an error of
that nature only, which did not keep them that were under it from closing with
Baptism as the means of their union with the Church, (I mean, upon those terms
according to which God had authorized the administration and reception of it,)
but that they might, and did repent and believe the main Principles of the
Gospel, (the terms quallifying men for Baptism,) and did thereupon receive
Baptism for all this weakness of theirs: Hence it came to pass, that they were
to be admitted into Church Communion, this weakness of theirs notwithstanding.
But now their error about Baptism of whom we speak, being an error of that
nature, by which they are kept off from embracing Baptism upon Scripture terms,
and so of attaining to, and making use of that which is the appropriate mean of
their visible union with the Church, this error of theirs does in a direct way
unavoidably cut them short both of right and opportunity of a regular admission
into Church Fellowship.

There being then so broad a difference between the two errors compared in the
Objection, as you see there is; the one consisting with, the other being
repugnant to that very mean, without which a visible conjunction and union with
the Church is not attainable on Scripture terms, it therefore no wise follows,
that because the one was no just impediment unto men's Church Fellowship, that
therefore the other is not neither; for where things and cases do really differ
as these do, there the consequences of those things cannot be the same.

Thus having finished my Answers to these Objections, I suppose it does appear
by what has been offered to consideration on this behalf, these Objections
notwithstanding, that persons baptized, refusing to join themselves in
Church Communion with those who are unbaptized, is not without such grounds
which will render them approved in so doing.

ERRATA.
PAge 6. l. 29. for, to, r. by. p. 10. l. 15. r. is, p. 16. l. 3. for end, r.
need, p. 18. l. 19. for disciples, read visible members, p. 20. l. 35, for who,
r. we, p. 21. l. 20. r. of, p. 22. l. ^. r. no. p. 22. l. 33. for any, r. my.
p. 84. l. 20. for dealings, r. deelinings. p. 89. l. 7. r. to. p. p, 91. l. 4.
r. upon. p. 93, l. 38. omit, old. p. 93. l. 37. omit, the deeds. p. 94. l. 30.
omit, in. p. 109. l. 7, for, into, r. unto, p. 109, l. 19, for, lights, r.
light.

The End.

