THE SPEECH OF His Highness the Lord Protector, TO THE PARLIAMENT, UPON His
dissolving of the House on Monday last, being the 22. of this instant January;
with the Grounds and Reasons thereof. And a Declaration to be published to all
the People in England, Scotland, and Ireland. Also, a Declaration of the manner
of the Parliaments proceedings immediately before their breaking up; Read and
assented to by the Members.

London, Printed for G. Horton, 1654.

The Lord Protectors Speech to the Parliament in the painted Chamber on Monday
last, being the 22. of this instant January.
HIs Highness the Lord Protector, having with much prudence seriously weighed
the Debates and Transactions of the Parliament; and after mature deliberation
and consultation with his Honorable Council, upon the vast expense of time,
and the few things done therein, resolved to put a period to their present
sitting; and accordingly on Monday, about ten of the clock in the forenoon, his
Highness came in his Barge from White Hall to Westminster, being accompanied
by diverse of his Lords and Gent emen; where, coming into the Painted Chamber,
the Parliament were sent for; and upon their attending his Highness. He
delivered himself by way of speech as follows;

That he could not but take notice of the variousnesse of their Debates; and of
their prolonging of time to little purpose; That he was sorry to behold such a
Spirit of Averse esse, that in so many months nothing could be established and
confirmed for the good of this Church and State, and the peace and tranquillity
of the three Nations of England Scotland, and Ireland; whose welfare and
preservation, He desired to prefer before all particular Interests whatsoever;
That he did protest in the presence of Almighty GOD, (laying his hand upon his
Breast) he never did seek his own Honor but desired rather, that the public
Affairs of the Commonwealth might be so balanced in the Skales of Equity and
Righteousness, that all things might conduce to the glory of God, and the
Peoples Comfort; And as touching his desire in the least to have his Son
Henry (or his Posterity) Hereditary, he protested against it; assuring them, He
was very well satisfied, in their voting of the power and Authority of Lord
Protectors for the future to be Elective; as knowing it to be the only Basis
of the Peoples Rights and Privileges.

And lastly, He exhorted them to peace and Unity using many Scripture phrases;
and interwove his speech with many admirable and singular Texts; declaring the
Grounds and Reasons of his dissolving that present Session; which done, He took
his leave, and retiring forth, each Member departed, and the Mace was taken,
and the Parliament door shut up.

This sudden change causes no little admiration, but a Declaration will be
published to give the People satisfaction.

A Declaration of the proceedings of the Parliament immediately before their
diffolving, etc.
THe parliament having spent much time upon the Articles of Government, and
having run through the several Chapters thereof, insisted upon the BILL for
setting the Government, which being engrossed, was reported to the House, and
read; at which time many provisoes were offered to be added thereunto as part
thereof, whereof this was one, That it be provided, that this Act for the
Government do not extend nor be construed to extend to abrogate, alter, or
diminish, any the Charters, Customs, Liberties, or Franchises of the City of
London, or any other Cities, Towns, or Buroughs within this Commonwealth,
saving in such things, whereby any alteration is thereby particularly made; but
that the said City of London, and the aforesaid places, shall and may enjoy
their said Charters, Customs, and Liberties, notwithstanding the said Act, or
any thing therein contained: After which another proviso was offered to be
added to the BIL for settling of the Government; and particularly one about the
Militia, which was to this effect, That the Militia should not be raised or
formed, but by consent of parliament, and to be used for the preservation of
this Common wealth, and not otherwise.

Upon his Highnesses dissolving of the House, it is to be further noted, that
some words passed in reference to the late Plot but especially touching their
Transactions, and the Peoples dissatisfaction; who (according to the trust
reposed in them) have long expected to have reaped some fruits of their
Representatives Labors: But to the end that general satisfaction may be given
throughout all the three Nations, touching this present Change and Revolution,
a Declaration is drawing up to evince and set forth the Grounds thereof.

FINIS.

