THE Last WORDS AND TESTIMONIES Of and for William Allen.

Late of Cowen in Essex, a faithful Servant of the Lord; who finishing his
Testimony, departed this Life the 21. of the 11th. Month, 1679.

LONDON, Printed and sold by Benjamin Clark in George yard, Lombard Street,
1680.

The last Testimony and living Words of our dear Friend and Servant of the Lord
William Allen, who departed this Life the 21. of the 11th. Month, 1679.
THe Earth is filled with the glory of the Lord, Praises, Praises, unto my God,
who Reigns over all, who has Redeemed my Soul from the Grave, and my Life from
the horrible Pit, who has plucked my Feet out of the mire and Clay. Glory,
Glory be unto thy great Name Oh my good God! As for my part I have fought the
good Fight, and have kept the Faith, and a large share of the Glory of my God
is sealed unto my Soul, its but an earnest of it that I have here, of that
Crown of Life and Glory which my Father has in store for me.

It has pleased the Lord to exercise me, as he did my Father Job for the trial
of my Faith and Patience; I have trodden his Steps these twelve Months. A full
reward thou have given me of Life and Glory: Oh my good God! how good art thou
to me: I have received abundance of good at thy hand, and shall I not receive a
little evil? Blessed be thy name for thy goodness; my Cup overflows I cannot
utter it. And so continued, at times often expressing the glory of the Lord, and
the Immortality that rested upon him; and charged friends to be faithful, and
that the dread of God might always be upon their hearts, that they might answer
his Love, in yiedling Obedience to his requirings: and then though they might
meet with Exercises for the trial of their Faith, yet the Lord would be with
them if they abode faithful to the end; And the same Crown of life they should
enjoy which he had an assurance of. Therefore (said he) Watch, and keep your
Garments and Oil in your Vessels, that ye may be ready to enter with the
Bridegroom. But as for those that shall continue in Hypocrisy and
Disobedience, shun the Cross of Jesus and neglect to work while it is day; the
night will come upon such, and that at unawares, when neither the Father nor
the Son works, and the foolish Virgins state they will be found in: and though
they may desire Oil of the Wise, they will have none to spare, ^ut the door
will be shut upon such, and the Sentence will be, time shall be no more, then
woe and misery will be their Portion for ^ver.

He divided the word aright to his two Daughters, and giving them good Counsel
and Exhortation, said, there was a blessing for them for their Fathers sake, if
they should bow ^o Truth, and abide faithful therein.

He longed he said, to have away, but was ^illing to drink the Cup at his
Fathers hand, and wait his pleasure

More was spoken by him, as friends came (...) to see him, and as his strength
would per^it, which was not taken in writing. Then his ^peech growing very low,
he could not well ^e heard, and seemed for some hours to lie as ^he was
departing; at last, he said to a friend, was almost gone, but I cannot go yet,
there is ^me secret counsel of God in it, which cau^d friends to believe that
he had yet a farther ^estimony to bear to some, which was so; for ^^er some
little time, more friends coming in, he was beyond outward likelihood enabled
to declare much to them, and exhorted to faithfulness, and said, I am glad to
see my friends about me: I go to my God and your God, my Father and your
Father; my bosom is full of Love to all my Fathers Children. And then said,
now Lord Jesus how acceptable is it to leave all the World and be gathered up
to thee. And so commiting his Spirit to the Lord, soon fell asleep, and is
entered into Rest and Immortal Glory.

The Testimony of Martha Allen, concerning her deceased Husband William Allen.
I Have parted with a man of God, a Minister of Jesus Christ, an ancient in
Israel, who has fought the good Fight and kept the Faith, and is entered into
his rest. He would often lament for those that set down in an easful State; and
would often say, that a terrible day would overtake those that are careless and
at ease in Sion that slumbers away their time, who are in the Holes, and Caves,
and Dens of the Earth. And in the time of his health (that he was able to go
forth and visit friends) he would often say to me, God has made me a^ Huntsman,
I must visit many of them there, as ^n their Holes and Caves, I must be clear
of their blood. And would often speak of the ^ore travel and pangs that he had
for some, which made his Soul often sorrowful, as unto death. So in that truth,
light, and life that dwelt in him, am I given up to follow the Lord to the end
of my days till my change comes: who am a Companion to all that fears the Lord.

Martha Allen.


This is the Testimony that lives in my heart, ^oncerning my dear and well
beloved friend William Allen; who died the 21st. day of the 11th. Month 1679.
Who in his life time was a man of an upright heart and walked in the integrity
of the Gospel of Christ, of which he received a dispensation in the early days
of his convincement, about the year 1654. And the Power of the Lord made a
speedy change ^n him, and stirred up a Zeal in his Soul against ^he false ways
and worships, superstitions and profaneness of those times. Which Zeal for God
produced living Testimonies from him in diverse Towns and places (where he
traveled) against those things which were evil, which sometimes occasioned him
to come under hard sufferings, bonds, and imprisonments; In all which he
behaved himself as a Faithful and Courageous Soldier of Christ Jesus, and a
good example to his fellow sufferers, Preaching the Gospel of peace, both in
life and doctrine; stopped the mouths of many gainsayers: And had a sweet and
comfortable effect, upon many who were reached in their Consciences by his
Testimony and Ministry, and by his innocent Conversation; so that they embraced
the Truth he Preached, and suffered for, and became Heirs of the Salvation of
God, to their everlasting comfort, and the furtherance of the Gospel.

I have known him about 24 years, In all which time his Conversation in the
Churches of Christ where he was led to labor and travel was amiable and
lovely, and his Testimony received with good acceptance among the faithful. He
was a man of a severe carriage to such as made a profession of Truth, and
walked not with a straight foot in the Gospel; but very tender over all such as
were young and under exercises about their inward condition, and did sometimes
speak very effectual to their conditions to the easing their afflicted Spirit
as diverse have testified, and can testify.

He was a good example in this Count^ where he lived, encouraging friends both
b^ exhortation and diligence, in observing the good order of truth to keep
things clea^ and to keep the Gospel void of offense (...) much as in him lay,
and after he fell into (...) way of trade in the World, his care was (...) keep
his word, and that men might be paid i^ due time according to their
expectations. (...) which thing it would be well if all the profe^sors of truth
would follow his exampl^*

He was a man that never exalted himse^^ above his Brethren, but carried a good
respect to them, and to their counsel and judgment, according as God had given
judgmen^ and wisdom to his Children; neither did h^ exercise himself in things
too high for him but dwelt in a contented Habitation, in the measure and
dispensation of the Grace an^ Gospel committed to him, serving the Lord Jesus
and his Church and people therein with out weariness to the end of his days,
no^ eying his own Interest thereby, but in simplicity of heart ministered to
every ones condition, according to the leadings of the gift o^ God that was in
him.

In fine, His Life and Conversation made ^n lovely, and his End was honorable,
and (...) is crowned with Immortality and eternal ^fe, and has left the World
in a good age, ^ving attained to about 63 years, and has ^t an example of
Innocence and Sincerity to ^em that are left behind, and blessed will all ^ey
be, that in Faithfulness follow the same, ^d fulfill their Race as he has
done, they all also partake of the same Crown of Im^ortality and eternal Life.

Steven Crisp.


Great has been the loving kindness of the ^ue God, who after a long night of
darkness ^at has been over the Nations, yet he has ^t left himself without a
Witness, which in ^ery Age and Generation strove with the ^ns and Daughters of
men, and bore witness ^to him, and gave men to see what it was ^at he required
of them, and in this Age, as (...) other Generations, he has raised up
Wit^sses and Ministers, who has born testimony (...) the Coming of Christ, and
of his being ^ade manifest in Spirit, in the hearts of Men ^d Women; among whom
was this faithful ^ervant and Minister William Allen, who is gone to his Rest
prepared for him, having ^nished his course in a good time, in the fee^ing of
the Power and Majesty of the Lord of which I am a Witness with him, I bei^ with
him a few days before his departur^ when I saw him in great weakness of Bod^
yet bearing a sweet and heavenly Image, a^ his spirit livingly breathing to
God, whi^^ brought the day of my tender years (in whi^ I first saw him) into my
remembrance, wh^ first the Lord shined upon me, and gave me sight of the good
Land: this man of God b^ing the first public Minister of the Gospel (...)
Jesus that ever I saw, whose appearance w^ beautiful and lovely, and God's
Image w^ upon him, and he bore the Image of the he^venly; his words were
weighty, and gra^ Sentences, who looking upon me, and pe^ceiving my weak
condition, he breathed u^ to God, for my growth and preservation (...) the
Truth, which (blessed be the Lord,) Go^ heard his Prayers, and answered the
desire (...) his Petition; for indeed I was as a Bran^ plucked out of the fire.
This was the Love (...) the long-suffering God, who waited to (...) gracious to
the workmanship of his han^ Oh Lord keep me in the remembrance of the ^y for
ever, that thy Name may be honored (...) me; for surely thy Love is great, and
thy ^ercy endures for ever to thy seed that ^eaths after thee, and cannot be
satisfied without the enjoyment of thee; praises to thy ^ame for ever.

^orwich the 3d. 1. Mo. 1679/80. John Fediman.


The Lord having visited a Remnant in our ^ge and Generation, with the
knowledge of ^s everlasting Truth, by causing his Day to ^wn from on high, did
raise up several faith^^ll Ministers, as Instruments in his hand, for ^e
carrying on of his Work, and redeeming ^s people from the Kindreds, Tongues and
^nguages, and from the many by-ways, ^ere they were scattered upon the barren
^ountains, to bring them to the one Shep^^rd and one Sheepfold, among whom was
^r deceased Friend William Allen, who was ^lled forth near the beginning of the
day, ^d endued with a living and powerful Mini^^y, whereby many by him were
turned from ^rkness to light, and from Sathan's power to ^e power of God, (some
of whom remains ^is day as the seal of his Ministry) which though it was not
adorned with the words (...) man's wisdom, yet it was reaching and co^vincingly
effectual unto many, who we^ made sensible of the Life that dwelt in hi^ and by
which he sounded a certain Alarm (...) those he traveled amongst, (being
mostly i^ Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, and Cambridgeshir^ and Parts adjacent) and
was read and unde^stood by the breathing traveling Babes, t^ whom he ministered
suitably, giving Milk t^ them, and Meat to those of riper age, (h^ being
skillful in dividing the Word aright so that by him the mourners were comforte^
and the feeble strengthened and encouraged, t^ persevere on in their most holy
Faith; but hi^ testimony was as a sword to the rebelliou^ and disobedient, and
would often declare, tha^ the Message committed to him, was not onl^ to proclaim
liberty to the captives, and gla^ tidings to the meek, but the day of vengeanc^
of our God, to all that obeyed not the Gospel, that being convinced of the
truth, sat^ down in a whole-hearted state, and knowin^ God did not like to
retain him in their knowledge, and therefore would often cry, In a^ much as the
day hastens, wherein the Lord would take vengeance on such in flames o^ fire,
Come away, come away, haste, flee for our lives, come out of Babylon, stick not
(...) her skirts, partake not with her of her sins, ^st you partake of her
plagues, but come up, ^ome up to the holy Hill, that you may be^old what the
Lord is doing in his Sanctuary, ^ho is creating Jerusalem a praise, and her
people a rejoicing, the day being now come ^at was prophesied of, that she
should be in^^bited without walls, the Lord himself be^^g a wall of fire round
about her, and her ^ory in the midst of her. Therefore let the ^habitants of
the Rock now sing, and shout ^oud for joy, for Sion's Light is come, and ^^e
Glory of the Lord is risen upon her, and (...) now become as an overflowing
Stream.

And it was not only given to him to be^^eve, but also to suffer for the
Testimony com^itted to him, being in perils and prisons often, ^s at Colchester
Castle, being taken at Weathers^eld as he was going to a meeting near that
^own, and committed by Dudly Templar, ^alled Justice, Anno 1658. (as also at
Cam^ridge-Castle, Ely, and Lyn) while he was at ^^e Castle at Colchester, (he
having after some ^me some liberty granted him) was made ^erviceable there,
sounding forth the everlasting Gospel, so that diverse were awaken^ and gained
to the Truth; amongst others, (...) was made instrumental to me, and has be^
as a Father to me for these diverse years, see^ing and traveling for ^y
preservation in t^^ way of life, so that we were near and dear (...) one
another; and often have I been refreshe^ (with many more) through that stream
(...) Life that ran through him in the Assemblies (...) the Lord's people, so
that I can truly say, (...) was pleasant to me to sit and hear the sound (...)
Life through him, his care being (as he wou^ often by way of counsel say to
others) to wa^ that God might give the breath, (that w^ might be as Trumpets in
his hand) for the^ only it gave a certain sound; his heart w^^ upright to God,
(and his care was over the Flock of God, where his lot was cast) who^^ glory he
sought above all, and has his r^ward with him in Glory for ever, though h^ met
with exercises as to the outward man, (incident to mankind while in this
Tabernacl^ of clay) especially within a year and ha^ before his decease, being
much afflicted wit^ bodily Weakness and Sickness, but would o^ say he was
content in the Will of his Father and to drink the Cup at his hand. In which
^ime he showed forth the Meekness and Pati^nce of him that dwelt in him, and a
large share ^e had of his Father Job's exercises, as he ^ould himself say. But
the Lord in due time ^eeing it was enough, (and that he had born a ^rge share
of the heat of the day) (spending and being spent for the Gospel) put a period
^o his days: Who was filled with the glory of ^he Lord to the last (so that he
said he could ^out for joy but that he wanted strength of ^ody) which he said
was but an earnest of that he should more fully enjoy when this ^arthly
Tabernacle was dissolved. Who now (...) entered into his rest and shines as a
Star in the ^irmament, and his memory is blessed, who ^et lives, and with whose
Spirit we feel uni^y and Fellowship (though the earthly Taber^acle is returned
to its center) which unity ^sts and endures through ages and generations, ^here
the Spirits of just men made perfect are ^elt, that are gone before us; and that
life which ^welt in them remains with us; which is our ^oy, Comfort, and
Encouragement to perse^ere on in the way of life: and to us is a cer^ain
Testimony that (though the Lord is plea^ed to remove his Servants and Prophets
from (...)) he will not leave nor forsake us, but will still lead his people,
as a Flock to the fresh Pastures of life, there to lie down, where none can
make afraid; wherein the blessed sense of the overcomings of his love, the holy
high praises is offered up unto him who is worthy of it, for all his Mercies
and Blessings daily enjoyed, increased, and multiplied upon us, who has been
our preserver and upholder to this very day, and is our stay and strength in
the deepest exercises: Blessed are they who keep to him, they never are
forsaken. To him be the Glory and Praise for ever.

John Furly Junior.


The Testimony of Ann Furly the Elder, concerning our deceased Friend William
Allen.
HE was a man whom God made instrumental to my being convinced of the blessed
Truth, and in whom the Power of God much dwelt, his Ministry was a living
Ministry, he lived in that which he declared of, he did not only exhort to
faithfulness, but he was always found in it himself, he was Valiant upon Earth
for Gods blessed truth, and as the Lord required it of him he thought not his
life dear, but did hazard it many a time; in particular here at Colchester,
where he exposed himself to the rage of the cruel Troopers (to the apparent
hazard of his life in the time of their sore beating and abusing friends when
assembled together (he then openly declaring the truth amonst us) but the
secret arm of the Lord preserved him and his people that day, that was no hurt
done, for which the Lord was praised for his great deliverance, for it was his
Wonderful hand only that effected it. And now after all his labors, the Lord
has given him a good reward and received him up to glory as he will do every
one who abides faithful to what he makes manifest.

Ann Furly the Elder.


The Testimony of Martha King, concerning our dear Friend William Allen.
THis dear worthy of the Lord and Valiant in Israel, who engaged in the Lambs
Warfare till he overcame; he was made a^ Pillar in the house of God, and as a
Trumpet that gave a certain sound; Sounding forth an alarm from Gods holy
Mountain, whereby many were awakened to righteousness, and their Spirits
quickened; and a remnant are the seal of his Ministry at this day; to whom he
was an instrument in the hand of the Lord, for the turning their minds from
darkness to light, and from Satan's Power to the Power of God. My Spirit is
bowed before the Lord, and the cry of my Soul is, that all who were so turned
by him may for ever walk worthy of the Lords goodness, and answer his ^arge
love to our Souls, so shall we answer the ^abour and travels of this our dear
deceased ^riend, that they be not bestowed upon us in vain, who breathed for
the prosperity of Sion, that all whose faces were turned Sion-wards night not
look back, nor linger in the Suburbs of Babylon; those that did so, he would
often declare should be left behind, and Amalek should prevail over them.

Much might be written concerning the bles^ed life and power which dwelt in
this our dear ^riend, wherein he obtained a good increase, through his
faithfulness to the Lord: the streaning forth thereof was very sweetly
refreshing, and consolating to those whose hearts were tru^y bowed to God.

Now, this remains, that we follow his steps ^n all faithfulness, holiness, and
Godly fear, and pure obedience to the Lord, watching to his Power, having a
single eye to him the living fountain, from whence all our refreshings come,
that we may have bread in our own Houses and water in our own Cisterns, and
witness a growth and increase in the increases of God, so shall we also finish
our course with joy, and lay down our heads in rest and peace with the Lord as
he has done.

Martha King.


OUr dear friend William Allen is gone, and Immortal is his Crown, and he is at
rest in his Fathers bosom. In his sickness he would say that he was filled with
the joy of the Lord, and with the presence of his Father. Our loss is great,
for I can truly say that he was an Instrumennt in the hand of God to do good to
my Soul, and to many more, and the living presence of the Lord was with him,
for our Souls have been refreshed with his living Ministry many a time, and
although his body is removed from us, yet we enjoy him in that I which is
Immortal, as we abide faithful.

Susanna Potter.
Colchester in Essex. 11th. 1. Mo. 1679/80.

Dear Friends,
There is something in my heart to wri^^ concerning our dear Friend William
Alle^ whom the Lord has taken out of the Bod^ but his Life still lives with
the upright in heart he was a man that did truly fear the Lord and sought his
Glory alone; he turned man^ from darkness to light, and from Satan power to
the power of God, and there ar^ many living Witnesses thereof. The Lord was
good to him night and day, beyon^ what words can declare, and although h^ felt
Exercises as to the outward man to abound, yet his consolation in the heavenly
power much more abounded; for the Lord filled him with the flagons of his Love,
and new Wine of the Kingdom, that he was straightened in the earthly Tabernacle,
being so filled with the living presence of the Lord, ^^at he would say he
wanted room, Let me ^o.

Much might be spoken as to that living ^ower that wrought in him, and his
faith^^lness thereunto, and many of his living ^xpressions does remain with me,
as con^erning Friends keeping low in the middle ^ath of judgment, where the
Redemption ^f Sion comes to be witnessed. But not unto us, not unto us, but
unto the heavenly ^ower, Spirit and Life, that wrought effe^tually in him, and
preserved him to the and of his days, be all praise, power, domi^ion, and
thanks given, for ever and evermore, Amen, says my Soul.

Elizabeth Fryet.


FINIS.

