A Faithful Searching HOME WORD, Intended for the view of the remaining
Members of the former OLD PARLIAMENT In the time of their late second Sitting
at Westminster.

SHOWING The Reasonableness and Justness of their first Dissolution, as also
the dangerous Rocks they formerly split upon, that so they might learn to
beware for the future: But being a second time Dissolved upon the like Account,
as so many Fruitless Trees twice Dead plucked up by the Roots.

Is now presented to the Officers of the Army as another Looking-Glass wherein
they may plainly see, how woefully they also have Dissembled, Dealt
Treacherously, Deceitfully and Wickedly both with God and Man, in having so
greatly Apostatized from, Rejected, Trodden under foot, Persecuted, Judas-like
Betrayed, and as it were Crucified and kept down in the Grave (as the Soldiers
formerly did Christ) that Blessed Cause and those Good Principles, they once so
highly pretended to own; and have done the same, yea worse things themselves,
then for which the late King was Beheaded, and they pretendedly Dissolved the
late Old Parliament, a first and second time; and have been Pharaoh, Edom, and
Moab-like, the only main Hinderers of the Lords Faithful People from going to
Zion, which has so pulled down the late and present Judgments which have been
and yet are lying upon these Nations.

Together with another Seasonable Word by way of Counsel and Proposal to the
aforesaid Officers of the Armies of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

All which, is also to be seen, and read of all men loving Righteousness, that
thereby they may (with the Army) the better know how to choose the Good, refuse
the Evil, and rightly steer their Course, and bend their Spirits in the future,
for the Exaltation of Christ, his Cause, and Interest, and against all the
Apostasy and Treachery, though never so refined, that may further appear in
this Gloomy, Dark, Overturning Day.

Isa. 24.16. From the utmost parts of the Earth have we heard Songs, even Glory
to the Righteous: But I said, My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me, the
Treacherous Dealers [to wit, the late Old Parliament] have dealt treacherously:
Yea the Treacherous Dealers [viz. the Officers of the Army] have dealt very
treacherously.

Printed in the first Year of the Army's endeavoring to deal treacherously
with the Faithful Friends of the Cause a second time, after their first and
second Dissolution of the late long Parliament, 1659.

A Faithful Searching Home Word, intended for the view of the remaining Members
of the former Long Parliament, in the time of their late Second Sitting at
Westminster; showing the Reasonableness and Justness of their first
Dissolution, as also the dangerous Rocks they formerly split upon; that so they
might learn to beware for the future, etc.
YOu may remember, when in the day of your former sitting as the Peoples
Representors, and a faithful Party among you, were according to their then
light going on in the Lords work taking away the Tyrannical, Antichristian,
heavy Yokes, which the King and his Prelates, laid upon the Bodies and
Consciences of the good people of this Nation, and also the Army, together with
your selves, gave them hopes, that you would endeavor to take away all the
remaining Oppressions that then were, or in the future should be found lying
upon them, and would bring forth Righteousness to them (as by many Declarations
may appear) which was then, has been all along, yet is, and in every
Generation for time to come, (but above all when the Kingdom of Jesus Christ
shall most visibly appear, and be set up in the world) will be the Cause of God
and his People; that by the good Providence of the Lord, as also through the
many Prayers, Petitions, and Strivings of the honest Party in the Nation, Army,
and among your Selves, to, and with the Lord and You, and against the common
enemy, very great and wonderful things were successively one time after another
brought about, and done amongst us, toward the ease of the people; viz. the
late King brought to Justice, and other great ones with him, his Monarchy,
House of Lords, together with his own, and the aforesaid Tyranny of his Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, (so called) and of other corrupt persons, with much of
the Oppression then lying upon us, taken away; How the Lord blessed you with
success in your Councels and Forces both by Land and Sea, and you also had the
love and prayers of the good people, and what a terror of you was upon the
Enemy both at home and abroad, whilst some who were faithful among You, and
the honest part of the Army, were in the zealous prosecution of these things,
and afterward declared for the Destruction of Antichrist, and the Advancement
of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and appeared to be growing up into the Light,
Spirit, and were doing the things relating and leading thereunto, you very well
know.

The Enemy being every where totally subdued, and the three Nations of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, with all the Territories thereunto belonging in our
hands; the Dutch Fleet also beaten at sea, and they thereby almost brought as
it were upon their knees, in the doing whereof, the appearances and salvation
of the Lord with, and about his poor unworthy people, were so very wonderful
and glorious, that the faith and expectations of many or most of them who went
along with him to that day (especially toward the latter end) whrlest these
things were doing, were very much raised, and that from Scripture grounds to be
eying the Promises and Prophesies relating to the Deliverance of Zion; The
Destruction of Babylon and Antichrist; The Call of the Jews; The Advancement of
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; all which shall certainly be fulfilled in the
latter days. (Among other see the following Scriptures. First, The deliverance
of Zion, Psalm. 48. Psalm. 69.35, 36. Psalm. 87.5. Psalm. 102.13. to 22. Psalm.
132.13. to the end, Isa. 2.2, 3, 4. Isa. 4.5, 6. Isa. 33.20. Isa. 35.9, 10.
Isa. 46.13. Isa. 51.3, 5. to 11. Isa. 52. Isa. 60. Isa. 62.4, 8, 9, 11, 12.
Isa. 65.19, 21. to 25. Micha. 4.2, 3, 4, 10. to 13. Obadiah verse 17, 18, 21.
Zeph. 3.13, 15, 17. to 20. Zech. 2.7. to 13. Zech. 8.3. to 8. Zech. 9.15, 16.
Zech. 12.2, 3, 4. to 9. Secondly, The Destruction of Babylon and Antichrist,
Isa. 47. Jer. 50. Jer. 51.2 These. 2.8, 9, 10. compared with Rev. 18. Thirdly,
The Call of the Jews, Jer. 23.3, 7, 8. Jer. 30.3, 10, 11. Jer. 31.8, 9, 11,
12.23.28. Ezekiel. 36.24. to the end. Ezekiel. 37.21, 22. Amos 9.14, 15. Zeph. 3.19,
20. Isa. 66.20. to the end. Fourthly, The Kingdom of Christ, Psalm. 72.1, 8. to
17. Isa. 9.6, 7. Isa. 32.1. Jer. 23.5, 6. Jer. 30.9. Jer. 33.15, 16. Ezekiel.
37.24, 25. Dan. 7.13, 14, 27. Obadiah verse 21. Zech. 9.9, 10. Zech. 14.9. Luke
1.32, 33. Luke 22.29, 30. John 18.37. 1 Timothy 6.14, 15. Rev. 2.26, 27. Rev.
11.15. Rev. 19.13, 14, 15, 16. Ezekiel. 21.27. And that these Scriptures shall
certainly be fulfilled, see Jer. 33, 20, 21, 25, 26. compared with Isa. 60.22.
I the Lord will hasten it in his time.) And could believe no other, but that
those late wonderful Revolutions and Overturnings, did loudly call upon them
to be looking out that way, and to be considering what was next to be done by
them, in order to a further going on with the Lord as Instruments of his
pleasure, in the bringing forth these things.

And knowing very well that the Lord eminently owned his people, and his
presence was wonderfully with them whilst there was a zealous pressing after
Righteousness, and strong endeavors used by some among you, and in the Army,
to get the most godly, faithful men into all places of Trust, in the Army,
Navy, and elsewhere, who would brow beat and punish wickedness, and countenance
and endeavor to promote goodness, and good men, and that nothing prosper'd and
went on to purpose till this blessed course and way was taken. (Witness the
Victory obtained by the Eastern Association Sectarian (so called) Horsemen
(chiefly) and Foot at Marston Moor, against Prince Rupert, and his Army; Also
(after the New Moddel) at Naseby Fight, Afterward in the West; Then at Preston
in Lanckashire against Duke Hamilton and the Scottish Army; The subduing of
Ireland and Scotland; The Fleet also beating the Dutch; and so on till the last
Battle at Worcester.) They were very much carried forth to desire, and
endeavor that all things for the future might run in that channel; without
which, they were considently persuaded (as well they might) that the Lords
former presence would not be with our Councels and Forces, as it was before but
would forsake them.

Now there being at that time a Corrupt, Malignant, Neutral, Presbyterian party
among you in the House, as there has been all along, and was to the very day
of your Second Dissolution, who were unsuitable to the work you were called to
do, and that knew not Let the Army beware of this.
Joseph, but rather closed with wicked men and enemies, they did so oppose and
hinder, that the Righteousness, and Justice, and putting faithful men into
places of Trust, so greatly desired, and promised, could not be effected as it
ought to be: Insomuch, that when the late General Cromwell came from Worcester,
several persons eminent for Godliness of the Congregations in, and about
London, and others, came to him, Desiring that he would employ his utmost
endeavors to get you to improve the great Mercies and Victories which the Lord
had bestowed upon us, as also to answer the expectations of his people in doing
the good things promised. In answer to which he replied, (beside other as bad
expressions of you) That there was no more hopes of drawing on the Parliament
thereunto, [meaning you] then was of making a bar of iron become a Lute string;
and desired, that they with the Congregations to which they did relate, would
seek unto the Lord to know his pleasure, in what was to be done, and to let him
know what upon such seeking should be set upon their hearts; whereof you shall
hear more afterward. And would likewise say of you at other times, that there
was not above five or six of you in the House [which more plainly appeared in
your second sitting] that had either a heart or mind to do any good thing,
which words were occasioned by several other good people who came to him for
help, complaining, That they had waited upon you day after day till their
hearts aked, their legs were weary and they almost undone, and could get little
or nothing from you but a company of fair promises. Others saying, That when
you did any thing for them, it was for the most part so long first, that they
had almost as good have been without it. And was it not too much so in your
second sitting.

Many also were the complaints of the Country people and others against you
upon the same account; some of them saying, That you were a company of corrupt
self-seeking persons, that minded your own Interest more then any thing else,
which [they said] was manifested by giving and receiving gifts, to and from one
another out of the Spoils of the Enemy, that ought to have been brought into
the Lords Treasury for the discharging of Public Debts, and the further
carrying on of his work withal: And that you preferred your Kindred,
Relations, Friends, Servants, and Flatterers, whether wise men or fools, honest
men or knaves, into places of Trust, [and so it was in your second sitting,
witness Nedham and others] contrary to the Qualifications so much pretended to
in that day; wherefore you being acted by such a corrupt self-seeking spirit,
little or no good at all could be expected from you. All which being too sadly
known to the forementioned good people of the several Congregations, they
proposed to the General, etc. (as being the result of what was set uptheir
hearts after seeking the Lord.) That a short time of six months or thereabouts
might be put to your sitting, and that in the interim care might be taken for
the Qualifications of persons to be elected to succeed in the Government which
might be furnished by the Lord for the further carrying on of his work, which
you had not enough of Were you not as short of spirit for the work in your
second sitting as before.
spirit [nor it seems of honesty] to go on in withal. And to say the truth,
upon this account, among other the like things that might be mentioned, was
there a general outcry amongst most of the friends of the Cause in the three
Nations for a New Representative (as so called in that day) and for your
Dissolution; the General (as you have heard) by himself, together with the
Officers of the Army, as well as others, complaining of you, and both
privately, and publicly, among themselves, and elsewhere, breathing out their
desires for your Dissolution, and that such faithful persons might come into
the Power, as would indeed bring forth the good things promised, as may more
plainly appear, in a Letter sent by the Officers of the Army in England to
Lieutenant General Fleetwood in Ireland, after you were dissolved, showing the
reasons thereof, signed by Major General Lambert, Major General Disbrow,
Commissary General Whaly, Major General Harrison, Colonel Saunders, Colonel
Hacker, Colonel Rich, Captain Farley, Major Packer, Major Wiggan, and others.
As also in a Speech made by General Cromwell in his own, and in the names of the
Officers of the Army to the Members of the Little Parliament in the Council
Chamber before their Sitting, likewise showing the grounds and necessity of
their dissolving you, and by way of encouragement to them to sit; in both which
are several Particulars laid to your Charge, with which whosoever shall compare
your late spirit and actions, it will very plainly appear, that you were rather
worse in your late second sitting, then in the time of your first.

I shall first begin with the Both the Letter and Speech may be seen in a Book
called, The Fifth Monarchy, or Kingdom of Christ in Opposition to the Beasts.
Sold at the Crown in Popeshead Alley.
Letter, wherein are five of the Particulars of your Charge.

See that Book, page 22. First, They complain of your evil mannagement of the
Affairs that were under your hand.

2. That the then dangerous remedy of dissolving you was not used till all
other ways had been by the Army assayed, and by you rejected.

3. That after four years expectation from you, since the change of the
Government [to wit from Kingship to a Commonwealth] they found no Was it not so
again in this your second sitting? Indeed you were very expert in laying
Burdens and Taxes upon the people. But what Righteousness and Justice did you
bring forth? Or what yokes lying either upon the Consciences or Bodies of the
good people did you take away? Or what has the Officers of the Army, who thus
complain of you; and dissolved you for not doing these good things, done herein
to this very day, but strive to advance and settle themselves.
performance by you of those good things that tended to the settlement of the
Commonwealth in Peace and Righteousness.

4. They say, They were abundantly satisfied from the long experience they had
of you; that as you were then constituted, you were so far from being the
Instruments of perfecting the Work of the Lord, that the whole Cause was in
great danger to perish under your hands, for which there has been so vast an
expense of Blood and Treasure; and therefore after seeking the face of God, and
taking counsel with one another, it was generally apprehended, that the only
way left to preserve the Cause, was to prevent your sitting by a speedy
dissolving you, and laying the Government upon the shoulders of such men as
might hopefully give the People the fruit of all their Labor, and Blood, and
encourage good men to be still willing to hazard their lives against the Common
Enemy, which, as things then stood, many had little heart to do.

5. That it was in their hearts to seek those good things in such a way, as
that you might have had the honor of it, but you had not then a heart to
incline to the Motion made in order thereunto; but rather endeavored a hasty
inconsiderate passing of an Act for a New Representative, though the General
and Officers at a meeting, with many of your Members, did abundantly
demonstrate the evident danger of it: yet did you the next day so earnestly and
precipitantly persist in it, as necessitated them to put you to that sudden
dissolution. Thus far the Letter.

They also say in the Speech by way of charge against you, see page 29, 30, 31.
of the forementioned Book, wherein are twelve Particulars.

1. That when the General and the Officers of the Army came from Worcester,
they expected that you having such a History to look back unto, a God that
appeared for you so eminently, so visibly; the mercies that God had showed, the
expectations that were in the hearts of all good men, would have prompted you,
that were in Authority, to have done those good things, which might, by honest
men, have been judged a Return fit for such a God, and worthy of such Mercies,
and a discharge of duty to those for whom all these Mercies had been showed,
(to wit) the true interest of the three Nations.

[ And likewise say,] They came fully bent in their hearts and thoughts to
desire and use all fair and lawful means they could with you, to have had the
Nation reap the fruit of all that Blood and Treasure that had been expended in
this Cause, and had many thirstings in their spirits, to find out ways, and
means wherein they might be any ways instrumental to help it forward, and that
they did from time to time solicit you to that purpose; and when they saw
nothing could be done they reminded you by a Petition, but had no return at
all; all the satisfaction they could get from you was but a few words. And
finding the People It has since appeared, that the Armies strivings and
thirstings to have had the Nation bettered by all the expense of Blood and
Treasure, has only been to greaten and enrich themselves, and studying how to
get the peoples money to be upheld therein, whereby they are looked upon as
cheating, self-seeking, unfruitful persons as well as your selves, neither of
you both having either honor or repute, but are a stink unto all honest men;
do bring down judgments upon the Nation, put all things into confusion, yet
neither they nor you the honesty or goodness to lay these things to heart to
this very day, but Lambert, Disbrow, Berry-like, go on to advance your selves,
though the Nation perish.
dissatisfied in every corner, and bringing home to their doors the
Nonperformance of those things that had been promised, and were of due to be
performed, judging themselves concerned (they say) they endeavored, as became
honest Men, to keep up the Reputation of honest men in the world, [it seems you
would not] and therefore had diverse times endeavored to obtain a Meeting with
diverse of your Members, and in those Meetings did in all faithfulness and
sincerity beseech you, that you would be mindeful of your duty, and of the
discharge of your Trust to God and man, and that they had at the least ten or
twelve Meetings begging and beseeching you, that of your own accords you would
do those good things that had been promised, that so it might appear you did
not do them by any suggestion from the Army, but of your own ingenuities, that
so you might have the reputation and good opinion of the people to the utmost;
also declared plainly to you, that the Issue of not doing those good things
would be the judgment and displeasure of God against you, the dissatisfaction
of the people, and the putting things into confusion, yet they could not
prevail with you, and that you laid them not to heart.

2. That you would not hear of a New Representative till such time as the Army
came to their close considerations what to do, and then you began to take it to
heart, and seemed exceeding willing to put it on, but not with that integrity
and caution as would have saved the Cause and Interest that you and they had
been so long engaged in, and that your intendment and design [in all you did at
that time] was only to recruit the House the better to perpetuate your selves,
several of the Officers having diverse times been spoken to by you to give way
thereto, which was so unreasonable a thing, as they not only had a perpetual
aversation to, but did abominate the thoughts of, and always declared their
dissatisfaction with and judgments against it.

3. That though you were unwilling to hear of a It was just thus with you in
your second sitting; for though you seemed exceeding willing to hear of
Proposalls from the Friends of the Cause in order to Settlement, yet your
spirits too much closed with that spirit that here they so complained of, and
could not endure to hear of such faithful persons coming into power, as would
indeed preserve the Cause; witness your late voting Major General Harrison
incapable of future employment, etc. and resolved as formerly to recruit the
House with men of the same spirit as your-selves. And therefore no wonder the
Army and the good people declare their dissatisfaction with, and rejoice in
your Dissolution as before. Yet in this very thing has the Army done worse
themselves, as you may see afterward.
New Representative before, or to proceed in one line considerable in it,
before it had lain three years before you, yet when the Army came to their
close considerations, instead of protracting, you made as much preposterous
haste on the other hand to put it on, without consideration or care had in the
Qualifications of the Act, you were about to assert and provide for the
security of the Cause, but would have thrown it back into the hands of them we
first fought with, which had they suffered you to have done, they should have
been rendered the worst people in the world, and have become Traitors both to
God and man.

4. That the Interest of the People of God was grown cheap with you, and not
laid to heart; a also if they came to Competition of things, the Cause even
among your selves, was (even almost in every thing) going to the ground, and
saw plainly and evidently, that in some Critical things, the Cause of the
people of God was a despised thing: and therefore not yours, but the hands of
other men must be trusted with it.

5. That if any body were in Competition for any place of real and signal
Trust, it was a hard and difficult thing to get any thing to be Carried without
making parties, without things indeed unworthy of a Parliament, and not as it
ought to be.

6. That you Alderman Atkins his saying in the House in the time of your late
sitting, That Mr. Sympson was an Anabaptist, and would not Christen Children,
nor give the Sacrament (as he called it) to the people; also as ignorantly
seconded by Sir Arthur Haslerig, saying, He believed the Sacrament was a
converting Ordinance, and that the Ministers of Mr. Sympsons judgment were not
the Ministers you intended to own. With other the like arguments to keep him
out of Bishopsgate. As also keeping Mr. Feak out of Christ Church, (so called)
though formerly put in by your Order, and continuing Mr. Jenkins there, who was
formerly sequestered and imprisoned by you upon the Scotch Engagement, and
lately refused to read your Declaration against Sir George Booth, yet gave
thanks when he was overcome; together with your hasty Vote for the continuance
of Tithes, with other things of this nature that might be mentioned, plainly
declares you to be acted by the same spirit in owning carnal Interests in
opposition to the Friends of the Cause as you were before.
discountenanced the business of the poor People of God in Wales, who had
watching over them men like so many Wolves, ready to catch the Lamb as soon as
it was brought out into the world, that you signally threw that business under
foot, to the discountenancing of the honest people there, and to the
countenancing of the Malignant Party of this Commonwealth, which they say was
as perfect a trial of your spirits as any thing, which many had felt by sad
experience.

7. That they found you never intended good to the people of God, (to wit) that
comprehension of them under the several forms of godliness, and that your
tenderness was forgotten to them all, though that by their hands and means it
was (through the blessing of God) you then sat where you did, and Affairs had
been instrumentally brought to that issue they then were brought to, which was
but an ill requital.

Page 34. 8. That though many words had been spoken to you for the Regulation
of the Law so much groaned under, in that posture it then was in, yet many
months together was not time enough to pass over one word called incumberances,
and this they say they found was your then spirit and complexion.

9. That they saw your intendment was to perpetuate your selves and men of that
spirit, which some understood from your-own mouths, from your own designs, who
could not endure to hear of being dissolved, the which, had you been a
Parliament never violated, sitting as free and as clear as any ever sat in
Englaud, yet to go about to perpetuate your selves they thought was so great a
breach of Trust, as greater could not be.

Page 35. That you did not proceed in ways that were honest and safe to the
Nation, in providing Qualifications of the Act of a New Representative, so as
to keep out Presbyters or Neuters, to put the power into whose hands they
having deserted the Cause and Interest upon the Kings account; and upon that
closure between them and the Neighbor Nation, was to have delivered up the
Cause into the hands of Interessed and Byast men who had little affection to
the Cause, and when the General and Officers made such objections as to the
danger of this proceeding that you could not but assent unto, yet answer was
made as before, that nothing would save the Nation, but the continuance of your
selves in Power.

Page 36. That you would not, though the Government was in that unsettled
condition, and things being under so much ill sense abroad, and so likely to
come to confusion in every respect if it went on so, answer the General and
Officers desire, to divolve the Trust (then in your hands) over to persons of
honor and integrity, that were well known, men well affected to Religion, and
the Interest of the Nation, which they told you, and had been confessed by you,
was no new thing when these Nations had been under the like burly burlies and
distractions, which they offered to you out of the deep sense they had of the
good of these Nations and the Cause of Christ; which in all likelihood had been
lost, had the Power been longer continued in your hands. But the answer still
was, that nothing would save the Nation but the Continuance of that Parliament.

Page 36, 37. 12. That you dealt You dealt as cunningly and deceitfully with
the Friends of the Cause in your second Sitting, as formerly with the Army, for
upon the Quakers Petition, among others, against Tithes, you took the advantage
one Morning, when several whom you thought would oppose you were absent, and
voted the continuance of them though (as it is reported) that business of
Tithes was not to have been debated till about four days after; and thus did
you carry it in putting Mr. Can by from writing the Intelligence, and placing
Nedham in his room; and how you likewise dealt treacherously with the Army a
second time, is very well known, which juggling trapanning practices of yours
among other things, declares plainly you would have dealt as deceitfully in the
business of the Representative you were lately about, had you not been
dissolved a second time. But I forbear to mention any further at present,
though very much more might be spoken in manifestation that your spirit in your
second Sitting was worse in every particular then in the time of your first.
deceitfully with the General and the Officers of the Army in saying you would
endeavor to suspend proceeedings with the Representative the next day till you
had a further Conference with them, and yet for all this did you that very day
proceed with all the eagerness you could, and had almost finished it, and
brought it to that issue with that haste, that it had never been before,
unsafely and dishonestly leaving out the things that did necessarily relate to
due Qualifications, and resolved to make it a paper Bill not to ingross it,
that so in a cheating manner you might make the quicker dispatch of it, thus to
have thrown away all the Liberties of the Nation into the hands that never bled
for it; and therefore for the preservation of the Cause (they say) they thought
it their duty not to suffer it, and upon this the House was dissolved. Thus far
is charged upon you in the forementioned Speech to the Little Parliament.

This we tell you [speaking to the Little Parliament] that so you may know that
what has been done in dissolving this Parliament, was as necessary as the
preservation of this Cause, and that necessity that led us to do that, has
brought us to this issue of exercising an extraordinary way and course to draw
your selves together upon this account, that you are men who know the Lord, and
have made observations of his mavelous dispensations, and may be trusted with
the Cause, etc.

In which words of the General and Officers of the Army to the Little
Parliament, thus laid before you, is given a perfect Character and Description
of the then (and may it not too truly be said the late) frame of your Spirits,
and what you would not do as to a more through carrying on his Work and Cause,
as also what with all haste you were doing against it; with several other
things too truly laid to your Charge contained in this Speech: and that upon
the account of these things you were dissolved.

Now what ever the design of the then General, Major Genesis Lambert, and some
other of his Machevilian politic Officers and Assistants was in dissolving,
and thus casting dirt upon you the Lord and themselves best knows; who
doubtless in his own time will (and has begun to do already) discover, and
bring all the hidden works of darkness, and secret wicked things to light; yet
there then was (and as by after actions also did appear) very evident grounds
to believe and say, it chiefly was to make way, and as a stirrup to get into
the Power themselves, and therefore, though it was unrighteously and wickedly
done as to them, yet doubtless as just and righteous in the sight of God,
considering the forementioned evils laid to your charge, as was formerly the
sifting and purging your House to hinder the personal Treaty and upon other
accounts, or beheading the late King, and casting out his Monarchy for his
Tyranny; and dissolving the last Parliament as enemies to, and opposers of the
Cause of God and his people, that so your selves, or better then you, might
come into their places, both of which according to man's Law, and the old almost
ruined Constitutions of this Nation, are judged lawful Powers, as well as your
selves.

And although it be granted there was a deceitful treacherous spirit which lay
(like a serpent under the grass) in the bottom of this action in some of the
Army who pretended to be either the stone it self mentioned, See page 43 of the
forementioned Book.
Dan. 2.44. or at least to have had somewhat of the spirit of it: So was there
likewise at the same time an honest, single, sincere spirit among some of the
Army, the Navy, the Churches, and good people of the Nation, who were indeed
for the work, and will erelong be found had then, and yet have the true spirit
of the stone (in some measure) both planted, and abiding in them, who did very
much approve of and rejoice in your being dissolved, and that upon the
forementioned too true account given by the General and Officers of the Army,
as is manifested in the latter end of the forementioned Speech to the Little
Parliament (page 45. of that Book) in the following words.

Says he, All that I have to say in my own, and in the names of my Fellow
Officers, (who have joined with me in this work) that we shall commend you to
the Grace of God, and to the guidance of his Spirit having thus far served you,
or rather our Lord Jesus Christ in it, we as we hope, and shall be ready in our
stations, according as the Providence of God shall lead us, to be subservient
to the work of God, and the Authority which we reckon God has set over us: And
although we have no formal thing to present you with to which the hands and
outward visible expressions of the hearts of the Officers of the three Nations
are set, yet we may say for them, and we may say also with confidence, that our
Brethren at Sea, with whom neither in Scotland nor Ireland, nor at Sea, has
any Artifice been used to persuade their approbation to this work, yet we can
say, that their consent and affections has flowed into us beyond our
expectations, and we may say with all confidence that we have had their
approbation and full consent unsought indeed to the other work, [to wit, in
dissolving of you] so that you have their hearts and affections in this, and
not only they, but we have very many papers from the Whatever Churches, or
other Persons they were, that closed with former Declarations, or thus freely
sent in their papers, or otherwise spoke in approbation of your first
Dissolution, for not doing the good things promised: as also approved of the
Call of the Little Parliament in order to the doing of them, and yet afterward
closed with and abetted the Protectoral Government, which was raised up upon
the ruins of the honest part of the Little Parliament, on purpose to hinder
their doing those good things, have turned their backs upon the Cause of Christ
as well as the Army, and ought to repent of their great evil in so doing as
well as they.
Churches of God thorowout the Nation, wonderfully both approving what has
been done in removing obstacles [that is in removing of you] and approving
what we have done in this very thing, [to wit, in calling the Little
Parliament.]

In all which, together with the forementioned particulars of your Charge
contained in that Speech and Letter, is set forth the matter of fact that was
against you, together with the righteous judgment that for the saving of the
Cause there was an absolute necessity to pass upon you, and also how most of
the good people in the Army, Navy, and Churches, etc. in the three Nations, did
both approve of, and rejoice therein.

And to say the truth, there was but very few, compared with the others, who
might then truly be said were Friends to the Cause that were dissatisfied;
whose dissatisfactions were not merely because you were dissolved, and the
other chosen in your stead, for they also complained of you, and desired a New
Representative as well as others, but that it was done in such a manner as in
their then apprehensions not only made way for the General to take the Power
himself, but also tended to pluck up by the very roots the old way of choosing
Rulers, by the whole Bulk or Body of the people, which they called (and
formerly was so) the Legal Foundations, which was then in their judgments
(and still is of some of them, who understand no better how to follow the Lord
in his overturning dispensations) the only legal and best way for the choice
of Rulers. So that all things considered, setting aside the forementioned
dissatisfactions of some, which was only as to the manner, but not to the
matter of your being dissolved, which signifies little or nothing at all as to
the clearing of you; it plainly appears, that for your unfaithfulness in, and
unfitness for your stewardship, and not thoroughly improving the Talent which
was then committed to you, for God and his People, you were both by his
Providence, and their Approbation and Consent justly laid aside. Insomuch, that
if the now true friends of the Cause, had either Light, and suitable thereunto,
a sincere, upright, courageous, single, and lively Spirit for Christ, and
Righteousness, as they ought to have, (and as the Saints shall have, when the
Law shall go forth of Zion) to follow the Lord in his Overturning
dispensations, who as he has formerly, and in our Day, so has promised for
the future safely to lead his People [on in his work] in ways they have not
gone with their feet, Isa. 41.2. And to bring the blind by a way they know
not, and lead them in paths that they have not known, etc. Isa. 42.16. Would
lay aside the excrementitious outside, shell, or notion of things relating to a
further carrying on of the Cause in its purity; to wit, the spirit of the
Nation, or whole body of the People, which the Lord by a continued series of
providential Dispensations (because of the malignity of their spirits, against
his Cause and People) has one time after another cast out, and witnessed
against; and on the other hand would look into the very spirit, kernel, and
substance of things relating thereunto, to wit, the spirit of the good People
who have gone on with the Lord in his work to this very day: who desired,
consented, and approved of your being then laid aside, you were really,
clearly, deservedly, and justly cast out; and to say the truth, had not from
that time to the very day of your second Call, nor have not now, the least
^^ght to sit again upon the former account, which I am persuaded the Lord in
due time will make manifest, notwithstanding through the short-sightedness
(though I trust simplicity) of some friends who desired (and were instrumental
therein) you might be called to sit a second time, (and possibly by your
selves) it is apprehended that there we went out of the way at first, and
therefore must there begin again: But if I know any thing of the mind of God,
(as I trust through his Grace I do) by the observations that I have made of his
footsteps in the carrying on of his work hitherto amongst us, you are all
mistaken, and I know you will find it so, which I doubt not but clearly to
manifest in that which follows.

For although we had many Deliverances and Victories, and the Lord eminently
blessed us with success, and our dread was upon our Enemies both at home and
abroad, whilst you were sitting, especially toward the latter end, yet be it
known unto you, it was not purely for your sakes, considered as you were a
Parliament in the Bulk, but as there was a sincere, single, honest spirit
(according to their then light) acting for Christ, his Cause, and Interest, in
some among You, in the Army, and also in the Nation, which I conceive will be
granted by every discerning person who was upon the place, and made observation
of things; and which the late General Cromwell, and his then Officers, do also
acknowledge in the forementioned Speech to the Little Parliament, Page 27. of
that Book, in the following words.

Says he, After diverse turnings of Affairs, it pleased God much about the
midst of the War to winnow the Forces of this Nation, and to put them into the
hands of men of other Principles, then those that did engage at the first, etc.
Those strange windings and turnings of Providence, those very great appearances
of God in crossing the designs of men, [to wit, Hollis, Stapleton, and the men
of that spirit among you, and in the Army,] that he might raise up a
contemptible company of men not verst in Military Affairs, nor having much
natural propencity to them, through the owning a If the General and Officers of
the Army had kept close to the practice of this honest Principle, those
Officers he has left behind him, and their pretended faithful brethren lately
imprisoned in Scotland, had not been served such a Monckish treacherous trick
as now they are; but they that deal treacherously with their Principles, as
also stand by and assist whilst their Brethren are imprisoned for their
faithfulness thereunto, it is just with the Lord to suffer or appoint others to
deal treacherously with them.
Principle of Godliness, which so soon as it came to be owned, and the state of
Affairs put upon that foot of Account, how God blessed them and all their
undertakings, by the raising up of that most improbable, despicable,
contemptible means, (for that we must for ever own) you very well known, etc.
He goes on.

Page 27, 28. The issues of those successes that God was pleased to give this
Nation were very great things brought about, besides the Dints that were upon
those Nations and places where they were carried on, even in the Civil Affairs,
to the bringing Offenders to Justice, the state of this Government to the Name
at least of a Commonwealth, the searching and sifting of all Places and
Persons, the King removed and brought to Justice, and many great ones with him.
The House of Commons the Representative of the People of England, winnowed,
sifted, and brought to a handful, etc. All which great things were
instrumentally brought forth by the honest Party, after the many strivings and
contendings with a Malignant, Rigid Presbyterian, Neutral, Corrupt Party among
you, as the then General and Officers also confess in Page 28. of that Book.
Says he, As the effect of that memorable Year 1648. was to lay the foundation
of bringing Delinquents to punishment, so it was of the Change of the
Government, although it be true, if we had time to speak, the carriages of some
in Trust, in most eminent Trust, was such as would have frustrated to us the
hopes of all our undertakings, had not God miraculously prevented, I mean by
that closure that would have been endeavored with the King, whereby we should
have put into his hand, all that Cause and Interest we had opposed, and had
nothing to have secured us but a little piece of paper, etc. Which clearly
confirms what I have said, that the Lord blessed us with success in our Councils
and Forces, as there was a sincere spirit acting for the Cause and Interest of
Christ in that day and no otherwise, his free grace only excepted.

For when you were dissolved, and the Little Parliament called, there was a
greater presence of God with them, a terror upon the enemy both at home and
abroad, especially upon the Lawyers, National Clergy, and all other corrupt
Interests; as also the hearts of most of the true friends to the Cause more
rejoicing then in the time of your sitting. But I let that pass, and shall in
the next place in some measure discover the mystery of iniquity that lay in the
bottom, and was working in Transactions after you were dissolved, wherein lies
the corrupt fountain or spring, (though unseen by most people) from whence the
late Apostasy had its rise, which so caused the forementioned presence of the
Lord to depart from our Councills and Forces, and exposed us to the reproach
and scorn of our enemies both at home and abroad, and also occasioned the late
distractions, and divisions, as between the true, so the true and false
professors amongst us, and is as it were the pin and hinge, on which all the
confusion and dark apprehensions of things have had their dependence and moving
from that time to this very day, and is as follows.

For after you were dissolved, and the Little Parliament were about to be
chosen, besides what was spoken to your selves, and was desired of you by the
General and Officers of the Army; to wit, That you would divolve your trust
over to Persons of Honor and Integrity, that were well known, men well
affected to Religion, and the Interest of the Nation, etc. He also declared in
the presence of Major Genesis Lambert, Sir Gilbert Pickering, Major Genesis Harrison,
Mr. Cradock, Mr. Lockyer, and others who were in a private consultation about
that choice, That if there were one man more faithful to the Saints, and more
suited to the work then another, and that had not been left behind in former
dispensatious, by the blessing of God he should be chosen, and that Relations,
and all others not thus qualified, should be rejected; and that from this
Scripture, which was then mentioned by the party to whom these words were
spoken, to wit, Hosea 11.12. Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the
House of Israel with deceit; but Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful
with the Saints. The first part of which Scripture he and his Officers applied
to you in the forementioned Speech to the Little Parliament, page 38. of that
Book; viz. That like Ephraim and Israel you had compassed God about with lies,
and deceit, to wit, with your Fastings and Thanksgivings, and other exercises
[yet did not do the good you were called for] which they had all cause to
lament of, but [the Little Parliament] were called by God to be faithful with
the Saints who were somewhat isntrumental in their Call, and to be just ruling
in the fear of God, etc. Which principle was more publicly (though
hypocritically) declared by them in that Speech page 41. of the forementioned
Book, says he to them, I confess I did never look to see such a day as this,
it may be nor you, when Jesus Christ shall be so If Christ indeed be King of
Nations as well as of Saints, as surely he is, and as the Officers of the Army
have both here and elsewhere acknowledged him to be; and the Little Parliament
was called to act upon his foundation, and to do all things in his Name upon an
avowed account as their Judge, King, and Lawgiver, as these their words
import. And the Lord by his eminent presence with, and refreshing the spirits
of such as were faithful among them, as also rejoicing the hearts of his
faithful people, and striking a terror upon the enemy whilst they were sitting
and endeavored to be acting according to that blessed spirit and principle
gave testimony thereunto; and the Spirit of the Lord, and his faithful people
grieved, and his presence, as also their prayers withdrawn, and the Nation
almost ruined since they were rejected, and the Lord so wonderfully overturned
and blasted the designs of whatever had enmity to, and was set up after it, and
seems by those his overturning dispensations not to be pleased till those who
have dealt thus treacherously return to the real practice of this their
declared principle, and to own that Spirit they have so rejected: Then
whosoever it is that shall be either laying, or building upon any other
foundation, or be promoting any persons into power on this side of it, though
never so refined, do set down short of what the Lord in that day had brought us
unto, and are in the apostasy still, and must be overturned as well as your
selves and all others that have gone before them.
owned as he is this day, and in this world, Jesus Christ is owned this day by
you all, and you own him by your willingness in appearing here, and you
manifest this (as far as poor creatures can) to be a day of the power of Christ
by your willingness; I know you remember that Scripture, Psalm. 110.3. The
people shall be willing in the day of thy power. God does manifest it to be a
day of the power of Jesus Christ.

Having through so much Blood and Trials as have been upon these Nations made
this to be one of the great Issues thereof to have a People called to the
Supreme Authority upon such an avowed account, God has owned his Son by this,
and you by your willingness do own Jesus Christ, etc. I confess I did never
look to see such a sight as this. We have not allowed our selves in the Choice
of one person, of whom we had not this good hope, that there was faith in Jesus
Christ, and love to all the Saints; and thus God has owned you, and by your
coming together have you owned him, etc. And toward the latter end of that
Speech, [Book page 43.] he further says unto them, Truly seeing things are so,
that you are at the edge of the Promises and Prophesies, at least if there were
neither promise for this nor prophecy, you are to be coveting after the best
things, endeavoring after the best things, and as I have said elsewhere, If I
were to choose the meanest Officer in the Army, or Commonwealth, I would choose a
godly man that has Principles, especially where Trust is to be committed, for
I know where to have a man of Principles, I believe if any of you should choose
a servant you would do so, and I would all our Magistrates were so chosen, that
may be some effects of this, it is our duty to choose men that fear the Lord, to
praise the Lord, yea such as the Lord forms for himself, and he expects not
praises from others, etc. In all which are good words spoken, and principles
laid down, as if he and his Officers fully intended to persevere in the
practice of them; but may not the true Friends of the Cause to the great grief
and sadness of their spirits, say of them, as the Lord concerning Israel of
old, Deuteronomy. 5.28, 29. They have well said all that they have spoken, but oh that
their hearts and tougues had gone together, that there had been indeed such a
heart in them, as in sincerity to have kept to the real practice of those
blessed principles, then had it been well with them, and with the poor Nation
upon that account. But notwithstanding these golden words and pretenses, the
Lord, my self, and others knows, that there was at the same time, yea some time
before these words were spoken, as in the seed of the serpent against the seed
of the woman, or in the spirit of Saul and his followers against the spirit of
David, and his followers, so a spirit of enmity and hatred secretly lodging in
the breasts of the then General, Major Genesis Lambert, Major Genesis Disbrow, Sir
Gilbert Pickering, Coll. Whaly, Coll. Goff, Dean Owen, (so called) and others,
against several of those honest men who were afterward turned out of the
Little Parliament, who were faithful Friends to the Cause of God, and indeed
above others, and that upon Scripture grounds for the Advancement of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and most suited to those good things, which the
General and Officers in the foregoing Speech do seem so much to press after,
whose principles they seemingly most owned, and whose assistance they greatly
desired (pretending to be of one heart with them) in the dissolving of you, and
choice of the other, yet for no other cause then their pressing, to be acting
up to these principles in reality and power, was this enmity against them,
which will afterward appear so plainly, as he that runs may read it.

For notwithstanding the forementioned pretenses and promises of choosing none
but what were faithful with the Saints, and most suited to the work, yet was
there such persons who were of a contrary spirit and principle purposely chosen
and packt together, ( viz. Coll. Montague, Coll. Barton, Coll. Mathews, Sir
William Roberts, Alderman Tichborn, and others) and those the greater number,
as that when the forementioned good things came to be done, and the remaining
more refined oppressions which lay upon the good people and others to be taken
away, they did so oppose and hinder the honest party in the House, that very
little or nothing at all could be done for them; the General, Ma. Genesis Lambert,
and the forementioned persons secretly owning of, and holding a Correspondency
with this corrupt Party all the while; which was such unheard of juggling,
deceit, and wickedness, that when I most seriously and thoroughly set my self to
consider of it, I cannot but cry out with a holy detestation and abhorrency in
my spirit, both of it and them, and say, Oh! the Hypocrisy, Treachery,
Villainy, Wickedness, and abominable unrighteousness that lies hid in the bottom
of the late and present Apostasy, and that surely the Lord who loves
righteousness, and hates iniquity, and every false way, will not let so great,
and not to be paralleled wickedness pass unpunisht without some more eminent
public repentance for the same, then has yet been If this wretched envious
spirit did not yet remain, would they since your second Dissolution have been
so forward to take into their New Council Lawrence Strickland, Tichborn,
Hewson, Clark, and others of that corrupt part of the Litttle Parliament, who
left the House and went to deliver up their pretended power to the General,
upon which he was made Protector, and promoted and abetted the late Apostasy,
and do what they can as it were to stave and keep off the faithful Friends of
the Cause who are well known to be men of integrity, and well affected to the
Interest of the Nation, which your not endeavoring to divolve the Trust in
your hands upon, was one of the great grounds why they pretendedly dissolved
you. The Lord who will not be mocked, nor his faithful people whom both you and
they have cheated and dealt unrighteously and hypocritically with all, will not
long bear such wicked actions at their hands.
manifested by them, and it will be well for them if the aforesaid enmity to
the true spirit of their forementioned professed and declared principles, and to
these very persons and others like them who through grace in some measure are
endued therewith, does not yet remain untaken away, for herein (in a great
measure) will lie the contest for the future, for either this hypocritical,
self-seeking, treacherous, envious spirit in the remaining Officers of the Army
that have now power in their hands must be put away, and they really united to
what they have so greatly professed and declared, and what they have so pretended
to dissolve you for nor doing of, which they have not been to this very day, or
else there will be no peace from the Lord and his faithful people with them;
and all their shrowding themselves under your wasting, decaying wing, had you
been sitting, or under a power that is more refined then you, if short of the
spirit they have so rejected, and as it were crucified, and endeavored to keep
down in the grave as the Soldiers did Christ in the days of his Humiliation,
can save them from the wrath of God, and the Lamb, and his faithful followers.
I shall now return to speak a little further how and for what cause it was that
the forementioned presence of the Lord departed from, and went not forth to own
and prosper the Counsels and Forces of this Nation as before.

As I said before, when you were dissolved, and the Little Parliament called
upon the avowed account of the Son of God, and to be acting upon his foundation
as he is King of Nations, and to do all things in his Name as their and our
King, Judge, and Lawgiver, Isa. 33.22. as you may see by the forementioned
Speech they were called to do, and the persons of the aforesaid honest spirit
and principle, who for some time (till the fish was caught and the bird taken)
were seemingly owned, were laboring as it were in the very fire to bring forth
in reallity what the General and his Officers so pretended to in words, and to
own and preserve the honest Interest, and taking away all the remaining Among
other Acts and Votes that past whilst this honest Party fat, they prevailed for
the passing of these four hereafter mentioned. First, for abolishing and taking
away the Court of Chancery, wherein was depending 23000. Causes, some of them
having lain there five, some ten, some twenty, some thirty years and more, to
the utter undoing of many Families. The second Vote, for a New Body, or Moddel
of the Law, then, and now so greatly desired by good people, which your not
doing of was one other reason of your Dissolution. A third Vote, the taking
away the Power of Patrons to make Presentations to Church Livings. The fourth
was; that Innocent Negative Vote of not agreeing with the report of the
Committee for Tithes, touching what they offered as the best way to eject
ignorant, profane, and scandalous Ministers, upon which presently followed the
Dissolution of the House. See a Book written by L. D. otherwise Mr Barhone then
a member of that House, sold at the Crown in Popes head Alley, and worthy your
taking notice of.
oppressions lying upon the bodies and Consciences both of them and others; not
only the same, but a greater presence and glory was with and upon our Councils
and Forces, our terror upon the Enemy both at home and abroad, and the hearts
of most of the true Friends to the Cause of Christ, and the Commonwealth, more
rejoicing then in the time of your first sitting; yea, the very Nations were
angry, and began to be wondering and looking after the things that were coming
upon them, as they shall more eminently be and do, when the Spirit of Life from
God shall enter into the Lords faithful people, to revive that spirit, which in
these persons was afterward as it were trampled upon, cast out, and crucified,
according to Rev. 11.11, 18. So also the Lawyers, Clergy, and all other corrupt
Interests, to wit, the Adonijah, false spirit of Magistracy and Ministry in
these Nations, were almost at their wits end, for fear their Corruption,
Bribery, Dilatory proceedings in Law suits, Double Fees, Taking Fees from both
parties, etc. A Coercive power over their Brethren Consciences, Tithes of all
kinds, Power of haling their Parishioners before Magistrates, Casting them into
Prisons, Seizing upon their Goods, and Forcing them to pay treble Damages for
non-payment of Tithes, and great Riches they gained upon this account would
cease, and be utterly taken away, and were ready to faint, and cry out, as the
more wicked Children of their dear Lady Mother, Mystery, Babylon, the great
Whore, and mother of Harlots, and abominations of the earth, both in the
Magistracy, and Ministry thereof shall certainly, and more eminently do in the
latter days, according to, Revel 18.

And seeing no other way to help themselves; By their Emissaries and Agents,
(such as Whitlock, And it may too truly be suspected that the same dark
lanthorn spirit, and most of the same persons are now at work with some of the
Grandees of the Army, as in the time of your first Dissolution, laboring as
for life to keep such faithful men from coming into power, as will suffer no
custom or practice, though never so specious in the outward pretense, that is
Oppressive, and without warrant in Scripture, to lie upon the Bodies or
Consciences of the Lords people. Which forementioned persons and others of that
spirit have been, and are the great Incendiaries, as was formerly Strafford,
Cottington, Canterbury, Wren, and others in their day: and I am very much out
of the way if they leave not off, but persist in this wicked underhand opposing
the work of the Lord, that the wrath and judgment of God and his people will
break forth against them as against the former.
St. John's, Lisle, As also Philip Nigh, (afterward Metropolitan Tryer at White
Hall) Deane Owen, Doctor Tho. Goodwin (so called) and others) they repair to
the then General and some of his Officers, and to a Corrupt party in that
Little Parliament, packed beforehand for such a purpose, crying out as it were
for help: which General, etc. were as willing to receive and hearken to them as
they to come; for that the aforesaid honest Party in the House did also strike
at their self-seeking and corrupt Interests, and were laboring to bring the
great Officers to serve the State (which was so impoverished) a Year without
pay, as also would render them very cheap, and have their persons no further in
admiration, then as they honored the Lord, and their sincerity to the Cause
and Interest of Christ appeared. Wherefore the forementioned corrupt persons
being so well agreed, their Case also being alike desperate, and knowing right
well they could expect no better at their hands, being thus greatly afraid (as
they are to this day) according to Isa. 41.6, 7. They helped every one his
neighbor, and each corrupt Interest said to his Brother, Be of good courage. So
the corrupt Lawyer encouraged the Clergyman, the Clergyman the eminent
University man, the eminent University man the corrupt, self-seeking General
and his Officers, the General and his Officers (with the former) the corrupt
Party in that Little Parliament, who upon a first day (Heathen-like called
Sunday) on which they usually pretend to worship God, and compass him about
with lies, (an evil they so complained of in you) they held Cabals at
Whitchall and the Cockpit to consult the Dissolution of the Little Parliament,
which being fully agreed and concluded upon, the Plot was so laid between them,
that Sydenham, Montague, Pickering, Strickland, Lawrence, Clark, and others of
the corrupt Party must get together betimes the next morning into the House two
hours, sooner then usually without the honest Parties knowledge, and before
they could get together and move a resigning or translating their pretended
Power to the General, that so his after Power and Government might appear with
the greater face of Legality, and be accepted of by the good people; but as
early as it was, this their wicked Motion met with opposition from the friends
of the Cause of Christ, who came in unexpectedly upon them, insomuch, that the
Corrupt Party durst not hazard to put the forementioned Motion to the Vote; but
without either Vote or Adjournment to any other place or time, they with their
Speaker in all haste go away to White Hall to deliver up their pretended Power
to the General, leaving a considerable number of the honest Party behind them
in the House, who in a little time after were by that Tyrant and Traitor both
to God and Man, Coll. Goff, and Lieu. Colonel White (since drowned coming from
Mardike) and Musketeers they brought (who are always ready for any villainy
they are put upon) turned out of the House; thereby thinking and endeavoring
so to fasten the Image of their corrupt Interests, and therewith all the
remaining oppressions lying both upon the Bodies and Consciences of the Lords
People with nails, that it should not be moved, and thus the business stands
between the Officers of the Army, and that honest Party of that Little
Parliament to this very day.

In doing which wicked action, and therein discountenancing, persecuting, yea
what in them lay as it were crucifying this honest Spirit in these persons, who
were bringing forth the forementioned good things, which the Army so greatly
promised, declared, and pretended to fight for, and which you were dissolved
for not doing of. And the General thus setting up himself upon the Monarchical,
or Beast-like Foundation, so contrary to former Declarations, and as it were
upon the ruins of the very spirit and principles, which he and his Officers
but a little before had so greatly pretended to own, and be of themselves, and
also doing the very same, yea worse things then for which the late King was
beheaded, and which they also condemned in you; as also Persecuting,
Imprisoning, and Banishing some of the forementioned faithful Friends of the
Little Parliament, and others of the Lords people, and blaspheming the Spirit
of the Lord in them, saying, They were acted by a giddy headed, rash, fanatic,
devilish Spirit; and this for no other cause, then their faithfulness to the
Lord, in pressing after the good things according to their forementioned
declared Principles, and opposing the General and his Officers backsliding from
them, and doing things, so diametrically contrary thereunto, therein falsifying
their Trust, and building again what they formerly had destroyed, and declared
against; the Army and all the forementioned corrupt Interests, with several
Independent, and The good things they desired in those Addresses does no more
excuse their evil in addressing, and thereby abetting that Tyrannical
Beast-like Government, then the Devils bringing Scripture in his mouth excused
his wickedness in tempting of Christ.
some Baptized Churches, by their Power, Addresses, and otherwise in the mean
while countenancing, encouraging, abetting, and upholding them therein, by all
which the blessed Cause and work of Christ was very greatly stopped and hindered,
the Spirit of the Lord and his People grieved.

Now since these with many other wicked things that might be mentioned came to
be done by that professing hypocritical generation, the forementioned glorious
presence that was formerly with you, the Little Parliament, and their Councils
and Forces was withdrawn, the courage of the enemy heightened, the corrupt
Interests before mentioned lifting up their heads and rejoicing, according to
Rev. 11.10. The Nations abroad contemn and scorn us; the lively fresh spirit
for the work and Cause of Christ, which seemed formerly to be in the Army very
much choked and lost; the hearts and prayers of the remaining faithful Friends
of the Cause which were formerly with and for them, now grieved, and engaged
against them, by all which the state and condition of this poor Nation was, and
is very greatly impaired, our Land Forces wasted and consumed at Hispaniola,
Jamaica, Mardike, Flanders, and elsewhere, our Shipping lessened and
diminished; our Stores and Provisions for Sea and Land expended and very much
consumed, and but very very little or no profit; our Magazines emptied,
Treasures wasted, Trade in a very great measure lost and decayed, as Tradesmen
of all sorts, and Shopkeepers (many of whom are broken, and are breaking every
day) find by such sad and woeful experience, as they never did before, nor in
the memory of man was the lke ever known or heard of, (though Mr. Nigh, Tho:
Goodwin, Dean Owen, (so called) and the Officers and Messengers of above one
hundred Congregations in England could tell their late Protector, that they and
the Nation had not eaten the Bread of Adversity, nor drunk the Water of
Affliction, but had served God in the abundance of all things;) Very great new
debts contracted, little of old being satisfied, all which sad effects, with
others that might be mentioned, (as was said before) he that has but half an
eye, or that runs may read, is the bitter fruit of the Apostasy, Treachery, and
Crucifying the Spirit of the Lord in the Members turned out of the Little
Parliament, who were bringing forth that Justice and Righteousness which the
Army and good People of the three Nations were so greatly engaged in, and was
no other then what the faithful Friends of the Cause are calling for in this
day, and will give the Lord nor them no rest till they do obtain.

All things going thus contrary to the sinful desires and vain expectations of
the upholders, and abbettors of this great Apostasy, (notwithstanding the many
helps they had to carry it on;) yet as if they had been left by the Lord to
studdy and procure their further destruction, they not only afresh imprison
the Lords faithful people for witnessing against them, but also suffer others
of them to be haled before Magistrates, cast into prisons, forced to pay
trebble damages, their goods to be seized upon, and ten times more taken away
then their pretended due came to, for not paying of Tithes, and this greatly
approved of by the then General (his Officers and all his worthy Addressors
upholding him therein,) who was once the head of the Sectaries, out of a carnal
design to draw in the Presbyterian Clergy to stand by his Interest; who since
the New Moddel, and beheading the late King, to this very day, it is well known
have been enemies to, and opposers of the Lords Work and Cause, that has been,
and is yet further to be carried on in these Nations. Though he and his
Officers not long before had as good as acknowledged in the forementioned
Speech to the Little Parliament. See Book, page 40. 41. that the now Ministry
of England, as to their then, and present standing derived it self, and
succession through the Papacy, and therefore a false succession, and none to be
the true succession but what was through the Spirit given in that measure the
Spirit is given, which [sayes he] Christians are well able to discern and do.
And yet for all this, contrary to Scripture or Reason, forced them to pay such
Ministers as they judged were not only destitute of a work of Grace in their
hearts, much less of the Spirit for that work, but also derived their
succession through the Papacy, wherein with other things of this nature that
might be mentioned; it appeared their tenderness was forgotten to the Lords
people under several forms as much as yours, and that the cause of the people
of God was despised by them.

Thus were things going on, one the one hand, and some of the Lords faithful
people, called Sectaries, Anabaptists, and Fifth Monarchy men by their Faith,
Prayers, Appeals, Prophesyings, and Testimony against the Apostasy, and
Abettors of it, counterworking and pulling down on the other, which honest,
faithful spirit in them to the Lord, his Cause, and interest, can, will never
leave working nor overturning till our Lord Jesus Christ comes whose right it
is. This remnant of witnessing Sectaries (so called) get ground, all the
designs and stratagems made use of to quell them, and to uphold and strengthen
the Protectoral Beast-like foundation in himself and family were frustrated,
and came to nothing; the Lords faithful people rejoice, the old Protector (so
called) is greatly troubled, grows faint, his heart as it were falls flat, and
he dies. I do the rather mention these things that you may the better remember
the several steps of providence preceding your second coming into power.

The light, the delight of their eyes, the breath of their Nostrils, their
Moses, David, great Mordecay, and Elijah, or rather the most Famous Renowned
Prince of their Apostate Congregation, who was gotten so far on of his journey
toward Zion; yet by himself, and them through unbelief, and a self-seeking,
self-exalting spirit, made their great Captain to return back again into
Babylon, being thus taken away, and therein, their head, as it were, struck
from of their shoulders; the remaining body of the Apostates, to wit, the late
Council, Army, Independent Clergy, Tryers, and University men, etc. either not
seeing, or rather being ashamed it should be known they saw this their sin of
Apostasy from the Cause of Christ, and how the presence of the Lord was
departed from them upon that account; instead of acknowledging the same and
returning into the way from whence they had so treacherously and wickedly
departed, and was the cause of all this evil that was upon them and the Nation,
they go on like so many blind Bayards, or as a people besotted in their former
evil ways, and to mend the matter, or lick themselves whole again, they set up
Richard Cromwell the eldest son of that family, upon his deceased Fathers
Throne, thereby endeavoring what in them lay, to confirm and establish the
aforesaid Tyrannycal, oppressive Power which they had exercised in the life
time of his Father, who to establish himself more strongly therein he calls a
Parliament, chosen by the whole bulk or spirit of the Nation, as did his father
before him, without any respect had to those good qualifications, which you not
being so honest to provide for in the Act of a New Representative you were
about, in the time of your former sitting, was charged upon you as one of the
great crimes, that it seems would have been committed by you, for which they
pretended you were dissolved.

These persons so chosen come together, some of whom were friends to a
Commonwealth Government in opposition to that of a Single person, yet most of
these (as was in his Fathers Parliaments) very short of that Your unwillingness
to divolve your trust over to persons of Honor, and Integrity, who were well
affected to Religion and the Interest of the Nation for the further carrying on
of the Cause of Christ, was another of the pretended Reasons why the Army first
dissolved you; and yet afterward, as here may be seen, they did worse
themselves.
excellent lively spirit for Government, and bringing forth of Righteousness,
which the dispensation that is upon us calls for from Rulers in this our day,
and these three Nations; so that no great good could be expected from them had
they not been overvoted by the greater pary that were of a contrary spirit to
them.

The other part of the House which were very much the greater number consisted
of persons tainted with both the Old and New Court Interest, who like Simeon
and Levi brethren in iniquity, would always be sure to join together against
the Commonwealths men, and others, to hinder whatever tended to advance that
interest or way of Government, and did strike at the dethroning of their own,
and of these the Old Your not endeavoring in the time of your first sitting to
keep out Presbyters, Neuters, and Masignants from coming into Power, was
another of the pretended Reasons why the Army dissolved you; yet therein also
as may be seen they did the same themselves. I mention these things not to
excuse you, or in the least to make divisions, but that the poor people of God
and the Nation may the better see and know how likely they are to be ruined and
undone between the Army and you. Oh that ever men, who have professed to be the
Army of the Lamb, and such professing men as many of you would be looked upon
to be, should ever deal so treacherously with the Cause of God, and his people,
as you have done!
Malignant, Neutral and Presbyterian spirit were predominant, who endeavored
(covertly) all they could to bring things to run in the old Malignant Channel,
and to be laying bonds upon the consciences, as well as upon the bodies of the
Lords people, called Sectaries; as also if they had been suffered to go on
would have disbanded, if not the whole Army, yet at least have purged out all
therein, whom they had judged to have been such factious seditious persons; as
Sir Arthur Haselrig (who then pretended to be a more faithful friend to the
honest frinds of the Cause, then in this time of your second sitting he has
proved to be) and others, very well know.

Things going on in this manner, and the Brass, Iron, and Clay of this Toe of
the Image, or Horn of the Beast, mixing and agreeing no better together, and
the pretended honest part of the Army so likely to be cast out, and as it were
undone if things went on so; they consult together, and conclude, that there
was nothing would preserve themselves, and the honest Interest but the
dissolution of that Parliament; in order to which, they rendezvous together in
their arms the night before, in several places of the City and about
White Hall. Richard Cromwell the then Protector, Coll. Goff. Com. Genesis Whaly
and others of the Army who closed with this corrupt party of that Parliament,
at the same time endeavoring all they could to draw away a party or all
engaged with the other to stand by them, fearing that their Kingdom would also
be struck at or diminished by this business, the pretended honest part of the
Army prevail and send to the aforesaid Richard Cromwell, (a pretended legal
Authority) desiring him by his power to dissolve that Parliament (who sore
against his will) answered their desire therein, whereby they apprehended they
were Legally Dissolved.

This great overturning dispensation being thus brought about, the Lords
faithful people and all others that may truly be said were friends of the
Cause, did greatly concur with, and approve of what was done by the Army, in
procuring the Dissolution of that wretched Parliament, and did bless the Lord
for the same, and likewise desired, and greatly pressed after the Dissolution
of the Protectoral Government also, as that which they formerly in the King,
and now again so lately in the Protector (so called) had the too sad experience
was Tyrannical and Oppressive, and altogether inconsistent with the well being
of the people of these Nations, and were not without some hopes. The Army
having but a little before Declared to the world, They could not but bewail
their great failings and turnings aside, and wherein soever they had
back-slidden they desired to take shame to themselves, and that they were now
as ever equally endeared to the good Old, Cause and utter enemies to all
Tyranny and Oppression, etc. but that they would have gone on to endeavor with
all their might to have brought things to that perfection and state they were
in when the forementioned presence and glory of the Lord, was with, and upon
us, to wit either to the choice of the same, or other persons of that honest
spirit, and principle who were formerly turned out of the Little Parliament,
(who have not since defiled their Garments with the late Apostasy, or if they
have, have repented publicly for the same) the departing from, and rejecting
of which spirit and principle, by the then, and now builders, was the only
chief Cause of the Lords, so withdrawing his presence from their Councels and
Forces since that time.

In order to which several faithful friends to the Cause in discharge of their
consciences, and duty (as they then apprehended) to serve the Lord in that
present juncture of affairs, did draw up, and (by the hands of Major Mallery,
Lieutenant Colonel Pinchin, Captain Cust, and others) present to Lieutenant
General Fleetwood, and the General Council of Officers a paper, called the Good
Old Cause, Stated, which holds forth that the Army themselves did formerly
declare for and approve of that very spirit, and principle, and such persons to
be in Power, as is before mentioned and therein was desired.

Now whether it was that the spirit of the Army which was so deeply drenched,
and as it were over head and ears in the late Apostasy, like old Bottles, could
not bear the new wine, to wit, the self-denying spirit in the forementioned
persons turned out of the Little Parliament, and in others like them, that was
the reason they were not called again, or what the matter was; but to be sure
if they and the people who called you had been right and clear in their
understandings, or had had a true hint or taste upon their spirits of that
Blessed, Excellent, Lively Spirit that shall execute the Justice and
Righteousness that shall be when the Law shall go forth of Zion, and our Lord
Jesus Christ and his Saints shall reign in Righteousness, Isa. 32.1. They would
have walked in that matter less by sense, and more by faith, have trusted God,
and never called you. But so it came to pass, that through the darkness and
short-sightedness of some of the Friends of the Cause and according to their
desires you were called together again to take your former Power, as being in
the outward appearance the only visible Legal Authority in the Nation, The
best expedient to root out the Monarchical Protectorall Government; To raise
Indeed you were very good at raising money and Soldiers to secure your selves,
and at going to Feasts prepared out of the Orphans money by the carnal vain
Magistrates of the City, to bribe and blind you, that you might not search
into and purge out the foolish, apish, corrupt practices, and oppressive
Customs that are amongst them, and from framing the Government of the City in
the way of a Commonwealth, as you had declared the Government of the Nation to
be. And at voting the continuance of Tithes, and therewith your wicked
Ordinance for trebble damages; at raising Enemies to the Cause under Colonel
Thomson, to balance and put a check upon the faithful Friends thereof; at
perpetuating your selves as before, by filling up your House with new Members;
at owning corrupt Interests, and preferring corrupt persons into places of
Trust, contrary to your own Votes and Declarations; at discountenancing the
business of the friends of the Cause, to the countenance of the enemies
thereof; at dealing deceitfully with the Army and Friends of the Cause; as
backward to reform the Law, as also to divolve the Trust lately in your hand
over into the hands of faithful men, as formerly you were, and as ready to do
the same, yea worse things then in the several foregoing Particulars is
charged against you: But as for the Cause of Christ according to the true
intent and spirit of it, the Just, Civil, and Religious Liberties of the good
People, and providing Persons of a more excellent spirit for Government, to
promote and bring this forth you understood it not, nor laid it to heart no
more then the Army, and therefore very unmeet to be continued, but dissolved as
formerly.
Money, And to prevent future War and Bloodshed, Maintain the Good Old Cause,
the Liberties and Freedoms of the good people in the things of God relating to
the Conscience, until such time as a better Moddel of Government should be
found out; so that here was your then Second call and Standing, by all which it
is probable you might apprehend the Lord did own you, notwithstanding you
retained the same spirit as before; and that during the time of your more then
six years dismission from your former Power, had only been putting you (as
formerly Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon) to eat grass with the Beasts of the
Field, Dan. 4.25. or made you as ordinary men, that so you might the better
understand and know, that the most High ruled in the Kingdoms of men, and gave
them to whomsoever he would, thereby to humble and make you better.

Now seeing you were once more brought together into the Power, not called
thither by Malignants, Presbyterians, or the late new Court Party, who profess
to remain in that spirit, but by some of the faithful Friends of the Cause,
and the Army, who as they say (though honest men think otherwise) are returned
from their Apostasy, to do the forementioned good things till such time only
as a better Moddel was found out, who in case you answered not what you were
called for, had also the same power to take from you again what they had so
committed to you; you should not have been high minded, but feared, and been
looking about you, and considering whether the same or a worse spirit had not
been in you now then formerly, and have taken heed of doing the same or worse
things that so caused the Friends of the Cause and the Army to complain of you,
and so greatly desire your Dissolution, and a New Representative to come in
your places. For if during the time of your almost seven years Dismission from
your former Power, you had only been like unto Nebuchadnezars stump, Dan. 4.15.
rooting in the earth, and bound as it were about with iron and brass, and had
not repented and broken off your former sins and evils charged upon you by the
Army and others, and grown better by the shame and affliction of being so laid
aside, but still remained as at your first Dissolution, you could not honestly
expect that the Friends of the Cause who called you only to do those good
things which the Army pretendedly dissolved you for not doing of, would take it
well at your hands, or bear you herein, because the former glory and presence
of the Lord that was with the Councels and Forces of this Nation, is by reason
of the late and present Apostasy almost clean departed, and we as it were upon
our last legs, and do well understand (some of them at least who are more
clear-sighted) that it is not barely the name of a Commonwealth Government, and
a people of a low, dull spirit and understanding exercised therein, who like so
many heavy listless horses put into their gears, must either draw or be whipped
to it, as most of you were in the time of your first Sitting, and to the day of
your late dissolution. But the Righteousness and Justice thereof executed and
brought forth with an excellent, lively, fresh spirit, by an humble, gracious,
willing people, who have the concernments and welfare of the Nation upon their
hearts more then their own, and are tender unto, and faithful with all the
Saints, anointed thereunto by the Lords Spirit, (which once the Army so greatly
pretended to own) that will save and exalt these sinking Nations, and do see
that thither we must come, or we perish, and therefore if you would not
speedily put to your helping hand in this crisis of danger, to bring this in,
but would from time to time, as in the time of your first Sitting either
continue your selves with your old spirit, or not before your rising so provide
as to keep out Cavaleers, Neuters, Presbyters, and the late New Court Party
from coming into Power for the future (as there was very little likelihood you
would, so many among you having Apostatized from your former Acts, Votes, and
Declarations, and fell in with the Protectorall Government, nay voted for
Kingship again, and therein dealt treacherously with the Cause of Jesus Christ,
and your own Principles, as well as the Army) you could not expect any other
from them and the Army, if their hearts were sincere and upright with God
indeed, as they lately pretended to be, but that they would take care to do it
themselves, though as formerly a desperate disease had a desperate cure.

And it seems for this very cause among others, it was that you were so lately
dissolved a second time, whereby it very plainly appears that your late call to
the Power was not a dispensation from the Lord to manifest we went out of the
way in your first dissolution, but only that the necessity and justness
thereof might more plainly appear not only to your selves, but to the
satisfaction of some friends of the Cause, that could not otherwise be
satisfied but by the late trial of your spirits a second time. As also that you
might be instrumental (as the righteous judgment of the Lord upon them) to
take away the Power, Government, Splendour, and Greatness of that family, which
was so hypocritically, unrighteously, and wickedly raised up upon your, and the
honest part of the little Parliaments ruins though in the outward pretense,
and show for better ends, and this your work being done, to be removed again as
before, that so a second trial might be upon the spirits of the Army to see
whether according to their former and late pretenses, they would indeed be so
honest (having so greatly mist it hitherto, The Lord has one time after
another since the Army rejected their professed spirit and principles, in casting
out the honest part of the Little Parliament, (as upon Pharaoh of old, who
would not let Israel go to Canaan, Exodus Chap. 7. to Chap. 12.) so blasted
their designs, and thereby plagued and brought them down, as they are
necessitated for their own preservation to send unto and call upon the faithful
Remnant (as did Pharaoh to Moses) to pray for, advise with, and come into their
assistance, as if he would force them to let them go; and doubtless will never
let them rest till they acknowledge their iniquity, and return to walk with
more refinedness according to their former honest Principles.
and thereby Pharaoh-like hindered the Lords faithful people from going to
Zion) as to bring in better and more suitable persons then your selves (whom
they had so greatly complained of) into the Government of the Nation, to carry
on with life and power the blessed Cause and Work of the Lord for the future,
which both you and they notwithstanding your many high professions have so
greatly opposed and dealt treacherously withal.

I might have been more large in comparing your spirit and actions in your late
second Sitting with the forementioned Particulars charged upon you by the
Officers of the Army as the grounds and reasons of your first Dissolution, and
have shown more fully wherein you were rather worse then in the time of your
first Sitting; but it being more properly the Armies work to do it for their
further vindication, who have in the General done something therein already in
their Plea they set forth for your late Dissolution, I shall leave it to them,
or to some other persons who were more upon the place, and could better observe
you then my self, (who had little heart to come where you were upon the
forementioned account) and shall conclude with (I hope) a Seasonable Word by
way of Counsel and Proposal to the Officers of the Army themselves, of whom the
true Friends of the Cause have to this day too great reason to say, having had
such sad and woeful experience of their Adulteries from their former honest
principles, neighings, and going a whoring after the accursed thing, to wit,
the Monarchical Tyrannical Power, Pomp, and Greatness, and their great lewdness
and abominations therein committed, yea greater then for which the late King
was beheaded, and they also pretended to dissolve you a first and second time,
and yet like the Whore, Prove. 30.20. wipe their mouths as if they had done no
wckiedness. But are now as ever equally endeared to the Good Old Cause, and
utter enemies to all Tyranny and Oppression, when as the Lord and his people,
yea the carnal people of the Nation, knows it is not so: As the Lord concerning
Jerusalem of old, Jer. 13.27. O Army, Army, will you not be honest, sincere,
upright, deny your self-Interest and Greatness, and he in reality what you have
so greatly professed! Will you not return from whence you are fallen, and so
truly be said to repent, must you needs ruin the Nation by your continuing to
go on in your Apostasy and Wickedness, will you not be clean, when shall it
once be?

A Seasonable Word by way of Counsel and Proposal to the Officers of the Armies
of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
YOu may by reading over the foregoing Word to the Remaining Members of the
Long Parliament lately sitting at Westminster, whom you have now dissolved a
second time (as it concerns you so to do) take notice of almost all the most
considerable circumstances relating to the Blessed Cause and Work of Christ,
that you and the good people of this Nation have been so long engaged in; and
upon what account it was that the Lord so greatly blessed the Councels and Forces
of this Nation against the common enemy, whilst it was carrying on; also how
the forementioned good people desired that the Righteousness, Justice, and good
things promised both by you and them, might be brought forth, and the Remaining
more refined Oppressions lying upon their Bodies and Consciences taken away, as
an improvement of all those great Mercies and Victories which the Lord had so
wonderfully and graciously bestowed upon us: And how they likewise desired that
the then Long Parliament sitting at Westminster, being short of spirit for the
further carrying on of this work (as they were to the very day of their second
Dissolution) might be dissolved, and that other more suitable persons thereunto
then they were, might be called to do it; as also how greatly you seemed to
concur and go along with them therein, as being of one heart with them,
declaring that you would have none to come into the Power for the future, but
Persons of Honor and Integrity, that were well known, men well affected to
Religion, and the Interest of the Nation; Men who knew the Lord, and had made
observations of his mavelous dispensations; Just men, ruling in the fear of
God; A willing people, who had faith in Jesus Christ, love to, and were
faithful with all the Saints, men who were called chosen, and faithful, yea
that it was your duty to choose men that feared the Lord to praise the Lord,
such as he had formed for himself, because he expected not praises from others;
as also pretended you dissolved the Old Parliament for their unwillingness and
backwardness in bringing forth these things; yet how hypocritically,
treacherously, and unrighteously your selves afterward dealt, and went
directly contrary thereunto in rejecting the good you had so greatly pretended
to thirst after the accomplishment of, and doing the very same, yea worse
things then you had so complained against them for, your after actions compared
with the several Particulars of your Charge against the aforesaid Old
Parliament taken out of your forementioned Letter to Lieu. Genesis Fleetwood then
in Ireland, and the then Generals Speech in his own and your names to the
Members of the Little Parliament before their Sitting, do very plainly manifest.

First, Did the Old Parliament manage their Affairs evilly in the time of
their first Sitting, and did as evilly in rejecting the Council and Advice you
gave them, and the means you used to have had them done the good things
promised both by you and them, and was of due to be performed tending to the
Settlement of the Commonwealth in Peace and Righteousness? So did you. For
after their first Dissolution you rejected the wholesome council given you by
your faithful friends, as to the choice of persons that would indeed bring
forth that good you so greatly pretended to be thirsting after, and dealt
deceitfully and treacherously with your then declared spirit and principle, as
to the Qualifications of Rulers for so good a work, packing that Little
Parliament for the most part with self-interested persons, such as Alderman
Tichborn, Mr. Lawrence, Coll. Montague, Mr. Strickland, Sir William Roberts,
Coll. Barton, the late Coll. Mathews, Colonel Clark, and others, who were
contrary to that honest public spirit and principle, which but a little before
you had so greatly pretended to own in the Dissolution of the Old and choice of
the Little Parliament, who whilst they were sitting hindered the Honest Party
among them (as you have heard before) from doing those good things that would
indeed have settled the Commonwealth in Peace and Righteousness, and you their
encouragers, and confederates all the while.

Secondly. Did the Old Parliament do evilly in endeavoring all they could to
perpetuate themselves, and thereby all the Oppressions that then were upon the
people, by filling up their House with men of the same corupt Spirit and
Principles with themselves in order thereunto? As also in not laying the
Government upon the shoulders of such men as would hopefully give the people
the fruit of all their labor and blood and encourage good men for the future
to venture their lives against the common enemy? So did you. For you very well
know that the business was so laid between you and the forementioned Corrupt
Party of that Little Parliament, as that they not only hindered the Honest
Party among them from the doing of that good whilst they sat, and providing
for the sure laying of the Government upon the shoulders of faithful men for
the future, but that they might for ever hinder them from so doing, and thereby
uphold both your own and their several self Interests, and all the remaining
Oppressions that then were, and to this very day are lying upon the people; in
a clandestine secret manner without the honest Parties knowledge or consent,
wherein you dealt deceitfully and treacherously with them, (the like carriage
in the Old Parliament to you a first and second time, was another pretended
reason of their first and second Dissolution) you consult together, and so
order the matter, that the aforesaid Corrupt Party, with the Speaker, must
leave the House, and bring away their Power to your Geverall, and Coll. Goff,
etc. presently be sent with soldiers to turn out the other, and your General
soon after be set up upon the Monarchical, Protectoral, Beast-like Foundation,
with a Negative Voice in all things that opposed his Government, as also the
Power of the Militia, during his life, and afterward to his Successor, which
the Lord, his people, and your selves had so greatly witnessed and declared
against, and which cost so much Blood and Treasure to oppose in the King, end
eavouring all you could to uphold and perpetuate him and your selves therein,
with all the Pride, Pomp, Luxury, Tyranny, Oppresion, and Popish, Sinful,
Heathenish, Foolish, Apeish Customs and Practices among your selves, the City,
and the rest of the Nation, attending the same, with many other the like wicked
actions committed by you, which would be too tedious to mention; wherein also
you did worse then the Old Parliament.

Thirdly, Did the Old Parliament do evilly in not providing such Qualifications
in the Act for a New Representative they were about in the time of their first
Sitting, as to keep out Presbyters, Neuters, and Malignants from coming into
Power for the future, and therein would have given away the Cause into the
hands that never bled for it, and that would impose upon their Brethren, which
you say had you suffered, you should have been the worst people in the world,
and have become Traitors both to God and Man. So did you. And therein (to use
your own words) were you indeed Traitors both to God and Man; for the very next
Parliament that was called after your General was made Protector, and the next
to that, did most consist of Presbyters, Neuters, and Malignants, and Persons
packed for the support of your Interests, and secluded and kept from sitting
near a hundred Members, among whom were several Persons for a Commonwealth
Interest, that so they might hot hinder your corrupt design of advancing and
perpetuating your selves. And just so was it in the last Free Parliament (so
called) summoned by his Son Richard your late Protector, chosen (as was his
Fathers) by the Clergy and And this also you did contrary to your former
declared Spirit and Principle in your Speech to the Little Parliament. See Book
page 42. where you acknowledge that the whole Bulk of the People of this Nation
were not fit to choose or be chosen Rulers till the Spirit was more poured
forth, and they thereby brought to own the Interest of Jesus Christ.
spirit of the Nation, most of whom were enemies to, and opposers of the Cause
of God and his People, and what endeavors you used by writing Letters, and
sending your Emissaries and Agents to the several Buroughs and Corporations to
get your Kindred, Relations, Servants, Flatterers, and mercenaries, whether
wise men or fools, honest men or knaves to be chosen for that end, and to keep
the faithful friends of the Cause from being chosen, (another evil complained
of in the Old Parliament) and yet how the Lord blasted you in all your vain
hopes and expectations from them, and for the preservation of your selves and
the honest Interest, you were still necessitated to dissolve them you very well
know; in all which you not only dealt deceitfully, treacherously, and wickedly
with your former honest Principles, but doubtless did worse then the Old
Parliament would have done; and the great kindness you pretended to show unto
the good People in dissolving them, does not in the least excuse your great
evil in laying such a wicked Foundation as necessitated you to call such
unworthy Persons to be building upon it: And I appeal to any honest faithful,
unbyast person to judge, whether your late unbelieving, treacherous carriage,
(since the second Dissolution of the Old Parliament) in framing your new
Council of Safety (so called) mostly with those very Persons that were the
promoters and abettors of the late Apostasy, as also casting several faithful
friends of the Cause out of the City Militia, and placing in their stead such
as Alderman Tichborn, Alderman Pack, Alderman Viner, Alderman Atkins, Alderman
Foot, Alderman Chiverton, and others who have likewise bowed the knee unto, and
abetted the aforesaid wickedness, does not declare you (notwithstanding your
many late Prayers, Tears, Fastings, shows of Repentance, and also Professions
of your sincere intentions to return to own and advance the Cause of Jesus
Christ) to be still acted by the very same, if not a worse spirit then before.

Fourthly, Did the Old Parliament in their second Sitting so carry it, as if
the Interest of the People of God was grown cheap with them, and not laid to
heart, and discountenanced their business that came before them to the
discountenancing of them and countenancing the Malignant Party, and as if they
never intended good to the people of God. So did you, and worse. For you stood
by and upheld your Old Protector whilst he confirmed a former wicked
Ordinance, and therewith all those cursed, Popish, Oppressive Laws, contrary to
Scripture or Reason, for imprisoning the Lords People, taking away their goods,
and forcing trebble damages from them for non-payment of Tithes, and this out
of an unbelieving carnal design to quiet the National Clergy, and draw them to
your Interest, though known enemies to the Cause of Christ which has been, is,
and ought further to be carried on in these Nations, whereby several poor
Families of the Lords people have been almost ruined and undone; and how they
were many times discountenanced and overthrown in their business by reason of
your countenancing and abetting those corrupt Interests you very well know.

Did the Old Parliament do evilly in their late Sitting in keeping Mr. Sympson
out of Bishopsgate so long, and so unwillingly voting his readmission at last,
as also in being so negligent, and backward in doing right to Mr. Feake, in
restoring him to the Meeting House by Newgate Market, where he formerly
preached, and was placed by their Order, and afterward unrighteously turned out
by the late Apostasy. As also in voting Major General Harrison incapable of
future public employment? So did you. For after the Old and Little Parliament
were dissolved, you first turned Mr. Sympson and Mr. Feake out of those places,
and cast them into prisons for their faithfulness to the Cause of Christ, and
your forementioned honest Principles, and witnessing against your backsliding
from them, and suffered, if not ordered, Mr. Lee, Mr. Jenkins, and others who
are known enemies to the Cause to come into their places, and there continued
them, keeping the others out, till the late Sitting of the Old Parliament, who
(though long first) restored Mr. Sympson; but Mr. Peake (if there be a keeping
close to the former honest spirit, and orders thereupon) was and is
unrighteously kept out both by them and you to this very day. And how you
likewise took Maj. Genesis Harrison's Commission from him, or otherwise put him by
his Command in the Army, as also inhumanely and unworthily sent him to Prisons
and Banishment upon the same account with the former, and to this very day
endeavor all you can to keep him and other faithful friends out of Public
Employment, unless they comply with your selfish corrupt practices, and own
you, as indeed returned from your Apostasy, when it is not so, you very well
know; which with many other things of this kind that might be mentioned,
declares plainly that the interest of the people of God is grown cheap with you
and not laid to heart, and their business discountenanced to the countenance of
the Malignant Party, and that you intend good to the people of God no further
then your own interest and safety will stand therewith, and therein also are
worse then the Old Parliament.

Fifthly, Did the Old Parliament manifest their Spirit and Complexion to be
corrupt by their backwardness in proceeding to regulate the Law which was then,
and to this day is so much groaned under, as that many months together (you
say) was not sufficient to pass over one word called incumberances. So did you
and worse by many degrees. For when the forementioned honest Party of the
Little Parliament had voted a new Body or Moddel of the Law for the speedy
ending of Law Suits with little charge, as also the abolishing and taking away
the then and now corrupt oppressive Court of Chancery, wherein was depending
twenty three thousand Causes, where some had lain five, some ten, some twenty,
some thirty years and more, to the undoing of many families; and had appointed
a Committee for the bringing of Sir John Lenthal Chief Jailer of the Upper
Bench Prison, and all other corrupt persons employed in Public Trust to an
account for the evil management of their Trust, and had made some good progress
therein, to the suspending or casting the aforesaid Sir John Lenthal out of his
place, among other good things they were doing for the ease of the people, you
turned them out on purpose to hinder them from bringing what they had so voted,
and were going on to do, unto perfection. And after this illegally, and
dishonestly imprisoned and banished some of the aforesaid honest Members of the
Little Parliament, and others of the faithful friends of the Cause without any
thing laid to their charge, seeing the face of an accuser, or bringing them to
a legal Trial, which is worse then was done in the Kings days. As also sent
Alderman Chiverton then Lord Major, (now one of your Commissioners for the City
Militia) and Alderman Robbinson the then Sheriff, two reputed Malignants, with
their Malignant City Marshals the acquaintance and confederates of the late
Mall Cutpurse and her Crew, to hale others of the forementioned friends of the
Cause from their Meeting Place in Colemanstreet, when they were seeking the
Lord, and pleading for his Righteous Cause, and witnessing against your
Apostasy from it, and to cast them in prisons to make them give over, and
afterward set the then Chief Justice Glyn, one of the Eleven Members formerly
impeached by your selves of Treason, as also Alderman Tichborne, and others of
your now new Council of Safety, and Commissioners of the Militia, to try and
pass Sentence upon them, who though the Jury had cleared them, yet to satisfy
your lust, and please you, for their own advantage, they illegally laid Fines
upon viz. Cornet, Day, and John Clark.
two of them and kept them in Newgate above half a year after at great charges,
and when the judgments, and overturning dispensations of the Lord came upon
you, and took away the light of your Eyes, breath of your Nostrils, and struck
your head from off your Shoulders, and they durst keep them no longer, they
turned them out saying nothing unto them; which wicked action among other
things of this kind that might be mentioned, declares plainly That the Cause
even among your selves, (as well as among the Old Parliament) was almost in
every thing going to the ground, yea the Cause of the people of God a despised
thing with you. Likewise unrighteously decimated the Estates of the Cavaleers;
when by your carnal, unbelieveing, selfish Act of Oblivion they would not be
drawn to your Interest. As also carried it in so insolent, high, and arbitrary
a manner, that almost no Lawyer durst plead in a Cause against you, for fear of
being cast into prison; Revived, and upheld Monopolyes (so greatly complained
of in the late Kings days) not only in Merchandise and other things, but also
upon the Scriptures; so that some Bibles were not to be had without paying ten,
or eighteen pence a piece more, then they were formerly sold for: Suppressed
the printing Presses against all who wrote in vindication of that Blessed
Cause, and those good Principles you once so highly pretended to own and
assert, and against your Judas=like Treachery and Backsliding from them, and
is another evil that your selves formerly See Book called the Looking-glass,
page 19.20.
complained of in the Old Parliament. also stood by, and abetted your Kingling,
or Humble Petition and Advice Parliament; Mostly made up of Sons, Kindred,
Servants, and Sallary-men, to trappan, and like so many evening Wolves,
ravening the prey, cunningly to steal upon and take away one whole years rent
from the people for all such new houses as they had built (within ten miles
round the City of London) upon new Foundations, to the almost, if not
altogether ruin and undoing of many of them, the better to uphold your new
Court Pride, Pomp, and Luxury, which persons of a self-denying, sincere,
honest, public spirit would greatly abhor to do.

All which, with many other evil practices of yours relating to the late and
present abhord Apostasy that might be mentioned, (which I leave to the lately
dissolved Members of the Old Parliament for the lessening their evil, if
compared with yours, to make a more full discovery of) it plainly appears, that
not only in every one of those particulars which you have so charged upon them
as the reasons of their first and second Dissolution, but also then for which
you fought with, brought to Justice, and beheaded the late King, you have by
far done worse your selves, and therein overpassed the deeds of the wicked;
which treacherous dealing of yours with, wickedly departing from, Judas-like
betraying, and as it were crucifying and keeping down in the grave that blessed
Cause of Christ, his faithful people, and those good Principles you once so
greatly pretended to own, thereby standing in the way, and hindering the
faithful Friends of the Cause from going to Zion, is the chief cause of all
those losses, miseries, disappointments, and judgments which has been from
the Lord upon you and the Nation (as upon Pharaoh of old, who would not let
Israel go to Canaan) from that time to this very day, and has occasioned the
enemy both at home and abroad, as also the Carnal, Episcopal, Atheistical
Apprentices of the City of London, whom the Lord for the malignity and
opposition of their spirits to his Cause and People has so many times
disappointed and subdued as the people of his curse to misapprehend and say, it
is only because the Government by King and Bishops is taken away, (with other
blind stuff of that nature) and that it will never be well until they be
restored again; thereby casting dirt upon, and as much as in them lies, making
null and void all those wonderful and glorious Appearances, Deliverances, and
Victories which the Lord from time to time has shown and given to his People
both against them and it; as if all had been only by Chance, Fortune, or
Common Providence, or as among Papists, Turks, and Heathens, and to threaten
once more to put it to the trial whether it be not so; and how far the Lord may
make use of them as his Rod to rebuke and scourge you, and all your Cycophant
Addressors, who have sided with, abetted, and not witnessed against your
wickedness, as also the poor Nation may likewise suffer in the common calamity
for your sakes, together with their own iniquities and opposition of their
spirits to the Cause, and People of God; the Lord who will not be mocked nor
dealt treacherously withal by you, as you have mocked and dealt treacherously
with his people only knows; For how can you rationally or honestly expect any
other but that a consumption and destruction from the Almighty is determined,
and will unavoidably come upon you, unless you speedily and thoroughly repent and
return from your Apostasy. And yet too too much is it to be feared, that
notwithstanding this, as also all the wholesome advice, admonition, and
reproof, that by speaking, writing, printing, and therein line upon line, that
from time to time has in all singleness and plainness been laid before you in
order thereunto, you lay it not to heart, nor intend to act according to it no
more then the Old Parliament did the Counsel and Advice of the same nature,
which you, say you, gave to them, but are still resolved to deal treacherously
and deceitfully (as they did) with the Cause and People of God, and to go on
acting by the very same carnal, selfish spirit, and policy as before, calling
to your assistance chiefly those very Persons that were the first Contrivers,
Promoters, and Abetters of the la^e and present Apostasy, whom the Lord has
had, and doubtless yet has a controversy with, and would not, no nor without
eminent repentance will not own, nor give favor in the eyes of his faithful
People, but rather more cause them to stink in their nostrils, and are as
unwilling and backward (as a Bear to come to the stake) to call the
forementioned faithful Persons turned out of the Little Parliament, and others
of that public spirit into Power, for fear they will do their work too
thoroughly. But go on as long as you will, and be as Politic in your Shifts and
Contrivances to uphold your carnal Interests, and to keep them out as ever you
can, yet assure your selves the Lord who loves righteousness, and hates
iniquity, and every deceitful practice, and takes the wrong you have done to
them, and therein to his Cause, as if done unto himself, and has already begun
to call you to an account, and to punish you for the same, will never cease
disappointing, overturning, and sending streights upon you, till you
acknowledge your iniquity in that very thing, (and well if you escape so too)
which so far as I yet understand you have not done to this very day. And that
you may the better weigh and consider what I say herein, read the following
Scriptures. Isa. 26.11. Lord when thy hand is lifted up they will not see, but
they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people, the fire of thine
enemies shall destroy them. Also Isa. 33.1. Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou
wast not spoiled, and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously
with thee, when thou shall cease to spoil thou shall be spoiled, etc. comp.
Romans 1.31, 32. and Romans 2.3.

Think not because you are a professing people, and the Lord has so many times
appeared for you, covering your heads in the day of battle, and likewise given
you houses full of good things which you filled not, Deuteronomy. 6.11. that you shall
always have his presence and salvation with, and about you, though you commit
iniquity, and go on therein without repentance, but rather consider what he
says to Israel of old, who had sinned and back-slidden from him as you have
done. Amos 3.2. You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth,
therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities.

Oh how greatly has the blessed Name, Cause, Ways, and People of God
suffered, been reproached, set at naught, and blasphemed by your (as well as by
the late Old Parliaments) evil mannagement of the Affairs under your hand from
the first beginning of your Apostasy, or turning the honest Members left
behind in the Little Parliament out of the Power to this very day? How is the
Enemy encouraged to lift up themselves in the hopes and expectations that they
shall once more have a day to advance their Carnal, Popish, Superstitious,
wicked Interest, and to tread down the Cause and People of God under their feet?

What might not you have done by this time for the Advancement of the Cause of
God and his People not only in our own, but in other Nations, had you kept
growing up in the light, spirit, and practice of those good Principles you once
so greatly pretended to own, and had not through unbelief and a self-seeking,
self-exalting spirit so treacherously and wickedly departed from them? Yea, how
far might we have been gotten on of our journney toward Zion, had you pressed
forward according to what above nine years since you See Declar. (Heathen-like
called) August 1. 1650. by it self, or in p. 18, 19. of a Book called the
Fifth-Monarchy.
declared to the Scots; wherein you say, It is our prayer daily that those that
fear the Lord in England and Scotland may become one in the hand of the Lord,
and join together in the Advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and
throwing down and trampling upon the Seat of the Beast; why should not Scotland
as well as England rejoice to see the Horns of the Beast cut off, that we may
join together to hate the Whore, and burn her flesh with fire; as also that the
Lord was about to put on the Saitns beautiful garments, and to make them a
praise in the Earth. And likewise above six years since to the Little
Parliament, page 43, 44, of the forementioned Book, that you thought something
was as the door, that you were at the threshold, and therefore it became you
and them to life up your heads, and to encourage your selves in the Lord;
looking upon your selves to be either the Stone it self, or at least to have
had somewhat of the spirit of it, and that your Call of the Little Parliament
was a fruit and an effect of the Stones smiting; saying, That some of you
thought it your duty to endeavor that way, not vainly looking on that
Prophecy, Dan. 2.44. and the Kingdom shall not be delivered to another people,
and that it was set upon your hearts, and upon all the faithful in the Land,
it may be it was not your duty to deliver it over to any other people, and that
that Scripture might then be fulfilling unto you. Also that we were at the edge
of the Promises and Prophesies, and did think that God was bringing the Jews
home to their station, from the Isles of the Sea, as once he led Israel through
the Red Sea; And although there were neither Promise for this or Prophecy, we
should be coveting after the best things, and therefore if you were to choose
the meanest Officer in the Army, or Commonwealth, you would choose a godly man
that had Principles, especially where trust is to be committed, for you knew
where to have a man of Principles, and wished that all our Magistrates were so
chosen, etc. Wherein you speak as highly for the Work, Kingdom, and Interest of
Christ, as can almost be spoken by any in this, or indeed in any other day on
this side the eminent fulfilling of the Promises and Prophesies relating
thereunto.

Now what great things might have been done toward the Calling home of the
Jews? Also what a glorious Presence and Salvation from the Lord might we have
had upon and about us, to the amazement, terror, and silencing of the Enemy
both at home and abroad, according to Psalm. 48. so as they would not have dared
to lift up their heads, or have wagged their tongues against us as now they do.
Yea, how many poor creatures might, according to Esther 8.17. and Zech. 8.22,
23. have been won over to own and love the Cause and Interest of Christ, that
now are either turned Atheists, or else remain in the hardness, wickedness, and
opposition of their hearts and spirits thereunto, had you not declined, but, as
was said before, kept growing up in your then light, as also in the frame of
your spirits and actions toward that perfection that shall be in the Lords
faithful People, when the Righteousness of Zion shall go forth as brightness,
and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burns, and he make Jerusalem a
praise in the Earth, Isa. 62.1, 6, 7. which is our duty not only to be praying
for, but pressing after, as well as after that perfection of light and holiness
in the inward man that shall be in that day, or at the Resurrection of the dead
Saints, when our Lord Jesus Christ shall come, and all the Saints with him,
Zech. 4.5. comp. 1 Cor. 15.23. Rev. 20.4. and how we were growing up into this
Righteousness, and the People according to Hosea 14.7. began to return from
their oppression, revive as the corn, and grow as the vine, and this glorious
Presence and Salvation was dawning and breaking in upon us, when the honest
spirit (which you have so rejected) was encouraged and acting in the Authority
of this Nation, as has been already mentioned, you very well know. But our too
sad experience tells us, that the Lord has now cause rather to complain and
say, according to Isa. 1.4.21, 22, 23. Ah sinful Nation, a people laden with
iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters, they have
forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel. How is the
faithful City become an Harlot, it was full of judgment, righteousness lodged
in it, but now murderers. Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with
water, thy Princes are rebellious and companions of thieves; every one loves
gifts, and follows after rewards, they judge not the fatherless, neither does
the cause of the widow come unto them; and upon this account we have cause to
lament and complain, according to Lam. 2.15, 16. All our enemies have opened
their months against us, they hiss and gnash their teeth, they say we have
swallowed them up, certainly this is the day that we looked for, we have found
we have seen it, comp. with Job Chap. 29. and Chap. 30. and this is the very
state and condition that the Cause and people of God, and the Nation, which had
once a beauty and glory upon them, is brought into at this day by reason of
your Apostasy.

Now in regard it is thus with you and the poor Nation (for your sakes) as it
is, and things are under so ill sense abroad (to use your own words to the Old
Parliament) and the issue like to be the further displeasure and judgments of
the Lord against you, the dissatisfaction and sadning the hearts of his
faithful people, and putting all things into greater Confusion, if you continue
to steer your course as formerly; which so far as I can yet see, or hear, you
are resolved to do, though the Cause, Your selves, and the Nation perish: and
although you therein so carry it as to give the Lord and his Faithful People
just cause to say of you, as of Ephraim of old, Hosea 4.17. The Army is joined
to Idols, let them alone. Yet considering on the other hand, that he likewise
calls to such a backsliding people as you are, to return unto him: and upon
their return, has graciously promised he will heal their backsliding, and
love them freely, Jer. 3.22. comp. Hos. 14.4. And not knowing though you have
gone on so long in the hardness of your hearts, but he may yet pour out a
spirit of grace and supplication upon you, and give you to look upon his Cause
and Faithful Remnant whom you have so rejected, and as it were Pierced and
Crucified, and to mourn, and be in bitterness for the same, as one is in
bitterness for his firstborn: as also to return to the real practice of your
forementioned honest Principles, it being better with you then then now; and to
cause Judgment so visibly to return unto Righteousness, as that all the
upright in heart may follow it, and be encouraged to venture their Lives with
you as formerly, against the Common Enemy, which as things now stand they
cannot but be very unwilling to do. And likewise having, though I have so
searched to the quick and spoken plainly, a desire to be merciful, as my
heavenly Father is merciful; and to be instrumental, so far as he shall assist,
to pluck you out of this deep ditch you have plunged your selves into; and that
whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear, you may be left without
excuse. As also that I may discharge my love and duty toward the Blessed Cause
of Christ, the Saints, and the Land of my Nativity, I shall in all sincerity
and faithfulness lay before you, what according to my present Light and
Understanding, will (if any thing) recover the forementioned Cause, the Saints,
Your selves, and this almost ruined Nation out of that sad and perishing
condition that by reason of your Apostasy and treacherous dealing with your
former honest principles they are brought into, and will engage the
forementioned Glorious Presence and Salvation of the Lord to be with, and about
us, as in former days; in order to which, though in and of my self I am very
unworthy and unable to advise in a business of so high and weighty a
concernment as this is: I counsel and propose as follows.

First, endeavor to be humbled for, repent of, and to turn from every
particular personal sin and iniquity that you have been in the committing of,
for if you, or I, or any other regard iniquity in our hearts, or wilfully live
in the practice of any known sin, the Lord will not hear our prayers, nor
accept of any thing we do for him wherein his Name and Glory is concerned,
Psalm. 66.18. Prove. 15.8, 9. Isa. 1.11. to 20. Therefore if there be any such
thing as false musters, or Dead pay, or wherein soever wrong has been done, or
sin committed, do so no more; As also restore back to those of whom you have
bought Debenters at cheap rates, somewhat proportionable to your great gains
thereby, if they be living; and if dead, then to the Widows, Children, or
Kindred related to them that are left behind them: As also to be sure to
promise nothing to any for the future either of a public or private nature,
but what is in the power of your hand to do, and have a real intention thoroughly
and speedily to perform, and herein be growing up into that holy frame
mentioned Zeph. 3.13. The Remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak
lies, neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouths, etc. And what
I say to you in this particular, I say to my self, and to all others fearing
the Lord; for the People whom the Lord will delight to use in his Work, must be
a sincere, upright, self-denying, holy people, therefore let us not hide our
iniquities, but rather say to the Lord according to Job 34.32. That which I see
not teach thou me, if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

Secondly, Be also humbled for, repent of suppress, and put away for the time
to come, All the Pride of Apparel, etc. Luxury, Gaming, and whatever else is
sinful, and of an evil report that is committed in your Families, by your
selves, Wives, Children, Servants, and Relations, according to Job 11.13, 14.
comp. with Chap. 22.23. If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hand
toward him, if iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away, and let not
wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles, etc. And endeavor all you can for the
future to get such as fear the Lord to attend upon you; for it is not only
your duty, but declared Principle to the Little Parliament so to do. See page
43. of the forementioned Book; Let not their failings, infirmities, and too
many times neglect of duty, hinder you from doing yours, if you can get them;
there is little good to be expected from you whoever you are, though your
knowledge and profession be never so high, whilst you are careless and slight
in this particular.

Thirdly. Be also deeply humbled for, and repent of your forementioned great
Apostasy from, rejecting of, and treacherous dealing with the Cause of Jesus
Christ, and your forementioned honest Principles, and all your persecuting,
Imprisoning, and Banishing of your Brethren for their faithfulness thereunto,
and for all other your great evils and miscarriages therein committed, whereby
the Name of the Lord and the Profession of the Gospel has been, and is so much
reproached and dishonored, and his Blessed Cause and Work so greatly stopped
and hindered, The hearts of his faithful people grieved, and has brought so
much poverty and misery upon this Nation, and return in the sincerity and
uprightness of your hearts to revive and promote the aforesaid Blessed Cause,
and those good Principles from whence you have so greatly departed, and resolve
in the strength of the Lord to return no more to folly. And that this your
repentance and through returning may so appear to all the faithful Friends of
the Cause, as to put them past all doubts and fears of your deceiving them any
more for the time to come.

First, Cast off the Counsel of St. John's, Lisle, Whitlock, Philip Nigh, Tho.
Goodwin, Dean Owen, (so called) (and all other the like Incendaries) the Heads
of the corrupt Lawyers and Clergy, unless you find they have really and
thoroughly repented of their great evil in being so instrumental to help turn,
(and keep) your then General and you aside into these crooked paths after the
first Dissolution of the Old, and choice, and turning out of the Little
Parliament; as also see them singly and sincerely pressing you to come up to
the practice of your former Declarations, and to the owning of that spirit,
those principles and persons which you once so greatly seemed to own, but
afterward through the enmity of your spirits, and their wicked Counsel and
Advice as greatly and wickedly rejected. For if they remain as they were, Owen,
etc. according to Lam. 2.14. Are the Prophets that have seen vain and foolish
things for you, and have not discovered your iniquity to turn away the
judgments that are fallen upon you, but have and do see for you false burdens
and causes of banishment.

Secondly, Send by way of entreaty (it being your duty so to do,) according to
Matthew. 5.24.25.) having so greatly wronged them) for those faithful persons
whom you have so rejected and turned out of the Little Parliament, whose
Garments have not since been defiled with the late, and present Apostasy, or if
they have, are known to have thoroughly repented of the same, with others of
that public spirit to come unto you, who if any in the Nation, yea, I may say
in the world will (the Lord assisting) bring forth the good things promised,
and have been so long expected for the good of the Nation. And when you have so
done.

Thirdly, Acknowledge your great sin and iniquity to them. First for rejecting
and casting them out of your hearts, and afterward out of that Little
Parliament, on purpose to hinder them from doing that good for the people,
which you pretendedly dissolved the Old Parliament for not doing of, and called
them to do; which were no other then what you will find the true friends of
the Cause, will neither give you, nor any other that for the future may come
into the Government of the Nation rest, do what you can to uphold your own and
other carnal Interests, in opposition thereunto, yea the Lord no rest till they
do obtain; And when you have in the singleness of your hearts, thus
acknowledged your iniquity to them and desired mercy for the same, (as Genesis
50.16. to 20. Joseph's Brethren did to him.) I hope they will have so much both
of the spirit of the Father of the Prodigal, though brought to your Husks, and
of the spirit of Joseph to his Brethren, as to be willing to go forth in their
spirits to meet this in you, and weepingly to joy and rejoice over you, as also
to pardon and pass by all the wrongs and injuries, that you have done unto
them, and therein to the Cause of God and his people. But if this be not in
your hearts to do, they must remain where they are, keeping the same distance
from you as before, lest they go before they are sent, and so come off with
loss and disappointments in their own spirits as to you, as my self and others
have done since you so deceivingly Declared that you were now as ever equally
endeared to the good Old Cause, etc. when it was not so.

Fourthly, With the Advice and Consent of the faithful friends of the Cause
both in City and Country (it being usurpation in you and acting arbitrarily to
do any thing without them) Deliver up (with limitations not to impose upon the
consciences of any in matters of Faith and Worship, and in all things else that
are against the safety of the Whole) the Power, Authority, and Government of
the Nation into their hands; for (by what has been said both by you, my self,
and others in this and other Papers, and keeping close to the spirit of them)
under Christ their right it is, and take heed of mixing them as in the time of
their first Sitting with persons of a contrary spirit and principle, on purpose
to hinder them from doing the good they are called to do, and thereby
designedly and wickedly give your selves a second feigned necessity of turning
them out and setting up another Single Person, or Protector upon their ruins
as you did before, but rather encourage and strengthen them all you can in the
bringing forth this good, and suppressing the evil; for that it is only the
bringing forth of righteousness, and breaking off all yokes of oppression, that
will save and exalt this sinking Nation, Prove. 14.34. Isa. 1.17. to 20.

5. These persons thus called together, having more light, faith, and communion
with God then formerly they had, in the work of the latter days, and that they
are called unto, as I conceive they have, and laying Jesus Christ the
Foundation on which they intend to Build; as also consulting with and managing
all their Affairs according to the Scriptures, as is their judgment founded
upon the same, Deuteronomy. 17, 18, 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7, 8. 2 Timothy 3.16. and not
only theirs, but of most of the Friends of the Cause, as also assented to by
your selves, and all the Great Lawyers, and all others present at the Sir
Thomas Widdrington having presented your Protector with a Robe, afterward
delivered him a Bible, and among other expressions said, It is a Book of Books,
and besides other things it conteins in it both Precepts and Examples for good
Government. Alexander so highly valued the Books of his Master Aristotle, and
other great Princes other Books, that they have laid them every night under
their Pillows; these are all but Legends and Romances to this one Book, a Book
to be had always in remembrance; I find it said in part of this Book which I
shall desire to read, and it is this, Deuteronomy 17.18, 19, 20. And it shall be when
he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write a Copy of this
Law in a Book out of that which is before the Priestt, and Levites, and it
shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he
may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of this Law, and
those statutes to do them, that his heart be not lifted up above his Brothren,
and that he turn not aside from the Commandment to the right hand or to the
left, to the end he may prolong his days in his Kingdom, he and his Children
in the midst of Israel. In which words you acknowledge that the Scriptures
ought to be the foundation of both the Government and Laws of this Nation,
which, though after this, you decline from, and therein add Apostasy to
Apostasy, yet do justify all others that shall go on therein, and proceed
according to Scripture Quualifications for the choice of Rulers, according to
Exodus 18.21. Hosea 11.12.
Speech made by Sir Thomas Widdrington then Speaker of your Petition and Advice
Parliament, at the second Inauguration of your late General in the Protectorall
Government) is the duty of all Gods Magistrates to do, Having also the
concernments and welfare of the Nation upon their hearts more then their own,
will I hope whilst they are Sitting, carry it so self-denyingly, graciously,
and uprightly, and with such tenderness toward all fearing the Lord, esteeming
none because of this or that judgment, further then their sincerity and
faithfulness to the Cause and Interest of Christ appears; and will endeavor to
do all things both at home and in other Nations so for the honor of him who is
their and our Judge, King, and Lawgiver, as also your own and the Nations real
good; and likewise with the approbation and consent of the faithful Friends of
the Cause, to carefully provide for the future well Government of the Nation by
the hands of other faithful Persons against they rise, as you will have no
occasion (if your hearts be sincere and upright with God indeed, and have grace
to deny your selves) to maintain any enmity in your spirits toward them, so as
to despise, reject, and turn them out as you did before, but will rather
encourage, rejoice in, and bless God for them. And whatsoever your politic
shifts and devices may be to avoid it, hither you must come at last; for
without this be done, let the foundation you lay as to future Governments, and
the Persons you call to build thereon in the outward appearance be never so
pure, or so much for Christ, yet it is (and you will find it so) but a false
Conception, a Bed too short, a Covering too narrow, a Plaster, that though it
may skin over, will not thoroughly heal the wound that your Apostasy and
treacherous dealing with your Principles has made upon you; for the first,
foremenoned, Cause of the Lords displeasure against you must be taken away, or
else no sound cure can be expected; (neither indeed would such as are faithful,
had they a true understanding of things, and did seriously weigh and consider
what has been already, and might further be said in this business, dare to
come in and assist you till this work were done, for fear lest the House that
in the simplicity of their hearts they would be building, should fall upon
their heads); and the Lords thus dealing with you is no other then according to
the usual method he goes in in matters of this nature, Prove. 28.13. He that
covers his sin shall not prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes his
sin shall have mercy. Remember what became of Cain who retained his wicked
spirit after he slew his Brother Abel, Genesis 4. to verse 14. Of the Ongregation
of Israel, who out of such a spirit as you are acted by, would have stoned
Caleb and Joshua for opposing their going back into Egypt, and pressing them to
go on the Canaan, Numb. 14.23.32.43. Of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and the two
hundred and fifty famous renowned Princes of the Congregation, and the people
joining with them in opposing the spirit of the Lord in Moses and Aaron upon
the account with the former, and how all these remaining in the wickedness of
their spirits, in opposition to the spirit of the work of the Lord in his
little Remnant in that day must not prosper, but their Carcasses fall in the
wilderness, dye of the Plague, fall before their enemy; the ground open and
swallow Korah and his company up alive. Numbers 16.2.31, 32. Joseph's Brethren,
who out of the wickedness and enmity of their spirits toward him, cunningly
endeavored all they could to make him away, and sold him into Egypt, must lay
aside their enmity, and own and acknowledge their iniquity therein to him, and
beg pardon for the same, or else no peace or prosperity for them could be
expected, Genesis 50.17. to 21. Ephraim and Israel having committed whoredom,
Begot strange Children, Revolted from, and Dealt treacherously against the Lord
as you have done, and the Lord having rebuked them and threatened that they
should fall in their iniquity, and that he would be as a moth and rottenness to
them, as he has hitherto been to you, yet they went on, and the Text says,
would not frame their doings to turn unto their God, because the spirit of
whoredoms was in the midst of them, as it is with you; but instead of returning
to the Lord in a right manner, as to the very thing wherein they had displeased
him. It is said, When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound, then
went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb, as you have done to the
Lawyers, National Clergy, Cardinal Mazarine, and other corrupt Interests in the
Nation; and it is to be feared, that to please, and keep the rude multitude
quiet, that so you may go on in your way, or to draw trade to the City, you
suffer wicked Stage Plays which were once suppressed to be in use again; if a
right spirit of Magistracy were among you, these things would not date to show
themselves; but these practices will not cure you of your wound no more then
King Jareb and the Assyrian cured them. For I will be unto Ephraim as a lion,
and as a young lion to the House of Judah, even I will tear and go away, I will
take away and none shall rescue him; I will go and return to my place till they
acknowledge their offense, and seek my face, in their affliction they will seek
me early, Hosea 5. These with many other Scriptures of this nature does witness
the truth of what has been asserted, wherefore it concerns you to consider,
and to look about you.

Sixthly, And if yet the Lord shall so far love, own, and honor you as to
change your spirits, and cause you willingly to stoop to this; then their, and
your next work, (and oh that it were so now) is to endeavor all you can,
according to your former declared principles, (denying your selves in your
kindred and relations) if not rightly qualified) to let no man pass into any
command or place of trust in the Army, Navy, or Commonwealth, but faithful
persons, fearing God, and of approved integrity, and have love to all the
Saints; that so wickedness may be suppressed, and punished, righteousness
encouraged, and the Lord engaged to be present with, bless, and prosper you in
all your future undertakings for the preservation and advancement of his Cause
and people as in former days. Your thus maintaining purity, love, and unity
between persons both in the Civil and Military Power, and being as it were of
one heart and soul upon the account of righteousness, and in a spirit of
self-denial, meekness and zeal growing up together in every day and generation
in the light, spirit and things relating to the Cause and Work of Christ in the
world, toward the forementioned perfection that shall be in the Saints in the
latter days, according to Micah 4.2. Isa. 32.1, 2. will so revive the Cause
and encourage the former honest lively spirit that seemed to be among you, and
through grace is yet alive in a Little Remnant ( or else we had been as Sodom)
as will not only cause the Lord to be in the midst of us, but also to rejoice
over us with joy, and singing, and to rest in his love, as he will more
eminently do over his faithful people in the latter days, Zeph. 3.17. and
cause our terror upon our enemies to be greater then ever it was before; and
surely honest men may think it is high time for you who have power in your
hands, and profess to be Saints, and to be now as ever equally endeared to the
good Old Cause, thoroughly to deny your selves, and not suffer the Cause, and
the Nation to be lost and ruined for want of a little honesty; but rather to be
doing what you possibly can do to bring things into the posture that has been
laid before you, for that it so plainly appears both by the Scriptures and the
late Revolutions and outgoings of the Lord in the midst of us, together with
the present fearfulness that has possessed you, and according to Isa. 33.14.
shall more eminently fall upon the Sinners and Hypocrites that pretend to be of
Zion in the latter days; there is nothing less then your hearkening unto and
following the forementioned counsel that has been given you, will save you and
the Nation from the further ruin and destruction that is coming upon you.

And for your encouragement that the Lord will receive you graciously, and pass
by all that you have done against him in case it be in the purpose of your
hearts in reality thus to come unto him; consider that he styles himself, The
Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgression, and sin, and will by no means clear the guilty, etc. Exodus 34.6,
7. Also the case of the Prodigal who went from his Father, and came not again
till all was spent, and he brought to eat husks, and so must return or perish,
as soon as ever it was in his heart (and accordingly did so) to arise and go to
his Father, and acknowledge his sin unto him, the Text says, Luke 15.20. But
when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him and had compassion, and run
and fell on his neck and kissed him, and instead of upbraiding and punishing
him, commands the best Robe be put on him, a gold Ring on his hand, and shoes
on his feet, as also the fatted Calf to be killed to eat, drink, and be merry;
and if you return as he did, I hope you will find no elder Brethren to repine
at it. And so David Psalm. 32.3, 4, 5, 6. Says he, When I kept silence my bones
waxed old through my roaring all the day long, for day and night thy hand was
heavy upon me, my moisture was turned into the drought of summer: I
acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. Now this is
that I mind, says he, I said I will confess my transgression unto the Lord,
and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin; for this shall every one that is
godly pray unto thee in a time when thou may be found.

When Joseph's Brethren acknowledged the evil they did unto him, and begged
pardon for the same, instead of being revenged upon them, it is said, And
Joseph wept when they spoke unto him, and said, Fear you not, I will nourish
you and your little ones, and he comforted them, and spoke kindly to them,
Genesis 50.17, 21. Now if there be so much pity and compassion in men to those
that trespass against them, there is so in the Lord much more. Also Jer. 3.22.
and Hosea 14 4.5, 6, 7. I will heal their backslidings, I will love them
freely, for mine anger is turned away from him; I will be as the dew unto
Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly, his Branches shall spread, and his beauty
shall be as the Olive Tree, and his smell as Lebanon; They that dwell under his
shadow shall return, revive as the corn, and grow as the vine, etc. These
among other Scriptures shows the readiness that is in the Lord to forgive the
iniquities of, and to be gracious to a repenting, returning, and backsliding
people, and oh that this goodness of his might powerfully and kindly work upon
your hearts to acknowledge your iniquity, deny your self-interests, and to
return unto him.

But if notwithstanding all that I have said (I trust) in faithfulness to the
Lord and you, you shall yet continue to go on in the hardness, wichedness, and
slavish fearfulness of your hearts and spirits, and through the advice and
persuasion of Philip Nigh, Tho. Goodwin, Dean Owen, (so called) and the
forementioned Ineendiaries upon carnal politic considerations, be still
upholding carnal Interests, and the Old, Corrupt Oppressive Customs and
Practices relating either to Magistracy or Ministry that has no warrant in
Scripture, which has brought all the divisions, confusion, and miseries upon
the Nation, and the better to carry on this your wicked design shall continue
in your rejecting the true spirit of your forementioned honest Principles in
those faithful Persons turned out of the Little Parliament, and in others with
them, who (as was said before) are spirited, and principled, if any, to bring
forth good to the Nation; and shall rather proceed to moddel your future
Councels with Malignants, Neuters, Presbyters, or unconverted Apostate
Protectorians, such as Tichbern, Lawrence, Strickland, Whitleck, Clark, and
others of that spirit, be it known unto you, you are Apostates still, though
the form you come under in the outward appearance be never so specious, and the
Protestations and Declarations you make and set forth be never so glorious and
taking upon the people; and the faithful Friends of the Cause, if they intend
to retain their former integrity and faithfulness both to the Lord, and it,
cannot, dare not own or touch with you, but according to Numb. 16.21.26. must
separate and stand at a distance from you as before, lest they be consumed in
all your sins. And although by your more refined Machevilian Devices, and the
many Professors, yea Pastors and Members of Churches you may gain thereby to
your Interest, as also by the strength of your Armies and Navies, you may think
to bear up, and to stout it out a little longer against the Lord, his Cause,
and his faithful Remnant, and the very spirit of your former honest Principles,
yet know that when you have done all you possibly can do to uphold your selves
therein, the spirit of the Lord in his forementioned faithful Remnant, as it
has already begun to do, will according to Isa. 28.17. further overflow, and
look into your hidling place, and see your sin as if written in your foreheads,
and to have a lie in your right hand, and so will go on to abhor and blow upon
you, and by degrees will bring you down, as your old and late Protectors with
their Parliaments, and the late Old Parliament, and so shall you become as a
shameful spewing, a byword, and a reproach not only in our own, but the
Nations round about us. If God be God, as surely he is, and Righteousness be
Righteousness, and the Scriptures are the dictates of his Blessed Spirit, and
he ever had a glorious Cause on foot in England, leading us out of Babylonish
and Antichristian Bondage toward that glorious freedom and liberty that the
Saints who have the first fruits of the Spirit, and the whole creation groans,
travelleth in pain for, and waits to be delivered into, and shall eminently be
when Zion shall fully be delivered, Antichrist destroyed, the Jews called, and
our Lord Jesus Christ and his Saints, according to Isa. 32.1, 2. shall Reign
and Rule in Righteousness in the world, all which, as is mentioned in page 2.
of this Book shall certainly be fulfilled in the latter days; it must be so,
unless the Lord be more merciful to you then ordinarily he is to others that
have sinned against, and back-slidden from him as you have done, which you have
no reason to expect, he being so much concerned for the recovery of his Name
and Glory to do some eminent remarkable thing against such a perfidious,
hypocritically, Apostate professing Generation as you have been and are, that
thereby he not only may keep the feet of his faithful witness-bearing people
from slipping, and encourage them to fear and trust in him for the future, but
that also all others may hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly.

And that the Common Enemy may not have the least encouragement from what I
have said to believe that now all shall be their own, and that the Lords lifted
up hand against you is in order thereunto. I further declare my present
apprehensions are, that although the Lord may make use of them as his Rod to
rebuke and scourge you not only for not bringing forth that good, but also
contrary to your Declarations doing worse things your selves, then for which
you sought with, and beheaded their King, as also cast out and banished his
Posterity; yet the Lord has a people in this Nation whom he hitherto has
kept; and I trust will keep faithful to the end to his Blessed Cause and those
good Principles you have so treacherously departed from, whom he will by his
Almighty Power and Providence so preserve out of their hands, that they shall
never be able to overcome or have their wills upon them, but they shall go on
in the power of his Spirit, (Isa. 59 19. and Mal. 4.2, 3.) with life, power,
and an undaunted spirit in that blessed Work and Cause that for some years
together has with such wonderful success been carried on against them. Neither
do I see in the midst of all the confusions, distractions, fears, and straits
you are encompassed with, the least ground to believe that the Lord will cast
away the Cause and Interest of his Son, to make way for a carnal Man, and that
wicked Generation whom he has so many times subdued as the people of his Curse
to bear Rule in this Nation, and therein send us back to Egypt or Babylon any
more, but rather is thereby removing that which stands in the way, and hinders
his faithful people from going to Zion. Wherefore if the Lord has so punished
you a professing People, who in the outward show may be said to be the green
tree, and caused you thus to fall before the spirit of his Cause and faithful
people; and so to disappoint and bring to naught all that you contrive and act
against them; then how shall they who are a wicked Generation, who should they
prosper would set up wickedness by a Law, and may truly be termed the dry tree,
be able to prevail against them? And if you who by your profession are called a
righteous people, scarcely be saved, where shall they who may be said to be the
ungodly and sinners appear; The present dispensations that are upon you, gives
not the least ground to believe that they shall bear rule any more; therefore
let them set their hearts at rest; Surely the Lord would never give his people
that light, faith, and communion with himself, and such tastes of sweetness in
their spirits in that Communion in the discovery ( Isa. 33.17, 18.) of the
glory that according to the Promises and Prophesies is to be revealed in the
latter days, and so much love to his Cause and Work that has been formerly,
and is yet on foot, though not so visible as once it was, leading thereunto,
and so owned their Testimony against you, in bringing you down for opposing of
them, or shown us all these things as the wife of Manoah said to him, Judges
13.23. if he intended to cast them away, or deliver them up either into your or
the common enemies hand. Would the Lord who styles himself a faithful promise,
Covenant keeping God, and that cannot lie, ever bid his people, Isa. 62.6, 7.
not to keep silence and give him no rest till he establish and make Jerusalem a
praise in the earth, if he did not really intend to do so? or have begun to put
on the Saints Beautiful Garments, and to make them a praise in the earth, not
for their righteousness or Goodness, but for his own Names sake; As also
plagued Israel of Old for not pressing forward, but endeavoring to go back to
Egypt, and will not he who has a fullness of the spirit, and love to his work,
and all power in his hand to do it, and has already laid the Foundation of
Zions welfare, carry it on and lay the top-stone also? Surely he will; And the
Rage and Tumults of the Carnal Apprentices and others at this day, for the
bringing in Charles Stuart, and saying, They will lose their lives every one of
them, rather then they will have such men to Rule as will take away the corrupt
Customs and Practices that are among them, is an eminent hint to me, that the
very Day of the setting Christ and his Saints upon his holy Hill of Zion is at
hand, yea so upon us, that none can put it off; and being so fully satisfied in
my Spirit it is so, I shall conclude with the following Scriptures. Esther
6.13. And Zeresh Hamans wife, and his wisemen, said unto him, If Mordecai be
of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not
prevail against him, but shall surely fall before him. Psalm. 2. Why do the
Heathen rage, and the People imagine a vain thing. The Kings of the Earth set
themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against
his Anointed, saying, Let us break their Bonds assunder, etc.

THE END.

