Sir Joseph Cop^ley Ba^^
woodcut, coat of arms

Without holiness no man shall see the lord Heb: 12:14
Sold by R: Sollers at ye kings Arms and Bible in St Paul's C yard

F. H. Van Houe. Sculp
woodcut frontispiece

THE BEAUTY OF HOLINESS.

WRITTEN By the Author of the Whole Duty of MAN, etc.

To which is Added HOLY DEUOLIONS UPON Several Occasions, Fitted to the Main
Uses of A Christian Life.

1. Chron. 16.29. Worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness.

Heb. 12.14. Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord

The Fourth Impression.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Crayle at the Lamb in Fleetstreet, next
White-Fryers-Gate. 1684.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Nature of Holiness. page 7. CHAP. II. Of the Rule of Holiness.
11 CHAP. III. Motives and inducements to the practice of Holiness. 48 Sect. 1.
The noble pattern of Holiness. 49 Sect. 2. Holiness the condition of future
happiness. 74 Sect. 3. Holiness the only safe way to escape the wrath to come.
82 Sect. 4. Holiness the main design of the Gospel, and the end of all Christ's
sufferings. 87 Sect. 5. Holiness the most proper and effectual means for
obtaining length of days. 91 Sect. 6. Holiness that which makes men honorable;
Vice rendering men mean and ignoble. 96 Sect. 7. Holiness attended with the
most solid and real Pleasures. 106 Sect. 8. Holiness accompanied with peace.
114 Sect. 9. Holiness the best evidence of true Wisdom and real Worth and
Courage. 119 Sect. 10. Holiness universally profitable, and above all things
most advantageous. 124
CHAP. IV. Frivolous Cavils and Objections removed. 142
THE INTRODUCTION.
MAN in his original condition, when he first came out of the hands of his
Maker, was a very noble and venerable Creature, adorned with many peculiar
excellencies; and as the Psalmist observes, Only made a little lower than
glorious Angels: But of all his perfections, Holiness, as it was the principal
and most oriental, so did it also give a beauty and luster to the rest; It made
his Authority and Power lovely and desirable, his Wisdom and Knowledge
venerable, and every other attribute, which without this is terrible and
dreadful, to be comely and praiseworthy. This was that single perfection that
raised Man above the beasts that perish, and made him Heavens great favorite
and darling; which if it had been carefully preserved, had undoubtedly secured
our first Parents in Paradise, and prevented that dreadful calamity that has
seized upon their Posterity.

But alas! how are we fallen from Heaven to Earth? from a Paradise of pure
pleasures, to a miserable and painful Prison? We have lost that divine Image
that was impressed upon Man in his primitive state, which indeed completed,
and alone preserved its beauty and comeliness; and with it have also lost every
thing that did then contribute to make us happy; and are now become vile and
abominable, and as miserable as we were formerly happy.

How much a serious view of that primitive felicity Man in his innocent state
enjoyed, would contribute to plant in us a holy life, I know not: but I am sure
it could not but mightily inhaunce the value of Holiness, and make it lovely
and desirable. That man that reflects upon the dismal miseries he is exposed to
in this lapsed estate, to what an infinite number of inexpressible evils, of
insupportable pains he lies upon; how he is hurried from a state of perfect
bliss, to a woeful hell of extreme torments: How exceedingly amazing is this?
The very Poet could say, Miserum est suisse heatum.

But, God knows, this is out very seldom (and if ever, but faintly) reflected
upon: we are (to our sharow) become contented slaves, and satisfied to bear
Fetters and Chains; we continually live in the midst of all evil, never enjoy a
moments solace or comfort: notwithstanding of which, like madmen we are
content with our state, and like the Sow take pleasure to puddle in the mire.

And although that same diffusive and boundless goodness that first breathed in
us the breath of life, and framed us in his own likeness and image, again
pitied us in our low estate, and provided the most valuable and Sovereign
remedy to recover us from this mortal disease; though he has procured a
complete Ransom to liberate us from the insupportable slavery and tyranny of
sin; has offered to restore our former beauty, to repossess us of that
happiness we had lost, and to make us again Favorites and Freemen; yet how
insolently have we rejected this kind offer? how impiously have we cut those
cords of love asunder, and refuse to be healed?

It Is, indeed, matter of great sadness to consider the lofty and intolerable
affronts that are now cast upon Holiness; how men are arrived at that pitch of
impiety, to scorn and deride Religion, which former ages were at some pains to
advance; as if Holiness were inconsistent with the principles of Generosity,
and only becoming mean and morose spirits.

How transcendent a folly and madness this is, will easily appear by what I
shall afterward lay down. Methinks the naked representation of Holiness,
should be motive enough (if not to court it, yet) to engage men to correct
their unreasonable prejudices they entertain against it; and even force its
greatest Antagonists to become its Advocates. But alas! vice has cast such a
dark shadow upon men's Judgments, that they are become as unfit Judges of its
beauty, as blind men are of colors; otherwise we might yet expect to see
contemned Virtue much more in vogue than ever Vice was.

To excite our desires, Scripture has represented it under the most comely
dress, has discovered its beauty and excellency, and recommended it by the
most endearing motives which are apt to work both upon our hope and fear: Upon
our hope, by proposing an infinitely valuable reward to the righteous, besides
the present advantages that attend it. Upon our fear, by opening to our view
the powers of the world to come, and discovering the insupportable misery that
the damned suffer day and night; so that if men would but so far actuate their
Reason, as soberly to consult their own interest and happiness, I doubt not but
this alone should be motive enough to excite them to the practice of Holiness,
and scare them from those ways of sin that lead down to the chambers of death.

It would make (one would think) the greatest Sensualist to relinquish the
momentary pleasures he enjoys here, to be possessed of those eternal joys that
the pure in spirit shall reap in the Kingdom of their Father: and the most
hardened and impregnable sinner tremble, to think of dwelling with devouring
flames.

Now the only infallible way to attain those celestial felicities, and to
evite the miserable consequences of vice, and those pains and tortures that it
exposes its votaries to, is to abandon every lust, be it never so impetuous,
and to cleanse our selves (as the Apostle advises us) from all filthiness of
the flesh and spirit, and to perfect holiness in the fear of God.

For the better directing our present inquisition, I shall first briefly
represent the nature of true Holiness, and show the beauty and excellency of
it. Secondly, I shall discourse of its rule, and more parricularly discover the
several branches of Holiness. Thirdly, I shall propound several motives and
inducements to engage blen to the practice of Holiness; and indeed, this is
what I chiefly intend to insist upon. Fourthly, I shall remove all those Cavils
and Objections that are urged against Holiness. And Lastly, conclude with some
short Reflections and Inferences.

CHAP. I. Of the nature of Holiness.
I Intend not here to descend to the consideration of every particular branch
of Holiness, but to discourse of it in the general, as it is the combination of
all Christian virtues: and as it is thus considered, I need not, I think, in
the description of it, accurately study all those Logical rules Philosophers
require in a good definition. For may part, it fully enough satisfies me to
know, that holiness is a conformity to the Divine Law, and a hearty and sincere
compliance with those original dictates of humane nature, and the Commands
revealed in sacred Writ.

So long as Man remained obedient to the Laws of his Maker, his holiness was
untainted, and his Beauty and primitive congenite comeliness continued; but by
his woeful apostasy he lost that noble embellishment of his nature, which did
indeed give a grace to all his other accomplishments, and is now become ugly
and deformed Holiness and purity of Spirit are different words, but of the same
signification, and are promiscuously used in Scripture to express the same
thing. Opposite to which are Sin and Uncleanness: Sin being that which
contaminates the Soul, and robs it of that beauty which formerly did of right
belong to it.

Although it is not one particular good action that denominates a man holy; yet
every wilful aberration from, and transgression of the Law, constitutes man a
sinner, and makes him liable to the demerit of the offense. Whosoever theresore
intends to perfect holiness, must (according to the Apostle's advice) cleanse
himself from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, abstain from every
appearance of evil, and sincerely endeavor to perform all good actions.

In a word, Holiness in its general notion, is the comprehensive sum of the
moral Law; and may be very aptly described to be a ceasing from evil, and doing
good; which in this lapsed estate consists in the sincerity of our intentions
and actions, and shall be perfected when mortality is swallowed up of life,
when those imperfections and spots that attend our natural state, shall be
quite removed and done away. So long as our souls actuate their impure bodies,
sins and infirmities will cleave to the best: an absolute innocence and perfect
holiness is reserved for that state, where all things are become new. But yet
so far as the frailty of our nature, and the imperfection of our present state
will suffer, we ought sincerely to study to walk (as it is said of Zacharias
and Elizabeth) in all the Commandments of God blameless; the general course and
tenor of our lives should correspond and keep a conformity with the divine
precepts, which, as I shall just now show, are the rule of holiness.

Almighty God, who well considers the nature of man, does not esteem men to be
either vicious or holy, from the performance of some particular acts: There is
not a just man who lives and sins not. It is the peculiar motto of our Lord
Christ, That he did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth. But the
imperfect obedience of good men, who in the general course of their life
sincerely study an universal conformity and respect to the divine Laws, is
esteemed by him who judges righteously to be sufficient in order to our
acceptance with him, upon the account of the merits and perfect obedience of
our blessed Savior. The wise God, who considers the frailties and
imperfections that attend our present state, expects not more from us than we
are able to perform. He is not so rigorous a Lord, to require Brick where there
is no Straw: the terms of the Gospel are accommodated to our capacities, and
only require a holiness which is possible for the Creature to attain; at least
it exacts and expects no more, but that we endeavor sincerely and unfeignedly
to obey all those precepts he has enjoined; that we habituate our selves to
perform good actions; that the general propension and inclination of our wills
and appetites be toward the doing of what is imposed upon us, and abstaining
from all kind of evil.

By what has been said, it may appear, that holiness consists not in
Speculation, but in Practice: It Is not the knowledge of duty, but the actual
performance of it that entitles men to be holy; and that too, not
superficially, or in a good mode, and rarely performed; but sincerely, and
throughout the whole course of our lives. For men to know their duty and not
perform it, is to inhaunce their own misery, and to secure to themselves double
stripes: and to perform some good actions, and abstain from the grosser
pollutions of the world, and yet to be vicious in the general course of their
lives, this is such a holiness that will never profit any man. The rule of
holiness, to which we must heartily study an actual conformity, does not
dispense, no not with the commission of the least sin, nor omission of the
smallest duty.

But because general descriptions of things are frequently overlooked, I shall
not think it unnecessary to descend to a more particular survey, and consider
Holiness in its several branches, as they are plainly described by the
Christian rule of Holiness.

CHAP. II. Of the Rule of Holiness.
Although the whole Canon of Scripture is useful to instruct us in our duty;
yet because many things, if not approved, yet dispensed with under the old
dispensation, are now quite antiquated and abrogated, I shall therefore at
present confine my discourse to the Gospel Economy, and by the rule discover
wherein the Nature of true Holiness and undefiled Religion before God consists.

I am a little confident, it will not be expected I should prove that the New
Testament is of Divine Authority, and consequently an infallible rule to direct
us in the way of holiness: the numerous late Discourses, which have excellently
well performed this task, against the prodigiously profane Atheists this
impure age has to its lasting reproach hatched, makes me without the least
fear of censure supersede this undertaking.

I shall take it then for granted, (it being acknowledged by all rational men)
that the Gospel is the great and certain Standard whereby we may truly judge of
any man's holiness; and never doubt to conclude, that he who in the general
course and tenor of his life walks contrary to the Rule, can lay no claim,
plead no interest to the title of Holiness; this being no other thing (as I
have already showed) but a combination of those virtues the Gospel-precepts
enjoin.

Now the precepts of Christianity which point us our duty, may, for brevity, be
reduced to these three general Heads. For first, they are either such as enjoin
Piety toward God. Secondly, or such that require the good government of our
selves. Or thirdly, those that prescribe our carriage and be haviour toward
others. Of these I shall take a brief survey; and as I go along, excite men to
the practice of every particular duty, by rational motives and inducements; and
withal discover the perfection and compleatness of the Christian Rule, above
all the Institutions that ever were or can be devised.

First, amongst those Laws of Christianity which enjoin Piety toward God, we
find Love to him standing in the front, and claiming the precedence. This is
(as our blessed Savior informs us) the first and great Commandment, it being
indeed the scource and original of all acts of obedience.

To excite our Love, let us but present to our view his infinite and
transcendent perfections, the undeserved favors he every minute bestows upon
us, the innumerable dangers and accidents we are daily preserved from:
Arguments forcible enough to draw Love from the most rocky and obdurate heart.
It Is indeed an amazing thing, to see those into whom he has breathed the Breath
of Life, on whom he has rained so many floods of favors, to remain
notwithstanding as frozen, as ground which the Sun-rays never touch. It Is an odd
and strange operation, that streams of Love only meet with contempt and
disdain.

Sure I am, there is a concurrence of all sorts of motives and arguments to
engage us to love God; and those indeed so charming and endearing, that it is
strange any body should fail in it. Methinks the work it self is so sweet and
delectable, so ravishing and lovely, that men need not be courted to it by
persuasion. O what a great deal of satisfaction, of ineffable delight, does the
devout soul find in those actings of love toward God! And if the Voluptuous
and Sensualist would but abandon those sinful delights he now finds so
charming and bewitching, and betake himself to the practice of holiness: If he
would change the object of his love, and place it where it ought to be; I doubt
not but he should quickly perceive there is more pleasure, more contentment and
satisfaction in the love of God, than in the enjoyment of all carnal pleasures.

That man that shall make a just estimate of things, shall be easily convinced
there is nothing worthy of love in comparison of God. Alas! the pleasures of
this world are but shadows and fancies, which will soon disappear^. Its beauty
and splendor is but gilded and delusory: and is it reasonable, nay, is it not
extreme madness, to place the strength of our affections on such uncertain and
quickly-removed vanities?

The usual arguments of love amongst men, are Relation, Interest, or the Beauty
and Excellency of the Object. Now all these lay much stronger obligations upon
us to love God. For Relation, is he not our Lord and Maker, who gave us life
and being, who as a tender Father kindly compassionates our condition, and in
our low estate has carefully minded us, when our other Relations have accounted
us aliens and strangers? This the Royal Psalmist experimented; and I make no
question but many good men have been, and are living instances of this truth.

And indeed, that man that consults his own interest, cannot but be strongly
excited to love that God who is the best benefactor, and equally willing and
able to bestow favors upon him. It is an argument of a very base and mean
spirit, to despise our benefactors: but thus have we requited God, who daily
loadeth us with mercies, and renews his blessings every morning: we have, God
knows, most insolently carried our selves, even then, when he has been
displaying a banner of love over us.

As for Beauty and Excellency, what in the world can compete with him, who is
glorious in holiness, and whose Name is excellent in all the earth? How quickly
are all created beauties winked into darkness? At the best they are but streams
derived from this glorious being; and is it not hugely reasonable, that he who
is the original of these, should be the chief object of our love, and make us
with the Psalmist say, Whom have I in the heaven but thee; and there is none
upon the earth I desire besides thee?

I know there is no man would take it well, nay who would not be highly
incensed, and think himself much wronged, to have his Love called in question;
but God knows how little reason the far greater part of Mankind have to
pretend love, who stand not to break his Laws, to cast behind them and lightly
esteem his precepts, the obedience of which is made the best and surest
character of Love.

Would God it were as easy to persuade as it is to propose our duty. But how
hard is it to convince men of the folly, the extreme and strange madness, of
being lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God? But the truth is, there is
such a mire and puddle of pollution in our hearts, that it quite choaks and
extinguisheth all sparks of Love, makes us violate the principles of humanity,
and become more ungueate than the beasts who have no understanding.

But if this Divine flame be kindled in our Hearts, if it be sincere and
superlative as it ought to be, it will easily employ all the faculties of our
Soul in his service; it will engage, and enable us too, to perform the several
Duties of Piety the Laws of Christianity enjoin: which because they are some of
the particular branches of Holiness, I shall briefly mention, with their
encouragements; and for method and order reduce to four Heads. First, it will
instruct and enable us to trust and depend upon God. Secondly, to submit and
obey his Will. Thirdly, to honor and reverence his great and sacred Name. And
Lastly, to worship and adore him according to the method he has himself
prescribed.

I begin with the first, namely, That Love where it is sincere, is a noble and
generous passion, apt to excite and enable us to depend on God. This is, I
confess, a duty very useful, and never out of season: the Psalmist wisely
advises us, to trust in him at all times, when we are in the midst of all
trouble, as well as when our condition is serene, and wholly exempt from
outward fears. When the divine Providence has placed us in the most dismal
circumstances, even in this sad and comfortless state, our fears ought to give
place to faith; we would do well to repose a special confidence in him, who is
hereby become engaged to secure and defend us. This method the excellent
Psalmist observed, and resolved constantly to heed in times of imminent danger:
What time I am afraid I will trust in thee, Psalm. 56.3. and we find that
faithful men in former times took this course also: We know not what to do,
only our eyes are to thee, 2 Chronicles. 20.12.

In this lapsed state we lie open to a multitude of accidents; every place is
attended with dangers; our enemies are as subtle and cunning, as they are
strong and numerous. The Prince of the power of the Air has his wit always upon
the rack, in inventing stratagems and devices to undo us; and his Emissaries
slip no opportunity of our ruin: and is there a safer course than to trust in
Jehovah, who is everlasting strength? who is indeed, as the Psalmist says, a
present help in time of need. Sure I am, it is man's greatest interest to flee
to the Divine Providence, which is the best guard against all dangers; for we
need not doubt to conclude with the Apostle. If God be with us, who can be
against us?

It Is also the Law of Heaven, that in times of want we confide in God, 1 Pet.
5.6. Cast all your care upon him, for he cares for you. I confess, we must not
expect to be fed miraculously, to have the Ravens to bring bread and flesh to
us morning and evening, or that the meal in our Barrel should increase and
never waste, but be multiplied as the Loaves and Fish were by our Savior: We
must not foolishly dream that Manna shall fall about our Tents, when we may use
the lawful means; this sure were rather a tempting of, than trusting in God But
yet, after we have experimented all lawful means and probable ways, and find
it utterly impossible for us to help our selves; then may we safely repose our
confidence upon him, who feeds the young ravens when they cry unto him.
Therefore (says our Lord) I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what
you shall eat, or what you shall drink; neither for your body, what ye shall
put on: Is not the life more than meat? and the body than raiment? Behold the
fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into
barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not much better than they?
etc. Matthew. 6.25, 26. It Is rejected and condemned as a Pagan and Heathenish
sin, to be querulons and sollicitous of what we shall eat, or what we shall
drink, or wherewithal we shall be clothed: for after all these things do the
Gentiles seek, v. 31, 32.

I confess, as I cannot sufficiently enough pity the madness of some men, who
will trust God with their Souls, but not with their secular Concerns; so could
I never yet project what may be the reason why better men than the former are
so apt to distrust God in times of danger and want. I^ wish such men would
consider how shrewd a presumption this is of Atheism, at least of establishing
the Epicurean notion of a Deity who is quite unconcerned about inferior
beings, and sequestrated from the care of sublunary affairs. For if we did
indeed think that he takes notice of us, we could not but confidently rely upon
his care.

Secondly, we are by the perfect rule of Piety and Holiness instructed to
submit to the divine Will, and comply with the Gospel precepts, which
concerning all things are right. Perhaps the lot infinite Wisdom has carved out
to us, is no ways relishing to flesh and blood. Whilst others are walking
amongst roses, enjoy all seoular advantages, and are placed in the sunshine of
prosperity; may be we are forced to hang our harps upon the willows, and spend
our few days in sorrow and grief. However, let us not, even under these sad
circumstances, charge God foolishly, or be impatient under the severity of his
correction; for this is no argument of the hatred of a Father. Let us rather in
this case view the unspeakable reward, and the divine promises, which are
sufficient arguments to revive our s^^ing and most languishing hopes, and able
to form our souls to true patience.

Philosophers, if ever they attained to a perfection in any virtue, it was in
their patience under the instability of worldly things; and yet their grounds
and motives to patience were sandy and ineffectual, and no ways comparable to
the arguments and inducements laid down in the Scheme of Christian Religion.
Epicurus his calling to mind his former pleasures, was but a weak plea to form
him to patience under the tormenting pains of the Gout. And the Stoics notion
that sufferings were no real evils, was really a fancy easily conquered by the
extremity of pain.

And as we are thus obliged to submit to the severest dispensation of
Providence, so we ought to comply with the divine will exhibited in his
Precepts. Obedience is undoubtedly the best evidence of Love; for hereby is our
love manifested, that we do his will: and indeed the divine injunctions are so
natural, so equitable and just, that we can allege no impossibility in
performing them. His Commands, as the Apostle informs us, are not grievous, 1 John 4.3. they require not things incommodious and burdensome, as the most of
other Religions do.

The third duty we are instructed in, is to reverence and honor his sacred
Name, to have apprehensions and affections suitable to his glorious
perfections. When we seriously reflect on the purity of his nature, and the
infinity of his cognizance; our esteem and veneration of him should be truly
elevated, and raised as high as possible, and make us with Moses (in a holy
rapture) say, Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods! who is like thee,
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? Exodus 15.11.

How impious then and unlawful is it, to profane and violate the sacred Name
of that God we should adore, by a multitude of rash and customary oaths! Sure
those who own any relation to that God who is so dishonored, will be so
generous as to express their displeasure, when in company with those who thus
revile him. But if God be so friendless as to have none to appear thus for him,
yet such profane wretches may know, that God himself will resent those
injuries and affronts put upon him; he will vindicate his own glory of which he
is so jealous, and surely will not hold them guiltless that take his Name in
vain.

Of all sins, this of Swearing is the most unreasonable, and cannot pretend the
ordinary incentives of Pleasure or Profit, that most of Vices lay some claim
to. How desperate a frenzy then is it, for men without any probability of
allurements, to draw down upon themselves the vengeance of an incensed God?
It Is sure but a mean Apology, to allege an habit and custom, while this is
the very thing that enhances their guilt: neither will it, I think, a whit
lessen the Crime, that Great persons have given it such a vogue in the world.

The Name of God is a sacred thing, which must not be appealed to, but in the
most weighty and serious cases: Thou shall swear (says the Prophet) that the
Lord lives, in truth, justice, and judgment. If we either affirm or promise
any thing by oath, it must be after mature deliberation, after we have
ascertained our selves of the truth and lawfulness of it: this the very Poet
could dictate, Nec Deus intersit, nisi dign us vindice nodus Inciderit -- It
were to be wished, that the Hectors of this age would learn of the very
Heathens more reverence; and that those men that pretend to good breeding,
would be so civil, even sometimes for the companies sake, as to forbear those
Oaths that tender ears cannot hear without offense.

In the last place, the Divine Love, if scattered in our Hearts, will excite us
to worship God after the method himself has prescribed: It will direct us to
the rule of Piety, where we shall find every thing that relates to our
immediate intercourse with God in Divine Ordinances and Worship exactly
ordered. I confess, the Heathen world, as they were confused in their notions
of a Deity, and almost quite ignorant of the eternal reward; so were they
superstitious in their Worship, and sometimes ignorantly erected Altars to an
unknown God. Their Worship was attended with a great deal of external pomp, was
very grateful to their external senses; but it reached not the Heart. But the
Christian rule instructs us to worship God in Spirit, and prescribes the best
method of devotion: It requires that We worship and bow before the Lord our
maker, with all possible humility and reverence; that we possess our Hearts
with the greatness and glory of that Majesty we adore; that we be intent in our
devotion, and not suffer s^^nlar concerns to intrude and interrupt us; that we
act faith upon him, and believe that he is a rewarder of those that diligently
seek him; and that we approach the throne of grace in the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

If Devotion were not a duty, yet methinks the advantages thereof should invite
us to the performance: But since God has coupled our duty and interest
together, how amazing is it to think we should so neglect it? How many
attractives are there to approach his presence, who dwells in light
unaccessible? Have we not a multitude of sins to confess? many wants we would
fain have supplied? How many temptations does every place present? How numerous
are the dangers and accidents to which we lie open? and should not all these
excite us to render homage to that omnipotent power, which alone can guard us
from inconveniences? But besides our dangers we are freed from, the mercies and
favors he daily confers upon us, the fresh communications of his bounty every
morning, nay minute, require at least a return of praise, and a grateful
acknowledgment. But yet alas! in spite of all these inducements, how is
Devotion contemned by some, and neglected by most?

But I dare not enlarge now on the particular Branches of Holiness, nor insist
in the recommendation of every particular duty, lest I seem to digress from my
proper subject. I shall therefore proceed to the other two Branches of
Holiness, namely, those duties that respect ourselves and others.

As to the first, we are by the perfect rule of Holiness instructed to live
soberly, to be moderate in all things, and to shun every kind of excess, as
equally hurtful to Soul and Body: it forbids complacency in those lusts that
war against both; restrains all irregular and impetuous inclinations;
retrenches all inordinate desires, the first motions to forbidden objects, and,
in a word, enjoins all those virtues which respect either our Bodies or Souls.

For those that respect our Bodies, how straightly is chastity commanded? For
this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from
fornication, 1 These. 4.3. We are urged with the most affectionate earnestness,
to abstain from the very first motions to forbidden objects, from the polluted
glances and wanton lascivious speeches that are windows at which uncleanness
enters; and that by such invincible and cogent arguments, as might prove
effectual with men who but consider what they do; Lust being a Vice mischievous
to the body, Prove. 7.26. hurtful to the Soul, Prove. 6.32. casting an
everlasting stain upon a man's good Name, Prove. 6.33. undoing his Substance,
Prove. 6.26. Job 31.12. and that which finally excludes from the Kingdom of
Heaven, where nothing that pollutes can enter, 2 Cor. 6.9. Rev. 21.27.

It Is indeed no wonder though the Religion of the Gentiles, which contained a
prodigious mixture of vanity and impiety, gratified the inclinations of
uncleanness: for if we consult their writings, we shall observe, that the most
abominable vice wanted not a Deity to patronize it amongst them; which upon the
matter was an establishing iniquity by Law, and an argument more sufficient to
encourage than to correct vice: And although the Writings of some Philosophers
have been more refined, yet the Lives even of such were full of the foulest
actions. Nay, the rules which the best Masters of Morality amongst them
prescribed, never reached to the purifying of the Heart.

I confess, that man that shall take notice (and who, having eves in his head,
can avoid this, when men proclaim their sin like Sodom?) of the prodigious
uncleanness this profane age has arrived at, shall be strongly tempted to
suspect the purity of the Christian Rule, if he make no farther enquiry than to
the practices of most that are called Christians. We may indeed very aptly
write to the professors of this age, as the great Apostle did to the Church of
Corinth: It is reported commonly that there is fornication among you, and such
fornication as is not so much as named amongst the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 5.1. And I
am a little afraid, if the Church should strictly observe that charge that the
Apostle gives there, and excommunicate all such wicked persons, that our Church
should not need to brag much of the number of Christians.

It Is indeed matter of great sadness, to consider how much the Christian
Religion has suffered, upon the account of the scandalous practices of Titular
Christians; and I make no doubt but this age has been at more pains than any
that precedes it, to increase the scandal: but sure it is but a silly artifice
to challenge the exactness of the Rule, and with Celsus impudently allege
that the Christian Religion encourages men to the practice of immorality and
vice; since of all Religions, the Christian only can produce the strictest
Laws against all filthiness of flesh and spirit. It Is a Doctrine, as the
blessed Apostle tells us, according to godliness, and lays undispensible
obligations upon its followers, both to think upon, and to do, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are of good
report, and suchlike things, which being general, include all particulars; and
yet it does not only prescribe general rules, but descends to the commanding
of all particular virtues, and the equal prohibition of particular vices.

Next to Chastity, we might discourse largely of the commendation of Moderation
in eating and drinking, and show that the excess of both is condemned, as being
mean and ignoble; that it is the true cause of many loathsome diseases, is
attended with a prodigious multitude of temporal evils, Prove. 23.22. and
threatened with lasting and eternal torments hereafter. Hence our Royal Master
fails not to exhort his Disciples, to Take heed to themselves, lest at any time
they be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, Luke 21.34. And one of his
blessed Apostles tells us, that Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God,
1 Cor. 6.10. And indeed, daily experience puts it beyond all doubt, that those
ignoble sins naturally tend to impoverish men, and fully verify the wise man's
prediction, That the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty, Prove.
23.21.

But passing those virtues that concern our Bodies, I come now to consider
those that adorn our Souls; and I shall confine my discourse to those which are
the peculiar graces of Christians, and which the Christian rule does more
particularly recommend: Such as Humility, Meekness, Contentment, and
Self-denial.

If we enquire narrowly into the Lives of Heathen Philosophers, we shall find
their pride and vainglory stained the best of their actions. Self-denial was a
virtue never taught in their Schools; and for Contentment, the rules they
prescribed were but ineffectual to recommend it.

But the Gospel couples our Duty and Interest together; it commands Humility,
and recommends its advantages and alluring attractives. It discovers the
dangers that attend Pride; and the great folly of being vain of Beauty,
Strength, Wit, Riches, Honors, or Preferments: Of all these I may use the
Apostle's phrase, It Is not expedient doubtless for men to glory, 2 Cor. 12.7.
Are not these the free gifts of Divine goodness? and what can be more
unreasonable than for dependent creatures to be proud?

Humility is indeed so amiable, so endearing dearing a qua^ity and so noble an
embelishment of our nature, that where this is wanting, all other advantages
are little regarded; and not only men, but the great God also resists the
proud, it being a vice which, besides Christianity, Morality also condemns, as
universally unbecoming to Humane nature; and that which not only disturbs ones
self, but also disquiets whole societies: But God gives grace to the humble; he
takes such persons into favor, as being more pliable to receive the impress of
his love.

And as a humble, so also a meek and quiet spirit is in the sight of God of
great price. And can there be a more convincing motive than this, to recommend
meekness to Christians? And indeed we cannot pretend to be the Disciples of
holy Jesus, if we refuse to learn that lesson he has copied out to us, Matthew.
11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart.

Although a calm and quiet spirit is a reward to it self, as every virtue is;
yet it wants not a claim to a temporal felicity also, Matthew. 5.5. Blessed are
the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. These be the persons to whom by
right of promise this stately Fabric of earth belongs. And if we now view that
unpleasant vice of Anger opposite to it, this will yet add more to its luster,
and help to recommend it the more effectually. Anger being such an unpleasant
humor, that it makes those men it possesses unfit for humane society, it being
not unfitly defined by the Poet to be a short madness; which indeed agrees very
well with the Wise man's verdict of it, Eccl. Anger rests in the bosom of fools.
If then men would but compare the calm and happy serenity of Meekness, with
that inward and outward trouble and disquietment that is the effect of Anger,
they could not but esteem the one, and declaim against the other.

In the next place, our Christian rule recommends Contentment as the most
precious Jewel in the Saints Diadem; it is that noble ingredient that makes the
most bitter cup sweet and pleasant: it renders things, otherwise unsavory and
burdensome, to be indeed relishing and easy. This is it that seasons the
meanest meal; makes a dish of herbs a feast, and a cup of cold water please the
palate: This is that virtue which makes men in the midst of storms represent a
calm, and in the saddest circumstances to sing sweetly. He who has learned St.
Paul's lesson how to want, and how to abound, is not discomposed either by
Prosperity or Adversity; but in both cases can behave himself like a man in
reason. This is it which is inseparably connected with Godliness, is the same
thing expressed by different names. This is a virtue so lovely and desirable,
attended with so many advantages, that we have all imaginable encouragements to
hearken to the Apostles advice, Heb. 13.5. Be content with such things as ye
have; and in the evil day to heed that advice Christ gives his Disciples, to
possess our souls with patience.

But how disquieting and tormenting are its contraries? Ambition makes men
restless in raising their own value and esteem above others; it prompts them to
be always in dislike with their own present condition; the least advancement of
others above them, gnaws and torments their spirits, and oftentimes hurries
them headlong to the greatest dangers. Murmuring is a most fretting evil, a
most painful distemper, a sin attended with the most dangerous consequents, and
which imbittereth the happiest state of life here. Envy is a vice nothing less
criminal, attended with as dismal effects as any, as the Apostle St. James
tells, Jam. 3.16. Where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every
evil work. And lastly, Covetousness is so mean and ignoble a vice, that I think
although it were not (as the Apostle describes it) the root of all evil; yet
gallant spirits should dislike it, as being base and contemptible.

In the last place, the Gospel recommends Self-denial as the Christians
peculiar Character: If any man (says our Master Christ) will come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me: And this precept he
backs with the most powerful incitement; For whosoever will save his life shall
lose it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake, shall find it, Mat.
16.24, 25. I doubt not but flesh and blood will cry out, as once Christ's own
Disciples did in another case, This is a hard saying, who can bear it? It Is
indeed no small matter to bring down the carnal part of man to submit to the
loss of Relations, Interest, and Life: But since the advantage and danger of
both cases is so clearly revealed, what fools will men prove, if to gain this
life, they lose the recompense of a better rewad?

As the rule of Holiness does thus instruct us in those duties that concern our
selves; so it also teaches us how to carry toward others. And in the first
place, it recommends the Royal Law of love, as the spring and source of all
other duties, Romans 13.9. If there be any other commandment, it is briefly
comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
This, for its excellency and comprehensiveness, is said to be the fulfilling of
the Law, as those who neglect it are said to sin against the Law.

Now if this rule of Charity were wel^ observed, it would help to correct,
first all undue Thoughts and Wishes. Secondly, all injurious Words and
Speeches. And thirdly, all unjust Actions and Dealings toward our Neighbors.

First, it would very much conduce to the regulating of our wishes, and to the
keeping of our minds in a meek and peaceable temper toward others. Charity,
if sincere, is a noble and generou^ virtue, which believes and hops the best
of all men: It thinks no evil, as the Apostle amongst many of its other good
properties observes, 2 Cor. 13.5. It eradicates and supplants all censoriou^
thoughts, and is incompatible with those tormenting passions of Malice and
Revenge, which, as the Wise man describes, suffer not men to sleep except they
have done mischief, Prove. 4.16.

And indeed this is but the least part of a Christians duty, it is but an
evidence of the lowest degree of Charity, to retrench those irregular and undue
wishes, which oftentimes do more prejudice to our selves than others: If it be
sincere, it will have a further and more important influence; it will help us
to govern our tongues also, that we may, as the great Apostle advises us,
speak evil of no man, Tit. 3.2. to lay aside all malice, and all guile and
hypocrisy, and evil speaking, 1 Pet. 2.1. and according to this precept did
primitive Christians walk.

But alas! we have degenerated in nothing more conspicuously from their
practice than in this: In place of their love, we have substituted an
industrious search into the iniquities of others, Psalm. 64.4. and have fully
verified the Apostles description of the tongue, Jam. 3.8. that it is an unruly
evil which no man can tame, a world of iniquity that sets the whole creation on
fire.

Neither Majesty nor innocence can now guard against its darts; its malignity
reaches through all the earth; nay indeed it were good if it were bounded by
this. May not the Majesty of Heaven resume that same complaint he expresses
Mal. 3.14. Your words have been stout against me; and charge the profane
Atheists of this age, for opening their mouths against the Heavens?

As for Innocence, although it is truly in it self a strong fence, yet it
cannot escape the assaults of a licentious tongue: but with the Psalmist may
complain; Behold, they belch out with their mouths, swords are in their lips,
Psalm. 56.7. and I think there are few men so happy, who cannot with the same
holy man regret, They lay to my charge things I know not: but how much this
violates all the obligations of Charity, and Justice also, every man's reason
will easily instruct him.

To secure men from being culpable in this, it were enough only to represent
the meanness of it: but as a more noble enforcement, the Gospel prescribes the
strictest rules against it, Matthew. 7.1, 2. Judge not, that ye be not judged;
for with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged. A sentence which methinks
should even strike terror in the consciences of the guilty; and sure if men
would but mind their own concern and interest, they should more attentively
hearken to the counsel of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.31, 32. Let all bitterness, and
wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with
all malice. And be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

But our love must not consist in word only, but in deed and in truth, as the
blessed Apostle exhorts the primitive Christians, 1 John 3.18. It is a vain
thing to pretend love, when we refuse to evidence it by our deeds: If a brother
or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them,
Depart in peace, be you warmed, and filled, notwithstanding ye give them not
those things which are needful to the body, what does it profit? Jam. 2.15, 16.
We must make our actions and dealings the test whereby we may evidence our
love, otherwise the sincerity of it may be justly suspected; and therefore in
the first place we must actually endeavor to supply the wants of our indigent
Brethren: This is above all things recommended to Christians, 1 Pet. 4.8.
especially to those who have received a large allowance of outward blessings,
v. 10. and it is noted as an evidence that the love of God dwells not in
those persons, who having this worlds goods, shut up their bowels of compassion
from those that have need, 1 John 3.17. Alas! little do men know how quickly
the balance may change; how soon the richest may be in poverty, and stand in
need of that supply that they now in the days of their plenty deny others: the
instances to prove this, are more numerous than that they can be doubted, or
need to be related.

Indeed the performance of this duty passes not without a temporal reward;
God, who accounts it a lending to himself, has promised to repay it; and sure
there cannot be better security than his promise. And I question not but all
ages can attest the truth of what the wise man observes, Prove. 11 24. There is
that scatters, and yet increases; and there is that witholdeth more than is
meet, but it tends to poverty.

I confess, I know no virtue more becoming a Christian than Charity, and scarce
any more scandalously neglected; and I am sorry to think that those good men
who compassionate the wants of the indigent, should be so unworthily
scandalized, as if they were but lukewarm Protestants, and established the
Popish Merit: but this is a piece of madness I shall rather pity than inveigh
against; and although I be no friend to merit, yet I cannot but speak
honorably of those whose charity and good works make them lovely in the sight
of God, who has accounted it pure religion and undefiled, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, Jam. 1.27.

In the next place, the Christian rule requires Justice in our intercourse and
commerce, and that in our dealings we be exactly conscientious, according to
that great rule of equity, Matthew. 7.12. All things whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the law and the prophets.
Injustice is a vice so mean and ignoble, that I cannot but admire how great men
should court it: and if men would but actuate their Reasons, I am sure they
should never become guilty of that which, if charged with, they cannot
patiently endure, nor be reconciled with the persons which freely reprove them.
There is no man, I think, that would be satisfied to be called a Cheat; and is
it not unreasonable to think they shall evite this character who practice
injustice?

The great bait and allurement to Injustice, is gain and advantage; but how
visibly has Almighty God by a wise providence defeated men's designs in this!
There is (as Eliphaz observed) a fire that consumes the tabernacles of
bribery, Job 15.34. and as the wise man tells us, An inheritance may be gotten
hastily at the beginning, but the end thereof shall not be blessed, Prove. 20.21.

Thirdly, The Christian rule is a most compendious and complete directory to
men in every station and place: Parents and Children, Masters and Servants,
Husband and Wife may from hence learn their duty* As it gives no encouragement
to Tyrants, so neither does it allow Rebellion in Subjects; but condemns it as
a sin heinous and unnatural. But I cannot stand to enlarge upon every
particular duty; only I shall infer, that from the accomplishment of those
duties enjoined by the Christian rule, is formed that Holiness I would fain
persuade men to follow.

To put a close to this Chapter, it will not, I think, be amiss to show, that
the Christian rule of Holiness is the most noble and most excellent that was
ever extant; that it far excels the Schemes of Morality drawn by the best and
most celebrated Masters of Pagan Philosophy, and is more comprehensive and
effectual to form men to true Holiness than the Mosaical Law.

I confess, the Heathen Religion does not in the least deserve to be compared
with the Christian, no more (I may say, much less) than the light of the
dimmest Candle should be compared with the Sun in its brightness, when all
mists and clouds are dispelled. It were indeed too great an honor to name the
Alcoran with the New Testament; the one being corrupt and imperfect, the other
pure and perfect in its tendency, designing to make men truly virtuous and
holy.

If we view the rules which the best and most refined Moralists prescribed, we
shall find much Brass amongst their Gold, many things exceedingly faulty,
which, instead of forbidding, encouraged many foul Vices. Thus concerning piety
toward God, what unbecoming thoughts did they entertain of him? They changed
(as the Apostle to the Romans observes) the glory of an incorruptible God into
an Image made like corruptible man, Romans 1.23. and in those moral duties that
concerned themselves and others, it were easy to show how miserably they
failed. The famous Peripatetick pleaded for the revenging of Injuries: The
divine Plato allowed the community of Wives: The strict Stoics patronized the
lawfulness of Self-murder; and thus professing themselves to be wise, they
became fools.

And yet (to the shame of Christians) how conspicuous was the moral gallantry
of the Romans! how famous and glorious are they esteemed for their Justice and
Constancy in friendship by all succeeding ages! their virtue did conquer
respect and esteem from their Enemies, and made them beloved by those who
feared their power. And here I cannot but take notice of St. Augustin's
commendation of the old Romans: Because God (says he) would not bestow Heaven
upon the Romans, they being Pagans, he bestowed the Empire of the world upon
them, because they were virtuous.

And yet the best rules those Illustrious Heroes and Lawgivers taught, are not
comparable to the Laws of Christianity, upon these three accounts. First, the
Pagan Law is deficient in many things, and many particular Laws mightily tend
to the promoting of vice; their Lawgivers being ignorant of the introduction
of sin, never made any precepts against the first motions to forbidden objects.
Secondly, those good Laws they taught, are more clearly revealed in the Gospel,
Which has brought life and immortality to light. As the Gospel commands only
such things that are good, and forbids only vice; so it more conspicuously
manifests what is good, that we may do it, and what is evil, that we may evite
it. The good Laws that Epaminondas in Thebes, Lycurgus in Lacedemon, and
Aristides in Athens taught, are in the Gospel-Oeconomy more excellently
confirmed; and we are now undoubtedly secured, that we do well in observing
what is commanded, and in abstaining from what is prohibited; which Numa
Pompilius, Marcus Antonius, and all the Lawgivers either of Greece or Rome,
could never be fully ascertained of. Thirdly, we have better encouragements and
inducements to obey the Gospel-precepts, than any other Religion prescribes.
The best motive to virtue amongst the Heathens was, that virtue is a reward to
it self; that it is the means to be celebrated by after-ages, and suchlike;
which were but insignificant encouragements, if compared with the eternal and
unspeakably glorious reward which Christianity holds forth, and those severe
threatenings by which it secures its Laws; of which I shall speak anon.

As for the Mosaical Law, which, next to the Christian, is the most exact and
incomparable, there are three reasons why it is not to be compared with, it
being so far exceeded by the Gospel. First, the Mosaical dispensation is not
unfitly called by the great Apostle, A law of a carnal commandment, Heb. 7.16.
and A law which made nothing perfect, v. 19. but the Gospel, which is there
called the bringing in of a better hope, is more spiritual and refined; and
Jesus is said to be a surety of a better covenant, v. 22. So that we may argue
as the Apostle in the 11th verse of that cited Chapter does: If therefore
perfection were by the Levitical Priesthood, (for under it the people received
the Law) what further need was there that another Priest should arise? I
confess, the legal Sacrifices did shadow forth the satisfaction of Christ's; but
yet I make no doubt but we may now understand the intent and meaning of all
those Types much better than they could. Secondly, the Ceremonial Law, as it
was very burdensome, so did it chiefly tend to make the observers thereof
externally righteous, and did not so strongly enforce the purifying of the
heart. As for the Moral Law, the Christian rule as it does as strictly enjoin
it, so it does much more powerfully excite men to the performance of it,
promising not a temporal but a^ eternal reward. Thirdly, the Mosaical
dispensation did indulge many practices which the Christian rule justly
condemns; such as Polygamy and Divorce, and several Marriages allowed by no
other Law: and indeed the whole contexture of the Jewish Religion seems to be
only calculate as it did well correspond with the humor and genius of that
people, and could not therefore be a general Law, agreeing with, and well
attemperate to the inclinations and humors of all Nations, as the Christian
rule is.

Any man that shall compare the Jewish Religion with the Christian, shall be
easily convinced that this does more effectually conduce to the purifying of us
from all filthiness both of the flesh and of the spirit than the former; and
that of all the Schemes of Religion that ever were published, none does deserve
to be paralleled with Christianity; nor can adopt to them that noble character
the great Apostle gives of the Gospel, Romans 1.16. That it is the power of God
to salvation.

CHAP. III. Motives and inducements to the practice of Holiness.
AS the naked proposal and representation of an excellent and beautiful object,
is motive enough to excite our love, and draw out our affections to it: so
methinks Holiness, which of all things is the most noble, most excellent, and
the most lovely, should, even abstracted from the considerations of its utility
and advantages, conquer our esteem, But God knows how much our depraved natures
in this lapsed estate stand in need of encouragements to excite us to our duty;
and I wish common experience did not make it too certain, that all motives are
little enough to form us to Holiness.

In the former Chapters I have only laid a foundation to this: for I thought
it fit to tell men what I understand by Holiness, before I should excite them
to it. In this dark age of the world we want not instances (God knows, too
many) of men's too frequent mistaking vice for virtue; to prevent which error,
it was thought necessary to show men their duty; and having done this, the next
thing I proposed, was to lay down several motives and inducements to engage men
to the practice of Holiness, founded solely upon this, that all those endearing
arguments that prevail with us to perform any duty or action relating to our
secular concerns, do more powerfully oblige us to be holy.

This is, I confess, a subject which for its nobleness deserves a better
judgment, a more clear wit, and a more enlivened and quick fancy to handle it
than I can pretend to: yet if I can but prevail with others to perfect what I
have begun, I shall not think I have much mis-employ'd my time in writing this
Discourse.

This Chapter is like to be somewhat disproportionable to the rest in length,
it being at first the only designed subject to be discoursed on; I shall
therefore divide it into several Sections.

SECT. 1. The Noble Pattern of Holiness.
The great inclination of Mankind to Imitation, gave ground (I doubt not) to
that old Maxim, Plus docent exempla quam praecepta; our depraved natures are
very apt to contemn Precepts, and to court forbidden objects: The tie of a
Commandment is become (by our increased guilt) too weak to bind us to our
duty, and is made as light of as Sampson made of those ropes with which he was
bound before his locks were cut. But O what a secret and powerful influence
have Examples on the spirits of men! I have seen Servants and Children who have
contemned Commands, yet shamed to their duty by the Example of their Masters
and Parents. The courage and valor of a Captain, proves frequently more
powerful to inspirit inferior Soldiers, than the most forcible injunctions
and helps to make even cowards stout; whileas a timorous Commander disheartens
the bravest Soldiers, and by his flight will make them who feared no danger
turn their backs.

Common experience makes it past doubt, that the patrociny and example of great
men is enough to render any thing fashionable. We daily have proofs of this
before our eyes: nay, so powerful do examples sometimes prove, that not only
the silly modes and gestures of men have been imitated, but also their natural
imperfections, as Nero's wry Neck was at Rome. It is the Poets observation:
Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. Upon which account, I heartily wish
the Nobles and Great men of this age would illustrate Holiness by their
Examples; and I doubt not but contemned Holiness should be as fashionable as
they have now made Vice by their patrociny. In sacred Writ we read, that when
the Rulers of Judah and Israel were religious, and examples of Virtue, that the
whole people imitated their footsteps, and worshipped the Lord God of their
Fathers: But when the Rulers became patrons of Vice, then the whole people
sacrificed in the high places, and worshipped their Calves at Dan and Bethel.

It is indeed a case that well deserves to be regretted with floods of tears,
that the footsteps of those who transgress should prove more efficacious and
effectual, and have a greater influence on men, than the presidents of good
men: but more lamentable is it, that despised virtue lies like the contemned
ashes on the level, and has so few to raise up its esteem by their examples.

And now, seeing Examples have so much force, methinks I hear the Captain of
our salvation saying, as Abimeleck said to the men that were with him, Judge.
9.48. Make haste, and do as I have done. Christ Jesus has by his example
taught us our duty, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. As he which has called you is holy, so be
ye holy in all manner of conversation; because it is written, Be ye holy as I
am holy. Upon which account we are seriously exhorted in Scripture to look unto
Jesus, and to walk as he walked; and can any consideration more abundantly
serve to inspirit and excite us to live holy, than this? Methinks our having so
brave an example should provoke us to follow his footsteps, who did no sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth.

There are two chief reasons that greatly prevail with us to imitate other
examples. First, the dignity and greatness of the person. Secondly, Interest
and advantage. Now both these motives should most powerfully prevail with us to
make Christ the copy of our lives: For first, if we consider the dignity and
worth of his person, is he not the Son of the living God, who in the days of
his humiliation thought it no robbery to be called equal with God? He was not a
person of a mean and low extraction, how meanly soever he lived here, but one
of extraordinary worth, who by partaking of humane nature elevated it to the
highest degree of honor: He was not only the chiefest among stten thousands,
but the delight of Heaven and Earth, before whom the Princes of the Earth must
appear, and the great men, to give him an account of their works. And as for
Interest, I shall afterward make it plain, that we in nothing more cross our
advantage, than in walking contrary to Christ.

But alas! how little are we moved by this noble president to mind Holiness?
how seldom do we express in our actions the virtues of our spiritual King?
although there is nothing more rational, more equitable and just, than to
follow his footsteps who has called us to his Kingdom and Glory; nothing more
honorable, nor can advance our happiness more, than to be conform to the image
of Christ; yet in opposition to the most endearing encouragements, we have as
much set at naught his example, as Herod and his men of war did his person,
Luke 23.11. Alas! what tears are sufficient to express and set forth this
exceeding great madness and insolency?

Methinks I hear our blessed Prince speaking thus in his own vindication: Ye
unwise and foolish sons of men, how long will ye prefer imperfect and ignoble
patterns to one that is every whit perfect and complete? In your secular
concerns ye judge more rationally, prove a thousand times wiser; for who
amongst you does not make diligent enquiry for the most exact pattern, that ye
may conform what ye design according to it? but in matters of everlasting
moment, how careless, how negligent and foolish do ye prove? If I had not been
held forth as the most desirable copy, as a pattern most accommodate to your
state, your case had been more tolerable; but since you can pretend no rational
excuse for your rejecting of me, Behold, ye despisers, wonder and perish.

I confess, our blessed Prince performed many extraordinary and miraculous
actions, which could have no other author but one invested with omnipotency;
and although we cannot, are not required to set Christ as our president in
these, as likewise in many other special actions he performed, as his fasting
forty days, etc. yet even these we are called to admire; and must in so far
imitate, as they were expressions of his great charity and kindness to men, and
of his trust and dependancy upon his Heavenly Father. But as for those moral
actions he performed, we are extremely culpable if we do not make him our
pattern, if we walk not as he walked: And it is sure the most unaccountable
thing that can be, to profess our selves to be his Disciples, and to despise
the lessons he has copied out to us.

The whole life of Christ being one continued lecture of Holiness, presents to
our view a large field to discourse upon: but my intended brevity will not
allow me to mention all those particular actions and virtues of his, which we
ought to imitate. I shall therefore contract my discourse to those more
remarkable instances, wherein we should industriously endeavor to imitate the
holy Jesus in his spirit and actions: and sure there cannot be a more powerful
motive to form us to holiness than his most excellent life, which is a pattern
absolutely perfect, and designed as a fair copy after which we should write.

In the first place, our blessed Leader (for so he is called, Isa. 55.4.) has
by his precept, as well as his practice, enjoined us to learn meekness and
humility of him, Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart.
Throughout the whole course of his life he did evidence a spirit full of
calmness and quietness. If we trace his foorsteps from the Cradle to the Cross,
we shall not fined him either by his words or actions discovering the least
expression of wrath, or revenge; but the most admirable disposition of
gentleness and meekness, even then when his insulting Enemies endeavored to
cast upon him the most ignominious affronts. We read, Numb. 12.3. of Moses his
great meekness; but how was he once and again transported with passion! but
never did our meek Jesus, by the most insufferable abuses he received, ever
discover a discomposed spirit. Isa. 53.7. He was oppressed, and he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opens not his
mouth. He did indeed frequently meet with extraordinary provocations to anger;
but yet how sweet were his reproofs? when the Samaritans refused to receive
him. Luke 9.53. he did not treat them with contumelious speeches, nor revenge
himself upon them, although he could have done it with ease; but being desired
by his exasperated Disciples to call for fire from Heaven to consume them, he
rebuked their revengeful motion with The Son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them. It would be too prolix a business to instance the
several examples of his Gentleness and Meekness; only let us view the last
scene of his life, where we shall behold lively instances to confirm this. When
he did find his three Disciples, whom he had commanded to watch, sleeping, he
did not upbraid them for their negligence, but gently asks them, What, could
not ye watch with me one hour? and when he was treacherously accoasted by his
own Disciple, who became leader to a great multitude who came out with Swords
and Staves to apprehend him, with what astonishing mildness did he entertain
this Traitor, who had the impudence to betray him with a kiss? Friend,
wherefore art thou come? Mat. 26.50. or, as another of the Evangelists
expresses it, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? This was all
the hard language he treated him with. And after he was apprehended, with what
horrid contumelies and affronts did his barbarous Enemies entertain him? they
did spit in his face, and buffet him; (the highest affronts imaginable) they
stripped him of his ordinary clothes, and put upon him a fools robe, and a
Crown of Thorns; and being thus disguised, they expose him to the mockery and
contempt of the Spectators. Notwithstanding of all which, he opened not his
mouth; but with a most sedate and serene temper he received all these abuses,
as the Apostle Peter expresses it, 1 Pet. 2.23. When he was reviled he reviled
not again, when he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to him that
judges righteously.

Meekness, I confess, is so noble a virtue, accompanied with so many admirable
and charming advantages, that it needs (as one would think) but few words to
recommend it to men; but no argument is like to prevail more with generous
minds, than the example of so excellent and perfect a Pattern. Sure I am, it
is the most unaccountable thing imaginable, for the Disciples of so meek a
Master to be of a disposition and temper quite opposite to his.

But as his meekness, so is his humility also recommended to our imitation: As
he was of a meek, so also of a lowly spirit. His first appearance upon earth
was but mean and despicable; he was born (as the Scripture informs us) in a low
estate, more fit for the meanest of his Disciples, than for so great a Prince.
He was not brought forth in some stately Palace, nor born in a Chamber
curiously decked, but in a vile Stable where the bruit beasts had their
residence. Nay, after he had discovered himself by his Illustrious works to be
a great Prophet, the true Messiah who enlightneth every one that comes into
the world, yet how humbly did he walk! his Companions he did choose were but
mean Fishermen; his Occupation and Employment was no ways honorable; and his
Revenues were but small, as he himself did testify, The foxes have holes, and
the birds of the air nests, but the Son of man has not where he may lay his
head.

Although his descent and extraction was incomparably great, yet he rather
endeavored to conceal than to brag of it; and so humble was he, that he chose
rather to attribute the praise of his admired works to his Father, than take
the honor of them to himself, Joh. 8.28. I do nothing of my self, but as my
Father has taught me I speak these things.

He was not ambitious of Rule and Government, but modestly refused to be a
Ruler and Judge. Nay, when the multitude thought to make him a King, he shunned
their society by an invisible removal, it being quite contrary to his design
in coming into the world, (as he tells us, Matthew. 20.28.) he came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister. And to correct the insolent pride and ambition
of his followers, how did he stoop to wash his Disciples feet! a most admirable
evidence of his lowliness of spirit.

And now since our great Lord and Master did so wonderfully debase himself to
the form of a Servant; since in all his actions he did manifest that he was
meek and lowly, how prodigiously incongruous is it for those who profess
themselves to be his Disciples to be proud and lofty?

I confess, Humility is a grace well becoming our state as creatures; we are
but dependent beings, having life and motion, and all those endowments we are
proud of, from the Father of spirits, from whom every good gi^^ comes. The
fresh communications of his love we constantly participate of, are freely
bestowed; which he may therefore, when he thinks fit, with an equal freedom and
ease remove, without being guilty of injuring us.

Humility is that peculiar grace that qualifies and fits us to receive the
divine aid and assistance; as the Apostle St. James tells us, he gives grace to
the humble. Upon which account we may with the Wise man well conclude: Better
is it to be of an humble spirit with the lowly, than to divide the spoil with
the proud, Prove. 16.19.

I doubt not but every considering man will find his own Reason suggest a
sufficient store of arguments to confute the imperious assaults of Pride and
Ambition: but methinks none can more powerfully prevail with ingenuous spirits,
than the consideration of Christ's humility: with this how effectually may he
repel every temptation to pride, by saying, Was my Master lowly of spirit, and
does it become me to be proud?

Thirdly, Christ is also set forth as our Pattern in his sufferings: If when ye
do well (says the Apostle) and suffer for it ye take it patiently, this is
acceptable with God; for even hitherto were ye called: for Christ also suffered
for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps, etc. 1 Pet.
2.20, 21. etc. Heb. 12.1, 2. His patience under his sufferings was very
admirable: for although he was flouted and contemned by his unworthy creatures,
was exposed to the base outrages of scandalous sinners, was made a spectacle,
set at naught, spit upon, and smitten by unworthy worms, whom with a word he
could have easily dashed into nothing; in a word, though he endured all that
malice could invent, suffered the worst of temporal evils, and became obedient
to the cursed death of the cross; yet notwithstanding, how patiently did he
endure the contradiction of sinners? how entirely did he submit to his Fathers
Will? Although he was extremely sensible of the weight of his sufferings, yet
he did not in the least evidence any revengeful mind in the midst of his
extreme tortures, but sweetly recommended his soul into his Fathers hands. And
now can any motive more effectually convince us to suffer patiently?

But God knows how much we set at naught this president: fain would we enjoy a
continual prosperity, a life of ease, without the least mixture or allay of
trouble. When we meet with any thing that imbitters our condition, like the
murmuring Israelites, we fret and repine, and our spirits begin to boil with
rage and discontent; we cannot endure to have our pleasures impaired, but
Jonah-like we are discontented, and ready to say, we do well to be angry: we
aggravate the most minute trouble with imagined circumstances, and are ready to
say, Come, behold and see if there be any affliction like mine. And although we
are assured that our repinings cannot remove or lighten our burden, cannot
give us the least ease or relief; yet we never rest till those puddled streams
be stirred up. Our grumblings are almost inseparable concomitants of our
sufferings; and if our Father smite us, we begin to accuse his love and
tenderness, notwithstanding he has instructed us that whom he loves he
chasteneth.

If we meet with reproaches, our revenge is on the wing; the least affront
kindles this unsanctified fire: No arguments can tame our Fury; no president
proves effectual to form our Souls to true patience. If we drink of the waters
of Marah, we complain of their bitterness, and, like foolish Children, think we
are hardly dealt with.

And although impatience enflames rather than allays the distemper, though it
augments the degrees of our trouble, and disenables us to bear the stroke of
Adversity; yet we will not be persuaded to a calm and quiet submission to the
Divine Will. Though impatience exasperates the pain, yet we think we do well to
be angry. If we meet with injuries, our appetite of revenge is stirred up;
flesh and blood we say cannot endure such affronts; we imagine it stains our
Reputation and Honor in the world, and is degenerous and servile.

Thus do we sew Fig Leaves to cover our nakedness; but the all-seeing God knows
that all these repinings are arrows directed against his Providence; otherwise
we should with the Royal Psalmist say, I will not open my mouth, for thou did
it. To this impregnable Fortress he had his recourse, when causlesly cursed and
reviled by Shimei: it was this that silenced old Eli, It is the Lord, let him
do what seems him good: he durst not quarrel at the message, but quietly he
submits. There is a secret Providence which does overrule the most terrible
accidents, and is not accountable to humane Reason. All those calamities and
sufferings we undergo, are ordered by infinite Counsel; and in repining at such
dispensations, we indirectly blame Almighty Goodness and Wisdom.

Is it fit and congruous that God should take measures from men in his Economy
of the World? is it reasonable that the whole course of things should be put
out of order, to satisfy every private man's humor? can there be any greater
madness, than to prescribe rules of Government to infinite Wisdom? Why then are
we dissatisfied with our adverse state? why do we repine and complain?

If we did indeed compare our Mercies with our Sufferings, our Receipts with
our Merits, or our Condition with that of some others, we could not but be
convinced of our folly: but we still pore upon the sore; all our thoughts are
taken up and in exercise about our affliction: if we would deal rationally, let
us view the sufferings of our blessed Redeemer, and see if we dare make a
contrary conclusion to that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.1. Forasmuch then as
Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, let us arm our selves likewise with
the same mind: He suffered patiently and calmly for us; and it is but
reasonable that Servants imitate their Master, and suffer the disasters they
meet with, with the same mind that he did; that being thus made conform to our
head, we may be also partakers with him of his joy.

It Is indeed an unchild-like behavior, to quarrel at the dispensations of our
Heavenly Father: Alas! all we merit by our sins, is stripes and chastisements;
and it is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed: sure many who have
offended less, have been justly sent to everlasting burnings, do now dwell with
devouring flames; and why should a living man complain? it were certainly more
rational to be humbled for the evil that occasioned the rod, that our present
misery may not be the prelude to more lasting torments. Nay, there is nothing
that more offends God, that is more contrary to the pattern set before us, than
to murmur and repine; let us therefore study to bear the resemblance of our
eldest Brother, that our Heavenly Father may acknowledge us for his Children.

In the next place, Christ's obedience to the Will of his Father, is set forth
as our president; and can any thing more powerfully persuade us to obedience
than his example? which not only discovers our duty, but also inspirits and
enables us to perform it. If the marvelous pattern of Christ's entire obedience
does not form our wills to do what God enjoins, I scarce know any argument that
will prove ^ffectual.

And now, how serious was our Lord Christ in dispatching that business his
Father entrusted him with? The work that his Father gave him to do he finished
it, Joh. 17.4. and he testifies of himself, That he did always those things
that pleased his Father, Joh. 8.29. and that he might more emphatically express
this, he tells us, Joh. 4.34. My meat is to do the will of him that sent me,
and to finish his work: and indeed, in that he so entirely resigned the whole
power of his Will to his Father, Not my will, but thy will be done, we have the
most unquestionable proof of his perfect obedience. He was, as the great
Apostle tells us, Obedient to the death of the Cross, submitted to the most
dreadful sufferings, that he might instruct us to keep his commandments, even
as he kept his Fathers commandments, Joh. 15.10. and that the same mind be in
us that was in him.

But God knows how little we regard either his Precepts or Examples: for
although our great Master has made his obedience our rule, yet how ready are we
to despise it, if in the least it cross our humors or carnal interest? Alas!
little do we consider, that obedience is essentially necessary in order to our
supreme happiness; and that torments, as severe and intolerable as they are
lasting, are the lot of the disobedient.

It were to be wished that the rebellious posterity of Adam would but seriously
ponder what they will be able to say in the great day of Audit. Sure I am, the
whole Contexture and Harmony of the divine Precepts and Doctrines are equitable
and just, and therefore call for our hearty compliance with them. The wise God
never issued out any Command which could not be obeyed; He is not like the
Egyptian Taskmasters, to require Brick while there is no Straw. Nay, indeed,
our duty and interest are coupled together so closely, that if we disobey and
rebel, we may thank our selves for the misery we have chosen.

And as his obedience is set before us for imitation, so is his Love, Charity,
and Compassion also. His whole life was spent in doing good to men: how
transcendent is, his love in pitying us in our degenerate and forlorn estate?
when we were at odds with Heaven, and incapable to help our selves, then, even
then, did he commiserate our case, and by his own Blood reconciled us to the
Father. It is the greatest demonstration of love imaginable, for a man to lay
down his life for his friend, Joh. 15.13. and yet more wonderful was the love
of our Redeemer in passing through so many cruel sufferings for us, who were
but Rebels and Enemies. O how should the remembrance of his boundless
compassions transport and ravish us with love! how strange is it, that the
highest endearments of Love have not inflamed our spirits, and made Love mutual
and reciprocal!

Love is a most excellent affection, of a noble original, by which we resemble
the best of beings; the great God being by the beloved Disciple described to be
Love: and indeed well does this description suit with his dealings with men.
But alas! how unlike are we to God in this! there is scarce any duty more
frequently inculcated by our Savior than Love, John 15.12. This is my
commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you: and yet how little
efficacy has either his precept or example with us?

Blessed Redeemer! how unworthy do impure Earthworms require thy love? thou
have not been wanting to conquer our affections, and to inflame our frozen
hearts with love to thee, and to our Neighbors also: Thy life and Death
comprehend the most endearing arguments imaginable; and yet well may thou ask
us as once thou did Peter, Love you me? but God knows there are but a very
few who can unfeignedly say as this Disciple did, Lord, thou know that I
love thee. We can remember all thy sorrows without tears, and look upon thy
agonies with an unconcerned eye: We can view thee in the Garden, when grief and
pain made thee sweat drops of blood, and behold thee as thou stoodst accused as
a Malefactor before Pilate, as thou were contemned, scourged, and derided by
impure worms, and most spitefully represented in a fools habit: we can ascend
Mount Calvary, and contemplate thee as enduring the most shameful death of the
Cross, and hanging betwixt two Thieves, and all this time have Adamantine
hearts, which receive no impression. Blessed Redeemer! come, touch these hearts
of ours, that they may be overcome with love, that our wills and affections may
be perfectly molded according to thy pleasure.

Sure if we had any sparks of Generosity or common Ingenuity, we could not thus
despise so much love: The very Publicans (who were reputed the worst of men)
yet loved those that loved them: And it has even in the most degenerate times
been reckoned the highest baseness to contemn Benefactors; yet more brutish are
we become than these, and may very fitly be ranked in a Category inferior to
that of bruits: For the Ass (as sacred Writ tells us) knows his masters crib,
and the Ox his owner, Isa. 1.3. The very beasts in their own manner express a
kind of love to their Benefactors; and yet although our Redeemer has made our
peace by his blood on the Cross, and has reversed that sentence of Damnation
passed upon us; although he has endured the greatest dishonor and pain
imaginable, that we might be delivered from the wrath to come, yet this
unparalled kindness, the greatest endearment of love, has not had the kindly
effect to quicken our dead and benumbed hearts, but like a lifeless carcass we
remain insensible without the least return of love.

And indeed it can scarce be well expected that the example of his love to us
should engage us to love one another, since it has produced so little love in
us to himself. But however, I need not take much pains to prove that hereby we
demonstrate our selves to be of all men the most ungrate, and justly liable to
the severest punishment ever inflicted upon the greatest criminal.

It would be too prolix to enumerate the several instances wherein Christ is
set forth as our Pattern: sure I am, he has by his example taught us the
exercise of all virtues; and I may say (as himself said in another case) If we
know these things, happy are we if we do them.

To sum up this Section, it will not be amiss to obviate an Objection, which is
indeed but very trivial, although it be too commonly urged: the Objection is,
How is it possible for men to conform to Christ, and be holy as he is holy?
Ans. I have already told, that it is not expected that we should imitate our
blessed Redeemer in all and every of those actions he performed; but in all
those moral duties which he has enjoined by his righteous precepts, and
encouraged us by his example to perform, these we must by no means neglect: and
to manifest the possibility of doing these, we may satisfy our selves by
viewing the pious and devout lives of primitive Christians. It is a great
mistake to think we are commanded to a rigorous and strict conversation which
cannot be attained; the faithful in former ages have run the same race that is
set before us; they have fully enough cleared the possibility of our duty:
Wherefore seeing we also (as the Apostle argues) are compassed about with so
great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin that
does so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set
before us, Heb. 12.1. For shame, let us rather imitate the excellent holiness
of primitive Christians, than the impure practices of those who are strangers
from the sacred Covenant.

O the perfect love and imitable kindness of the first professors of the
Gospel! what purity, what integrity and innocence appeared in their lives? how
ravishing and splendent were their virtues and graces; their Patience in
suffering, their Courage and Magnanimity in death, their Temperance and
Moderation, their Charity and Compassion, their Equality and Justice, and their
Contempt of this World and all earthly concerns for the sake and honor of
their Master? These were the virtues they were adorned with, which made the
Heathen world, who hated the Doctrine they professed, yet esteem and reverence
them. Bonus vir Cajus Sejus, nisi Christianus.

SECT. 2. Holiness the condition of future Happiness.
The desire of Happiness is so natural to all that partake of humane nature,
that it can no more be separate from it than heat can be from fire. It Is true,
the mistakes concerning happiness are as numerous as dangerous; every one in
this corrupt state is apt to frame a happiness which best suits his
inclinations: but yet there is no man so devoid of reason, who does not desire
to be happy; although indeed there be but a few who make use of the right means
to attain to true felicity.

Daily experience puts it beyond doubt, that a carnal and fictitious felicity
is by the unwise sons of men pursued with the most indefatigable pains and
industry possible. Now how strange, to amazement, is it to think, that men
should be so sedulous in hunting after a fancied felicity, and yet so
negligent, so careless and unconcerned about a real happiness which is both
satisfying and lasting?

But not to digress; that which I am now to urge, is: since happiness is that
which excites men to perform any thing cheerfully in order to the attaining of
it, how mightily should the expectation of a future felicity induce them to the
practice of Holiness? for betwixt the two our blessed Savior has made an
inseparable connection, Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in spirit, for they
shall see God: and indeed it is the height of folly and madness, for impure
wretches to expect they shall be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints of
light; for as the Apostle tells us, There shall in no wise enter into it any
thing that defiles, Rev. 21.27. Holiness is the established condition of
happiness, Heb. 12.14. Without holiness no man shall see God. Hence is it that
all the promises concerning our future felicity are only made to those men who
purify themselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit; and the great
design of them is to encourage us to Holiness; upon which account St. Paul
draws a very pressing inference, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises,
(of which he spoke in the foregoing Chapter) let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

There is nothing more certain, than that only holy souls are in a capacity of
participating of that future felicity; and these may without the least charge
of presumption claim an interest in it: But for those vicious wretches, who are
wholly polluted, who have devoted themselves to commit sin with greediness, and
take pleasure in doing evil; how utterly incapable are they (if they continue
such) to dwell in his presence, who is not a God that takes pleasure in
wickedness?

And now seeing there is such an inseparable connection between Happiness and
Holiness, it cannot be amiss if we take a short view of the excellency of this
celestial felicity, that it may more plainly appear what a notable
encouragement and motive it is to holiness.

There be two things that forcibly recommend the excellency of that future
state of bliss. First, A perfect freedom and immunity from all evils. And
Secondly, a perpetual enjoyment of the chief good.

First, it is a blessedness wholly exempt from evils whether of sense or loss;
it is a happiness attended with no inconveniences, nor dismal circumstances, as
the happiest state here is: we now walk in the midst of perplexing doubts and
fears; temptations increase our inquietudes, and dangers our continual fears:
our complaints are by far more numerous than our joys; nay, what is our whole
life, but a scene where sorrow and fears act their parts! Man that is born of a
woman is of few days, and full of evil.

But our future blessedness quite excludes all those evils; there is nothing
admitted to imbitter that pleasant state, Rev. 21.4. And God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow,
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for the former things are
passed away. The holy soul shall then no more complain of any dolorous hours;
the heavenly Jerusalem is a place unacquainted with every thing that is uneasy
and troublesome.

And yet this is but the least part of the Saints felicity: for as they shall
enjoy a perfect freedom from evil, so shall they also be advanced to the
fullest fruition of that God, where all the streams of goodness do finally
empty themselves: Blessed are the pure in spirit, for they shall see God,
Matthew. 5.8. They shall see him, not as now through a Glass darkly, but then
face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. they shall, as the Angels in Heaven, always behold
the face of their Father, Matthew. 18.10. in whose presence (as the Psalmist
assures us) is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for
evermore, Psalm. 16.11. O the unspeakable delectability of the Saints future
state! where the most blessed God shines forth in his Glory, where the beams of
beauty ravish the beholders, who stand continually in his presence receiving
the manifestations of his Glory!

Sure if the faint expectation of enjoying the company of virtuous men in their
fancied Elyzium, did instigate some Heathens to imitate their virtues; how much
more persuasive should the heavenly Jerusalem, and the City of the living God
be? where the holy Soul shall be admitted to converse with an innumerable
company of holy Angels, and taken into the blessed Society and Church of the
firstborn; where all those imperfections that imbitter our communion here, are
removed; where the holy Soul shall see Jesus the blessed Mediator of the new
Covenant, Heb. 12. who suffered so much for sinners, now sitting in glory and
majesty; not crowned (as once he was) with thorns, nor wearing a purple robe;
but having on his head the most transplendent Diadem, and clothed with Majesty
and Beauty. Methinks the thoughts of beholding this glory, and participating of
so much felicity, should excite the most lazy to follow Holiness, and to walk
worthy of him who has called us to his Kingdom and glory.

But I confess I am not able to express half of the glory of that future
felicity: The blessed Apostle seems to intimate, that all Hyperbolical
expressions fall short in describing it, 2 Cor. 4.17. where he styles it, A far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: and 1 Cor. 2.9. he tells us, Eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive what God has prepared for those that love him. For although we may be
assured that the reward is of infinite value, and that the righteous shall
shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father: yet the most glorious
part is hid from the eyes of viators; it is only those who taste the Honeycomb
that can best discover its sweetness.

And yet it is prodigiously strange, that the imperfect glance of future Glory
that men may here behold, is so ineffectual to form them to Holiness; that men
who know they may be for ever happy, if they would study and endeavor to be
holy in all manner of conversation, yet live as if they thought such a happy
state not worthy to be noticed.

I confess, if the faithful and true God had not promised this state of
blessedness, and discovered by revelation the truth and reality of it, we could
never have dreamed of partaking of so much happiness. The Heathen world could
never be ascertained (by Natures dim light) that the Soul is beyond all doubt
immortal, and that there is a future state of rewards and punishments. The
wisest of their Philosophers, by their most laborious search, were exceedingly
confused in their thoughts about it, and could at the most only entertain some
probable guesses and conjectures, founded upon moral arguments, which could
never perfectly conquer their doubts: They did indeed think it was very
reasonable to believe that God (who is holy, just, and good) would in another
life (since he did it not in this) reward good men, and punish the bad; but
they could not be, beyond all doubt, ascertained that it would be so. The most
celebrated Socrates, who parted with this life in expectation of a better,
plainly told his Friends, it was God only who knew whether there were a future
felicity or not; much less could either he or any other, without revelation,
discover the nature and quality of the blessedness of that future state. And
indeed, although they entertained some imperfect notions of a future life of
bliss for the Soul, yet they never thought of the resurrection of the Body:
although it is true, the felicity they formed, was more congruous by far to
satisfy sensual appetites, than rational Souls: The Poets Elyzium being much
of the same nature with the Mohammedan Paradise, exactly accommodated to their
flesh and senses.

In these thick clouds of darkness and ignorance did the wisest of the Heathens
walk: Exceedingly perplexed they were what to think, their doubts being greater
than their hopes. But the arising of the Sunshine of Righteousness has wholly
dispelled all that darkness; the Gospel has brought life and immortality to
light, 2 Timothy 1.10. and has undoubtedly assured us that there is a reward for
the Righteous, and that Holiness shall be crowned with Happiness.

SECT. 3. Holiness the only safe way to escape the wrath to come.
Fear is a passion so extremely violent, and repugnant to Humane nature, that
nothing imaginable is of more force to conquer the unruly wills of men to duty.
Hence is it, that even humane Laws are much more secured by punishments than
rewards: Therefore if the promise of Heaven be not forcible enough to work upon
our rebellious Wills, we have a Map of eternal and intolerable torments to
excite our fear, and to affright us from the commission of those sins that lead
down to the chambers of death; and that drawn so exactly, that it is the
greatest miracle, that men will notwithstanding slight Holiness, which is the
only means to evite these lasting tortures.

In sacred Writ, the torments of the damned are represented by such terrifying
expressions, that it is a wonder they impress not a fear and terror upon the
most daring sinner. The Apostle St. Jude describing Hell, calls it, The
vengeance of eternal fire, and the blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 7, 13.
And the Apostle St. John calls it, A lake of fire and brimstone, Rev. 20.10,
15. Our Savior more emphatically describes it to be A fire that can never be
quenched, and where the worm dies not, Mark 9.46. All which phrases do most
significantly express the severity and intolerableness of the torments: for
what punishment is so terrible as that of Fire? and how unspeakably does it
inhance the misery, in that it is eternal? and that too, as inflicted by an
offended God, who is executing his vengeance upon sinners.

Would God sinners would seriously consider whether they are able to endure the
eternal pains of a gnawing Conscience? or can patiently dwell with devouring
Flames? Whether the momentary pleasures of sin, are to be balanced with those
furious reflections, those horrid stings and intolerable tortures the damned
suffer day and night, where nothing of life remains but the sense of pain?
Alas! will no argument prevail with men? how amazing is it to think that the
everlasting God has used all the methods of love to excite men to Holiness, and
to reclaim them from sin, and all to no purpose? May I not well say to such
men, as St. Paul said to the Galatians, Unwise sinners, who has bewitched you?

Did men seriously believe the threatenings of the Gospel, I am sure they would
not, for the fullest enjoyment of carnal felicity, run the hazard of dwelling
with everlasting burnings. That man that soberly considers, that the wrath of
God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men,
will, I think, easily be scared into reformation, and be thereby excited to be
diligent in the pursuit of substantial Holiness, which is the safe course to
escape that wrath.

Alas! that men who are so wise and diligent in their secular concerns, should
prove so foolish, so remiss and careless in matters of the greatest weight, and
which require the utmost diligence! That rational creatures should so willingly
purchase their own misery, and be at so much pains to damn themselves! 'Twill
surely be an aggravating circumstance of their misery, to think that they might
have been happy, if they had but taken as much pains to live holily, as they
took in the pursuit of sinful pleasures. How astonishing a consideration will
it be to the damned, to think of their treading under foot the Son of God, and
their counting the blood of the Covenant whereby they were sanctifi^d, an
unholy thing? Heb. 10.29. to think, that the time was, when they enjoyed not
only a possibility, but a fair probability also of escaping the fury and
indignation of God!

But men will not believe that a merciful God will thus torment his creatures;
that he who delights not in the death of sinners, will execute his vengeance
upon them. Alas! what delusory imaginations arethese? for although fury is not
in God, yet his honor calls for the execution of Justice upon ungodly sinners,
who obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus. He has waited long upon sinners, and
has fully testified that he is a God long suffering, and slow to wrath: He has
not instantly resented every injury offered to him; but day from day has been
entreating sinners to turn from the evil of their ways: and now seeing they set
at naught all his counsel, and will not hearken to his reproof, what wonder is
it though he laugh at their calamity, and mock when their fear comes? Prove.
1.25.26. How heavy is that threatening, Deuteronomy. 28.63. As the Lord rejoiced over
you to do you Good: so the Lord will rejoice over you to destroy you?

To complete the misery of the damned, besides the intolerable and eternal
pains they endure, we may also add that celestial felicity they are for ever
excluded from. How tormenting will it be to think of an everlasting separation
from the divine Presence, and instead of a holy Society, to keep a continual
correspondency with impure Spirits?

Would God that this brief discovery of the powers of the world to come, might
prevail with men to be holy in all manner of conversation.

But methinks I hear the over zealous Professor too ignorantly objecting, that
it is servile, mercenary, and legal, to be holy for love of Heaven, or fear of
Hell. Truly if it were so as these men teach, I know not what can be the intent
and design of all the promises and threatenings of the Gospel. And although I
question not but it is a generous and Christian principle, to serve God out of
pure love; yet I can never be induced to think, that to be holy for love of
Heaven and fear of Hell, can be separate from that principle of love to God.

God knows how much in need men stand, both of arguments to work upon their
hope and fear, to excite them to duty. And since he who knows our natures, has
used promises to allure us, and threatenings to awaken us, we must not pretend
to be wiser than God, and reject those motives he has thought fit to prescribe:
and indeed, if it were not for the fear of evil, and the hope of good, it is to
be feared, the pressing of other motives should be but a mere beating of the
Air.

But that this is not servile and mercenary, needs no other argument to prove
it, but our Savior's enduring the Gross, and despising the Shame, for the joy
that was set before him; a Scripture sufficient enough to stop the mouths of
all opponents.

SECT 4. Holiness the main design of the Gospel, and the end of all Christ's
sufferings.
Subjects who know the intent and design of those Laws issued forth by their
Prince, will be loath to contemn his Authority, especially when the whole
intent of these is to make them by their obedience the more happy; and sure
it is the most unaccountable thing that can be, if they notwithstanding despise
his Laws, and quite counter-act his design.

Now the main design of the Christian precepts, is the promoting of Holiness,
and planting a good life in men: This also was the only intent of our
Sovereign and Lawgiver; and it is certain the whole advantage redounds to us.
How impious then is it to despise the Authority of Heaven! If God had made
Holiness a matter of indifferency, the want of such a qualification had not
been criminal: but since sacred Writ has declared, That this is the will of
God, even our sanctification, and that we must be holy as he is holy; if we
rebel, the indignity and contempt we cast upon him, is insufferable.

I have already showed, that it is the great design of the Gospel-Precepts,
Promises, and Threatings, to exalt Holiness. Hence the Apostle very aptly calls
it, A doctrine according to godliness: and he tells us, that the design of it
is, to teach men to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world: and the Character of its nature
is, to turn men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God,
that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that
are sanctified by faith in Christ.

I wish the effect were answerable to the design. I doubt not but the Gospel
has had a kindly influence upon some, to form them to Holiness, I would fain
wish upon all: But alas! the perverse and corrupt conversations of men plainly
tell us, that there are but a few who have answered its design.

In the next place, it were easy to demonstrate, that to plant Holiness
amongst men, was the end of Christ's descending from Heaven to Earth, and of all
that he suffered. This the Apostle plainly enough holds forth, Tit. 2.14. He
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purisie
unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Now what argument should
be so powerful and prevalent to engage Christians to be universally holy, as
the due consideration of Christ's redeeming them for that end?

Men who are endu'd with any sparks of ingenuity, cannot but be inspirited to
be separate from the pollutions of this world, when they reflect what their
Redeemer has suffered in order to the purchasing of their pardon and
reconciliation: For when poor Man had cast himself headlong from Heaven to
Earth, had lost his pristine purity, and subjugated himself to the cruel
tyranny and dominion of sin; in this deplorable state being utterly unable to
help himself, our blessed Lord redeemed us from our captivity, by offering up
himself a ransom to satisfy divine Justice; and all this, that we might walk
in newness of life. And now what ingratitude is it to despise so much love?
Sure, If he that despised Moses law died without mercy, of how much sorer
punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, and has counted the Blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an
unholy thing? Heb. 10.28, 29.

He must certainly be of a very base and disingenous spirit, who takes pleasure
in sin, when he considers how dearly Christ paid for it. Has he been at so
much pains, undergone such dismal sufferings to purchase our peace, and will we
notwithstanding frustrate his design? how strange to astonishment is this,
that men should prefer captivity to freedom!

Alas! is it not enough that our blessed Master was so barbarously and
despitefully used by the Jews and Roman Soldiers, but must we be also Actors
in the Tragedy, and by our sins crucify him again?

Did he not die that we might live? and shall we spend our life in offering
despite unto him? Strange, that so much madness should lodge in the breasts of
any into whom God has breathed the breath of life!

I might here also add, that it is a contemning, and offering of the greatest
despite to the Holy Spirit, to despise Holiness: for upon this account is the
third person of the blessed Trinity called the Holy Ghost, because his peculiar
office is to enable us to perform holy actions: now if we continue in our
rebellion, if we reject the offers of grace, and the internal motions of the
Spirit to Holiness, we do hereby become guilty of quenching the Spirit of God,
and offering despite unto him; which is so horrid a piece of villainy, that
Heaven threatens it with the severest torments.

SECT. 5. Holiness the most proper and effectual means for attaining length of
days.
Of all outward and temporal blessings, length of days has justly the
precedence, since without this, all others can afford little or no comfort: The
possession and enjoyment of other mercies, can bestow no satisfaction to men
lying on their beds of languishing: nay, there is no comfort, be it never so
great, but men would willingly quit with, to acquire this. Now since this is
above all things so universally desired, it cannot but very much enhance the
value of Holiness, to demonstrate that there is nothing so proper, nor more
effectual to procure length of days than this.

In order to my proving of this, I shall first make it plain from Scripture,
that length of days is due to holy men by virtue of the many true and faithful
promises; and secondly, I shall appeal to common experience to determine the
case.

First, there is nothing more evidently asserted in Scripture, than that
Holiness has the promise of length of days annexed to it, Prove. 3.1, 2. My
son, forget not my law, but let thine heart keep my commandments; for length of
days and long life shall they add unto thee. This encouraging motive is
pressed very effectually by Moses, in his exhortation to obedience, Deuteronomy. 4.40.
Thou shall keep therefore his statutes and his commandments which I command
thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee,
and that thou may prolong thy days upon the earth. Upon this account we also
find that there are many promises of this nature to obedient Children, Exodus
20.12. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long upon the
land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

And as Righteousness tends to life, (as the Wise man observes) so he that
pursues evil pursues it to his own death, Prove. 11.19. There is nothing more
evident from Scripture, than that sin has a natural tendency to shorten men's
lives; nay, the great God, who is serious in his threatenings, has assured us
it is so: upon which account we may well conclude with the Wise man, Prove.
10.27. The years of the wicked shall be shortened.

The whole tenor of the Scripture abounds with many such promises and
threatenings; and the thing is so plain, that I need not stand to transcribe
many texts.

But besides Scripture, this truth is also plainly attested by common
experience: for if we examine who are the men who for ordinary are most
obnoxious to diseases, and live shortest; we shall find it true enough, that
the vicious are the men, who live not out half their days, Prove. 23.29, 30. Who
has woe? who has sorrow? who has wounds without cause? they that tarry long
at the wine, etc. Holiness is repugnant and inconsistent with excess, which
naturally puts a period to the lives of men: It forbids all manner of vice,
which leads down to the chambers of death; and keeps men within due bounds in
their eating and drinking.

Before mankind had corrupted themselves by their notorious and impudent
vitiousness, we read of their great length of days; but the increase of sin
multiplied diseases, which hurry men to untimely deaths.

I deny not but the great Lord and Master of the Universe may, for holy and
wise ends known unto himself, cut short the lives of the righteous; yet surely
if we consult either Experience or Reason, we shall find it certain beyond
doubt, that virtuous men enjoy, for ordinary, far the longest lives.

Some good men may be naturally of a brittle constitution, yet how strangely
has their life been protracted by their moderation and sobriety? and how many
strong men have had their days shortened by their intemperance and excess?

Indeed, he that considers this well, shall find, that Holiness is the most
effectual means to promote long life, both upon a moral and natural account.
Upon a moral account, long life is the reward which the divine promises do
secure to such men; and on the contrary, wickedness is threatened with shortness
of days. Upon a natural account, the fire does not more naturally produce heat,
than Holiness does procure health and length of days; and there is nothing more
evident, than that the most of vices have a physical efficacy in the shortning
of humane life. That this is the necessary product and genuine effect of
intemperance and lasciviousness, needs no other argument to prove it, but the
daily examples of multitudes, whom those sins have hurried to their graves. And
truly there is not any vice which does not like fire in men's bosoms torture and
consume them; and so disorders and discomposes them, that they even neglect the
necessary means of their health. See Period of Humane life, page 111, 124,
Edit. 2.

SECT. 6. Holiness that which makes men honorable; vice rendering men mean and
ignoble.
Honor is an ornament so noble and venerable, that he is but very sottish, if
not quite brutish, who does not court and caress it. Upon this account it is
nothing strange, that ancient Philosophers, who wanted the assistance of
revelation, placed man's happiness in it.

How many brave and gallant actions have been performed, which if they had
wanted the bait of Honor had never been attempted! Gallant souls, who despise
all other rewards, have been hereby excited to undergo the greatest dangers.

Now, since honor is so highly esteemed, especially by those who pretend to
generositie; I shall, to encourage such to befriend Holiness, endeavor to
prove, that the most effectual means to procure Honor, and to be in esteem
both with God and man, is to live (as the Apostle advises men) soberly,
righteously, and godly.

Only before I proceed to prove this, I shall premise one Caution, namely,
that by Honor I do not chiefly understand one dignified with any extrinsecal
honor arising either from his Birth or Office; though both these are to be
highly esteemed, and must not be denied that external respect due unto them:
but by Honor I understand that esteem and reputation that the best and wisest
men do give to any whose Moral honor is conspicuous; and under this notion the
Stoick-Moralist has very well expressed it, Nobilitas sola est atque unica
virtus. which upon the matter disagrees not much from that sacred position of
the Wise man, Prove. 22.1. A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches.

Having premised this, I come now to prove that Holiness is the pathway to
Honor. And indeed, this is so plainly asserted in Scripture, that it is
needless to insist. The God of Heaven has assured us, that those that Honor
him, he will honor; and those that despise him shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30. Much like to this, is that inducement to Holiness urged by our Lord
Christ, Joh. 12.26. If any man serve me, him will my Father honor. Now men
cannot honor God more, than by being holy: for the word is comprehensive, and
includes all those duties that God has enjoined; but every vice is a despising
of his sacred Authority. If then holy men are those only whom God will honor,
and vicious men those whom he will contemn, we may easily conclude, who are the
honorable, and who are the base and ignoble. Sure those men must be
honorable, whom the Fountain of Honor esteems such.

It Is upon this account that the Saints are called (in Scripture) the excellent
of the earth, and the worthies of the world, (how meanly soever men esteem
them) of whom the world is not worthy: And the righteous is said to be more
excellent than his neighbor. And indeed, Holiness does not only promote the
honor and esteem of private persons, but of public Communities and Kingdoms
also, Prove. 14.34. Righteousness exalts a nation; but sin is a reproach to
any people.

This is a truth which the wisest of the Heathens, who yet wanted Revelation,
constantly taught, namely, That Honor is the reward of virtue. Hence the large
Lectures they have written in the commendation thereof: it would be too tedious
to transcribe even the Elogies that they have written in the praise of Virtue;
and indeed it is well worthy of our observation, that as they have illustrated
Virtue by their large Encomiums of it, so Virtue (which they courted) has made
them venerable to posterity, and transmitted to us their memories under the
most amiable Encomiums imaginable: And however their birth was but mean and
almost regardless, yet their virtues have made them more famous than Princes
and Emperors. The virtues of Aristides, Socrates, Seneca, Marcus Regulus, and
many others, have made their renown glorious; whileas many Emperors and great
men have had their names buried in silence.

Let a man be as rich as ever any of Adam's posterity was, or (that I may
extend it farther) as high as his ambitious thoughts can wish; let him be wise
as Solomon, and endued with all other perfections and advantages; yet if he
want virtue, how insipid will his Name be to posterity? It is Virtue alone that
conduces to same. It Is true, some wicked men (called in Scripture vile,
notwithstanding their authority) have been set in high places, and honored for
fear, when alive; yet they never received that honor which has in all ages
accompanied the Righteous. They have had the external, (which is indeed due to
men by virtue of their Descent or Office) but wanted that internal reverence
and honor which is only due to good men: and I doubt not to say, that there
is nothing more incongruous and unsuitable, than to see Honor given to such
men. As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest; so honor is not seemly for a
fool, Prove. 26.1.

Vice is in the judgment of all considering men so mean and base, that it
casts a stain and reproach upon men; makes their names unsavory, and stink in
the nostrils of after-ages: but Holiness forces a veneration from men, and
makes posterity raise Elogies in their memory; but the memory of the wicked
shall be forgotten.

Virtue was that alone whereby many Kingdoms and Empires have been raised; was
that which made them so flourishing and potent, and prevailed more to their
establishment and advancement, than Strength or Policy. Thus it was with the
old Romans, (for their virtues are a shame to the present state of that Empire)
their Clemency and Justice conquered Kingdoms, and made Rome renowned and
glorious beyond all other Kingdoms and Commonwealths: and as Virtue has raised
Kingdoms, so has it also particular Persons; whileas Vice has cast Emperors
from their Thrones, and made them as unfortunate as they were wicked.

Many of the primitive Martyrs, who were renowned by Kingdoms and Commonwealths
(who keep Festivals in honor of their memories) were but of an inferior
degree, and had nothing to recommend them to posterity but their Holiness and
Sanctity; and indeed, any man that consults Reason, will easily find himself
constrained to reverence and esteem virtuous men.

It Is a wonder that any man who pretends to generosity should be vicious, there
being nothing so mean and base as Vice, which like to cowards always lurketh,
and dares not approach the light. I doubt not but this present age has arrived
at as high a confidence in proclaiming their sins as Sodom, as ever any former
age acquired; and it may (to the reproach of it) be said, as ever any is like
to reach to: yet till men cast quite off humanity, it cannot be expected that
Vice shall have Advocates to plead in its defense. It Is a noble saying of the
great Moralist Seneca; Licet Deus nesciret nec homo puniret peccatum, non tamen
peccarem ob peccati vilitatem.

It Is no wonder then though Vice appear (as the Devil in Samuel's mantle) under
the cloak of Virtue; though Lust mask it self with the pretense of Love, and
Cruelty of Zeal: but by this means it proclaims its timorousness, not daring to
own publicly what it really is.

It were a large field, to descend to the consideration of every particular
virtue and vice, and to show that there is not any virtue but tends to the
advancement of a man's honor and fame, and no vice which is not ungentile,
mean, and base: But the brevity I have designed will not allow me to enlarge;
only in brief I shall demonstrate the truth of this by some few Instances.

Justice is so gallant a virtue, that it advanced the renown of those whom it
adorned, beyond what riches or preferment could ever bestow. The Romans were
more famous, and (where they were Enemies) more formidable for their Justice
than their Power: it was this virtue which in a peculiar manner made Scepters
and Kingdoms submit to their Governments. But Injustice is so base and
contemptible a vice, that it has made those who are captivated by it, despised
as the unworthiest of men, not deserving to be taken into friendship, but to be
excluded from humane Societies. How unsavory has the name of unjust Judges
been to posterity, while every one is ready to strew some Elogies in honor of
the just!

To this I may annex Constancy in friendship, as a virtue as noble as amiable:
For who will not admire and celebrate the man who remains fixed to his friend,
whatever alterations or changes there may be in his condition? And sure
whosoever fails in his friendship, lays himself open to the most merciless
condition, and needs expect to be left to befriend himself when the wheel of
Providence lays him below those he thought unworthy of his favor.

Of all virtues, Liberality, Charity, and Compassion are so noble, that common
speech adapts this Elogie to them by way of emphasis; and indeed, I think I
need not say much to raise an estimate of these: for no man can be so base as
to despise those who bestow favors upon him. Sure there is no virtue that
makes men more famous, that wins the hearts and affections of people more, than
Liberality: but Avarice is ungentile and sordid; and so odious a vice, that it
ever lessens all other virtues, and makes those it possesses the most hateful
of men.

Charity is an obliging virtue; and as it has its original from, so does it
also necessarily produce Love, and esteem too: he who prefers the necessities
of others before his own superfluities, and who does supply the wants of
others, does so cheer the languishing hearts of the needy, that nothing can be
more generous, nor generally meets with a greater recompense of honor and
esteem.

To compassionate the case of the Fatherless, of the Poor and Needy, is so
noble a virtue, that the Apostle makes this qualification alone the evidence of
pure and undefiled religion. It is a most unnatural and more than brutish sin,
to slight and forget such.

Meekness and Humility are such noble embellishments of humane nature, as I
have formerly showed, that none but proud and insolent spirits, who have been
always condemned as insufferable, durst ever disesteem them.

To these I may join Affability or Courtesy, as a virtue near allied to
Humility and Meekness; which being noble in its causes and effects, cannot but
denominate the person it illustrates both noble, and amiable, and lovely: It Is
indeed an evidence of a very base and abject spirit, to be sullen and morose.
Persons of a noble education and original, are frequently known by their
condescending and obliging behavior; and I am sure Reputation and Esteem are
the apparent effects of Courtesy.

Temperance and Moderation are virtues more noble than that they need eloquence
to advance their value, as its contraries are too mean and beastly to be
inveighed against. How brutish and contemptible is a drunken man, who is
rather an object of pity, (as madmen are) than reproach! who being a more apt
resemblance of a beast than a man, deserves as little Honor, as he is ignorant
what Honor means.

SECT. 7. Holiness attended with the most solid and real pleasures.
In all things that concern practice, there is scarce any motive more forcible
than Pleasure; and of all pleasures, those that entertain the Soul are the most
excellent. We indeed need no argument but experience, to demonstrate how
ravishing sensual pleasures and delights are, how much they are caressed and
courted, till men be glutted and filled with them. But alas! how inconsiderable
are all sensitive delights? the enjoyment of these cannot raise us above the
beasts that perish; but those pleasures which are fitted for the rational
nature, are noble and lasting; and such are all those delights that arise from
a holy conversation; no joy, without this, being able to make a man's life
pleasant and delightful.

There is in Holiness an internal delectability, that is better felt, than it
can be expressed; but how loathsome and odious is Vice? it is compared in
Scripture to the most ugly and unpleasant things: But Holiness is so comely, so
delightful, and ravishing, that it is very fitly (according to the
Scripture-Epithet of it) called, the Beauty of Holiness. It is this alone that
produces a calm and serene Conscience; from which necessarily results
acquiescence and delight: and indeed, this is no fantastic and imaginary joy,
(as the Atheists of this Age would make men believe) but a true and real one,
affording much more complacency and satisfaction, than all the pleasures of
sense. To the truth of which, I doubt not but those men who question it should
assent, if they would but make the experiment; and till they do this, they give
us too evident an instance of their folly, in denying the reality of those
raptures of joy resulting from a holy conversation.

But besides Experience, this truth is likewise confirmed by Reason: For who is
in more probable circumstances to participate of Pleasures, than he who is
Master of his Passions, who has subdued his appetites, and freed himself from
those imperious Lords, who denied him the liberty of tasting and relishing
pleasures? The pious Soul may have no large allowance of temporal mercies; yet
having Contentment, he is richer than the wicked man whose coffers are full.

But we need not doubt of the reality of those pleasures; the Wise man has
long since put this out of question, Prove. 3.17. Her ways are ways of
pleasantness. There is here a concurrence of all those circumstances that
contribute to make any thing delectable: it is a way pleasant for its plainness,
and desirable for its end. There is not indeed any thing wanting in it, that
usually draws out men's delight.

All beauty falls inconceivably short of this; it being Holiness alone, that
makes the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father:
without this, all natural comeliness is imperfect, and, as the Wise man
expresses it, is deceitful and vain, Prove. 31.30.

And yet what an universal Empress is external beauty become? nothing being of
equal force to attract the eye of beholders as it does. How has she conquered
the mighty, and made the Nobles of the Earth Vassals to lacquey after her?
There is an almost irresistible power and force in her charmings, which
conquereth the hearts of men insensibly.

Now if Beauty mixed with so much deformity, accompanied with so much
attendance and slavery, be so enchanting and attractive; how much more
powerfully should the Beauty of Holiness, which is every whit perfect and
unspotted, and attended with no dismal accidents, raise our admiration, and
make us say (as David of Goliah's Sword) There is none like it?

Alas! all earthly beauty will be quickly laid in the dust! a little time will
deface the fairest face, and make its beauty consume like a Moth: an unexpected
accident may disfigure it, and mar the most lovely features; and there is no
doubt but old Age, which draws on a pace, will make wrinkles in the smoothest
face, and make it wither as a flower: But the Beauty of Holiness is lasting; it
fades not with time, nor can it be impaired by the most loathsome and
nauseating disease.

Since then Pleasure is so ready to excite our affections, and draw out our
complacency, it is pity that the noblest, the most satisfying, and the most
lasting should be so much contemned. Eccl. 5.10. He that loves silver, shall
not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loves abundance, with increase. All
the caresses of this World are unable to satisfy the Soul; but how ravishing
are the joys of a holy conversation! The pleasures of this world are short and
momentary, are only (as the Apostle phraseth them) for a season, which quickly
passes; but the joy of the Holy Ghost is as lasting as unspeakable; and this
joy (says Christ to his Disciples) no man shall take from you. It is without
the reach of the malice of men and Devils too.

Alas! how diminutive does it make the pleasures of the wicked, to say they are
short? how exceedingly does this one circumstance diminish them? But indeed
this were not so very considerable, if there were a concurrence of no worse
circumstances: but that which mostly is an allay and damp to temporal
pleasures, is the consequence, a painful and lasting eternity of the severest
punishments. It Is this life that puts a period and conclusion to the joys of
wicked men; whileas the pious have Rivers of pleasures for evermore to delight
and ravish them: it is at Death that they enter into the joy of their Lord.

This is a subject so ravishing and pleasant, that I cannot without reluctance
conclude it. O how unsatisfactory are all the delights of Sense, if compared
with those Spiritual Joys the holy Soul partakes of! The delights that the
Drunkard has in his Cups and Companions, the Covetous in his Riches, the
Ambitious in his Preferments, etc. fall all incomparable short of that joy that
is the lot of the righteous.

The delights that the holy man enjoys do upon a double account far over-poise
the transitory pleasures of the wicked. First, the present satisfaction that
the holy Soul tastes of in this valley of tears, is incomparably greater than
the delights that arise from sense. The soul that has once tasted of the love
of God, finds more pleasure in the very acts of mutual love, than in all the
feasts of delight that sense is capable to enjoy. Food is indeed sweet to the
hungry, and drink to those who are languishing with thirst: the taste does
without doubt find some meats sweet and relishing, even where there is no
extremity of hunger, much more where it is: for, to the hungry every bitter
thing is sweet. Beauteous Sights ravish the Eye, melodious Music the Ear, and
Odoriferous things please the Smell: But alas! how far beyond these is the
delight which the devout soul receives in Ordinances! the antipasts of joy
which their Heavenly Father bestows upon them, are more delightful than the
concurrence of all sensual pleasures. The soul that is in trouble can fetch
more consolation from the promises of the Word, than the carnal man can from
his pleasures: Unless thy Law had been my delight (says the Psalmist) I had
perished in my affliction. Other things could not avail him, they could afford
no relief: but to have access to God in prayer, and to pour out our complaints
to our willing God, this is more ravishing than I can express. And I am sure
there is no man who has tasted these joys, who would part with them for
sensual pleasures; and no man dare inveigh against those spiritual delights,
but strangers who intermeddle not with this joy.

The very Heathens have taught us, that Virtue is a reward to it self; they
experimented more real satisfaction in moderation and temperance, than in
Drinking and Whoring. But Christianity gives us more uncontrolable evidences of
the reality of that joy that good men even in this state of absence taste of.
Into what a rapture and unexpressible ecstasy of joy did the abundance of
revelation St. Paul met with put him! and the Apostle St. Peter was so
transported with joy when he did see Christ in his Transfiguration, that he
could not forbear crying, Master, it is good being here. How full of joy have
Martyrs been in the midst of the flames! what comforts have they even then
expressed! And is not all this evidence, that the joy of holy men is more real,
more sweet and ravishing, than the transitory pleasures of the wicked, which in
several seasons can afford no delight? a little pain or disease is such an
allay and damp to their pleasures, that it quite extirps them.

But besides those foretastes of joy that the holy Soul experiments here,
which, as I have showed, infinitely overwhelms all trouble and pain; that which
contributes most to advance the joy of good men, are those felicities above,
which are prepared for them; and to these wicked men can lay no claim, their
farthest prospect being confined to temporal delights.

What abundance of delights and unexpressible pleasures are laid up for the
holy Soul above! How delectable will it be, to be constant residents in the
Heavenly Jerusalem, whose Streets are pure Gold, and whose Gates are Pearl! how
ravishing will it be, to be always in his presence, where there are Streams and
Rivers of perpetual pleasures? How sweet will it be, to be a member of that
blessed Society of the firstborn in Heaven, where there is a perfect concord
and agreement? But I confess, I am not able to express half the joy of this
future felicity: Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into
the hearts of men to conceive, what a store of happiness God has laid up in
Heaven for those who are holy in all manner of conversation.

SECT. 8. Holiness accompanied with Peace.
There is nothing more suitable to, and agreeable with Humane nature, than
Peace; as those who endure trouble and vexation can fully attest: Amongst
earthly blessings it deserves not the last place, it being a mercy which crowns
all others, and without which, the fullest fruition could not prove
satisfactory.

Those languishing, and much to be pitied, Kingdoms, which now lie bathed in
blood, can attest the evils and mischiefs of War, much more pathetically than
words can express. How sweet and acceptable would Peace (a word always sounding
sweetly) be to them?

Now the Apostle St. James has given us a brief, but unquestionably true,
account of the real causes of Wars and Fightings, Jam. 4.1. From whence come
wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts that war
in your members? From these sinful causes have all the disorders and jars in
Kingdoms and private Societies had their real (I speak not of their pretended)
original. How impetuous are the lusts of turbulent spirits! like the raging
waves of the Sea, they are still in motion, casting forth filth and dirt.
Ambition is so unquiet and restless a passion, that no man is ignorant what
desolations it has wrought in the earth: How many famous Kingdoms has it
ruined and destroyed? what inquietudes and disorders are occasioned by
coffeehouse? All these are things so evident, that I need not enlarge upon
them: but how repugnant are these vices to Holiness? and can it be rationally
imagined that their genuine and proper effects can be more reconcilable with it?

I confess, Religion has too frequently been pretended as a Cloak to dover the
greatest Villainies, Confusions, and Rebellions: but sure I am, nothing
imaginable contains a greater contradiction, than to say these impieties have a
warrant from the sacred Laws of the Gospel, the combination of which is the
rule of Holiness, as I have formerly explained. Is not Christ called the Prince
of Peace, and the Gospel the Gospel of Peace? And it is certain, if men would
be ruled by the Laws of so peaceable a Prince, they should be of a calm and
quiet spirit: then should we indeed see Righteousness and Peace kissing each
other.

When ever therefore we read in ancient prophesies of the great peace that
shall be in the Messiahs reign, we must thereby understand, that the nature of
the Gospel and its precepts are such, that if men would conform their lives to
them, there should be an universal Peace. How strictly are all the causes of
Envy, Contention, Ambition, and Rebellion, prohibited? and sure if these causes
were removed, their effect should have no place: Then should the Bow be broken,
and the Spear cut in sunder: Swords should be turned into Plough-shares, and
the Instruments of War into more necessary uses: War should cease unto the ends
of the earth, and Peace should be within each wall.

By this it is apparent how much holiness conduces to the establishment of
public peace. But that which I would more especially take notice of, is, the
internal serenity and calmness of Conscience, which is the only effect of
holiness: and truly upon this account there is no peace to the wicked.

I might here appeal to every man's breast, whether Holiness does not calm and
quiet the Consciences of men; whileas a natural horror results from the
commission of vice, more heavy than the severest lashes ever inflicted by
Tityus or Rhadamanthus. What unspeakable peace and ease does attend holiness of
life! there is no jar nor contention, no check of Conscience, nor wound of
spirit, to disturb the inward repose of the Righteous: but that remorse that
results from the commission of sin, even after men have acquired what they
sinfully lusted after, is like that handwriting, Dan. 5.5. which made the
stout heart Belshazzer to tremble, and his knees to smite one against another:
It troubles the thoughts of the most daring sinner, and makes him a terror to
himself. There is no imaginable torment that can equal the terrors of an
awakened guilty Conscience; it has put men to choose strangling and death
rather than life: all which is fully verified by the Word of truth: The spirit
of a man can sustain his infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear?

O the secret pangs and fears that possess the spirits of wicked men! the
severe checks and lashes of Conscience that seize upon transgressors, which all
imaginable divertisements cannot quite stifle and suppress! All the attendance
of the most dear Relations cannot give ease and comfort to them. How dismal and
inconsolable was Spira's condition? how amazing are the very thoughts of those
gnawings and horrors of Conscience he suffered? The fears and apprehensions of
a future misery, mar all the joy and mirth of carnal men. In their most
flourishing state it continually haunts them, and so fills them with horror and
inquietude, that they cannot quietly enjoy themselves. Whilst the Soul acts
within the Body, it cannot but present those horrid and disquieting reflections.

Hi sunt qui trepidant, and ad omnia fulgor a pallent. These are the men who in
the midst of outward felicity are amazed with tormenting fears, which cannot be
eradicated but by a sincere repentance.

But the holy Soul, in the extremity of outward troubles, enjoys an internal
calmness and quiet of mind: the very Pagan, who could not be beyond doubt
assured of the certainty of a future reward, could yet say, -- Hic murus
ahenaeus esto,
Nil conscire sibi, nulla palescere culpa.
But the Word of truth has made this more unquestionably sure: Psalm. 119.165.
Great peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them.

SECT. 9. Holiness the best evidence of true Wisdom, and real Worth, and
Courage.
Wisdom and Courage having their rise and source from nobler. Principles than
external helps, have therefore in all Ages been esteemed excellent and
venerable virtues, and much preferable to those others which depend upon
external advantages. Wisdom is (as the Wise man speaks) the principal thing,
Prove. 4.7. It is that virtue which in a peculiar manner raises the Humane
nature above that of Bruits, who act without consideration and counsel. And
Courage is that which subdueth that ignoble passion of fear, which hinders men
from attempting actions praiseworthy. Hence it is, that to be called a Fool,
or Coward, are such reproachful denominations, that nothing imaginable is more
shameful.

That Holiness is an infallible evidence of true Wisdom, is more plain than it
can be doubted. In sacred Writ, Wisdom and Religion are used as convertible
terms, as words expressing the same thing. And unto man he said, Behold, the
fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil, that is
understanding, Job 28.28. Hence the impious and wicked are frequently called
Fools, and men void of understanding and wisdom. And however this profane Age
of ours has accounted those men great Wits, who have cast off all Religion,
and who Burleseque Scripture; who think it the greatest folly to be kept in awe
by the fears of future danger, and to be kept in thraldom by the apprehension
of an invisible being: yet men who consider things aright, have in all ages
accounted those Atheists both fools and madmen.

Fools, in condemning that which all wise men have assented to. But it is no
wonder, since sin is that which overclouds and stupifies the judgment, and
deprives them of those intellectual abilities whereby men acquire a right
judgment of things. Alas! why should such be accounted wise, who cast
themselves in the dirt and puddle, who contaminate and pollute their Souls, who
prefer a temporal to an eternal felicity, who blindly and inconsiderately
expose themselves to the wrath of a God-revenging sin? Sure the greatest Idiots
are not comparably so unwise as these men, who venture their Souls upon such
hazards.

There is nothing that does so much debase Humane nature, as sin: the Psalmist,
who but upon a surprisal vented his impatience and envy, yet characterizeth
himself a fool for doing so, Psalm. 73.22. So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was
as a beast before thee. It Is Religion alone that is the most certain and
uncontrovertable difference betwixt men and bruits. The very Pagan Satyrist
could say, -- Separat haec nos
A grege brutorum --


Reason will easily convince every man that will but take pains to consider,
that those men who neglect their greatest interest, can never shun to be
esteemed fools. Now to be serious and careful about the Soul, to be ascertained
how it shall go with us in the other world, this is the greatest concern of
man, about which the greatest care and diligence possible is little enough: and
sure those men who design happiness (a thing implanted in the natures of men)
must either make use of the right means in order to their acquiring of it,
otherwise they too plainly proclaim their folly: but the holy Soul makes
Religion its whole business; he knows that it is his greatest interest to be
holy, and that without this he can never expect to be happy hereafter. And
indeed, whatever may be the present apprenhensions and thoughts of men, yet
they shall ere long pass this verdict of circumspect walkers, That they were
the only wise men: and the God of wisdom, who can give the best judgment in
the case, does account the Saints to be wise men. Let us then hearken to the
Apostles advice, Ephesians. 5.15. See that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but
as wise.

But as Holiness does thus entitle men to wisdom, so does it also promote true
valor; it mightily conduces to inspirit men with courage and magnanimity: The
righteous are bold like a lion; but the wicked flee when no man pursues. And
the reason of both is plain: the one has secured his future state; but the
other expects no better inheritance. And however wicked men may be very daring,
yet they cannot be said to be truly valiant; for this is always rational and
deliberate: but if wicked men should soberly consider the unspeakable hazard
they run upon, they durst not be so daring; for what considering man would thus
expose himself to danger to be esteemed gallant, who knows if he miscarry he is
everlastingly miserable? If this merits the Encomium of courage, why may not
those madmen who inconsiderately expose themselves to danger, be also
accounted valiant? Nay, the Horse that undauntedly, but inconsiderately, runs
so many dangers, encounters so many perils in battle, may be as truly said to
be valiant, as those men: But this is to mistake quite the true notion of
courage.

That man that is affrighted with a small danger because it is present, but
nothing amazed with a future danger which is certain and intolerable, is
certainly both Fool and Coward. A Fool, in judging so badly, and mistaking his
own interest and well-being: A Coward, in being afraid for a danger because it
is present. He who runs from his Colors in time of Battle, proclaims himself
to be a coward, although thereby he exposes himself to a greater danger if he
be apprehended, even the severe Sentence of the Martial Law justly inflicted
upon Fugitives. How then can those men be accounted valiant, who for fear of
some small danger they may run the hazard of here for Holiness, expose
themselves to those vials of fury which is the portion of ungodly men hereafter?

SECT. 10. Holiness universally profitable, and above all things most
advantageous.
In all secular affairs that concern practice, Gain and Advantage is the great
argument and attracting inducement that prevails upon men; it is like oil to
the wheel, making its motion more easy and swift. There is no danger so
terrifying, but men have hazarded on, who have had this motive to animate them:
this is it that prompts the Mariner to expose himself to the dangers of the
merciless Ocean, that excites Servants to toil so industriously, and
encourages Soldiers to fight battles.

That men may also be inspirited and allured to court Holiness upon the account
of its utility and profit, I shall (abstracting from those advantages I have
already instanced) now briefly discover that Holiness is, first, positable to
men in every condition and state. Secondly, that it is attended with all
outward blessings, and wants not a claim to a temporal felicity. Thirdly, That
without it all other mercies are useless, and unable to quiet the Soul.
Fourthly, That it is the most incomparable blessing, and frees the Soul from
the worst of evils. Fifthly, That it is the best evidence of our being in
favor with God, and of our adoption to Gods Family. And Lastly, That it is the
best cordial against the fears of death, and affords the greatest satisfaction
to men lying on their beds of languishing.

That Ho^^ness is proficable and advantageous to men in every condition and
state, seems to be clearly enough asserted by the Apostle, when he says,
Godliness is profitable for all things. But besides Scripture, Experience and
Reason do jointly agree in the proof of this. That man that is advanced above
others in riches, has no ground to expect honor and reverence from men, if he
walk not according to the rule of Holiness; that is, if he be not moderate and
compassionate, if he restrains not his ambition and pride: And sure, without
this love and reverence from others, his condition is not very happy, he lies
exposed to infinite dangers.

Again, if a man be exposed to a mean and adverse estate, is environed with an
infinite number of perplexing difficulties; yet this case is not altogether
hopeless; for if he be not vicious, but on the contrary religious, besides the
divine aid that is engaged for his relief, the circumstances he is stated in
are apt motives to stir up bowels of compassion toward such a person.

Unless the Magistrate, who is invested with Supreme Power and Authority,
imitate God in goodness as well as in greatness, his Authority will produce
fear rather than love. The very Moralist could say, Sine bonitate nulla
majestas. Those who will be at the pains to consult Experience, shall find
that good Princes have always been in the greatest esteem; and sure it is the
most unpardonable villainy, to attempt any evil against religious Kings.

Holiness is also profitable for Subjects to teach them obedience, and to
submit, not merely upon the account of wrath, but for Conscience sake; which is
certainly the only safe expedient to secure the obedience of Subjects: And, I
confess, I know not how that man can be a true Subject to his earthly Prince,
who stands not to offend the God of Heaven. I know some who have pretended to
much Holiness, have been the greatest villains; but this proves not that the
rule of Holiness gives a Supersedeas or allowance to any to disobey Authority.

Art thou a Parent? the rule of Holiness (to which holy men conform) will
instruct thee to be gentle and tender to thy Children, and not to provoke them
to wrath, which is the only thing that lessens their affection. Art thou a
Child? it will teach thee to reverence and honor thy parents; in doing of
which, thou entitlest thy self to the promise annexed to the fifth Commandment.
In a word, it is profitable to make all manner of Relations live in quietness
and peace, and to bestow mutual offices of love upon each other. It instructs
men to be faithful in every calling and employment: and certainly the good man
is to be trusted far rather than the wicked; for Religion lays an awe and
restraint upon the one, but the other pretends no such motive to engage him to
fidelity, especially if he may deceive and not be noticed. To this purpose
Plutarch has a notable saying: Pietate (says he, Not. Deor. lib. 1.) sublata,
fides etiam and Societas humanae generis, and una excellentissima virtus
justitia tollitur.

There are several things useful for some men, but altogether unprofitable for
others; but Holiness is equally profitable for all; there are none exempt from
tasting its utility, but those who exclude themselves by a vicious conversation.

Secondly, Holiness is attended with all outward blessings, and wants not a
claim to a temporal felicity, Matthew. 6.33. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and
his righteousness, and all other things shall be added unto you. The promise of
inheriting the Earth (by which all temporal felicity is meant) is made to the
meek: Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the meek; for they shall inherit the earth. And
indeed, we find this blessing even promised to the posterity of those that
fear the Lord, Psalm. 25.13. And to put this beyond all doubt, we find the
Psalmist repeating this five times in one Psalm, Psalm. 37.9, 11, 22, 29, 34.
And the great Apostle tells us, that it is Godliness that has the promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. The God of
Heaven has also assured us, that he will withhold no good thing from them that
walk uprightly. Upon this account well might Wisdom say, Prove. 8.18. Riches and
honor are with me: a plain instance of which, we have in Solomon, who because
of his asking Wisdom to govern his Subjects, when he might as freely have asked
Riches and Honor, he receives this answer from God, I have also given thee
both riches and honor, 1 King. 3.13.

But however this discriminating providence does not so discernedly appear
here, yet there is no man but can attest Vice has impoverished thousands;
there being several sins that have a natural tendency to poverty. By means of a
whorish woman, a man is brought to a piece of bread, Prove. 6.26. The like we
may truly enough say of several other sins. I have seen (says the Psalmist)
the wicked great in power, and spreading himself like a green bay tree; yet he
passed away, and lo, he was not: yea, I sought him, but he could not be found,
Psalm. 37.35, 36. I confess, good men may be reduced to great wants, may be
destitute of necessary provisions; nay, how frequently is this the lot of the
most excellent and gallant Souls? yet this may be safely said, That a little
that a righteous man has, is better than the riches of many wicked.

But then those things that best deserve the name of riches, because of their
enriching the Soul, which being more excellent than the Body, must upon that
account be of greater value than these things that only respect the Body,
these are only peculiar to holy men: and such are the graces of the Holy
Spirit, the combination of Christian virtues, the price of which is above that
of Rubies. These are riches which are of a more lasting nature than those which
the ignoble of the world call riches; they are not subject to the casualties
which Gold and Silver and precious Stones are; which upon that account cannot
be called a man's own, as Pagan Moralists have largely and excellently
confirmed: And if we will not dispute with God, and contest his determination,
we shall find one single virtue receiving a more ample commendation than ever
riches did; 1 Pet. 3.4. The ornament of a meek and quiet spirit is in the sight
of God of great price.

Although the holy and devout Soul may be reduced to our Savours straits, not
to have where to lay his head; yet how can he be said to be poor, since he
possesses him who is All? The most adverse chances that befall such a Soul,
cannot denominate it poor; there is a Crown and Princely Inheritance which
belongs to it. Nay, besides that glorious reversion, we have express promises
that such Souls shall not be altogether destitute of necessaries to sustain and
support them in this their pilgrimage.

I have already showed, that Honor and Pleasures are the attendants of
Holiness: What in the world is more glorious, than for a man to conquer those
lusts and inordinate appetites that seek the mastery over him? what pleasure is
able to contest with those ravishing joys which result from a holy
conversation? There is nothing imaginable that so exhilarates and revives men,
as a calm and quiet Conscience. But I pass this.

In the next place I come to show, that the enjoyment of all other blessings
can never profit that man that wants Holiness. This is plainly attested by our
Savior, saying, What has a man profited if he should gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul? To have an affluence of temporal mercies, cannot so much
as contribute to a present felicity, where the forementioned qualification is
lacking. Outward favors, not attended and chained with real Holiness,
contribute only to enhance the misery of their possessor; they being proper
fuel to increase the flame of inquietude and restlesness, but unfit to allay
it. The greatest plenty of riches cannot satisfy the covetous mind, which
like the Grave cries Give, give. The whole world could not satisfy Alexander's
insatiable ambition; but, as the Poet speaks, Aestuat infoelix angusto limite
mundi.

It Is indeed impossible for a man to enjoy that earthly felicity he designs, if
he want Holiness: For, suppose he be possessed of it, yet the secret
acknowledgement of a superior power, impairs the delights that do arise from
such a state, and makes him in the height of his fancied felicity startle and
quake. Conscience, upon the apprehension of guilt, and the vengeance due to it,
recoils upon the sinner, and disturbs his quiet enjoyment of the pleasures he
might otherwise freely enough delight in. O how does it molest and torment him
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem, to have an inward principle of
Fear haunting the sinner in his most retired enjoyment of pleasures, which
cannot be silenced by his utmost endeavors! This, this is it that torments him
with anguish and confusion, that allays the imaginary pleasure of the most
charming Lust, and in the midst of laughter makes his heart heavy: which fully
verifies the truth of what I said, that the enjoyment of all other blessings
can never free a man from torment, nor a whit profit him that is destitute of
Holiness.

Fourthly, Holiness is the most incomparable blessing, and frees the Soul from
the worst of evils. What David said of Goliahs Sword, I may more safely say of
Holiness, There is none like it; nothing in the world so apt to remove those
disasters and turmoiling fears that inwardly work upon and damp the minds of
men with severe checks and lashes, as Holiness, which being diametrically
opposite to sin, which is the worst of evils, must therefore by a necessary
consequence be the best of blessings.

Now seeing contraries placed near to other are the more discernable, I shall
therefore take a short view of the evil and malignity of sin, that hereby the
beauty and excellency of Holiness may appear the brighter, and have the greater
force to conquer our affections.

To express the evil and malignity of sin, Scripture represents it by the most
ugly and abominable things, by the most dangerous and terrible Diseases: Nay,
the great Apostle seems to want language and comparisons too, to express the
evil of it, when he calls it exceedingly evil, as if he had said, it infinitely
transcends all other evils; the malignity of which, no Pen can fully delineate
and describe, either in its nature or consequences.

In its Nature; the Scripture-character of it is, it is an enmity against God;
a transgression and voluntary violation of his most holy and righteous Law; a
disobedience of his Authority, and a wicked contempt of all the divine
Attributes: it is the woeful stain and blemish of our Natures, the disease of our
Souls, and the reproach of our Reason.

The consequences of sin are fearful and fatal. So bad a cause can never fail
to produce the worst effects; for besides all the temporal calamities and
mischiefs that befall Mankind, those unspeakable miseries and extreme torments
that accompany men to the other world, are also the dreadful and sad effects of
sin. I have already showed, that every vice is naturally attended with some
particular punishment: but that indeed which is most terrible, which should
mightily amaze and startle the sinner, are the dreadful miseries of another
world: Alas! how dismal is the condition of those men who have lost the divine
Image, and consequently his love and favor, and are liable to his fury and
wrath? who are possessed with a legion of impure lusts, which lead them
captive, and hurry them headlong to perdition, where they must have their
everlasting abode with impure spirits and devouring flames.

How impossible is it to give a just List and Catalogue of the sad and dreadful
consequences of sin, or fully describe the evil and malignity of it! But yet
this imperfect glance may in part satisfy and inform us, that a holy and
virtuous life, which excludes all those mischiefs and inconveniences which
both in this and the next life attend sin, is the best of blessings, and frees
us from the worst of evils.

Fifthly, Holiness is the best evidence of our being in favor with God, and of
our adoption to Gods Family. How sedulous and inquisitive are many good
Christians to understand their spiritual state and condition, that they may
know into which of the two regions of the other world they shall be stated
after death? This is certainly a matter of the greatest consequence, and
deserves every man's most serious consideration; a mistake here being so
exceedingly dangerous, like a wound in the vital parts, it proves mortal and
incurable if continued in. Now the most infallible mark and character of our
being in favor with God, and that which comprehends all others, is that which
the beloved Apostle sets down, 1 John 3.7, 8, 9, 10. Little children, let no
man deceive you: he that does righteousness is righteous. ( And every one that
does righteousness is born of God, Chap. 2.29.) He that commits sin is of
the Devil -- Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin -- In this the
children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil: Whosoever does not
righteousness, is not of God. Let men pretend what they will, if they be
destitute of righteousness, they are of their Father the Devil, and can claim
no interest in God as their Father; seeing it is purity of Spirit that gives us
a title to be the Children of the most high; 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Be ye separate,
and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a Father
unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. The
whole tenor of the Scripture abounds with so many such instances, that I shall
supersede a tedious citation of texts.

This then being so infallible and certain a character, methinks every rational
man may quickly come to the knowledge of his spiritual estate. A bad man may
certainly enough know whether he breaks the divine Laws, and goes in a
continued course of sin; and a good man may sufficiently know whether he obeys
the divine Laws, and is sincere in his actions. These are things so plain and
undeniable, that all doubts of this kind are ridiculous. Now it is no
difficulty to draw these plain inferences: I break the divine Laws, therefore I
am not of God: or, I obey them, therefore I am a Child of God. And thus every
considering man, who impartially considers, and exactly examines his life and
actions, may be fully enough ascertained whether he be a Child of God or not.
Alas! how useless and dangerous is it to ascend unto Heaven to search the
secret and eternal Decrees of God, which belong not to us to pry into, that we
may know whether our Names be written in the Book of Life or not? He that does
righteousness needs not fear any latent Decree concerning his reprobation; and
it is the vainest thing imaginable, for impenitent and obstinate sinners to
dream that God has from eternity elected them to life. The pure nature of God
is so perfectly opposite to sin, that it is quite impossible there can be any
agreement betwixt him and sinners, no more than there can be betwixt light and
darkness. The Psalmist acquaints us, That he is not a God that has pleasure in
wickedness. And the Apostle has told us, That the wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. But yet the
righteous Lord loves the righteous: These are the men whom he esteems his
Children, to whom the promises of eternal life belong.

In the last pace, there is nothing in the world that will prove so effectual
to comfort men at the hour of death, as the sweet thoughts of their being
separated from the pollutions of the world. How unspeakably comfortable is it
for men, when they are just stepping into the other world, to reflect upon the
good life they have led, and that they carry in their bosoms Consciences void
of offense both toward God and toward man? This is indeed that noble and
Sovereign Cordial that revives the spirits of good men, in their passage
through the valley and shadow of death, and makes their comforts abound and
overflow.

Death is not so small a matter as some men think; in Scripture it is not
unfitly called the King of terrors: Now nothing can free men from the terror
of it, but a good Conscience; and this cannot be had without Holiness, which
makes all calm and serene within. It will afford men little pleasure when they
come to die, to reflect upon the earthly pleasures they have enjoyed: these
things profit not in the day of wrath; but the Conscience of well doing makes
men salute death without dread and astonishment, and lift up their heads with
joy, because the day of their redemption approaches.

But with the ungodly and wicked it is not so; then their sins stare them in
their face, and so terrify and affright them, that no wonder though in the
extremity of their agony they prefer strangling and death to life. If holy Job
does so heavily complain of the terrors of God, how much more terrifying shall
the apprehensions of a severe and terrible judgment be to the unsanctified and
polluted? To think how shortly he must be everlastingly separate from the good
things he enjoyed here, and be cast into utter darkness, to have his portion
with the damned in devouring Flames, to be an everlasting resident in the Lake
of fire and brimstone, where he shall be continually tormented with that
gnawing worm that never dies: These are the amazing thoughts that will seize
upon the sinner: his Conscience then will not sleep; nothing will be able to
allay those Storms and Tempests that are raised by the fearful expectation of
the reward due to sin. At death, men are generally wiser than at other times;
then they begin to consider what they have been doing, and call themselves fool
a thousand times for their disobedience and wickedness. The smoke of worldly
cares that formerly blinded their eyes, are now dispelled; they see their
folly, when it is too late to mend it; and if they do no more, yet Balaam-like,
they will cry, O that I might die the death of the righteous!

CHAP. IV. Frivolous Cavils and Objections removed.
THe former Chapters having discovered the Beauty of Holiness, and the mighty
power and force of Arguments that excite to the practice of it; one who weighs
all this by the measures of equity, cannot (as any man would think) but look
upon it as the strangest prodigy, that so just a Cause should miss of its
effect, and find the sons of men, who pretend to be such Masters of Reason, so
monstrously foolish in rejecting it upon the account of some frivolous and very
fallacious cavils: But the truth is, resolute Impiety is set upon the Bench and
made Judge; and no wonder though it pass an unjust sentence, and condemn
Holiness because of its opposition to Vice.

The common imputations and prejudices which wicked men load Holiness with, I
shall reduce to the four following Heads, First, Holiness lays upon men heavy
burdens, and grievous to be born: which makes humane life joyless and uneasy,
they being so inconsistent, first, with Peace; and secondly, with Pleasure and
Satisfaction.

Secondly, Experience informs us, that wicked men enjoy pleasure and
satisfaction in their ways, there being no men so jovial and merry as they; and
that men who pretend to Holiness are sullen and melancholy, and are exposed to
heavy sufferings and trials.

Thirdly, It Is singularity and ambition that prevail more with men than any
other motive to be holy.

Fourthly, It Is the greatest piece of folly, ignorance, and impudence, for men
to quit with present pleasures for mere uncertainties.

The first being the most material Objection, I shall therefore more largely
and distinctly examine it; and in doing of this, I shall desire these four
things may be considered. First, that the divine Laws are not grievous and
uneasy. Secondly, that Vice is much more troublesome and difficult than Virtue.
Thirdly, that Holiness conduces both to the Peace and Happiness of humane
Societies, and to the temporal Advantage of private persons. And Fourthly, that
there is a great deal of more pleasure in the ways of Holiness, than in the
commission of sin.

That the divine Laws are not grievous and uneasy, but extremely reasonable
and wise, is a truth I have already made plain, when I discoursed of the rule
of Holiness. The whole tenor of the Laws of Christianity being so exceedingly
suitable to the very nature of men, it cannot be rationally supposed that they
can be grievous to them. St. Paul to the Philippians, gives us a brief and
compendious, but very full and comprehensive, account of what things the Laws
of our Christianity enjoin, viz. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, and whatsoever things are of good report: all which are so
agreeable to Reason, that even the light of Nature prompts men to the doing of
them, and fully discovers it self to be an irreconcilable Enemy to all kind of
vices.

It Is not then Reason, but the impetuous Lusts of men, that determines a holy
Law to be grievous and uneasy: and indeed, no wonder though this unjust Judge
make Holiness appear formidable, and represent it as grievous to Mankind; it
being so much the interest of this partial Judge to condem^ it as criminal, and
to decrie it as a yoke intolerable and grievous to be born. It Is not probable
that the most innocent shall pass uncondemned, when an Enemy is set up in the
Judgment seat to pass Sentence: our blessed Savior must be pronounced guilty
by Pilat, although even this unjust Judge openly professed, he found no fault in
him. And seeing our great Lawgiver met with so severe a sentence, who can
expect any more upright verdicts should pass upon his Laws?

But that the divine Laws are not indeed grievous to be born, may easily appear
from plain Texts of Scripture (which is the only infallible rule.) Our great
Lord has himself taught his Disciples, That his yoke is easy, and his burden
light. And one of his inspired Disciples has assured us, that his commands are
not grievous: two Texts sufficient methinks to remove all those prejudices that
are cast upon a holy life, as if it were full of fatigue and trouble.

But besides Scripture, Reason and Experience too, come in to witness this
truth. First, Reason bears witness that the divine Commands are extremely
reasonable and natural; and is it not against the common vote of Mankind, to
say, What is natural, is uneasy and difficult? Men who impose hard and
grievous tasks upon others, are by all men condemned as unreasonable; which
certainly implies, that whatever is reasonable, is not grievous and difficult.
It Is true, sinners, who by their many-repeated acts of disobedience have
contracted a habit of sin, do indeed commit it with less trouble than those who
first engage to this Tyranny; as Slaves, who by custom look upon that as easy,
which at their first entrance upon such a slavery was very difficult and
grievous: And yet whatever ease the most daring sinner may pretend is to be
found in the acts of sin, I durst appeal to his own breast, whether he might
not with a great deal of more ease, and less fatigue, have kept the divine
Laws, than he met with in breaking of them.

I confess, the Laws of Christianity are not natural in a strict and confined
sense; but only in so far as they correspond with, and are suitable to, the
nature of Mankind: hence some sins are said to be unnatural; not because all
sins may not adopt to themselves that title, but because upon a more peculiar
and special account, all men are sensible that they are brutish, and
unbecoming any who carry in their bosom a rational Soul. There is not any vice,
but it infests and prejudges Nature. Anger is a degree of Madness, that
violently transports men, and quite mars their inward ease and repose. Revenge,
a more lasting and deliberate fury, preys upon the Soul where it resides, and
so distracts and hurries it with inquietude and restlesness, that nothing
imaginable can be supposed a greater Enemy to Nature, how sweet soever and
luscious it may seem to depraved nature. Intemperance, and Uncleanness, are
sins which debase Humane nature below that of beasts, and are the cause of many
intolerable pains and Diseases, which make Humane life but an uneasy burden.
But besides all these troubles, we may add that horror of Conscience that
haunts the sinner with fear and astonishment. All which contribute to clear the
truth of what I assert.

Again, Reason tells a man, that it cannot be grievous to him to perform that
which is so much his interest and advantage. Men in their secular concerns
find no difficulties in any undertaking wherein their interest is concerned;
and sure it is man's greatest interest to keep the divine Precepts, as I have
already at some length discovered. It Is an excellent saying, of as excellent an
Author: Reason (says he) must first cease to be Reason, and commence Phrenzie,
before it is possible it can set it self in defiance of those Laws of Christ,
which are accommodated to its greatest interest. Causes of the decay of
Christian Piety, Chap. 5.

But besides Reason, Experience bears also witness to this truth, that the
divine Laws are not grievous. But before I proceed to prove this, I shall
premise two Cautions: First, when I say that Experience makes it plain, that
the Laws of Christianity are not grievous; I do not mean that a sinner when he
first forsakes his sins, and betakes himself to a holy and virtuous life,
shall encounter with no difficulties; no sure, this cannot reasonably be
expected: for his former habit in sin will at the first give him work enough;
he has an old custom to oppose and struggle with, which will cost him no small
pains to overcome. Secondly, far less must we fondly imagine that the Law of
Christianity is so easy, as supersedes and gives a discharge to humane
industry, vigilance, and care: they are but strangers to a holy life, and never
knew what it is to obey Gods Commands, who never were at any pains, nay who are
not very industrious and careful to observe them. When our Savior says, his
yoke is easy, he does not hereby intend to persuade men to be like Solomon's
sluggard; sure Heaven was neverdesigned for loiterres in Gods Vineyard: but his
intent there, is to remove a common prejudice men were like to entertain
against Christianity, as if it were an intolerable yoke, and insupportable
task: now this Christ forewarns his Disciples is not true.

These two things being premised, I now appeal to Experience (which often
corrects error in speculation) whether the Laws of Heaven or Hell are most
grievous. And to condescend as far as possible, I shall not here call in the
Experiences of good men, who all unanimously assent that there is more ease and
less fatigue in obeying, than in breaking the divine Laws; but I shall submit
to the sinners own testimony, when he is in his most sober state; I mean, when
he is under the extremity of some pain inflicted by his sins, or when he lies
upon his deathbed: at other times, when he is in the pursuit of some Lust, no
wonder though he pass as unjust a sentence as sick men do of tastes, who having
their palates infected with some venomous and filthy humor, judge every thing,
be it really never so pleasant, to be bitter and harsh.

Go then to sinners when they come to themselves (as it is said of the
Prodigal, He came to himself, as if he had been before mad or distracted) and
ask them whether they sinde more trouble in their doing or omitting of sin? Ask
the Drunkard, who by his intemperance lies smarting under the tormenting pains
of the Gout, whether he had been wiser, and suffered less trouble, if he had
been temperate, and abstained from excess? Nay, besides the diseases that many,
if not most of vices bring upon men, there are some sins that make men sensibly
in the time find pain and trouble. Go to the Lascivious and Wanton person who
is tormented with the Pox, and ask whether his sin be grievous to him or not?
There are few sins which are not attended with grievous concomitants. But I
shall not insist.

I confess, no men's Experiences are so likely to demonstrate this truth, nor
are more pertinently appealed to, as theirs who have once experimented the
pleasures and pains of both states: Ask therefore those who were once Drunkards
and Adulterers, but are now sanctified and settled in a course of Holiness; and
I am sure they shall verily testify, that it is only Satan's Yoke that is
uneasy and burdensome.

But granting that there is some difficulty in the exact observation of the
Laws of Christianity, (as sure any man who consults the corruption of his own
nature, and the depraved inclinations thereof, against which they are levelled,
will never deny) yet if this shall be judged a good Argument to cancel the Laws
of Christianity, all Laws whatsoever shall be quite dashed out, and banished
the world; for who shall be guilty, if he may have the liberty to use this for
a relevant excuse?

This being then so unreasonable to imagine, (and if it should be admitted,
should yet never a whit excuse the sinner, who to his experience finds sin to
be so uneasy and troublesome) yet I shall add two Considerations that
demonstrate, the Laws of Christianity are more easy than any other Laws that
ever were invented; and that they are not (as carnal men represent them) hard
sayings which none can bear. First, the Author of the Gospel-precepts has
offered to us an assistance, able to conquer all the difficulties that can be
supposed to attend the keeping of his Mandates. It Is true, if Christ had
enjoined his followers to obey a Law which could not possibly be kept; I
confess, in that case, his Commands had been grievous, and his Yoke
insupportable: Or if he had been satisfied with no less than perfect innocence,
and unsinning obedience, I don't see how this prejudice and cavil could have
been removed. But he who prescribed those Precepts, considered the frailties of
our nature, and the weakness of man in this lapsed estate; and therefore he has
provided help for us, if we will but be at the pains seriously to implore it;
For he gives his Spirit to them that ask it. And upon this account the beloved
Apostle encourages Christians to obey the precepts of the Gospel, because,
Greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.

Secondly, The excellency of the Reward that is promised to the obedient, is a
most noble consideration to make men (as the Psalmist speaks) run the way of
Gods Commandments. The promissory part of the Gospel, renders the preceptive
part easy. Methinks the holy Soul should with comfort thus express it self,
when the greatest difficulties offer: Good God! shall I be discouraged to obey
the hardest (if any thing proceeding from infinite Wisdom and Goodness can be
said to be difficult) of thy Commandments, when so glorious a prize is the
reward thereof? If a terrene and temporal felicity animates others to encounter
the most Giant-difficulties, how much more unconcernedly should I slight all
hazards, and contemn by a fearless courage all dangers, for that blessed hope
that is set before me? Can I remember there is a Kingdom promised, and yet be
terrified from it by supposed difficulties, or complain that the way is
inaccessible? Do I really know that it is indeed a good Land, and am yet
discouraged to attempt the taking of it, because it will require some violence?
Shall I, like the Reubenites and Gadites, set up my rest on this side of
Jordan, notwithstanding this proposal of Canaan? No sure, eternal Life is too
noble a prize to be lost, for fear of fighting the Good fight. I regard no
difficulties while I eye the Crown; I cannot think those Precepts grievous,
that are enforced by so many excellent promises. So great a recompense of
reward should, methinks, inspire the dullest Heart, and sweeten the hardest
Service; should make any one willing and content to sacrifice his most beloved
lusts, to cut off the right Hand, and pluck out the right eye, which stand in
the way, and hinder him from entering into Heaven.

Having thus endeavored to explain upon what account the Laws of Christianity
are not grievous, I hope I shall not need to insist long upon the following
particulars. At first sight it seems plain, that since the case is so, Vice
must certainly be more troublesome than Virtue; and that it is easier for men
to live holily, than wickedly: and yet, I know not by what strange artifice,
Holiness has had the bad luck to be represented as being extremely difficult. I
confess, I intend not to inveigh against the sacred Tribe of Levi, who have
represented Heaven almost as unaccessible, as the Israelitish Spies did the
good Land of Canaan; knowing they thereby only design to raise men's
endeavors: although I could have wished that they had considered better, how
readily men of corrupt minds and vicious practices lay aside all care of Gods
Commandments, upon this suggestion, that they are grievous; and are deterred
from a holy and virtuous life.

But that Vice is more troublesome and uneasy than Virtue, will (besides what
I have formerly said) appear to be so, from the following Considerations.
First, Sacred Records represent sinners as men who weary themselves with sin;
and the Prophet Isaiah describes their trouble by a very apt sim^litude, Isa.
57.20. The wicked is like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters
cast up mire and dirt. The ways of sin are frequently called crooked paths, and
wicked men are said to walk astray; whileas the way of Holiness and Virtue is
said to be a straight and high way: All which Phrases plainly enough imply,
that the former is full of intricacy and perplexities, and the latter plain and
easy.

Experiences to prove this, are every day so multiplied, that they may
abundantly serve to silence all doubts. The Drunkard can experimentally tell
the costliness of his sin, and the tormenting diseases that are frequently the
effect of an overcharged Stomach; the uneasy belchings and overturnings
within, the grievous pains of Head and Joints. The Wanton and Lascivious can
produce his painful boils and sores, to witness the uneasiness of Lust; at
best, he can only produce an hectic Body. But besides those loathsome
diseases that are the effects of Lasciviousness, how restless and uneasy is
the condition of such persons? But how impossible is it to give a just list of
those miseries that Wantonness and Intemperance hurry men to? To what a
multitude of amazing difficulties does Pride expose men! what mischiefs, jarrs
and contests does it raise? Envy and Revenge torment men's spirits, and so
disquiet and perturb them, that men may as well take fire into their bosom, and
pretend they perceive no torment, as lodge those horrid lusts in their breasts
without the sense of their extreme misery and pain. The Covetous mind is never
at rest, but is ever craving and desirous of more. But to show how troublesome
the practice of every sin is, requires a larger discourse than I can well allow.

But how easy is Virtue, if compared with Vice? At what trouble and pains are
men, to invent a lie? and when they have contrived it, they cannot but be
afraid lest it be discovered. But how easy is it to speak the truth? With how
much art and pains do men trouble themselves to conceal their vices? The
Adulterer is wearied with watching convenient opportunities, and afraid lest he
be discovered; whileas the chaste person enjoys himself quietly, and is troubled
with no such attender. The covetous Miser is cruciate and tormented with a
desire of what he cannot expect; is extremely tormented by an incessant care,
lest he lose what he has, and ever toiling to acquire more; whileas the
virtuous Soul is contented with what he enjoys, and grudgeth not to bestow a
part of what is his to others.

There is no man who is not quite given up to commit all manner of wickedness,
and whose conscience is not seared as with a hot Iron, but can tell by his
experience, how perplexing and uneasy Vice is. And to make this yet more
plain, I shall add these few following Reasons. First, the nature of Vice is
so reproachful, that men are even troubled to coin shifts to avoid the owning
it; and sure this cannot but be uneasy to men. Secondly, the most viciously
inclined persons, who will not practice, yet are forced for their interest to
pretend Virtue, and usually indeed become greater Zealots than those who are
really virtuous: But this cannot but be exceedingly troublesome to them, it
being against their inclinations, and contradictory to the internal sentiments
of their minds. And besides, at what pains are they to make other men believe
that they are real in what they only pretend? Thirdly, Vice is very perplexing
and difficult, upon the account that it requires hard, if not impossible
performances: the Covetous mind is prompted to attempt many difficulties to
obtain what it craves, and after all is disappointed. Nay, indeed, Covetousness
is a vice so uneasy and troublesome, that it proposes what can never be
acquired: for after it has got what is designed, it is restless, and as ready
to say Give, give, as ever. But Lastly, that which contributes most to render
Vice uneasy, are those after-pangs of Conscience which fill the Soul with
horror and amazement; the consciousness of guilt stings and torments it, and
makes the sinner a terror to himself. It Is impossible either to gag or corrupt
Conscience, that it shall never give any check. But now how quieting and
solacing is Virtue? no man ever yet complained that terrors haunted him for
living holily. O how do the thoughts of a virtuous life refresh men in the
midst of greatest dangers? Let us go to sinners on their deathbed, and then we
shall find this truth preached to the full; an evidence valid enough to
condemn sin as the uneasiest thing imaginable.

And thus we have seen how many difficulties attend sin, both before, and after
it is committed. And now what reason can any man allege for the pretended
easiness of sin? I confess, I know not any thing, except it be custom, that can
be pertinently adduced; but how weak is this Plea? for although Custom, which
is a second nature, may contribute very much to stupifie the Judgment, and
harden the Conscience, and so consequently make Vice the more easy; yet we can
hardly suppose that ever Humane nature will so far assimilate the nature of
mere Animals, as to be deprived of Reason and Conscience: And sure, so long as
any of these remain, Vice must needs meet with opposition. But Secondly, if men
will compare the easiness of Virtue and Vice, they must put them in equal
circumstances; and then I doubt not but Vice shall stand condemned, as the
great troubler of peace and quietness. For instance, let us suppose that a man
is accustomed to a holy life, and is habituate to live soberly, righteously,
and godly; in this case, let any man make but the experiment, and I am sure he
shall ingenuously acknowledge, that a good life affords more tranquillity and
peace, than Vice dares lay claim to.

And yet, I know not by what bad luck, Holiness has been represented as
opposite to men's present welfare, and hurtful to their peace and tranquillity.
How groundless this prejudice is, I have already endeavored to show. I shall
therefore now only in a few words make it plain, that Holiness is the most
effectual method that can be taken, to exalt the public peace and happiness of
a Nation. And Secondly, that it infinitely conduces to the happiness, peace,
and tranquillity of particular persons; and that nothing is so inconsistent
with, and hurtful to both, as sin.

How much Holiness tends to the advancement of public peace in a Kingdom and
Nation, appears very plainly from the Wise man's observation, Prove. 14.34.
Righteousness exalts a nation; but sin is the reproach of any people. And the
Apostle St. James gives us a true account of the causes of public jars, Jam.
4.1. From whence come wars and sightings amongst you? are they not hence, even
from your lusts that war in your members? If minkinde had not corrupted their
ways, and degenerated from their pristine purity, how peaceable and happy had
humane societies been? but in this lapsed state, Ambition, Pride, and Injustice
act their tragical parts, and so tend to the destruction of humane societies,
that if there did not remain some sparks and remainders of Religion, it is not
possible that humane society could evite an utter ruin. And he that well
ponders the settled course of divine Providence, shall easily assent, that in
all Ages Righteousness and Virtue have been rewarded with a temporal
tranquillity and happiness; and that fruitful lands have been turned into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. And indeed it is very
reasonable to think that the divine Justice will reward a righteous Nation, and
punish a rebellious People. It Is true, he may defer his Judgments for a while,
yet his Justice will not always give place to mercy and forbearance; but a
Nation that continues and increases its provocations, must expect to be
punished in this world, (which is the only proper place) as a righteous Land
may expect a present reward.

That Holiness does also conduce to the peace and quietness of particular
persons, is nothing less evident from Scripture: Psalm. 119.165. Great peace
have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them: but the wicked is
like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt,
Isa. 57.20. I have once and again showed, that there can be no inward
tranquillity and peace, where Holiness is wanting: the very thoughts of God,
which above all things are most sweet, are notwithstanding troublesome to
wicked men. But because Humane nature is in this degenerate state extremely
sunk down into Sense, and more apt to be wrought upon by temporal advantages,
than what only concern the Soul, and have a prospect to things that are
future; I have also in the former part of this Discourse endeavored to make
plain, how advantageous Holiness is upon the foresaid account; and that length
of days are in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor: That her
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace: That Godliness is great
gain, having the promises of the life that now is, as well as of that which is
to come. And indeed, any man, who considers the nature and reason of the thing,
cannot but be inclined to think it must be so: For how can that man be exposed
to trouble and disquietment, who has gotten the mastery over his Passions? And
I dare appeal to the sinners own experience, whether vices have not been
prejudicial to his health, macerated his Body, and filled him with tortures and
pains? whether some sins have not brought him to poverty and disgrace, ruined
both his estate and fame? Can any man produce any good effect that ever sin
caused? sure, if men would speak impartially, they should acknowledge all this
to be true.

That there is a great deal of more pleasure in the ways of Holiness than in
the commission of sin, (which is the fourth thing proposed to be considered)
needs not puzzle any man to prove it. How delightful are all acts of Piety and
Virtue? how unexpressible is that comfort that the devout Soul finds in
conversing with God? Well might the Psalmist say, Light is sown for the
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm. 97.11. he often
experienced that sweetness and satisfaction that is the result of obedience;
whileas Solomon, who could pass the best verdict of sensual pleasures, yet
concludes them to be but vanity and vexation of spirit.

There be two things that allay the pleasures of sin: First, the unruliness of
immoderate passions, which fret and vex the minds of men, and hinder the
sinner from tasting its pleasure. Secondly, the fear of an invisible being,
armed to punish them for their misdemeanors: Conscience, upon the apprehension
of guilt, recoils upon the sinner, and mars all the pleasure he promised
himself to enjoy: This made Belshazzer, a King, and environed with his Nobles,
tremble and quake in the midst of his cups. But supposing vices did bring as
much pleasure along with them as they pretend, yet upon two accounts they are
not half so delicious as the pleasures that spring from a good life. First, the
pleasures of sin are so interrupted, of a short duration, or, as the Apostle
expresses them, they are but for a season: how quickly will a period be put to
all these pleasures, which now make so much noise? They are very fitly compared
by Solomon, to the crackling of thorns under a pot, which are scarce sooner in
a blaze, than they vanish; but the joys that spring from a good conversation,
are at their lowest ebb here: they do indeed continue, for no man takes away
this joy; but Heaven is the designed place for the good Soul to feed upon those
Rivers of pleasures that are at God's right hand for evermore. Secondly,
sensual pleasures do soon cloy men's appetites: we cannot enjoy long any sensual
delight, but we are quickly weary of it: but it is not so with spiritual
delights; it is only the absence of them, when suspended for our sins, that
troubles and molests us. It Is impossible that sensual pleasures can satisfy
the soul of man, which was never framed for a Mohammedan Paradise; nor can it be
rationally expected, that he who is conscious to himself of guilt, should be
free from fear; which being so tormenting, can never permit men to enjoy
pleasure freely.

But let us descend to sensual pleasures, and we shall find, that he who is
temperate and moderate, is more likely to relish the pleasantness of Meat,
Drink, and Pastime, than the intemperate and immoderate. He who relieves the
Poor, and refreshes the Needy, cannot but find more real sweetness and
satisfaction in doing so, than he who drinks away his Estate. He who speaks the
truth, finds not those tormenting checks of Conscience which are the just
reward of lying. But all this will more plainly appear, by the Solution of the
next Objection.

The second Imputation is brought from Experience; namely, that wicked men are
for ordinary very jovial and cheerful, and enjoy a great deal of satisfacton in
their ways; whereas men who pretend to Piety and Holiness, are very sad and
disconsolate.

To this I answer; That the Question is not, whether wicked men have some
pleasure in their sins, or not? but, whether that pleasure that arises from a
good life, be not infinitely preferable to these? Alas! the most promising
sensual pleasure (supposing it to be lawful) is much inferior to the
satisfaction and comfort that springs from a good Conscience. How much more
inconsiderable must sinful pleasures be, which are attended with so black and
dismal consequences? Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every
soul of man that does evil. Sinful pleasures are at the best but short; and
sure this, consideration contributes very much to lessen their value; But that
which makes them so mean, and not worth the enjoying, is the painful Eternity
that succeeds to them.

However then the wicked may appear jovial and merry, yet their inward thoughts
(if we could discover them) cannot be at quiet and ease: Whatever pleasure they
may reap in the present act, yet they cannot afterward look unto themselves
without horror and amazement: The after-stings of sin are so painful, that he
buys those present pleasures at a rate no reasonable man would purchase them.

But that wicked men cannot really enjoy that pleasure and contentment they
pretend to, seems very plain from Reason. For first, How can any man be
satisfied with those actions which are so cross to his very nature, and
opposite to Reason, as every sin is? Can a man find pleasure in doing that
which he knows he ought not to do? sure the reboundings of Conscience, upon the
apprehension of doing amiss, will soon raze out any pleasure that sin affords;
and a sick man may more rationally expect rest, than those men pleasure and
contentment. Secondly, it can afford little pleasure to men, to act quite
contrary to their own interests; it is rather like the laughter of fools and
mad men, than a real pleasure, that such men can pretend to. Now every sinner
quite ruins his interest and happiness, while he runs headlong to
destruction; and for a present pleasure, which is only grateful to the sensual
appetite, loses those lasting Rivers of pleasure, which, though future, are
yet certain, and which are calculated for the Soul. Thirdly, What pleasure can
any man enjoy, who is sure to be eternally tormented? As there is no peace, so
no pleasure to the wicked, who are at odds with God, whose favor is better
than life.

But what reason have good men to be sad and disconsolate, since all the causes
of grief are removed from them? Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness
for the upright in heart; so that the Apostle had good reason to double that
Exhortation, Rejoice in the Lord, again I say rejoice. O how satisfying and
pleasant is it for men to act reasonably, and to be assured that they have done
their duty, and have acted for their own interest! Our rejoicing is this,
(says the Apostle) the testimony of our consciences, that in all simplicity
and godly sincerity we have had our conversation in the world.

Sure there was never any man who was troubled for living holily, there being
no reason why any should: It Is true, good men may be of a melancholy
disposition, and naturally inclined to sadness; but this can be no reflection
on Holiness, as if it were the cause of that melancholy temper: nay, the best
of men have their own failings, and no wonder though these breed some trouble
and disquiet: But this is not to be disconsolate for being good, but for doing
evil. And indeed, I may add, that the great abominations and profanity, the
contempt of Religion, and dishonor that is done to God that abounds, may very
rationally make good men with the Psalmist say, Rivers of tears run down my
eyes, because men observe not thy Law.

And thus this imputation cast upon Holiness, is easily wiped off. Grief and
sadness are not the effect of a good life; but of an imperfect obedience: And
while our sins call for mourning and fasting, it were a piece of madness for
men to be jovial and merry, and entertain themselves with those deceitful
melodies, which will end in weeping and gnashing of teeth.

And yet the sorrow of truly good men is not so obvious to the eye of men, as
it is to him who is the searcher of the heart; it is rather the artifice of the
formal Penitent, and hypocritical Professor, than the character of the
Righteous, to disfigure their faces, and appear sad and demure. A good man
chooses rather, with David, to mourn in secret, and when he appears in public
to wash his face, than with those Hypocrites of whom Isaiah speaks, who bow
down their head like a bull-rush, who have chosen affliction rather than
innocence.

The next imputation cast upon Holiness is, that it is but a piece of
singularity, and a vain ambition to walk alone. Ans. I am heartily sorry that
the universal deluge of Impiety should make good men say as once Elijah did in
another case, I am only left: the few number of good men, compared with the
vast multitude and Armies of transgressors, makes them to be esteemed singular
and precise; and brings upon them the wrath and fury of ungodly sinners,
because they will not run with them to the same excess of riot, and wallow in
the mire as they do. But truly this charge is not more rational, than if a
company of mad men should call one a singular fool, because he does not comply
with them in all their extravagant actings, which do really rather require pity
and compassion than imitation.

I doubt not but Singularity in some cases is a very intolerable temper, and
unbecoming any man who pretends wisdom: but yet, if it be universally
condemned, and in no case admitted as reasonable, I don't see but the charge
will rebound upon the sinner, who in this degenerate age thinks the worse of
himself, if he exceed not others in wickedness.

But since Holiness is so conformable to Humane reason, so advantageous and
beneficial to every man; what madness is it to condemn it as singular? Sure, he
who intends to walk as a man who is of a good understanding, (as good men are
said to be) who intends to mind his interest and happiness, will never be
frighted from Holiness, because may be it is not in vogue, nor become the mode
of the Kingdom. If a whole Kingdom (excepting a few) should rebel against
their Prince, would it be any blot upon these sew Loyal Subjects, that they
affected Singularity?

But this cavil is so insignificant and silly, that I need not enlarge. Sure,
since Holiness is the peculiar excellency and noble embellishment of Humane
nature; since it is so venerable and lovely, and of all perfections the most
excellent; he must be degenerate to the brutal nature, who condemns Singularity
in Holiness; for this is in truth a condemning a man because he is more
excellent than his neighbor, as the righteous is said to be in Scripture.

The last heavy Charge is, that it is folly and madness for men to quit with
their present pleasures, and expose themselves to grievous troubles, for a
future reward which is uncertain, and which no body ever saw. To this I Answer,
First, it is a great mistake to think that Holiness exposes men to relinquish
temporal and sensual pleasures; there being no men in the world so qualified to
experiment the sweetness of these, none who live in so happy and flourishing
condition, who are more healthful, and enjoy a greater measure of peace and
quietness, than good men. The only inconveniency they are exposed to, is
affliction upon the account of Religion; which when Christianity did commence,
was no rare thing, but now is not so ordinary. But supposing good men were
exposed to greater afflictions than other men, yet there is a great deal of
satisfaction in submitting to them, since they are but light afflictions, and
momentary too, which work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory. These small evils are rather to be endured, than lasting pains and
torments. Sure, Of two evils, the least is to be chosen.

Secondly, Although the reward of Holiness be future, yet it is not uncertain.
We have as great assurance that there will be a reward for the Righteous in
another world, as the nature of the thing is capable of: and sure he is an
unwise man that asks any other demonstration or proof. Now that there is a
reward laid up for good men, which though unseen, is yet as certain as if it
were obvious to sense, we have the greatest rational evidence, and the best
moral arguments to confirm it. For first, if there be a God; Secondly, if the
Scriptures be the Word of God, then there is not any thing more certain, than
that there is a state of rewards and punishments after this life. First, if
there be a God, then we can have no reasonable scruple about the future reward:
for since God is holy and just (perfections essential to a Deity) then
certainly he will, as the great Governor of the World, reward Virtue, and
punish Vice. But this does not always fall out so here; therefore it is
reasonable to conclude, that he has reserved the wicked till that great day of
wrath, and prepared a reward for the righteous. Secondly, if the Scripture be
the Word of God, then he who runs may read this truth.

We have then the greatest moral assurance possible, that there is a future
reward; which may sufficiently encourage men to hazard all they enjoy here, for
the expectation of it. But I shall only suppose that the future reward is
possible; (which I think few will deny, or can prove it to be impossible) yet
even upon this supposition, good men who part with the transitory things of
this life, prove a great deal wiser than those who condemn them: For if there
be no life after this, all the loss a good man suffers, is that of temporal
convenience; he has denied himself the enjoyment of sensual pleasures, so far
as he judges them sinful; he is not so intemperate as other men, and perhaps
is exposed to some hazards for his Religion; at the most, all that he is to
hazard is but very small. But if there be a future reward, in what a dismal
state are the wicked, who shall everlastingly be deprived of it, and be
irrecoverably plunged into a state of lasting and severe torments?

But since we are assured of a future reward, and know certainly, that the
righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father, and that
the wicked shall be cast into utter darkness; What folly and madness is it to
be careful for the Body, and careless what becomes of the Soul; to provide for
Time, and neglect Eternity? Sure it is no wonder though the Wise man does so
frequently characterize the sinner a fool, and represents him as one that
lacks understanding: And indeed, we may rationally say, This their way is
their folly; their foolish choice proclaims, that those workers of iniquity
have no knowledge.

The Conclusion.
WE have now seen the Excellency and Beauty of Holiness, have discovered the
absolute Perfection of its Nature, and the Compleatness of its Rule; have taken
a view of its Allurements and powerful Motives, and have discovered the
weakness of those Cavils that are urged against it: and what remains, but that
we set about this work with the greatest seriousness imaginable; that we give
no sleep to our eyes, nor slumber to our eyelids, till we forsake our sins,
and enter upon a course of Holiness?

If God had imposed upon us a heavy and intolerable yoke; if he had commanded
us to perform some grievous and uneasy service, had we not been obliged to
have obeyed? But since he only commands us to wash and be clean, requires
only our consent to what is so much our own interest, only exacts that we
separate our selves from those lusts that pollute and defile us, that vex and
torments our minds, and which (if continued in) will certainly ruin and undo
us; what fools and madmen are we if we refuse to hear his voice?

Almighty God has been drawing us with the Cords of Love; has presented to us
the most charming motives to excite our love and esteem; has carried us (as it
were) to the Pinnacle of the Temple, and discovered to us all the glory and
beauty of this world; has taken us to Pisgah, and given us a view of the good
Land of Canaan, of the City of the living God, of which glorious things are
spoken; and promised, that all these things shall be ours, if we will but be
holy in all manner of conversation: And to excite our fear, he has opened to
our view, the powers of the world to come; has plainly told us of the pains and
torments that the damned suffer day and night, and that indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish, remains as the due portion of those that do evil. And
now may he not take up that same protestation that he used to his ancient
People the Jews; What more can I do for you? But alas! we have in the most
insolent manner despised all these charms of Love, and, like the madman in the
Gospel, have broken to pieces the strongest Fetters and Chains. We are, God
knows, as deeply sunk into sensuality and bruitishness, as those to whom the
Grace of God that brings salvation has never appeared. It Is not credible, (I
may say possible) that men could have been more wicked than they now are,
supposing they had never heard of Heaven or Hell.

It Is a wonder (as any one would think) that those very men who profess they
believe in Christ, should so grossly and openly contradict his plain Precepts;
that those who believe, that without holiness no man shall see the Lord, and
that the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness, yet
persist in their abominable wickedness, and are neither awed with fears, nor
animated with hopes. What is all this, but for men to expose themselves to the
contempt rather than pity of discerning men?

We have surveyed the several advantages which attend Holiness; have discovered
how much man's temporal as well as his eternal welfare and happiness depends
upon it: We have explained how in her right hand is length of days, and in her
left hand are riches and honor: that her ways are ways of pleasantness, and
all her paths peace. And now may we not give the same testimony of it which
Joshua and Caleb did of Canaana, Numb. 14. The land which we passed through to
search, it is an exceeding good land? The Sons of Anak (I mean the pretended
difficulties) are not so strong as some men represent them to be; we need not
be discouraged to encounter with them; greater is he that is in you, than he
that is in the world. Alas! what Objection can men possibly make against a Duty
that is so excellent, useful, and necessary, that is founded upon such mighty
motives, as may prevail with any who is not quite petrified in desperate
Impiety? Good God! what stupid folly is this, that men hide their hands in
their bosom, and will not so much as stretch them out to this tree of Life,
that they may eat of this fruit, which is pleasant to the eye, and profitable
both to our present and future happiness.

It Is indeed pity, that men should be thus permitted to run headlong to
destruction. Alas! is perdition so lovely and desirable, that, like Rachel, a
double servitude is thought light for it? and shall wise and discerning men be
Eyewitnesses of the bad bargain those men make, and not warn them of their
folly? I know this is a duty chiefly incumbent to our spiritual Watchmen to
discharge; I doubt not but many of them stand upon their watch, and warn men of
their danger. It were to be wished that all and every of them were thus
faithful; but sure every man is in some manner concerned to be his brothers
keeper; and he is highly criminal, who should see a mad man running upon
danger, and not stop him in his course.

I wish some new-coined Doctrines had not an inauspicious influence upon the
bad practices of many, had not too much countenanced and authorized vice: but
my present design is so far from controversial, that I shall rather think my
self concerned to inveigh against needless disputes, than start any. If I may
speak from my own experience, I ingenuously confess, I find Disputes so
insipid and fruitless, and in the review so unsatisfactory, that I am resolved
henceforth to bid an eternal adieu to them, and to condemn them as the great
underminers of Christian Piety: And if any shall after this fair warning
assault any Doctrine I have elsewhere owned, I hope discerning men will neither
esteem me nor the Cause the worse, that I draw not my Sword in its defense.

And now what shall I say more, but conclude with Moses's passionate
Exhortation, Deuteronomy. 32.46. Set your hearts to the words which I testify to you
this day: for it is not a vain thing, because it is your life. Let us no longer
delay and put off this duty; while it is called to day, let us not harden our
hearts through the deceitfulness of sin; but seriously search and try our ways,
and turn to the Lord: this is the proper season for so necessary a work; ere
long, there will be no time left us to consider our ways: O that in this our
day we did understand the things that belong to our peace, before they be hid
from our eyes! If men would but be induced to imitate the Psalmists Example,
Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways, I doubt not but they should also imitate
the course he did take, I made haste and delayed not to keep thy commandments:
But men consider not what they are doing, and so no wonder though they perish,
no wonder that they prefer darkness to light, and despise Holiness as a thing
of no value. Let us therefore humbly and heartily invoke the Father of Lights
to open the Eyes of men, whom the God of this world has blinded, that they may
flee from the wrath to come, by cleansing themselves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

Holy Devotions: OR, A COLLECTION OF PRAYERS AND THANKSGIVINGS, Fitted to the
main uses of a Christian Life.

PHILIP. 4.6. Be careful for nothing: but in every thing by Prayer and
Supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God.

London: Printed for Rob. Sollers, at the Kings Arms and Bible in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1683.

HOLY DEVOTIONS: OR, A Collection of Prayers.
A Prayer for Families on the Lords day in the Morning.
O Most holy and eternally blessed, The heavens and the heaven of heavens is
thine, the earth also, with all that therein is. Thou art everywhere, and can
not be excluded from any place; but art present to the greatest secrets of our
Souls, and see the closest and most retired thoughts of our Hearts. Thou
know very well with what designs and Affections we now bow our selves before
thee, and can not be deceived by any words that we are able to speak in thy
praise, whilst our Hearts are far from thy fear and love.

Behold, O Lord, our Hearts are full with desires to be possessed with a mighty
reverend sense of thee, and all the benefits thou have bestowed on us; and be
lifted up to Heaven in Love to thee, and Joy in thee, whilst we bless and
praise thee, and speak good of thy Name. We here remember with all humility and
thankfulness that thou art our Creator, and acknowledge thy care and providence
over thy ancient People, in blessing and Sanctifying a day, wherein thou thy
self restedst from thy works, that they might cease from all other employments,
and admire thy wonderful works, extol thy Power, bless thy Goodness, and be
astonished at thy Wisdom, in making, preserving, adorning and governing this
excellent frame of the World. The Heavens declare thy glory, O God, and the
Firmament shows thy handiwork. The Sun, the Moon, and all the Host of
Heaven, proclaim the greatness and splendor of thy Majesty: The whole Earth is
full of thy rich goodness, so is the great and wide Sea, wherein are things
moving innumerable, both small and great living Creatures. There is nothing but
what speaks of thee; and above all, the Children of men, whom thou have
wonderfully made, curiously wrought, and impressed with thy own Image; that
they might understand thee, and love thee, in all, and above all things.

The variety, the order, the stedfastness of all thy works in this great World,
abundantly utter thy adorable perfections. But thou, O Lord, by thy goodness in
giving thy Son for us, and then raising him up from the Dead, and setting him
at thy right hand, have given us new matter of wonder and praise; and
consecrated a better rest, and holy day of rejoicing: wherein we should behold
the glories of another World, and have before our Eyes the happiness thou
intendest for us there, together with all the excellent means which lead unto
it. Thou give us occasion not only to reflect upon all the good things thou
have provided for our bodies; (which we can never acknowledge enough, the very
Health and Ease of one day deserving the thankfulness of many) but we must also
remember, that we are thy redeemed ones, and that thou have done great things
for our Souls in thy Son Jesus, who is entered into the Heavens for us, and gone
to prepare a resting place for all those that follow him. This exceeding riches
of thy grace infinitely surpasses all our acknowledgments; since all the
praises we are able to render thee, are less than is due for thy temporal
blessings.

To this Love we owe the knowledge of thee, the true and only God; our freedom
from Idolatry, and a vain Conversation; the true principles of Holy living; the
benefit of repentance; the promise of a pardon; the assistance of thy Holy
Spirit; the ministry of thy Angels; the hope of immortal Life; and the pledges
our Lord has left us of his endless love. To this we owe thy forbearance in
the days of our ignorance, thy unwearied patience toward us in a continued
Rebellion, and thy earnest entreaties of us, when we were passionately bent
upon our own destruction. Thou have sent us, in much love, many Holy
Instructors and Guides to blessedness; we have had the benefit of sundry Pious
Sermons, good Examples, holy Admonitions, and serious Councels, of the Power of
the Holy Ghost, and diverse restraints of Fear, and Shame, and Love; and thou
still pursuest us with thy merciful kindness, and beseechest us to attend to
thy gracious invitations, and receive thy blessings, and make thee our choice,
and be Eternally happy in thy divine favor and likeness. What shall we render
to the Lord for all his benefits toward us?

O help us to manifest our real and unfeigned desires to make some worthy
returns to thee, by our careful improvement of the Holy opportunity which thou
this day put into our hands.

O that our minds may be more enlightened to understand the Truth as it is in
Jesus; that our wills may be more steadfastly resolved to cleave unto it; that
our Affections may be excited to a stronger and more ardent Love to thee, and a
greater delight in thee; and all the powers of our Souls disposed to serve thee
at all other times, more cheerfully and readily, in all the Duties of Piety,
Soberness, Righteousness, and Mercy. So that every day may become an Holy rest
to the Lord, by ceasing to do Evil, and constantly doing well: that we may
Glorify thee throughout our whole life, in all our actions showing forth thy
praise, who have called us out of Darkness into thy mavelous Light. And
enlighten, good Lord, the whole World with the beams of thy Glorious Gospel,
and dispose the Hearts of all Christian People, among whom the Son of
righteousness has shone so long, to walk as Children of the Light: that so
they may offer unto thee this day most acceptable Sacrifices for themselves and
for all mankind; and be fitted and prepared by serving thee in Righteousness
and true Holiness here, to shine for ever in his Heavenly Kingdom, with Christ
Jesus our Savior, by whom thou have given us good hope in thee, that thou will
hear our Prayers, and do for us above all that we can ask or think; which we
humbly beg, in those Holy words which he has taught us, saying,

Our Father, etc.

Another for the Lord's Day at Night.
O Most blessed for evermore, the Father of mercies, and the God of all
comfort. How precious are thy promises to us-wards, how great is the sum of
them! Thou renewest thy favors continually, and art still pouring upon us
innumerable benefits; of which, this is not the least, that thou give us
leave to come into thy Presence, to call thee Father, and to make known our
requests to thee, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving. We accept, O
Lord, with all thankfulness this thy great Grace and Loving kindness to us; and
are here again prostrate before thee this Evening, to acknowledge thy goodness
in making us such excellent Creatures, capable to know thee, and acknowledge
thee, and love thee; and by being made like thee, to be Eternally happy with
thee.

Blessed be thy Name, that we are now alive, and that we have lived so long in
health, and strength, and peace, and plenty of all good things; whereas our
Eyes might have been consumed with grief, our Bones sore vexed, and, we might
have mingled our Drink with continual weeping. We are bound unto thee for the
free use of our understandings, for the good inclinations we find in our will,
for any devout affections which are stirring in our Hearts; for all the
advantages we have had by our educations, good company, and holy Examples: and
more especially, for the Illuminations of the Holy Ghost, by thy blessed
Gospel; the breathings of it frequently into our Spirits; the importunities
thou have used to draw us to thee, and the great and precious promises whereby
thy love in Christ Jesus constrains us to resign our selves entirely to the
Obedience of thy Precepts.

We ought likewise to admire and praise thee, for thy Goodness to all thy
Creatures, who live daily upon thy bountious allowance. The eyes of all wait on
thee, and thou give them their Food in due season; thou diffusest thy
blessings in several Streams to every one of them, according to their needs.
That thou give them, they gather: thou openest thy hand, they are filled with
good. We give thee the Glory of thy plentiful provision thou have made for
them: and more particularly admire thy great liberality to the Children of men,
under whose Feet thou have put in subjection all Sheep and Oxen, yea, and the
Beasts of the field, the Fowl of the Air, and the Fish of the Sea, and
whatsoever passes through the Paths of the Waters. O Lord, we praise thee for
thy Goodness to those who praise thee not themselves. Be thou adored and
acknowledged in thy bounty, which bestows so many blessings unasked and
unsought, and continues them notwithstanding abundance of provocations, and
most high Offenses that they have given to thy merciful kindness. And let thy
Goodness to thy Church be never forgotten by us, which thou have in all Ages
Protected and defended, in a marvelous manner propagating the Gospel of our
Savior, confounding its opposers, and spreading it by the power of the Holy
Ghost over the face of the Earth. We thank thee for thy singular favor to these
Countries wherein we live, to whom these glad tidings of Salvation have
reached, and who have long enjoyed a more glorious light than many other
places, and been delivered from the Darkness of Popish superstition, and from
sundry attempts that have been made to bereave us of this Happiness: and are
again settled after many Confusions in a peaceable enjoyment of thy true
Religion; which thou have also continued to us, though we have not brought
forth Fruit worthy of the Gospel of thy Grace.

O that all thy undeserved Goodness may have this effect upon us, to make us
heartily love thee, and devoutly worship thee, and zealously obey thee, and
steadfastly trust and hope in thee for ever. That by a careful improvement of
the knowledge of thee our God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom thou have
given us all things that pertain unto life and goodness, we may still enjoy
this inestimable treasure, and all thy love to us may at last be finished in
those eternal Joys, which he has promised to the Faithful. And as we have been
taught, exhorted and encouraged this day out of thy holy word, and have
likewise publicly acknowledged our obligations to thee, and made profession of
Love and Gratitude, and Durifulness to thy Divine Majesty: So help us all the
Week following openly to testify the Truth and Honesty of our Hearts, in all
this, by a blameless conversation; in all Humility, Meekness, Temperance
Righteousness, Charity and Peace, with all them that call on the Lord out of a
pure Heart.

Bless our Sovereign, the defender of the Faith we profess, and all employed
under him, in their several Offices: that they may be Instruments of continuing
to us these Holy opportunities, with all other good things that may make these
Kingdoms happy.

O that all our friends may be thine; and if we have any Enemies, Father,
forgive them: comfort and support the Sick, the Needy, and all other distressed
persons, with an immovable belief of thy wise and good Providence; to which
give them Grace patiently and obediently to resign themselves. And when all our
senses this Night shall be bound up with sleep, be thou, O Lord, our keeper:
and after the refreshment of that repose, and this Holy rest from our Labors,
raise us in the Morning to return unto them with cheerful minds, and ready
wills; Praising still and Magnifying thy multiplied Mercies to us in Christ
Jesus, by whom we present our selves and petitions to thee, saying farther as
he has taught us.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family on any Morning.
O Most holy, most glorious, and eternal Lord God; we thy poor and unworthy
Servants, in all humility of Soul and Body, and unfeigned acknowledgements of
our duty, prostrate our selves before the throne of thy Mercy, praising and
magnifying thy Fatherly goodness for the abundance of thy blessings, and for
the multitude of thy Mercies heaped upon us; beseeching thee for Christ his
sake, to be merciful to all our sins committed against thy Divine Majesty;
upon the consideration of which, we confess we are not worthy to appear in thy
presence, much less to ask a blessing at thy hands: for, by reason of our
corrupt Nature in us, derived from our first Parents, our inclinations have
been prone to commit all manner of sin and wickedness against thy Goodness. Thy
Laws and Precepts we have broken, both in thought, word, and deed; out of our
hearts proceed evil and wicked imaginations which defile the soul and body.
Yet, O Lord, thou art our Creator, thou have sent thy dear Son Jesus Christ to
die for us, and thy Holy Spirit to sanctify us; and many are the benefits and
blessings which thou have bestowed upon us, and which by thy goodness we enjoy
both of soul and body: and therefore by the Testimony of our own Consciences,
we stand convicted; and the thoughts of our great sins and transgressions do
much astonish us. What shall we say therefore, or wherein shall we open our
mouths! who shall deliver us from the misery due unto us for our transgression!
nothing can be expected in this life, but misery and confusion; and in the
world to come, eternal condemnation. But yet, O Lord, in obedience to thy
command, and in confident assurance of thy endless and unspeakable mercy,
promised in Jesus Christ to all sinners which come unto thee with sorrow in our
hearts, shame in our faces, and in all humility of spirit. And we would appeal
from thee, a just Judge, to thee a merciful Father; from the Throne of thy
Justice, to the Seat of thy Mercy; beseeching thee, O Lord, to have mercy upon
us, and to turn away thy face from all our sins, and to blot out all our
transgressions, for the only meritorious Death and Passion of Jesus Christ,
who so abundantly shed his Blood on the Cross, to take away the sin of the
world: and be pleased now to reform our affections, transform us out of sin,
into the glorious liberty of thy own Children, to live in newness of Life, in a
holy conversation, and continual obedience to thy divine Majesty.

And now we further entreat thee, O Lord, for a blessing upon the Church
universal: more especially we beseech thee, to continue the peace and
prosperity of these Churches wherein we live, and every member thereof; and in
a more especial manner, bless, with the chiefest of thy blessings, our King,
Queen, Duke, and the rest of the Royal Family; bless our Counselors,
Ministers, and Magistrates; bless our Friends; Kindred and Acquaintance; bless
the whole Church, and every afflicted member of it: accept of our
morning-sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, for all themercis and favors,
comforts and deliverances, which from time to time thou have afforded and
continued to us. We thank thee for thy last mercy, in preserving us from the
dangers of this night past; for refreshing our bodies with seasonable rest, and
bringing us safe to the beginning of this day. Lord, what is man, that thou art
so mindful of him, and the Son of man, that thou should thus visit and
remember him? Give us grace, O Lord, to remember thee, and to be mindful of thy
mercies, that we may praise thee for all the truth and faithfulness which thou
show to us in the land of the living; that as thou have brought us to the
comforts of this day, so thou may go along with us in the same, to enable us
for the Duties of those callings wherein we are placed, and to deliver us from
those dangers to which we are exposed, even for Jesus Christ his sake; in whose
most blessed name and words, we conclude these our weak and imperfect prayers,
saying as he himself has taught us in his holy Gospel,

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family at Night.
MOst glorious, and everlasting Lord God, which inhabitest eternity, and
dwell in that light which no mortal Eye can attain unto; the God in whom we
live, and move, and have our being; we thine unworthy Servants do here in all
lowliness and humility present our Persons and Prayers before thy Divine
Majesty; confessing and acknowledging, that we were conceived in sin, and
brought forth in iniquity; and as if that had been but a small matter, we have
heaped up our Actual transgressions, as the sand upon the Seashore, and as the
Stars in the Firmament for number: we have broken thy Commandments, we have
profaned thy Sabbaths, we have dishonored thy Name, we have abused thy
Creatures, we have neglected the day of our Visitation, and turned thy Grace
into wantonness, whereby we have most justly provoked thy wrath and everlasting
displeasure; we have wounded our own consciences, weakened our assurance of
Salvation, and grieved thy good Spirit, which seals us up unto the day of our
Redemption. And now, O Lord, if thou should deal with us after our
deservings, thou mighest pour upon us the deluge of thy wrath and fury, to
sweep us out of the Land of the living, into that place of torment prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. But thou have revealed thy self to the Sons of men,
to be the Lord, the Lord merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and of great
goodness, who pardons sins, and passest by the transgressions of thy People;
this is thy Name for ever, and thy Memorial throughout all Generations. We
beseech therefore, for Jesus Christ his sake, to be merciful unto us, in the
free pardon and forgiveness of all our sins, that we have ever committed
against thee: Accept of his obedience, for our disobedience; of his
righteousness, for our unrighteousness; of his sufferings, for all our sins:
wash them away in his blood, nail them to his Cross, hide them in his Wounds,
and bury them in his Grave, that they may never rise up for our confusion here,
or for our condemnation hereafter. O Lord, be unto us a Father of mercy, and a
God of consolation; speak peace unto our Souls and consciences, and say unto
us, that thou art the God of our Salvation. And give us Grace, for the time to
come, to dye daily unto sin, by virtue of thy Sons death, and to rise up to
newness of life, by the power of his resurrection. Wean our Hearts, and take
off our Affections from the things of this world, which endure but for a
season; and raise them up unto those things which are at thy right hand for
evermore. Enlighten the darkness of our understanding, subdue the stubbornness
of our wills, rectify the disorder of our affections, and bring into obedience
whatsoever exalts it self against thy will; that at last we may become such
as thou would have us to be.

Continue and enlarge thy blessings upon the Church and Land wherein we live,
upon the Person and Government of our King: bless all the Royal family,
together with his Majesty's Councels; the Nobility, Magistracy, Clergy, and
Gentry of the Land: Be merciful to all those who are afflicted with any cross
or calamity, all our relations and aquaintance, and all others whom we are
bound to pray for.

O Lord accept our thanksgivings this Evening, for all the mercies and favors
which thou have afforded for our Souls or Bodies, for this Life, or a better;
more especially, that thou have preserved us and our Family this day, in health
and happiness. Now, holy Father, seeing the Night is upon us, and we are ready
to take our rest, in thy hands we commit our Souls, and Bodies, and all that we
have; beseeching thee, who art the keeper of Israel, that neither sleep nor
slumberest, to take care of us; for if thou protect us not, Satan will devour
us; yea, we shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and never arise up to praise thee:
we pray thee therefore to be good to us this night, defend us from danger,
refresh us with comfortable rest, and raise us up to glorify thee in the
duties of the day following; that thou may still be our God, and we may be
thy People. Hear us and graciously answer us in these our requests, and what
else thou know needful and expedient for us, and that for Jesus Christ his
sake, in whose most blessed Name and words, we conclude these our imperfect
prayers, saying as he himself has taught us,

Our Father, etc.

A Morning-prayer for a private person.
O Lord my God, merciful and loving to all thy servants, pitiful and patient to
me thy child, gracious and favorable to all those that meekly come unto thee;
I dare not with the proud Pharisee justify my self, or say, I have not sinned:
I dare not press into thy presence with hope or confidence through mine own
merits to be saved; but, with the poor Publican, laying my Soul upon the work
of Repentance, and with an unfeigned sorrow casting my self down at the
footstool of thy Majesty, I cry, and say, O Lord, be merciful to me a sinner.

O my God, the horn of my Salvation, and my refuge, my stony Rock, and my
defense, in whom only I trust, and to whom alone I flee for succor; miserable
wretch that I am, how have I provoked thee! I have done evil in thy fight, I
have stirred up thine anger, I have deserved thy displeasure. I have sinned, I
have offended, yet thou bear with me. One deep calls to another, the depth
of misery to the depth of mercy.

I feel, O Lord, (but it is thy Spirit that gives me this feeling) that mine
Understanding is darkened, Conscience seared, Memory decayed, Will bewitched,
Heart hardened, Affections disordered, Conversation corrupted; my thoughts,
desires, and best actions are abominable in thy sight. Mine eyes cannot see
thee in thy Creatures, mine ears cannot hear thee in thy Word, my mouth cannot
praise thee in thy Works, my hands and feet cannot serve thee in my Calling:
destruction and calamity are in all my ways, and the way of peace I have not
known. Unto whom now shall I come for comfort, unto whom now shall I sue for
succor, but to thee, O Lord, whom I will look up to, as unto the Brazen
Serpent! If I repent, thou sparest; if I return, thou embracest: yet beside all
this, though I defer, thou waitest. Thou teach the ignorant, thou comfortest
the pensive, thou liftest up from destruction after a fall, thou give to him
that asks, thou reclaimest him which wandereth, thou invitest him that
resists, thou look for him that sleeps, and him thou embracest which
returns.

Now, O Lord, what to answer for my disobedience I am ignorant; for what am I
not subject to, by reason of my sins! I cannot hide my self from thy presence:
I could not abide it, if thou should enter into Judgment.

O Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, pierce my flesh with thy fear, so
that by fearing I may escape such things as thou do threaten; and restore to
me the Joy of thy Salvation, that by loving I may taste the felicity which thou
have promised. Put thou into my remembrance, O Lord, the things I should
conceive of thee; teach me by what words I may call upon thee, instruct me with
what good works I may please thee. Cover thou mine head in the day of battle:
Let me not be of that number which for a time believe, but, when temptation
comes, go back.

Grant me, I beseech thee, the gifts of regeneration, to become thy child of
Faith, to believe thy promise; of obedience, to do thy will; of prayer, to seek
thy presence; of comfort, to endure thy trials; and of strength, to continue
thy servant to my life's end.

Open my blind eyes, to see the sins I am most given to: give me grace to sigh
and groan under the burden of them: and give me spiritual understanding to
discern and judge betwixt good and evil.

Thou have been good unto me, O Lord, many ways, in my creation, redemption,
vocation, sanctification, in preserving me all the days of my life hitherunto,
and in opening thy hand continually, and filling my mouth with good things.
Thou have preserved me from all dangers of this night past, and brought me safe
to the beginning of this day: whereas thou might have made my bed my grave;
thou might have turned my sleep into death unto me, but thou lendest me a
longer and a larger time to repent. Lord, increase my zeal, further my
repentance, make me sincerely to embrace thy mercies. I will take the Cup of
Salvation, and call upon thy Name. Receive, O Lord, this early sacrifice both
of my soul and body. I offer them up into thy hands to be disposed at thy
pleasure, and with them unfeigned sighs for offending thee. Go on with thy
favors toward me thy humble servant; go along by me and with me all this day,
and all the days of my life, that I may not step into the path of sin, but that
thy Law may be my delight all the day long.

Thou, O Lord Christ, art risen from the dead. Let the power of thy
resurrection make me rise unto newness of life: And that which is impossible to
flesh and blood, make it possible by the virtue of thy blood. And so in thy
Name I shut up my imperfect prayers, both for my self and others, in that
manner and form of prayer which thou have taught me;

Our Father, etc.

An Evening-prayer for a private person.
O Lord my God, who aboundest in all good things, and art a liberal bestower of
the dainties of heavenly safety; I praise and glorify thee for thy love and
bounty toward me this day past, having bestowed upon me all things necessary
for the day, withholding nothing from me that might be beneficial to me. The
night now steals upon me like a thief, and I am nearer to old age than I was
in the morning, though not nearer to goodness. I know not whether thou will
this night make my bed in the dark, and the hour of my visitation be this
present evening. A wake me then out of that slumber of sin, remove from me that
sloth that has all this while hindered thy Grace: Forgive me my sins, which are
more infinite than the stars, and more heavy than if mountains lay upon my
bosom: but thy mercy and the merits of my Redeemer do I trust in; in his Name
do I sue for a pardon.

Let my mind, O Lord, fly from the parching heat of worldly cares, under the
shadow of thy wings; that being hid in temperate coldness, it may joyfully sing
and say, I will lay me down, and also sleep in peace. Let my memory sleep, O
Lord my God; let it sleep from all evil. Suffer not unclean thoughts this night
to pollute my body and soul; but keep my cogitations chaste. Let not the Sun go
down upon my wrath; but if any man this day have done me wrong, grant that I
may freely and heartily forgive him, as I desire at thy hands to be forgiven.
Keep me from the adversary, who sleeps not, but seeks how he may devour me.
Anoint me, O Lord, with the Oil of thy Spirit, that of thy fullness I may be
filled with Grace, even that Grace, which may further my Salvation. Keep me, O
Lord, in my old age, forsake me not when I am gray headed. And whenever it
shall please thee to cast me upon my sick bed, grant that I may take my
sickness patiently; and at the last gasp let not either sin or Satan take such
hold upon me, that I depart this life with cryings, and screechings, and words
of despair; but that, believing thy word, and yielding to thine ordinance, my
last hour may be my best hour, and I may say with the Psalmist, Lord into thy
hands I commend my Spirit; for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth.

Pardon, O Lord, my misspending the time, my unprofitableness, my
unthankfulness for thy goodness. Supply what is wanting in me; through the fire
of compunction make me at all hours to seem a living sacrifice in thy sight.
Continue toward me thy love, and make me to love thee again. Without thee,
alas! I die; but when I think on thee, I revive again. To thee therefore be
ascribed all honor and glory world without end.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer before the receiving of the Sacrament.
O Most gracious and merciful Lord God, thou have called all those that are
weary and heavy laden with their sins to come unto thee, and have promised to
ease and refresh them; thou have invited all those that hunger and thirst after
thy Kingdom and the righteousness thereof, to come to thy Table, to taste of thy
supper, and have promised that thou will satisfy them: in assurance therefore
of these promises I come to thee, blessed Lord Jesus, beseeching thee to ease
me, to refresh me, to satisfy me with thy mercy; for my Soul hungers and
thirsts after thee and thy Salvation. I confess and acknowledge that my daily
sins have made me unworthy of my daily Bread, much more of this Manna, this
Bread of Life that came down from Heaven. I confess, O Lord, I am not prepared
according to the preparation of thy sanctuary; yet for as much as this day I
have set my Heart to seek to thee, thou, O God, be merciful unto me: and though
I cannot bring with me a clean Heart, (for who can say his Heart is clean?) yet
behold, O Lord, I bring with me a contrite Heart and a broken Spirit; despise
not, O God, this Sacrifice. As for the sins that I have committed against thee,
bind them up in one bundle, and cast them into the bottomless Sea of thy
mercy; bury them in thy Wounds, and wash them away in the blood of that
immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus: and for the time to come sprinkle my conscience
with the same blood, that being cleansed from dead works, I may serve thee the
Living God in righteousness and true holiness all the days of my life. That so
this blessed Sacrament may be a means to quiet my conscience, to increase my
Faith, to inflame my Charity, to amend my life, to save my Soul, and to assure
me that I am of the number of those blessed ones who shall eat at thy Table,
and be called to the Marriage-supper of the Lamb. Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus
Christ his sake, in whose Name and words I conclude these my imperfect prayers,
saying as he himself has taught me.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer after the receiving of the Sacrament.
O Most gracious God, from whose bounty every good and perfect gist is
derived; I and all that is within me praise and magnify thy holy Name for all
thy mercies and favors which from time to time thou have bestowed upon me. But
especially I thank thee for Jesus Christ thy Son, the fountain and foundation
of all blessings and benefits; that thou have sent him into the World to take
our nature upon him, and to die for us; and that thou have fed me, who am
unworthy of the least of thy favors, with the precious merits of his death and
passion. Blessed Lord God, thou have been pleased this day to set thy Seal to
the Pardon and forgiveness of all my sins: Oh, let me not lose it again by
unthankfulness, or relapsing into my old sins from which thou have purged me,
lest my last end be worse than my beginning. But if hereafter I shall be
tempted by the Devil, allured by the World, or provoked by my own flesh, then
set before mine eyes, by the remembrance of thy Spirit, how dear the expiation
of my sins cost my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, even the effusion of his most
precious and holy blood; that in the contemplation of his death, and
application of his most bitter passion, I may die daily unto sin, and so may
show forth the Lords death till he come and bring his reward with him; I may
receive the Crown of Righteousness which he has purchased and prepared for all
those that love and expect the day of his appearing, with the precious price of
his incorruptible blood. And whereas I have this day renewed my covenant with
thee my God in vows and purposes of better obedience, assist me by thy grace,
and strengthen me by thy power, that I may pay the Vows which I have made unto
thee, and that by virtue of thy heavenly nourishment I may grow up in grace and
godliness, till at last I come to be a perfect man in Christ Jesus.

Preserve and maintain always this thine Ordinance, that it may be a note and a
badge of my public profession: and give unto all of us that have been
partakers of thy body and blood, one heart and one mind in the unity of Spirit,
for the worthy and reverend receiving of the same whenever we shall come to
thy holy Table again. And for this thy mercy toward me, do I yield unto thee
all praise, and glory, and power, and might, and majesty, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, in whose most blessed Name and words I further pray,

Our Father, etc.

Another Prayer before the Sacrament.
DEpart from me, Luke 5.8.
for I am a sinful man, O Lord. I am not worthy that thou should come under
my roof. For the house of my Soul, which thou have made a fit Temple for thy
holy Spirit to inhabit in, I have defaced and defiled with all manner of
pollutions and abominations. It is become a den of ravenous Beasts, and a cage
of unclean Birds, and every corner so crowded with filthiness, that thou will
not find where to lay thy head, Luke 9.58.

But thou, O Lord, which despisest not a penitent sinner, but have promised to
dwell with the humble and contrite Spirit, I beseech thee cast me not away from
thy presence, but cast out all profaneness and uncleanness out of my Heart, and
remove every thing that may offend the pure Eyes of thy glory, and the holiness
of thy presence: and then, O Lord, vouchsafe to come and enter in, and dwell
there, and abide with me for ever.

Behold, O Lord, I am before thee in my sins, Zach. 3.1.
clothed with filthy garments, and Satan standing at my right hand, accusing
me, and bringing my transgressions into remembrance before thee, with loud
clamours for justice against me. O Lord, I acknowledge and confess my self
guilty, and that I have deserved the utmost of thy wrath and indignation. But,
O Lord, I appeal from thy seat of judgment to thy throne of Grace and Mercy,
humbly beseeching thee to rebuke and repel the malicious accuser of thy
servants, and hearken to the intercession of our advocate in thine own bosom:
for his sake have mercy upon me, and pardon my offenses, and blot out the
Handwriting that is against me, and put away all mine iniquities, and drown
them in the depth of the Sea.

Wash me thoroughly from all my pollutions in that Fountain which thou have
opened for Judah and Jerusalem to purify in; and then cloth me with that white
robe of thy Son's righteousness, the Wedding Garment requisite at this feast,
and admit me to thy Table which thou have prepared for thy Children.

And grant, O Lord, that when I have tasted of these thy Heavenly dainties, I
may no more return like the Dog to his vomit, or the Sow that was washed to her
wallowing in the mire; but I may keep my self unspotted from the World, and
walk before thee in all purity and holiness.

And now, O Lord, thou invitest and exhortest me to come to thy holy Table.

O my God, I know mine own unworthiness, yet in the multitude of thy mercies I
will humbly approach to thine Altar, beseeching thee to behold me not with a
severe, but a gracious eye.

Thou know the earnest desire of my Soul: be thou pleased to pass by the
weakness of the flesh, and accept the willingness of the Spirit, and grant that
I may now receive this holy Sacrament to the honor and glory of thy Name, and
the good and comfort and Salvation of my own Soul.

The Good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, 2 Chronicles.
30.18, 19.
the Lord God of his Fathers, though he be not purified according to the
purification of the Sanctuary. Amen.

After the Sacrament.
LOrd, what is man that thou art mindful of him, Psalm. 144.3.
or the son of man that thou visitest him?

What is thy servant, 2 Samuel 9.8.
that thou should look upon such a dead Dog as I?

The Dogs eat of the crumbs that fall from their Masters Table, Mat. 15.27.
but thou have fed me with the bread of thy Children, and given me to drink of
thine own cup.

Thou have fed me in a green Pasture, Psalm. 23.2.
and leadest me forth beside the waters of comfort.

O taste and see how gracious the Lord is: Psalm. 34.8.
blessed is the man that trusts in him.

What reward shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? Psalm.
116.12.


Lord, I offer up unto thee my self, my soul and body, Psalm. 84.4.
and all that I am and have; beseeching thee graciously to receive me for thy
servant, to dwell in thy House, and praise thy Name for evermore.

Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, Revel. 4.11.
and Honor, and Power; for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure
they are and were created.

Thou art worthy to take the Book, and to open the seals thereof: Revel. 5.9.
for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to our God, out of every Kindred,
and Tongue, and People, and Nation, and have made us unto our God Kings and
Priests.

Salvation to our God which sits upon the Throne, Rev. 7.10, 12.
and to the Lamb. Amen.

Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and
Might, be unto God for ever and ever. Amen.

An Admonition after Receiving.
ANd now you have thus solemnly devoted and consecrated your self to God and
his Service, beware that you do not fall back, and return to your former course
of sin, 2 Pet. 2.22.
like the dog to his own vomit; or as the Serpent, which casts up his Poison
when he goes to drink, and when he has quenched his thirst, returns and sucks
it up again. And thus some are content to leave their sins at the Churchdoor,
but with an intent to take them up again when they come out.

But God will not be so mocked.

And know this, that if you have well and worthily performed this Duty to day,
yet if you do not persevere in Piety, as you have promised and begun, not only
your former sins, but even the Piety of this day shall one day rise up in
Judgment against you.

But a diligent watching and wariness over your ways after this, will be the
best preparation against the next time.

A Prayer for one that is troubled in mind.
O Lord, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, I acknowledge and
adore thy eternal Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness. I render thee my most hearty
thanks for all the benefits thou have bestowed on me, from my first coming into
the world until this time. Many, O Lord my God, are the wonderful works which
thou have done, and thy thoughts which are to usward; they cannot be reckoned
up in order unto thee: if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than
can be numbered. Above all, I bless thee for that great demonstration of thy
Love and Good Will to Mankind by Christ Jesus, whom thou have sent into the
world to save sinners; and for bringing me to the clear knowledge of him, and
unfeigned affection to thy holy Will declared to us in his blessed Gospel.

O God, thou have taught me from my youth up, and hitherto been marvellously
gracious to me. Hide not, I beseech thee, thy face now from me, and put not thy
Servant away in displeasure. Thou have been my help, leave me not; neither
forsake me, O God of my Salvation. But for Jesus Christ his sake, I humbly
entreat thee to pardon and pass by all my neglects of thee, and unthankfulness
to thee, and offenses against thee. And as I here sincerely devote and dedicate
my whole self, soul and body to thy service; so help me, O my God, and further
me in the performance of my duty, by the grace of thy holy Spirit. To thee all
hearts are open, and from thee no secrets are hid: deal with me according to
the earnest desire and full purpose of my soul, to conform my self in all
things to thy holy Will.

Settle in me an immovable faith in thy infinite Mercies, a constant love and
cheerful affection to my duty, and a readiness of heart to obey thee, and to
submit to thy wise appointments in every condition. The whole Earth is full of
thy Mercies. That I may rejoice and be glad all my days, compose my broken and
disturbed thoughts, quiet my troubled and disordered spirit, and appease all
the ragings and tumults there, by a sweet sense of thy most tender mercies,
which have been ever of old, and endure continually.

Banish from me all causeless fears and jealousies; deliver me from all
unprofitable sadness and dejections of spirit: keep me from charging thee
foolishly. Bestow upon me a cheerful spirit, by an humble hope in thee, and by
referring my self wholly to thee. Endue me with such wisdom and uprightness,
that I may neither neglect my duty, nor suspect thy gracious acceptance of me.
Give me an hearty zeal to do the best that I am able; and a settled persuasion
that thou requirest no more of me.

Defend me, O my gracious God, from dishonouring thee, and my Religion, by
distrusting thy goodness, and calling thy loving kindness in question toward
those that are sincerely bent to please thee. Remove all troublesome
imaginations from me, and give me a clear understanding of thee, and of my
self; or when I am in darkness and confusion of thoughts, grant me so much
light and judgment, as not to conclude my self forsaken by thee, but to reflect
upon thy long-continued favors to me, and many deliverances of me; that so I
may resolve still to hope in thee, to bear my present trouble patiently, and to
resign my will absolutely to thy good pleasure. And good Lord, enable me to
look beyond these clouds, to that blessed state whither my Savior is gone, in
which there is no darkness at all: and in an humble hope of coming to the same
place where he is, to content my self with any condition whilst I am here, so
far remote from that Region of light and glory.

Hear me most loving and merciful Father, I most humbly beseech thee; Pity my
great dullness and deadness of heart. Strengthen my weak and feeble endeavors,
support my fainting spirit, and cause it humbly to hope in thee for ever.
Confirm and establish every good thought, desire and purpose which thou have
wrought in me; perfect that which thou have begun; make me to grow in wisdom,
faith, love, and willing obedience: conduct me hereafter so evenly and
steadily, so peaceably and quietly, so cheerfully and sincerely in thy ways,
that I may Glorify thee whilst I live, by encouraging others to accompany me
in thy service; and when I come to die, may resign my Soul unto thee with an
undisturbed mind, and in an holy hope also of a joyful resurrection of the
body, at the great day of the Lord Jesus, to whom be glory and dominion for
ever. Amen.

The Prayer for a Woman with Child.
MOst merciful and gracious God, who wilt not turn away thine ear from those
that call upon thee in sincerity and truth; look down with an Eye of pity and
compassion upon thy unworthy Servant. I must confess, my sins are very great,
and so is my danger which is at hand; my pains to come will be grievous, and my
life is now most uncertain. Assure me, I beseech thee, of the forgiveness of
all my sins, mitigate my fear and sorrows, strengthen me with the comforts of
thy Spirit, confirm me in the faith of my Savior, and bless all good means
appointed for my comfort; that in due time I may be a joyful Mother, and see
the fruit of my Body, safe, sound, and perfect, without blemish or deformity.

O Lord, I know not how soon my travel will steal on me, when I must fight that
battle of Life and Death: one drop of thy mercy has sovereign power to cure
all the Wounds of those sorrows; shed therefore, O holy Father, that drop of
grace upon me, in that minute when I am to encounter with so stern an
adversary; strengthen me with patience; bless me that I perish not: bless the
work of my Midwife; let not the Child yet unborn, the Babe in my womb, be
punished for mine offenses; but give it growth, give it flourishing, and form;
and when the time is come, that thou will call it out of this close House of
flesh, where it now inhabiteth, to dwell in the open World, sanctify thy
Creature, make it by Baptism, a member of thy Church, a Lamb of thy flock, and
direct it in the ways of Godliness to its lives end. And all through Jesus
Christ our Lord, in whose blessed words I continue to pray,

Our Father, etc.

A Thanksgiving by the Woman after safe deliverance, to be used when she is
able.
MY Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit rejoices in God my Savior. He
has given me my Hearts desire, and not denied me the request of my lips.
Children are his heritage, and the fruit of the Womb is his reward.

Glory be to thee, O Lord God eternal, who have now delivered me from the great
pains and peril of Childbirth, who have taken away my reproach, and made me an
instrument to increase thy Kingdom. It is in thy power to strike death into my
Womb, but thou have given me a double life: all mine anguishes thou have
sweetened with gladness. Continue thy mercies and favors to me thy servant; put
strength into my blood, blood into my Veins, and courage into mine Heart; that
my lips may render thee deserved thanks.

Thou that art the Father of love and life, look upon this mine Infant, which
thou have given me; preserve it in health, quicken it with grace, crown it with
long life, that it may grow up to be a servant in thy household. Send the Father
of it and me much comfort by it, that it may be a staff to our old age. Bless
it with store of friends in this World, and be thou the chief friend to it for
evermore: and for the better growth in godliness, feed it with the Milk of thy
Word, defend it from all dangers, and all enemies Bodily and Ghostly.

And whereas it is written, that the great red Dragon stood before the Woman
which was ready to be delivered, that he might devour her Child when she had
brought it forth; so guard me, and regard this my birth, that Satan rule not
nor reign within us; but deliver us still out of his Jaws, as a Bird out of the
Snare of the Fowler. Let thy blessing, O Lord, be upon me and my Children,
strongly to help, keep and defend us, from this time forth for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer to be used by one that is sick.
O Eternal and most merciful Father, look down I beseech thee upon thy poor
servant, who is punished and afflicted in Body with the smart of my pain and
sickness; and who is also troubled with the fear of thy heavy displeasure for
my many sins and iniquities, wherewith I have provoked thy holy Majesty in the
time of my health. I confess that of very faithfulness and goodness to me, thou
have laid this scourge upon me, to the end that by the stripes of my flesh, my
Spirit might be healed, and saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. I valued not
the benefit of health as I should have done, and therefore thou have made me
sensible of it by the want of it: in prosperity I remembered not the
afflictions of my Brethren, and therefore thou have afflicted me like unto
them. I was in a kind of Spiritual lethargy, till thou did awake me with the
stroke of thy hand. And because I know that it is good for me to be thus
disciplined by thee, I humble my self under thy mighty hand, and kiss this thy
rod, which I trust through thy grace shall make my Soul appear fair and
beautiful in thine Eyes. Comfort O Lord, my fainting Spirit, and strengthen my
feeble knees, and support my weak hands, and revive my deaded heart; and so
powerfully assist me with the Spirit of strength, that I may with confidence
call upon thee, with patience endure this trial, with hope expect thy good
pleasure, with wisdom make use of this thy visitation, and with thankfulness
ever praise thy goodness and mercy for my safe recovery, if it may be with thy
sacred will, whereunto I submit and wholly resign now and for ever, through
Jesus Christ my blessed Lord and Savior, in whose most holy words I further
pray,

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer to be said by them that visit the sick.
O Eternal God, who in thy holy word by the Apostle have promised, that the
Prayer of faith shall save the sick, and thou will raise him up; and if he have
committed sins, they shall be forgiven him; We come unto thee in the behalf of
our diseased and distressed friend, visited under thine hand. Speak
comfortably, O Lord, unto his Soul; seal in his heart by thy holy Spirit the
forgiveness of all his sins. Have mercy upon him, and according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away all his offenses: blot all his sins out of thy
remembrance.

Grant him thy grace to bear willingly this Cross, the Cross of sickness; to
drink heartily of this Cup, the Cup of affliction; to endure patiently this
Yoke, the Yoke of tribulation; and to suffer meekly this Rod, the Rod of
correction. He has received good things of thee, make him willing to receive
evil also: as heretofore he rejoiced in his health, so teach him now to rejoice
in his sickness: and as he was not ashamed to live, so let him not be afraid to
die, because his life is hid with Christ in Heaven.

Let the sweet feeling and taste of a lively faith distaste all the filthy
corruptions that are in him; and after the example of the good Samaritan, after
the sharp wine of grievous tribulation, instill also the suppling Oil of
comfort, whereby he may be able to endure those troubles which otherwise would
be intolerable unto him. Strengthen his memory, whereby to call upon thy
glorious Name. Settle his Spirits, that they may not wander and fly out into
any unruly motions. Lay thy finger upon his lips, that they may not fall into
cursing or blaspheming thy Deity, or into any vain language. Take from his
Eyes all delight of this frail world, and let his Soul make ready only for a
voyage to Heaven. Set thy saving mark upon his Soul, and give order to the
destroyer that he hurt it not. But having fought a good fight, let him now
triumphantly exult and say, O Death, where is thy sting; O Hell, where is thy
victory? I thank thee, O Lord, who have given me victory by Jesus Christ. Be
merciful unto us here present, who as feeling members of one body, adore thy
holy Name, and implore thy Divine help, for this thy servant; grant him
assistance of thy Spirit to the last gasp, and us assurance to be heard of thee
for him, and all others upon the like occasion We could wish that thou should
speak to this our friend, as thou did unto thy servant, when thou said,
Arise, take up thy bed, and walk: but yet alas! we know not whether we ask
aright or not; thy will be fulfilled; we know that he shall but change this
life transitory for Eternity, cast off mortality, and be clothed with
immortality; and this light affliction, which is but for a moment, shall cause
unto him a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory. Wherefore make us
all wise to salvation; and teach us so to number our days aright, that we may
apply our hearts unto wisdom. Give both this thy servant and all of us grace,
willingly to forsake this present evil world, and so to live in thy fear, that
we may die in thy favor, and so reign with thee for ever hereafter. Grant this
for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Thanksgiving after Sickness.
O Most merciful Lord God, I thy late sick and sorrowful servant do with bended
knees, and a thankful heart, prostrate my self before thee at this time,
acknowledging that thou have been a loving Father unto me, not only before I
was yet born, but ever since I hung upon my Mothers breast.

Manifest experience have I had of thy manifold mercies many times, but never
more than in my late and last visitation. I offer now unto thee a sacrifice of
praise. Because I employed not the faculties of my Soul and members of my Body
as I should have done, thou did bereave me of the strength, and vigor, and
use of them for a season; but now because thy compassions fail not, thou have
returned them to me again: wherefore I consecrate and devote them perpetually
to thy service; and as I am in the state of my Body, so by the power of thy
renewing grace I will become in the estate of my soul a new man. My broken
heart which thou have healed, shall now entirely love thee; my feeble knees and
weak bones which thou have settled, shall night and day bow to thee; my weak
hands which thou have strengthened, shall continually be lifted up unto thee. I
confess unto thee, O Lord, that in my health I often read and heard that
worldly delights and comforts were vain, and much like Flags and Bulrushes,
which men in danger of drowning catch to bear them up, but they sink down under
water with them; yet did I not learn till I suffered, till thy rod had
imprinted it even in my flesh. Now O Lord I beseech thee to knit my heart unto
thee, that I may fear thy Name: create in me a new heart, and renew a right
Spirit within me. I asked life of thee, and thou gave it me. I now desire and
crave thy salvation; O my God, withold it not: make me to repent of my sins
(the cause of my sickness) and to depend upon thee, the giver of all good
things; and make me in the time of prosperity to think of adversity, in health
to think of sickness, in sickness to think of death, and at all times so to
think of judgment, that whether I wake or sleep, eat or drink, or whatsoever I
do else, I may ever have this sounding in mine ears, Arise ye dead and come to
judgment Give me grace, O Lord, to make this use of mine affliction past, and
to cleave and stick fast unto thee in all holiness for the time to come,
through my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in whose Name and words I further
pray,

Our Father, etc.

Of DEATH.
ANd now I cannot think any conclusion more fit and proper for a devout life,
than a short meditation on that which shall be the conclusion of life it self.
First therefore, consider the shortness and miseries of this life; That our
days consume in vanity, and our years in trouble; That our whole life is but a
Dream, and when Death awakes us, we find our hands empty of all that which
has cost us so much labor, and travail, and sorrow, and sin.

Remember the swiftness and suddenness of Death; That our days are but a
span-long, and our flourishing but a flower of the field, which though it be
not plucked up, yet soon withers of it self, and falls away.

The young may die soon, but the old cannot live long.

Remember that in this short life, we are yet to provide for an Eternity either
of weal or woe; and therefore cannot be too careful how we spend every minute
of that upon which depends a matter of so great, so lasting importance.

There is but one way of Birth, but many ways and means of Death: and our life
hangs by so small a thread, that every little chance is ready to break it off.

After Death we are immediately called to judgment before the high Court of
Heaven, to give a severe account how we have performed that duty to which we
were Created; and accordingly to receive an irrevocable sentence of eternal
happiness or misery.

The Judge, before whom we shall stand, is infinite both in Knowledge and
Power; so that it is impossible either to hide any thing from his all-seeing
Eye, or to escape out of the reach of his Almighty hand.

The Lord comes in a day when we look not for him, and in an hour when we are
not aware. Let us therefore watch, and wait for his coming, that when he
knocks, we may open unto him immediately.

How dangerous and deplorable a condition would it be, to be found and taken
away in the midst of any sin, or in a continued course of sinful life.

On the contrary, how happy, and blessed, and joyful a thing would it be, to be
found practicing and persevering in that which is good!

Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

A Prayer preparatory to Death.
O Eternal Lord God, who have Created the world and all Time, who have made my
days as it were a span-long, and mine Age even as nothing in respect of thee:
Teach me so to number my days, that I may apply my heart to thy Heavenly
wisdom, and so carefully employ this short time which thou have appointed me to
spend here, so make up my recknings before that great day come, that whenever
thou shall call me hence, I may give such an account of the Talent where with
thou have entrusted me, that I may receive that joyful sentence, Will done,
good and faithful servant.

Grant that I may be always provided with Oil in my Lamp, and ready to enter in
with the wise Virgins whenever the Bridegroom shall come, and receive a
blessing among those which watch and wait for thy coming: so come Lord Jesu,
come quickly. Amen.

Grace before Meat.
HUmble our Souls before thee, O Lord, and cause us to see the smalness of our
desert, even in respect of the least of thy mercies; and bless these thy
Creatures to us at this time, to the rejoicing of the Soul of thy servants,
through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
O Lord, we return thee most hearty thanks for the mercy we have enjoyed in
receiving these thy Creatures for our Bodily relief, and let us also labor for
the meat that perishes not, for the sake of our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Grace before Meat.
WE look up unto thee, O Lord, who give us life and breath, and all things;
beseeching thee to forgive us all our sins, and to make us such thankful
partakers of these thy good Creatures, that by a moderate use of them our
Bodies may be refreshed, and made more fit to accompany our Souls in hearty
endeavors to do thee faithful service, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
WE return unto thee, O Lord, our hearty thanks for these and all other the
like mercies bestowed upon us, even since we had a being; especially for the
promises thou have given us of eternal life, by thy Son Christ. Enable us, we
beseech thee, to continue so patiently in all good works, that at last we may
attain it. And bless thine Universal Church, these Realms, the King, the Queen,
and all the Royal Family; and grant us thy grace, mercy and peace, through
Christ Jesus. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be Sold by Robert Sollers, at the Kings Arms in
Ludgate Street.
SErmons preached upon several occasions before the King at Whitehal. By the
Right Reverend Father in God John Wilkins, late Lord-Bishop of Chester; to
which is added A discourse concerning the beauty of Providence, by the same
Author.

Rome a-la-mode: or the Sentiments of the Court and Cardinals there, concerning
Religion and the Gospel, as they are delivered by Cardinal Palavicini in his
History of the Council of Trent.

Syncrisis, or the most natural and easy method of learning Latin by
comparing it with English. Together with the holy History of Scripture-war: Or,
the sacred Art Military, Illustrated in fourteen Copper Plates; with the rude
Translation opposite, for the exercise of those that begin to make Latin. By E.
Coals.

Cocker's Arithmetic: the second Impression.

Cocker's Morals, fitted for the use of all Grammar and Writing-schools: For
the Scholars of the first to turn into Latin, and for those of the other to
transcribe into all their various and curious Hands.

Nugae venales: or, the complaisant Companion; being new Jests Domestic and
Foreign, Bulls, Rhodomontado's, pleasant Novels and Miscellanies.

Asteria and Tamberlain; or, the Distressed Lovers: a Novel.

Madam Wheedle: or, the fashionable Miss discovered: with all her modest
Pretenses, and subtle Stratagems.

Scaramouch, a Philosopher, etc. Acted at the Theater Royal: A Comedy, written
by Edward Ravenscroft, Gent.

A Treatise of the nature of a Minister in all his Offices. To which is
annexed, an Answer to Dr. Forbes, concerning the necessity of Bishops to
ordain; which is an Answer to a Question proposed in these late unhappy times
to the Author, What is a Minister? By William Lucy Lord Bishop of St. David's.


