An ACCOUNT from Lymerick in IRELAND, Of the Arrival of Ships with Succors in
the River Shannon; With a Particular Relation of the Beating down of Two great
Towers, and the Dismounting of the Enemy's Guns: Also, of the Famous Actions of
Baldarick Lord O Donnel, for Their Majesty's Service, in his Taking the strong
Castles of Ballymate, Loughlin, etc. With the Total Routing of the Rebels in
Kerry, etc.
Licensed, September 21. 1691.

SIR, Dublin, September. 16th. 1691. and Camp before Lymerick the 11th.
THE First of our Batteries (which we told you in our last, we had begun to
raise on the Right of the Town.) was not finished on the 6th at N^ght, as we
expected; but was on the 9th in the Evening; on which said Day we began to Play
on the Town from it: It consists of 22 large Cannon, from 10, to 24 Pounders,
and 8 Mortars: We continued to Play from this Battery all that Night with very
great Success.

On the 7th likewise there arrived in the Shannon Six Sail of Ships from
Bristol, under the Convoy of the Smirna: Merchant, Laden with Provisions, etc.
for the Use of our Army; which they had no sooner unladen, but pursuant to the
General's O^der, they took on Board the Princess Anne of Denmark's Regiment of
Foot, and Landed them near Iralee, in order to join Brigadler Leveson; who,
since the last, has defeated another Party of the Rebels, taking many
Prisoners, with one Thousand Head of Cattle, and great Numbers of good Horses
and Garrons, and was resolved before his Return, to reduce the several Forts,
and other strong Places the Irish are still possessed of in the way to Lymerick
and Cork. By a Dragoon of Colonel Nugent's, who lately deserted the Enemy's
Camp, we are advised, That their Horse and Dragoons were at Annaghbegs about
Two Miles above Lymerick, where there is a very good Ford; i^ being the same
Place that His Majesty passed the Shannon the last Year, That they lay there
encamped; but that they were very ill clad, as was the Deserter, and in great
want of Bread and Salt. The General went yesterday to view their Camp, to make
which look great, the Enemy had set up all their Sheets and Blankets.

The 9th. All last Night and this Day we continued to play from our New Battery
on the Right; as likewise from another raised this Day about Noon, which
consists of eight 24 Pounders and 10 Mortars, near Ireton's Fort (now called
Maccay's Fort) to dismount the Guns that galledus from the Black Fort near St.
John's Gate, and to annoy the Enemy that lay in the Counterscarp; and, as by
several considerable Deserters come into our Camp this Evening, We have an
Account, that our Bombs had set on fire great Numbers of the Houses in diverse
parts of the City; That the Besieged blew up most of the Houses we had fired,
to prevent its spreading; That our great Cannon had levelled two round Towers;
That we had dismounted their two whole Cannon which were on the left of the
Town, and likewise four other of their Guns near the lower Gate, this Day we
began to work on another Battery of 24 large Cannon and 8 Mortars. Our first
Batteries on the Right has cleared and levelled all the Palisadoes, and made a
Breach in the main Wall, by which we can plainly discover some Forts or
Re-doubts that the Besieged have made within the Wall, our Guns make the Stones
in the Wall fly about like showers of Hail.

The 10th, All last Night and this Day we have continued firing incestantly
from our several Batteries, pouring at least 1500 Shot, with good success, on
the Walls, etc. and our Bombs and Carcasses have set Fire to the Town again in
several places, which we could perfectly discern by the Flames. We widened the
Breach we had made, the Day before, in the Wall of the Town; and the Deserters
tell us, that all the Inhabitants that were remaining in the Town being
terrified with our often Firing the place, were retired over the Bridge that
led into the County of Clare, and were gone to Sat^sfield's Camp at Annaghbeg.
All the empty Ca^ks in the Camp were taken up in order, as was supposed, with
the Pontons to make a Bridge or Bridges over the Shannon to pass it.

11th, the General has given Orders for all Gunners on Board the Ships in the
Shannon, both English and Dutch, to come on Shore to be employed in the Camp:
so that we shortly expect thundering Work, for by break of day, this Morning,
our Cannon, by their continual playing, had so widened the Breach, that it is
above 30 Yards wide; We continue to play on the Enemies Forts or Re-doubts that
Flank the Breach, in order to Facilitate our Entry.

The Militia of the City and County of Dublin, with 800 of the Northern
Militia, and 1000 others Commanded by the Lord O Donnel commonly called
Baldarick O Donnel, marched to Abbyboyle, where they arrived on the 8th. The
Lord Granard, who commands the Militia in chief, having Summoned Ballymate, he
ordered the Lord O Donnel with 1000 of his Men, and 4 Troops of Dragoons, with
some Field-places, to Attack it, where the rest also will join in their March
to Sligo; in their way the Lord O Donnel surrounded Laughlin, Commanded by
Theobald Dillon; and another place Commanded by Colonel Charles Kelly, both
strong Castles, Garrisoned by the Irish; but immediately, upon O Donnel's
appearing before the said places, they Surrendered; This Lord O Donnel, since
his coming in, not only continues very Faithful, but has been very Serviceable
in many other late Actions.

There has been lately taken, and their Heads brought into this City, diverse
Notorious Repperees, who were Captains or Leaders of great Bodies of them;
which we hope will be a great means of totally breaking them, especially those
about the Bog of Allen.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, 1691.


