AN ACCOUNT How the Earl of Essex Killed Himself in the Tower of London, The
13th. of July 1683. As it appears by the Coroners Inquest, and the several
Informations following.
THe Information of Paul Bomeny, Servant to the Earl of Essex, for about three
or four years now last past; taken upon Oath the fourteenth Day of July, Anno
Regni Caroli Secundi Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae
Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. Tricesimo Quinto, Annoque Domini 1683.

Says, That when my Lord came to Captain Hawley, which was the 11. Instant, my
Lord of Essex asked him for a Penknife to Pare his Nails, as he was wont to
do; to which this Informant answered, Being come in haste, he had not brought
it, but he would send for one, and accordingly sent the Footman with a Note for
several things for my Lord, amongst which the Penknife was inserted; and the
Footman went, and gave the Bill to my Lords Steward, who sent the Provisions,
but not the Penknife, and he told the Footman, he would get one the next day.
When the Footman was come, my Lord asked, if the Penknife was come? This
Informant answered, No, but he should have it the next day, and accordingly, he
on the twelfth Instant in the morning, before my Lord of Essex was up, this
Informant sent the Footman home with a Note to the Steward, in which, amongst
other things, he asked for a Penknife for my Lord; and when the Footman was
gone, about, or a little after eight of the Clock, My Lord sent one Mr. Russel,
his Warder, to this Informant, who came, and then he asked him, if the
Penknife was come? This Informant said, No, my Lord, but I shall have it by
and by; to which my Lord said, That he should bring him one of his Rasours, it
would do as well; And then this Informant went and fetched one, and gave it to
my Lord; Who then went to Pare his Nails, and then this Informant went out of
the Room into the Passage by the Door, on Friday the thirteenth Instant, and
begun to talk with the Warder, and a little while after he went down Stairs;
and soon after came the Footman with the Provisions, and brought also a
Penknife, which this Informant put upon his Bed, and thought my Lord had no
more need of it, because he thought he had Pared his Nails; and then this
Informant came up to my Lords Chamber, about eight or nine in the Forenoon, on
Friday the thirteenth Instant, with a little Note from the Steward; but not
finding his Lord in the Chamber, went to the Close-stool Closet-Door, and found
it shut; And he thinking his Lord was busy there, went down, and staid a
little, and came up again, thinking his Lord had been come out of the Closet;
And finding him not in the Chamber, he knocked at the Door with his Finger,
thrice, and said, my Lord? But no body answering, he took up the Hanging, and
looking through the Chink, he saw Blood, and a part of the Rasour; Whereupon he
called the Warder, Russel, and went down to call for help; and the said Russel
pushed the Door open, and there they saw my Lord of Essex all along the Floor,
without a Periwig, and all full of Blood, and the Rasour by him. And this
Deponent further Deposes, That the Rasour now showed to him, at the time of
his Examination, is the same Rasour which he did bring to my Lord, and which
did lie on the Ground in the Closet, by my Lord.

BOMENY.

THe Information of Thomas Russel one of the Warders of the Tower, who had the
Custody of the Earl of Essex, taken the Fourteenth day of July, Anno Regni
Caroli Secundi, Dei Gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis,
Fidei Defensor', etc. Tricesimo Quinto, Annoque Dom. 1683.

Says, That on Friday the Thirteenth Instant, about Eight or Nine of the Clock
in the Forenoon, he was present when he did hear the Lord of Essex call to his
Man Mr. Bomeny for a Penknife to pare his nails, and then for a Rasour, which
Mr. Bomeny brought him, and then my Lord walked up and down the Room scraping
his nails with the Rasour, and shut the outward door; Mr. Bomeny, half a
quarter of an hour afterward, not finding my Lord in his Bedchamber, went
down stairs again, believing that my Lord was then private in his Closet.
Bomeny came up about a quarter of an hour afterward, and knocked at the door,
then called, My Lord, My Lord, My Lord; but he not answering, peeped through a
Chink of the door, and did see the Earl of Essex lying on the ground in the
Closet, whereupon he did cry out, That My Lord was fallen down sick; and then
this Informant went to the Closet-door, and opened it, the Key being on the
outside, and then did see my Lord lie on the ground in his blood, his Throat
being cut.

Thomas Russel.

THe Information of Robert Sherwood of Fanchurch Street, Chyrurgion, taken the
Fourteenth day of July, Anno Regni Caroli Secundi, Dei Gratia, Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensor', etc. Tricesimo Quinto,
Annoque Dom. 1683.

Says, That he has viewed the Throat of the Earl of Essex, and does find that
there is a large Wound, and that the Aspera Arteria, or Windpipe, and the
Gullet, with the Jugular Arteries; are all divided: Of which Wound he certainly
died.

Robert Sherwood.

THe Information of Robert Andrews of Crutchet Friars Chyrurgion taken upon
Oath the Fourteenth day of July, Anno Regni Caroli Secundi nunc Regis Anglia,
etc. Tricesimo Quinto, Annoque Dom. 1683.

Says, That he has viewed the Throat of the Lord of Essex, and does find,
That it was cut from the one Jugular to the other, and through the Windpipe
and Gullet, unto the Vertebres of the Neck, both Jugular Veins being also quite
divided.

Robert Andrews.

Tu^^^ London ss.
AN Inquisition Indented, Taken at the Tower of London, in the County of
Middlesex, the Fourteenth day of July, in the Five and Thirtieth Year of the
Reign of Our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoque
Dom. 1683. before Edward Farnham Esquire Coroner of the said Lord the King, of the
Liberty of the Tower of London, upon view of the Body of Arthur Earl of Essex
then and there lying Dead, by the Oaths of Daniel Colwell Esquire William Fisher,
Thomas Godfel Esquire Thomas Hunt, Nathaniel Mountney Esquire Thomas Potter, William
How, Robert Burgoine, Eleazar Wiggins, Thomas Hoggsflesh, Henry Crips, Richard
Rudder, William Knips, John Hudson, John Kittlebeater, Lancolet Colson, Morgan
Cowarn, Thomas Bryan, William Thaxton, Richard Cliffe, Zebadia Richard, William
Bayford, and Theophilus Charter, good and lawful men of the Liberty of the
Tower of London aforesaid, who being Charged and Sworn to enquire how and in
what manner the said Arthur Earl of Essex came to his Death, upon their Oaths
say, that the aforesaid Arthur Earl of Essex the thirteenth day of July, in the
said five and thirtieth year of His now Majesty's Reign, at the said Tower of
London, in the said County of Middlesex, about the ninth hour of the same day
in the Forenoon, not having God before his Eyes, but being moved and seduced by
the Instigation of the Devil, of his Malice forethought at the Tower of London
aforesaid, in the said County of Middlesex, then and there being alone in a
Closet, with one Rasour of the value of one shilling, Voluntarily and
Feloniously Cut his Throat, and did thereby give himself one Mortal Wound, it
being cut from the one Jugular to the other, and through the Windpipe and
Gullet unto the Vertebres of the Neck, both Jugular Veins being also quite
Divided; of which said Mortal Wound the said Arthur Earl of Essex instantly
Died; and thus the aforesaid Jurors, upon their Oaths say, That the aforsaid
Arthur Earl of Essex, in Manner and Form aforesaid, did Voluntarily and
Feloniously, as Felo de se, Kill and Murder himself, against the Peace of our
Lord the King, His Crown and Dignity. In Witness whereof, as well I the said
Coroner, as the Jurors aforesaid, to this Inquisition have put our Hands and
Seals, the Day and Year abovesaid.

Vera Copia Examin'cum Originali, Per E. FARNHAM.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty, 1683.


