THE ACCOUNT AUDITED, Or the Date of the Resurrection OF THE WITNESSES,
Pretended to be demonstrated by M. Carry a Minister.

Examined by a Friend to the Truth and Ministry.

LUKE 21.36. Watch ye, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to
escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son
of man.

LONDON, Printed for T.R. and E. M. in the year 1649.

The Account Audited, OR The date of the RESURRECTION of the WITNESSES
pretended to be demonstrated by M. Carry a Minister.
WHen I first saw the Title Page of M. Cary's Book posted up, professing a
clear demonstration, that the Resurrection of the Witnesses, spoken of in
Revel. 11. was accomplished; I was glad to see a Treatise of that nature come
forth: partly as supposing that the Lord might have brought to public view,
some more satisfactory Exposition of that difficult Scripture, then had yet
seen the light; but chiefly as conceiving some hopes, that peradventure the sad
season might be already past for the slaying of the Witnesses; the near
approach whereof is much feared by many of the Saints. And as naturally men are
apt to believe things to be as they desire to have them; so did I find more
willingness in my mind, to dispose me to close with the Authors judgment,
then I found reason in that Book to persuade me to it; for when that Treatise
came to my hands, I read it over with much greediness and expectation, till I
came to that place, where the commencement with the expiring of the time for
the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, is stated, which if rightly placed,
would have been the Key to unlock the Controversies of the Text; but being
misplaced served only to check my expectation; for, if specious allusions (of
which the Au hor is not destitute) could have cleared the text without the
right clue of Chronology, the task had been long since performed by diverse
others; who not only with as good color for the phrase of the context, but
also with much more ex^ctnesse for the Historical application, have published
their conjectures upon it.

This Author professes to go a way different from all others: for in the
Epistle to the Reader I find these words, That which I chiefly aim at in this
discourse, is that which is not yet printed by any other, and whether any other
have yet observed it, I know not. And yet so confident is this Female-Minister
M. Carry in her sole invention; as if there might not be so much as room left
to doubt whether she had performed her undertaking; for thus I find in the
Postscript, that the Witnesses are indeed slain, and risen, and do stand upon
their feet, is altogether unquestionable, because (as appears by the foregoing
discourse) this prophecy of the slaying of the Witnesses and of their rising,
etc. is in every particular jota and tittle of it most exactly accomplished;
the like confidence she discovers in the Epistle Dedicatory, and in the
Preamble, and in diverse other passages of the Book. And truly it is pity that a
woman of her parts should build with so much confidence upon so rotten a
foundation; the discovery whereof is the drift of these following lines.

As there are many things in that Book which are good, and of which a Christian
improvement may be made; so are there diverse passages, both in her exposition,
and also in her application, which are liable to just exception; yet that part
concerning the time of the Resurrection of the Witnesses, is that which I
purposely chose to debate, 1. Because the Authors maine confidence lies there.
2. Because most of the other mistakes in that Treatise will stand or fall with
the date of the Resurrection, as being either strained to comply with it, or
drawn by inference from it. 3. Because the ordinary Reader may be most apt to
pass over those passages of the Book without search, 1. through credulity, not
suspecting what the Author obtrudes for granted; or, 2. for want of skill in
ciphring, not being able to cast up the Accounts of years and days mentioned
by the Author; or, 3. through want of History, not being furnished with such
Books as handle the matters of fact, which the Author relates; which things, as
I have diligently searched into for my own satisfaction, concerning the time
stated in M. Cary's Book: so I judged it my duty, having seen the Authors
mistakes in that point, to publish briefly somewhat to keep others from being
carried away in those mistakes.

That the way of my proceeding may be the more clear, I shall desire the
Christian Reader to take notice of thus much, the time of the Resurrection of
the Witnesses which is the matter in difference between us, is that of which we
read, Revel. 11. ver. 11. in these words, And after three days and an half,
the Spirit of life from God intred into them, and they stood upon their feet.
M. Carry in her exposition upon this verse in the 100. page of her Book writes
thus, The fifth day of April 1645. did the Witnesses, the Saints stand upon
their feet, having a Spirit of life from God put upon them. This is the Authors
assertion, whose ground I shall recite and examine. Only by the way; if any
should ask, what is meant by the two Witnesses? Wilson in his Dictionary for
the Revelation, resolvs it in these words [two Witnesses] a competent number of
faithful Preachers, which testify against the errors of Antichrist, and for
the Doctrine of Christ; thus he; and this, so far as I can learn, is the
most received interpretation; for my own part, though I will not now engage to
determine what sort of persons the Witnesses are, yet I shall acquaint the
Reader with this, that by Patrick Forbes, in his Commentary upon the
Revelations, page 88. is hinted to us, as also it is by others (though M. Carry
takes no notice of it; and indeed it makes not for her purpose) viz. that Elias
and Moses ( those two which appeared with Christ at his transfiguration, Matthew.
17.) are held forth as the types of the two Witnesses, and thus much is
intimated to us in the description of the Witnesses in Revel. 11. v. 5, 6.
which I shall thus make out to you, by comparing Scripture with Scripture. 1.
Elias is hinted in verse 5. in these words, If any man will hurt them, fire
proceeds out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies; and if any man will
hurt them, he must in this manner be killed: This description has reference to
Elias (who also is called Elijah, thus much is clear from 2 Kings 1.10. And
Elijah answered and said to the Captain of fifty, if I be a man of God, then
let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty; and there came
down fire from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty, Luke 9.54. and when his
Disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord, will thou that we command
fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elias did?

Elias also is hinted in ver. 6. in these words, these have power to shut
heaven, that is rain not in the days of their prophecy; that this
description has reference to Elijah, will be easily gathered from these texts,
1 Kings 17.1. Elijah the Tishbits, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead, said
unto Ahab, as the Lord God of Israel lives, before whom I stand, there shall
not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my words. James 5.17. Elias
was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it
might not rain, and it rained not in the earth for the space of three years
and six months.

2. Moses is hinted in the following part of the 6. verse in these words, and
have power over waters to turn them to blood; that this is spoken with
reference to Moses is clear from Exodus 7.17. Behold, I will smite with the
rod that is in my hand, upon the waters which are in the river, and they shall
be turned to blood, Exodus 17.5. the Lord said to Moses, go on before the
people, and take with thee of the Elders of Israel; and thy rod wherewith thou
smotest the river, take in thy hand.

Moses also is hinted in the next expression of the 6. verse, in these words,
and to smite the earth with all plagues; that this is spoken with reference to
Moses, is clear from Deuteronomy. 34.10, 11. There arose not a Prophet since in Israel
like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face, in all the signs and the
wonders which the Lord sent him to do in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, and to
all his servants, and to all his land. The variety of Plagues wherewith Moses
smote the earth, is more at large declared in the History in Exodus to which I
refer the Reader.

And now I shall give you the account, which M. Carry lays down to make good
her opinion, that on the fifth of April 1645. was the day of the Resurrection
of the Witnesses: which, that I may deal fairly both with the Author and the
Reader, take thus at large in her own words.

Page 81. and 82. that term of time which the Beast was to continue, and the
Saints to be trodden under foot, and to prophecy in seack-cloth, is a thousand
two hundred and threescore years as appears page 62. Now this 1260 years,
being added to the year wherein the beast received his devilish power, and
seat, and great authority, in the reign of Phocas the Emperor; which was, as
say Historians, in the year 404. I say, adding to this 1260. it makes up 1664.
and this year 1664. should be the year wherein the Witnesses should finish
their giving testimony, clothed in sackcloth: if this 1260. years should be
computed according to the rule of Astronomers, allowing 365. days to a year,
and to every fourth year adding a day more: but we find that the holy Ghost in
this prophecy, not observing that rule, does allow but 360. days to a year,
and according to that rule 1260. days to three years and an half, and
therefore in computing the time of the Witnesses, prophesying in sackcloth, we
are to observe the rule which the holy Ghost here lays down, to allow 360.
days to a year, and so the time of the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, is
to expire eighteen years and almost an half, sooner then as by the other
account, and so the beginning of the year 1645. was the time, etc.

And page 98. and 99. on the 23. day of October 1641. did the beast begin the
war in Ireland, and he continued overcoming the Witnesses, the Saints of Jesus
Christ in Ireland and in England, until the fifth day of April. 1645. and from
the 23. of October 1641. unto the fifth of April 1645. there is just a thousand
two hundred and sixty days; which according to the Scripture account, (though
not according to the heathen account) is three years and a half complete: and
when this three years and a half were expired; which was I say, on the fifth of
April 1645. then was the Resurrection of the Witnesses, for they having lain
dead for three years and a half before; then the Spirit of life from God entered
into them: and the year 1645. as it is the year wherein the Witnesses were
raised from the dead, so it is the year wherein the term of time in which they
were to prophecy in sackcloth, and to be trodden under foot was to expire, and
the year also wherein the prevailing power of the Beast over the Saints was to
expire, as is made evident in the opening of the 2 verse page 60. etc. Now that
on the fifth day of April 1645. the Saints, Witnesses, and Servants of Jesus
Christ were raised up, and that then a Spirit of life from God entered into
them, appears thus: on the fifth day of April 1645 the Parliaments Army, who
had stood for the defense of the Saints against the Beast, and had been before
that time exceedingly overcome, and were brought into a very low condition at
that time, being new modelled, and having a great many precious Saints in it,
both eminent Commanders, and inferior Officers and common Soldiers; and being
then put under the conduct of Sir Thomas Fairfax; they then began to march
against the enemy, and then had a Spirit of life from God that entered into
them, etc.

Upon this account the Author is confident, that her new tenet is sufficiently
demonstrated: to which I enter my dissent; and now come to show you upon what
grounds I am unsatisfied with what I have transcribed out of that Book, and
shall desire the ingenuous Reader to weigh the following exceptions which I
shall lay down, according to the order wherein the things I except against are
laid down.

1. Exception.
The Author tells us page 81 and 82. That Historians say, the year 40^. was the
year wherein the Beast received his devilish power and seat in the reign of
Phocas the Emperor. This being the first root of the Account, deserves
thoroughly to be examined, as being of greatest influence into the present
controversy. I shall therefore debate it fully, wherein we might have made a
more short cut; if the Author had told us who are those Historians, and where
they say so. I have upon this occasion perused variety of Historians: but all
that I have met with do make the History of Phocas at least 200. y. later.

In the fourth Book of ancient History, which out of several Authors treats of
the Roman Emperors for above 700. years after Christ, I find but one
Emperor Phocas mentioned, and no other of that or the like name; and
concerning him I there read thus: That Mauricius the Emperor being by dream
forewarned of a conspiracy against him by Phocas a Commander of some forces in
the borders of Sarmatia, this Mauricius sent for his son in Law Philip, and
acquainted him therewith: Philip wondering at it, told the Emperor that he knew
the man, namely Phocas, to be one that durst not attempt such a design; as
being too fearful, though wicked enough to do it; to which Mauricius replied,
that he had the more reason to take heed of him, because those which are
fearful, when once they assay wicked enterprises, know not how to give over,
but act with the more cruelty: and so it proved in the event; for this Phocas
murdered the Emperor Mauricius and his three sons, and then being chosen
Emperor by that wicked Army whose leader he was, did at the instance of Pope
Boniface the third, appoint the seat of Rome to be the head of all Churches.

Szegedin in his Looking-glass of the Popes, writes thus. Boniface the third,
was by Phocas the Emperor (who was an adulterer, parricide, and Tyrant)
confirmed chief and supreme over all Bishops.

Doctor Favor in his book of antiquity, p. 436. writes thus. This Mystery of
iniquity, in the days of Phocas the Emperor that had murdered his Master
Mauricius, and usurped his crown, began to work more strongly. For Boniface (
Bishop of Rome) obtained of Phocas, that the Church of Rome should be the head
of all Churches.

This is the substance of what Historians speak concerning the preeminence of
the Roman Bishops obtained in the reign of Phocas, and in this we agree, but
the difference lies concerning the time, which M. Carry affirms to be in the
year 404. and I find to be in the year 604. or rather a little after; for
though Phocas might have begun his reign in 604. yet the donation of the
supremacy to Boniface, might well be after that year, which I the rather
assent to, because our industrious Country man Barns the Martyr tells us in his
Treatise of the lives of the Popes, that Sabinian predecessor to Boniface,
lived under Phocas the Emperor, and for this he cites Platina and
Volaterranus; and Pareus also in his Marrow of Ecclesiastical History, makes
Phocas's grant of the supremacy to Boniface the third, to be after the first
year of his Empire.

I shall now for the satisfaction of the Reader, set down what I have met with
in other Authors, word for word, with directions to the places where they may
turn to them, which take as follows.

In the state of the Church, translated out of French into English, page 183.
In the year 604. Phocas after he had wickedly slain his Master, was chosen by
the unlucky Army whereof he had charge; a very slave of covetousness, who
handled secret matters with Courtiers after the manner of the Persians, and
sold the offices of Magistrates and judgments, dearly loved such as tormented
the people by rapine and extortion: this is he who first ordained that Rome
should be the chief of all Churches.

In the Treatise of the lives of the Popes written in Spanish by Cyprian
Valera, and translated into English, page 34. In the 605. year died Sabinianus
[whose successor] Boniface the third being Patriach of Rome, was made Pope by
means of Phocas the Emperor, who was an adulterer, murderer, and tyrant; a
murderer I call him, for that to make himself Emperor (as he did) he
murdered Mauricius his Lord and Christian Emperor.

In Morneys Mystery of Iniquity, page 117. Boniface the third in the year 605.
to effect that which his predecessors had projected, took his advantage, seeing
the Emperor Phocas on the one side displeased with Cyriacus Patriarch of
Constantinople, because he would not approve of his murders; and on the other,
jealous the hatred of his dealings might happily cause Italy to revolt from
under him: and thereupon he asked, and by the proffers which he made of his
good service obtained of him, that the Church of Rome should thence forward be
the head of all other Churches, and the Bishop of Rome should be called the
Sovereign and Universal Bishop.

In Heylins Microcosmus the fifth Edition, page 179. Phocas having killed the
Emperor Mauricius, his wife and children An. 604. to assure himself of Italy
ready to revolt from so barbarous a tyrant, made Boniface the third Universal
Bishop, and head of the Church; before this time the Bishops of Constantinople
and Ravenna, did often dispute with the Bishops of Rome for superiority; the
seat of Religion commonly following the seat of the Empire, and the Bishop of
Constantinople prevailed so far, that with the permission of Mauricius the
Emperor, he took upon him the title of Universal Patriarch.

As for the year 404. which M. Carry builds upon for the History of Phocas the
Emperor, and his donation of the supremacy to the Church of Rome, I shall say
this farther; that it may appear to any that have opportunity to search into
Histories; that there was no such Emperor as Phocas, in or near that time,
but the Emperors at that time were (according to Historians) Arcadius and
Honorias. To clear this yet more fully, I shall give you a Catalogue of the
Emperors as I find it in Heylins Microcosmus, Edition the first, page 88.
Italy continued a m mber of the Empire till the year 399. in which Theodosius
the great divided the Empire; to Arcadius his elder son he gave the Eastern, to
Honorius the younger the Western part of this Monarchy.

The Western Emperors in the year
399 Honorius. 458 Severianus 4^5 Valentinianus. 462 Anthemius 454 Maximianus.
467 Orestes 473 Augustulus the last that ever kept his daily residence in
Italy, a thing ominous, that Augustus should establish and Augustulus ruinate
that spacious Monarchy.
And page 219. the Constantinopolitan Emperors in the year
399 Arcadius 412 Theodosius the 2d 454 Martianus 461 Leo 478 Zeno 494
Anastasius 521 Justinus 528 Justinianus 566 Justinus the 2d 577 Tiberius 584
Mauritius 604 Phocas who made the Bishops of Rome Popes, and heads of the
Church.
As I have thus by a List of the Roman Emperors proved, that Phocas his
donation to Boniface the third could not be near the y. 404. So I might in the
next place show the like by the List of the Roman Bishops; for Boniface the
first of that name Bishop of R me is placed by Historians after the year 404.
and there were above twenty Bishops of Rome successively between Boniface the
first and Boniface the third, as may appear by this Catalogue.

Boniface the first 1 Caelestinus 2 Sixtus 3. 3 Leo 4 Hilarious 5 Simplicius 6
Foelix 3. 7 G^lasius 8 Anastasius 2 9 Symmichus 10 Hormisda 11 John 1 12 Foelix
4 13 Boniface the second 14 John 2 15 Agapetus 16 Sylverius 17 Vigilius 18
Pelagius 1 19 John 3 20 Benedict 21 Pelagius 2 22 Gregory the great 23
Sabinianus
Boniface the third, in whose time Phocas gave the cheifdome to the Roman Seat.

Having thus abundantly discovered the gross Error, which is the foundation of
M. Cary's reckoning; who pretends to calculate the Resurrection of the
Witnesses to a very day; I shall leave it to the head of prudence with the
heart of charity to consider, whence so gross a mistake of 200 years could
arise. I have cast about in my thoughts to see how a mistake of this nature
could, in an Author of such abilities, be interpreted more favorably then a
wilful misreckoning; and two ways I do apprehend that possibly the mistake
might be entertained unawares. 1. Peradventure the Author might have read in
some History book, the year 404 misprinted for 604. for misprinting of one
figure might happily fall out in some Copy pend of that subject; though I have
not yet met with that misprint in any one of those Treatises, or in any of
those Editions, which I have sought out and diligently compared on set Purpose.
2. Peradventure the Author might not have read the History of Phocas; but only
received it upon hearsay, and so she might either have mistook the Relator, or
swallowed down the relators mistake; and this later conjecture I look upon as
the most probable in that it suits b^st with her own words; for she does not
say, as historians write; but as say Historians. Thus have I given my Reader
the best light I can, to furnish his charity with a favorable construction of
the foresaid mistake, which may in part excuse the Authors credulity, but will
not be able to justify her confidence, nor her cause; for, the correcting of
this mistake, if the rest of her account hold good, will make the Resurrection
of the Witnesses to fall out 200. years later then she counts for; namely in
the year 1845. and this shall suffice for my first and principal Exception.

2. Exception.
The Author page 82. deducing from the astronomicall years, five days in a
year, and one day every fourth year, for the space of 1260. years, does abate
for it 18 years and almost in half: which if it be mean of astronomicall years
(which are the years that she does substract) does not amount to so much: for,
five times 1260. days and 315. days put together, make but 6615, which is not
18. astronomicall years and a quarter, no nor half a quarter; for, it is but
^0. days over the 18. years.

3. Exception.
The Author page 82. from the year which in ordinary account is 1664 deducing
18. years and almost an half (for the difference betwixt the astronomical
account, and the account which she follows) tells us, that then the account
will fall in the beginning of the year 1645. the falsehood whereof I shall thus
discover: to the beginning of the year 1645. add almost half a year, and it
will be about the midst of the year 1645. to which add the 18 years, and it
will be in the 1663. not in 1664. the deduction therefore of 18. y. and almost
an half, though we should begin the deduction from the very first day of the
year 1664. will make the account to fall out after the midst of the year 1645.
which is about half a year later then M. Carry counts.

4. Exception.
The Author page 98. makes the time of the Witnesses lying dead for three years
and a half, to begin on the day when the War began in Ireland; which how it
will stand with what the Author says elsewhere, I know not, unless we should
make the Saints in England to ly dead from the first day of the War in Ireland;
which how rational it is let indifferent men judge; and yet thus it must be
upon her grounds: for, by the Witnesses she understands (at least principally)
the Saints in England; for thus she explains her self, page 87. as the War in
England and Ireland was made by the Beast, so it was made by him against the
Witnesses, the Saints, and precious ones of Jesus Christ; for that which is
done against the most considerable number of Saints, is done against the whole;
as being the way to prevail over all. Now in England there are a more
considerable number of the faithful servants and Witnesses of Jesus Christ,
then in any Kingdom in the world, as one truly said, England is the richest
ship in the world; for God has more of those precious jewels in it, then he
has i^ any other Kingdom in the world.

5. Exception.
The Author page 98. makes the fifth of April 1645. to be the day of the
Resurrection of the Witnesses, wherein she contradicts her own account, page
82. but, because this exception has affinity with the third, I shall say no
more to it but this; that if she had made her day for the Resurrection of the
Witness a year later, she would have agreed with her own account, which now
she does not: for, her abated 18. years and almost a half, added to April the
fifth 1646. would have made the day to have fallen out in the year 1664. as the
1260. added to her 404. makes up the same account.

6. Exception.
The Author page 98. makes the time of the Resurrection of the Witnesses, and
the expiring of the time for prophesying in sack cloth, to be all one, and so
the time that the Witnesses lie dead, must be three years and an half before
the finishing of their testimony: which, how contrary it is to the Scripture,
will easily appear, Revel 11.3.7. I will give power unto my two Witnesses, and
they shall prophecy 1260 days clothed in sackcloth, and when they shall have
finished their testimony, the Beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit
shall make war against them, and shall over come them, and kill them. I shall
here only insert a passage out of Brightman on the Revelations, printed in the
year 1644. his words in page 372. of that impression, are these, Thy time of
three days and a half begins not before the 1260. days be ended; for so it
is said before, and when they have finished. Besides, the Prophets lay killed and
unburied for these three days and a half, but the time of the 1260. days is
the time of their prophesying in sackcloth; so that they can by no means be
referred to the same time.

7. Exception.
The Author page 99. makes the Resurrection of the Witnesses to be an army
business, which I see no reason for, but rather reasons against it; which I
shall briefly propose in behalf of my Exception.

My first reason is taken from the context in Revel. 11. when the Witnesses are
in slaying, the slaying of them indeed is described as an army business, ver.
7. in these words, shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and
kill them: but when the holy Ghost speaks of the Resurrection of the Witnesses,
it is in another strain, ver. 11. and after 3. days and an half, the spirit of
life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear
fell upon them that saw them. Here is no warlike word used; and though it is
said that a great fear fell upon others at the Resurrection of the Witnesses;
yet it is not said it fell upon the Beast that slew them, or upon their
enemies; but it is said indefinitely, it fill upon them that saw them: for such
an astonishing work of God as that in Ezekiel. 37. (whence the phrases are taken)
might cause a fear, though of a different kind, to fall upon all the spectators
both friends and enemies: and though it may be granted, that a singular fear
might fall upon their enemies, in respect of their great guilt in slaying of
them, and the unexpected check to their insulting over them when they were
slain; yet this fear might well be without an army, by some special presence
of God shining forth in the Witnesses. As after that Herod had beheaded John
the Baptist, and Christ's fame was spread, though Christ had no army with him,
Herod was perplexed: and why did he fear? was it not because it was said by
some, that John the Baptist was risen from the dead? by some, that Elias; by
some, that one of the old Prophets? as you may read Luke c. 9. v. 7, 8, 9.

My second reason is taken from the description of the Witnesses, in Revel. 11.
v. 4. under the phrase of Candlesticks, and Olive Trees; the exposition of both
which might be taken from Zach. 4. where we shall find expressions rather
excluding then implying the aid of an Army; that Zach. 4. does explain the
later expression, is acknowledged by M. Carry page 69. and page 70. in these
words, These two Witnesses are the two Olive Trees; in that they are said to be
(the) two Olive Trees, it implies it has reference to some passages of
Scripture, wherein there is a former mention of them. Now the place where they
are mentioned is Ezekiel 4. so that Zechariah does prophecy of these two
Winesses, under the expression of two Olive Trees. Now in that place, Zach.
4.4. we find that the Prophet does ask the Angel, what these be; and then the
Angel makes this answer, this is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying,
not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, says the Lord of hosts; Who art
thou O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain, and he
shall bring forth the head stone thereof with shoutings, crying, grace, grace
unto it. In this text thus cited by M. Carry, observe, how expressly the aid of
armies is excluded by a double bar, ver. 6. in these words, not by might, nor
by power; where, by the way, it is observable, that the marginall note in our
Bibles, instead of might, reads army.

8. Exception.
The Author page 99. for the reason why the fifth day of April 1645. should be
the day of the Witnesses Resurrection, lays down this; that the Parliaments
army being new modelled, began then to march against the enemy, to which I have
four things to say.

1. That the Author leaves us in a great mist, to find out so glorious a day
as the Resurrection of the Witnesses; for she tells us only in general of the
new modeld armies beginning to march against the enemies; but whether the new
model were then completed, or but begun, she tells us not; nor yet whether the
maine body of the army began then to march, or some small parts of it; nor,
whether that part of the army which then began to march (if indeed any did then
march) were at that time new modeld or not, nor whence they marched that day,
nor whether they marched that day, nor upon what service, nor under what
special Leader; nor any the like circumstances, by which the truth of what she
affirms might be tried.

2. Suppose it could appear by credible testimony, that some part of the army
did march on April the fifth 1645. and that that party did march against an
enemy, and that that party was new modeld before its march, and that they were
the first forces that did march being new modeld: though all this should be
supposed to be true; yet this would be but a poor matter to make a day of
Resurrection: and I appeal to any indifferent persons, whose judgments are
for a martial Resurrection; whether many, and many passages might not be
observed, both in this army since the new modelling of it, and in the
Parliaments army before the new modelling, and in other armies in former ages,
which might with better color lay claim to the dignity of ushering in the
Witnesses Resurrection.

3. I have with much inquisitivenesse endeavored to find out what particular
passage might cause the 5 of April to be fingled out as the day of the
Witnesses Resurrection, rather then any other day in April, or any other day in
the whole year: and I can find none besides M. Carry that makes any mention of
any passage in the army as on that day. I have, by me, three several Lists of
passages of the army in that year, and none of them does mention the fifth of
April, or so much as intimate any action, march, or motion, on that day. I have
perused many other printed Lists, and I find not that day at all taken notice
of in any of them; but other days in that month I find mentioned with
remarkable passages on them. And here I shall leave it to the Reader to judge,
how likely it is that the Resurrection of the Witnesses, which should fill the
spectators with fear, could pass undiscerned by those, who have made it their
work to observe the footsteps of Providence in the army, if indeed it were an
army providence, and at that time, when the observations of so many were at
work about the new model.

4. Master Sprigge, a man unlikely to deprive the army of any deserved honor,
and likely to know more of the passages of the army then M. Carry: in his large
book called Englands Recovery; being the History of the motions, actions and
successes of the army under the immediate conduct of his Excellency (then) Sir
Thomas Fairfax, in that Treatise makes no mention (that I could find) of that
fifth of April, nor intimates any thing suitable to what M. Carry relates in
order thereto; but rather the contrary, so far as I can judge from these
ensuing passages, which I shall give you in his own words, Sir Thomas Fairfax
having with much modesty accepted this command, immediately applies himself to
the discharge of it; it was the first of April ere his Commission was granted,
and the third of April he went from London to Windsor, to see and personally to
assist in the framing of a new army. His Excellency continued at Windsor from
the third to the last of April in that work, the difficulty whereof might well
account for this time, if it had been a longer space; considering that besides
the fitting of the trains for the field, and the attendance of the (...) from
London, which with the old that continued, were to make up the ^^signed number,
an entire new form was to be introduced into the whole army the forces that
remained of the whole army being not only to be recruited, bu^ to be reduced
into new companies and regiments, as if they had been new ra^sed, page 9. and
afterward page 15. the first of May his Excellency began hi^ march with the
whole army, in this first march of the new model, etc.

Now Reader weigh impartially what thou have read, and so I leav^ it to thine
own judgment to determine, whether the pretended demonstration of M. Carry be
more then a partial fancy, and whether her single opinion be not maintained
with more then single mistakes, if thou art one who wilt own the truth in these
times; Farewell, and pray for the faith and patience of the Saints.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

April 11. 1649. JO. DOWNAME.


