The Abstract OF Sir CHARLES HOLT's CASE.
A Mortgage of 700 l. per Annum, Robert Holt to Mr. Fountain, and also a
Recognizance of 8000 l. is assigned to him for securing 5000 l. lent in Mr.
Fountaine's Name, in Trust for Mr. John Coke, since deceased.

Mr. Fountain, who pretended a Gift of this Money, from Mr. John Coke, after
ten Years Suit with Mr. Coke's Executors, and several Hearings, is decreed to
transfer the Securities to Mr. Coke's Executors; and these Executors have been
since adjudg'd to be Executors in Trust for Edward Coke Esquire; an Infant, who in
Trinity-Term 1693, obtained another Decree against Sir Charles Holt for this
Money, and all Interest since the Loan of it, and for Nonpayment to hold the
Mortgaged Estate discharged of all Equity of Redemption. About 2800 l. has been
paid for Interest, and received out of the Profits of the Mortgaged Estate:
3000 l. more paid into the Court of Exchequer, and 2000 l. more paid lately to
Mr. Edward Coke's Guardian in Obedience to the last Decree.

Mr. Fountain, who has the Estate in Law, and the Securities in his Hands, and
is the only Person capable to reconvey the Estate, refuses to reconvey it, or
to deliver up the Securities, and has stood out all Process of Contempt for
eleven Years.

Sir Charles Holt always has been, and still is desirous, and ready to pay what
remains due, if he may have his Estate, and is not capable of raising the Money
otherwise.

It is contrary to all Justice and Equity, that Sir Charles Holt, who has been
forced to pay the greatest part of the Debt, and is ready to pay the Residue,
should lose an Estate of 700 l. per Annum, and have the rest of his Estate
subject to a Recognizance.

The Cause has passed the ordinary Judicature of the Nation, and that cannot
divest the Estate out of Mr. Fountain, nor restore it to Sir Charles Holt: and
unless there be some Remedy by Act of Parliament, Sir Charles Holt must lose
his Estate, tho he would pay his Debt; which Case it is humbly hoped may
deserve (if any Case can) the Relief of an Act.

THE ABSTRACT OF Sir Charles Holt's Case.


