An Account of His Most Excellent Majesty's Splendid Reception into the Famous
City of London; together with His Royal Entertainment in and through the said
City, on Tuesday the 16th of this Instant November, 1697.
Whitehall, November 16.
HIS Majesty having been pleased graciously to accept of the Humble Request
made to him by the City of London, to honor them by passing through the same
publicly in his Return from Flanders, upon the Conclusion of the Peace with
France; and the City having adjusted every thing on their Part in the most
Splendid and Honorable manner for His Majesty's Royal Reception, His Majesty
did this Day about Noon set forth in his Coach from Greenwich accompanied by
his Royal Highness Fr. George, and attended by the Great Officers of State, and
a numerous Concourse of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Privy Council,
Judges, and diverse other Persons of Quality of the Three Kingdoms, all in
Coaches with 6 Horses; And being come to St. Margaret-Hill in Southwark, was
there received by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in their Formalities on
Horseback: And his Lordship alighting, and presenting to the King the City
Sword, and receiving it back again with His Majesty's Directions to carry it
before him, and the Recorder also alighting, and in a short Speech
Congratulating his Majesty's happy Arrival, the Proceeding from thence to
Whitehall was in manner-following.

First, a Detachment of about 100 of the City Trained-Bands, all in Buff Coats,
led the way from the Bridge to Charing Cross, then followed two of the King's
Coaches, and one of Prince George's; the two City-Marshals, with their Men; the
Sheriffs Officers with Javelin's, preceded by two of the City Trumpets; next
the Lord Mayor's Officers in Black Gowns; the City Banner born by the
Water-Bayliff, preceded by two more of the City Trumpets; next the City
Officers on Horseback in their proper Gowns, each attended by a Servant in
Livery; then the King's Banner Born by the Common-Hunt, preceded by three of
the City Trumpets; the common Crier, and Sword Bearer, the last in his Gown of
Black Damask and Gold Chain, each with a Servant; Then the Aldermen, Recorder
and Sheriffs, and such as had served or fined for Sheriff or Alderman, the
Juniors first, all on Horseback in Scarlet Gowns, each Alderman below the Chair
attended by his Beadle and two Footmen, and those above the Chair, with four
Footmen each; the Messengers of the Chamber and Knight Mareschal's Men
attending the Proceeding in their proper Station,

Then the King's Trumpets and Kettle-Drums, followed by the Sergeant-Trumpet
with his Mace; the Herald of Arms according to their several Classes between
the Sergeants at Arms with their Maces, all bare-headed, and each attended by a
Servant; Then the Lord Mayor of London on Horseback in a Crimson-Velvet-Gown,
with his Collar and Jewel, bearing the City Sword, in the middle between
Clarenceux King of Arms on the Right hand, supplying the place of Gartor King
of Arms, and one of the Gentlemen-Ushers on the Left Hand, supplying the place
of the Usher of the Black-Rod; the Lord Mayor attended by four Servants, and
each of the other by a Servants.

Then the King in a rich Coach of State, accompanied by Prince George, with the
Gentleman of the Bedchamber in waiting, and attended on each side by His
Majesty's Equeries, Footmen, and the Yeomen of the Guard, led by their
Officers, and followed by His Majesty's Life-Guards, and a long Train of
Coaches with six Horses of the Great Officers, Nobility and others, according
to their respective Degrees, Ranks and Qualities, in the same Order as they
came from Greenwich.

The Street were lined and guarded in Southwark by the Militia of Surrey,
assisted by the Militia of the Tower Hamlets; from the Bridge to Walbrook by 3
Regiments of the City Militia; From thence to St. Paul's Churchyard by the
Liveries of the several Companies with their Banners and Ensigns displayed; and
from thence to Temple Bar by the other 3 Regiments of the City; and thence to
Whitehall by the Militia of Middlesex, and His Majesty's own Guards; the City
Conduits running with Wine all the while.

Thus the Proceeding moved to Whitehall Gate, only the Lord Mayor, accompanied
as before by Gartar and the Usher of the Black Rod, attended his Majesty to the
Foot of the Stairs in Whitehall leading up to the Guard Chamber, where humbly
taking leave of His Majesty, his Lordship and the Aldermen were conducted into
the Lodgings, and Treated with a Noble Supper by my Lord Steward.

The Balconies and Windows were adorned with rich Hangings and Tapestries, and
crowded with infinite Numbers of Spectators and all the Streets as His Majesty
passed rang with loud Acclamations of Joy.

At the East end of St. Paul's were placed the Hospital Boys, one of which made
a congratulatory Oration to His Majesty.

The whole Ceremony was performed with great Order: The Cannon at the Tower
were discharged at His majesty's taking Coach, and at His passing over the
Bridge; His Majesty's Foot Guards gave 3 Volleys in St. James's-Park; and the
Evening concluded with Bonefires, Illuminations, Ringing of Bells, and all
other Demonstrations of Dutiful Affection to His Majesty's Sacred Person and
Government.


