AN ACCOUNT Of a most Strange and Barbarous Action How a Prisoners Wife of
Ludgate threw her self from the Leads into Blackfriars, on Sunday the 22th of
this Instant March, between Twelve and One in the Afternoon.
HOW sad and dismal a thing it is to consider, especially when we seriously
reflect on the various and most inhumane Cruelties and Barbarities that are so
frequently acted and committed among us, but I am sure there can be none more
strange, or indeed unaccountable than this I am now about to give you a
Relation of, being it was committed against all Laws, even that of Nature, for
self preservation is implanted in our very Beings, but how frail and weak we
are when left to our selves, and how cunning and subtle an Enemy we have to
deal with, that continually encounters us, and makes the strongest Assaults
upon our weakest Guards, insinuating into our most private concerns and
conditions, and taking all advantages to work our Ruin, there being none more
prejudicial or destructive than bringing us to despair, as this most sad and
lamentable Instance here plainly demonstrates.

For, on Sunday the 22d. of this Instant March, between Eleven and Twelve a
Clock, one (...) Smith (the Wife of Michael Smith Sawyer, who lived in
Holy-day-yard in Greedlane) went as her accostomed use was to Visit her
Husband, who has been a Prisoner in Ludgate for the space of Fifteen or Sixteen
Weeks, which long and tedious Imprisonment had reduced them to a very poor and
low condition, as having been forced to sell even their very Household goods for
a present maintenance, and that being almost expended, utterly despairing of
his enlargement, asked him after they had dined to go upon the Leads of the
said Prison, having been there some time discoursing together, he went down to
the Celler to fetch some drink, and leaving her there walking alone, she about
Twelve a Clock (by the Instigation of the Devil) took that opportunity to throw
her self over the. Battlement of the Leads into Blackfriars, which is at least
Four Stories high, so that she was bruised to pieces, and was carried to a
House adjacent till the Crowners Inquest sat^ upon her.

Thus you see how the Devil tempts us to Sin, and attaques us when least
suspected, therefore may this Circumstance afright us by this sad Example from
the Commission of tha^ horrid Sin of Self-murder.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Moore. MDCLXXXV.


