An ACCOUNT of Major General KIRKS's Safe ARRIVAL at LONDONDERRY: With
Allowance, June the 21st, 1689.
AS there is nothing more desirable than to hear the Glad-Tidings of the safe
Arrival of Maj. Genesis Kirk, Sir George St. George's Regiments, at Londonderry;
So we are now assured, that to the Inexpressible Joy of Colonel Walker their
Governor, and all the Protestants in Garrison: They came with their Ships being
24 Merchantmen, and 3 of His Majesty's Men of War, the 13th Instant.

Upon his Arrival at the Mouth of the River, he found it Blocked up, there
being a Battery Planted on each side of it, which run in a pretty way into the
River; and the middle of it was filled up with great Boats that were sunk in
it, and a Bome across, and other such things, so that it was not possible for
any Ship to get over. The Major General finding things in this case, was
resolved to make his Entry, and first, he played Briskly with his great Guns
from the Frigots upon the two Forts, as likewise with small Shot; and the Forts
being not so high as they ought to have been, he had the Advantage of them and
Dismounted all their Cannon, which he took, though his Frigates are much
shattered; after he had Dismounted their Cannon, he sent off several Boats,
with Hooks, and such Instruments as they use to Heave up their Anchors with,
and they at last made so much way, as for one Ship to go safely over, and so
they all followed one after another, and Arrived safely at Londonderry, to the
Unspeakable Joy of those poor Distressed People, who by the help of God, will
now be able to hold out till such time as His Majesty's Army Arrives, which
will be very speedily. The Major General lost in this Expedition about Three
Hundred Men, and it is not doubted but double the Number is Killed of the Enemy.

He carried with him, Provision, Powder and Ammunition for their Relief, viz.
500 barrels of powder, 6000 Arms and Provision for Ten Thousand Men for three
Months, all which was taken from on Board, and reposited in particular
Storehouses, and some of it delivered out to the Garrison, and a Distribution
made of Ten thousand l. which the King sent as a Donative to the Garrison, but a
particular Reward to Coll- Walker, and the rest of those Noble Chistains that
have so bravely Signalized their Valor against the Enemies, and who without
all doubt will no less behave themselves for the future, they having
courageously resolved upon the next Effort the Enemy shall make upon them to
march out and give them Battle, and enlarging their Quarters into the Country;
being assured from England,, that Duke Schomburgh is speedily to their
Assistance, with a Gallant Army of 25 or 30000 Men, with a proportionable Train
of Artillery; and it is not in the least to be doubted but that his Grace will
soon Reduce those Rebellious and Stubborn Papists supported by the Assistance
of the French King, who we doubt not also suddenly to see Reduced by the
Confederate German, and Belgic Forces as low as the Pyrenean Treaty: And there
being now a conjunction of the English and Dutch Fleets, who will be
undoubtedly Master of these Narrow-Seas; Some great Enterprise perhaps of
making a descent in France it self will be attempted, there being diverse
Regiments of Infantry on Board the Dutch Fleet, for what Service shall be
judged most requisite: And the great News being brought us, that the Affair of
Holsteine being compremished; His Danish Majesty restoring that Duke to his
Country, and quitting all his Engagements to France. His Majesty of Sweden, is
sending 10000 of his Forces to King William's Service, with some of his Ships
of War: Which as it will be a great Reinforcement, so it is not to be
questioned, that if it be thought fit to Employ them in Ireland. We shall soon
hear that they will possess themselves of their Metropolis Dublin,
notwithstanding the boasted Army of the French and Irish.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1689.


