An Account of a New and Strange DISCOVERY, That was made by John Sheirly,
alias Davis, and Joseph Fisher, The same Day of their Execution, Relating to
the Ordinary of Newgate: With a True Copy of the Petition, that was Presented
to the Lord Mayor, by the Prisoners of Newgate, concerning the same, with many
other remarkable Particulars.
WHEN I discrib'd what Mr. Allen really is, or what a Clergy Man ought to be, I
humbly beg I may not be thought to reflect upon the Clergy in general or of any
Religion in particular. There was a Judas in the Number Twelve etc. But not an
example in any Age of a Clergy Man's being Guilty to the degree of wronging
those that wronged others, not only of their Worldly Substance, Reputation, or
^^^e, but of Eternal Happiness likewise. Mr. Allens Life ought more
partiticularly to be good, having the care of so great, and yet miserable
number of Souls, which if not preserved under the Wings of Care and Tenderness,
nay and assisted by their Shephard with Temporal Succors, may (as too many
daily do) perish Eternally. His Function ought to be doing all good, suffering
all wrongs, avoiding in all things giving Scandal; ready upon all occasions to
venture his dearest Blood for the Propagation of the Faith of Christ Jesus,
letting his Actions so shine etc. But if he be found upon due enquirey to have
no Coherence with what he ought to be, but a Suborner, a deceiver of Men's
Lives, Honor, Souls and all that is dear to them; then where is the harm we do
any Profession, or the wrong any Creature can sustain in his being Detected?
on the contrary all the good: It was he, who robbed the Law of Justice, and
cried Newey deserved the worst of Punishments for his Crimes, but it ^ow
appears by his Marriage to his Sister, which is the Price of what he Swore at
the Old Baily or of the trouble cost and great Pains he was at; But why all
this? there was an necessity on both of them to be linked by the Chains of
Matrimony, that neither Fear Interest nor Despair might ever discover what
would prove the ruin of the Party so discovered, being both in public
Business and under a Necessity of being thought well of; I will not,
notwithstanding what he has made me unjustly suffer, be for Poisoning him under
pretense of Comforting him, or abeim him under the shadow of reaching a hand as
he has but too often done, but will pull him from the Precipice in which he is
nigh, by relating to the World some few, of his misdeeds, that the Town may
find who was the Suborner of Jones, alias Ambrel, alias Clement, Mr. Allen or
Newey: And to set the Saddle upon the right Horse, tho he be full of the Farsey.

Joseph Fisher was Indicted for House Breaking, and his Prosecution managed by
Anderson the Theif Catcher, to whom Fisher gave Six Guineas to bring him off:
But was importuned by Anderson to make it up Twenty, or else he would be far
from serving him etc. which Fisher not being able to do, was sworn against and
Cast, tho he declared upon the Words of a dying Man that he was Innocent of
that Fact, tho he had been Pardoned by the King for one of the like nature, for
some particular service done his Majesty, which induced his Jury to believe
what was sworn against him. After Condemnation he was told Mr. Allen the
Ordinary of Newgate could save his Life; upon which he ordered his Wife, to
apply her self to him, which she did with Tears: He told her he had Interest
sufficent to save any Man's Life, but he must have Money to defray his Charges;
the poor Woman gave him two Guineas, being all she had, or could procure in the
World; but she found that the said Allen never went or minded in the least the
saving of her Husbands Life, tho she said and did all she could to induce him
to it, so that upon Friday the 24th of May, her husband was brought with the
rest of the Condemned; to the Chapel of Newgate in order to prepare himself
for another World; But finding that Mr. Allen had got him no Repreive, he begged
he would return his poor Wife the Two Guineas she had given him, but Mr. Allen
denied to him with Execrable Oaths and Protestations that ever his Wife gave
him a Farthing, and that she must have deceived him, which put the Man into the
greatest of Confusions, declaring that he was sure his Wife had done it, and
that he had taken away his Life by the keeping those Papers which he had given
him into his own Hands to show the King, they being signed by my Lord Berkley,
for service he had done, and would induced His Majesty to have Pardoned him;
Mr. Allen protested by that Holy Place that he knew nothing of the mutter, tho
the said Fisher confirmed what he said to be True upon the Words of a dying
Man, and as he hoped for Mercy from a just God; Mr. Allen telling him he must
forgive every one, he answered he did, and particularly him, who he said had
not only Cheated him of Two Guineas, Papers etc. but Life also. Mr. Allen asked
them if they would receive the Sacrament, Fisher asked him how they could
receive the Sacrament, or believe one Word he told them, and hoped there was no
such Villainy in the other World; They went away Exclaiming greivously against
the said Allen's ill Treatment of them, to the horror and concern of all the
Prisoners, and several Strangers who heard what they said. The next Day after
his Execution with much Threatening the said Allen, his Wife got the Two
Guineas of him, but he desired her at the same time to make Affidavit that he
never had any Money of her, which she refused, but going to him the next Day
for her Husbands Papers, he so far prevailed upon her to make Affidavit before
Judge Gould, under pretense that he had the Two Guineas, but that he had
returned her them again, and some things, quite contrary to what was matter of
fact: Mr. Allen read the said Affidavit in his Pulpit the Sunday following,
Exclaming against Mary, Fisher and her Deceased Husband to all the Prisoners:
Mary Fisher having understood that Mr. Allen had made her Forswear her self,
(for she could neither Read nor Write) was almost Distracted, went before the
Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and declared all she knew concerning the
matter.

John Sheirly, alias Davis, Declared upon the words of a Dying Man, that he did
give Mr. Allen Forty Shillings to save his Life, and had ordered his Wife, to
pawn her Clothes off her Back for it, which she did, believing Mr. Allen,
would save her Husbands Life for that Sum: The Saturday after her Husband was
Condemned, Mr. Allen told Sarah Sheirly, that she must get him Twenty Shillings
more for Coach Hire, which she did, and told him, she would go along with him,
and throw herself at His Majesty's Feet, but he told her it would be but in
vain, for none would be suffered into the Kings Bed Chamber, but those of his
Cloth; Mr. Allen finding the said Sarah very Zealous, and not to be put off by
him, did what he could to set her Husband against her, and did so Effect it,
that she believing her Husband had given to some lude Woman, what she with the
greatest trouble had got for him; she told him she would never come nigh him
more; her Husband wished such wishes, that she could not but believe him, tho
Mr. Allen denied that her Husband gave him a Farthing, with such abominable
Wishes, that she could not tell what to say: The last Words the said Sheirly
spoke to his Wife in the Cart was, that he had truly given the said Allen the
said Forty Shillings, or that God of his Infinite Mercy, might never have Pity
on his Soul, and desired his Wife to believe what he then said; he likewise
told her that if she did not do him Justice to the utmost of her Power, he
should never rest, all which she made Affidavit before my Lord Mayor of; and
that she could not rest Night nor Day, till she had don it; these things, with
too great a number to be Incerted here, are known by above a Hundred to be
matter of Fact, and occasioned this following Petition.

To the Right Honorable Sr. Richard Levit, Knight, Lord Mayor, Shereiffs, and
Aldermen of the City of London.
The Humble Petition of the poor distresed Prisoners, of His Majesty's Goal of
Newgate.
Most Humbly Shows,
That your Petitioners are not detered from their former Misdeeds by the
Example, Exhortation, or any real Encouragement, given them by Mr. Allen their
Ordinary's Life or Conversation; His telling them of a great God, which they
ought to Adore, and the next moment Cheating poor Wretches to the utmost of his
Power, gives them to Dread, that what he says of that is likewise false; Your
Petitioners cannot believe one Word he tells them, and are afraid he may
Misrepresent, (as to their great Misfortunes, he has two often done) or what is
worse, if Disobliged by unknown of ways, will he insure their utter Ruin.

Your Petitioners therefore most humbly Implores of your Lordship, Shereiffs,
Aldermen, etc. that out of Your accustomed Zeal to the Faith of Christ, Your
Clemency to the Miserable, Your Care to detect Vice, and Encourage Virtue, and
prevent the Ruin of some Thousands, both as to Body and Soul; You Will be
Graciously Pleased so to Order, that no more at their Deaths Despair of Mercy,
from a Merciful God, or so many Perish, as Daily do, without Temporal or
Spiritual Succors; that You Will be but Pleased to Encourage such timbersome
Prisoners, as knows some part of the said Dr. Allens Tricks, and Detect him in
the same for the good of all Men: And Your Petitioners will for ever Pray, as
in Duty Bond, etc.


A True Copy of a Certificate.
Captain,
These are to Certify that I know, that in the Month of January last 1700, a
Gentlewoman came into the Master-side Fellons, where I was then a Prisoner, to
one Mr. Jones, who was also a Prisoner, and desired him to Swear against
Captain Charles Newey; the said Jones replied, he would not without Forty
Shillings in Hand; she then did Pay him one Guinea, and Eighteen Shillings and
Six Pence, to Swear against Captain Newey; I made bold to ask the Gentlewoman,
if her Name was not Madam Newey, she replied Sir my Name is Newey, If Examined
before a Magistrate I can declare a great deal more,

Signed Henry Waldrond.


Some that are in Prison, and some that are gone out, do know from Jones, and
what they themselves heard pass betwixt Allen, Mrs. Newey, and Jones, of his
being Engaged, Frightened, and Suborned to Swear against Captain Newey.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1700.


