AN ACCOUNT Of a most Barbarous and Bloody MURTHRE, Committed Yesterday in
Covent Garden, By Mr. Parry who belong to the Playhouse, On the Body of Mr.
Henry Arthur, who was lately Tried for Robbing the Western Maile.
Particularly, How Differin^ about Gaming, came into Covent Garden about 3 of
the Clock in the morning, where after they had given and received of each
other, several dangerous Wounds, mr. Parry Stabbed Mr. Arthur in the right Pap
above 6 Inches of which wound, he Immediately Dyed. With an Account of his being
Apprehended and carried to the Round-house, in order for his Commitment to
Newgate.
14. Nov. 1699.
ON Sunday Morning being the 12th of this instant November, 1699. Mr. Parry,
who belongs to the Playhouse in Lincoln-Inn-Fields, being in Company with
Henry Arthur, whose Brother was Iately Executed at Tybarn for Robbing the
Western Mail) I say being together at a Tavern near Covent Garden, they
continued together till between 3 and 4 of the Clock, at which time Differing
about Gaming, they went out together to all appearance in a very Frindly
manner; but going over the Square near the Market place* some words arrising
about a certain Reckoning between them; some say about dividing a sum of Money,
which in short was agrevated to that Violent degree that they both drew their
(...) (as we are informed) by consent, at which time several desperate Wounds
were give^ and received on both sides, Arthur pricking Parry in several places
on the Arm, and another dangerous one, on the right Pap; which so Increased his
Passion, that redoubling his Fury, he returned Arthur as many by way of
requital, Particularly on the Shoulder, Thigh, left Breast, and several other
places, among which one upon the right Pap, that extended above 6 Inches slope
wise, it proved so Fatal, that he Dropped down and Died thereof immediately; at
which instant the Watch, who had heard the clhashing of their Swords came in,
and seized Mr. Parry the Murderer, who with the great Effusing of Blood that
issued from the wounds which the Deceased had given him under the right Breast;
was ready to faint, being hardly able to go to the Round-house, whither the
Watch conveyed both, him and the deceased; where was found about them four
score Pound in Gold and Silver, befides a very rich Watch in the Pocket of
Henry Arthur; both which it is Conjectured they had Obtained by unlawful
Purchase the Night before: About 5 a clock Mr. Parry Wounds were searched and
dressed by a Skillful Surgeon, who judges that on his right breast very
Dangerous; However as soon as he is able he will be carried before a
Magistrate, and consequently be Committed to Newgate for the said Murder, but
last night he remained in the Round-house: Where the Coro ners Inquest Sat on
the view of his body, when by reason, there was no Evidence, but what Parry
declared, and both of them having many Wounds, as well the Surviving Person as
the Deceased, the Jury thereupon brought Mr. Parry in guilty of Man Slaughter,
and Mr. White the Coroner ordered his Committment for the Gate House, from
whence it is thought he will suddenly be removed to Newgate.

It Is Eminently remarkable and well worthy observation, that Companions in Evil
Enterprises, commonly meet with sad and disasterous Fates, and fatal Exit, as
is plainly Evident in the unfortunate and untimely Deaths of the two Arthurs,
and others concerned with them, as for instance the two brethren in Evils, in
conjunction with Captain John Belingham, Robbed the Western Mail; when being
taken, the said Belingham became an Evidence against them, for which Crime John
Arthur was Executed, since which Belingham, was Sworn against last Sessions by
his own Compaion, and was, also Hanged, and though Henry escaped that shameful
Death, yet at last, when he little thought of it, he was Killed by the Sword of
his Familier Friend; who it is thought, has received his mortal Wound from him:
So that hereby it is notoriously manifest that such unlawful Confederacy's or
Societies, though they may seemingly Flourish for a time, yet either sooner or
later they meet with sad and fatal Consequences; and that often too by
Destroying one another.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas White, near Fleet Street, 1699.


