AN ACCOUNT OF Prodigious Storms of Thunder, Lightning, etc. NEAR Londonderry
in Ireland.
On Saturday June 26, 1680. As they were communicated to a Friend in London by
the following Letters.
THese Letters came to my hand from Ireland last night by Post, I give them to
you in their Native dress, without any preface or embellishments, and to keep
them no longer from you they are as follows.

SIR,
I Presume you will have the following News more at large than here I give you:
On Saturday last, about five in the Afternoon, happened a very great Thunder,
with Hail and Rain, in these parts, but especially about 16 or 20 Miles from
hence, insomuch that it has not only tore up a Mountain of near 200 Acres, but
the Cloud breaking thereon has carried all the surface of the Earth in that
compass into all the Rivers round about, but withal has carried away several
Houses and Families, insomuch that of Men, Women and Children, already above 30
Corpse are found, and many more is believed to be lost. Of a sudden the Waters
rise betwixt the Mountain 14 Fathom high; On that part where the Mountain was,
only one Woman left alive to give account of the Dreadfulness thereof, which
she says, was as well by Hailstones of an incredible bigness, as by the vast
Cloud coming down at once, that none but she, and that by a wonderful
providence, could escape in that place; and had it been in the night many
hundred persons more had been destroyed as well as their Houses and great
numbers of Cattle drowned and killed: All Fish for several Miles up the River
are destroyed by the blackness and mudiness of the Water which the surface of
that Mountain made, of Salmon above 7 or 800 found already dead on the Shore,
of Eels and all other small fresh water Fish, infinite numbers destroyed, that
it is nor cannot be believed, in those Rivers one Fish is left alive; it is too
tedious to relate to you the whole Matter, but is as dreadful to this Country
as you can imagine by being much worse then I here give you.

Londonderry, Wednesday June the 30th 1680.

A Prodigious accident fell in Monterlony, on Saturday the 26th of this instant
June, a Thunderclap forced the Bowels of a great Mountain belonging to one
Glaine Hamilton, after which ensued the fall of a prodigious Cloud, which
entering the Cavities of the said Mountain made by the Thunder, its weight bore
the greatest part of the Mountain before it. which made such a deluge of
puddle, that that part of it which fell into Glenally Water that runs toward
Newton Stewart, drowned 19 persons in their Houses, turned the whole Valley for
8 or 9 Miles in length, that were Meadow and Corn, into a Desert of dirt a foot
thick, and has killed all the Fish in the River for 20 Miles in length, The
other half of this Cloud fell into the Row-Water that runs through the County
of Londonderry, has drowned 31 persons, and forced away the Stonebridge of
Limavady.


Newhall the 28th of June, 1680.
ON Saturday last about 12 at Noon it began here to Thunder and Rain, which
continued for 3 hours incessantly, the River swelled suddenly and did so
overflow all the Banks that I never see so great a Flood, and coming down so
impetuously, it brought with it an infinite deal of Timber, Sticks, Straw and
Rubbish, which gathering together at the side of our New Bridge, and having no
vent it overthrew, and there is not one stick left, and so the prettiest Bridge
in Ireland is lost. I understand since, that the Thunder began above Dungiven,
and there a Thunderbolt fell upon a Hill and tore it down, which mingling with
the Rain which rather fell like a great Spout, it came tumbling upon a House
belonging to Aveny O Cahan, the Father of Chan O Cahan the Tory, and in a
moment overthrew it, and carried all away with it, and Aveny and his Wife and 5
Children and 4 Friends were drowned, with all their Cows, Sheep and Horses, and
among them a Child in a Cradle, which Cradle, with many other Houshold-goods
and Timber of Houses, did help to choke and overthrow our Bridge. A Boy told me
he saw a Thunder bolt fall, which with great flames and flashes tore the
Ground, that all the day after none could go near that place for the smell of
Brimstone: He says there fell also Hailstones of a strange size and shape,
some like pieces of Candles, some like great Buttons with sharp points. Within
a few Miles of that place 18 persons were found drowned in one heap, and
several about Newtown-Stewart, but the mischief is not all known; after this it
is a small thing to tell you that all the Meadows about this Town are spoiled,
and all the Corn from hence to the Rivers mouth, and which is wonderful, about
Derry and Colerain nothing but an ordinary Shower, at Maherae, and thereabouts
clear weather.


Newtown-Stewart 29 June, 1680.
THere has happened near this place, so strange and sad an accident, that I
think the like has been seldom known: On Saturday last, about ten a Clock in
day, we heard much Thunder about 17 Miles from hence, which made many great
Breaches in a Mountain, and such Spouts of Water fell upon the place so broken
up, that the Flood hurried the looshed Earth with it to the bottom, and swelled
a Brook which ran there (and which comes into the River by this place) so
suddenly, and so high, that it carried all away that stood before it; People
that lived near the Bank had not time to get out of their Houses, but with
Goods, Houses and all, were swept along with it and perished; the Beasts that
fed near it were lost, the very Fish were stifled by the Earth which the
Current brought with it; great quantities of Salmon Trouts, Lamprey (which I
never saw here before) even the Eels that live in Mud, were choked, and thrown
dead upon the Shore, and I do not believe there is one Fish alive in the River
from the Mountain to the Sea; My curiosity took me yesterday to the place where
this new kind of Deluge began, and truly, I was amazed to see a Mountain torn
in above ten several places, and all the low ground by the River, for ten Miles
together, covered with the Ruins, the Cornfieldsd buried, and People groaping
in the Mud and Earth for the Bodies of their Friends and of their Cattle. I
cannot yet learn exactly, how many have perished, but by the Account that is
given, there are lost in several places fifty Souls, and abundance of Cattle.


LONDON, Printed for B. Took, in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1680.


