An Account of a PAPER, presented to the GENERAL ASSEMBLY, October 1690.
Containing the Complaints of many Presbyterian People, living in several Shyres
of Scotland. And now a Second time with Additions offered to their
Consideration.
AS Union in Truth and Duty is a great Mercy and Blessing, and ought carefully
to be entertained and maintained, so Division is always to be wearied of as a
Misery, and all lawful and honest Endeavors to be made use of, for healing the
Breach: Of both these, the Church of Scotland has been partaker in a great
measure; Sometime indeed this Church was famous for Union, and did share of the
Blessings, which usually attends such a happy Condition; Nevertheless of late,
she has been much rent with Divivisions, and broken with Breaches, caused by
the sad Defections and Backslidings wherein many of her Members, in the late
defyling and unhappy times were involved; Against which, we thought it our duty
to bear Witness and Testimony, by withdrawing from these, guilty of, and
defending the same, out of Love to them, and that they ^ight be convinced and
ashamed thereof* But albeit we did withdraw from many Presbyterian Ministers,
(whom notwithstanding we loved and reverenced) involved in, and defending
several of these Defections, seeing no other way left us in that broken and
confused state, of freeing our selves, from partaking in (...) thereof; yet we
never owned or looked upon it, as a separation from the Church of Scotland, or
the Ministry thereof, or so stated it, as that we would never more Unite: For
as alwise we declared our willingness to join again, when ever we could have
the opportunity without Sin; So of late we gave a demonstration thereof, in
applying to the General Assembly, by offering to them a Paper, containing our
Complaints, which we earnestly desired might be Heard and Redressed, that so
our Union after so long an interruption, might be the more comfortable. A brief
account of the Management of which Paper follows.

When it was known, that there would be an Assembly, it was judged requisite,
we should lay hold upon that opportunity to remonstrate and represent to them
our Complaints and Grievances (under which we had been groaning) and seek
Redress of the same, and that these Defections and Corruptions might be
condemned, which had offended us, and caused our withdrawing in the broken Case
foresaid, that so our Union might be with the greater comfort. Upon which a
Paper being drawn up, it was brought to one of our General Meetings, where it
was agreed, to the End all our Friends concerned therein might be thoroughly
informed of the said Paper, that Coppies should be written and shown to our
Societies, who might consider thereof, and send two or three, or more of their
number unto Edinburgh, to Subscrive it in their Name. According to which
conclusion, some Persons, from several places of the Country, came to
Edinburgh, where the Paper was subscribed by sundry Hands, in name of many
others. The Tenor whereof follows.

To the MODERATOR, and Remnant Members of this Reverend GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
The COMPLAINTS and Humble PETITION of many Presbyterian People, Living in
several Shyres of Scotland.
SEEing the Lord in the riches of His infinite Mercy, wherein He has abounded
toward this Generation in the late Revolution of Providence, far beyond all
possible Acknowledgements, has been pleased to grant at length this long
wanting, long wished and prayed for Privilege, of seeing a free General
Assembly of Presbyterian Ministers, gathered and fenced in the Name of our Lord
JESUS; We cannot, dare not, and must not omit this Opportunity of Applying our
selves thereunto, for a Redress of these many long lasting Complaints and
Grievances, under which we have Groaned these many years; The chiefest,
bitterest* and most burdensome of which (tho we have not wanted our share of
other Burdens and Afflictions very heavy) has been, and yet remains to be,
even in this plenty, our scarcity and famine of Gospel Ordinances, wherein we
have languished of a long time, sighing over our silent Sabbaths, as Sheep
scattered without a Shepherd fainting for hunger, at the head of every Street,
and panting after the green Pastures and pleasant Waterbrooks of the Preached
Gospel; And yet scarred and made to stand aloof from it, by the Stumblings,
Tentations, Defections and Divisions of these unhappy times past; Which, as it
has been our greatest sorrow, so no comfort on this side Heaven, could be so
desirable, as to re-enjoy and recover again access with clearness to pure and
powerful Gospel Ordinances, without which we shall never have a pleasant day in
the greatest abundance of all our outward peace. It was truly, Right Reverend
a Reproach upon us most heavy to bear, that we were called Despisers of the
Gospel, and of the Ministry thereof, which ye^ so far as we had clearness and
access, we sought after and followed, even upon the hazard of our Lives, so
earnestly, that no terror of Persecuters could drive us from the pursuit of it:
And nothing moved us to withdraw from these Ministers* who reckoned themselves
rejected by us (whom nevertheless we loved and respected, and do high^^ love
and reverence) but their sad Involvements in the Defections of the late
defyling and unhappy times; seeing no other may left us in that broken state,
of keeping up a Testimony against the same, and (...) our selves from partaking
in the six thereof, but that abstraction in these circumstances, which we never
looked upon, as a Separation from the Reformed and covenanted Church of
Scotland, (as is more fully showed in our Informatory Vindication, which we
here Homologate) but only from the Defections and Sins of which many of her
Members were guilty; and not that we should never Unite more upon any
Conditions: For Schism is, and ever was equally hateful to us as sinful Union;
and we are now, and alwise were, most desireous to Join again, in terms most
pleasing to the LORD, edifying to the Church, and satisfying to our
Consciences. We are not for imposing Terms, giving Directions, or prescribing
Rules to Ministers, more than we are to be imposed upon, and implicitly led by
them; yet seeing People are allowed of the LORD, sometimes in sobriety, to say
to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry, which thou have received in the LORD,
and fulfill it; And when Offenses are given by Ministers, it is Peoples
Privilege to plead for the removing of them, in a Christian way, to the
satisfaction of the offended Party. We humbly conceive, in order to the removal
of the many offenses given and taken, in this our day, in order to our
comfortable Reconciliation together, and that we may be reconciled to the LORD,
and His Wrath turned away, that Confessing, Foresaking and Condemning the
Courses that have been so offensive, is very necessary And seeing in merciful
Providence, there is a Door opened, whereby ye have access and capacity to fall
about Building the Temple of the Lord, and cleansing it from these ^^^^^nesses,
wherewith in times of Defection bygone, it has been defiled, and removing
these Stumbling Blocks which have offended the Consciences of many tender and
serious People: Therefore, in all Humility and Reverance, we must take the
freedom to represent to this Reverend Assembly, in a few particulars, what
things chiefly have stumbled us, and occasioned our withdrawing for so long a
time, from many Ministers of this Church, which we cannot omit to Complian of
and Protest against: Designing hereby not to irritate or offend, nor to lay the
Faults of any open unto the World, nor to plead our own Innocence, but desiring
to acknowledge our deep accession also to the Sins, which has provoked the
LORD to all this anger against this Church and Kingdom: That which has drawn
from us, the mentioning of these things, is that the remembering of them, may
help us all to the sight and sense of these Sins amongst others, that we may be
found Mourning for them, and keeping up a Testimony against them; And to show
our earnest desire of having Peace and Truth, Union and Order, among all the
Lovers and Well wishers of Zion, settled upon Lasting and Solid Foundations and
Comfortable Communion in Ordinances restored to us who have been long driven
away, from that Benefit, by these offenses.

As it was not a little afflicting to behold, so it is now no pleasure to
remember, that when Prelacy, condemned in the Word of GOD, and abjured by our
Covenants, was established, many Ministers did hear and join with these
perjured Hyrlings and Intruders the Prelates and their Curats, Yea and persuaded
others to the like Practice: Whereby their hands were strengthened, and the
Hearts of many of the Godly were sadned, and their Consciences stumbled: We
desire to be thankful that Prelacie is condemned by Act of Parliament,
nevertheless we are grieved that such Joining and Complying therewith is not
yet condemned, nor the Practice of these that withdrew approved.

As it was no small grief of heart to see the Supremacy, which belongs only to
the Lord JESUS, as King and Head of His Church, given away to a miserable
Mortal, and settled upon him by Law; so it was an augmentation to our Sorrow,
to see an Indulgence flowing therefrom, clogged with Restrictions, very
prejudicial to the honor and freedom of Christ's Ambassadors, embraced by
several Ministers* and justified by others, which did much strengthen these
wicked Usurpations on our Lords Crown Rights, and His Churches Liberties, and
gave occasion of great Stumbling and Offense, and was a Bone of Contention
among the Lords People in this Land. But yet tho both the accursed Fountain,
and impure Stream be removed and cut off, for which we desire to Bless the
Lord, the Sin thereof nevertheless is not Confessed and Condemned; the doing
whereof we are persuaded, would be very contributive to the turning away of the
Lords anger, and satisfying all offended.

It was very Stumbling and Offensive to us, when many Snares and Tentations
were abounding and going through the Land, that then many Ministers who should
have Preached in Season, and out of Season, and whom no Dispensation could
discharge from that great and necessary Duty, did not set the Trumpet to their
mouth, to give faithful warning in times of such danger, as became Watchmen;
but tho often called to Preach in the Country, did either faintly leave the
Land, or lurked and lay by in the Land, and others when they Preached, either
did not apply their Doctrine to the Times, so as we might take it up, or were
ambiguous in their Application of their Doctrine to the dangers of the Times,
whereby many were left to perish in their iniquity, and the hands of these who
endeavored to keep clean Garments, were not strengthened: Yea, it was very
offensive to behold the practice and carriage of some Ministers, who instead of
strengthening their hands, who were at that time most forwardlie and zealouslie
appearing and contending for the Cause and Interest of CHRIST, and joining
with, countenancing or encouraging the Ministers, who were Valiant for the
Truth, and Jeoparded their Lives, in the high places of the fields, for the
Testimony of CHRIST, did condemn their laudable endeavors, and reproached
them, and their actings and sufferings, both at home and abroad.

More especialy it was sad and stumbling to us, when many Mischiefs, were
framed into Laws, by a Throne of Iniquity, when many wicked Oaths and Bonds,
ensnaring Consciences, contrare to the Word of GOD, and our National Covenants
were imposed, and when we were required upon pain of Death, to own the
Authority of, and acknowledge Alegiance to Tyrants and Usurpers, as our Lawful
Magistrates, whom GOD had set over us, as His Ministers of Justice, that then
many Ministers, did comply with these wicked Laws, and taught the People to
obey them, and some did take and subscribe these Oaths and Bonds themselves,
and persuaded People to take them, and not only owned and acknowledged
Alegiance to these Tyrants and Usurpers, prayed for them and their Government,
and pleaded for the Lawfulness of their Authority; Yea, some prayed for the
pretended Prince of Wales: But instead of sympathizing with the sufferings of
these that could not in Conscience own that Authooity, condemned and inveighed
against them as fools, and dying in an error. We have reason to be thankful
for this reviving in our Bondage, and that the yoke of Oppression and
Persecution is taken from off our necks; yet we wish that untender carriage
toward conscientious Sufferers were resented, and the Heads and Causes were
approven and justified, upon which these reproached Martyrs and Confessors
suffered.

It was very burdensome to our Consciences, that a Popish Toleration designed
to introduce Popery into this Land again, granted by K. James from his Absolute
Power, which he blasphemouslie arrogated to himself, and whereby he presumed to
stop the Penal Laws against Papists, and clogged with many Limitations, was
embraced by many Presbyterian Ministers, and Addressed for, to that Popish
Usurper, in the Name of ALL: Which many of the Godly of the Land looked upon
with weeping eyes, as a sad step of Defection from the wonted Zeal of the
Ministers of Scotland; The Sin and Scandal of this course is evident in a
Testimony given in against the same, by some Ministers, which we here own: Yet
now, notwithstanding that it be removed, and the wicked power it flowed from,
we cannot think the Sin and Scandal of it is taken away, so long as the same is
not confessed, mourned over and condemned.

The condemning of all these Courses of Compliance and Defections, would not
only be as a Beacon set up to hinder the following Generation from spliting on
such dangerous Rocks, but also will make our Uniting and Joining with these,
from whom we stand at a distance (which we long for, and pray for) cordial and
comfortable.

We are also dissatisfied and offended at several things at present; It might
have been expected, that the Mercies we have met with of late, should have
filled our Hearts with kindly sorrow for our former Sins and Backsliding, and
inflamed the Souls of all the Lovers of Christ, with more Zeal, for advancing
and promoting Reformation in this Land, according to the capacity and
opportunity the Lord has put in their hands; But alas! unsuteable has been
our Returns of Fruitfulness and Thankfulness; And as all of us have come far
short of improving these Opportunities, so the practice of these Ministers
continues to be very offensive and stumbling, who instead of Confessing and
Condemning the above written Defections, and minding the People of their former
Backslidings, and discovering the Sins of the la^e times, that were many and
heinous, to the end, they may be induced to mourn over them, and to turn unto
the Lord, do yet continue to defend and hide their own guilt, and thereby to
harden others in Impenitency; So that the wrongs done to Christ, are like to be
forgotten and buried, and few are like to be brought off from the evil of their
vvayes.

We are also much discouraged and dissatisfied, that the National and Solemn
League and Covenants, have not only not been renewed, but not contended for by
many, the affront done to them, and their binding force not declared, but like
to be buried in oblivion. And more especially it was wounding to us to ^ear,
that when opportunity was given, and access to Address the King and
Parliament, the mentioning of these holy Covenants was omitted; And since the
King and Queen were advanced to the Throne, we fear that that faithfulness and
freedom has not been used as was wont to be in former times, to warn and
admonish their Majesty's, of the Sins and Snares of the Throne, to beware of
evil Counselors, and of the guilt and danger of tampering with, and
patronizing Prelacie in England and Ireland, nor to discover and declare to
them, and the Parliament, the Sin and danger of bringing into, and keeping in
places of ^ower and Trust, in Judicatories and Armies, Person's who are known
Malignant Enemies to Truth and Godliness, and to the present Interest now to be
maintained, as faithful Ministers in former times used to witness against such
sinful Associations; and after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and
have gotten such a deliverance as this, if again His Commandments be broken,
by joining in affinity with the People of these abominations, it will be more
than ever dangerous both to King and Kingdom.

Likewise, albeit we dare not despise the day of small things, and desires to
bless the Lord for what we have seen; yet we cannot conceal our sorrow, that
the great and glorious Seize between the year 1638 and 1649, being years
of the right Hand of the Most High in which we were brought under the renewed
Bond of Solemn Covenants, are not revived, nor any honorable mention made of
them, in any of the Acts, establishing the Privileges of the Church, which we
think a losing of the ground which our Fathers gained. We do not say, that it
was in the power of Ministers to redress this, before or after, it was done;
yet as we conceive the pleading for the full of this in their Addresses, was
not above their reach, and that they should have signified their dislike at the
want thereof, and taken what they got by these Acts, with a Protestation, that
it should be without prejudice of their seeking and getting more; so in our
poor Judgment, we think in all Establishments of Religion and religious Rights
in a Land, respect, is always to be had to the Pattern and Rule of GOD's
revealed Will in His Word, and not to Worldly Politics.

It is also very discouraging and offensive, and we cannot but complain of it,
that now when there is an opportunity to purge the Church from these
Corruptions, wherewith she has been long pestered and plagued; yet tho Prelacy
be abolished by the State, and many Curats put away, some one way, some
another, we hear of none censured and removed for Prelacy, Perjurie and
Intrusion, and some Ministers are also pleading for keeping them in, upon
Carnal and Politic grounds, who we fear may afterward do more Hurt and
Mischief, than the Good now pretended can countervail; And that if this
occasion be lost of purging the Church of insufficient, corrupt and scandalous
Officers of all sorts, especially of Prelatick Curats, and of planting it with
Godly, faithful, and able Ministers, we may all repent of it too late.

More especially, It is very stumbling and offensive to us, that albeit there
be an opportunity without fear and danger to exercise Discipline impartially
and faithfully; yet some who have formerly taken the abominable Test, and are
guilty of other gross Scandals, are admitted to be Officers of the Church, some
to be Ministers, and some to be Elders, and many guilty of very gross degrees
of Compliance, are admitted to the Sacrament, without any public
Acknowledgement of their Offenses; whereby they and others are hardened, and
many of the Godly stumbled, to the great disadvatage of the Church.

To conclude, Right Reverend, we expect and entreat, that ye will not offend at
our freedom, in what we here Represent, but our meaning and end to have
differences satisfyingly removed, will move you, to put a favorable
construction upon that, which a Critical Disposition, might be ready to censure
for rashness and ignorance, and meddling in matters wherein we are not
concerned: But tho we should be condemned and censured with the greatest
severity, and be counted yet more vile, we must seek, we must cry, for the
removing of these Stumbling Blocks, and condemning these Courses, which have
done our Lord JESUS so much wrong, and His Children so much hurt, in the
standing in the way of their comfortable and edifying Communion with the
Church; Let the famishing and starving case of our Souls, through want of the
Blessed Gospel, and our hungering to hear it preached by you, prevail with you
to consider our Complaints, and let the Wounds of our bleeding Mother, panting
to be healed by the Hand of the tender hearted Physician, have weight with you
not to slight or despise our Desires: But if ye shall shut your eyes and ears
at them, then we know at the time, no Remedy left us, but to Complain and
Protest unto Judicatories; and cry, sigh and groan to the Father of Mercies,
who is tender of all His Little ones, and is the Hearer of Prayer, that He may
see to it, and heal our Backslidings and Breaches in His own time and way, and
not lay it to your charge, that ye have had so little regard to the stumbling
and saddenning of so many of His poor, broken, bruised, and scattered Sheep,
and that ye have not had greater care to strengthen the Diseased, and to heal
that which was sick, and to bind up that which was broken, and to bring again
that which was driven away, and to seek that which was lost.

AFter Subscribing of the Paper, some Men were chosen in name of the rest, to
present it to the Assembly, to desire an Answer, and to use diligence therein,
of which they were to give an account to their Friends: But the delivering of
it in was thought requisite to be delayed a little until it was known, what
would be done with a Paper given in to the Assembly by Mr Thomas Lining, Mr
Alexander Sheilds, and Mr William Boyd; yet tho it be not expedient to relate
either the isue of that business, or how the same was managed, nevertheless it
is not unsuitable to the present purpose to mention this, that instead of a
satisfactory Answer, it was very offensive to many, that the Assembly by a Vote
refused to read the foresaid Paper presented by the Ministers above named, upon
the Reasons given in by the Committee of Overtures, why it should not be read,
which condemned the same, before it was heard; especially the persons entrusted
with the subscribing and ingiving of our Paper, and some others were so
offended, that they judged it duty to signify their dissatisfaction therewith
to the Assembly: Whereupon a short Paper being drawn up, was subscribed by the
Men (chosen to deliver the other Paper) in their own Name; Representing it as
an additional Complaint, that the Assembly had, in the manner above specified,
refused to read the foresaid Paper.

To get opportunity for delivering in both these Papers to the Committee of
Overtures, by whom they might be transmitted to the whole Assembly, the Men
went to the place where the said Committee was sitting, where meeting with two
Ministers (Members thereof) and after some conference with them, concerning the
Papers; One of the Ministers said, he would inform the Committee of them;
Accordingly they having both gone in, acquainted the Committee therewith, who
(instead of giving the Men access, a privilege denied to none but them) only
nominate two Ministers and a Ruling Elder, to speak with them: These immediately
coming out, had conference with the Men: Before whom first the short Paper,
next the Larger were read; After hearing both, and desiring some things to be
altered in the large Paper (which could not be condescended unto) they
endeavored to dissuade the Men from pressing the reading of them in the
Assembly; which the Men insisted earnestly for, and for an Answer to return to
their Friends: When these Ministers found them so pressing for this, they
promised to represent it to the Committee; whereupon one of them went in, spoke
of it to them, and delivered the Papers to the Clerk. After this, the Men at
several occasions, solicited the Ministers above mentioned, and some others,
that the Papers might be read in the Assembly, and to have somewhat to return
to their Friends: But the Answer they received, was a Letter subscribed by
three Ministers, direct to them: Which follows.

Loving Friends,
THE Papers you gave in to the Assembly, were first given in to the Committee
of Overtures, and we were by them appointed to confer with you; And after some
conference with you, we moved in the Committee, that the Assembly would order
the Papers to be given in to these, who were to draw up the Monitory Letter,
and causes of the Fast, that they might make their own use thereof, in drawing
up the same: Which at the first next Session of the Assembly, on Saturnday
last, the first of November, was accordingly done in open Assembly, and we by
the Assembly allowed to report the same to you; which now accordingly we do:
And we hope this will satisfy you, and others who did commissionate you; and
that the Lord will incline your Hearts to Peace, and to guard against any
further rent in the Church of GOD; and in this hope we subscribe our selves,

Edinburgh, November 3. 1690, Your Friends and Servants in the LORD.


FRom which Letter, we shall only take notice of this, that as we have never
yet seen the Monitory Letter mentioned therein, whereby we do not know what use
is made in it of our Paper; so albeit we have got a sight of the Causes of the
Fast, from which it was said (several times) that we should receive
Satisfaction to our Scruples, yet we are so far from getting of the same, that
we must Complain, not only of the ambiguity of some Expresions in it, but also
of its Lameness, several things being omitted, which are steps of Defections
and Causes of Wrath; And that the abominable Test, Declaration, Prelatical
Intrusions, being once in, were put out again.

We hope, as well as Seriously desires, that our design in Publishing what is
above, may not be mistaken, but rightly Constructed, seeing it is not to
irritate or offend any Person; But to make manifest what has been our
endeavors, in order to get a Comfortable Union, with these Ministers, from
whom we are yet standing at a distance: As also to let them know, how
unexpected, yea astonishing it was to us, when we heard that our Paper of
Complaints, was so little regarded, as not once to be read, either in the
Committee, or open Assembly; It contained what really was and is ground of
offense and matter of Complaint to us; And whatever was pretended for not
reading thereof, yet the Consequences has been sad, having created Jealousies,
Scruples and Discontents, and has been tho occasion of a further rent, for it
could not be rationally expected, that to deny that privilege to them, which
was granted to others, was the way to heal the breach, which was wide, and
remove the Scruples that were many, of these, who are Conscientious; This was
rather the way to ^oment new Debates and Jarrs, then to cement, or remove the
old: And in like manner that we may have opportunity and occasion hereby, again
to desire of, and cry unto Ministers, not only for removing of our former
Scruples, and redressing of our old Complaints and Grievances, but also to
Represent, some New Ones, which are not only burdensome, grievous and offensive
to us, but to many of the Godly in the Land; earnestly entreating, and
fervently desiring, that Ministers, may do what is incumbent for them, and in
their Power* for removing of the same: One is,

The Admission of some of the Prelatical Curats, not only to the exercise of
the Ministry, but to a share of the Government of this Church; of which, we
crave leave to signify our dislike and dissatisfaction, and to testify against
the Pestering and polluting the Church with them; In regard it is the receiving
in of such Men whom the Scriptures declares should be avoided and with drawn
from, because they have caused divisions and offenses, contrare to the Doctrine
which this Church learned, and walked not only disorderly themselves, but many
of them compelled others to do so, and Persecuted these who desired to keep
their Garments clean; In regard it is unreasonable, and not consistent with
policy, to put Weapones in the Hands of Enemies, lest they may turn them
against us, if not openly, yet in a way as dangerous; Yea it is not long since
all of them were Reckoned Such: And whatever some of them pretend to now, yet
the time of this Change makes the sincerity of their Repentance strongly
suspicious, neither does it seem reasonable or safe to admit such Men to a
share of the Government, who opposed the same, while Power was in their Hands,
or to commit to them the care of Souls, who formerly have poisoned and done
great hurt to many of them; In regard they are incapable to give security, for
their being Faithful, and true to the Government, as is required in the
Instructions given by the Assembly, being Men, not only guilty of Intrusion,
dreadful Apostasy, advancing the kingdom of Satan, persecution (some one way,
some another) of the Godly, and not a few of them, of profanity and error, but
also of gross perjurie by taking wicked and contradictory Oaths, as that
abominable Test etc. And teaching others to do so, all repugnant to our Solemn
Covenants, whereby they have forefaulted the Honor of any Trust amongst Honest
Men, much more in such great and weighty matters, as are the having a share in
the Government of CHRIST'S House, and the care and oversight of Souls; In
regard the taking in of these Men, will tend to the present hurt of the Church,
seeing it will occasion a great Breach and Division in the same, which will do
much more hurt, than all the good these Men will do, can countervail; In regard
it will rend to the prejudice of the Posterity, whose advantage should be
sought, by endeavoring to transmit pure Ordinances to them, which we think
cannot well be done, and those preserved entire, if these Men be entrusted with
the dispensing of them: For as they are known formerly to be of corrupt
Principles and Practices themselves, and the soundness of the Change, that they
make, considering the time thereof (beside other things) being greatly to be
feared, so they will endeavor by degrees to bring in others of the same Stamp,
whereby at length (others dying) a little Leaven may leaven the whole Lump, and
so the ordinances be in great danger of being corrupted, if not Changed, which
will tend to the unspeakable disadvantage of the Posterity: And in regard it
will tend to the hurt of these Men themselves, seeing to admit them to such a
great Trust, so easily and hastily may harden them in their former evil ways;
whereas a more strict and sharp dealing, according as the rules of Discipline
prescribes to take with such scandalous persons, might by the Blessing of the
LORD bring them to a sight and conviction of the same. These, and many other
reasons that might be adduced, have weight with us; and we are hopeful will so
far prevail with Ministers as to withstand and oppose (now when they have power
and opportunity) the polluting and pestering the Church* and any mixing with
the Men of these Abominations, notwithstanding of what Authority may enjoin:
But if it shall be otherwise, as it will presage sad things to this poor
Church and Kingdom, so it will give ground of S^^mbling at others.

In like manner, as it is offensive and stumbling to us, that some Ministers
and Elders has been admitted to be constituent Members of the Assembly, who
are so heinously guilty and were so deeply involved in the defections of the
late defyling times, as by the Word of GOD, and Constititutions of this Church,
would debar them; So it cannot but be more stumbling and is matter of Complaint,
that albeit there were many Reverend and Worthy Divines in the Assembly and
Commission thereof, yet often times, when they have had public matters to
manage, and some things to put in Print, that such should have been appointed
for that end, who are laxest, and deeply involved in that late defections; The
sad effects and consequences whereof appears already, and certainly will be
more evident afterward, particularly by that Book Entitled A second
Vindication of the Church of Scotland etc. Wherein the Author (who was employed
for drawing up thereof, and does it name of the whole) not only gives
ignominious Characters and Epithets unto Honest and Conscientious Sufferers,
but also condemns and disownes their laudable actings in easing the Church and
themselves, in the Interregnum, of these perjured hirelings and intruders, the
Curats: Wherein we are concerned in it, we are so far from being a shamed
thereof, that we stand not to let it be known, that we are chiefly sorry, we
were not more active; And we may adventure with some confidence to say the like
in behalf of others: And in some singleness of heart may add, that what we did
therein, was from a Principle of Conscience, and as a Duty lying bound on us,
and not (merely) because they were our Persecuters.

Another thing offensive to us and many others, is the seldom mentioning of our
National and Solemn Covenants, not only in Preaching, but at Baptizing of
Children, at which time formerly it was usual to mention them, but now by some
only darkly hinted at, and by others altogether laid aside; And it cannot but
be grievous and wounding unto us, that the Author of the foresaid Book, should
insinuat so much as it is concluded, so be done. We are not for giving
directions unto Ministers; Nevertheless, we humbly conceive, we may safely
complain of the silence of many of them, in this, especially, when it is like
to produce such sad and lamentable effects, as the wearing out (among many) of
the sense and impression of the obligation and binding force of these
Covenants, and that not a few are like to forget, that the same has been
broken and burnt in this Land. Whatever difficulties are alleged, hindering
the Solemn Renovations of them at this time, yet Ministers may even at this
season, show people that perjurie and breach of Covenant, are among the sins of
the Land, and what way all ranks are guilty of the same, as also that these
Covenants are still binding, and the obligation of them remains inviolable,
notwithstanding of any iniquious Law made against them in the late unhappy
times.

Like as, it is offensive to us, and many others, that Ministers has been so
silent at the Encroachments already made upon the privileges of this Church,
in putting a stope in a great: Measure, to the purging out of the Episcopal
Clergy; by which Reformation is hindered, and negligent, erroneous,
insufficient and scandalous men are still kept in: As also their silence at the
adjournment of the General Assembly by proclamation, whereby that
Ecclesiastical Court is made like one of the civil Judicatories of the Nation:
These Encroachments and Usurpations (against which we, for our parts; cannot
but Witness and Protest) makes us afraid of the plague of Erastiansim (of which
we heartily wish we may be disappointed) the beginings whereof, and the very
appearance of a Supremacy over the Church of CHRIST, arrogate by King or
Council, or any whomsoever; Ministers especially, ought to withstand, and not
be hindered from asserting the privileges of His House, either for the
terror, pleasure or persuasion of any Mortal, high or low, great or small.

To conclude; That it may be manifest for what end we mention these things
(which is not fom pleasure to speak of them, or to make a noise about them, but
from a fervent desire to have them redressed and removed) and that all
concerned, may know how desireous we are of Union in the Lord, and what longing
we have for the benefi^ of the Gospel in purity and power; Again and again we
earnestly entreat and seriously beseeches that these our Complaints and
Grivances above, may be laid to heart, and that some effectual, way may be
fallen upon to remove and take them away, which we long for, that so our Union
may be more comfortable, and we expect the Blessing of the Lord thereupon.


