SInce the former Impression of this Book, meting with the Judgment and Opinion
of a great Statesman, in the Reign of King Henry VIII. and his Viceroy in
Ireland, Sir Anthony St. Leiger by Name (who used to say, That there were three
things would settle a State or Kingdom, 1st. Good God fathers and Godmothers
performing their Vows. 2dly, Good Householders overlooking their Families. 3dly,
Good Schoolmasters Educating of Youth. And this last the most useful, although
the most contemptible.) I am the more encouraged to a Second Impression of the
same, hoping it may somewhat contribute to the same good End beforementioned;
which is the hearty Prayers of the Author.

A New Years Gift: OR, ADVICE TO A GOD-SON.

Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it, Prove. 22.6.

Religio est omnium moralium Virtutum nobilissima.

The Second Edition,

By P. A. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Luke Meredith, at the Star in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1696,

IMPRIMATUR,

Liber cui Titulus [A New Years Gift; or Advice to a God son.]

Nov. 26. 1687. Guil. Needham.

TO THE Hopeful young Gentleman T. C. Esquire.
THE serious consideration of the dreadful danger to men's souls by reason of
vicious and sinful Customs and Habits contracted in youth, which being
confirmed by a long continuance in a debauched course of Life, renders their
Conversion and Reformation very difficult, if not next to impossible, as the
Prophet speaks, Jer. xiij. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil;
made me sensible, that the only way to prevent this great Mischief must be by
engaging Persons betimes in their young and tender Years, in Virtue and true
Goodness, by means of religious and prudent Education, Instruction and Advice:
And therefore I conceived it not to be besides my Duty (next to my own
Children) to endeavor to prevent this Evil and Danger falling upon my only
God-son now remaining alive, and capable of Advice, and that therein (I acting
within my own Province) it could not be imputed to me as a Crime. But, Sir, now
seeing this Discourse is likely to be made more public than was at first
intended, I could not well find out one more suitable, to whom to dedicate it,
than your self, who are a Gentleman of such great Hopes, as to be in time, one
of the Vertuosi of the Age you live in; who, I doubt not, will make it your
Study and Care, by your Life and Conversation, to refute that bold Assertion of
him who once said, O virtus, quaesivi te ut rem, sed tantum merum nomen es! For
certainly there is true Gold in the World, although there is a great deal of
counterfeit Metal like it. I shall say no more, least it may prove Offensive to
you, whose Care, I verily believe, will be to be rather Good than Great; who
will have a greater Desire to be useful in your Generation to serve your Prince
and Country, than to be talked of in the World. Thus heartily wishing to you
the Completion of all Happiness, which only consists in a religious and
virtuous Life here, and at Death to be made more Happy; translated hence into
heavenly Mansions, those Receptacles of Virtuous, Noble and Purified Souls, in
the highest Heavens, there to be taken up with the holy and excellent
Employments of the blessed Angels, for evermore: I am,

SIR, Your affectionate Friend and humble Servant, P. A.
December. 10. 1687.
A New Years Gift: OR, ADVICE TO A GOD-SON.
God son,
IN regard you have owned me your Godfather, I think therefore you do not
doubt but that I performed that Office for you in the Face of the Christian
Congregation. So that if that kind of Right and Interest I have in you, do it
not, yet at least, the Obligation of Christian Duty, puts me upon this present
Trouble of tendering to you my Christian Advice and Counsel; which being out of
my Love to you, I hope it will not be ungrateful and unpleasing; (for none but
ill Natures can be so unworthy, as to reject the Advices of an affectionate
Friend.) You are to know, God-son, That I was your Proxy in your place and
stead, to answer for you, (you being not able to answer for your self) That you
did renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked
World, the sinful Lusts of the Flesh: That you did believe all the Articles of
the Christian Faith; And that you would keep God's holy Will and Commandments,
and walk in the same all the Days of your Life, as you have acknowledged in
your Catechism, in which I was instrumental, in the solemn Dedication of you to
God and his Service, to be the Disciple of the ever blessed Jesus; to your
Entrance upon your holy Christian Profession, and the initiating you in his
holy Catholic Church, of which the present Church of England is a Part; in
which Church you being born, were baptized. Now, God son, although I question
not, but by the Christian Care of your Parents, you have been already
instructed in the First Principles of your holy Religion contained in our
Church-Catechism (who, doubtless are no less obliged to promote your
Christianity, than if you had had no Godfathers and Godmothers:) But
nevertheless it many times falls out, that our Parents are remiss and negligent
herein, therefore our Mother, the Church of England, has strictly imposed this
Duty of catechizing and instructing all young Persons her Children, in their
Christianity, upon all her Priests and Ministers. Therefore for your Welfare,
God-son, after my hearty Prayers to God for you, give me leave, with Freedom
and Earnestness, to exhort you to account this happy Privilege of your
Christianity, to be the greatest Blessing and Happiness that a Man or Woman
(born into the World) are capable of; for the Gospel, or glad Tidings of
Salvation by Jesus Christ, was the great Redemption and Happiness to a sinful,
degenerate and miserable World: Now you must know, God son, That God (having
created Man) made a Covenant and Agreement with him, to this purpose; That if
he continued in Obedience to God, That both that Knowledge of his Duty, and
that Strength of Soul and Mind he then enjoyed (in his Estate of Innocence and
Happiness) should be continued to him, and that he should never die, but be
happy for ever: But on the other side, if he sinned and disobeyed God, then
both he and all his Posterity should lose that Knowledge, and that perfect
Strength, and be subject to Death, both Temporal and Eternal. But our First
Parent Adam disobeyeth God, and so brings a Curse on himself and all his
Posterity, (they losing both their Knowledge of, and Strength to perform their
Duty; being both ignorant and weak, having a Backwardness to all Good, and an
Aptness to all Evil) and also Death Temporal and Eternal at last. All Mankind
being now in this miserable Condition of Bondage and Slavery, to Sin and Satan,
Death and Hell; God was pleased to make a Second Covenant of Grace and Mercy
with lost Man, and therein promises to send his Son (that Seed of the Woman
which should break the Serpents Head) who should be a King, Priest, and Prophet
to us: A King to rule us, a Priest to make an Atonement for us with his Father,
and to intercede for us; and a Prophet to teach and instruct us in all things
necessary to our Happiness, in the whole Will and Mind of God. Accordingly the
Blessed Jesus, in fullness of Time was sent into the World from Heaven, to take
our Nature upon him, to become Man, and so in our stead, as our Surety, then
paid the Price of our Redemption, by shedding his most precious Blood upon the
Cross, offering up his Soul, a Sacrifice to God, to satisfy his Father's
Justice, (of which great Sacrifice all the legal Sacrifices were Types, and as
such were acceptable with God, for he was the Lamb of God slain from the
Beginning of the World) and by this means to reconcile us to God, to procure to
us the sinful Offspring of sinful Adam (upon our true Repentance) a Pardon of
all our Sins: (For he purchased a general Pardon to all the Rebellious Sons of
Adam, upon their Submission and laying down their Arms, and ceasing their
Hostilities against Heaven, and becoming dutiful and obedient Subjects) and of
the Servants of Sin and Slaves of Satan (the greatest Slavery in the World) to
be made the Sons and Servants of God (whose Service is perfect Freedom) to be
in some Measure restored to their first State of Innocence and Happiness, to be
made virtuous and holy, conformed to the Image of their heavenly Father; to
enjoy his Friendship and Favor, and to be blessed by him here in this Life,
and at Death to be translated into the blessed Regions of Happiness above in
Heaven; there to behold, love, contemplate, praise and admire Him to all
Eternity, with all his holy Angels.

Now, consider seriously, God-son, Was not this great Love and good Will of
God, in this great Contrivance and Work of our Redemption? And in his sending
his beloved Son into the World for the effecting the same? And was it not also
great Love and condescending Goodness in the Son of God, the blessed Jesus, to
stoop from Heaven to Earth, to take upon him the Nature of sinful Man? To be
born of a Woman, to live here upon Earth a mean and despicable Life, to be
hated, reviled, persecuted (even while he went about designing and doing all
the Good he could, both to the Bodies and Souls of Men, and publishing the glad
Tidings of Salvation to all the World, and by his divine Doctrine rectifying
the great Errors, Mistakes and Delusions that the World lay under making a
clear and full Discovery of what was Truth, and being the great Exemplar of all
Virtue, Holiness, true Worth and Goodness to all the World,) Being,
notwithstanding, herein exposed to all the Malice and Rage of Men and Devils:
And at last to lay down his precious Life by a shameful, ignominious, painful
and cruel Death of Crucifixion: Hereby perfecting the Work of our Redemption;
That whosoever would accept of this Salvation, and would believe in him, repent
and be baptized, and so become his faithful Disciple, should be saved.

Now, God-son, you being happily born of Christian Parents, were according to
the holy Institution of this blessed Jesus our Lord and Master, and the
constant Practice of his Church, baptized, and thereby initiated in his Church,
and made a Member of the same (as I mentioned before) and so made not only
capable of, but really partaker of this great Redemption and Salvation. It very
much concerns you, now you are come to a competent Age of Understanding, to
consider how you stand obliged to God, and to be true and faithful to your
baptismal Vow and Covenant, which now you must renew in your own Person (except
you will renounce your Christianity) and think that you were obliged also to
them who were assistant and instrumental in this charitable Work of bringing
you to this holy Baptism, and devoting and dedicating you to God, and to be the
Disciple of the blessed Jesus Christ, you being thereby Partaker of all the
Privileges and Benefits of the Gospel. Now I beseech you, with all Cheerfulness
and Alacrity of Soul, resolve forthwith to ratify and confirm this Advantageous
Contract and Vow, made for you (by your Godfathers and Godmothers) in your
Minority and Nonage, and perform the same in your own Person, now you are of
Capacity, and abhor to profess, what you do not intend to practice.

In pursuance thereof be modest, and humble, and teachable, be very sollicitous
to know and understand fully what your Christianity means, and also what it
requires of you: And abhor to be of the Number of them (too many in the World)
who neglect that most wherein their chiefest and greatest Care should be, viz.
Their Religion; and by that means know little more of their Christianity but
the Name.

First therefore, God-son, have recourse, with humble Reverence of Heart and
Body, to God in Prayer, and with great Fervency beg the Guidance of his Grace
and Spirit, wherein your blessed Lord and Savior has furnished you with the
most excellent Form composed by himself, which should be a Pattern to all our
Prayers, and always to accompany them: But herein also your Mother the Church
has furnished you, as also other pious Men, especially that most excellent
Book, the whole Duty of Man, which, now I have mentioned to you, let me
recommend it to you as an Attendant to the sacred Scriptures, in which, in the
next place, I would advise you to be very Conversant, I mean the Scriptures,
with a spiritual Guide to direct you, and take you by the Hand, especially in
doubtful and difficult places, and hearkening to good Sermons, and the learning
and understanding the Principles of your Religion, contained in our Church
Catechism; in which you should request your Parents and Friends to assist and
help you.

And consider, God-son, Whereas in your Baptismal Vow you renounced The Devil
and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the
sinful Lusts of the Flesh, That is to say, all Acts of Sin and Disobedience to
the Divine Laws (for Sin is the Transgression of God's Law) as also all the
vain and evil Customs of the World, the Pride, Excess and Vanity of worldly and
wicked Men, together with the gratifying of your carnal and sensual Desires and
Appetites, in opposition to those Restrictions and Rules God has set us. And
whereas, in the next place, you promise to believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith, briefly summed up in the Apostles Creed, in which is
comprehended the Knowledge and Belief of all those Truths of Christianity,
necessary to be known by us, to be the Guide of our Lives, it being the
Foundation of all Christian Practice. It is very needful to have your Mind well
instructed therein: For without this Foundation be well laid, the
Superstructure thereupon can never stand, but will come to nothing; Ignorance
herein is the Mother of Error: He that understands amiss, concludes worse, and
Error is endless, as one speaks, and as Dr. Sibs long since well observed,
Whosoever is corrupt in Faith, is corrupt in Obedience in that Degree. Evil
Opinions hreed evil Life: For as Truth is from above, the Offspring of God, so
Error is from beneath from the great Deceiver, the Father of Lies the Devil.
Therefore nothing is so much worth as a Mind well instructed, says the Son of
Syrach, Eccles. 26.14.

And Mistakes in things of Religion are of most dreadful Danger to you,
wherefore it very much concerns you to be well instructed with good and sound
Principles: True Piety being the Consequent of a sound and orthodox Faith. And
whereas you promise to keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and therein to
persist to your Lives end: It is most necessary you should know them and their
true Sense and Meaning, that so you may avoid the Ill they forbid, and do the
Good they command you, which are briefly, yet fully contained in the Exposition
set down in your Catechism, which deserves your frequent and serious
Consideration.

And as soon as convenient Opportunity is offered have Recourse to Confirmation
by the Hands of the Bishop, there to renew solemnly your baptismal Vow and
Covenant, and receive the Benefit of the Prayers of the Congregation, and of
his Prayers and Blessing also. For as a worthy Divine observes, When Men have
solemnly addicted themselves to the Christian Religion, and made it their own
Act by a voluntary and public Choice, it will ordinarily have a great
Influence upon them in Modesty, Honor and Reputation as well as Conscience,
that they shall not easily go back from it and renounce it.

And if you have not a convenient Opportunity for Confirmation, take the
greater Care to fit your self the sooner for the holy Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of our Savior, and there renew solemnly you baptismal Vow and Covenant,
and as soon as you have so renewed your Covenant and Vow, either at
Confirmation or at receiving the Sacrament, I would advise you to enter it down
in Writing in your Bible, or some other Book of Devotions and Prayers, in which
you are often, if not daily conversant: In Manner following.

BE it remembered that I (...) did this (...) Day of (...) Anno Domini 16
solemnly renew my baptismal Vow and Covenant with God, and did then seriously
devote and resign up my self to his Service, from which, I am resolved, by his
Grace, never to depart, but to persist in the same, and be a faithful Disciple
of my dear Savior unto my Lives end; in Witness whereof (and that I may be
mindful of it, and not forget it) I have here set down the same, and subscribed
my Name.

And then subscribe your Name thereunto: And often afterward have recourse to
this Contract, Vow and Covenant you have made with God, and consider it
seriously, and often renew it at the holy Sacrament, as also at convenient
times read both the Church Office and Prayers at Baptism, and at Confirmation.

But here let me advise you to have a great Care that your religious Warmth and
early Seriousness, do not carry you beyond the plain and known Measures of your
Duty. Let your baptismal Vow, your Duty to God and your Neighbor, as set down
in the Catechism, be chiefly in your Mind, and suffer not your self (mark it
and remember) I say, suffer not your self to devise some new and particular
Rules to your self, which, in your Zeal, you will be apt to think necessary, and
then be ready to tie your self up by a solemn Vow to observe them. This
Forwardness in making Vows is ordinary in all beginners in Religion, and
especially in young People. And such Vows (which are no part of Duty, but
proceed usually from too much Heat, and too little Consideration: I have heard,
to become afterward great Snares to those who made them, robbing them of the
Comforts of sincere Endeavors to keep a good Conscience, by being brought
under an Obligation, which they had better have avoided, of doing such and such
particular Acts of Religion, and with such Circumstances as in themselves are
not necessary, and perhaps not convenient for them, when their own Condition of
Life is altered, nay, perhaps were not so when they made their Vow. This I the
rather caution you against, both for the Reason above mentioned, That I
conceive an early Piety is very apt to lead you this way; and because I have
heard some, whose Scruples have been so great upon the breaking of these Vows,
and coming short of that Strictness and height of Religion in those particular
Tasks which they had imposed upon themselves, as to be ready to fall into
Despair: Whereas had their Souls been free from such a Bondage, they would have
made great Progress in virtuous Living, and not have wanted the unspeakable
Comfort of a good Conscience. Wherefore I advise you heartily that in all these
Religious Warmths, you never bind up your self by any hasty Vows, but consult
your spiritual Guide, and take his Directions. For such Assistance is every
whit as necessary for the well governing our Fits of Heat, as it is for curing
our Coldness in the Duties of Religion. And do not think my Advice in these
Matters to be needless or superfluous: For Religion is the grand Concern of our
Lives, and therefore not to be trifled and played with, as (it is to be feared)
most do among us now adays in the World. I hope I need not use many Arguments
or Motives to persuade you to that which is the grand Concern of your Life, and
in which consists your greatest Interest and Advantage. I need not use many
Words to persuade you to be an honest Man, and to be as good as your Word, as
your solemn Vow and Oath made to God. I hope you will say with holy David,
Psalm. 101.4. I hate the sin of Unfaithfulness, there shall no such thing cleave
unto me; and when your faithfulness herein, is to be true to your own highest
and greatest Interest and Advantage. Further, consider seriously the Worth and
Excellency of the Rules and Precepts of the Christian Religion; which, in
short, you know, is, the loving God with all our Hearts and Minds, with all our
Souls, and with all our Strength. And in the next place, loving our Neighbors
as our selves, as you are taught in our Church Catechism. Now one would think
there should need no Argument to persuade you to be in Love with God, the most
excellent, amiable, soul-satisfying Object in the World, the greatest and most
resplendent Beauty you can ever have your Mind fixed upon in the whole
Universe; yea, The Beauty of all the Beauties and Excellencies in the World,
Wisdom 13.3. For the first Author of Beauty has created them: And as the
Prophet Zachariah speak Zach. 9.17. How great is his Goodness, and how great is
his Beauty? And as the Author of the Book of Wisdom, Chap. 11. Verse 23, 24,
26. sets forth the Goodness and Excellency of God. But thou (says he) have
Mercy upon all, and winkest at the Sins of Men, because they should amend: for
thou love all things that are, and abhorrest nothing which thou have made.
How could any thing have endured if it had not been thy Will, or been preserved
by thee? But thou sparest all, for they are thine, O Lord, thou lover of Souls.
Now if under the Law God appeared so good and Gracious, that he was styled the
Lover of Souls, how Resplendent and Illustrious must needs appear the divine
Goodness to us under the Gospel, when God spared not his own Son, but has
given him up for us all, Romans 8.32. Yea, so loved the World, that he sent his
only begotten Son into the World, that whosoever believes in him should not
Perish, but have eternal Life. How should we Christians love God with the
strongest and greatest Affections imaginable? And in an ecstacy of Joy loudly
proclaim him to be the Lover of Souls indeed; and cry out with holy David, O
love the Lord ye his Saints, etc. Psalm. 31.23.

In the next place, as to our Neighbor, our Religion teaches us to do unto all
Men, as we would they should do to us; (that is to say) to honor and reverence
our Parents, to be Humble toward all our Superiors, to be Loyal and Faithful
to our Prince and Sovereign, obedient to his Laws and Government; to submit our
selves to all our Governors, Teachers, spiritual Pastors and Masters: To be
Just and Honest in all our Dealings, friendly and peaceable toward all our
Neighbors; to be Charitable and ready to do all the Good we are able both to
the Bodies and Souls of those who stand in need of it: To be Sober, Temperate
and Chaste, and to follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness: And in respect to
the Duties both of the First and Second Table, to follow the Apostles
comprehensive Direction, Philip. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report; if there be
any Virtue, and if there be any Praise think on these things. So that this most
excellent Religion, must needs make its Votaries the best, the most lovely
Persons in all the Earth, even like unto their Lord and Master, the ever
blessed Jesus, who himself was the express Image of his Father, God blessed for
ever: For this is the great End of Religion (as a late Author discourses) viz.
The purifying and refining the Nature of Man, correcting the wild Exorbitances
of Passion and Lust, by which he is so estranged from God, and disabled to
arrive at the Life of Virtue and Goodness, it restores us to that primitive
State of Happiness that we lost in Adam.

Thus, in short, you have the true Representation of the Christian Religion,
than which nothing can be more excellent, as to its Laws and Rules of Life: And
although it is true, it is a Yoke and Restraint, yet (as our Lord and Master
testifies) his Yoke is easy, and his Burden light. His excellent Religion is
not a sour melancholy Thing, as is falsely represented by ignorant and wicked
Men: It is not an Enemy to your Mirth, Pleasure and Delight in this Life (as
one has well observed) you may Sing, Rejoice and be Merry, God denies you
nothing but Sin, which spoils your Joys and dasheth your Mirth, and sooner or
later must be sadly accounted for: As the Pious Mr. George Herbert used to say,
Religion does not banish Mirth, but only moderates and sets Bounds to it; it is
the only way to render our Delights pure and real, and satisfactory: For do you
imagine that any one can so heartily sing and rejoice as he that has God his
Friend, who lives under the Smiles of Heaven: Indeed it is the Voice of all
Men, who will show us any Good? Omnes tendunt ad gaudium, sed unde magnum and
stabile consequantur ignorant, says the Heathen Seneca. Every Man would arrive
at Joy and Contentment, but how to obtain that which is great, stable and
lasting, they know not. All Men seek Happiness and Satisfaction, and
Tranquillity of Mind in this Life: Now behold, here it is only to be had, in a
virtuous and christian Life; for if we search the whole Universe, where else
shall we find it? For we see by daily Experience that when Men have run through
all the Felicities this World can afford them, Riches, Honors, Pleasures; at
last, when they come to be Wise and Serious at their Deaths, (for Death being a
serious thing indeed, it makes them that have played the Fool all their Lives
to become then serious and wise:) Then they all (if they have their Senses)
loudly proclaim with Solomon, That all is Vanity and vexation of Spirit. And as
the wise Man discourses, Wisdom 5.7, 8, 9. They will say, We alas! wearied our
selves in the Way of Wickedness and Destruction. What has Pride profited us;
Or what good has Riches with our Vaunting brought us? All these things are
passed away like a Shadow, and as a Post that hastes by, etc. And they
repenting and groaning for Anguish of Spirit, shall say within themselves (of
the Righteous Man) This is he whom we had sometimes in Derision and a Proverb
of Reproach, we Fools accounted his Life Madness, and his End to be without
Honor: How is he numbered among the Children of God, and his Lot is among the
Saints? 3, 4, 5. Verses of the same Chapter. But certainly true Happiness, and
Satisfaction and Pleasure is to be had only in a good, virtuous and christian
Life, which leads us to, and fixes us upon that summum bonum, God: A good
Conscience being a continual Feast, that only a good Man, a good Christian
always carries about him: For as Solomon says truly, God's Ways are Ways of
Pleasantness, and all his Paths are Peace, Prove. 3.17. A good Christian is the
only Man that can with an humble and cheerful Confidence look up to God as his
almighty Protector and Defender, as his gracious Father, under the Light of
whose Countenance he does every day Rejoice: For as one well observes, Virtue
is the Tenure by which we hold of Heaven, without this we are but as Outlaws,
who cannot claim Protection. Thus as to the Provision for a Christian's Welfare
in this World. And as the Wicked at their latter End see (although too late)
their Folly, and then Lament and Bewail their Rebellions and Wickedness against
God, with great Horror and Consternation of Heart, and then not being able to
fly from themselves, lie down in Sorrow, forewarning others of their Follies.
So, on the other Hand, these faithful Disciples of their blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, when they come to die, if you should then ask them
whether ever they repented of their faithful serving God, in walking in that
seeming straight and narrow Way of Virtue and true Christianity? And they will
presently tell you, That he was the best Master in the World, and that his
Service was perfect Freedom; That there is no such Life of Pleasure, Joy and
Satisfaction, and true Tranquillity and Peace of Mind, as in an honest sincere
Christian Life. Ecclesiast. 2.10, 11. They will say with the Son of Syrach,
Look at the Generations of old, and see, did ever any trust in the Lord and was
confounded? Or did ever any abide in his Fear and was forsaken? Or whom did he
ever despise that called upon him?

For the Lord is full of Compassion and Merciful, long Suffering and very
pitiful, and forgiveth Sins, and saves in time of Affliction. You will hear
even the best of them bewailing much their own Unprofitableness, and that they
have done so good a Master so little Service; and you will find them rejoicing
in God, even when grim Death looks them full in the Face, and they returning
him a Smile of Disdain for his Frowns: And to speak the Truth, they are so full
of Joy they are not able to express it in Words, it being better felt than
expressed, and what they have all along met with in their holy Christian
Course. For what great Encouragements have they had daily also from their clear
and full Prospect of a glorious celestial Crown awaiting for them in the other
World? But this future, great and transcendent Felicity (that neither Eye has
seen, nor Ear has heard, nor ever entered into the Heart of Man to conceive)
how can they, or I, represent it to you? O how great is thy Goodness which thou
have laid up for them that fear thee, etc. Psalm. 31.19.

Now, God-son, you are entered into their Christian Race, and may become as
Happy as they, if you will but follow their Example, and walk in their Steps,
you may assuredly partake of their Satisfactions and Comforts in this Life, and
also of their Reward and Crown in the other World. Consider the seasonableness
of the time of your Youth, which is the most acceptable time with God, now you
may assure your self the golden Scepter is held forth: How pleasing must it
needs be to the Divine Majesty of Heaven, the supreme Lord the Creator, to have
the First Born of his Creatures, their Youth and Strength, their First virgin
Thoughts and Affections devoted and dedicated to him and his Service? O how
rejoicingly will he now receive you, yea embrace you in the Arms of his
tenderest Affections? And how may you now exspect the all-powerful Assistances
of his Grace, the strongest Gales of his Spirit to assist your Endeavors? Now,
what wise Man (think you) who having a long and difficult Voyage to take,
wherein he is like to meet with a strong Tide and Current against him, but will
be very ready to take the Advantage of Wind and Weather for his Help and
Furtherance in his Voyage? Now God has assured to you the Gift of his Spirit,
if you earnestly beg it of him, and make diligent use of it, both to encourage,
assist and comfort you in your Christian Race, that at last you may gain the
Celestial Crown.

How seasonable also will this Time of your Youth, Health, Strength and Vigor
be to your self, for the easy effecting and accomplishing this great Work? Now
before you have tasted the Pleasures of Sin, or however, before you have taken
too deep Draughts of that poisonous and pernicious Potion of Vice, and Sin
before you have contracted Evil Habits (those Customs in Sin, which are as a
Second Nature) and before you are immersed in the Cares and Troubles of this
Life, now to receive the Impression (on your tender and pliable Minds) of
Heaven, of Virtue and the Love of God.) O, have therefore a more especial Care
at this time, of those dangerous Rocks of Ease and Pleasure, and ill Example,
upon which so many are daily shipwrecked in their Youth and tender Years;
herein take the Advice lately given by a worthy Author to young Persons. The
chiefest Instances of Vice (says he) consist in the extravagant Affectation of
sensual Delights and Pleasures. The Judgment of Youth is raw, nor has its
Reason attained to any Consistency, is easily imposed upon by Shows and
Appearances of things, it sees but the Surface of them, the Inclinations of
Sense are strong and prevalent, and the Powers of Reason weak and imperfect,
are easily fired and captivated by any thing that proposes present
Gratification and satisfying its carnal Appetites. It therefore very much
concerns you, not to trust to your own Judgment, but take in the Advice of
wiser Heads than your own, and now to labor to mortify and subdue your Lusts
and carnal Appetites and Passions, and to get the Conquest over them betimes,
as the Son of Syrach advises thee, Ecclesiast. 18.30, 32. Go not after thy
Lusts, but refrain thy self from thine Appetites. Take not Pleasure in much
good Cheer, etc.

Now let it be your great care to break off such sinful Customs you have
contracted especially those of lying and swearing (too much abounding in young
Persons in our days.) Use not to make any manner of Lies, for the Custom
thereof is not good, as the Son of Syrach advises thee, Ecclesiast. 7.13. And
accustom not thy Mouth to swearing, neither use thy self to the naming of the
Holy one: As he further advises; For a Man (says he) that uses much swearing
shall be filled with Iniquity, and the Plague shall never depart from his
House, etc. Ecclesiast. 23.9, 11. I pray you consider it well, and abominate
and detest this horrible Sin of swearing and cursing, this blasphemous Contempt
of the divine Majesty of Heaven, which in young Persons may be well looked upon
as the Seed of all Vice and Wickedness in them, to end in that Plague and Curse
before mentioned.

And in the next place engage and fix your Affections strongly upon God and
things above; now a quarter part of the Pains and Labor will do the Business,
which you must be forced else to use afterward, if you let pass this best time;
now strike while the Iron is hot.

In respect of your Mortality. How seasonable is this time to do this great and
necessary Business of Life? Consider the Frailty and incertainty of your Life,
which may more especially be compared in Youth to a Bubble, a Vapor, a Flower,
quickly nipt in the Bud, when least expected by your self: Death is your great
Enemy, who awaits for your Life every day, be therefore beforehand with him,
and prepared against his Assaults, which only can be by making use of the
present time (which is only yours) to make your Peace with God, and to secure
to your self eternal Happiness, that you may be made Holy and fit for Heaven;
that when Death comes it may not be able to hurt you, but advantage you, in
translating you from this sinful and troublesome World into the Mansions of
eternal Pleasures and Delights above. This true Wisdom of being Religious and
Virtuous, will, in short, make you live comfortably and die bravely.

God-son, you remember that saying in your Grammar, Multum scire est vita
Jucundissima, Wisdom and Knowledge is the sweetest Life of all. And the Son of
Syrach, Ecclesiast. 40.20. will tell you, Wine and Music rejoice the Heart,
but the Love of Wisdom is above them both.

Improve your Mind therein, now take Pains to acquire it: As one has well
observed, All Men desire Knowledge, but they are unwilling to be at the Pains
to get it. The wise Heathen Seneca will tell you, The greater any Man's
Knowledge is the greater and more perfect is his Mind. It Is Knowledge makes us
Men and not Years; and he goes on and extolleth the Knowledge and Contemplation
of God, above all other Knowledge. The Knowledge of God (says he) is the most
excellent Knowledge: He is the most excellent Object; and therefore the
Knowledge of him must needs be so. Nothing so much delights and perfects the
Minds of Men as the Knowledge of God; that is most Pleasant, and ministers
greatest Satisfaction to them; that quiets and lays to Rest the Motions, and
satisfies the Appetites of them, it also perfects and compleats them.

I need not recommend to you the knowledge of God and Religion, for he has
(you see) prevented me, done it to my hands: And not only get your Mind well
instructed in your Christian Religion, but consider also that our Happiness
lies not in bonorum cognitione, but fruitione, not in knowing but in living
answerable to our Knowledge: As a great and learned Man says, Veritatem
Philosophia quaerit, Theologia invenit, Religio possidet: Religion Consists in
Practice. If ye know these things happy are you if you do them as the holy
Scripture teaches us. If you love me (says our blessed Lord and Master) keep
my Commandments. Let me exhort you to live answerable to your holy Christian
Religion in Communion with the Church of England (she being a sound part of the
Catholic Church of Christ) and beware of such as would seduce you from her
Communion, for herein lies your Safety, to obey and be guided by them that have
the Oversight of you, and are over you in the Lord, Heb. 13.17. and to esteem
them highly for their Works sake, as the Apostle exhorts us 1 These. 5.13. And
tell them that shall at any time attempt to pervert you, That by an hearty
Practice of the Religion as you have been taught in the Church of England; you
find you have attained to a Temper so like that of good Men, and even of our
Lord Jesus himself, as it is set down in Scripture; you find such a
suitableness in it, with all the Wants and Desires of your Soul, such Helps
against your Infirmities, such Comfort from discharge of your Duty, such a Fear
of doing any Ill either to Friend or Stranger, such an hearty Inclination to do
Good to all: As that if they should teach you any other ways they must needs
make you a worse Man: Both more uneasy to your self, and more troublesome, and
perhaps, dangerous to others. And that therefore you resolve, by God's Grace,
to continue in the said Holy Church, which, as far as you can discern, by a
Trial of your own (and I am sure Practice will convince you of this) makes Men
as Happy in themselves as useful to others, as they can be in this World. And
that any other Communion which requires Men to practice otherwise must, as far
as you understand, make them worse. And therefore you cannot but think that you
have more reason to hearken to the Advice of, and be guided by your Mother the
Church of England, and her Pastors she has appointed and set over you, than by
any Strangers whatsoever. And in this humble Submission to the Church (wherein
you were born and baptized, and from whom you received your Christianity) and
in your Fidelity to her (if you should happen by this means to be led into any
Error, or Mistake, as to Matters of Dispute) it will be doubtless a very
venial, or pardonable Crime in you, it being in an humble Submission to the
best Guide you have next the Scriptures. An Error, or Mistake arising from
Humility of Heart, and Diffidence in your self, is a far less Crime than what
arises from Pride and self-Confidence in Opposition to your spiritual
Governors and Guides, which God has placed, and given them Authority over
you; which our Sectaries have reason seriously to consider of in our days.

God-son, Since the penning of the precedent Discourse, meeting with these
following Verses of a late Author, something pertinent to my Discourse, I
thought fit to add them to it, considering that with Youth the same Matter
being clothed in Verse may be more acceptable than in Prose.

Do not mispend thy golden Youth, and bring
The Dross of thy old Age to serve thy King.
Do not neglect the Morning of thy Days,
And think the Evening fit thy God to praise.
God early must be sought, the longer we
Persist in Sin, the stronger Sin will be:
From Vice to Virtue turn, from bad to good;
The deeper still he sinks who stands in Mud.
A Nail, the farther it is driven in,
The harder is drawn out, and so is Sin.
None can foretell, how long the fatal glass
Shall run, or else how soon the Sand will pass.
Delay no time; that Man will shrink and fear,
Who lays the Burden on old Age to bear.
Because the foolish Virgins came too late,
They Heaven lost, for Christ had shut the Gate.
Should we be old, are we then sure to store,
Our Souls with Grace, which we refused before.
Through Mire and Dirt, who travels all the Day,
Will hardly go by Night a cleaner way.
The Tenant which neglects the appointed Day,
Forfeits his Lease, and fret his Landlord may.
Unto which let me add what a worthy Divine speaks, as very remarkable. It is
observable (says he) that for the most part of good Men and Women, they are
such as had the Foundations of Piety laid in their Youth, and very few are
found who were effectually reclaimed afterward.

Doubtless, God-son, there is nothing makes a Man honest, upright, ingenious,
useful and truly recommends himself to the World and Society of Mankind as
Religion, and above all Religions the Christian; which truly makes us like to
God.

St. Chrysostom (as a late Author presents him) does confirm what I have said
herein. In one of his Homilies or Sermons, he speaks thus. None labors so much
that we should be approved Great and Ingenious, as God who made us, and
therefore he does us good oftentimes even against our Wills, and gives us many
good things which we know not of, etc.

In the next place it will not be improper to give you a short Description of
Ingenuity of Mind, to let you know what it is, as a worthy Person has
described it, viz.

We cannot (says he) suppose the divine Wisdom so much short of humane, as not
in his Intention to assign it to purposes worthy of it, these must relate to
God, our selves, or our Neighbors.

In Respect of God, it renders us more capable of Contemplating his
Perfections, discovering the Equity of his Laws, and our Obligation to
Obedience: In regard of our selves, it makes us apprehend our own Interest in
that Obedience, Makes us tractable and perswasible, contrary to that brutish
Stubbornness of the Horse and Mule, which the Psalmist reproacheth wicked Men
with; besides it accommodates us in all Concerns of humane Life, forms it self
into all those useful Contrivances which may make our own Being here more
Comfortable, especially it renders a Man Company to himself, and in the
greatest Dearth of Society entertains him with his own Thoughts.

Lastly, As to our Neighbors, it renders us useful and assistant; all these
Discoveries and Experiments, those Arts and Sciences, which are now the common
Treasure of the World, took their first Rice from the Ingenuity of particular
Persons, etc. Now all these are Employments commensurable to the Faculty from
whence they flow, and that answer its Excellency and Value, and he that so
bestows his Talent gives a good Account of his Trust.

This very Description of Ingenuity is enough (one would think) to make us all
to fall in Love with it. To conclude all in the Words of that excellent and
wise Heathen Seneca: Wealth, Honor and Favor may come upon a Man by chance;
nay may be cast upon him without so much us looking after; but Virtue is the
Work of Industry and Labor; and certainly it is worth the labor to purchase
that good which brings all others along with it.

The most miserable of all Mortals are they that deliver themselves up to their
Palates, or to their Lusts.

I could out of my Christian Affection to you (God-son) have said a great deal
more upon this Subject, but I am unwilling to cloy your tender Mind. Read now
and then a little of this Discourse as you have convenient Time, and consider
seriously of it: What I have herein done, is out of Sense of my Duty, and that
I might not be your Godfather for nothing, but that you might be somewhat
benefitted and profitted by the same. And that this and all other Helps in this
kind, in tendency to promote your Welfare both in Soul and Body, may prove
successful, shall be the hearty Prayers of your Christian Friend.

Let us heartily pray, as our Church directs in the Collect for the 6th Sunday
after the Epiphany.

O God, whose blessed Son was manifested, that he might destroy the Works of
the Devil, and make us the Sons of God, and Heirs of eternal Life; Grant us, we
beseech thee, that having this Hope, we may purify our selves even as he is
Pure; that when he shall appear again with Power and great Glory, we may be
made like unto him in his eternal and glorious Kingdom, where with thee, O
Father, and thee, O holy Ghost, he lives and reigns ever one God World
without end. Amen.

POSTSCRIPT.
God-son,
I Hope you will give me leave further to put you in mind (now and then by
Letter, so long as you and I live in this World) of your Christian Duty, and
your solemn Engagement thereunto, and to encourage you in your Christian Race.
I adjudging it to be no more than my Duty so to do. And I humbly conceive, were
Godfathers and Godmothers but careful to perform their Duty toward their
God-Children, there would be no reason for the quarrelling, and finding fault
with the Institutions of the Church injoining them; but the great Wisdom and
Piety, of the Church would eminently appear to them herein. And, I pray God,
that all who have made it their Business to cry out against it, would seriously
consider what harm they may have done, and repent of it: And that those who
honor the Institution, would be careful to do all the good which the relation
of a Godfather requires; and I doubt not but a Blessing would go along with
them, for the increase of Truth, Piety, and the adorning of the Gospel of God
our Savior in all things.

November. 20. 1687.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Luke Meredith, at the Star in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
THE Countess of Morton 's daily Exercise: Or, a Book of Prayers and Rules how
to spend the time in the Service and Pleasure of Almighty God.

A Book for Beginners: Or, a help to Young Communicants, that they may be
fitted for the Holy Communion, and receive it with Profit.

A Private Prayer for the use of those who want the Opportunity of Receiving
the Holy Communion; Or are any ways disabled from going to it, at the usual
times of its public Administration. Price 1 d.

A Copy of a Letter written to a Gentlewoman newly Seduced to the Church of
Rome. By the Reverend J. T. D. D. late Bishop of Down and Connor. Price
stitched 2 d.

Happiness at Hand: Or a Plain and Practical Discourse of the Joy of Just Men's
Souls in the state of Separation from the Body. For the Instruction of weak
Christians, and for the Comfort of the Afflicted. By J. B. Rector of
Finchamstead, in the County of Berks. Price bound 1 s.

Short Directions how to obtain Peace and Tranquillity of Mind. Price 2 d.

Rest for the Heavy-Laden. Promised by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to
all sincere Believers, practically discoursed upon. By Clement Ellis, Rector of
Kirby in Nottinghamshire.

THE END.

