An Account of the Affairs in Ireland, In reference to the late CHANGE in
England: WITH A DECLARATION OF Several Officers of the Army in Ireland, on
behalf of themselves, and those under their Commands; holding forth their
steadfast Resolution to adhere to the Parliament, in Defense of its Privileges,
and the just Rights and Liberties of the People of these Nations, as MEN and
CHRISTIANS.
SIR,
THE diligence of Sir Hardress Waller, and Theophilus Jones has been admirable
here, for the Parliamentary interest: for by their great wisdom, and
indefatigable industry, it has been here settled, as follows.

On the 13. of December. 1659. about six at night, a party of Horse and Foot
approached the City of Dublin; some of which Foot drawing toward a small
Passport on the backside of the Castle, surprised the Sentinels, and entered
the same. Hereupon, three Muskets being fired from the Tower, caused the
remnant of the whole Party to enter; which were disposed of, some to the
Castle-gate, and some to the Custom House. Then they surprised Col. John
Jones, and two other Commissioners, who were dismissed, upon their promise to
act for the Parliament. And all this brought to pass with so much care and
discretion, that no bloodshed either accompanied or ensued the same.

Most of the chief Cities and Towns here declare for the Parliament; as,
Galloway, Limerick, Youghal, Kilkenny, Clonmel, Bandon, Drogheda. etc.

Affairs here being reduced to this Chanel, the enclosed Declaration was
published for satisfaction of the people.

WHereas by Divine permission (either for the punishment of the high
provocations of these sinful backsliding Nations, or for the discovery and
prevention of the Disturbers of the peace of this our Israel, God thereby
making way to settle his People upon Foundations of Holiness, Righteousness and
Peace) a new interruption has been put upon the Parliament, by some Officers
of the Army in England, notwithstanding their solemn Engagements to the
contrary, to the amazement of the people of these three Nations, the hazard of
public peace, the discouraging and sadning the hearts of the Godly and
well-affected, the obstructing of Reformation, the giving advantage to foreign
and domestic Enemies, and the exposing the Lives, Estates and Liberties of
all, to Blood, Rapine and Slavery: We, upon a sad sense of present threatening
calamities, having sought the Lord in trembling and much fear, do find it our
duty to declare; and we do, through the grace and strength of God (we trust)
conscientiously resolve, I. That through the Lords assistance, We will, in all
simplicity of heart remain firm in our Obedience to the Trust reposed in us by
the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, so
sinfully interrupted heretofore, so solemnly of late restored again, by our
Brethren of the Army in England; and to whom we have, as it were but yesterday,
by his Excellency Lieutenant General Ludlow, our Commander in chief, professed
our obedience by Promises, Subscriptions, and other sober Acknowledgements;
which (as we own there is a GOD in Heaven) we take our selves deeply obliged to
pursue. II. That we shall not suffer our selves to be any manner of way divided
one from another, or from any of our Brethren of the Army, that shall continue
their faithfulness to the Trust reposed in them by the Parliament; or from any
that shall return to yield obedience thereunto; for which, in much love and
tenderness toward them, we shall use our utmost endeavors. III. That we shall
by all good means, labor the settling and maintaining of a godly, learned and
faithful Ministry in these three Nations; with due encouragement to the
Universities and Schools of good Literature; that they may be Nurseries of
Piety, Learning and Godliness. IV. That we will, as God will enable us, use our
utmost Endeavors to detect and suppress all Enemies at home and abroad, that
shall attempt to disturb the peace of this, or of the other Nations, either by
introducing and setting up the Interest of any single person whatsoever; or,
through turbulency of spirit, shall foment any confusions to the endangering
the peace of this Commonwealth. V. That it is not our intent to impose upon any
tender Consciences, being otherwise found in the Fundamentals of Religion.


And lastly, We do declare, That we shall, to our utmost, protect all such,
who do at present adhere unto us; and shall also endeavor that due
encouragement may be given to such, whether Officers or Soldiers, formerly of
the Army, who either have, or shall join with us in this Undertaking.

Dated at Dublin- Castle, the 14 of December, 1659.

Har. Waller, W. More, John Bridges, Edw. Warren, Maurice Fenton, Abel Warren,
John Warren, Tho. Dancer, John Jeoner W. Warden, Theo. Sandford, John Cole,
Theo. Hen. Whalley, Nic. Kempston, Dan. Lisle, Edin. Temple, James Hand, Jo.
Thompson, Tho. Hopkins, Rich. Nun, Rob. Cook.

Ordered by the Council of Officers, met at Dublin Castle the day above
written, that the foregoing Declaration be forthwith printed and published.

Dublin, 14 of December, 1659. Signed in the Name and upon the desire of the
said Council of Officers, Har. Waller.


Printed at Dublin by special Order: and Reprinted at London, for Nath. Brook,
at the Angel in Cornhil. 1659.


