AN ACCOUNT OF SOME Remarkable Eclipses, AND The EFFECTS observed to ensue
thereupon.
Being a Translation from the Latin out of Alstedius's Thesaurus Chronologiae,
for the Consideration of the English Reader at this GREAT ECLIPSE of the SUN,
on the 13th. of September, 1699.
ECLIPSES are the Chiefest Treasure of Astronomy and Chronology, being as it
were the main Bases and infallible Characters of Time: The Principal whereof
are as follows.

Anno Mundi.
A. M. 3180. The first Eclipse of the Sun, which Authors have taken notice of,
was about the Time that Romulus was conceived; and then the Kingdom of Israel
began to decline. A. M. 3230. In the 28th. Year of Nabonassar there was an
Eclipse of the Moon, and in the Year of the World, 3235, there was another of
the Sun. About this Time the Ten Tribes of Israel were carried away into
perpetual Captivity, viz. in the Year of the World, 3228. and Romulus died,
3235: At which Time, Sennacherib, King of Assyria, the Angel of the Lord having
slain in one Night 185000 of his Soldiers, raised the Siege of Jerusalem, and
fled to Nineveh; where, a little after, as he was worshipping in the House of
Nisroch his God, Adrammelech and Sharezer, his Sons, smote him with the Sword,
Isa. 37.36, 37, 38. A. M. 3329. In the 5th. Year of Nabopalassar was an Eclipse
of the Moon; and the Year of the World, 3343, another of the Sun. About this
Time the State of the Kingdom of Judah was grown very Corrupt; for which,
various Troubles and Calamities befell them: For in the Year of the World,
3350, began the Captivity of Babylon, which lasted 70 Years; and in the Year
3360, Jerusalem and the Temple were destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, 2 Chronicles. 36.
A. M. 3427. In the 7th. Year of Cambyses, King of Persia, was an Eclipse of the
Moon: About which Time the Jews, whom Cyrus had released from the Babylonish
Captivity, were hindered from building the City and Temple, Ezra 1. and 4.
Chap. A. M. 3459. In the 31st. Year of Darius Hystaspes, King of Persia, was an
Eclipse of the Moon: About which Time Miltiades, General of the Athenian
Forces, gave Darius a prodigious Overthrow near Marathon. For Justin says the
Persian Army consisted of 600000, and Miltiades had but 10000 Athenians, and
1000 Auxiliaries of the Plataeans. Justin, Lib. 2. A. M. 3469. An Eclipse of
the Sun happened when Xerxes, King of Persia, made those great Preparations
against the Spartans, who was discomfited by them near the Straits of
Thermopylae and Salamis. Justin, Ibid. A. M. 3470. There was seen an Eclipse of
the Sun before the Fight at Plataeae, where Mardonius, General of Xerxes
Forces, received another Defeat. Justin, Ibid. A. M. 3519. This Year there was
so great an Eclipse of the Sun, that the Stars were seen at Noon Day: After
which followed the Peloponnesian or Archidamian War, between the Lacedaemonians
and Athenians. A. M. 3526. In the 8th. Year of the Peloponnesian War, was seen
an Eclipse of the Sun. About this Time ceased the Persecution of the Jews,
Darius Nothus usurping the Empire of Persia. A. M. 3546. About the End of the
Peloponnesian War, there was an Eclipse of the Sun: And the City of Athens was
taken by Lysander, the Lacedaemonian General. A. M. 3619. There was an Eclipse
of the Moon: And Darius Codomannus, the last King of Persia, was overcome near
Arbela by Alexander the Great, who translated the Monarchy from the Persians to
the Greeks. A. M. 3775. There was a great Eclipse of the Sun: and the Moon, in
the D^y-time, the Sky being clear, was darkened, while the Games, instituted in
Honor of Apollo, or the Sun, were celebrated. A. M. 3776. This Year was seen
an Eclipse of the Moon: And the Year following that Beast Antiochus Epiphanes
began to tyrannize. He was the 8th. King of Syria, a most Cruel and Bloody
Tyrant: He took Jerusalem, plundered the City, robbed the Temple, set up Idols
therein, and by sundry cruel Torments compelled the Jews to transgress the Law
of God, and to commit Idolatry. 2 Maccab. A. M. 3782. A great Eclipse of the
Moon was seen at this Time: And Perseus, King of Macedonia, was conquered by
Aemilius the Roman Consul. Here ended the Kingdom of the Macedenians, being
translated from them to the Romans. A. M. The Maccabees began now to appear. A.
M. 3905. About the Time that Julius Caesar was slain, there happened an Eclipse
of the Moon.
Anno Christi.
A. C. 35. At the Time of the Passion of Christ upon the Cross, the Sun and
Moon were totally Eclipsed, Mat. 27. Mar. 15. But this was plainly
supernatural: For the Eclipses of the Sun ordinarily happen in the New. Moon,
but this happened in the Full: Which is evident from hence, because the Jews
kept the Passover, by God's own Appointment, in the Full Moon. A. C. 45. In the
1st. Year of Augustus Caesar there was an Eclipse of the Sun. Herod Agrippa was
smitten by the Angel of the Lord, Acts 12.23. There was also a great Famine in
Syria. A. C. 59. An Eclipse of the Sun preceded the First Persecution under
Nero, which began in the Year 65. A. C. 317. There was an Eclipse of the Sun
this Year, when Arius began to publish his Opinions. A. C. 348. There was a
very great Eclipse of the Sun, when the Arians prevailed. A. C. 360. The Sun
was Eclipsed from Morning until Noon. A. C. 393. An Eclipse of the Sun was
seen, and then the Roman Empire was divided under Honorius and Arcadius. A. C.
404. Another Eclipse of the Sun: And in the Year 410, Alaricus, King of the
Goths, took and sacked the City of Rome. A. C. 527. This Year was another
Eclipse of the Sun: And the Goths made great Spoil and Devastation over the
Roman Empire. A. C. 592. The Sun was Eclipsed: And in the Year 606, Phocas, who
murdered the Emperor Mauritius, and his Wife and Children, established the
Pope's Supremacy. And in the Year 622 the Impostor Mahomet appeared. A. C. 733.
There was an Eclipse of the Sun: And then began the Controversy about
Image Worship. The Eastern Christians opposed, and the Western approved it;
though Damascen in the East wrote in behalf of Images. A. C. 796. The Sun was
Eclipsed for 17 Days together; and the Darkness was so great, that the Ships
could not sail. Bellarmine, in his Chronology, places this wonderful Prodigy at
the Year 797. A. C. 803. The Moon was thrice Eclipsed, and the Sun once. A. C.
806. There was an Eclipse of the Sun. About this Time, there was a great Change
under the Emperor Charles the Great; the Empire being then divided into the
Eastern and Western, and the Christian Religion largely propagated. A. C. 807.
There were 3 Eclipses; one of the Sun, and two of the Moon. About this Time,
there was a great Change under the Emperor Charles the Great; the Empire being
then divided into the Eastern and Western, and the Christian Religion largely
propagated. A. C. 809. The Moon was Eclipsed. About this Time, there was a
great Change under the Emperor Charles the Great; the Empire being then divided
into the Eastern and Western, and the Christian Religion largely propagated. A.
C. 810. There were 3 Eclipses; one of the Sun, and two of the Moon. About this
Time, there was a great Change under the Emperor Charles the Great; the Empire
being then divided into the Eastern and Western, and the Christian Religion
largely propagated. A. C. 812. This Year an Eclipse of the Sun preceded the
Death of Charles the Great. This was a prodigious Eclipse; for, as Eginhard
writes in the Life of Charles the Great, a Black Spot appeared in the Sun for
seven Days. A. C. This Prodigy, as Alstedius conjectures, undoubtedly portended
the Eclipse of the Gospel under the Popes of Rome; who, being enriched by
Charles the Great, and his Father Pipin, began to aspire to Secular Power and
Jurisdiction. A. C. Some place this Eclipse at the Year 814; but then they are
to be understood according to the more exact Account of Time, which differs two
Years from the Vulgar Computation. A. C. 831. There were 3 Eclipses; one of the
Sun, and two of the Moon. About this Time Ludovicus Pius, King of France, was
taken by his Sons, and cast into Prison; and the Ecclesiastics took too much
upon them in State Affairs. A. C. 840. There was a very great Eclipse of the
Sun, so that the Stars could no more be seen, than in the darkest Night. The
same happened again in the Year 899. A. C. 1290. An Eclipse of the Sun preceded
the setting up of the Ottoman Empire. A. C. 1387. Upon the Nones, or 5th. of
November, there was such an Eclipse of the Sun, as the like was hardly seen. A.
C. 1415. On the 7th. of the 4th. Month, in the Morning, being the 6th. Day of
the Week, there was such a dreadful Eclipse of the Sun, that the Birds of the
Air fell to the Ground. A. C. This Year, upon the 6th. of the 5th. Month, John
Huss, that Faithful Martyr of Christ, was burnt by the perfidious Council of
Constance. A. C. 1544. There were four Eclipses; one of the Sun, and three of
the Moon. About this Time began the Smalcaldian War, and various Stirs and
Agitations about Religion.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Geo. Conyers, at the Golden Ring in Little Britain. 1699.


