AN ACCOUNT Of the Actions of the Confederate and French Armies.
With a List of the German Forces arrived to the Assistance of the Duke of
Savoy.
In a Letter from a Gentleman in the Army to his Friend in London.
Dated August the 13 th. New Style.
20. Aug. 1691 SIR,
SInce the taking of Beaumont, by a Detachment of our Army, the Duke of
Luxemburg, has employed all his skill to Repossess himself of that place, by
reason of its Advantageous Situation, but hitherto he has been frustrated in
all his Designs. Between the 9th and 10th he broke up, with his Camp, in hopes
to surprise the Count van der Lip, who had put a strong Garrison into that
place: But his Majesty having timely Notice of his Design; gave immediately
Orders to our Army to March, which we did accordingly the 10th in the
Afternoon, and about 5 a Clock at Night, we came within Sight of the Enemy, we
Marched directly toward him; And about Night our whole Army was ranged in
order of Battle, within a Cannon Shot of the French. They had posted themselves
upon the Hills of Faubrechies, and we had Beaumont in the midst of our Line.
The whole Night was spent in laying Bridges over a Water and Morass that was
between us and the Enemy, some of our Cannons were Planted, and we intended to
pass the Bridges by break of Day, and to Attack the Enemy, but his Majesty
being advanced within a Musket Shot of the Enemy, and taken a full view of the
Ground, it was found that there was not Room enough to Range four Regiments in
order of Battle; There being nothing but Defilees on all sides, and that
Consequently it was impossible to Attack the Enemy, without hazarding our whole
Camp. We remained nevertheless in order of Battle, to try if the Enemy would
give himself the Trouble to come half way; But they keeping themselves very
close according to their usual manner, we returned in the sight of the Enemy.
It was expected they would fall into our Rear: Having so fair an opportunity
for it; But not a Man of theirs stirred, and we arrived safely into our old
Camp at Court. Since this time orders have been sent to the Bailiffs and Majors
to have eigtheen thousand Pioneers ready to March, within three days time, and
this is without doubt to execute some considerable Enterprise. We have indeed
not been able as yet to provoke our Enemy to a Pitch-Battel, nor have we taken
any great Fortresses; But if understanding Men will soberly consider that his
Majesty has forced the French, to entertain for so Considerable a time, Two
vast Armies within their own Territories, that so considerable a part of the
French Kings Dominions, that enabled his Forces to make such great Excursions
into the remaining Spanish Provinces, are now destroyed and laid wast, And that
in the mean time, there is time given to the Subjects of his Catholic Majesty
quietly to bring in their Harvest, and consequently to fill the Magazins with
Provisions for the next Campaign, I say they that consider all this, will
certainly agree that the King has done very much, and more than reasonably
could be expected, although it should not come to any considerable Action this
year, which as yet we have great reason to hope, for the last News we had out
of Savoy and Piedmont entertain us in our hopes of great Success on that side.

Montmelian makes a vigorous defense, though it has been formally Besieged, and
the Trenches opened eight days ago. Catinat with the main Body retreats toward
Pignerol, and Prince Eugene of Savoy is always at his heels. Upon their Retreat
to Piobes, Prince Eugene fell into his Rear with 500 Horse, and cut entirely
off three Squadrons of Horse, and a Troop of Carbines of the Enemy, but the
Enemy, being reinforced, the Prince did retreat, and had certainly lost his
life, in case a German had not killed a French Dragoon that was just going to
shoot the Prince. In the mean time, the French carry all their provisions out
of that Country into Dauphine, which is a certain sign that they have but
little hopes to maintain themselves in Savoy. The three German Generals
Caraffa, Palfi, and the Prince of Commercy, are alrerdy arrived at Turin, and
his Electoral Highness of Bavaria is expected there himself within few days, he
having taken the Post at Munichen, August the 10th. New-stile, Besides the
German Succors has all past through the Duchy of Milain from whence we have
received this following List, A List of the German Forces that Marched through
the Milaneze to the Assistance of the Duke of Savoy, from June the 29th. to
July the 30th.
OF the Regiment of Foot of Wirtemburg 180 Of French Protestants 324 Lorrain
700 Coberg 450 Brandenburg 400 Staden 900 Old-Wirtemberg 2200 Saxen-Mersburg
1500 Wirtemberg Dragoons Cuirassiers 110 Horse to recruit the Regiments of
Bavaria, the Prince of Savoy's Montecuculi's and Taff's 450 The Dragoons of
Arco 1200 Baraith Dragoons 1000 Palsi Cuirassiers 1000 Caraffa Cuirassiers 1200
Steinau 1200 French Protestants, with the Equipage of Caraffa 280 Commercy
Horse 1000 In all 14094.

From the Rhine we hear that the Elector of Saxony having left a considerable
Body on this side the Rhine, has repast that River, and is going to Besiege
Landaw.

LONDON: Printed for S. Smith in Fleet Street. 1691.


