THE COPPIE Of A LETTER Written to the DVKE of BVCKINGHAM Concerning the match
with Spain:

Discovering what Dangers would happen to this State by the Kings marrying with
one of a contrary Religion showed by diverse Presidents.

Printed at London for George Tomlinson. 1642.

The Copy of a Letter written to the Duke of Buckingham, concerning the match
with Spain.
THough to advise may seem presumptuous, what is well intended I am more then
confident will not be either offensive to your Lordship, or prejudicial to me;
the rather what is now offered is, not for your good only, but for the
general also; the honor whereof as in some sort you may appropria^e, so you
cannot but participate and communicate in the benefit.

The Parable in the Gospel tells us of a great King that married his Son and
bid many thereto, yea upon the excuses of some and refusal of others, all of
what sort soever and condition as well out of the highways as high places,
were called and invited. As every true Christian has an interest in the
Marriage of the Kings Son of Heaven; so every good Subject as well as every
great subject has an interrest in the marriage and welfare of the Kings Son
here on Earth, which occasions so many to wish, that it may bring to him glory
in her, good will and peace to him on earth, which is much doubted cannot be
from Spain, since the motion of this match makes a gener^^ fear that it can
neither be safe for the Kings person not good for this Church and
Commonwealth, because that thereby may be an inlet to the Romish Locusts, who
like a Canker-worme may in an instant smite our Gourd under whose shadow we
sit safe; and then what may we all fear but the heat of persecution, or
dissension to beat upon the head of Jonah the best affected of Gods people.

Who can but lament and wish with Jonah to dye, rather than to see and endure
that day; for what evil will they not attempt against our goodly Cedar tree,
that the Vine which their left hand has planted may grow up? and they be
sheltred under her Branches. But herein it is hoped that God will enable this
State sooner to make prevention of their mischief than trial of their
affections, for as there is no person that wounded them more deeply, so there
is no person whom they hate more deadly. And if they murdered the last Lord,
Hen. of France because they but suspected him to favor the Protestants how do
they burn in malice against him who has so professed himself, and blazed to
^i^ glory and their shame? And it is as unsafe for men as displeasing to God,
to rely upon them.

Henry of Bullen King of Navar father of Henry the 4. drawn by an imaginary
Crown of Sardinia and the Provinces of the Spaniard, left the Protestants both
in profession and person, and became a persecutor of those whose protector he
was; but whiles he cast his hopes upon Spain he was deprived of his own
Crown, and God in Justice who never leaves any that lean upon him, first gave
him over to a violent death, for a bullet took him within his own Trenches
besieging the poor Protestants in Roane; Henry the fourth his Son, what
Battles did he fight, what dangers did he escape even to admiration while he
was at distance with the Pope and Spaniards? but when in a politic and worldly
respect he tasted the same sower Grape which set his fathers teeth on edge;
First a young Jesuit struck him on the mouth, and then a Popish Raviliack
stabbed him to the heart. Whereas Queen Elizabeth the happiest instrument of
Go^s glory of her sex, since the blessed Virgin, notwithstanding the few
friends she had abroad and division at home when she came to the Crown, being
a l^ane woman yet she refused the King of Spain, being her first and earnest
Suitor by the Earl of Feria his Ambassador and notwithstanding the thundering
of the Popes Bulls and Spanish Canons openly, or the working of his Pistols
privately, they were never able to cut as much as the lap of her coat, or to
diminish one hair, much less the Crown off her head. And His Majesty, that
now is continuing constant in the same Religion she professed, continues no
less miraculously in Gods protection; and though there were but one Protestant
Prince in Christendom then besides himself, chose rather to match with her,
than with all the wealth of Spain, or any other popish Prince.

What therefore his Majesty has given by precept to the Prince in his Book,
and by precedence in his own person will undoubtedly be expected, and all good
men hope will be performed; for as the Prince Proclaims the King his Father by
his wonderful likeness and resemblance of the King him self, so it is hoped
he will never appear unlike him as in his other virtues, so particularly in
the choice of his second self, which so merely concerns himself and your
Lordship only, for none can be too circumspect, especially since not a
Somerset, not a Secretary only, but the first, the strongest and the wisest
man that ever was, though they were all good men, and Types of Christ, yet they
were hereby tempted and seduced.

To address this Discourse more particularly to your Lordship, Kings have
almost ever had their favorites.

Alexander had long since his Hephaestion. and H. 3. of France his Epermon, and
Philip of Spain had since his Larvea, yea the best Princes have not wanted
them; for after the reckoning of David's great Officers, Hushai the Archite is
called the Kings friend, Ira the Iairite is set down to have been chief about
David, which stands with reason, and agrees with nature; for every private man
is left to affect as he likes: neither can affection be forced. Now to
dis-allow or confine that in a King which is left at liberty to the meanest
subject, were preposterous and injurious. For though they Command actions as
they are Kings, yet are they subject to their passion as they are men.

And if I may allege it without mis-interpretation of others (as I am free
from ill meaning my self) who knows but Christ, the rather to show himself a
Natural man, expressed so much the more his Passion in his often weeping and
affection to diverse particulars, but especially to Saint John (if I may not
say his favorite) certaintly the Disciple whom Jesus loved more than any of
the rest.

It is Gods blessing and your happiness to be the Kings Favorite, as Peter
therefore not presuming to ask Christ of whom he spoke, beckned to the
Disciple whom Jesus loved, on whose breast he leaned to ask for him: so sure
most men neither may nor ought to be so bold to ask or advise the King in this
business so much spoken of, yet they point at you, who the higher you are in
the Kings favor, the more you are in the peoples eye and observation; and they
expect you will not be wanting in the duty of a subject, a Counselor and a
Favorite; but as the reasons and persuasions are known to have the better
opportunity to be delivered, and the more credit to be believed, so in this
case to be with the King as Moses one of Gods greatest Favorites and familiar
servants to stand in the gap, to divert the plague (for so in most men's
judgments it is feared) how glorious and necessary soever it seem outwardly,
I am confident you think the Kings favor and your own fortunes are not for
your own ends alone, or for any ill end at all, we have lately seen the ends
of those that have proposed such ends, and as Gods providence extends to the
fall of a Sparrow, so much more to the rise of a Favorite. And who knows but
the same, that raised Joseph in Egypt, has advanced you in England for the
like end.

To parallel you in no disparagement you are a younger Brother by a second
marriage as Joseph was, a fair person and well favored as Joseph was, the
King has for your honor altered your name, as Joseph's was, you have honored
and enriched your Parents and brethren, and kindred as Joseph did, Joseph's
kindred were made known to Pharaoh as yours to our Caesar; Now my Lord seeing
you follow Joseph so far leave him not to the end, but strive to be a means
to preserve this our Land from a spiritual famine. We read not of any servant
better respected of his Master than Eliazar of Damascus, whom Abraham had meant
(had he dyed childlesse) to have made his heir, and we find not any service he
did Abraham more (at least greater) then in the choice of a wife for his son
Isaac.

Amongst the servants of our Patriarch, The Defender of the Faith, we observe
none better respected than your self, and we know not in what you may do him
better service then with Eliazar to help to choose a Rebecca for our Isaac,
Abraham's injunction is a good direction not to take her amongst the Cananite
Princes, for having liberty to taste of every tree in the Garden, if we shall
one^y meddle with the forbidden fruit how miserable and woeful is our
condition; for the Serpent will not only beguile the woman but the Philistims
will entreat Dalilah, and she will betray Sampson, so while they plough with
our Heyfer they will unfold our Riddle and undo our State.

Besides whatsoever Language the Father speaks the children do commonly
speak the mother tongue, and wheresoever there is a Babel, there is a
confusion not of tongues only, but of states.

Whereas Christ's Church is like his Coat closely woven and at peace within it
self, though some itching Seperatists seek to make a hole in our coat and
Church, which the Papists labor to rent worse, and the desperate Jesuit makes
it past mending for wheresoever they come they turn Christ's coat into
Deiantar garment, which as it set Hercules on fire, so it set others in
combustion; the reason is, their first founder was a Soldier, and ever since,
The way of peace they have not known; at least not loved. To instance in
particular not unfit for our present purpose, we have not heard of any
Protestant King that ever married with a contrary Religion, whose reign has
bin prosperous but very fatal and unfortunate.

Henry of Navar married with Mary of France, which marriage was very
unfortunate to the parties never having issue, and being afterward divorced,
and so fatal to our Religion that there was more blood spilt at those
Nuptials than wine spent; for whilst the Parents dreamed of the glory and
security they should have by the match, they were most miserably massacred, and
who doubts but what the French committed in their own Country, upon that
color would any Papists be glad to do in this Kingdom, for without breach of
charity we may doubt of their sincere meaning when they seem to desire the
greatest union; for in 88. while there was a Treaty of peace, the Spanish
Armado came upon us. If therefore we either live or are led by example or
precept, we shall find it was forbidden the people of the world to marry with
a different Religion; the injunction; the reason and the effect are set down
in Deutrinomy to the Jews. And we see in Solomon the wisest King that ever
was, who married one of the greatest Kings daughters that then was, yet we see
the weakest sex withdrew the wisest man, for Solomon became an Idolater, his
Son a fool, his Subjects rebelled, and the best part of his Kingdom rent from
his posterity for ever.

If we search our Chronicles we shall find that God has crossed (if not cursed)
our alliance and association with foreign Princes, especially with Spain. A
Prince of the greatest performance that this Kingdom or Christendom ever had
was the black Prince, yet going into Spain to settle Don Pedro in that
Kingdom, besides the monstrous ingratitude and perfidiousnesse of the
Spaniard, who failed of the performance of those conditions he had promised,
which caused the unseperable Revolt in France to the loss of our inheritance,
the Prince was poisoned in that Country that he never had his health
afterward.

But to come nearer to our present purpose and to our own times, which are
little the better for our Spanish friendship.

I beseech your Lordship observe that all the marriages for this last 120.
years (except the several second marriages of Hen. 8. have bin only and no
where else but with Spain, with how little good God has blessed them, the
success shows.

Prince Arthur married the Spanish Kings daughter, we know God took him away
presently by a sudden death without any issue.

In a politic respect we would then make a second match for Prince Henry,
afterward King, did marry the same daughter, but doubtless God was less
pleased with that match which was less lawful, and God took away all the
male children, and left only a daughter, in whose short reign was shed more
blood for the true Religion in six years, than for the false in these
succeeding sixty years. We made then a third adventure and married with
Spain, Queen Mary with King Philip, which was so discontenting to the people,
that it caused Wiats Rebellion, so discomfortable that it broke the Queens
heart being left and neglected by her husband so dishonorable and prejudicial
to this Kingdom, that merely for the Spaniards sake we having no difference
with France we lost Callis in six days which had bin above 200. years in our
possession.

And though I have not so much judgment, nor so little wit to presume where to
match, yet I assume so much as to think a match at home cannot be held any
ways inconvenient.

We find that the first and the last of our Kings that ever matched with their
subjects were William the Conqueror, Edward the fourth, and Henry the eighth,
to which three matches God as it were to show the less we rely upon others
abroad, the more he will bless us himself at home; for by the two latter
marriages God gave two daughters, two Elizabeth's, two such Queens, than which
there were never two such blessed instruments of Gods glory, and this Kingdoms
good, by establishing peace in the Land, and Religion in the Church, until his
Majesty's most happy coming who brought both with him.

Thus my Lord have I made bold to lay my poor single (...) at your feet the
many Talents you have cannot be better employed than this, to make you here and
everlastingly a good and fait^full Servant to both your Masters; if you would
lie in wait for an opportunity which is happily presently offered, and your
honor cannot invent any occasion more pleasing to God, and more laudable to
the best men, then by persuading secretly by humble entreaties, and opposing
publicly by your solid reasons this. Spanish match, since whatsoever the
occasions or necessities of the Crown be, it will find more support by casting
it self into the Arms of the Subjects which are the two Houses of Parliament,
then by seeking to any foreign fawning foe, or envious enemy, whereunto
whenever we leave and trust we shall find the Egyptians Reeds, and their
intentions rather to supplant than to support us.

By him that is not ambitions (because not worthy) nor yet afraid (because not
ashamed) to be known to your Lordship in this business. Thomas Alured.

FINIS.

