Ambitious TYRANY, Clearly Demonstrated; In ENGLANDS Unhappy and confused
Government Proposed to the serious consideration of those that may endeavor to
remedy it, and not do ill, if they have not forgot to do well.

Printed in the Year 1659.

Whereas it is credibly reported, that your servants and vassals in Ireland,
have not only labored with all their strength, to raise and increase the
exorbitant powers of the late Tyrant, but are are also still active and
designing to support and maintain the same from its most deserved ruins and
destructions; to effect which, like State Juglers, they have obscured their
intentions, concealed their designs against you by a pretended compliance with
you. And because to patronize Tyranny in an unmasked ga^b, would argue them to
be murderers of their Count^ey, they suggest another ground and foundation;
whereupon to raise and build their quarrel more strongly against you, and this
we are informed they have done by their mock Commissioners, sent unto you, or
unto your Lieutenant Genesis Fleetwood.

Etsi meliores sunt quos ducit amor, tamen plures sunt quos corrigit timor:
little beloved, much feared Oliver will hold a Crown faster then the most
beloved and lest dreaded Richard; the impressions of fear upon the peoples
hearts, are best characters, whereby to read the lastingness and stability of
any Government; fear (result of power) is the very sinews, life, soul, nay the
all of all authorities in the wo^ld, and whosoever endeavors to weaken or
lessen that does unavoydably design the destruction and subversion of these:
with what impudence and brazen foreheads, dare these Commonwealths Apostates,
appear before your Honors? instead of congratulating you thus to expostulate
with you, instead of strengthening your power, thus to weaken your hands, and
(rather then they will by a penitential resignation of themselves expect your
pardon and hope for your mercy) thus to provoke your justice, thus to contemn:
your authority?

What does this imply but to transmit rebellion unto their neighbors, and to
teach others to do what should not be done, because these will not do what they
should: this spark of rebellion will by its native activity (if not suddenly
quenched) arise into a flame, which once blazing, will (we dare say) hazard
the drying up of the ditch betwixt them and us, rather then not transfer its
destructive and devouring quality upon us; and who knows not Englands temper to
be the exactest made tinder upon the first touch to kindle any spark of
insurrection, rebellions and tumults against you, which the hot headed spirits
of the time may but gently strike or let fall amongst us. Therefore we most
humbly conceive that it concerns the very life and soul of your authority, not
to be imposed upon by your vassals, nor to admit the least capitulation from
those who had neither a being, nor a well being, but what they have derived
from the indulgence of your sovereign powers. Are they Soldiers? is it not by
the word of your Commission? Are they landed men? is it not from your most
noble communerative dispositions? and shall these who are the very feet, the
most incondsiderable of all your creatures, thus kick against you? shall these
declare to the world, that before they will be subject to your commands, they
will have your honors to submit unto their wills? shall these represent you
more in considerable, then parents, then masters, who expect and will have an
absolute obedience from children and from servants; where then is the glory of
all your former triumphs? has not Neptune himself felt and trembled at the
dreadfulness of yo^^ ^^w^^, whose waves have been so often dyed with the blood
of your conquered enemies? where are all your martial achievements since 44
whereby Scotland has been conquered, Ireland ^^^dued, and our own nation
delivered from the miseries of a bloody and ^ivil war? are you who have been
the supremest agents in the grandest actions of the world, now become slaves to
your servants and servants unto your slaves? will not those trophies of victo^y
hung in Westminster either blush at so great a metamorphos^s, or else rejoice
to behold the authors of their captivity themselves thus to be captivated? to
invade the enemies country, when he has invaded the heart of our own
territories, seems a policy more full of danger then of safety: and yet rather
then the Romans would have the glory of their commonwealths authority, and of
their puissant arms darkened with the rumors of being an half conquered
people, they did attempt and effect it, they who scare themselves with notions
of dangers, and inconsistencies at home (even unto a dishonorable comportment
with any) do but increase and multiply the dangers even at home and abroad,
not roughly to handle your private or open enemy, is an invitation of him to
abuse you severely; sometimes indeed to complement an enemy into his own ruin,
may be a saving of blood with honor, and a purchase of honor without blood,
but it is a sight most preposterous to behold the legislative power of three
Nations through a pusillanimous temper, truckling under the standing obstinacy
of their servants, who all the while lie upon their beds either taking their
ease to express their rebellious confidence or else laughing at the lowness of
your condition to declare their malice against your persons. But that we may
more discover the vast incongruity betwixt your justice and their demands, that
you should admit of a compliance with your Irish Vassals, upon those their
terms, give us leave briefly to touch upon some of the proposals themselves.
England, of Ireland, etc. shall be deemed and adjudged a Traitor and an enemy
to the Commonwealth.

And does not the very square of this law, if applied to their actions, make
them Traitors beyond all measure, how then dare their guiltiness expect? how
can your justice grant unto them an act of indemnity: which because they have
proposed it indefinitely, and by the priority of its tender, supposed its
necessity, logical construction makes it universal; that is, for all treason,
for all Traitors, against the Commonwealth, and what is this but to obscure the
glory of your Justice and to enervate the strength of your laws, and to render
them weaker then cobwebs, not able to catch either the greater or the little
flies. It Is confessed from the universality of a rebellion, justice many times
satisfies her self with the punishment of some principal agents, but will
never admit a universal banishment from a Nation, because the crime she must
punish is become universal. This were to teach highwaymen, robbers, traitors,
and rebels, to justify the wickedness of their actions by the multitudes of
their persons, and to conclude themselves innocent because numerous, let it
therefore be considered that the end of vindictive Justice is to strike a fear
of offending into the hearts of all by the terror of punishing a few,
according to the rule paena ad paucos, metus ad omnes perveniat: whereunto, if
in this so dreadful an Apostasy, you do not proportion your present actions,
we are greatly afraid you will betray your own honor, and become unhandsome
Executioners of your own Authority.

We acknowledge that Acts of Oblivion, Indemnity, or of Pardon, has been the
practice of all States and Republikes in the world; yet is it not very
considerable whether by (as it were) a natural emmanation they proceed from the
noble and frank inclinations of their Authors, or forced by them who would
become the Subjects of, and take (for a time) some advantages by them; for if
this last be the mother of them, we are confident they will weaken, not confirm
the power; encourage, not prevent designs, and increase, not sedate the
discontented spirits of the people: We might press you with this theological
dilemma, that this Apostasy into Rebellion since 53. in your servants, was
either evil or not, if evil, it is in its own nature punishable, and you stand
indisputably obliged by the Laws of God to actuate the punishment; if it be not
evil, then the righteousness of your own most desired authority would be
questioned, and your friends affections thereby weakened: Nor is there any
reason to evade this argument (should we insist thereon) from the difference
that is conceived betwixt things purely spiritual, and matters purely civil:
For as this or that particular color is of the same nature, though the subject
of its inhesion be stone, wood, or iron, so all evil, or anomia, is one and the
same in its essentials, only variated by the difference of its subjects, or
objects; and if irregularity or evils be in themselves punishable, then all
evils inhering in any subject, conversant about any object, is so too; for it
is a real truth, a quotenus ad omnea valet consequentia. But to wave this
rugged way of argumentation, and to change the subject of the argument it self,
lest while we are discoursing against the universality of an Act of Indemnity,
or pardon, we are necessitated to obey your pardon, for the tedionsness of our
discourse it self.

Further, is it not a peculiar and sovereign prerogative inseparably annexed to
all authorities, to judge unto what societies of men, unto what adjacent
countries they will indulge an incorporation, or an union? how durst then your
vassals, by such a proposal, attempt to impose that upon you, whereof your
selves must be the sole Judges and Authors? it were worthy your consideration
to observe who these your creatures are that now are become so arrogant
proposers; are they not a multitude of men in arms? are they not your own
Mercenary Army? from which abstract that which we call resolution and courage,
and they are but a rour of people, an herd of cattle, or rather a silly flock
of sheep, very simple and inconsiderable beings, whom we hope you will reduce
with as much ease and honor, as you have their fellow creatures in England,
whose hands (through your prudence) you have so tied behind their backs, that
they shall never be able (do what they now will or can) to lift them up against
the face of your authority; with which the Nations (lately desponding to have
ever seen the masterie of so unrulie and turbulent a generation) are now
revived, and transported to see the Sea the Army mastered.
Day Star of their liberty, long benighted with the darkness of tyranny and
confusions, once more to arise in this their English Horizon. To conclude then
what we have to say in reference to this their second proposal, we admire no
less at the arrogancy and simplicity of the proposers, then (...). Laert. in
vita ejus.
Anacharsis did amongst the Grecians, imprudentes de imprudentibus judicantes;
(or as Tertullian) non musicos de musicis, let the Soldier know how to handle
his Sword and Pike, let him behave himself valiantly in the fields of Mars,
but let him cease to presume that either his dexterity in the first, or
corrage in the second, should render him forthwith a Son of Saturn, or (if you
will) an accomplished Statesman.

3. in justice you ought to command: representations of so prodigious a
creature; how then can you tolerate the name, title, power, (and thereby the
interest) of the late Tyrants to remain, (and that upon) Record in all Fines,
etc. or Deeds enrolled, etc. what more lasting monument can be erected for
them, then to admit your Apostate vassals to enjoy their lands by a right
derived from them? we omit the fraud and evil practice (as most notorious) in
the purchase of those lands, etc. and in the acquiring of those leases, all
which will (we hope) hereafter require the justice of an impartial and diligent
inquiry, and shall only say with submission unto your wisdom, that as to all
p^rchases, bargains, contracts, leases, etc. since 53. it will be the honor of
your justice not to confirm them, there being a Right neither in the Donor to
grant, nor in the Donees to receive, and both apparently guilty of High
Treason, only the greatness of their power has prevented the justness of their
attainder.

Having thus briefly glanced upon these four proposals, in the las^ place we
cannot but observe how subtillie, and with more then Achitophels counsel these
your servants have bottomed and laid their design against you. In contending
for C. St. or R. P. the people were observed more cautelous then to shed one
drop of blood; and therefore these most seriously, profound, and malignants
Statesmen (designedly waving those interests) have drawn one more common and
effectual interest upon the Stage, thereby to affect, close, and invite all
those their discording parties and factions against you, (as is easily visible
to any diligent Observator of the proposals) which can have no other aim or
design then either to force you unto a most dishonorable condiscention, or
else to attempt open force against you: notwithstanding we are confident, that
if you preserve the reputation of your justice in the former, there are many so
faithfully devoted unto your service, that rather then they would behold you
(the most noble Assertors of our Nations Freedom) necessitated by your most
contemptible servants to act any thing unlike your selves, would hazard all to
secure you against the second.

It is the most ambitious desires of all true English men, that neither by your
fears, nor by your lenity, you should introduce those Saturnalia Feasts,
(unless upon a true Roman account) wherein your servants shall sit at the
Table, and you (their absolute Sovereign Lords and Masters) with Trenchers in
your hands, attend and wait upon them.

It will suffice, if you make all your Rebellious Apostates to know so much of
your Authority, that (without any further disputes) they may both hope for your
clemency, and also dread your justice, for the most impartial preservation of
both. These lines are now presented unto, public view, by the most unanimous
consent of many obliged to own you, faithful to serve you, and ready upon all
occasions to honor (and die for) you.

FINIS.

