AN ACCOUNT OF THE Condemnation, Behavior, Execution, and Last dying Words OF
Captain Francis Winter, Who was Condemned at the Sessions House in the
Old Bailey, on Saturday the 29th. of April. For the Murder of one John
Chandler, in White Friars in London, etc. and Executed for the same at
White-Fryars-Gate in Fleetstreet, on Wednesday the 17th. of May, 1693.
19. May. 1693
SEveral Reports, of this Nature, have been oftentimes Manifested in Print;
many, of which, have seemed to look somewhat obscure, till it has been more
particularly dissected, and laid open, in all its Agravating Circumstances. And
indeed, till that be done, there are a sort of Men in the World, who are apt to
asperse the Superior Powers, as if they were too Severe in the Execution of
Justice; but, when their Eyes are enlightened by the due Weight of Reason, then
perhaps they will be of another mind, unless they are Prejudiced beyond the
bounds of Natural Reason, and Common Sense, therefore, it will not be
inconvenient to give the Reader a Brief Account (by the way) of the Matter of
Fact, in Relation to this Unfortunate Gentleman, etc.

Some Persons (it is very likely) have not forgotten, that about the 4th. of
July last, was Twelve Month, there was a Mutinous, or Riotous Assembly Raised,
and got together in White Friars, in London, in opposition to the Gentlemen of
the Inner Temple, who stopped up a Passage that led out of the said Friars into
the Temple Walks, the Gentlemen finding the said Passage to be very
incommodious to them, upon the hot Resistance of the White Friars men, there
was likely to be great Mischief done, to prevent, appease, and qualify which,
the then present Sheriffs of London, (being sent for) came with their Officers
and Attendants, entered in at the Friars Gate, endeavoring to make open
Proclamation, that all Persons should Cease, and go Home in Peace to their
Respective Abodes: But this was not Regarded by the Mutineers, for they were
the more Incensed, and came with great Fury against the High Sheriffs, this
Gentleman being at the Head of about Fourscore of them, as their Captain and
Leader, with a Blunderbuss in his hand, which he was seen to Fire off several
times, bidding defiance to the Sheriffs; and all those who were their
Assistance, crying One and all, they would kill them, rather than any Man
should be taken out from them, by way of an Arrest, but that was looked upon to
be but a false Suggestion, and a Cunning Plea of their own Forging, they having
no Regard to Authority, for they had placed several Casks on both sides of the
Street, on purpose to Impede the Passage of the Sheriffs, and some of them lay
secretly behind them, as it were on purpose, to lie in Wait to take an
Advantage, etc. Firing several times against the Sheriffs and their Men, the
Captain being at the Head of them, as aforesaid. And Chandler, the poor Man,
who was killed, being on the Sheriffs side, had the misfortune to be shot in
the Calf of his Leg, with a Leaden Bullet, which wound killed him in two or
three Days, he solemnly protesting upon his Deathbed, that he knew Captain
Winter very well, and that he was the Man that Shot him, for which Fact the
Captain, for some considerable time, Absconded, but was lately Apprehended, and
Committed to Newgate for the same, and was this last Sessions Tried for it, and
found Guilty of Murder, and, on the 29th. of April he was Condemned, in Order
to be Executed with the other Criminals, who suffered at Tyburn, the 8th.
Instant. But, by Virtue of Her Majesty's Gracious Reprieve, he was Respited
until this day, etc. As for his Birth, he was Born at Truro in Cornwall, then
sent Apprentice to a Captain of a Ship, after this he was made a Captain of a
Merchant Man to the West Indias himself, after that he Commanded a Ship in the
last Dutch Wars, where (to say the Truth) he behaved himself with a great deal
of Candor and Courage, afterward he fell into decay, and had Contracted some
Debts in the World, which occasioned him to fly for Refuge into White Friars,
where he had the Unhappiness to be Engaged in such an unworthy Design, and
Violent Attempt, as aforesaid.

He had not much to offer in his Defense at his Trial, only in the General,
that although he was there amongst the Multitude, yet there were others that
Shot, and therefore the Man might fall by another hand as well as his, or to
that Effect, etc. After Condemnation he Behaved himself in a Christian like
manner, being much Concerned for his Souls Everlasting Welfare, desiring the
Advice, Good Counsel, and Prayers, of all those Worthy Divines that came near
him, acknowledging the Justice of God, in bringing him to Undergo so Severe a
Punishment, for that he had been guilty of several Irregularities in the Course
of his Life, and had not walked up to the strict Rules of the Christian
Religion as he ought to have done, which he now Lamented, and was exceedingly
troubled for, therefore he hoped that God would forgive him, being willing to
submit to the Righteous Judgment of God Almighty. He gave himself to Reading,
Prayer, Hearing God's Word, and to all other Exercises of Religion, being
willing to adhear to all Seasonable Advice, that might any ways advance his
mind, and set his thoughts on Heavenly Things, Relying only upon the Merits of
Christ, for his future Happiness; he carried himself humbly, during his
Imprisonment, both before and after Conviction, though Naturally of a stout,
hardy, and undaunted spirit, was no ways affrighted at the near approaches of
Death, giving God the Praise for such a Respite of Time, in Order to prepare
his soul for another World.

On Wednesday morning, the 17th. Instant as abovesaid, (by Virtue of a Fresh
Warrant from her Majesty) he was put into a Coach at Newgate Stairs, and from
thence Conveyed down Old Baily, and over Fleet-Bridge, to the Friars Gate, in
the way to which place, there were several Thousands of Spectators, who
thronged to see him, when the Cart was settled under the Gibbet, and he put
into it, (which was Erected there on purpose) he stood up, and spoke as
fo^^^ws: I have no Public Declaration to make here, my Thoughts being wholly
taken up in the Concerns of my Eternal Welfare, for that is the Work that I am
come here to do: Therefore I desire that I may not be interrupted. Then the
Minister Prayed with him, and for him, and Recommended him to the Mercy of God,
etc.

After this, he Prayed in these Words.

O Most Great and Glorious Lord God, do thou look down in Mercy upon me, a Poor
Miserable Sinner, and show thy blessed Face to me, now in this Hour of my
Extremity, for what am I without thee, therefore O Lord! I beseech thee to
Pardon my Sins, and Wash my Soul clean in the Blood of CHRIST JESUS, and
deliver me O Lord from the guilt and defilement of Sin; Holy Father do thou
Receive me into Mercy, for into thy Hands I Commend my Spirit: O Lord let it be
Precious in thy Sight, and let it live with thee in Everlasting Glory: Now I
come, sweet JESUS now I am coming to thee; Dear JESUS do thou plead my Cause
with the Great GOD of Heaven and Earth, and send down thy Blessed Spirit to
Assist and Help me in this Great Work I am now about; I am a Poor Worthless
Creature, full of Sin and Misery; yet do thou Lord JESUS take pity upon my
Precious Soul: O Lord JESUS come quickly, for I am now coming to thee,
therefore I Humbly beg thee O GOD to Receive my poor Soul into the Arms of thy
Everlasting loving Kindness, Lord! Into thy Hands I Commend my Spirit, for thou
have Redeemed it O LORD GOD of Truth Amen.

Then the Cart Drew away, and afterward he was Carried into White-Fryars, to
be Interred in the Sepulcher with his Brethren, etc.

LONDON: Printed for J. B. and are to be sold by Randall Tailor near
Stationers' Hall. 1693.


