AN ACCOUNT Of the BURNING of Havre de Grace, By Their Majesty's FLEET under
the Command of My Lord BERKLEY.
BY an Express arrived last Night at Six a Clock from my Lord Berkly, we have
received the following Account, dated off of Havre de Grace at Five a Clock in
the Afternoon, July the 18th. 1694.

My Lord Berkley having laid the Town of Deipe into Athes by the many Bombs
which he threw into it, insomuch that there is not a House standing, weighed
Anchor on the 14th. and directed his Course toward the Mouth of the River
Seine, where we arrived the 16th. It was thought fit in the Council of War to
Bombard Havre de Grace, and accordingly the next Morning, our Bombing Vessels
drew near the Place, and Played their Bombs into it with so good an effect,
that the Town was set on Fire in several Places; we continued this Morning, and
by the help of a High Wind which blows since break of day, the Town, as far as
we can judge, is all in Flames.

The Enemy has made a great Fire upon us from their Bastions and Citadel, both
with their Canon and Bombs, but with small Success, saving only that one of
their Bombs has sunk one of our Bombing Vessels, in which was Captain Silver,
who has been saved, but with the misfortune of having one of his Legs broken
off.

My Lord Berkley intends to continue here till the Town is all in ashes; and
that the Enemy may not quench the Fire, we continue to play our Bombs upon the
Place, and upon the Citadell.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
Pantagruel's Voyage to the Oracle of the Bottle. Being the Fourth and Fifth
Books of the Works of Francis Rabelais, M. D. With the Pantagruelian
Prognostication, and other Pieces of Verse and Prose by that Author; Also his
Historical Letters. Completing all his Works that are Extant. Never before
printed in English. Done out of French by Mr Motteux. With Explanatory Remarks
on every Chapter by the same Hand.

Bibliotheca Politica: Or, an Enquiry into the Ancient Constitution of the
English Government; with respect both to the just Extent of Regal Power, and to
the Rights and Liberties of the Subject. Wherein all the chief Arguments as
well against as for the Late Revolution, are Impartially represented and
considered. In XIII. Dialogues Collected out of the best Authors both Ancient
and Modern. To which is added, an Alphabetical Index to the whole Work.

Both sold by R. Baldwin.

London: Printed for Richard Baldwin, in Warwick Lane, 1694.


