An Account of the Behavior, Confession and last dying Speech of Sir John
Johnson, who was Executed at Tyburn, on Tuesday the 23d day of December, anno
Dom 1690. for stealing of Mrs. Mary Wharton, in company of Captain James
Campbel and Archibald Montgomery, since fled.
ON Tuesday Morning, about 11 a Clock, the Prisoner was conveyed in a Mourning
Coach to the place of Execution, attended by two worthy Divines of the Church
of England, as also by one Gentleman, who was his Friend, besides a Hearse to
bring back the Body, in order to its being interred: Being put into a Cart, out
of the Coach, he spoke to this effect,

Gentlemen, I suppose ye are not Ignorant for what I am brought here to die,
which is for being Accessory or Consenting to the Stealing of Mrs. Mary
Wharton, in company of Captain James Campbel, and one Mr. Montgomery: But,
Gentlemen, I saw nothing in the whole affair but what I thought was Justifiable
by the Laws of this Kingdom, yet it has pleased the Laws of this Kingdom to
find me guilty; which Laws I was before ignorant of, as to this Case.
Gentlemen, I shall not have time to talk of the Ignorance I have been bred up
in, I never was bred at Court, neither have I been a Scholar but a Soldier, and
indeed there is little Learning to be found in such who have been bred in the
Army.

Gentlemen, on Friday the 10th of November one Mr. Montgomery and Captain
Camphel, came to my Lodging with a Hanch of Venison, and Mr Montgomery told me,
That it was to treat one Madam Bierly and her Daughter, Persons that I never
saw before; yet I was persuaded by them to be a Witness to this Marriage. Then
we went to a Coffee-house, and drank two Bottles of Mum, but said nothing
material to this Point there, as I can remember of. Then we parted, and I met
them both at a Coffee-house near to Mr. Montgomeries Lodging at six a Clock at
Night, where was C. Campbel; a little after came in Mr. Montgomery, and clapped
his Hand on Captain Campbel's Shoulder, saying, The business is done. Then
about 9 a Clock, or a little after 8, I do not know exactly, Madam Brierly's
Coach came and carried them away. Then Captain Campbel called his Coach and 6
Horses, and ordered the Coachman to drive to Queen Street, and there it being
stopped; and the young Lady was brought into the Coach, and she was very
Voluntary, Frank and Free, and began to ask Capt. Campbel, If he was the second
Brother of the Lord Argile? What his Answer was I am not positive, but she told
him, That she knew several of his Brothers, and that my Lord Argile was married
to the Duchess of Lauderdale's Daughter: And this made me think, that this
must have been with a Voluntary Consent, viz. to marry this Gentleman.

When we came to the Coachman's House (for I knew nothing where I was going)
Capt. Campbel led her up Stairs, and she went with all the freedom that a woman
could, or is possible to be expressed: Then they came before the Parson, and
the Parson declared in Court, That they themselves spoke to her, That there
should be no Force used, but that she did it wholly by her own consent. Well,
when the Ceremony came to be administered, she spoke the words with such a loud
Voice, that there was none in the Room but what could hear her. After this she
found some Fault with the Wedding Ring, which was too big, says Capt. Campbel
to her, I will have it changed: No says she, I will not, for it is not lucky to
change Wedding Rings: then after she had a Ribbon to make it less, and then she
put it on again. Then we supped, and after Supper, the Parson said, It is fit
that we should Pray before we go to Bed; she says yes, with all her heart, and
the Parson made a very good Prayer. After this we undressed the Gentleman, and
by that time the Lady was in Bed we came in with him, and he went into Bed to
her; and after the usual Ceremonies upon these occasions were ended, we left
them, and indeed I saw nothing in her Deportment but was frank and free, but
for the inward thoughts of her heart, what they were I could not tell. In the
Morning, she said that she rested very well, then, I think, I did advise her
and the Company, That she should write a Letter to her Aunt, that she might not
take care for her; she took the Pen and Ink and writ these words. Dear Aunt,
Pray be not troubled, nor take no care for me, for I am very well with my
Husband Captain James Campbel, and in a short time I will bring him to wait
upon you.




Then Mr. Montgomery asked her, if she would dine at Pontacks; no, says she, I
had rather go to my new Lodging: Mr. Montgomery said, you had better go to
Pontacks. Gentlemen, I think there is none here but knows Pontacks, it is one
of the greatest Ordinaries in England. We took Coach about 10 or 11 a Clock,
Mr. Montgomery told her, That his Wife should come and dine with her; and,
says he, drive to Pontacks, and I will be with you presently, and bring my
Wife with me, but he did not come presently, so Pontacks asked us if we could
have the Dinner, because it would be spoiled; so we had it, and when we began
to eat, Mr. Montgomery came in, and made his Apology that his Wife could not
come.

All this while I perceived no alteration in her Behavior: So after Dinner
they went and took a new Lodging in Newgate street, but I did not know of it
till afterward; he was a great while gone, at last she said, what, has Mr.
Montgomery left me, and will not his Wife come near me? and then she began to
be a little concerned, but after she was better, and then we went to her
Lodging in Newgate-street, and there was every thing in good Order, and we went
to Cards at Lank-tra-lue for 6d a Dozen; and then at Night it was asked her if
she would go to bed, and she readily consented: This was the second Night, and
I opened the Curtain and looked upon her, and saw nothing of any discomposure
in her, but an equal Satisfaction in both their Faces.

The next Morning my Lord Chief Justice's Order came out to take Mrs Wharton,
wherever she could be had; then the Landlord told Captain Campbel of it, That
there was a Message come to him for his Wife: then it was after advised that we
should retire, and I put on my Clothes and came down Stairs, and found Captain
Campbel gone, and she was dressing her self, but I saw no Concern in her; then
I went to a Coffee-house, and smoaked a Pipe, and then came back again, and
found that she was carried a way. And Gentlemen, take notice of this, pray
now, what she said to the Landlord before she went; It Is true, says she, that
what I have done is by my own Consent, but, however, I cannot love him, and
therefore will not live with him, but I will not hurt one Hair of any of their
Heads. This the Gentleman, the Apothecary in Newgate street, told me himself.
The next Sunday after this I sent one Mr. Angeire to my Landlord's House to
take me out some Linen out of my Chamber; and he told me, when he came back,
That there was none but the Maid at home: Then says I, I may go the more safe,
and take out some Linen my self: So I went to the House, and saw my Landlord
and Landlady, who told me, with all imaginable Expressions of Kindness, That I
should be safe; but when I went in I was immediately taken by the Constables
there. This is the Truth as near as I can speak it. Gentlemen, I tell you, as I
am a Dying Man, that I never saw any thing done by Force, neither was there any
Intentions to force any thing upon this Gentlewoman contrary to her own
Inclinations: But indeed it is true, I was a Stranger to the Laws of England,
which says, That an Accessory shall be found Guilty as well as the Principal.

Here he stopped a little, the Divines speaking to him -- then went on.

Gentlemen, I had forgot one thing until these Reverend Divines put me in mind
of it: Mr. Montgomery told me, That he would assure me, that there should no
Damage fall upon me in the whole matter; when I was invited to the Wedding, I
told him, that if I thought there were any evil designs in it, I would
sacrifice my self before I would have any hand in it.

Now Gentlemen, give me leave to give you a little hint of the Hardships that I
have met with since my imprisonment, though by the way, I do not at all reflect
upon the good Constitutions of the Laws of this Land, nor upon the King Judges,
nor Jury, but only to some passages that occurred upon my Trial.

First, When I was brought before the Judges, I subponn'd in Mrs. C. and her
Maid; who knew the thing before I knew of it, when I brought them in, as to be
Witnesses for me, they were immediately indicted and brought in as Criminals, so
that their Evidence could not avail any ways for me. And more, which is a
little hard, the Coachman was brought in, and they acquitted him to bring in
his Wife a VVitness against me, this is hard.

Now, Gentlemen, there is another hardship, though not equivalent to this, When
Mrs. Campbel was sick, that was not taken notice of, but when Pontacks was
brought to Witness, That there was no Force at all used to this Lady, Pontacks
( I pray God forgive him, I freely and heartily do) then said, that he saw a
discomposure in her Face: which I take God to witness, that I saw no such
thing, and when this man came in, he declared quite contrary: Nay, the Sergeant
at Law stood up and said, What? I warrant you are a Scots-man. Yes, says I,
yea, says he, I thought so. So that I say, why should a man meet with that
hardship, because he is a stranger, or an Outlandish man? And I cannot call my
self an Outlandish man, because I am the King's Subject. I desire, Gentlemen,
that you would take this as from a Dying Man; I speak it because I would not
bring a disgrace upon my Family, and I desire that you would consider of all
the Trials that I have met with; not that I do (as I told you before) find any
fault, or any ways arraign the Constitution of the Law or Justice of the
Nation, no, I would not do that by any means.

And sirs, in the Printed Papers they have wronged me, and have done me a great
deal of Injury in them, for they accuse me, that I should commit a Rape in
Chester: Who did this, I know not, God forgive them.

I will declare the Truth how it was. I was going to the Castle at Chester, in
the Nightime, I found a Man and a Woman in the way and I said to one of my
Footman, That it might be that those were some of the Persons that had abused
my Sentry at their Posts, for my Sentry were wont to be much abused, this
provoked me to endeavor to seize this Man, but I could not catch him, then I
ordered my Sentry to take care of the Woman till Morning, lest she should be
one of them that did abuse my Sentries: The next Morning she told me, That the
Man made Suit to her to Marry her; but some time after, about a Week or 10
Days, as I remember, but it was a more considerable time than the Laws of
England provide in that Cause, for the Law says, That if a Woman is ravished
she must cry out, but this she did not do for many Days after, till I was gone
to London, and then she swore a Rape against me. When I heard of it I writ to
my Lieutenant, to bring in proof that I never did any such thing to her: A
(...) which I went to Chester, and finding it true, I ordered Posthorses to be
made ready to come to complain to the King of the injustice that I had done me
in this Case: Then she said, If she had a little Money to carry her to Ireland,
she would clear me in this Case, and declare the Truth; then I gave her 5 l. to
declare the Truth, which she gave under her hand, and the next Day I presented
this to the Major, and I desired the Laws might be put in execution against
her, but she was gone. Gentlemen, this is the Truth, concerning this Rape, that
I never had any Hand in such a thing.

There is another thing out that they have thrown upon me, and that is, That I
should be concerned in such another thing as this in Holland: Gentlemen, there
is one Mr. Sayers by name, Servant to one Mr. Swinfoord, he was in the same
Town with me, in Vtercht 6 Months, he and many more will justify me as to
this, That the World has injured me, and done me much wrong.

Gentlemen, I must now exhort you to be careful for the Salvation of your own
Precious Souls. Gentlemen, he that has been bred a Soldier has not lived so
strict to the Rules of Christianity as some other Men. I must confess, That I
have left undone those things which I ought to have done: and I have done those
things which I ought not to have done: But however, Gentlemen, let me entreat
you, yea all of you, That you would remember your latter end; I pray God that
none of you all may come to an untimely end; yet remember that you must come to
an End, your Time must have a Period. I bless God, my Life and Conversation has
not been so odious and obnoxious to the World, nor, (I hope) in the sight of
God, but that I have Confidence in his Mercy; and I hope that those Divines
that have been with me can justify, That there is nothing that has come from
me, but what has proceeded from a true and a penitent Heart; and I beg that
you would offer up your Prayers to the Throne of Grace for me, because no Man
can say that he does not want the Prayers of the Righteous, for God bids all
Men to pray and not to faint.

Well Gentlemen, he that made Heaven and Earth keep and defend you from all
Misfortunes, from the Power of Death and Hell, and then you need not fear, for
Christ is able to save to the uttermost, all that come to him, therefore offer
up your Prayers not only for your selves, but for me who is a dying Man.

Then the Ministers prayed with him, afterward he he prayed privately, without
Book for himself, then he read two Prayers out of a Book, entitled, A form of
Prayer for Prisoners, and then he read the 51, and 103. Psalms; then he prayed
again for himself, and afterward stood up, and put on his Cap himself: after
the Rope was about his Neck, and fastened to the Tree, he took his final leave
of all the Spectators in a most humble manner, recommending them to the
Merciful Protection of Almighty God, desiring the continuance of their Prayers
to the last Breath, hoping they would be so charitable as to join with him,
because the Prayers of the Faithful were of great Efficacy, and availed much.

And indeed in all his whole Deportment, from the Prison thither, and in the
time of his being there, he behaved himself with great Humility toward God,
and very examplary toward all; which drew great Lamentations, and caused much
concernedness to appear in the Physiognomies of all that beheld him.

After he had given the Signal, the Cart drew away, the Prisoner praying to
God, and holding up his Hands some small time after the Cart was gone away.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas there is a Mistake in some of these Printed Narratives of Sir John
Johnston's Last Speech, this is to give Notice, That the Landlord here
mentioned to betray and seize him, was not the Apothecary in Newgate-street,
but his former Landlord.

Reprinted in the Year, 1691.


