AN ACCOUNT Of the Discovery of the NEW PLOT, Made Manifest by several of the
Conspirators Convened before His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council at
Hampton Court on the 23. of this Instant June 1683.
NO Wonder if Sacred Princes, Vicegerents to the King of Kings, are Heavens
peculiar care, since Wicked Men so frequently are combined (with the powers of
Darkness, in Malice to him that Instituted them by his Eternal Decree to Govern
the Inferior World) do disturb their Reign, and conspire their hurt; but in
vain are all the Machinations and Devices of a Turbulent Faction, who seek to
overthrow the Established Government; which is Heavens peculiar Care, though
like Bulls in Bassian, they have pushed for some years past to overthrow Great
Britains Monarchy, yet have their devices been brought to naught, as appeared
by the late discovery, when Ignoramus Juries were brought as Salvo's, yet the
Eyes of the Nation were too open to be deceived with Shaddows, Spectrums, or
Fantoms, when apparent Truth presented her self in her Native shape, and much
more now since a more then ordinary discovery has been made by such who were
in the Combination against the best of Kings, who is indeed, next Heaven, our
only Refuge, and the breath of our Nostrils; a Prince so Good, so Bounteous,
and so Just, that Heaven thought him only fit to Rule so great a People.

But to the Purpose, some days since Depositions having been made by one
Keeling (who, as Heaven would have it, was altogether Restless till he had
Disimboged the dire Secret) that a Hellish and Damnable Conspiracy had for a
long time been Brooding and carried on by several of the Disaffected party,
many of which he Named, and deposed likewise the several Circumstances, so far
as his knowledge Retained, that attended the Damnable Conspiracy, no doubt laid
deep to deprive true Loyalists of all they hold dear on this side Heaven; upon
which Deposition, one Mr. West a Councillor at Law, and one who formerly was
Active in the behalf of Stephen College, had his Chamber Seized by Order of
the Secretary of State, and diverse Papers secured by the Officers Employed to
that purpose, many of which contained matters of Dangerous Consequence, tending
to the Countenancing Sedition and Rebellion, etc. Upon Notice of which, He the
said Mr. West. Councellor at Law, for some time Absconded Himself; but being
moved by the sense of his unnatural Combination against ^i^ Sovereign, He
expressed a Deep, and past doubt, an unfeigned sorrow for his Offense which he
discovering to his Father-In-Law, who is doubtless a Man of unbiassed
Principles, He advised him to throw himself at the Feet of that Majesty, which
in so High a Nature He had Offended, but he not daring to Approach such Innate
goodness, against whom He had causelessly conspired, before his Atonement was
in some measure made, He by his Agents, if not in Person, applied himself to
the worthy, (and of unquestionable Loyal^^) Sr. George Jefferies chief Justice
of the County Palatine of Chester, and His Majesty's Sergeant at Law, etc.
Humbly Beseeching him to Interceed with His Majesty, that Fountain of mercy,
for his Pardon, and confiding in such his Intercission, and His Majesty's never
failing compassion to those that Sincerely confess their Offenses, he
surrendered Himself into the hands of Justice, and this day being the 23d. of
this Instant June, attended the Honorable Privy Council (for that and other
Important considerations) Assembled at Hampton Court, upon Examination he laid
open (according to our best Information) the Hellish Conspiracy against the
Person of his most Sacred Majesty, and His Royal Highness, the Illustrious
Prince James Duke of York, in Order to the overthrow of Monarchy, and all that
can be called dear to Loyal and Peaceful Subjects, in which Diverse of the
Disaffected had Involved themselves, but Heaven not permitting so great a
wickedness, prevented it most miraculously, as is conjectured, by his Majesty's
unexpected Departure from New Market, upon the breaking out of the late
dreadful Fire in that Town, which Conflagration caused his Majesty and Royal
Highness to depart, and take their way to Cambridge: In this design many were
Involved, as by some Papers Seized appears, and upon discovery of which, diverse
are Fled, nor cannot be yet found, diverse Messengers have been Empowered to
apprehend them, and of this pernicious number, Mr. Goodenough late under
Sheriff for the City of London, etc. Is shrewdly suspected for one, as also a
Lawyers Son of note, but till the Wisdom of the Nation (in Council Assembled)
make a further Progress in this happy and timely discovery; I shall acquiesce,
wishing that all such as either in thought or deed attempt the hurt of His
most, Sacred Majesty, may undergo the Punishment due to the worst of Traitors.

H^^ Majesty being satisfied of the Truth of this Conspiracy against his Sacred
Person, and the Person of his Royal Brother, caused his Proclamation to be
Issued forth, commanding these Conspirators, viz. Colonel John Rumsie, Richard
Rumbal, Richard Nelthrop, Edward Wade, Richard Goodenough, Captain Walcot,
William Thompson, James Burton, and William Hone, to render themselves to his
Judges, Justices, etc. strictly forbiding any of his Subjects to Conceal,
Harbor, or Relieve them, and that whosoever shall apprehend any of them, and
put them, into the hands of Justice, shall receive for each so apprehended, One
Hundred Pound as a Reward.

Entered According to Order.

Printed by W. Downing for T. Benskin in St. Brides Churchyard.


