AN ACCOUNT OF SPAIN: BEING A New Description of that COUNTRY and PEOPLE; And
of the SEA PORTS along the Mediterranean: Of Ceuta, Tangier, etc. Written by a
French Gentleman, who was in disguise Aboard the English Fleet: With an Account
of the most Remarkable Transactions of that Fleet. To which is added, A Large
Preface concerning the Establishment of the Spanish Crown, on the DUKE of ANJOU.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Wild, at the Elephant at Charing Cross, 1700.

TO THE Most Noble PRINCE HENRY DUKE of NORFOLK, Earl Marshal of England. One
of His Majestys most Honorable Privy Council, Knight of the most Noble Order
of the Garter, etc.
May it please your Grace,
THE following Letters contain some general remarks of what happened in the
English Fleet, that was sent to the Mediterranean toward the letter end of the
last War; with some observations of the posture and disposition of the Spanish
Nation as it then stood. The Account is not so particular as it might have
been, I wish something more had been said of the History and Politics of that
People, that it might have been more seasonable for this present juncture, when
the eyes of all the World are pointed to that Empire: But to make amends for
that Omission, I take every thing in it to be very justly described, most of it
having occurred to my own experience, and to the Knowledge of all the Curious in
that Voyage: And as I can affirm the Account to be just, so there is little or
nothing said that ever has been mentioned by any other Author.

I have formed it into a Book for your Graces perusal, and am happy that I can
lay it at your feet in a time when your confinement at home by a troublesome
pain, and sometimes your want of Company gives you leisure to read it over: And
though I know your Graces Palate to be exceeding Nice in all sorts of reading,
yet I am not more discouraged at that, than I am animated with your Goodness
and Indulgence.

The opportunities I have had of your Conversation were very fortunate to me:
by them I had the Honor of being known to your Grace; By them I have been
present at some of the Politest Discourses that I have met with, and by them I
have, of consequence, refined my own Capacity; and I cannot choose but say, I was
astonished to hear the first Peer of England, whose Nobility has been of late
years less Curious of these finer Studies* talk so well. My next thought was,
(may my Lord pardon me) that if the Duke of Norfolk were stripped of all his
Titles, and could come upon the Square to converse with such as me, there is
not a Man on earth whose Society I should so much covet: But in the pleasure of
that thought I forgot my distance, not considering that Nature, as well as the
situation of your Birth, had put so great a Bar betwixt you and me, that like
the Sun, you cannot be looked at, but with the Clouds between. My Lord, I was
born with an antipathy to flattery, and I hope, I have said nothing that can be
so understood; I Am sure I would avoid it if I knew where it looked like it, but
in your Graces Character, 'twould be hard to say too much, and it is the
World's unhappiness not to know you as well as I do.

I am at a loss, My Lord, how to acknowledge the Honors I have already
received, and nothing but your Permission could make me sin again by laying
this trifle under your Patronage: but when I considered the Curiosity your
Grace has for Books, and the particular inquiries you made of the Country here
mentioned, I thought I had a fair occasion of putting your Name before this,
which I hope will give you some satisfaction: I wish it were in my Power to
cover something better than this Imperfect Account with your Illustrious
Protection, but it is the Debtor's curse to be always in Arrears, and I don't
know how to offer your Grace any thing that will not want a blush to hide it:
But your Grace is often exercised in Acts of Clemency, and it is but the habit
of your Goodness to Pardon. The Contemplation of that Virtue gives me
unspeakable pleasure, therefore with the greater assurance I address this Book,
and with profound humility remain,

Your Graces most Dutiful Servant, E. LEWIS.

THE PREFACE.
THis Year will be famous in Chronicle for the Death of the two greatest
Monarchs in Europe, the Pope, and the King of Spain; and of one who might have
been as great as either, the Duke of Gloucester; whose short life has been as
much lamented, as that of any young Prince who was ever born with a relation to
the English Throne: But for the first that I Named, one would think he had
prevailed with Nature to allow him a few Months longer than his Natural Lease,
on purpose that he might live to see the end of the Century, and to perform all
the sacred Ceremonies of opening the year of Grace; that he himself might
hammer down the Gates of Eternal life, to be sent up to Heaven on the Wings of
a Million Jubilee indulgences of his own granting: The good Old Man is now with
the Conclave of the Fathers, shut up in the limbo of everlasting darkness, and
bound up with the rest of that gang to be tried at the last day, as well as we.
The other lived till he had lost all hopes of an Heir, and when he found he
could raise no posterity to take his mantle from him, he left it to be
scrambled for by them that can catch it, just in such a distracted manner, as a
better Man did once before him, that is, to him that best deserves it; and it is
more than I expect if this late Monarch of Spain has not by his Will laid a
Foundation for a War of as Menacing consequences, as that Macedonian did, when
he bequeathed the World to him who had the longest Sword, and the best Army.
This Saint of a King is now laid down in the regions of Night, and his Death
has left all Europe as much in the dark, as he himself now lies in the Royal
Pantheon. The amazement that the World now stands in, is, because he has Named
the Duke of Anjou his successor, who in all probability will be invested with
that Empire, and for ought I see, there is no opposition made against him.

I hope our Politicians who are of another Opinion will not be offended with me
for saying so, especially when they shall hear that I am, as much as they can
be, against the Crown of Spains falling into the House of Bourbon; But since
there is so little stir among those Powers who are most concerned against it, I
cannot foresee what interruption the young King can meet with.

I wish with all my heart the Emperor and the Princes of Europe would look
about 'em before it be too late, before the Scepter is put into his hands, and
the Court of Madrid sworn to their allegiance; for when once that is done, and
the Duke upon the Throne, taking upon him the Name of the Catholic King, and
the Administration of Public Affairs, and making himself esteemed by his
People, by Acts of bounty and insinuating Declarations, it will be a harder
matter than we imagine to dispossess him of it. There is not upon Earth a
People more tenacious of what they have once resolved than the Spaniards are,
nor fonder in all the observations of their Duty to their Kings, whether Dead
or Alive: And if they can be persuaded to think well of the present
establishment, I know their Nature to be such, that they will stand by him to the
loss of all that they are worth: And since this Book is so far concerned in the
Description of that Country and People, it will be expected that something
should be said of the present posture of affairs, tho whatever can be said must
be purely but matter of Opinion, and a blind conjecture of what may, or may not
happen.

And here it falls into our way to inquire whether the greatest part of the
Nobility and Populace of that Kingdom, are pleased to have upon their Throne a
Son of that Family, that for many Ages has been in Arms against 'em, always the
rivals of their fame, and the invaders of their Provinces: One would think it
strange if they should, for several reasons; First, because of that invincible
antipathy in their Natures; Secondly, because he comes upon a wrong Foundation,
he having renounced all right and title; and his breach of that vow denoting
him faithless and never to be trusted; not to mention the affront put upon the
memory of their great Minister De Haro, by making such a jest of that solemn
League. Thirdly, because in all their Histories they have no Example of a
French King, who was King of Spain; it being the interest of their own State,
as well as that of their Neighbors, to keep France on the outside of their
Frontiers: With many such reasons as might be produced: But to Answer E
Contrario; we know that the Archduke was pitched upon for Successor some
considerable time before the Kings Death, and that the Succession of the Crown
was so entirely invested in him, that there was no manner of Provision made for
the French Line: Of this settlement the Court was well satisfied, and there was
no other interest made in Public, nor any Heir talked of but He who was
already Named: Thus it continued a long time before the King died, and might
have done so still, but for a zealous hotheaded Church Man, who by being so
near the Kings Conscience had opportunities of Cajoling him which way he would.

This Cardinal being by some means or other brought into the French faction,
whispers the King with the injury that would be done to France, if the
succession was given away from her, and that there was no right
(notwithstanding the treaty of Saint John de Luz) but what was absolutely in
the Children of that Marriage: The Pious King more afraid of doing a thing that
hazarded the Health of his Soul, than consenting to a project that might undo
all the Countries round him, listened to the Cardinal and gave him hopes of
succeeding.

While this was depending at Madrid, measures were concerted elsewhere for the
safety of the rest of Europe, by preventing the Crown of Spain from falling
into any one Monarchy, whether that of Germany or France. The Watchful Guardian
of England, was at the head of that project, and the States of Holland being
every way guided by so good a Pilot, followed him into it; Then having agreed
upon terms according to the most reasonable way of securing the Peace of
Europe, they proposed those terms to France and to the Emperor: France,
doubtful of his success at Madrid, consented to what was offered him, and
seeing no probability of getting all, he was glad to be content with a part:
The Emperor on the contrary, well assured of his right, and not doubting but
his Son would be declared Successor, refused to engage in that partition, which
was the dismembring of an Empire one day actually to be his; and in this
assurance he stood out to the last.

But now comes the great turn, the unexpected Catastrophe of the Spanish
Policy. The Cardinal Archbishop engages for the French, and being of great
credit in the Court and with the Credulous King, he forms a Confederacy to help
him to turn the stream into that Channel; and in the very moment of Death, when
the King was given up to contemplations of another Life, and was willing to
forget every thing that might bring back his mind to earth again, this
Spiritual tempter came in with a Will of his own making, and told the King
plainly, that he would not send him to Heaven, till he had revoked his first
Will, and Signed that: The good King now upon the Verge of Life, consents to
any thing, rather than not be absolved; and so to release himself, he has bound
us all to more terrible circumstances than those he was to endure in Purgatory.
The Will was then signed for the Duke of Anjou, and when he had done that, the
Cardinal told him he might die when he would; So he shut his eyes, and departed.

Now I would fain know what this Gigantick Will is that looks so big, and
Bullies the Empire of Germany out of her Right and Title: Is there force enough
in such a piece of Writing to put by the Heir from his possession? Can the
Archbishop of Toledo make a King of Spain in defiance of Leagues and
Inheritance? by his Office he invests the King with the Regalia, but what is
that to the making of a King? Or is the Crown of Spain so precarious, that the
King himself can give it away at his pleasure to the right or the wrong, as he
thinks fit? I don't remember any History of a Successive Monarchy that can
produce an Example like it. Queen Elizabeth, a little before her Death was very
much pressed to Name her Heir, not that she could make him an Heir that was not
so already, but because there were several pretenders that made their claims,
and this was an expedient to prevent animosities and parties among the People:
Accordingly the King of Scots was declared the immediate Successor, who
afterward came in, and all England were happy in him. This was another matter:
Here was no invading the rights of others, here was no bequest made of the
Crown, nor a Legacy that could not be countenanced by Justice and the consent
of all the Laws: The King of Scotland was the invincible rightful Heir, and
there has not been a Sovereign on the Throne of England of a fairer Title, and
not many of so fair, so that this Example gives this circumstance no advantage;
for though this Will had been considered, made and signed in the time of the
King's Health, it is beyond all controversy, that it could do the D. of Anjou no
Service, when he has no other Title to support him.

But there has been so much said of this by others, that I shall mention it no
more, and I shall say as little as I can of any thing that I have read
elsewhere, though it is hard on such a Subject to escape the same Arguments which
have been used before.

It concerns us now to reflect on the Establishment of the Succession, as it
stands at this time, and to see what remedy we have left us to help our selves,
if there be occasion: We are all sensible it would be a dreadful thing to see
the Scepters of F. and S. United into one Hand, and if so, why not into one
Family? Have the Ancestors of this present French King been more faithful in
keeping their Leagues than he? I believe not, and I remember formerly to have
seen a Book, Called An Account of the Contraventions of France; that made out,
that all the Leagues and Alliances whasoever made with F. have been to all
Intents and Purposes broke, when she had opportunities of bettering her self;
and that it was a Maxim there (as all particular Countries have particular
Maxims) to make their Covenants with such reservations to themselves, as to be
at Liberty to evade 'em, when they could get more by such a breach, than the
terms of the League came to: And if their Ancestors have been so perfidious,
why may not their Posterity? For my part, I expect nothing but universal War in
Europe, even in our Days, to set up an Universal Monarchy; and it is plain, we
all have reason to apprehend it, seeing the balance of power now absolutely
broke; but whatever becomes of us in the beginning of this Century, it is
certain there will be most fatal Changes before the end of it: Perhaps he who
now sits upon the French Throne, may not live to do the World much more
mischief than he has already done, yet he who shall succeed him, may follow his
Example, in his perfidy and contempt of Treaties, and as he sees opportunity,
work by easy degrees the entire inheritance of Spain, into their own line,
never to be interrupted.

But why may not this alteration be made in our Days? Whoever considers the
weakness, the Effeminacy and Dejection of the Spaniards at this time, will
think it no hard matter. They who have read the Story of the Erection of the
Roman Empire out of the Roman Commonwealth, have found, that though that was a
Republic, supported by the bravest Spirits in the World, Composed of a People
rigorously fond of their Liberties, and had lasted in that form for 6 or 700
Years, with an invincible abhorrence of all Kingly Government; yet 'twas all
too little for Caesar, who by one Step after another brought it out of that
form, and raised it into a Monarchy, and when he had done that, he made it
hereditary to his own Family.

The Design was very great, but nothing was too great for Caesar; he had a
powerful Army to back him, and an Exchequer to distribute to those he found
necessary to his Design.

The King of F. will have to do with a People already Degenerated to the lowest
pitch of Infamy, and while he has so good an Army without, and so much Money to
give away within Doors, What may he not do when he sets about it? And that the
Spanish Nobility will be Corrupted, is no hard matter to make out: Else why
such Zeal and Obstinacy for a Prince so far out of the way, as the D. of Anjou
was? Why such an imposition upon the easy King, as the forcing a Will upon him,
which he refused to Sign till he was threatened with Damnation? Why such
impatience for the bringing the Young King to Madrid? Why such fulsom
Hyperboles as De los Rios at Paris every Morning Salutes his New Master with?
Why such Largesses to be scattered among the People? Not to mention any more,
it is apparent that all the measures they take tend directly to create a Title,
and not demand it: And indeed his Policy in this is very Machiavilian, for he
knows the Title is a Foundation, upon which it were ridiculous to depend, and
therefore what he wants in that, he will make out in Ostentation and Caresses:
Then, when the Scepter is settled as he would have it, and the Genius of Spain,
made conformable to that of France, then 'twill be too late too look out; then,
in good earnest (as the Spanish Ambassador said in a Compliment) The Pyranees
will be melted down, and the Barriers between the two Kingdoms utterly taken
away. And this carries me to consider the only Objection of Force which can be
admitted; namely, That the D. of Anjou will enter into the Custom and Manners
of Spain, Rule all together by their Politics, and forget that he was Born a
Bourbon. But however probable this may seem, let us not deceive our selves;
it is a dangerous Trial, and not to be trusted in the Hands of one descended
from a Race of Kings, notorious for their Apostasy from all the bonds of Honor
and Alliances.

It Is ill Policy to trust a Pirate with our Merchandise, who has so often
plundered us already; or not to make a Metaphor of so literal a Truth, it will
be a Melancholy Reflection, to think, that all the Commerce of the World shall
be at the pleasure of two consenting Monarchs, the Grandfather and the
Grandchild.

Here I shall be interrupted -- But what harm can that cause us, if the D. of
Anjou stands up for an interest of his own, and renounces the Ties of Blood to
depend enteirly upon himself?

Suppose he does so, which, for Arguments sake we'll grant: But when he Dies,
and it is again in the power of France to give a King to Spain, Why may it not
be questioned, whether he who then sits upon the French Throne, will not as soon
make himself King of Spain, as make the D. of Berry so, considering the right
was first in him, or in the Elder Blood? To me it does not at all seem
unreasonable: for now it could not be done, because there is a Force in Europe
to awe him, as long as the English and Dutch stand together: But that such a
thing may happen hearafter is more than probable; for by that time there may be
changes in other Governments; England may want such a King as she now has:
Holland may want such a Stateholder to head her Army, and an English King to
Unite the English and Dutch powers, and make 'em act together: By these means
the two Nations, most able to keep up the Balance, may come to be divided
between themselves, and who shall then oppose what violence may be offered to
make F. and S. one? Nor is this a triffling Supposition. When the Lords and
Commons of Denmark fell out among 'emselves about Prerogatives, the King took
advantage of their quarrels, and while they were rivalling each other, he stepped
over 'em both, and made himself Absolute, and his Government independent of
'em, which else he never could have done. The parallel is good in the other: For
when the two Ballancing Nations come (as they often have done) to clash one with
another, What Enemies will be able to confine France? Germany will not then be
a Match for her; the Emperor has no Naval Force to contend for the Sea: The
Northern Crowns have little to do with it: Italy can do nothing, 'twill be more
than she can do to save her self, and in this perplexity, what can be expected
but absolute uncontrollable Dominion, not to be confined? And let not the
distance of these Events make us negligent now; they may be certain, though they
are remote; and the Children of the next Generation may have reason to Curse us
for suffering a Prince, whom we had so much Reason to mistrust, to get into his
Hands and the Management of a Crown that ought never to be annexed to that of
France.

To what extremity was Europe reduced by Charles the 5th. till Francis the
first stopped him! 'Twas well there was a Prince then in being, who had Strength
and Courage to check his great Successes, and to keep down his swelling Empire
from such a prodigious impostumation. Till then he had met with nothing that
opposed him, or he Conquered all that did: And it is past dispute, that he would
have made himself universal Emperor, if he had not been interrupted by this
Rival King: There he found his good Fortune to fail him; there the God of War,
that had given him so many Victories, held up the Standard of his Enemy,
against him, and overthrew that Favorites he had so long espoused; so that,
from that time; to his abdication of the Imper^ial Diadem, he found every thing
go backward with him; and lest he should live to see himself stripped of all that
he had got, he withdrew from the World, before the glory of his Arms was quite
departed from him, and in a humor, left the Empire to his Son, who lost it
fast enough.

But if we turn to the comparison upon France, the Event will not be the same:
for if France be so formidable of her self, what will she be, when the Sea
Ports of the Bay of Biscay, the Atlantic, and the Mediterranean; when the
Mines of America, and the richest Islands of the World, shall be added to her?
Nor can the Emperor do much to hinder him. The Turk is ready to divert him,
whenever France has a mind to put 'em by the Ears; England and Holland may be
engaged in Emulations of their own; and if these shall not be at leisure to
oppose him, where is that Power in Europe, that can Face him in the Field, much
less upon the Ocean? I hope this needs no proving; every one can Prophesy the
Misery of such a Reign, if ever it comes to pass. Nor can it be supposed, that
when a King of France is got to such a height of Power, he will descend from
it, as Charles did; for as long as the Posterity of this House will be in being
(and that may be to the end of the World, for they are a numerous Issue) there is
too much Ambition in their Natures to give away their Laurel while they are
able to to keep it.

But perhaps this may never happen; perhaps, as we said before, the D. of Anjou
will prove more a Spaniard than a French Man: Well, be it so; I wish it may:
But will not the King, whether it be his Grand Father, or his Father, resent
such a Defection? Most certainly they will, and if in his New Government he
acts any thing in contrariety to the interest of that wherein he was Born, How
easy will it be to set up the Elder Brother against him, especialy since
Renunciations go for nothing, and so take him down from that precarious Throne,
which he holds but by their Favor.

Or on the other hand, suppose the D. becomes a good Spaniard. The time may
come when He or his Heirs may have a right to the Succession of France: Can it
then be thought, that he who is in possession of so wealthy, so vast an Empire,
will surrender it to another, because the Will has so ordained it? It Is absurd
to think it; and he will be so far from quitting such a glorious So'vrain^ty,
that the Spaniards themselves will help him to recover his Right, and be proud
of the occasion of aggrandizing themselves, by having the reputation of giving
their Monarch another Empire.

This Article must be easyly granted, for the D. has left a Declaration behind
him to secure his turn in the Succession of France, as one of his Ancestors did
before him, who was made King of Poland: The Story is eminent in the French
Chronicle, which says, That when Henry the Third was elected King of Poland,
he left behind him a Specification of his Title; and when the Crown devolved
upon him, he stole out of Poland, and came to France to claim it, which was
allowed him, and he was thereupon King of France.

Be how it will, as near as we can guess at the uncertain dependances of
futurity, the result of this present Establishment, must be unhappy one time or
other: And by how much the longer the D. of A. is in possession, so much the
greater will be, either his Power, or the Power of France, according as he
acts, either for his own, or the interest of the other.

What then is to be done? There the wisest Politicians are at a loss: Our
cautious King fell upon the only Method to prevent the Calamities we are to
dread: And he had so far Established t, that if he had to do with a Man of any
Faith or Honor, we had been secure by those Measures he had formed. But as the
King of France has broke through all ties of Treaties and Leagues, there is
nothing hereafter to be trusted to his Word, and that being forfeited, we must
of necessity be always in Arms to watch him.

I would be far from advising the People of England to a War, who are but
lately come out of one, which cost 'em so much: But surely there is something
to be considered for our own security, if France be now intriguing for an Union
of the two Crowns. I must confess, it is more the Emperor's business than ours
to call him to Account, for he is positively affronted by having the Arch Duke
Post pon'd of his Right; but let it be his never so much, it is ours so far as
to oppose the conjunction of F. and S. with all our Vigor; that is undeniable.

But besides that, What can the Emperor do of himself? His Country is so
unhappily situated, that nothing can be like it: For Spain is not only a great
way from him, but France interposes so directly between 'em, that it is
impossible to come at any part of Spain, but through F. And one would think, that
as Nature has contrived the Pyrenees to keep Spain out of the power of France,
so she had, given to the French the power of keeping out every Body else: By
this unfortunate situation, it will be hard for the Emperor to do much in
Spain, or, indeed in Italy,, unless he can out-bid the K. of F. for marching of
his Men through the Grisons.

But to make amends for this Misfortune, the Emperor has an Army not inferior
to that of France; some of his Veteranes being the best and eldest standing
Force in Europe; and if he had Ships to Transport 'em through our Channel, and a
good Fleet to second him, he might bid fair for the Bay of Biscay, and the
Straits.

But this will be practicable at no time, but at this very juncture: For if the
Young King, who is going to his Throne, has leisure to ingratiate himself with
his People, and to buy up the Concurrence and Hearts of the Nobility; his
Grandfather, who has been used to that sort of Traffic, can put him in away
how to do it, and help him to Money into the bargin. To prevent this, it ought
to be the consideration of all Europe, especially the Emperors Duty, and the
Princes of Italy, and next Ours, and Hollands to look about us.

That there should be always a strong Fleet at Sea, every way superior to the
French, is absolutely necessary; and that to be under the conduct of the
Renowned Orford, so successful in our own Channel, and so beloved in Spain: If
this be not done, and by such a neglect, we give France the opportunity of
Triumphing every where over us, How dismal will it be, to have these things
issue in an Union of these two Monarchies and to so forma^ble a Power as France
already has; to see a Dominion of Thirty Eight Thousand Miles in circumference
in all parts of the Globe Allied, if not added to it.

AN ACCOUNT OF SPAIN, In several Letters.
LETTER I.
My Dear Brunet.
NOthing could give me greater satisfaction than the Commands you honored me
with at parting: My own curiosity agrees so well with yours, that I find double
pleasure in obeying you; for while I am contriving to gratify your Desires, I
am indulging my own. And when I write to the generous Brunet, I do it with the
greater complacency in my self, because I know I am to stand before a Judge,
who will not too severely censure my imperfections: I remain indebted to your
Clemency, for several favors which are yet unacknowledg'd; and I consider that
I am running into a new Score before the old be paid off, like a Bankrupt who
has nothing to afford for his Disability, but Thanks and Gratitude: However
I Will venture a little further on your good Nature, and with the same assurance
that I relied upon it in our former Correspondences, I begin my Narration.

When I left St. Maloes, I embark't on a Danish Ship that was bound for
England: The Port where we Anchored was the same where the Royal Armado of that
Country then Rode. It fell out very opportunely for my Design, that I should
come there at that juncture; for the Day after our arrival, there was an order
for all the Squadrons to Sail, and immediately the Signal was made by halling
home the foretop-Sail Sheets. As soon as I came a shore I shifted my Clothes,
and having furnished my self with the habit which their Sailors wore, I changed
the form of my dress, and disguised my self as like one of them as I could: You
may remember that I had been Master of the English Tongue a great while, for I
had formerly been in London, where I resided four Years, and had in that time
acquired so much of it, that I could express my self perfectly in whatever I
had occasion to say: This was of great use to me afterward; and even at first
I might have met with some difficulty if I had given them any jealousy of my
coming so lately out of France, by being destitute of it. But I was now
provided against all suspicion; for feigning my self a Hugonot, (which is a
sufficient pass for a French Man among these credulous People) I got admittance
into company of some of the Seamen; and having easily persuaded them, that I
had been a sufferer for my Religion, and that I fled from the rage of the
Persecution, they become fond of me to such a degree that it had almost proved
a quarrel among the several Competitors who courted me to ship my self among
them, which of them should enjoy my company. These sort of People are stubborn
and quarrelsome, apt for all manner of mischief, turbulent and hard to be
subdued, and highly jealous of their affronted Honor, for they have a notion
of something which they take to to be a point of Honor, which amounts to no
more than this, That every one thinks himself a better Man than his fellow. The
dispute which they had about me was of this kind, every Man courted me to
himself, and each opposed the other.

I who was not yet well enough acquainted with the nature of these fierce
Islanders, was at a loss how to behave my self among them on this nice
occasion: I saw plainly if I should determine in favor, or in prejudice of any
of their Persons, by seeming to prefer one to another, Civil Wars would have
ensued. But after some consideration, I believed the only way would be to let
them know that I had already resolved how to dispose of my self, to give them
every one thanks for their kindness, and to unite all their differences by
concluding in favor of none of them, but to assure them, that I had long ago
intended to ship my self upon the Admiral (of which I had heard great Fame) and
was then come to enter my self Aboard. The Speech which I made to to this
purpose had like to have undone me; for I forgot to change my style, and they
began to find out that I did not talk like a Sailor. This bred a Mutiny, and I
was going to have a Council of War called upon me, when an Officer passing our
Room, heard the noise and came in, Demanding the cause of this uproar, every
one stood up and would undertake to tell him the Adventure; then from one end
of the Room to to'ther there was such a general din, that I verily thought I
had been in one of Quevedo's Visions, and that I saw the Devils going again to
macerate the poor damned Traitor Judas. The presence of the Officer put at last
an end to their Fury, and away they marched.

This Gentleman was a Lieutenant, of the very Ship I looked for, who inquiring
whence and what I was, I gave him the same account I had done to my Companions,
only adding, that I had formerly lived in a better Capacity, but was now
reduced to circumstances of great necessity; and having some insight into
Navigation, I could not dispose of my self better than into the service of a
Prince, who had filled all the World with the Fame of his Arms.

The Gentleman might perceive by the manner in which I spoke, that I had not
always been so wretched as I now seemed to be, for I did it on purpose to
prevail with him for good quarter, and he very civilly assured me, he would
distinguish me from the rest of the Crew. Then he took me with him, and
appointed me conveniences better than I could in reason expect.

One might think, that he who had seen the lofty Navy of France, could not be
much transported with what he saw in any other Country; But I cannot forbear
acquainting my Dear Friend with what amazement I beheld this glorious Show.
Never was the Bosom of the Sea insulted by such a Fleet, never was so
Magnificent a Pomp. Oh Brunet! It Is inconceivable and above description: Let it
suffice that all the Kingdoms of the Universe come infinitely short of England
for the Strength, Number and Beauty of their Shipping. It Is true, our present
glorious Monarch has done wonders that way, but trust me Friend, it is all but
Pageantry to this.

Soon after my Embarkment, I gave my self up to consider of every thing I saw
round me: To speak of all that pleased me, would run me into such confusion,
that I should not clear my self a great while. I beheld every where matter of
sufficient contemplation; but that which struck me with most wonder, was the
suprizing Brittania, the Ship wherein I entered my self, and the Capital of the
whole Navy. To describe this noble Structure, would be a Task of immense
difficulty; In all the fabrications I had seen, I never met with any thing came
near her. I know what Opinion you at home have of your own Power, but be
assured from one who was well acquainted with the Naval Force of France, That
she bears no proportion to this, neither in Number, Fabric, Ornament, nor
Discipline, though I confess, it may be said with some justice, That the Rising
Sun (which was once the glory of the Gallick Fleet) had many excellencies to
make Her remarkable; but when She stands in comparison with the Bratannia, it
may be said the Kite is compared to the Eagle: Not that I want Ceremony for my
own Country; but that my Opinion in this, and every other particular may be
impartial, I shall all along speak my mind as if I had no interest in the one
side or the other.

The Signal for Sailing being made, one might behold in this Ship a Thousand
Hands at work in an instant; such a multitude loaded her Decks, that her strong
Floors groaned with the oppressing Weight, and seemed to bend beneath it: There
appeared in every Face such an alacrity, and in their Hands such readiness,
that I could not choose but be delighted with it.

Our Anchors being up, we made Sail, stretching over to the Coast of France,
and standing toward Breast. Here it was that I began to feel some reluctance
for what I had undertaken, for I found there was a design of attempting
something against that Harbor; and it grieved me to the Soul, that I should be
constrained to take up arms against my native Country. I had not been long in
this apprehension, ere I perceived the Squadrons to part several ways: That
wherein I was, and two more stood back again to Sea, and the remainder stayed
behind and plied upon the Coast. This relieved me from my Fears of Fighting
against my Country, but I was not a little mortified, that the English and
Dutch should thus Lord it in the Channel, and drive us under the Protection of
our Harbors. It was now rumored that their Design was against Breast, both by
the Course they Steered, and by the great preparation which was made for a
Descent; They on the other Side had early Intelligence of the Design, and were
so well prepared to receive 'em, that when the English landed, expecting little
or no Opposition, they soon saw their fatal Mistake, and that they had now
besides all the Castles and Forts, a huge Army to Encounter. This was the most
deplorable Enterprise that ever the English undertook, and it was almost a pity
to see so many miserable Souls run headlong to their Destruction, which they
themselves now easily saw, but had not power to avoid. This memorable Exploit
is known by the Name of Cameret-Bay-Fight, and will be Famous to all Posterity
for the bloody Execution, and for the Death of the most Renowned General
Talmash, who was one of the first who fell. Our Squadrons, which now made up a
Fleet of about 40 English, and 20 Dutch, besides small Frigates not in the Line
of Battle, Fireships, Storeships and Tenders, changed their Course as soon as
they were out of Sight, and stood out for the Main, and we all jumped right in
our Opinions that we were going to the Straits.

At this time our Toulon Fleet had been Bombarding the Coasts of Spain in the
Meditteranean. Malaga and Alicant and some other Places had already felt the
fury of their Bombs, and Barcelona was to be the last Scene of their Hostility;
and by the way I cannot choose but admire the wonderful Intelligence our Master
keeps in these Foreign Courts; for he had long known of this intended Voyage,
and not caring to hazard his weaker Fleet against the best of his Enemies, he
sent Orders to his Admiral before Barcelona to dislodge. And what is very
remarkable, the French withdrew from thence the very same Day the English
hoist'd Sail in the Channel: 'Twas a Masterpiece of Care so soon to foresee
this Storm, and to prevent it; for had they surpised them at Sea, the
Consequences might have been fatal.

Our Voyage (I speak of the English) went prosperously on, without encountering
any extraordinary Adventure: Some Prizes the Cruisers brought in, but I think
our Countrymen made sufficient Reprizals on 'em in all parts of the World. In
twenty Days, or thereabouts, we came within sight of Cales, and there another
Squadron, commanded by a Rear-Admiral, joined us: This last Squadron was the
remainder of that commanded by Sir Francis Wheeler, who was Drowned at the back
of Gibralter, by that terrible Levant which cast away His and Thirteen other
Ships, and dashed 'em into Pieces: This Gentleman was of great Reputation for
his Skill and Courage; but I don't know what can be said for the First, after
so notorious a Mistake as he made of the Land; for at the close of the Evening
he perfectly saw the Shore, but he mistook his Marks, and thought he had been
to Leeward of the Hill, when he was to Windward; and that cost him his Life,
and the loss of many good Ships, both Men of War and Merchants.

We were now 70 Men of War in the Line of Battle complete, besides innumerable
other Vessels of inferior Order, which made in all a glorious Appearance.

The Spaniards were alarmed at this stupendous Navy, because they had never,
in their Opinions, seen any thing much better than their own.

We had not been long cruising off the Island, e're the Spaniards got ready
what little force they had, which consisted in all but of Ten Ships of War and
Two Fire Ships: With these they joined us, and a great many Complements we
received from their Guns, which our General Answered.

Of these Ten there were but Three or Four that were fit for Company, the rest
were such Hospitals that they were a scandal to the Navy: And though they had
been Five Years in fitting out these, and boasted to the World what a power
they would bring; yet after Six days sail, most of 'em were disabled, and they
could hardly crawl under their Crutches up to Barcelona: However, at their
Return, they failed not to give out, that it was for fear of them that the
French ran away, and the ignorant People, who have a high Conceit of their own
power, believed all that was said. It Is a ridiculous Story to tell, how they
were exalted with this Summers Expedition, they verily thought the whole Navy
of France was not able to Encounter their Ten Ships; and though they came home
Cripl'd and Maimed, because indeed they went out so, yet nothing could
undeceive 'em, but that it was the bare appearance of their Ten Ships that set
the Enemy a running, and scoured the Sea. When we came up to Barcelona, we
found the Rode clear, and no Marks of an Enemy but what they left with their
Mortars. We Anchored, and it was some satisfaction to us to see that we were
now in a part of Spain, that could acknowledge the benefit they received by us,
and that we were welcomed ashore as the Friends and Protectors of Catalonia.

There being nothing to be done here, we stayed awhile to water and divert our
selves, and then prepared for our Return; and by the way we put in at Alicant,
to see what devastation the French had made, and perhaps every one but I was
mortified at the sight. Malaga fared not much better; but because I intend not
this as a Journal, I shall make haste to Cales, which was appointed for our
Winter Quarters, and say nothing of Barcelona, and the other places we touched
at, till next Voyage.

After some time of Abode and Conversation, the English and Spanish grew more
familiar: Our General and the Governor had interviews of Ceremony, and every
thing tended to a good Understanding. Our Ships were laid up, and every man
began to be idle.

In this Interval of Ease, when all the world was at quiet, and War set aside
till the Return of the Spring, pleasure was all the study of the Fleet: Every
Captain had now his House and his Mistress ashore, every Seaman Surfeited with
good Wine and fresh Provision, and his short Allowance-money bought him a
Spanish Whore and a Clap: Above all, our Noble General lived in great Royalty
at his House, which a Don bestowed on him for his use and diversion, as long as
he stayed: He kept a plentiful Table, and began already to amaze the thrifty
Spaniards with that Excess and Profusion which every day appeared on the board.
But when the Fourth of November was drawing near, which is the Birthday of the
King of England, there was such an Entertainment talked of, as hardly was
outdone by any of the Gluttonous Emperors, who are Chronicled for their Luxury.
I shall presume so much on your inclination as to be a little particular in
this description; for it made so great a noise all over the World, that you
must needs hear on it, but perhaps not know any thing of it, but as you had it
in gross.

On this great Holiday the General intended to Entertain all the English,
Dutch, and Spanish Officers with a Dinner and a Bowl of Punch, to Celebrate the
Birth of his Master, and to keep up that Amity that was between themselves: It
was already rumored as an extraordinary thing; and believing there might be
something in it worth my Curiosity, I crowded in to see it, and I can assure you
I was so strict an observer of all that past, that nothing escaped me, nor
shall I relate any thing but what I really saw with my own Eyes.

The Feast was in every respect beyond what I could imagine; and if I had not
been a Witness to every singular transaction, you might perhaps doubt the truth
of what I am going to tell you.

There were Four Tables spread in all: At the First sat the General, the
Spanish General, and Vice Admiral: The Dutch Admirals, and Two or Three men of
Quality besides; At another Table in the same Room sat all the English
Merchants of the Neighboring Towns; At the Third which was without, were all
the chief English Officers to the number of a Hundred or thereabouts, and in
the adjoining Room the inferior Officers. I never beheld greater plenty at any
Feast I had seen at Paris, nor sent in better order: There was such variety of
every thing that was in season, that one might have said, the Lakes had been
drained of their Fish, the Air had been stripped of its Fowls, and the Fields of
their Cattle; That the Vines had been unloaded for Wine, and all the Gardens in
the Province plundered for Fruit: The vainest Epicure could hardly have named
that thing that was wanting; and in short, I never saw a more beautiful
Confusion: Every Element had some share in it, and I can say nothing greater of
it, than that it was a Banquet fit for the generous Giver, and the august
Occasion it Commemorated. When Dinner was over, the General rose, and all the
Company after him, and the Scene was removed to the Garden. When they came
there, they found the Punch ready.

I don't know whether Brunet is acquainted with this sort of Liquor, but he may
guess, when he has heard what the Ingredients are, what an unpalatable Drink it
must be. That which they called the Bowl, was a large Fountain in the center of
the Garden, shaded with Lemmon Trees, and looking into the Four principal Walks
that terminated at the end of the Garden; Now you will say this seems a little
Romantic, but I do assure you I shall write nothing but what was literally
true, at least as well as I can remember. There were in this Fountain-Bowl
first of all a Dozen English Barrels of Water, amounting to 432 Gallons: Of
Brandy there was 188 Gallons: Of Sugar 400 weight, of Lemmons, which the Garden
it self afforded, about Six Thousand: A Pound of Nutmegs, and there was ordered
a 100 weight of Biskets, but there was none put in. Thus this Giant-bowl was
compounded, and they who were Critics in this Sort of Liquor, said they never
drunk better in their Lives; for the General had taken great Care to have it
well made, and for that end had named three Captains, whom he styled the
Commissioners of the Punch, to see it duly prepared: The Fountain was brim
full, and for the Merriment of the Frolic, there was a small Boat built on
purpose to float about this Lake of Sulphur, with Oars and a Boy to Row, and to
Skink to the Company in Silver Pints that lay thick about the brim of the
Fountain: Now the Healths went plentifully round; The Princes of the
Confederacy were first huzzaed in Pint Brimmers, as the Emperor, Kings of Spain
and Britain, then the States of Holland, and last of all the Generals with an
universal Huzza, which echoed to the Skies. This fearful Noise put me in Mind
of the Ottoman way of Warring, for when they begin the Charge, every one
Hallows as loud as ever he can, and tears his Throat for the shrillest Voice,
and then with a general Shout they fall to: Just so 'twas here; The Punch was
the Enemy they were to engage, they fell to Work with a most outrageous Dinn,
and their Engagement had so much of a real Battle in it, that several were
Killed and Wounded in the Assault. Round the Bowl were several Tables spread
with Hams, Tongues, Pickles, and all sorts of dried Meats in great variety; and
behind 'em, in the Walks, were Consorts of Music, so far from one another that
they were just heard, and distinguished without Confusion. Now tell me (my
Friend) was ever any thing more Magnificent? Was ever any thing more Romantic?

This Noble Company (though most of 'em had more than they could carry off) sunk
not the Bowl above an Inch, but when they withdrew to let in the Sailors to it,
there was such a Torrent of these Drunken Rogues, that in half an Hours time
there was not one Drop left, for with their Hats and Buckets they lav'd it as
dry, as an honest Drunkard does his Glass when he Drinks to a Supernaculum; and
well the Gluttons might, for they were now thirsty after having fed upon a
whole Ox that was roasted for 'em, which they cut off the Spit, and swallowed
down burning Hot: So ended this sumptuous Banquet.

The Winter being our long Vacation, I had nothing else to do but to make my
remarks of the Disposition of the People I was engaged with. 'Twere a needless
Trouble to tell the well Read Brunet what a Temper the English are of, the
Neighborhood of our Countries has always afforded great Commerce with 'em, and
there is hardly a French Man of any Curiosity, but is perfectly acquainted with
their Humors. As for the Spaniards, there is such an Antipathy between us and
them, that we seldom speak well of 'em, but though I were divested of all my
Country prejudices, yet I could hardly say any thing to their Advantage, and to
tell thee the Truth, I hate 'em heartily: But the present bent of my
Inclination lying another way, I shall not spend my Time in giving Characters, but
considering that Brunet is at this time a Lover, I would fain entertain him
with some amorous Adventure that is more suitable to his Genius: This idle Time
furnished us with variety of Intrigues, but as I am no good Historian at such
Novelties, so I would not render your Time heavy to ye by relating 'em in my own
Style, but I Will make you amends with a Manuscript, which with much difficulty I
purchased of a Traveller who was concerned in the Ship which was the Scene of
the Amor, and which I have transcribed and sent enclosed: But I send it to ye
with such Caution, that I would have you value the Gift, as you would a fairy
Treasure, which (they say) is dangerous to reveal. The Author has shadowed his
Lovers with imaginary Names, to darken a little so late an Adventure, because
the Matter of Fact is true, and of so great Importance. The Story runs thus.

THE STORY.
THE Monarchy of Philippia had been long governed by a Race of warlike Kings,
no Chronicle can produce a Series of greater Heroes, nor Actions more
astonishing than what we find in the Histories of that Empire: For from the
first Prince Pelagius, who for his great Exploits against the first barbarous
Invaders was chosen King, down to the present Sovereign Catolinus, there was
hardly one who enlarged not the Bounds of his Sovereignty, and planted not his
Arms in some far distant Region. A Thousand Ages they were reputed the first
Monarchs of Asia, and their spacious Dominions reached from one end of the
Globe to the other.

In this Posture stood the Kingdom, when from an Infant Catolinus was saluted
King: Never was a People in greater Expectation than of this young Hero: They
looked in him for all the gallant Accomplishments of his Ancestors, and the Eyes
of all the World were bent on him as the Successor of such an illustrious
Progeny, and as a Prince of wondrous Promises. There wanted nothing to render
his Education complete, Masters of all Sciences were brought from the Academies
to give him Discipline; the Sun shined with a double Force upon him, and every
thing conspired to animate him with all the Vigor that his Years could bear:
The Subjects which he was to Rule, were a People who had been very Famous in
the Ages that are past, for their Courage and Successes; but of later Years,
since Religion has usurped so much over the Temporal Power, and effeminated
their Spirits, they have been enslaved to the Church, and changed beyond all
belief from what they were. Yet in the midst of this depravity they still
retained some Notions of Honor, and were now in Hopes of a King that should
restore 'em to their Courage and their Glory: His first Minority gave 'em all
the Encouragement they could wish for, and they hoped to find him one Day such
as they had formed him in their Imaginations, and for many Years he blossomed
so beautifully, that they doubted not but he would prove the Summer's Blessing.
Thus every thing flourisht, and there seemed no want, but of a Maturity of
Years to ripen the young Monarch, and to make 'em a happy People: But now
behold what a turn, what a fatal Disappointment of their exalted Hopes!

The Inhabitants of Philippia, are (as was said) ridiculous Bigots to their
Religion: The Patriarch of all the Eastern Churches has not throughout the
extent of his Jurisdiction, a People more devoted to his Interest, nor more
violent Defenders of his Usurpation: This is the Reason that this Country
swarms with an ignorant and superstitious Clergy, Zealous of the Interest of
the Church, and absolute in their Power: The Laity stands in profound Awe of
their Frowns, and when any Affair of Importance is to be controverted, wherein
there may be a Party made for the advantage of the Church, they ride upon the
humility of the People, and get all things into their Government.

'Twas thus with this infatuated Nation, when the tender Catolinus arrived to
Years that made him fit for their Management, and the Patriarch knowing what
benefit it would be to him if this Young King was betimes made his Creature,
prevailed by his insinuating Ministers that he might be put into the hands of
the Ecclesiastics, and Educated with a fond Affection to the Church, and a
prejudice to all Secular Affairs. They prospered so well in their design, that
even in his Pupillage he became a passionate Lover of his Religion, and seemed
already to be wrapped up in it to such a degree, that he took no notice of those
Exercises which were fitter for his Youth, but gave himself wholly up to
Amusement and Meditation. This unmanly weakness was the cause that afterward
he could relish nothing of the Duty of so great a Monarch; but having neglected
to accomplish himself as a Prince, instead of becoming a Soldier as his
Ancestors had been, he degenerated into a stupidity of Godliness, and Reigned
more like a Priest than a King.

'Twas a melancholy Reflection to see such a military People now diminisht into
the most sordid slothful Wretches that ever lived: Arms were now forgot, their
rusty Swords lay idle, their Garrisons were unregarded, and their neglected
Shipping, which for many Ages had been the wonder of all their Neighbors, now
became their disgrace. The King's Example corrupted all the Youth, he became a
Bigot to the Church, and they became Bigots to him, not that they could commend
his Genius, but it indulged their idleness, and unmann'd their Souls: Never was
so hideous a sight of Corruption and Apostasy, their Friends pitied 'em, their
Enemies derided 'em, and the distant parts of the World could hardly believe
it. Near Thirty years he held the Scepter without doing any Action fit for so
sublime a Monarch, he saw himself invaded on all sides, whole Provinces were
snatched from his Crown; and he who had no disposition for War, saw all with
little or no opposition, and sat down at last contented with the loss. At
length his miserable Subjects became sensible of their Shame; and as they found
it too late to hope for redress from the present King, they concerted means to
furnish the Kingdom with an Heir who might in time redeem their prostituted
Honor, and awake 'em from their inglorious Lethargy. In order to this, it was
advised that the King should marry, his Counselors looked around the World for
a Lady fit for so high a Dignity; and at last, they cast their Eyes on a
Daughter to one of the Chief Princes that Compose the great Body of the First
Empire of Asia, the Celebrated beautiful Nuberia now appointed the tutelar
Goddess of this perishing Empire.

This charming Princess was the Idol of the Country where she lived, a Lady of
such excelling Beauty, and such uncommon accomplishments of mind, that it is
hard to say, whether her Virtue or her Beauty was most admirable: Fame had long
ago filled the Universe with the Acclamation of her Perfections, and Princes
from the remotest parts of the Earth languish'd for her. Every sighing Lover,
when he would say any thing extraordinary of his Divine Mistress, could say
nothing finer of her, than by comparing her to the Princess Nuberia; for in
that all the glory of the Sex was determined, and there could be nothing more
said than what they copied from her. Soon as they had concluded on this
illustrious Lady, Ambassadors were sent to her Father's Court to treat of a
Marriage. But though the incurious Catolinus had given his consent to this
Embassy; yet he found in himself but little inclination to the Alliance, having
intoxicated his Brain with other matters, and made himself utterly insensible
of Gallantry, or the softer Impressions of Love: The Ambassadors being
dispatched, came in few days to the Court where she resided; The grateful
Arsaces her Father read their Message with great Acknowledgments of the honor;
and though he had already matched his other Daughters to the best Monarchies in
Asia; yet he esteemed this the greatest honor he had received, and no wonder
then he showed his readiness to consent to the proposal.

The disconsolate Nuberia had quite another opinion of this Match; she had
heard no advantageous Character of Catolinus; and the first emotions she felt
at the proposal, were resentment and reluctance. But 'twas in vain to contend
with her Father's Authority; Ambition was his God, though Love was hers: At
length his frequent sollicitings made her descend to it whether she would or no;
and she who had never disobeyed him, at last consented. The Ambassadors
returned with their Commissions prosperously discharged; and the next thing to
be considered was her Transportation to Philippia.

It happened at this time that the Crown of Philippia was in Confederacy with
the King of the famous Island Neptunia, against the common Enemy the Tyrant of
Asia.

This King of Neptunia had above all his Ancestors in that Monarchy so great a
Force every Summer at Sea, that he was looked upon as the entire support of the
War; and by being himself present with the Allied Armies in the Field, he had
acquired immortal Renown by his great Conduct and Gallantry. And on the Ocean
he triumphed so securely, that since the fatal Defeat which he gave the Tyrants
Ships even upon their own Coast, the Dominion of the Oriental Seas became
entirely his. Catolinus having the opportunity of so good a Friend, and being
ill provided of Shipping himself, bethought himself of sending to his
Ambassador who always resides at that Court, to beg that a Squadron of Men of
War might be detatcht out of so numerous a Fleet, and sent on this important
Errand. This being immediately granted, it was ordered, that his Chief General
Saladine, famous for a Thousand glories, should Sail with the Capital Squadron
to the Imperial Shore, and wait for her Arrival.

This General, whom we shall describe because of his importance in this Story,
was a Gentleman of one of the first Houses in the Kingdom of Neptunia; his
Ancestors had been for many Ages famous in the Records of that Country; and
though he himself was but a younger Branch of that illustrious Stock, yet at
this time his Family boasted of one of the best Estates, and the best Titles in
the Land, and even he himself enjoyed an honorable Report, and a Spacious
Fortune, besides what he held by his Noble Employments, and was all along one
of the leading Subjects of the Nation: He had been Educated with all the
advantages the Court could give him; and besides those outward Accomplishments,
he was of a graceful person, and exceeding suavity of Manners. When he received
his Instructions, he made what haste he could to get ready, and with much
celerity he furnished himself with all things fitting so high a trust. As he
was a man of great Address, he spared for nothing that was proper for the
Entertainment of so Royal a Guest, and his liberality was on this occasion so
particular, that he put himself and all his Retinue into magnificent Garbs, and
loaded his Ship with profusion of all manner of Necessaries, and adorned the
Royal Apartment with all the beauty he could purchase for it, insomuch that
after her Embarking, it may be admitted a Question if ever the Princess had
been more magnificently regaled in her Father's, or any of the Courts of the
Empire, though all the Treasures of the Province were laid upon the Board.

'Twas in this manner the gallant Saladine waited for the coming of the
Celebrated Dame, and after some few days expectation, the Bruit of her approach
gave him notice to prepare, and he now began to set all things in order for her
Reception. In few Hours after he heard the Guns from the Shore, proclaimed her
Entrance into the Port Town, and he answered 'em with his and all the Ordnance
of his Squadron: When she first beheld the Neptunian Fleet, though at a distance,
she felt in her self all the Convulsions of joy and terror: The first arose
from the pleasure she had in beholding such a noble preparation for her, and
the latter from the reluctance she had to this unwelcome Voyage: But the
Ceremonies of the place not giving her leisure to reflect on any thing, she
must of necessity render her self to the Civilities of those Princes and other
great Personages who came to pay her their Gratulations. When the Ceremonials
were over, and she no longer restrained, she withdrew to her Closet, to
overruled as much as she could her Sorrows, and to be at liberty to fortify her
self against the approaching Fate: But in vain was all her Philosophy; for though
she had an entire resignation to the Will of her Father in every thing, yet in
this Circumstance she could not choose but condemn him for disposing of her
without her own Approbation: Night drew on, and she retired to her Repose,
having first sent to Saladine, that the next Morning she would come Aboard.

When the Morning came, the Shore was crowded with infinite Numbers of People
who pressed to see Her. The Cannon again founded her Triumph, and the Clamours of
the Amazed Spectators returned it to the Skies. The Nobles who attended Her
were now dismissed; and they who were parting with Her, wholly resigned her to
the care of the happier Saladine. 'Twas visible in every Eye the grief they had
to part with Her, but most of all in Her own, when She considered She was to
take Her everlasting leave of Her own Country, in exchange for another. She
could not think of without Tears: She bid 'em all adieu with exceeding regret;
and having turned her Eyes to the Fleet, she gave her self up to her expected
destiny. The hasty Oars carried her off, and the last sight she took of the
Shore, drew some sighs which She had not strength to stifle.

At length She came Aboard, and the Sumptuous Saladine received her at the
side. But good Gods! the Astonishment he was in when he beheld the immortal
Charmer! The Tongues of Angels tuned to Celestial Music cannot utter his
surprise; He thought he had received something immortal, and he was within a
thought of prostrating himself at her Feet, to show how much he was enchanted:
It Is inexpressible his Wonder and Amaze; for though at another time he could have
played the Orator, now Excessive Splendour struck him dumb. He gazed at the fair
Divinity, as if he had never beheld any Human Creature before; and
notwithstanding all his good breeding, he was struck into silence and
stupidity; just as a Traveller who unawares is surpised with some superb
Building, whose mavelous Fabric of a sudden strikes him with inconceivable
Transports. At length he tries to speak, but the power was wanting; for the
Organs of his Voice were bound up in Rapture, and he remained like a Statue
stiff and void of Motion. His Mind was agitated with a thousand different
Labors; and in his Breast he already felt a Fire which scorcht him to the
Heart: His Eyes were fixed not to be removed, his Countenance changed with the
Anguish of his Passion, and he trembled as if an Earthquake had shook the
Foundations of the World. At last he burst out -- Ye Gods! what can this be?
Why do I gaze on this Celestial Creature, to whom it is even Sacrilege to speak?
He stopped and gave his Senses leave to renew their Contemplation. Still his
Amazement continued; and though the Credit of his Character lay at stake for so
profound stupidity, yet he was so lost in wild Confusion, that 'twas in vain to
endeavor recovery.

The quicksighted Princess saw all his disorder, and could not choose but
ascribe it to some extraordinary Cause, his handsome appearance spoke him no
Clown, and she believed perhaps on another occasion he could have carried
himself another manner, yet far from divining the true reason, she considered
him as a man under some dissatisfaction, and gave her self no Curiosity to
examine it further.

These were the first Impressions they had of each other, he was Thunderstruck
with the Figure of so excellent a Creature, and she was pleased to have so
Renowned a General to accompany her in her Voyage.

Upon her Embarking all the Ordnance was thrice discharged, Vollies of welcome
were shouted by the Seamen, and nothing was omitted to express the Triumph of
the day.

The beautiful Nuberia had among other Ladies, one whom she admitted into all
her Affairs. This Lady she chose for her Bedfellow, and for the Partner of her
secrets: To her she began now to reveal her displeasure of this Marriage; and
though she had not engaged her Heart in any Passion elsewhere; yet she found in
her inclinations no promptness to the Alliance. She failed not to tell her,
that the Temper of the Philippian Monarch would by no means suit with hers,
that she had heard how his Government had run him into discredit with his own
People, and that he was too much a Saint to be a good Lover.

The indulgent Maid agreed with her in what she said, and humored her
Melancholy with more than an affected pity; for she really lamented her
condition: The ingenious Fidelia had been brought up with her Mistress in her
Father's Court. In their Infancy they had been Companions, and from time to
time as they grew up together, their Pleasures and their Exercises had been
always the same, and nothing happened to one, but the other shared in the
satisfaction or distress: 'Twas thus that by a long Trial of her Virtue the
Cautious Princess knew the value of her Friend, and she never had than now more
need of her Consolation. And being so well assured of her integrity, she
unbosom'd her self of all those oppressions which she labored with.

By this time the amazed Saladine began to recover, he now ruminates on what he
had seen, and the manner of his behavior: He remembered he had been too remiss
in the Ceremony with which he ought to have received so illustrious a
Passenger, and torments himself with the apprehension of having given her an
ill Opinion of his Carriage, he was afraid his ill behavior would be
interpreted to proceed from want of Address, or what was Ten thousand times
worse, from want of respect, and the dread of such an impression gave him
unspeakable trouble. In this distraction he could hardly contain from running
into the Cabin, and prostrating himself at her Feet: But that extravagance
left him when he considered he should have opportunities sufficient to clear
himself of that imputation: And immediately while it was unseasonable to pay
any further Civilities to the Princess, he called together his Captains and
other Officers of his Ship, and gave 'em strictly in charge to treat with most
profound respect all such of her Country who had the honor of attending her.
This piece of Gallantry was presently reported to Nuberia, and she seemed
extremely pleased to find her self mistaken in the Conduct of a man who knew
how to regard her, and one that took such early care to make himself obliging.

After she had been Aboard a while, and contemplated the Magnificence of the
Provision that was made for her, she was highly delighted with it, and confessed
that upon another occasion she could have been well contented with such an
Abode; so showing some inclination to walk upon the Deck for a prospect of the
Neptunian Fleet, she had no sooner said it, but the News was carried to
Saladine, who hastened to the Cabbin-Door to receive her: She did not expect
him there, but she was not unpleasantly surpised to see him so obsequious, and
to find him a little more complaisant than he had been at her entrance: She
then gave him her Hand, and walked forwards with him: The confounded General
trembled with the unexpected honor, he now felt her tender delicate Hand, and
the joy which he conceived at it threw him again into a Lethargy of Silence and
Confusion. Ye Heavens (he muttered to himself) what can this be? Whither will
ye hurry the undone defenseless Saladine? If this I feel be love, first strike
me dead, rather than let me fear a Fire which must consume me to nothing: How
can a Wretch like I look up to so much brightness! it is Insolence, it is
Arrogance, it is Blasphemy to speak to her: Oh Charming Excellence! with that he
sunk his Eyes down to the Deck, and durst not raise 'em up for fear of meeting
hers.

The penetrating Princess, spite of all his Caution, saw his glances; but
whatever effect they had upon her, she showed neither pleasure nor resentment;
but passing on as if she had not minded him, she suffered him to lead her to
the Ballisters, and there she stopped: She thought she had now given him an
opportunity of saying something to her of the delightful prospect they had; but
she was quite out of her Aim; for even now again the poor sufferer had no
Language for her, but that of his Eyes. This gave her extreme impatience, and
she could not conjecture the cause of his continued reserv'dness; but being no
longer able to hide her Curiosity, she began the Conversation by asking him if
that were the whole Navy of Neptunia. Her Voice awak't him; but not being so
much at leisure to himself to consider what she said, he Answered her in broken
Accents very far from the purpose; this increast her Wonder and his Confusion;
and for an Hour together, he could not recover from his Amazement. Never was
the lost Saladine in such a Labyrinth of Misery, he saw himself entering into a
Passion which might prove fatal to him, and he now began to lose all hopes of
arming against it: Every sight he had of her gave him less and less assurance
of his Recovery, and still plunged him deeper. The cautious Princess was in
some confusion as well as he, to see him thus; not that she altogether believed
she had any interest in his disorder; but it is very likely she wished the happy
Saladine so well, that she could suffer with him in all his Adversities: She
began to condole and pity him, and though she found no violent Inclination to
Love him as yet, yet she conceived for him such an ardent Friendship as was not
many degrees from it. She believed she might without an Injury to her high
Quality consider him as her Friend, and not making any further Reflections on
the State of her present Disposition, she gave her Heart leave to act as it
would.

It Is indeed to be allowed, that bating that Melancholy which had overcast him,
The gallant Saladine wanted no Ornament to recommend him, his Person was
exceeding Graceful, his Mien and Air had something of uncommon agreableness,
and besides the advantage of his Person, he had a happy Genius in his Dress,
which never failed of serving him to good purpose. Nuberia was a good Judge of
these Things, she had been always used to the best of both Sexs, and that in a
Country very much addicted to show and Gallantry; so that when she beheld our
General attentively, she persuaded her self she had never seen any thing that
pleased her better. After some stay, and a little Conversation, she again gave
him her Hand to lead her back, and having waited on her to the Cabin Door, he
made her a profound Reverence, and withdrew. When she entered the Cabin, she
found the Table covered with a magnificent Banquet prepared for her; She was
pleased with the Surprise, and could no longer think but her General knew in
what manner to entertain her, and thinking it no breach of Order to desire his
Company, she sent to him, and begged that he would favor her with it. The well
Bred Saladine would have excused his sitting in her Presence, and desired no
greater Honor than to wait at her Chair, but no Excuse would be received, she
was resolved to dispense with all Ceremonies, and by beginning a more intimate
Acquaintance to try if she could find out the Cause of his Perplexity; seeing
it better became him to obey, than to refuse a Civility from one so much above
him, he took a little more assurance, and placed himself at the lower end of
the Table. Soon as the Meal began the Music struck up, and now every Sense was
delighted; She had every Thing that was agreeable to her Taste, her Sight and her
Ears, and she seemed at this time to be so present to her natural good Humor,
that for a long while she forgot her Afflictions, and gave her self up to Ease
and Pleasure.

There is not on Earth any Thing that softens the Soul so much as Music, it
must be a stubborn inflexible Nature that cannot be alarmed at it, not such as
that of the generous Saladine, who was strangely moved with the exciting
Sounds, his Heart was touched with the piercing Echo, and now languishing upon
the Strings, grew so very Amorous, that his ecstasy carried him almost beyond
the Apprehension of his Sufferings: He could not forbear Wishing it might have
the same influence on the Divine Nuberia, and he could not wish for any thing
more happily, for the tender Princess had a sensible Breast, and being
exceedingly pleased with the splendour of her Entertainment, she found in her
self an Inclination not much to his Disadvantage: She could have been satisfied
to have had her intended Bridegroom just such a Man as Saladine, and the more
she considered him, the more she lamented her Misfortune that she was to be
suddenly deprived of him, to be thrown into the Arms of one, for whom she had
an unconquerable Prejudice. In this adversity of Thought, she regarded him with
more Address, and as her Indulgence increast, so did his Flame. His Faculties
now regained their wonted Vigor, his Assiduities were doubled, and every thing
he did and said tended to her good liking. In a little time she grew more
familiar, and he more assured; their Conversation was now grown unreserv'd, and
distances were laid aside: She began to consider him with something more than
indifference, and he gazed on her as he would devour her with his Eyes. 'Twas
then the accomplished General began to display himself, he was no longer awed
with Majesty, nor fettered with the Terror of Offending her: His Discourse was
free and eloquent, and to whatever he uttered, her Ears were open and
attentive. Sometimes his stolen Glances met her Eyes, and sometime he was
resolved to declare he knew not what, but as yet his Courage was not sufficient
when he considered what he was going to do, but stifling his Temerity he
forbore to be so presumptuous. He knew very well the danger of the Design, and
while he was in Temper to Reflect, he trembled for his Arrogance. She on her
part behaved her self with much Condescension, but not so far as to encourage
his Hopes, and when he considered the Happiness he had already received, he saw
he had good reason to be contented with his Condition,

The Time being come that it was seasonable to depart, he remembered that it was
not decent to take too much advantage of the Honor she did him, and making a
handsome Complement to that purpose, he left her with her beloved Fidelia, well
pleased with what had past.

The Apartment where this charming Princess lay was directly under that where
Saladine took up his Lodgings, The Roof that parted them was but thin, so that
it was not difficult for the wakeful Lover to hear what Discourse past between
her faithful Confident and her. His Pains kept his Eyes from Slumber, and he
had not long laid down, ere he heard his lovely Passenger address her self to
Fidelia in these Terms. Oh my Fidelia! Whither has my Father's Ambition hurried
me? Why must I be made the Sacrifice of his Glory, by becoming the Wife of one
for whom I can have no Inclination? Is there in a Crown any thing can make me
happy? No my Fidelia, it is worth no more than the Riches that adorn it, and I
despise it as a Trifle not worth my Heart: Why am I then enslaved to Greatness
without the liberty of choosing for my self? Oh unhappy State of Women Born for
such Alliances! Were this Philippian Monarch Generous, he would release me from
my Fears, and not betray me to a Marriage in which I have not consulted my
Eyes. Why must I Marry whether I Love or no? Am I not a Woman, Born with
Passions like other Women? Have I not a Heart to give, and can I not Love? Oh
Yes, my dear Fidelia! I have all the tenderness of my Sex, my Bosom is soft and
gentle, my Heart is flexible and relenting, and I have a force of Nature in me,
which tells me, without being Beloved, I never can be Happy.

The pitying confident heard her Mistress with infinite Sorrow, she endeavored
not to persuade her it was for her Glory, but consented to every thing she
said, and lamented with her the Severity of her Condition. On the contrary she
told her, the Court of Philippia was an absolute Prison to all the Queens who
entered into 't, and the nature of the People was to be excessively jealous of
their Wives. What then will become of me, she cried? Can I endure to have my
Honor suspected, and to be guarded like a Criminal? Oh wretched Fate! Unhappy
lost Nuberia! These Words were pronounced aloud, and the attentive Saladine
echoed her Sighs with his: He wished it were not so, but alas, how could he
oppose it? He saw she was going to Execution, and that he himself was to carry
her to the fatal Place. This Thought rackt him to Death, and made him Ten
Thousand times more uneasy than the poor Sufferer below: He could have died to
rid her of that tormenting Destiny, and a Thousand times he resolved, if she
would consent, rather than to obey his Orders, to carry her into some far
distant Country, where she should never hear more of that unfortunate Contract.
But yet he had some Consolation from her Aversion to it, because he hoped it
might make better way for him, not that he could aspire to make her his, for
that was infinitely above his expectation, but yet he hoped, she would not be
altogether insensible of his Passion, since her Heart was disengaged, and at
liberty to please it self. Thus this disconsolate Company were condoling their
several Misfortunes, when Word was brought to the General that the Wind was
fair.

He who had taken no rest, was now weary of his Pillow, and upon this Summons
rises. He found the Wind presented, and that 'twas necessary to use it, so gave
Orders for Sailing. Then were his Pains renewed, when he considered he was now
advancing to his and the mourning Nuberia's Destiny, every Wave his Ship cut
carried 'em further on, but much happier would he have thought it, if those
Waves had buried him. The Noise that is at such a time reached the watchful
Princess; and when she was told she was on her Voyage, she abandoned her self
to Despair; and in her innumerable Torments invoked the God of Tempests to end
her unhappy Being: But in vain were all her Prayers, the uncertain Elements
were never more certain, and the God of the Waters disobeyed her.

The Wind continued fair for many Days, fair for their Voyage, but adverse to
their Wishes, and 'twas not now long ere they expected to see the unwelcome
Shore. Then was it that all the Pangs and Agonies of Grief surrounded 'em, the
drooping Fair sunk under her approaching Calamity, the weeping Fidelia kept her
beloved Princess Company in her Melancholy, but the Rage, the Torment, the
Distraction of the lost Saladine is not to be expressed. He Cursed the prosperous
Wind, he railed at Heaven, he Cursed himself, and only Blessed Nuberia: He saw too
late that he now loved her, he saw her going to her Grave, he saw himself going
to be deprived of her for ever, and all this confusion of Misery not to be
shunned. Thus was he fretting like a Lion in the Toil, champing the Chain that
held him to his Fate, and calling for Thunder to dash him into Pieces, when of
a sudden the Wind came about, and as it had been for four Days directy for 'em,
it was now as directly against 'em.

Never was so successful a Turn as this: Their Curses were all changed into
Blessings, and the Deity which just before they had Blasphemed, was now the God
of their Thanksgivings. The overjoyed Saladine, ran in have to carry the News
to the disconsolate fair One, covering his Joy with as much Temper as he could,
not to give her any Jealousy that he knew of her Aversion to the Voyage, and
she received the News with wonderful Serenity, though her Heart was in no good
Condition to disguise her Satisfaction. Soon after this lucky turn it fell flat
Calm, not a Breath of Wind ruffled the Face of the Deep, the Elements were in
perfect Tranquillity, the floating Palaces lay wantoning on the Bosom of the
Ocean; the sporting Nercids danced around 'em, wondering at this universal
Stillness. Now they moved neither one way nor other, their Ships rode on the
smooth Pacifick as they had been held by their Anchors, their Sails flatted
against the Masts, and the idle Sailors had nothing to employ em: The Face of
Heaven had not one Cloud that threatened them, the Weather seemed to be settled
in this Halcyon, and Morning and Evening Fogs demonstrated no near approach of
an alteration. It seemed indeed, as Fate had contrived it for the Wishes of the
laboring Saladine, who desired nothing more than to dwell for ever in the
Company of his charming Princess.

The fair Nuberia too could not hear of this revolution without warm emotions
of Joy, as it delayed a while her arrival to her Destiny, and gave her a longer
enjoyment of the noble General, whom she began to value with a more than
ordinary Esteem. She had been sensible in this part of her Voyage of his
frequent Diligences, and a thousand Turns of Gallantry with which he hoped to
please her, she saw in all his Actions an Air of Nobility, and such a profound
Submission, that even her exalted Quality could hardly countenance it: But
above all she distinguished that Desire which she perceived he had to please
her, which with the rest of his Tenders took such root in her Heart, that she
could not forbear showing on all Occasions the Satisfaction she received in his
Services. She now thought it no Crime to wish him well, and if a little
Tenderness mixed with it, she had not Power to control it. It Is true, she
considered she was going to tie her self for everlasting to the Embraces of her
contracted Husband, and that her Duty would not warrant her Inclination for any
other Person, but though she was of an inviolable Virtue, and in all Things paid
a solemn deference to her Honor, and to her Father's Will, yet the Image of
the generous Saladine would break in upon her most serious Reflections, and
make her whither she would or no regard him with some concern.

He on the other hand grew every Day more inflamed, he found he loved in good
earnest, but the dread of offending her kept him from revealing it: This
constraint he put upon his Passion served but to increase it, and the more he
strove to conquer it, the more unconquerable it grew. This set him sometimes on
extravagant Projects; now he would resolve to let her see it, but presently he
apprehended the discovery might be fatal, if she should receive it with
Displeasure: Sometimes he determined to prepare her by making an interest with
Fidelia, but knowing the uncorrupted Duty that Lady paid her Princess, he was
afraid it might miscarry on that side too.

Never was a poor Lover agitated with so many different resolutions; as he was,
he felt intolerable Pains, yet if he should attempt to ease 'em, it might add
to his Afflictions by seeing her offended. He found he now loved with all the
fury of Distraction, his mind was never at rest, but when his Eyes were on her,
his Visage changed, his Health left him, his Body sicken'd, and all the
Faculties of his Soul were at War one with another. He no longer took any Care
of the Expedition, the Business of the Voyage was quite out of his Memory, and
the charge of his Commission lay buried in profound Oblivion. These violent
Convulsions threw him into a Fever, yet he chose to suffer on with invincible
Fortitude, rather than divulge the Cause of his Pain. But though he strove with
his Passion, 'twas in vain to strive with his Distemper, his Illness daily
increast, and all his Physicians were in consultation about his Recovery. They
readily found out his Disease, but the Cause was beyond their Search, to no
Purpose were their Applications made, the Symptoms of Death had already marked
him for another World, and they had nothing in their Art that could remove 'em.

When the News of his Danger was carried to the Princess, she was extremely
grieved, and the more, because she doubted if it would consist with her
Character to visit him: She could have been contented to have eased him of one
half of his Illness, for she looked on him with the same tenderness, as if she
had a Brother in his Condition: But Maugre all Ceremonies, she found she could
contain her self no longer, and sending her dear Confident to know if a Visit
would be agreeable to him, that Maid ran to his Apartment, and found him almost
in the Arms of Death.

At the Name of the Princess he started from the Verge of Life, and looking up
to see who sounded that charming Name, he saw it was the Faithful Fidelia: He
held forth his Hand to let the welcome Messenger know nothing could give him
greater Comfort, and though his Tongue had not power to utter his Joy, his Eyes
confessed it. When the frighted Maid returned to her Mistress, she related to her
the deplorable Condition he was in, and the trembling Princess hearing her with
infinite Pity, she hastened with her to the Scene where the expiring Lover lay:
At the first Sight of her, his Spirits forsook him, but striving to recover, he
would have raised his Head to pay her his Acknowledgments for so undeserved an
Honor; but she approached his Bed time enough to prevent him, and took her
Seat by the Bedside. The poor unthinking fair here dispensed with the Decorum
of her Quality, as a Princess, and as a Wife, she considered the occasion too
pressing to insist upon Formalities, and she chose rather to deny for once her
duty to her Honor, than to the Necessity of her Friendship for the dying
Patient: She then beheld him in the Agonies of Death, changed from what he was,
and she thought it Charity to administer all her good Offices for his recovery.

The Apprehension she had of his danger made him now almost dear to her, who
perhaps for want of such an occasion might have still kept her Heart secure;
but so it is, that we oftentimes begin to Love, when there is any danger of
losing what before we only esteemed. Now it was that the Crisis of his Fate was
at the highest, there was but one way of saving his Life, and that was guarded
with innumerable Difficulties. He had the pleasure of beholding his Divine
Nuberia; but where was that Tongue that could reveal his Sufferings? His Eyes
languisht on the beloved Object as they were rivetted to it, but his Voice was
shut up with Awe and Terror.

This moving sight struck our generous Princess with mortal Anguish, the
compassionate Fidelia wept over him, and it was hard to say which of the Three
bore the most significant Characters of Despair.

The Princess omitted nothing that could express her infinite sorrow; nor to
comfort him while there were any hopes he yet might do well: At last she tried
by Questions to find out the unsearchable Cause, but all her inquiries returned
without satisfaction.

If the gallant Saladine (said she) has so much confidence in my Friendship as
to trust me with the secret of his mysterious ilness, he shall find I shall
concern my self in his sufferings as if they were my own: I Conjure you
therefore, no longer to hide the cause of your indisposition; but if I have any
prevalence over you, or you value the repose of one who has an interest in your
welfare, declare what it is that burdens your Spirits, and presses down your
noble Nature to such an extremity.

Though there was a great deal of kindness in these words, yet the guilty Blood
stole into his Cheeks, his Eyes were sunk down, and a fatal shivering shook the
Foundations of the Bed: He still had a check of shame on him, though she seemed
so much interested in his Affliction, and to encourage the discovery: But at
last assuming more resolution, he raised his Eyes up to hers, and she
encountering 'em in the very minute of his greatest langour, she saw there was
something in his Heart which he fain would reveal, but that he was withheld by
some secret reluctance: He struggled long between his pains and his fears, she
saw him in perplexity, and he saw her in trouble for him. This indeed seemed a
fair opportunity for him, he thought now to hazard all, not doubting but he
should soon be out of a capacity of seeing her displeased with him, by the
approach of that Hour which he had been impatlently expecting; but he was not
long of that Opinion, his fears returned upon him, and after all his
strugglings he was forced to resolve rather to die than to tell her.

Just as he had thus determined, the Physicians came in, and cut off all
farther Conversation for that time.

The impatient Princess felt violent vexation at this cross Adventure, and she
had rather have spared 'em that visit, than have been so unseasonably
interrupted: But not thinking it convenient to tarry longer; and being already
a little resented to be found in his Cabin, she quitted it, not without great
regret to leave him in that condition.

But now behold what a turn of Fortune! for while the indulgent Princess had
been conversing with him, Fidelia spying a Paper folded up in the Form of a
Letter sealed, and carefully laid by his Pillow, she took it up, and was amazed
to find it inscribed, to the Princess Nuberia. She made sure of so happy an
Accident; and carrying it with her into the Princesses Apartment, she gave it
her to read, who opened it with eager have and found it thus: When I am Dead
and my torments at an end, let it be known to the Divine Nuberia that for her I
dye: I could not live to see her another; and being unworthy to possess her, I
chose rather to end my Passion with my Life, than to live in perpetual Misery:
Let this be a Memorial of my Love, and let me be pitied by all succeeding
Lovers.

Saladine.




It Is impossible to describe the different effects this Letter produced in the
Breast of the Astonished Princess, she could not but look upon this discovery,
as an injury to her Birth, and to the Circumstances of her Condition, she knew
it was not fit for her to hear of Love from any person, at such a critical
juncture when she was just going to be the Wife of another: But then she
considered the deplorable state of the dying Saladine, and how much he chose to
suffer rather than make it known; and then she really wished him happier: A long
time her duty and her inclination contended for possession, and spite of all
opposition at last her pity triumphed. She his considered her self the cause of
mortal dejection, she considered how full of respect his behavior had all
along been, and to what an extremity he was now reduced: And these Reflections
wrought upon her more than all the Rhetoric he could have used: The tender
hearted Fidelia was no less moved than she, that faithful Maid had a high
Opinion of his Virtues; and now endeavored to confirm the Princess in those
kind Sentiments: She Advises her again to visit him, and represented to her the
necessity of saving so precious a Life; to which the Princess replied, What can
I do Fidelia? Thou know I Am not at liberty to hear of such a passion, my
cruel Father has sacrificed me to his Ambition, and how shall I withstand the
force of my Destiny?

But Madam (she was presently interrupted) you may see him, you may allow him
to be so far happy, as to let him see you pity him, if you can allow him no
more: You're not yet in the Court of Philippia, here are no Eyes to watch you,
nor Tell-tales to publish any Breach of Decorum; you are not yet subjected to
the Austerity of those Rules, that misfortune will come soon enough; In the
mean time therefore ask your self how necessary it is to save a Life which you
confess is not indifferent to you, and resolve over all Scruples to visit him
again.

The disconsolate Princess was at a stand how to carry her self in such a
perplexity, she found but little inclination to disobey her, but she could not
easily consent to put her self into the opportunity of an Amor which by no
means consisted with her Honor. But when she consulted her Heart, these
Obstacles were of little force, and after she had determined what to do, she
prepared to see him again.

The dying desponding Saladine knew nothing of this Accident; he every Hour
expected Death; and had framed that Letter to let his beloved Princess know he
died for his insolent Passion: While he was now musing on the approaches of his
fate, he was amazed to see them enter his Cabin again. The Princess held in
her Hand the guilty Paper, and he knowing it to be his, his Astonishment and
Shame was beyond all Confinement: Then no longer doubting but that she knew
all, he was ready to yield up his Breath with Remorse and Confusion. He cried
out in an ecstasy of penitence, Oh Heavens! what have I done? How has my
treacherous Hand betrayed me? Oh Madam! Let me not live to meet your Eyes: My
guilty Flame has undone me, and I now deserve to become your detestation. The
Queen looked on him with some glances of Compassion; and though she still
remembered this tenderness was not to be justified; yet she could not forbear
saying, Here Unhappy Saladine, Take back your guilty Declaration and with it --
My good wishes for your Health; and if you Value my satisfaction, preserve your
life. These unexpected words were life it self, he needed no other remedy to
restore his Health, and already he felt his Heart relieved, and the powers of
his Soul quickened up to Joy and Rapture: Then looking on her with Eyes divided
between Awe and Ecstasy, he told her if he deserved not to dye for what he had
done, he would live to make the remainder of his Life the witness of her
indulgent Goodness.

Then in a Moment his illness began to abate, his Fever left him, his
Countenance resumed its usual luster, and through all his Veins the vital Blood
ran temperate and healthful: All Signs of dangers were removed, his Reason
returned, and his Senses possessed their former Occupations. No Marks of
Desperation appeared any longer, nor any Raptures but what he uttered in the
admiration of her Mercy.

The Princess was much joy'd at this alteration; she told him, That if the
recovery of his Health depended so much on her power, she was sorry she could
not always be his Physician; that she had consideration enough for the Merits
of so generous a Man; but it was entirely against her Honor to Answer his
Passion as it deserved; but if he could be satisfied with such a place in her
Heart as would not invade her Duty, she should conceive for him the most tender
Friendship; but that if she were at liberty to choose a Lover that could be most
grateful to her, she could not fix better than on the Gallant Saladine.

There needed no more to finish his recovery, he could not hope to break off
the Nuptials she was going to Celebrate, and all the Ambition he coveted, was
but to see himself in her good Opinion, and in some possession of her Heart: He
heard her last words with transporting joy, and though there was a great deal due
to the presence of so illustrious a Princess, yet he broke out from all
Constraints of Decency into an extravagance of Passion. Oh ye Celestial Powers
(he cried) too happy, Happy Saladine! and can the generous Princess pardon me?
Can she forget my daring Insolence, and forgiving me the Sentence of Death
which was my due, raise me to Life? and bid me live for ever? Oh let me rave a
while with boundless Ecstasy, till I have uttered this excess of joy that fills
my grateful Soul: Yes, I will live, since you command me, and live a thousand
thousand Ages, till I become immortal as my Love, and carry to the end of
Nature the Triumph of your Eyes.

She would have checked his Transport, but he was in no condition to hear
Reason; his Flight was too lavish to be bound up to Rules, and he spared
nothing that expressed his Gratitude and her Generosity. At length he stopped,
and she Answered in such Terms as these.

I have already done more for the brave Saladine than I can justify to the
present dependence of my Affairs; but I have considered every thing, and I find
all too weak for my Inclination: It becomes me not to say more, perhaps I have
said too much already. Only that if our Fortunes had so ordained it, I could
have been content without the Temptation of a Crown, to have shared my
happiness with him. She blushed for what she had said, and not able to look up,
she let fall her Eyes, and wish she had not said so much. As it gave her
confusion, so it increast his Happiness; and now the revived Lover, who a
moment before would have parted with his Life for an Expiation of his Guilt,
lived to see himself forgiven, and what was infinitely more, beloved: Now be
undertook to talk with the freedom of a Lover; and while his Tongue was
recounting the violence of his Flame, his Heart and his Sighs kept time with
his passionate Relation: His languishing Looks pleaded powerfully for him, and
he who knew to a syllable the way to a Ladies Heart, made every gesture humor
the distressful Tale: Now he played the Orator indeed, his Tongue was Tipped with
softness, his Eyes with Fire, his Breast beat to the Accents of his Voice, and
every thing he uttered was Music to the attentive Princess, 'Twou'd be very
hard to describe our General with all the advantages which he now possessed; for
notwithstanding his Illness, he had an Air of sweetness in his Face, and in
every Action such a persuasive Allurement, as was not to be resisted. The
Princess received a sensible Impression of all he said and did, she found her
Heart already tottered, and when she would again have consulted her Reason, she
had no power to think. She represented to her Fancy that she had never seen any
thing more worthy of her, and now she was not determining whether she should
love him or no; for that was already decided, and 'twas too far gone to be
recalled: Her Heart became absolutely his, and there wanted but the consent of
Fortune to make 'em the happiest Couple in the World. Now the distances of
their Quality and all reservation was laid aside, our Lover grew more assured
by the encouragement she had given him; and taking her fair Hand, he held it to
his Lips with such ardency as very much affected her: She grew less scrupulous
as he grew more assured, and she mistrusted not those innocent allowances in
the possession of one she esteemed so much, and whom she had found so worthy of
her Confidence.

Thus were they highly satisfied with each other, she was exceedingly pleased
to see she had such power over him as to restore him to Life at her pleasure;
and he was in no ordinary degree of rapture, to see such a change in his
condition, to be redeemed from the jaws of Death and Despair, and to see
himself raised from such dejected Miseries to a felicity infinitely above his
hopes. But alas how short were these starts of joy! they presently called to
mind that they were not ordained for one another, that they were within few
days of parting, never to behold each other more. Soon as that dismal thought
seized 'em, they were both cast down into mortal Affliction: All the Terrors of
Despair sat in their Faces, and they became the pity of the sorrowful Fidelia.

And now to increase their Grief, the Weather grew Cloudy, the Calm was blown
away with a boisterous Eastern Gale, their Sails were all trimmed for the
pursuit of their Voyage, and they hurried on with such precipitancy, that to
their insupportable sorrow they saw the fatal Shore where they were to part for
ever. Who can describe the extremity of their sufferings at the discovery of
that infernal Coast? The Weeping Princess was past all Comfort, and the furious
Saladine ready to plunge into the bottomless deep to prevent the parting
moment, which was but preventing one Death by another. But vain were their
Complaints, the remorseless Wind increased, and they fled before it with such
fury, that they plainly saw the Shore within few Hours Sail of 'em.

The nearer they approacht it, the more deplorable were their sorrows, and they
now macerated and tore 'emselves with the utmost apprehensions of Despair,
abandoned to their Sufferings and Distress. The Princess lay like one bereft of
Reason, Fidelia sympathiz'd with the Melancholy of her dear Mistress, and the
inconsolable Saladine had hers as well as his own Torments to afflict him. In
that Frenzy he could not forbear running into her Cabin, where he found his
Charmer overwhelmed with trouble; and throwing himself at her Feet, begged to
die in that posture rather than to see her torn from him to an Everlasting
Separation. What did he not say to move her? But there needed no further
Arguments to make her pity him, she already found him so dear to her, that she
was within a moments consideration of running the hazard of disobeying her
Father, and flying to some far distant safety with her beloved Saladine. But
these were only Chimera's of a Distempered Brain, she talked of things
impossible, and now there was no way to escape her Destiny.

The Storm began to sing louder, and the faster it blew, the nearer they drew
to the unwelcome Scene: The Sea was now grown outrageous, the Billows tossed 'em
to the Skies, and the darkened Heaven (as if it mourned for their Calamity) was
painted with the Visage of horror and death. In this Tempest they hoped for
some unexpected adventure, as being on an Element apt for Changes, at least to
delay a while their parting; but the Wind had no compassion of 'em, it Whistled
still louder, and drove 'em forwards with such impetuosity that now the Shore
was just under their Bows, and spite of all their care, the Ships in hazard of
perishing. The alarm of this danger frighted all but the despairing Lovers; the
Officers ran to the General for Orders in this extremity; but they might as
well talk to the Clouds as to him: He was not at leisure to regard the safety
of his Fleet, being agitated with a greater Storm in his Breast, and whatever
should become of 'em, he was in no condition to prevent it: Immediately they
dropped their Anchors, hoping to ride out the Storm; but all their caution was
little enough to secure 'em. The Gulf of of Moco has always been notorious for
Shipwreck, the Sea runs there with incredible fury, and a thousand Vessels have
found their destruction in its implacable jaws. No Wonder therefore at this
time the danger astonished all them who were tender of their safety; for
throughout the whole Fleet there was not one who expected not Death, and who
did not make it his business to shift for himself. All but the desperate
Saladine and his Princess were fearful of being stranded on the Shore, but they
had so little taste of Happiness, that Death would have been more welcome to
'em than Life, on any terms but of enjoying each other for ever. But seeing no
hopes of such a Fortune, they gave 'emselves up with ready Resignation to
whatever should befall 'em. In few Hours they could behold several of their
Ships cast on the Shore, and the drowned Mariners tossed on the relentless Beach,
as a Token of what they were now to expect.

This dreadful sight gave all the Spectators unspeakable horror, but to our
disconsolate Lovers it appeared with a quite different Face: Not that they
wanted pity for those miserable Wretches who were perished; but it gave 'em
hopes of suffering the same Death themselves, and they were prepared to receive
it with wonderful Alacrity.

The Princess felt not those fears which were common to her Sex in such
Emergencies, her Courage was as much as was necessary, fortified with the
presence of her Saladine, and in his Arms she was resolved to end her Life. He
too who was grown careless of his own Life, neglected for a while even hers;
and because he saw he could not be hers in Life, he rejoiced to think they
should die together. This indeed was grateful to him for a time; but at length
he considered, she deserved better Fortune than to perish for want of the means
of safety, and he now was of Opinion to prevail with her to have some regard to
her self. Accordingly he went to her, and Conjured her by all the happiness she
wished him, not to remain longer Aboard, but to give him leave to get a pinnace
ready to carry her ashore, and to leave him to the Mercy of the Sea, who was
willing to die if he could secure her from the ruin which threatened her. He
told her, there was less danger in venturing out than in remaining where she
was, that if she would consent to go, he would give in charge to his chief
Officers to Pilot her ashore, and to set her safe from the hazard of
Shipwreck: That indeed he would attend her himself, but he could by no means
set his Feet on the Country where she was to be for ever lost to him; and that
the torture which he should feel to part with her, would be too conspicuous,
and might give her Subjects occasion of censuring that Reluctance, with which
he was to see her torn from him.

Though there was a great deal of Reason in what he urged, she could not hear it
without a Resentment, which showed her violently offended; no Sir, she cried,
there is no safety for me where I have not the gallant Saladine to bear me
Company, and as we are now in the Moment of eternal Perdition, I can rather
consent to perish with you, than to endure the anguish of parting with you to
sustain a Crown which will prove a Torment to me under the fatal Separation
which it makes betwixt us. Then abandoned to Distraction, she cried, Oh forgive
my Honor! If I transgress the Bounds of Decency to tell the faithful Saladine
how much I Love him! Hence -- away -- with all Impediments of Duty, of strict
Obedience and contracted Vows, let me be Mad till I have raved enough, and told
the generous Man how dearly I adore him! Oh take me to your Arms, and hide my
Blushes, let me be wrapped within your fast Embraces, and never wake but to
behold you mine.

The Amorous Saladine was ravished with this sudden Tenderness, in all his Joys
he never hoped for such a Declaration, but now his Soul was all on Fire. Ye
bounteous Gods! (he cried) What Words are these? Oh let me hang upon your
lovely Knees, and prostrate on the Earth receive this Blessing! Then starting
from that Posture, he flew out into a Transport, Let the Seas roar, and let
Destruction reign, since I am made thus happy: Then running to her Arms, he
added, Now -- now -- thou God of Whirlwinds strike us down, sink us together to
the vast Abyss, but let no Bolt of Thunder part our Arms! Oh Joy too great to
bear! -- here his Breath failed him, and the weeping Princess ready to expire
with the moving Spectacle, sunk down into his Arms, and they both remained as
if they had been Dead. The diligent Fidelia, who never left 'em, was in little
better Condition, but knowing the Danger of calling for help, she used all the
Means she could to bring 'em to Life. Saladine first recovered, and finding the
Princess entranced in his Arms, it is impossible to tell the various Passions
that possessed him: He held her still in his Embraces, and looking on her with
Eyes that languisht with the heaviness of his Heart, he was ready again to sink
to Death, but seeing her in that insensible Condition, he ventured to let down
his Cheek to hers, and to touch those Lips that now could not be opened to
accuse him: But 'twas with so much Awe, that if she had awakt and felt him, she
could not be offended with the Violence. His busy Eyes ran over all her
Perfections, and he gazed at her, as if indeed he never were to behold her
more; and he could have wished to Die that very Moment, without the desire of
any further Happiness.

At length she opened her Eyes, and finding her self in his Embraces, she was a
little staggered at her Weakness, and at another time could not have pardoned
her self such a Confession of her Love: But now 'twas too late to hide her
Passion, she was entirely resigned to her Inclinations, and she thought nothing
too much for that charming Man, who knew how to use her Indulgence without
invading her Honor: Soon as she collected her Spirits, she looked on him with
such Tenderness as could proceed from nothing but her Excellency of Pity and
Generosity, and he met those Glances with such a Languishment, that nothing
could be more moving than this dumb Conversation: He raised her up, and as well
as he could, desired her to be composed, but her Trouble was too great to be
comforted, and he was in no good State to give it her. Fidelia, who was least
concerned, though not without her share of their Misery, prevailed with her to
retire, she suffered her self to be carried whither she would, and giving
Saladine her Hand to support her, she was conducted to her Bed: She strove not
to oppose 'em, but finding in her tortured Breast no Disposition to Rest, she
laid her down, while the lamenting Maid did what she could to divert her. But
in vain was all she said, her Heart was overcome with Melancholy, and she could
think of nothing but of the dreadful Hour that was approaching. She now lost
all Hopes of perishing in the Storm, for the Sky cleared, and the Face of the
Deep was grown smooth and calm; and every Minute she expected the fatal Summons
to debarque.

Saladine being withdrawn to his own Apartment, begun to ruminate on his
miserable Condition, he saw nothing before him but Misery, yet 'twas some
comfort to him to think he was beloved; but how short was that Comfort! For he
soon concluded his Condition the worse, that being advanced to so great a
Happiness he was in a Moment to be deprived of it for ever. When he perceived
the Weather grow fair, his Torture was doubled; he now looked for the
Ambassadors from Shore that were sent to receive her, and every thing he heard,
he thought was they. He was not long deceived, for upon the ceasing of the
Storm, they who were appointed to attend her to the Court came Aboard, and now
Spite of all his Afflictions he was constrained to meet 'em, and to give 'em
the Honors that were due to their Characters.

When the Dying Nuberia, saw the fatal Messengers, it is inexpressible her
Anguish and Dejection; she looked on 'em as they had been her Executioners, and
she had hardly Fortitude enough to support her self to receive their Homage:
She showed so little Complacency for the Errand they came upon, that the quick
sighted Philippians were at a loss how to behave themselves; but not daring to
press beyond her Pleasure, they withdrew to give her Time to prepare for her
solemn Departure.

Though she had been a great while arming for this unavoidable Necessity, yet
again her Grief returned, when she considered her lost Saladine: She had but
another Moment to see him, and that was to be spent in utmost Sorrow: But being
resolved to have her eternal Farewell, she sent privately for him, and he was
conducted by the faithful Confident to the last Scene of their Interviews: This
Meeting, as it was the last of their Lives, so it was attended with the most
deplorable Circumstances: She now omitted nothing that could assure him of that
indearing Esteem she had of him, and taking a Bracelet from her Arm, put it
upon his, conjuring him never to part with it till some happier Occasion should
make her capable of sending to him again: She hoped one Day to make him better
Acknowledgments, if she had Strength enough to Survive this doleful Parting,
and ending her Discourse with Repetitions of her everlasting Friendship; she
gave way to that torrent of Tears which burst from her deluged Eyes.

The unhappy Lover received her Present with such a dejected Air, as if it were
only to put him in Mind of his eternal Misery; but the Assurances she made him
of being eternally his Friend, was yet some small Mitigation: He yet hoped the
varieties of War might give him an occasion of seeing her Country again, that
he might hear how she lived in her new Majesty, and what Remembrances she still
preserved of him: After this, he would have thrown himself at her Feet to take
his final Adieu, but she raised him by the Hand, and suffered him to take her
once more into his Arms, as being the only Happiness she had now remaining for
him. He pressed her lovely Bosom close to his, and with a Groan that brought up
his very Soul, he cried -- farewell: She had but just Strength enough to echo
him, and with a fainting Voice she replied -- eternally Adieu. He then let fall
his Arms, and turning away his Eyes, he strove to hide that Weakness which
deprived him of any further Speech; and staggering to the Door, he went he knew
not whither. All Things being got ready for her departure, she prepared for it
without asking any Questions, and without any further Ceremony entered her
Pinnace; still keeping her Eyes fixed on the expiring Saladine; and as the
Vessel bore her away to the fatal Shore, the unfortunate Lover gazed at her
till he could behold her no more.

Thus (my dear Brunet) you have the Story of that unfortunate Princess, which
some time ago made a great Noise in that part of the World where it was acted:
The best thing that can be said of it, is, that it is true, and our Author has
omitted all flourishes, to keep to Reality: The Princess of this Story is still
alive, and I am told, the royal Catolinus proved just a Bridegroom, as she
prophesied of him; but the poor Philippians were disappointed in their Hopes of
an Heir, for Heaven has not Blessed that Crown with any Issue from that renowned
Woman, though they were Daily in expectation of one, which they hoped to obtain
through the intercession of their Friends in Heaven, which were constantly plied
to for that Purpose. And now I shall shut up my long Letter, without troubling
you with any other Adventures, but I hope in few Months more to find you some
other Diversion, for I have made an Acquaintance in this Place which will
furnish me with all Occurrences that are worth hearing: Till then I release you
from any further importunity, and remain

Your most Devoted Friend, R --
Cadiz Dec. 4th, 1694.
POSTCRIPT.
IF you intend to Honor me with any of yours, let 'em be directed for me here:
The Method of this Post Office is very extraordinary, and I cannot miss of any
of your Favors, if you write between this and May. There Is such a Number of
Strangers in this City, that 'twou^d be impossible to know every Man by his
Name, or almost by the Place of his Dwelling; therefore the Officers of the
Postage order their Business thus. When the Mail arrives, the Clerks write down
the Number upon every Letter, from One perhaps to 1000, as many as there are,
and then the Copy of the Names as they are Superscrib'd, is writ down on a
Table kept for that Purpose, putting opposite to the Name the Number that lies
upon his Letter, and this Table always hangs in the Passage, where every one,
who comes to inquire, looks if there be one for him, and if he finds his Name
in the Alphabet of the Table, he takes notice of the Number, and goes in to the
Clerk, who always attends for that end, and reporting his Number, his Letter is
presently found.

LETTER II.
NOW again I have got something to entertain my dear Brunet with, but how
agreeable it may be to him, I am not positive to determine, though I have taken
some Pains to find him Matter of Diversion, and if I give him half so much
Entertainment as I receive in furnishing my self with Adventures to please him,
I shall think my Time and my Toil amply rewarded.

As I told you in my last, I had now leisure enough to make my Observation of
every thing I saw and heard, and when I got leave to go Ashore to Cales, which
I informed you, were our Winter Quarters, I dressed my self in the Habit of my
own Country, and went to see some French Merchants I was recommended to, who
were very glad to receive me: And I so well pleased them with the Relation of
my Undertaking, that I made my self many good Friends among 'em. There are
great Numbers of French over all this Kingdom, and I have been told that in
Madrid alone there are Forty Thousand, who follow their several Vocations,
generally under the disguise of Flemings. Whenever I had any curiosity to see
the Rarities of this Town, one or other of my Friends always accompanied me, to
protect me from the insults of the Spaniards, who are very Inhospitable to
Strangers: And where ever we went, I found our Countrymen well esteemed,
notwithstanding their national Prejudices, for being accounted, as indeed they
generally are, Wealthy, the Fame of such a Character draws some Veneration from
the People.

The City of Cadiz is a very ancient City, the Foundation of it having been
laid by the Phoenicians: It is Situate on the Skirt of the Island, famous
heretofore for being the Habitation of Geryon, the Antagonist of Hercules, who
is said to have carried away the Herds of Cattle which grazed in this Fruitful
Pasture; and at this Day the Pasture is so rich, that Cattle will die of
Fatness within 30 Days, unless they be let Blood; and, to say true, the whole
Province is so exuberantly Rich, that in the Time of the Carthaginians, before
the first Punick War, it was a Temptation to those warlike Invaders to make War
against it, which they did so successfully, that all that part of Spain was
Conquered by 'em, though afterward the Romans sent their Armies hither against
the Carthaginians, and in process of Time the African Scipio Conquered it, and
made it an Appendix of the Roman Empire. This Island by Mariana's Account was
formerly 700 Paces from the Continent, and had 300 Leagues circumference: What
he means by so extravagant a Measure, is beyond my Apprehension, for though I
have often Pac d it round to examine if there were any Footsteps of so unlikely
a Compass, I could never find 'em, for at this Day it is no more than 3 Leagues
about, and the River that parts it from the Continent is so narrow, that a
Bridge of 6 Arches strides it over. But as to the Situation of the Land, every
Schoolboy knows, Hercules concluded his Ramble here, and left his Name to
those Two great Hills Calpe and Abyla, which front each other from Africa and
Europe, which are to this Day, and will be to all Posterity called his Pillars,
as if he had erected 'em for the Boundaries of his Conquest. It was many Years
afterward the Vrbs Gaditana of the Romans, and, one of their Magazines for
furnishing their Transports in their Maritime Expeditions. The City is not
extraordinary large, but so full of People, that no Habitation in the World can
boast of greater Numbers, and for Magnificence of Churches, Convents and
private Houses, neither Paris nor London, Germany or Italy can out go it: The
Fortifications are not the best that I have seen, for all the backside which
fronts the Southward, is naked; but on the Angle they have built a small Fort
into the Sea, which they call St. Sebastians, and in time of War it may serve
to prevent a descent on that Quarter: But the front which looks upon the Bay is
well walled, and mounted with good store of fine Brass Cannon, and serves for
the Evening Walk of the Merchants and other Inhabitants. Higher up toward the
Bay is a Neck of Land which runs like an Isthmus between the two Seas, lately
Fortified, and indeed I think, impregnable, and they have good Reason to guard
that Place well, for it was on that Side the famous Descent was made by the
English Generals, Essex, and Rawleigh, who^ in one Day they Sacked this wealthy
City, and laid it in Ashes. A Mile without these Works stands the Castle of
Puntal, a small well built Garrison, but ill Armed, and more negligently
Guarded: For I don't know what use they make of it, but to lay up the Plate and
Money, which, contrary to the Statutes of their Country, they provide for the
Genoeses, and other Ships which come here for that Purpose; and from hence to
convey it aboard. It Is true this Castle, and the other opposite to it on the
other side of the Bay, made some resistance when Essex invaded 'em, but it was
so small, that he was not twelve Hours in gaining 'em, and in beating the
Garrison out: The other that I named is built on purpose to Countenance this,
and to oppose the Passage of an Enemy into the Creeks, and not being above a
Cannon Shot asunder, it would prove hard for a Man of War to go between 'em, if
they were well Manned.

Within the City I observed no regular Militia, only a Muster of a few ragged
Rogues, which don't deserve the Name of a Regiment, for neither Government nor
Discipline appears among 'em, yet these Rascals are so Insolent, that a
Stranger would be in danger of his Life if he should refuse to give the most
beggarly among 'em the Wall and the Salute. They have three Gates, which are
opened and shut every Morning and Evening, each of 'em guarded with the
Officers of the Customs, and I think they make little use of 'em but to that
purpose, nor that neither effectually, for nothing here is more common, than to
run Goods ashore, and carry Money out, either by Stratagem, or the Connivance of
the Officers: At the Sounding of the Oraison Bell these Gates are all shut, and
the Keys carried to the Governor, and upon no Terms to be delivered out again,
unless on very important Necessities. The first and principal is called Puerta
de la Sevilla, because the Boats which Trade between Sevil and this City lie
before it; the Second is called Puerta de la Mar, because here the Captains and
Masters of Ships generally come a Shore; and the third Puerta de la Tierra,
because it is the Key which opens to the Island: But since I have mentioned the
Oration, give me leave to acquaint you, That the custom of the Evening Prayer
is here performed with wonderful Devotion; not but that I know it is in all
Catholic Countries observed less or more; but here it is done with so much
severity, that not one Person, be who he will, who is at that time in the
Streets, though the weather be never so dirty, but falls down on his Knees in the
very place where he stood, and in that Posture gives up his Thanksgivings for
the Mercies of the Day: And surely there is in this custom, an exceeding show
of Piety not to be met with among our pretended reformers, those zealots who
have elop'd from the Church, and now set up for Christians more Spiritualized
than we. It was no small pleasure to me (My Dear Brunet) to see those obstinate
Heretics obey this custom of falling down on their Knees at the call of a
Catholic Signal, and bemire their laced Coats to conform with a Religion they
so much rail against; but 'twas their Fear of being knocked on the Head, and not
their Devotion, which made 'em comply, and they were so much in the right on it
as to save their Bones, though they ventured at what they themselves call
Idolatry, as indeed they impiously call most of our Devotions. Soon as this is
over, the City is on all Sides shut in, and it is then impossible to get out,
and this is the only Face of a Garrison which I could see among 'em.

It Is almost incredible the Opulence and Traffic of this City, there is scarce
a Nation upon Earth that has not sent some of its Natives to Trade here; and
among these there is such Diversity and Confusion of Habits and Languages, that
at high Change, which is always at Eleven in the Morning, the Scene looks like
an Opera, and the Eye is filled with Show and Figure. But it is a strange Thing
to consider, that among such Crowds of all Countries, there is hardly one
Spaniard to be seen, these are so Lazy, or so Proud, that they give 'emselves
no manner of Exercise, for they had rather Starve than Work: If they had not
the best Country in the World, their Condition would be very Miserable, and as
it is, they can but barely Live, for notwithstanding their Ostentation, there is
the Curse of Poverty in all their Families. At the time of Exchange one may see
some of all the Kingdoms of the Earth negotiating their private Affairs, which
are mostly levelled against the Interest of Spain; so that when I considered
this strange Medley, I could not choose but commend what I had once in Holland
seen of a Picture, which showed the King of Spain lolling on a Table covered
with Pieces of Eight, with the King of England and the States of Holland on
each Hand, raking from under his Arms the shining Metal; the Genoeses behind
his Chair making Grimaces at him, and the King of France snatching it before
his Face, whether he would or no: And indeed it is literally true, for all
Nations prey upon him, and either by Wile or Force get most of his Treasure out
of his Country. How should it else be? For there is not another Kingdom in
Europe has any Mines of its own, and though the French and English have a small
Trade with Guinea, and bring sometimes Dust from thence; yet that is so small a
Parcel of the Riches of both Countries, that it must be confessed, the Body of
their Treasure must come from hence, and so be dispersed through all Parts of the
World, to the utter Subversion of the Spanish Power: And were it not for their
Possessions which they still hold in America, they would inevitably fall before
every Prince that could draw an Army against 'em, and be reduced to Nothing.
But to return to Cadiz.

The Government of the City is in the Hands, first of the Government, and next
to him of the Alcalde; the first is for the Regulation of the Military, as the
latter of the Civil Affairs; and between these Two are frequent Disputes about
Prerogatives, which are generally determined in Favor of the Governor, who
has a Power (such as it is) to awe and intimidate the Civil Magistrate, who in
so depraved a Reign may complain of the Usurpation of his Rival to no Purpose
in the World: At our first Arrival Don Pedro de Velasco was Governor, who was
afterward presented to the Viceroyate of Catalonia; a Man supposed to be in
the Interests of France, and supported by the Authority of his Father, who is
Constable of Castile, and one of the prime Ministers of State: The Conduct of
this Governor was highly Censured when Admiral Tourvile lay before this Place;
for as it is reported, there was a private Correspondence between 'em, and the
Governor openly regaled him with several great Presents, to Bribe him from any
Hostilities, and to gain the good Will of the French Merchants, who were not
wanting to reward him.

Here is an excellent Market for Fish and Fruit; but as for Meat, I have seen
more on one Butchers Stall in London, than in all the Shambles here: All manner
of tame and wild Fowl are scarce, though I have sometimes seen of both Sorts
exceeding good, but in no plentiful manner, for these are Forestalled before
they come to Market, and they who cannot go to the Price of 'em, must Feast on
Herbs* or eat their Fish as their Daily Food, and thank God for Blessing 'em
with the Neighborhood of the Sea. Their Pork indeed is the best in the World,
but their Mutton, Beef and Veal the worst; for whatever becomes of all their
Cattle, there is little to be found of 'em in their Markets; and even that that
is, is so strangely mamockt in the cutting up, that with that, and the beating
of the Sun all Day upon it, it looks like Carrion. To sum up all in a word,
nothing can show more Sumptuous than the outside of their Houses; and nothing
more Beggarly than their Poverty within.

Some Months after our arrival, several Visits were made between the English
General, and the Governor, but if you were to see the gaudy Pomp of the
Spaniard when he puts on all his gallantry for a Visit, you would think your
self in the Holiday Show of some overgrown Citizen, when the Peddler puts of his
blue Apron to strut along in Silks and Ribbons. Certainly nothing can be more
Ridiculous than this Pageantry, and yet you may as well persuade 'em that
they are not the Ancienest People of the Creation, as that they are not the most
accomplished in Breeding and Gallantry. The height of their Mode is but to
mimick the French in their Garb; and you know they do this to such a pitch of
Deformity, that it is become a Proverb, when we would speak of any Body very
awkard, to say, He looks like a Spaniard in a French dress. To mention the
English, though they are our Apes as well as they, yet they wear their Clothes
with a tolerable good grace, and bating that sullen Air which is inseparable
from all Northern People, they come nearest us of any of our Neighbors.

Whenever the General made his Visit, he went attended with the flower of his
Officers, as there are many among 'em fine Gentlemen. Once there was a solemn
Invitation, from his Excellency a Shore, to hls Excellency a Board, to an
Entertainment at his House; the chief Diversion was to be a Comedy, and to this
Invitation, the General went with the best appearance he could make; and indeed
the procession was Magnificent beyond what is commonly seen here: For as the
General Landed, the Governor in his own Person received him at the Water side,
and led him to his House, between his Guards and the Soldiers (if I may so call
them) of the Garrison, with such Music as the place afforded, and a general
discharge of Cannon: At his House he was regaled after a handsome manner, and
the Comedy Acted to the best advantage they could, which yet was very
miserable: When the General came away, he left a large Munificence behind him,
which consisted of Sixty Pistoles for the Comedians, and Sixty more for the
Governors Servants. This liberality of the General, made a great noise, and
the Spaniards ever after expressed a high Opinion of his Generosity, and began to
treat the English with more respect.

Without question, their Comedies (as they call 'em, for they have hardly any
distinction between Comedy and Tragedy) are the vilest things on Earth, and can
be out done by nothing but the scandalous manner they Act 'em in, and the
pitiful Decoration of their Stage: You who are a Critic in these Studies, may
judge what they are, when I have told you, that in three Days time they can
patch up a Play, even in verse, for they are all in Rhyme, and get it Acted in
three more, but after such a barbarous manner, as would sooner raise your
Contempt than your Diversion: I have heard that the Famous Calderon seldom took
more time; and though his are the most correct of any in the Language, yet if
they were brought on the French Stage, the Audience would think the Poet out of
his Wits, and a Ballad Sung in a Country Market a better jest: As for their
Scenes and Ornaments, a Mountebanks Scaffold is an illustrious contrivance to
'em: Two or three dirty Blankets pined across the Stage, serves for the
Curtain, that is, The flat Scene before which they Act, and when they have any
thing to show behind that, they draw the Woollen Scene, and then the Audience
may suppose what they will: One would think they should be ashamed of Day
light, they Play in such abominable Habits, and yet they never use Candles, but
stand in full view of the Sun, and defy the Devil and the Critic. My Friend,
Even in these trifles we may observe the dissimilitude between this Country and
all others, for I think 'em altogether and in every thing the most contrary
People on Earth.

And as if these People had contrived on purpose to be opposite to all the
World beside, they erect their Boxes just where our Galleries stand, and the
Pit which with us is taken up only by the Gentry, is with them prostituted to
the Vulgar at the Price of about a Tester: But with this remarkable difference,
That the Benches are locked up, like the Pews in Protestant Churches, sometimes
purchased by particular Families, but generally to be open^d to every Scoundrel
who starves a Dinner to treat himself with Sixpeny worth of the Play. As to the
Boxes, they are built on high from each side of the Stage to the end of the
House, not near so commodiously as our Galleries; and the charge of one of them
amounts to about Twelve Shillings, and that finds room for half a dozen: But
for the most part, these boxes belong to such and such Houses of Quality; and
as we say, This is the King's Box, etc. They say, This is such a Ones, and this
is such a Ones -- But when any of them are not taken up by the Owners, the
Box-keepers make Money of them to others.

Another Bar besides the situation, to render these Boxes more inconvenient,
are, the Grates which they always put before 'em. This Custom arises from the
Care the Women take, or the Men for 'em, that they shall not be seen; and because
they must deprive others from seeing them, they deprive themselves of seeing
the Play.

One of the Plays which I was at, invited me there by the curiosity of the
Title; it was the Story of the English Earl of Essex, and Qneen Elizabeth;
which because I had read both in French and in English, I was resolved to see
what they made of it in Spanish; and to be ingenious, I could not choose but be
extremely Scandalized at the Character which they make of that Princess; for
she is there represented as the blackest and most deformed Monster in Nature, a
Tyrant, Homicide, an Usurper, Bastard and a Witch: And even out of the
Playhouse, the People have the same Opinion of Her; and which is more
intolerable, I have heard a well read Gentleman, but hot and zealous, affirm,
That she was contracted to the Devil, and that she was branded with a great
black Beard, which made Her horrible to behold.

When I considered this, I found these Impressions are conveyed to the Laity by
the Artifices of the Priests, to give 'em an invincible abhorrence of those
they call Heretics, and though nothing is more evident, than that this is as
Lie, yet the common People are so tenacious of what the Church tells 'em. That
they will sooner quarrel in defense of such a falsehood, than admit of any
Conviction. I saw several other of their Plays, but as they are crampt into
short Verses, and the sense very much pincht in for the sake of the Rhimes, so
I was sometimes puzzled to understand 'em; in the main, I believe, there may be
Wit in some of 'em, or else the People are easily provoked to Laughter and
Admiration; for their Applauses are often expressed by crying, Vita, Vita, which
is contracted out of Victoria, a Word that signifies their good Liking and
Satisfaction: I observed in most of their Plays that they are very happy in
what we commonly fail, and that is, in the Economy of the Fable: Their Plots
are neither so intricate as to confound, nor so transparent as to be seen
through, but substantial, clear and surprising: Their Verse is every First and
Fourth, and Second and Third; and their Acts, which they call Jornadas, are
never more than Three, only at the end of each, they bring in a scurrilous
Interlude of Farce and Nonsense, disgraced with a Guittar and Harp, to make the
Rabble Laugh.

I shall not delay you with any more Remarks of this Place, I have already too far
Transgrest, for indeed there can be but little Pleasure, either in Writing or
Reading any Thing that can be said on such a wretched Subject. Give me leave
only to add, that this Country is intolerably Hot, which makes good what one
said of Hell, that if he were to place it in Africa, Libya should be his
Choice, but if in Europe, no Place so fit as Spain for the burning Mansion.
This extremity of Heat is the Reason, that from Twelve to Four in the
Afternoon, every Body goes to what they call their Cesto, that is, to Sleep,
and the Streets for that time are as silent as at Midnight, and no greater
appearance of a Trade than if it were the Sabbath; so that when the English,
who were not accustomed to Sleep at such Hours, would be about the Streets, the
Spaniards made a Byword of 'em, and said that at such a time nothing but
Englishmen and Dogs walked about.

But now I have been mortifying you with these heavy Complaints, let me try if
I can lighten your Spleen a little with something more relishing: As you are a
Friend to a Bottle and an Intrigue, you cannot choose but be pleased with the
Conversation of some honest jolly Friars that are here: Those of Spain are
commonly more Temperate than the French, the French yet more than the English,
and indeed that is no Wonder, for the English can hardly produce any Nation that
excells 'em in all manner of Lewdness: Here are in this City of all Countries
some, and of all Orders, from the stately Castilian, down to the humble
Irishman, and from the proud Jesuit to the lowsy Capuchin: The Clergy are so
numerous and so Rich, that I have been faithfully told, near a third Part of
this well Built City is in their Possession, either given 'em by pious
Legacies, or purchased with ready Money: Besides some fourteen Convents of Monks
and Nuns, there is a Hospital called, St. Juan de Dios, which is maintained with
the Profits of the Playhouse, the Stage being interdicted, unless it pays (as
I remember) about 2 thirds of their Daily receipt to its maintenance: The
Occasion of this heavy Tax on the Theater, was the result of the Bustle which
the Spanish Jesuits made to get it suppressed: The Story is very Famous under the
Name of Pedro de Guzman, a zealous Churchman, who wrote a Book, wherein he
vilifies the Stage, seeming to be much scandalized at its Impiety, and giving
it all the Opprobrious Terms he could gather out of the discontented Fathers;
and concludes, that it is equally Shameful to the Catholic Religion, to bear
with this (which he calls) Pagan Lewdness, as to suffer the Bull-Feasts, which
gave it at all times such infinite Scandal. The Latter is a Custom which they
derive from the Moors, who once Inhabited their Country, and was among other
Sports, in mixture with a deal of gross Superstition, left to these Spaniards
their Successors after they were expelled Spain, and which are still highly
prevailing at this Day: I shall not go about to describe this heathenish Sport, it
being already done by every Author who has writ any Thing of the Country; only
I shall tell you, that once I had the Curiosity to be present at one of 'em, ar
which Time I saw 33 Bulls cut down, and macerated alive one by one, by these
inhumane Butchers. Though I found much Cruelty in this kind of Pastime, yet I
could not choose but be diverted with the Dexterity of the Spaniards, in amusing
and shunning those fierce Creatures: The Bulls which are designed for the
Sacrifice are all managed, for they are kept wild, and for some time before the
Day of Sport, shut up in Darkness, to render 'em more Furious when they are let
out into the Light and the Crowd: The Combatants of this Day were some
Gentlemen, whose Relations had been formerly Foiled by the Bulls, and then
lying under (what they call) an Impena, to revenge the Disgrace, which is a
Puntilio of Honor they never fail to observes: They came into the Lists, dressed
up like Morris-Dancers, Riding upon Mules, as fine as themselves; and one after
another, they ran their Course: This Impena (if I call it right) is reckoned a
Disgrace of the highest Degree, if any Cavalier comes off without Killing his
Bull, though he himself be Wounded, or perhaps Killed, as it sometimes happens,
there lies an Infamy on that Family, till some other Branch of it takes off the
Attainder, by Slaying one of the Savages with his own Hand, which at last, though
perhaps with the Sacrifice of most of the Family, they never fail to do. These
Gentlemen were reputed great Dabs at the Game, and so they proved, for by one
Shift or other, they all came off unhurt, having redeemed the Disgrace of their
Friends, and acquired to themselves universal Applause. But on these Holidays
of Bull-Fighting, every Fellow gets ready his Dart or his Spear, and with that
in one Hand, and his Cloak in the other, he Wounds the Bull, and defends himself;
for as soon as he strikes, he throws his Cloak about his Eyes, which catching
on his Horns, muffles him, and gives the Assailant an opportunity of Escaping.

This dexterity of the Spaniards makes all Strangers wonder: Among the rest
there was a drunken English Sailor, who was extremely pleased with the Sport,
and was resolved to take a run himself; he thought himself as good a Man as the
best of 'em, and why should not he show his Courage as well as they? It
happened immediately that there was a fierce Bull turned out, and now was the
time to show himself: Out then he steps into the Lists, with nothing in his
Hand but his little Hat, which was not much bigger than one of the Bulls Eyes,
and in a daring manner waits for his running at him: Soon as the roaring beast
saw him, he ran furiously toward him, and there being no Body else in the
Lists, the Sailor must now make the best of a bad Market; the poor Fellow still
stood his Ground, and when the Bull came near him, he tried to amuse him with
his Hat, as he had seen the Spaniards do with their Cloaks, and throwing it
between his Horns, it signified as much as if he had held his Hand against a
Thunderbolt, for down he came upon his Back, with his Face to the Bulls, one of
the Bulls Feet on his Stomach, and one of his Horns through his Cheek and out at
his Mouth.

One would have thought these Braves that saw him, should have run in to his
Rescue, but not one of 'em stirred, though the defeated Hero lay every Moment
expecting Death; till of his own accord the generous Beast got out his Horn,
and as if he had been sensible of his Conquest, left him on the Ground, and
walked on as if he were satisfied with his Victory. Soon as the Bull quitted
him, then they run Races who should first see if he were living, and finding no
other hurt about him but that of his Cheek, he was carried to the Hospital, and
soon afterward Cured.

If you have the Curiosity to ask on what Occasion these Bull-Feasts are
generally made, take this Account which was given me of that which I was at.
The Duke of Medina Sidonia, Captain General of Andaluzia, had a Son at the
point of Death; his Life being given up by the Physicians, the Duke had
recourse to the Prayers of the Church, as his last Remedy; and particularly
addressed a Monastery of Augustines in the Town where he Dwelt, to offer up their
Intercession for him: In some Time after the Gentleman recovered: and the glad
Father, thinking his Recovery had been an effect of the Prayers of the Convent,
presented it with these 33 Bulls, to be first Baited for public Diversion, and
as a Token of his Gratitude, their Carcasses to be devoted to the Holy Fathers.

This is not always the Reason of 'em, for sometimes the King, or some Grandee,
entertains Ambassadors with them, before the royal Palace at Madrid; or, for
want of a better Occasion, sometimes the Mob: When ever the latter happens, it
is done to pacify their Clamours, for they are always Mutinous in a Time of
Scarcity, and then the King appoints 'em a Bull-Feast, which is both Sport and
Supply to 'em. Though generally this is performed here with Circumstances of
great Ostentation, yet in Barbary they have 'em in ten times more Splendor.
Those African People being lovers of all sorts of Cruelty, and not to be
pleased but with such savage Diversions. But so much for their public Sports
-- I could now make you merry with another kind of Gallantry very much in
practice among these Spaniards; I mean that of Pimping and Intriguing: And though
these two Excellencies are chiefly prevailing among the Laity, yet to give the
Church its due, the Clergy are very dextrous at any thing wherein a Woman is
concerned.

But since I have mentioned the Reverend Clergy, let me not traduce 'em without
entering their Convents and Chapels, and examine what sort of private Devotion
they practice; and I can assure my Friend whoever sees 'em in their cells, though
they are zealous pretenders, and carry to the World such a Face of Austerity,
will find nothing less than Mortification among 'em.

Consider, My Friend, I am not speaking of all that are in Religious Orders,
God forbid I should accuse so solemn a Life with general Prophannes: No Brunet,
I have a profound Reverence for that Monastic Holiness which inspires the
greatest part of 'em; but yet as in all other Societies, there are even among
these, some Corrupt Members which shame the Sanctity of our most Holy
Communion, and are Weeds that ought to be torn from the Earth, and Rooted out
from the Churches of the Faithful: I am now speaking of those abandoned
Hypocrites, who have other secret Causes for their entering into holy Orders,
than Contrition and Repentance. That there are such, every Age has informed
us, and every Convent, or there would be a little work for public Scandal, or
for Confession, and such severe Chastisemenas as are often exercised in 'em. It
was my Fortune to be acquainted with some of these we are now speaking of,
Brave Fellows, My Friend, Men who would stick at nothing to gratify their
Appetites, or to serve a Companion. If a Husband or a Brother be in the way,
they have devices to remove 'em, and such subtle Stratagems as will hardly
admit of Opposition: That what I say is true, every English and Dutch Officer
that is here will bear me witness; for there is hardly a Gentleman in the Navy
that loves an Intrigue, and can part with his Money, but has been helped by one
Friar or other of his acquaintance. Though I am very much scandalized at so great
an infamy, which gives occasion to our Adversaries to reproach us; yet in spite
of all shame it is an absolute truth, and so much the more deplorable.

It may well be answered, if it should be asked how these Vermin have a knack
at Pimping above any other People, that by the power they have when they
receive the confessions, they discover who are Corrupt; and having known that
the rest is easy. And that these Villains are sometimes as successful in
Debauching innocent Maids, as they are in continuing the pollutions of others
already Defiled, has been notoriously proved by Examples, that have occurred to
my particular knowledge; and the reason is plain, why the Priesthood is more
mischeivious that way, because the doors of every Family lie open to them, and
that reservation which Parents use in guarding their Children from all the
World beside, is put by at the approaches of a Priest, who, wherever he comes,
is as familiar as if he were one of the Domestics. The liberty which they thus
assume, as it is the particular privilege of the Church, so it is very
serviceable to 'em in their Designs of every kind, but principally to insinuate
for Alms and Benevolences, in which they are so dextrous, that it is a hard
matter to avoid 'em: For besides the Artifices they use by fair means, they
have always the necessities of the Church to pretend, and when good words will not
do, they have a Purgatory and Damnation to awe the unknowing Vulgar. I would
not say this of the Roman Clergy if I did not know it to be literally true;
for as I would be thought impartial in my remarks of every thing I undertake to
Relate; so in this particular I would shun all detraction, and cover as much as
I could the nudities of the Catholic Communion; but to deal plainly with a
Friend, I found within these holy Societies very much Corruption and
Degeneracy; I found Abstinence and Chastity, which are their Principal vows, no
more than nominal Virtues, but I saw every where an egregious abundance of
Slothfulness and Luxury, with a disguise of Hypocrisy to cover it, and to keep
up the reputation of the Cloister. I say not this universally of Religious
Orders, it were pity if this should be generally true of these recluses;
without question, there are multitudes of Saints among 'em; but granting that,
yet it is beyond all controversy true, that they have extremely degenerated from
their first institution, and instead of giving themselves up to Works of Piety,
and the study of the sacred Scriptures, as their Primitive Fathers did, they
are sunk down into a Lethargy of Ignorance and Stupidity.

I believe, my Friend, it would not be very difficult to find a reason for this
Apostasy, when we consider, how easily they give admission to every lazy
indigent Wretch that can give little or no Account of his Faith, taking the
sacred Habit only to skreen him against the Gripes of Poverty, and the injuries
of Fortune. But one would think, notwithstanding all this, that among so many
idle People, who have nothing to mind but their Prayers and their Study, that
there should not be a greater show of Learning, not to mention any thing else;
but let Brunet believe what I now tell him, that in all the Conversation I have
had with 'em, I scarce met with one in twenty, that had any other Language than
that he was born with; or at the best, if his Practice at the Altar had
furnished him with some loose Fragments of Latin, it was commonly no more than
would serve to ask me what Countryman I was, or to tell me how many Masses are
said in a Day: Not but that there are some of 'em great Masters, but these are
so few, that a Traveller may weary out his Patience, before he can meet with
one who can satisfy his Curiosity in any question of importance.

The Jesuits are the only Order by whom the more polite Studies are encouraged;
of these indeed there are many great Critics in all manner of Sciences, and
it is with which Wisdom, that they are appointed the Missionaries to go Abroad,
for the first thing they study, is Humanity, and that in the chief place fits
'em for these wonderful Expeditions which they are sent upon into the parts of
the World. Besides this, they are perfect Proficients in all the parts of the
Mathematics, than which nothing can be more necessary for the conversion of
the Eastern Nations, who are extremely bigoted to Augury and the study of the
Stars.

The Method which these cunning People have to recruite their Order with a
succession of ingenious Men, is very remarkable; for in all Countries where
they are, they ingross to themselves the Education of all the Youth, and when
they find a Boy of a toward spritely wit, as it is easy out of sometimes a
Thousand, as I have known in one School, they secure him to themselves, and
bring him up to their Order. By these means they never want a supply of able
Men to carry on their Designs, and to preserve their Superiority over every
other fraternity.

At this time I was recommended to make a Journey to a Monastery of
Carthusians, distant some four Leagues from hence: My company was a French
Merchant and a Religious of his acquaintance; so crossing the Bay, we rid it in
two Hours, but after such a barbarous manner, that as bad as I love walking, it
had been much for the advantage of my Bones, if I had footed it through all the
bad ways.

Our Mules (for here are rarely any Horses) were some of them which always ply
at the landing Place, covered with Packsaddles instead of Padsaddles, and
Rein'd with Halters instead of Bridles. The seats of these Saddles are as flat
as a Cushion, but not half so soft; and the fall on each side stretched out so
wide, that it is as bad as the rack to sit on 'em: And to all this the saucy
Muleteer, though there be but the Tail to ride on, will be sure to be up behind
you, if you don't out gallop him, or threaten him with more than bare words. In
this manner we went, and when we came within sight of the Monastery, we
dismounted, giving our Mules in charge to the Owners, who footed it as fast as
we rid. Here we took out a Bottle, and some Provision, and what was remaining
after we had done, we sent to our Jockeys; but the proud Spaniards though they
were ready to starve for Victuals, refused our leavings, and sent us back in
answer, That if we thought 'em not good enough to sit down with us, they
thought 'emselves too good to take up with our Orts.

This was Demonstration beyond whatever I had heard of the Pride of these
rascally Peasants; but indeed in every thing else that we had to do with 'em,
we found 'em always the same

We entered the Monastery, and because I was mightily smitten with this superb
Building, I can hardly forbear you giving its Description. I was so delighted
with every thing I saw, that though I had seen that in Lions which is justly
counted the finest in France, I could not suffer any comparison between this
and that, neither in the Architecture nor Decoration.

Throughout the World the Houses of this order are the most Magnificent of any
and as much as they outdo all others, so much does this exceed all that I had
seen of the same Foundation. The reason of this grandeur is evident, for they
admit none into their Habit, but Persons of the highest Quality, who generally
bring all, or the best part of their Estates in along with 'em, and dedicate
'em to the Monastery. This which we now speak of has such prodigious Revenues,
that in a Year of scarcity, in the City of Cales, they undertook to supply that
populous place with Provision of all kinds for Twelve Months out of their own
Magazines. The number of Fathers in the House was Originally limited to Thirty
Three, but at this time, there were no more than Eighteen; and we were
informed, there seldom are more, because of the rigid and insupportable
severities of their Vows. We were likewise told, that when it was first
Erected, the reputation of the House brought from all parts of the Kingdom,
such as offered 'emselves to it; but when they had a while groaned under the
rigours they were forced to observe, they were no longer able to endure 'em;
and because there was no returning to the World, they sent 'emselves down to
Hell by desperate and violent Deaths.

For five Days of the Week they are denied all Conversation, or so much as the
sight of one another, only Tuesdays and Thursdays in the Afternoon they enjoy
for their Relaxation, and it is upon these Days the House is open for Strangers
to see: When we went in, we met with some of the Fathers coming out, they
surpised us e're we expected 'em, and I confess, I was never so terrified with
the sight of human Creatures before. In their Faces they bear such marks of
Austerity, and such Reveence, that to them who are affected with Solitude and
Contemplation nothing could be more moving. We were carried by our Guide to the
apartment of the Procurador, and he entertained us very courteously with Wine,
Oranges and Citrons, which grew in his own Garden. He had two Rooms to himself,
as they all have, one for his Study and Refection, the other for his Dormitory.
They eat nothing but Fish, but of that they have such variety, that they never
want change either of what they are to eat, or the manner of dressing it: In
the common Garden we saw a Fountain full of tame Carps, which at the call of
the Feeder, would put their Mouths above Water, and take their food from his
Hand. The Duke of Medina Sidonia, has a little House Built within the Walls,
where he lies when he comes to his Devotion, tho he lives a good way off;
invited here, I suppose, by the Healthfulness of the Air, and the Beauty of the
Monastery.

I could say much more of this Noble Structure, for on such a pleasant Subject,
it is harder to say little than a great deal; but I consider, that I have been
already too prolix, and because here I found the best retirement, I took an
afternoon to my self, to piece together my Prayers, and to fit 'em up to what
you see they are. Therefore i will shut up this Letter, only putting you in mind,
that you are indebted now two to me, who am,

Yours, R. R.
January, 12th. 94.
LETTER III.
I Make have to back my Second Letter with a miscellany of Observations which I
made after my return from Xeres, because I would not be thought* idle, or
forgetful of my Duty. And the first remark that occurred, was that of the
Spanish manner of Eating, and dressing their Meat: And certainly no People upon
Earth enjoy 'emselves so little in their Appetites. Whether their Temperance be
the cause of their ill Cookery, or their ill Cookery the cause of their
Temperance, is a Question; for as the first is a Quality they value themselves
upon, so the latter is a shameful Truth, for in all my Life, I never saw such
Mammock and Sluttery. Not that what they eat is in it self offensive, but
between the Butcher and the Cook it is so miserably handled, that our Prisons
would hardly receive it: And yet it is a thing imposible to persuade a Spaniard,
that they are not the only Nation in the World that knows how to eat well; if
you object to him his Safron, he tells you, it is Savory; if you find fault with
his Oil, he answers you, That Oil was one of the Blessings of the Land of
Canaan, but when you come to touch his Sacred Garlic, he brushes up his
Whiskers, flies into a Rage, and wonders at your folly.

When the Table is covered, your Meal is served up in Plates, or very small
Dishes, and hewn into so many Diminitive Pieces, that your Knife may lie by
till it grows into a Sword before you have occasion to use it: and if you
should dare to call for a Fork, the good Man will stare at you as if your
Temples were forked with a pair of Horns. I my self have been at an
Entertainment, of no mean Figure, where we had all the services in Plate, but
not a Fork to be seen, where above half the Company had not Knives, and of
Twenty Dishes of Lenten Diet, Red Herring was the chief. The best on it is, the
Wine is good, and the desert is excellent, and without much ado an honest
Drunkard may make a plentiful Meal among 'em. That which, at the end of the
Entertainment gave me the greatest surprise, was, to see a large Silver Basin
brought in, that almost covered the Table, for every Body to wash together: And
as with us it is counted rude to dip into another Glass; so here they count it
rude not to dip altogether: when we washed, a Servant that stood at the end of
the Table, threw a large Diaper Napkin among us, and every one took a part to
wipe him.

I, who yet had an inclination for the fair Sex, was very uneasy that the good
Woman of the House did not sit with us, and bring two Daughters she had, which
were reported to be very pretty: My impatience to see those hidden Charmers,
made me importunate with Don Francisca Castiliano to speak to the Man of the
House to send for 'em; but he told me, such a request would offend him, and he
would not by any means as'k him; then I turned to an Italian Gentleman who sat
next me, and he assured me, 'twas to no purpose; for he had lodged in the House
two Years, and never had seen the Daughters, I was heartily vexed at this
nicety, and thought it a little uncourteous to disappoint a stranger's
Curiosity.

And now I am upon the Subject of Women, give me leave to make you what
Description I can of them.

The better sort are very Beautiful, fair of Complexion, if compared with the
Vulgar, for which there can be no better Reason, than that they stay altogether
within Doors, and escape the injuries of the Sun and Weather: Of shape they are
exceeding fine, and indeed that may be generally said of the Spaniards both Men
and Women for to my remembrance, I never saw any there either Deformed or ill
Made.

There is but one Day in the Year when they are allowed their Liberty: and then
it is so absolute, that a Woman may Cuckold her Husband to his, Face, and defy
every thing but his Dagger. On this Day (which is Corpus Christi) the Churches
are all open, and a deal of fine Pageantry spread without the Houses to
Solemnize the Festival. The Women walk the round of their Devotion to all the
Churches and under, the umbrage of that, commit those things which at another
Season they have not the freedom to do: And I have been told, that they will
intrigue the Year round to finish it at that time, while their Husbands and
Fathers are busy in the general Procession that takes up all their Leisure; nor
are the Duegna's so dreaded for their watchfulness, able to prevent 'em.
Besides the Beauty of their Persons.

Their dress is so singular, that a stranger must needs be pleased with it:
Their Heads are not embarast with Commodes, nor their Wastes with Stays. On
their Shoulders they ware laced Hankerchiefs, instead of Nightrails, and their
Hair, which is the finest in the World, is richly pleated with Ribbons, and
falls down to their Seats. The outside is yet far inferior to what is
underneath, (for they affect an outward show of gravity) but under their
Wastcoats and Petticoats, they wear the most sumptuous Ornaments they can can
purchase. But the most singular fancy they have, is that of admiring little
Feet, and to this end, they cramp their Children when they are Young, and as
their Feet are straightened, their Legs are enlarged, which is likewise accounted
graceful: I was offended at this Custom, and when at the Playhouse I saw a
Woman Act a Man's part, who had large Carman's Legs, I complained of it to my
Friend, who told me, that was the only Beautiful Part about her. But though they
take such pains to Beautify their Feet they are extremely shy of showing 'em,
and it is held a Favor as great as any thing can be afforded, when one of 'em
uncovers her Feet to show 'em; after this and a Kiss nothing is denied, for he
who has these two, is Master of the rest of her Person.

The Men of Spain are not so fair as the Women, they are well in Shape and
Stature, Active, but unwilling to show it: I need not say much of 'em, every
History being particular in this, and every thing else that concerns the
general Description of the Country. Their Habit is for the most part the
Castilian, though I observe, of later Years, they begin to affect the French,
especially they in the Maritime Provinces, distant from the Court; or such as
have been abroad; and as this dress is plain and cheap, so it is the most
advantageous in the World to display the Elegancy of their Shapes, for every
thing from the shoulders down sits to the Skin as close as the Skin does to the
Flesh: But about the Neck they are always loose: One Reason of that, is, to show
their Linen, for though that is not very fine, yet it is of an excellent Color,
and the work which they bestow about the Neck and Hands is so amazing, that I
really knew a Butcher in Cales that gave Fifty pieces of Eight only for making
of his wedding Shirt.

Their Beds are the worst that can be, stuffed only with Wool, and quilted down;
their Sheets no larger than Aprons, but always clean and white; the Frames of
the Beds are made to fold up like an Old Woman's Stool and to be removed from
place to place: Of these, I have seen Twenty in a Room, set close one to
another, which though it makes the Chamber look like an Hospital, yet we found it
very sociable.

Next to their Beds, the greaest plague was that of the Musketoes, these are a
small kind of Flies, which in the Night buzzes about your Face, and stings most
intolerably: Strangers never fail of being marked with 'em the first Night they
lie a Shore, which makes 'em in the Morning look as if the small Pox was broke
out upon 'em: Some have fine Gawze Netts to keep 'em off, but that is very rare.

Curtains here are as scarce as a shade about Madrid on a Sunshiny Day, hardly
any to be heard of: And all the while I lay a Shore, I met but with one Bed so
provided: The insides of their Houses are unhung, unless it be with Pictures,
bare Walls being cooler, and the color of these Walls is whiter than a Ladies
Skin: They use no Chimneys, and rarely have their windows glazed; the two
Reasons are, Glass is very dear, and very hot. The security of their Windows
lies in the Iron Bars, before which they have a Lattice, which does as well as
Glass.

The Spaniards are very Idle, and consequently much given to Gaming: They know
the use of Dice very well, but their chief Diversion is in Cards. Ombre is a
Game as common with them as Triumph is with us, but the difference that is in
every thing between them and others, is even in this most provoking, that as
all People upon Earth deal the Cards to the left, they deal to the right, and
handle 'em a quite contrary way to us and every Body. And now we are upon this
Subject, I have a fair occasion of reckoning up the differences of particular
Humors between them and us.

And first in general, though we are parted but by a ridge of passable Hills; yet
it would seem, we live under a strange diversity of Constellations, for even in
the Actions of the Soul we are quite different, as well as in those of the
Body: for the French Man is Active and Mercurial, the Spaniard Speculative and
Saturnine; the one Sociable and Discoursive, the other reserved, and full of
Thought; the one so open, that you cannot hire him to keep a secret; the other
so secret, that the Rack cannot force him to discover: Next in their Fashion
and Apparel: The French go thin and open, as if there were continual Summer;
the Spaniard so Wrapped and Cloakt, as if it were always Winter: The French
Button downward, the other upward: The last constant to their Mode, the first
more wavering than a Silkworm: The French walk as fast as if they were running
from an Arrest; the Spaniards as slowly, as if they were newly come out of
quartan Agues: The French Parade in clusters; the Spaniards never walk above
two: The French as Airy, as if they were galliardizing in the Street; the other
as solemn, as if they were marching in a Procession. Whence this prodigious
discord should arise is very unaccountable, whether by Antipathy, by Emulation,
of Derision, or whatever it is, there is not such another instance upon the Face
of the Globe. I might have added, That the French walk with Swords no longer
than Woman's Bodkins, and the Spaniards wear 'em so long, that their Rumps seem
as if they were Spitted. I was alarmed at this excessive length, and it was
told me, That the standard for a Blade was four Feet, but the Cutler always
adds another Foot, and then they are about as long again as ours: And because
this great length makes 'em awkard and hard to be drawn, they have contrived
for the better dispatch of Execution, to have their Scabbards open from the
Hilt to the Chape, as if it were no more than a Case, and the upper end is
locked with a spring, which opens with a touch, and the too sides of the
Scabbard parting, the Instrument of Death comes forth. To this unconscionable
measure of their Swords, they have likewise great skill in Fencing, but after
another manner than ours, for as we keep a Guard even with our Breasts, they
keep their's even with their Eyes, and the Arm a little bent at the Elbow, as
ours is always strait; and yet I seldom heard of Duels among 'em, but of
Assassinations without number.

I am afraid, My Dear Brunet, of being too particular, lest I grow tedious, or
else I could sit up a whole Winter's Night upon this one Topic of
Assassinating: Let it suffice instead of more, that there hardly passes a Day
here when we don't here of some new Murder committed the Night before, and yet
the Authors are never inquired after, or never punished: This Scandalous
contempt of the Law arises from the implacable desire they have of revenging
their injuries with their own Hands, and many times when a Court of Justice
would redress 'em, they Laugh at such a Proposal, and scorn to give away the
opportunity of doing 'emselves right.

As to the Laws of Spain, I believe they are very well Executed, where the
Churches claim does not interfere with it; they have many Courts of Judicature,
and the method of Prosecuting Business is easier than any where else, for often
a Trial is called and determined before the parties know any thing of the
matter. I take the Rule to be thus: The Merits of both sides are got ready, and
entered into some inferior Office, deputed by the Chief, where Officers wait
for such purposes, and there being all that can be said by both Parties made
out plainly, and what ever they can bring material, by their Witnesses, or any
other Testimony summed up in order. The depositions are packt up in two Bags
among a Thousand more, and so sent to Toledo, Sevil, or some other Court, where
they are carefully examined, and afterward dispatched to their respective
Countries, without sending for, or seeing the Parties or Witnesses.

In every House in Spain is the King's Picture, almost in equal veneration with
the Virgin's and our Savior's, though certainly he makes the worst Picture that
ever I saw. His Face is Fair, Long, Lean, sunk in the Cheeks, sharp Chin,
turning toward his Nose; his Nose Romaniz'd, great Ears, and his Hair most
frightfully tucked behind 'em: His Eyes are good, his Body small, and his Legs
every where alike: I inquired of his Disposition, and it was Answered, That he
is infirm and apt to be disordered, That he is of an exceeding sweetness of
Nature, fond of his People, Mild and a great Lover of Jesting: No correct
Politician, nor very studious of Politics, choosing rather to rule by the
indulgence of Nature, than the Maxims of Art: His Diversions are Comedies and
Bull baitings; his Exercises, the great Horse and the Prayer Book, and his
Dress the plainest in the Court: He Loves the Queen fondly, and She him, nor do
the prejudices of their different Countries ever divide 'em, though sometimes the
Factions of both sides are Clamorous. But the greatest unhappiness is, the want
of an Heir, which though every Day Prayed for, comes to nothing. This is an
unspeakable Misfortune, and Ages yet to come may feel the Consequences of it.

Spain is crowded with as great number of Men of Quality as any Kingdom of
Europe, excepting Poland, and with a Clergy of the best indowments in the
World. And though the ordinary standing force of the Kingdom is not so great as
that of France, yet without question the King can raise incredible numbers when
he is heartily put to it.

And because I would not say any thing without a Reason, I believe it may be
easy to prove that this King can produce as numerous Armies as the King of
France, if he would pursue the same Course. For,

First, Spain abounds with a great many idle fellows, who had rather Starve
than Work, and being all fond of wearing Swords, they would gladly take the
Title of Soldiers, if the King gave 'em encouragement.

In the next Place: They are so well affected to their King, that if his
Affairs required their Lives, they would stick at nothing to serve him; and so
fond of their own Liberties, that if there were danger of losing them, no
constraint of Estates or Families could keep 'em from their Arms: Again, His
Provinces (though not so well peopled as those of France) are infinitely more,
and larger, and if as the Grand Seignior does, he were to Levy so many Men out
of every Village by the proportion of Estates, the amount would be prodigious;
but as he never had occasion to make so great a Muster, so to ease his People,
he sits at as little charge as he can; his frontiers being Manned with few
Regiments, and the inner parts of his Empire requiring none. To this purpose,
was the answer of a Courtier to a Stranger, who seemed to wonder at so small a
Guard as the King kept about him, for when the Stranger demanded, If that were
all his Guard? The Answer was, Are not we all his Defenders? What need is there
of more?

But the principal Augmentation of the Spanish Force, will arise from the
assistance of the nobless, and the vast numbers they can bring of their Vassals
and Dependants: And as this August Body Subsists entirely on the Crown by
tenures of one kind or other, so it is at the pleasure of the Crown to command
'em to service, when any urgency presses it; and their territories and revenues
being so spacious, it is thought, the least Muster they can produce would be a
Hundred Thousand. Add to this, That the Clergy too, being for the most part
feud a tory to the Crown, and bound (though not personally) to assist in the
defense of the Realm, their produce must be very considerable. But as to the
Noble Men, their Services are the more certain, because their Honors descend
not de jure from Father to Son, unless confirmed to the Son by the King's
Acknowledgment and Compellation, which makes them more observant of him, than
in France or England, where it is demanded as a Birthright; and because out of
the gross Body of these Noble Men, the King honors some with the Title of
Grandees, privileged to stand covered before him, which being the highest pitch
of Grandeur the State can give, it keeps those great Ones in readiness to Obey
his Pleasure, in hopes of being sometime called to it.

Here it must be confessed, that the People of France are more Military, and that
the King of France has a better Exchequer, and consequently his Armies are
fuller; but consider, The King of Spain of late makes no Conquests abroad, and
therefore is not necessitated to be always in Arms; and if his Exchequer be
low, it is because he seldom Taxes, but slides on in Tranquillity with his
ordinary Intrado, and as well as he can, bears up, without oppressing his
People: but if an unavoidable necessity threatens him, and he be forced to Arm
as many as he can, it is beyond Controversy, That he can fill a Campaign to as
great an extent as France, and saying That, I have comprehended any Kingdom in
Europe. It may be subjoined here, that his Country is naturally Strong,
defended on one side by the Pyrenes, his shore every where guarded with good
Forts, and the other side secured with difficult Approaches, good Garrisons,
and the Warlike Nation of the Catalauns: So that upon the whole, his charge is
very easy, which is a happiness to himself and his Subjects.

Of the Language of Spain, it is a comely Sonorous Majestic kind of speaking;
it is generally the same all over the Kingdom, except in Biscay, where they
still use their own Barbarous Original: but every where else it is the same,
only distinguished in some remote Provinces, by idioms particular to every
place; though in Catalonia and the contiguous Towns it is Corrupted into a sort
of Languedock. It has a very near affinity with the Latin, the Roman Conquerors
having here more than any where else, left their Language behind 'em. It Is not
very hard to be learned, for foreseeing the usefulness of knowing it, I gave my
self up to it, and in three Months I became so good a Proficient, that I
understood every thing that was said.

But before I end this Miscellaneous Letter, take as near as I can Collect, all
the vast Kingdoms and Dominions that make up the Body of this Magnificent
Empire. In Europe, there is Spain it self, of two Thousand five Hundred Miles
Circumference: Catalonia, Naples, Millain and Flanders. In the Mediterranean,
the Islands of Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, Majorca, Minorca, Yvica, and
Fermentera. In the Atlantic, the Canaries, Madera, Cape Verde, and some other
small Possessions. In the Oriental Seas, the Ladrones, Philippines and
innumerable lesser Isles in America, almost the whole Continent, with the great
Island of California; in Africa, Ceuta, Maragan, and several small Plantations
in all the parts of the World; but there having been no Account published of 'em
since the defection of Portugal, the List is not so exact as I could wish it,
but enough has been said to prove that the Crown of Spain has a larger tract of
Land than any Monarchy in the World, amounting to more than Thirty Seven
Thousand Miles in circuit: and as his Dominions on Land are of so great extent,
so on the Coasts he has Harbors of the greatest security from Storms, and
Forts of invincible Defense against an Enemy. And certainly nothing can be more
delightful than to Sail up the Mediterranean, almost every where in sight of
Land; the Country of Spain yielding the finest Prospect of any upon the Face of
Nature, which appears charming to the Ships that go by because of the color of
the Soil, the numbers of the Towns, and the Beauty of their Buildings, the
Houses being all Built of a white Stone, and so raised one above another, that
every distinct House may be perceived at a great distance; but this is not the
Beauty of Spain alone, for all the Towns of Barbary are built in the same
manner; above all, the lovely Town of Algier, which without doubt for the
bigness, is the most delectable Fabric upon the Ocean.

I might here enlarge my Letter, by reviving the old Records, which talk so
ostentatiously of the great Actions that have been performed in this Country by
the Romans, but I have been too tedious already, and as I intend this but as a
Postscript to my last, and have all along said very little of the History of
the Country, it is time I should pay my Compliment and bid you adieu.

But before I shut up, and while it is in my Head, let me ease my Spleen
against two things which I abominate here; one is the most odoriferous Custom
of Watring and Dunging the Streets with what comes out of their Close-Stools;
and this they do in such an outrageous manner, that I have seen the high
Streets of several Towns paved in a Morning with that soft matter, and a Tide
of Urine rolling down the Kennels: But what is most wonderful, by Noon all this
is all gone, and not the least appearance of all that Filth that we saw when we
rose: The Air is so incredibly fine, that it rarifies whatever it meets with to
prey upon; and the Spaniards hold it a Physical prevention thus to furnish the
street with Matter for that voracious Planet, lest it should prey upon their
own Carcasses.

The other Offense, is the universal use of Oil in every thing they dress,
which is so venomously bad that it infects the Air around: and this is
altogether the Sauce the ordinary People have; so that for a whole Streets
length you shall see no sky for the thick Fog that comes out of their
Frying-Pans; and that makes such an intolerable stink that I don't know any
thing more nauseous.

When I was discoursing of their Pride, I might have told you that I have seen a
Smith at work upon a Horseshooe with a Sword at his Side, and a Dagger behind
him: His Man held the Shoe, and the Master (who never works but upon pressing
necessities) gave it the finishing Stroke. They hammer their Iron all cold, and
that is the Reason that a Horse need be shod but three or four times a Year.

I might have said something of their Gravity, and by how many ridiculous
Affectations they would be thought reserved and demure, but I have been as good
as my word in making this a mad Miscellany, and I hope you will pardon the
Confusion,

I Remain Yours R.

LETTER IV.
AT last I have the favor of yours, and the Account you send me, of the Great
Exploits our Sovereign has Acted on the Continent, gave me Infinite
Satisfaction. Certainly he is the greatest Monarch that ever came after
Augustus, and if his Sea Expeditions had the same Success, there would be
nothing wanting to Chronicle him, the first, in all the Annals of Glory. But
alas! When I Reflect on the Insults these People his Enemies, have made on this
side of his Dominions, I am strangely Mortified; for without Complementing
their Power, it must be acknowledged, that they have an Invincible Navy, and
it is happy for us, that our Harbors Protected us from 'em, or there would have
been no safety from their Arms. The Fatal Defeat at La Hogue, is a bitter
Evidence of this Truth, and I wish for the Glory of my King, we may never come
so inopportunely into their Power again: What is there in the World but the
Power of this Rival English Monarch, to Eclipse him? The Genius of that Prince
is a Check to the Career of his Ambition; and though it never shall be said, that
he can blot out the Honors of France, yet give me leave to say, his Emulous
Gallantries Interpose a Cloud of Darkness before 'em, and make 'em less Visible
to Impartial Judges: But to my Business.

About the Latter End of April, we Sailed from the Bay of Cales, and there
being Occasion to send a Scout a Cruizing, the General Ordered, that some of
the Britania's Crew, should be Shipped Aboard Her, of which Number, I had the
good Fortune to be One. This unexpected change pleased me, because I thought I
should see something more in a Cruizer, than by Remaining where I was; for the
great Ships scarcely put in any where, while the Frigots are in continual
Employment, and I was not mistaken in my Opinion.

Being now Shipped anew, I showed my self very forward, in whatever was to be
done, partly to get to my self a good Character, but chiefly that I might be in
the Opportunities of seeing all Adventures; we had not been long from the
Fleet, e're we took a small Bark, and though this was no extraordinary Prize, yet
it gave us occasion to put into Tangier, the only thing in the World that
suited with my Curiosity. There being a War between the English and the Moors,
we durst not come in near the Shore, but Anchoring about a League without, we
saw a Pinnace making toward us, under a White Flag; the Signal of Peace.
Immediately the Captain ordered his Barge to be Manned, and putting White Flag
to be Hoisted; and putting a Lieutanant in Her, he Commanded him to meet the
Tangerine, and Complement him in Civil Terms. The Lieutenant obeyed his
Instructions, and being Met, he delivered by an Interpreter, the Business of
his Errand, and after Mutual Civilities they parted.

Soon after, a Gentleman from the Town, came aboard, with a Present to the
Captain, of Mutton, Kid, and other Provisions, which he Returned in English
Glasses, Racking Bottles, and other Toys, which were very acceptable to the
Mahometans. They then Treated about the Prize, and she was Bought and Sold, in
half an Hour.

The City of Tangier makes a fair Prospect to the Sea; It was Abandoned to
Alphonso, K. of Portugal, in the Year 1471, after his Successes at Arzila, and
has been ever since in their Possession, till Katherine had it for part of her
Dowry, and it now being in the hands of the English, the Moors thought it
easier to be recovered, by being so far distant from it is Master; and
accordingly they sell to Work under the Conduct of that Tempestuous General
Gaylan; who after several Defeats which he Received, and the loss of his own
Brother, at last Played the English so foul a Trick, that in an Ambuscade,
which he made for the L. Tiveott, the English General, he cut to Pieces most of
the Garrison, and the General himself. It Is Built on a Rising Ground, of White
Stone, and seems to be well Fortified: The Hills on both Sides are Guarded with
Walls, and before it is a Peer, Rebuilt by the Moors, after it was Demolisht by
the English. You may remember this City was once in Possession of England,
being part of the Dowry of the Sister of Portugal, who was Married to Charles
the 2d, then King of Great Britain; but the continual Assaults of the Moors,
kept 'em always in Alarm, and after a Thousand Skirmishes, it was found too
Great a Charge, for that Remote Island to be every Year sending Succors to
relieve it; and I am persuaded, that it is Impossible for any European Nation
to be long Master of it, since the Provinces under the Emperor of Morocco, are
so much Improved in the Art of War, by those Instructions they have received by
the French, who are at this Day in all their Camps. I need not say what
Advantage it would be to him if our Monarch had it in his Hands; for it is a
better Curb to the passage into the Mediteranean, than any on the Spanish
Shore; but I Prophecy, that whosoever undertakes to Besiege it, will be Losers
by more then their Cost; and I doubt not but in time, those Moors will Recover
the rest of their Country out of the Hands of the Spaniards; who are now
Possessed but of Ceuta, and Two more small Towns, of all the Coast which was once
theirs.

And now I have mentioned Ceuta, let me say something of that, more than Trojan
Siege; which has already lasted Six Years, and is like to Last as many more. I
know the World has Looked upon this Siege, with some Contempt, both of the
Besiegers, and the Besieged; because in so many Years time, there is neither
One way nor other, any Period put to it, neither the Town Conquered by the
Moors; nor the Moors beaten from before the Town: But let us see, if there may
be an excuse made, for the slow Progress of the Moors, or the weak Defense of
the Spaniards.

In the first place, the Camp of the Moors (according to what the Musters
amount in general) never consists of more than 15000 Men, and they a Medley of
Diverse Nations, collected into that great Empire, who till of late knew nothing
of the Modern way of Besieging. It Is true, the Engineers are mostly French, and
whatever little Success they have already had, must be ascribed to them: I
don't know if it be worth your Hearing, what the Current Opinion is concerning
this Undertaking; but I have heard that the General, who has the Command of the
Siege, had formerly committed some Unpardonable Crime, and it was given him in
Choice, either to enlarge the City of Macchaness, the 2d Metropolis of the
Empire, to Redeem Ceuta out of the Hands of the Spaniards, or in the 3d place,
to Forfeit his Head: Though I believe this to be a Fable, yet so much of it is
True, that if the General miscarries in his Design, his Head will be in good
earnest Forfeited, to the Emperor's implacable Resentment: For he rarely
Pardons any who fail of what they Undertake.

In the 2d place, the Kingdom of Morocco, is but very ill supplied with
Ammunition: We all know they would be Bartring with all the Courts in Europe,
for Arms, and other Necessaries of War; but it is not the Interest of any
Christian King, to put into their Hands the Power of Injuring their Trade, and
making Insults on their Coasts: So that they have little of Warlike Provision,
but what they get from the Dutch, who will Traffic with any People for their
own private Interests, though all their Neighbors are to Suffer for their
Avarice. By this Indigency of Military Stores, it follows, that their Attempts
in War must be less Vigorous. Besides this, the Garrison is strongly Fortified
toward their Camp, and it being open at Sea, for Succors to be continually
poured in, their Opposition of the Garrison must consequently be great, and
their Sallies frequent and Numerous. To add to all this, Morocco is perpetually
in War with the Re-publick of Algiers, and being a little Pressed in that, they
are less at leisure to regard this.

On the other Hand, if it be Objected to Spain, that they are too remiss, now
they have little else to do, that they don't drive their Enemies from before
their VValls, and Dislodge such a Confusion of Vagabonds, it may be answered,
That, as they are but on the defensive, they have no more to do, but to prevent
'em from making any considerable Progress; and though it would be highly
necessary for their Honor and Interest, to Raise the Siege; yet the Exchequer
of Spain is always kept so low, that they have hardly Money to Pay their
Soldiers; and of course, the Work must go on with little Resolution: Besides,
they who are sent thither, are for the most part such who are taken out of the
Streets, and sent into the Service, and who must needs be a great while
Training up, and Disciplining, before they can be made fit for a Sally. The
Governor is a Grandee of Spain, and a Gentleman of Gallantry, but wanting a
Force of Men and Money to answer the Necessities of so long a Siege, he is able
to do little: His Lady is an English Woman, Sister to the present Duke of
Norfolk, the first Peer of that Kingdom; and when our Ship came before the
Town, the Captain went ashore, and was entertained with a hearty welcome by her
and her Lord. When the Entertainment was over, the Governor took all the
English Gentlemen, and showed 'em the Moorish Camp, and to do the K. of England
Honor, in the Persons of those his Subjects, he caused to be planted on the
walls the Royal Standard of Great Britain, which when the Moors saw, they
wondered what it meant. The French could presently inform 'em what it was, and
by that Signal, supposing there were English Strangers in the Garrison, they
fell to Firing and Bombarding, as if now they were in a humor of taking the
City by Storm, and soon made the Ramparts too hot for the Curiosity of the
Beholders. Then they fell to it Pell-mell, both from the Garrison and Camp, and
this Fury lasted on both sides, all that Night, and part of the next day, and
for several hours sailing we heard 'em still at it. Ceuta was taken by the
Portuguese in the year 1415, and was annexed with the rest of the Dominions of
the Crown of Portugal, to the Monarchy of Philip the Second of Spain; but when
Portugal recovered her self out of her Usurper's Power, most of her Colonies
abroad deserted the Spanish Yoke, except this Garrison, and some Islands in the
Atlantic and Eastern Seas.

Next morning we joined the Fleet, and we who had been removed, were now
restored to our own Ship.

After some days Sailing, we came up to Barcelona, where we all Anchored; And
now the Catalauns began to treat us like Friends; for as soon as we arrived
before the City, we were saluted with all the Guns, and they were answered with
as many of ours. The Viceroy, who was the Marquess de Leganez, came Aboard us,
with a considerable Pomp of Barges and Equipage, and the General received him
with great satisfaction: At his debarquing, he was complemented with all the
Guns of the English Fleet, except of one Squadron, who (for some private
Reason) did not fire: The next day he visited the Dutch Admiral, and at his
Departure was saluted with all their Guns.

The City of Barcelona is the Capital of the Kingdom of Catalonia, an ancient
City, it being formerly called Barsino, and then a Roman Colony, inhabited by a
more industrious People than the Spaniards; for here they are all employed in
one Occupation or other; and though the King favors 'em with larger Privileges
than any other of his Dominions, yet it is with much difficulty they are kept in
their Allegiance: The Reason of this is, because the Power of Spain cannot
preserve 'em from the Invasions of the French, who are their near Neighbors,
and upon every opportunity, molest 'em in their Trade. This Country has at all
times been very apt for Mutinies, and Popular Commotions, being as nearly
related to the French, by the disposition of their Humors, as they are by
their Situation; and to prevent 'em from revolting, the King caresses 'em with
great Immunities, and when that fails, he has a standing Force to awe 'em into
Subjection.

In this City, there are (as near as I can remember) about 30 Monasteries of
both Sexes, well endowed besides some Churches, and a Cathedral of great
Ostentation. The Vice-king's Palace is a large plain Structure, neither well
built, nor well furnished, though the Spanish Historian Mariana commends it
highly, though he never saw it; it stands at the side of a great Square, which is
the Parade of the Militia: The other Buildings are high and fair, and the Shops
of the Citizens display a great deal of Wealth. It Is here, that the Galleys of
Spain are laid up, there being an excellent Mole to shelter 'em from ill
Weather, and convenient Houses to lay 'em up in the Winter. At this time all
the Galleys, as well of Scicily as Spain, were together; and it must be
confessed, spite of all Detraction, that the King of Spain is well provided with
such sort of Navigation: These Galleys are sumptuously decked, and carry one
with another between 50 and 60 Oars, manned with four Slaves each, who are
chained to their Seats, and stripped to the Skin. I believe there might be about
30 in all, which being together, side by side, made a fine show, and surpised
us with pleasure, when we turned short into the Mole to go ashore. The Command
of these Vessels is held superior to the Command of Men of War, and the Captain
of each is a Man of Quality, and the General, a Duke.

On the Shore, before the Mole, the Nobility and Gentry of the City (which are
very numerous) take the Air every Evening, where one may see at one time a 100
Coaches lined with the Beauty of the Country, whom the Cavaliers wait upon on
Horseback, and gallant with more than Spanish Gallantry. The City is walled
round, and mounted with brass Canon, formerly in such a Number, that there were
reckoned above 300 round the Works, but there are not half so many now, the
rest having been taken down by some of the former Viceroys, who represented to
the King, that they were disabled and unfit for Use, though in reality they were
very good, and so converted 'em to their own Advantage. The M. de L -- has been
a Notorious Offender this way, and when he was deposed from his Government, he
feigned himself mad, to elude the Examination they were going to make, and so
escaped an Account.

There is not in the world better Artillery than is in the Dominions of the
King of Spain, and this is so strong a Temptation to the covetous Governors,
that they are every year diminished under one Pretense or other, and put into
their Pockets. What can be a greater Demonstration of the Remisness of the
Spanish Government?

After some little stay here, the Fleet weighed, and stood to the Eastward,
their design being to Bombard Toulon, or Marselles, and to burn the Ships: It
was (my Friend) good sport to me, to see 'em go about a Project which was like
to cost 'em so much trouble to so little purpose. I knew it would be in vain to
attempt any thing against either of those Harbors; and I was well pleased to
find they had contrived an Expedition, which would turn to their own Disgrace.
Soon as we reached the Latitude of Toulon, there was an Order for all the Long
Boats, and Pinnaces, to be Armed, and the Rear Flag of Red, was Hoisted Aboard
a 3d Rate, to Conduct this Diminutive Armado, within the Isles of Hieres; but
before this was put in Execution, a small Frigot was sent in to Spy the
Condition of the Enemy, who made a quick Return, having with much ado, escaped
the Galleys, who were sent after Her, and Reported to the General, that it was
Impracticable to Attempt any thing there, the Harbor being Lined with
invincible Forts, and a Stout Resistance provided round the Shore: This
Disappointment Galled 'em shrewdly, but then turning their Design toward
Marselles, the General Detacht other Frigots, to Discover where it was most
convenient to Enter, who came back with the same Account they had done from
Toulon; adding, that they were every where so Impregnable, that it would be but
to Sacrifice their Ships, and their Lives to Assault 'em.

Thus being on all sides prevented, we withdrew further off, and Cruiz'd off
the Isles; when a Furious North-West Blew us quite out of Sight of Land, and
put us to a Necessity of Shifting for our Safety. This Storm continued for a
Fortnight, and was so Violent, that the Birds were blown from Shore, and came
to Rest their Weary Wings, on the Decks, and Rigging of our Ships. These Poor
Creatures were Grown so Tame, with Famine, and Fateigue, that it was an easy
matter to take 'em with our Hands; and there was hardly a Ship that had not
Quails, and Turtle-Doves, sitting on their Yards. The Tempest continuing still
Obstinate, and the Sea Running High, as it always does in the Gulf of Lions,
at length it was Determined to stand before it, and Steer for the Island of
Sardinia; there was a Necessity for this, for we began to want Water extremely;
and in few days Arriving there, we Anchored in an open Road, within four
Leagues of Cagliari. Here we found a Fresh Stream, that Supplied us
immediately; and when we had been a while at an Anchor, the Country Peasants
brought down Provisions in such Plenty, that now all the Mariners Fed upon
Fresh Meat.

Sardinia, is an Island near adjoining to Corsica, opposite to the Re-publick
of Genoa, and the Dukedom of Tuscany; the People of both Islands are Accounted
Barbarous, but we found 'em quite otherwise, unless we Value their Capacities
by the Good Bargains we made, and count 'em Fools because they Sold us Good
Penny-worths: They are indeed Notoriously Ignorant, and Superstitious, but far
from being such Savages as they are Accounted in History; and unless the
Character belongs to the English, who Riffled and Pillaged the Poor Wretches, I
don't know of any Barbarity I saw while I was abroad. The English, to give 'em
their Due, are exquisite at that sort of Mischief; for when they had any of
those Poor Creatures in their Power, they made no Conscience of Plundering them
of what they had and turning 'em loose to Nakedness and Beggarly. I Will give you
one Instance of this Kind, because I would not fix a Scandal on a People
without good Reason; and that is thus.

Two Soldiers having got Leave to go a Shore, under pretense of Buying Fresh
Provision, bethought 'em selves of a Cheaper way of being Supplied, than by
their Money, and Marching up into the Country, came to a Poor Peasant's House,
who Lived Far from Neighbors, an Honest, Simple Wretch, who Fed and Clothed
himself with the Profits of his own Industry, and kept about his House all that
he was worth in the World: It was this Poor Man's Unhappiness to be at Home,
when those Stroalers entered his House without any Ceremony, who seeing a
strange People within his Doors, Imagined 'em to be some of the English, who,
he had heard, were come into their Country, and designing to Treat 'em with
what he had, he offered 'em the Bounty of his House, sparing nor Meat, nor
Wine, nor any thing that could express his Satisfaction of seeing 'em there:
After he had given them of what he had, and they had Glutted with all sorts of
Plenty, he loaded 'em with Fruits and other Good things, and Offered 'em what
Accommodation he could make for their Lodging, if they would be so kind as to
stay with him that Night: They likeing well their Entertainment, thought this
was a good Opportunity to Enrich themselves, and making their way up stairs in
a Riotous manner, they amazed the unwary Landlord, who could not guess what
they meant by Running up and down, in such Tumultuous Have: But The Poor amazed
fellow, who saw himself going to be Undone by these Rogues, made what
Opposition he could to hinder 'em, and as he Struggled, and Prayed, that they
would offer him no Violence, one of the Villains with his Dagger, Stabbed him
to the Heart, and laid him Dead at his Feet; and when they had committed that
Execrable Deed, they Stripped the House bare, and marched away with the Spoils
of their Villainy. This Bloody Action was afterward made known to the Viceroy,
who Demanded Justice of the General; the General making inquiry after the
Criminals, found 'em out, and Sentenced the Principal to Death: When this was
Reported to the Viceroy, he Desired no greater Satisfaction than to see 'em
Condemned; and being a Man of Generosity, himself interceded for their lives,
only desiring they might be made sensible of their Crimes, but that they might
not be Executed. The General with some Regret, granted his Request, but would
not let the Murderers yet know what had been determined; so appointing a day
for the Execution of the Principal, and the Punishment of the other after the
Military manner, they were drawn out under a Strong Guard, and a Battalion was
Commanded ashore to attend the Execution: And now behold a turn, and the
Justice of Providence on the Guilty Malefactor. The Ruffian who gave the Fatal
Blow, was pinnion'd, and upon his Knees ready for Death, which he was to
receive from a File of Muskets, drawn out for that Purpose; and his Companion
placed close by him to Suffer the Terror of his Execution: He who Headed the
Battalion, and carried the Pardon in his Pocket, gave Orders that the
Musketeers should not Fire, till he made the Signal; but that all the Ceremony
should be made to Terrify him a while with the Prospect of his Death; the
Lieutenant who had charge of the File, knew nothing of the Pardon, but
supposing he was to be Shot, according to his Sentence, gave the Signal for
Firing, without asking any further Direction; and in a Moment the Murderer was
Torn to Pieces. Judge now my Friend of the Precipitancy of these English, but
chiefly of the Divine Justice, that would not let such a Notorious Offender
Escape the Punishment of his Bloodshed. The other Delinquent was Punished at
the same time, though not by Death, and the Blood of the Murdered Peasant so far
atton'd: The Officer who Commanded the File, was Broke for his Rashness, and
the Colonel that should have taken more care, was made Prisoner, but soon
afterward Released.

The City of Cagliari is the chief of the Island, exceeding strong, and the
Seat of the Viceroy; this formerly was accounted so Noble a City, when
Gracchus took it for the Use of the Romans, that Florus, by way of Excellency,
called it Vrbs Vrbium, though afterward it was demolisht by the same Gracchus,
to disable the Natives; but in more settled times it was Rebuilt, and a second
time Taken by the Saracens, and at last restored by the Pisans to it is
Primitive Luster. I never in all my Life, saw so plentiful a Market as here,
nor every thing Sold at so cheap a Rate; a dozen Chickens might be bought for a
Shilling, a Kid for 2, a Mutton for 4, and a Beef for a Pound, all excellent in
their kind. It was evident, this proceeded from the Scarcity of Money among 'em,
as well as from the plenty of the Market; for the ordinary People were so
little conversant in Money, that they hardly knew the different Species of
Coin. Yet here, as well as in Spain, 'twas easy to discover the Natural Pride
that is in all, who have any Relation to the Crown; and one unanswerable sign
of it, is, that notwithstanding their wondrous Simplicity, their Poverty, and
abject Condition, they esteem 'emselves beyond the Spaniards, in Riches and
Power: and as in Spain, the Natives of Galicia, value 'emselves above all the
provinces of the Kingdom; so here, they triumph over the Galicians, in the same
degree of self-destinction. But certainly nothing can be more ridiculous than
this Vanity; for there is not the least pretense for such a Comparison, not even
in the Fruitfulness of their Country, which is their chief Glory; for though
their Corn Harvests are very succesful, and they swarm with variety of all
Living Food, yet they are so unlearned and ignorant in Commerce, that their
Neighbors on all sides fetch away their Commodities for half the Value, and
leave the inhabitants, nothing but the disgrace of being cheated, and ready to
Starve in the midst of Plenty.

One thing I observed, from the top of a Steeple, which was very remarkable;
'twas a lake of about a mile in circumference, which the Sun seemed to have
diminisht from twice that Compass, and to have candy'd all the edges round it
into an excellent white Salt: I inquired of our Guide, if the City made use of
the Salt, but he told me, that the Physicians held it to be unwholesome, and
forbad the eating it, under the Penalties of Fluxes, and Fevers; but that
indeed the better reason was, that there were several salt Works in the Town,
and it would be a fatal disappointment to the Proprietors of these Works, who
paid dear for their Licenses, if this were used, and that the Physicians were
in Fee to Cry it down. I was satisfied with the latter Reason, knowing the
first to be a fiction; for what could there be of malignity in this Lake, more
than in that Rock of Salt, a little to the Eastward of Barcelona, which was so
Fine, and White, that the General himself used no other at his Table?

The great Church here, is very Old, and very Stately; the outside and Roof,
seemed to me like the Musaeum in Oxford, and because I had once seen that in my
Ramble through England, I gazed at this with the greater delight. The rest of the
sacred Buildings are less magnificent than in Spain; but beneath all, the Royal
Palace is the most humble Piece of Grandeur (If you will pardon the Solecism)
that I ever saw. 'Twas Large, it is true, but in no other respect, suitable to
the Pride of such a People; for a private Gentleman of France, would be ashamed
to have such a House, accounted the Seat of his abode, or indeed of his
Retirement. Some half a score ragged tawdry fellows, are the Viceroy's Guard;
and these so miserable, that the English Sailors made sport of 'em, when they
would hinder 'em from Entering. But to make amends for our disappointed
Curiosity, we found the Viceroy, a Gentleman of so much Courtesy, that there
was not the least appearance in him of that sullen Pride, which is natural to
the Spaniards, though he was a Spaniard Born, and Educated in the Court, the
Original of all Vanity. He lived in no manner of Majesty, which for his sake we
Lamented, and thought it pity a Man of such Merit, should not enjoy all the
Honors of his Place, and we heartily wished him better Fortune. I don't know
how to urge it upon him, for a weakness that which he did out of an excess of
affability, and good Nature: I must own I did think it beneath the dignity of
so exalted a Station, to do what he did, but as he did not seem to want sense
to know his Distinction, and the quality of his Royal Office, so it must be
understood the Effect of complacency to Gentlemen of a Foreign Nation which
was in alliance with his Master. The thing I speak of was this, That when some
English Officers came ashore, he sent his Coaches to bring 'em up to his
Palace, where He himself stood ready to receive 'em, I my self was one of the
retinue, and saw every thing that past. When they were within the House, he
accosted 'em one by one, and the first civilities being over, he led 'em
himself from Room to Room, quite throughout the Palace, Naming, by particulars,
what every Apartment was, omitting only that, where his women were, which was
not open. This, and other Condescensions of the same Nature, was, what looked
very odly to the English. But if we consider the Satisfaction that must arise
to him, by seeing strangers in his Government, who were come to defend his
Master's Country, and the few opportunities he had of conversing with any but
his own People, we cannot blame him for the Pleasure he took in serving 'em.

The Women here are in no Comparison with them of Spain, they have indeed in
their Conversation, a freedom more engaging than the Spanish Ladies have; but
even in that they are so awkard, that a Man of ordinary Gallantry, would hardly
find an inclination for an amor with 'em. The Women of Spain, though they are in
Public more Reserved, have yet Infinite Charms, to make amends for the Toil of
coming at 'em; and as they are very Beautiful (I mean the better sort, for the
rest are all Gypsies) so they have such an insinuating Wit, that a Man of
intriegue, may be exceedingly delighted with 'em. But the Sardinians are the
most stupid Jades in the World, not, I believe, that they want a Force of
Inclination equal with others, but they want that address to set off, and to
engage the Hearts, as well as the Persons of their Lovers, which the Spanish
Ladies excel in.

After the Fleet had Watered, they prepared for their return Down: In the Night
we past between the Isles of Majorca and Minorca, and before the shutting in of
the Evening, we made the Land, and it appeared so like that of Catalonia, that
we thought we had been upon the Continent sooner than we expected; but finding
our selves here, some were of opinion, we had Steered a wrong course. Next Day
we reached Barcelona, and now it was talked of, as if here we were to take up our
Winter Quarters; at least, that the Four Regiments which we brought from
England, should quarter here with the 7000 Germans we took in at Final. I had
forgot to tell you, that it had been agreed by the Confederate Princes, to lay
Siege to some French Garrison in Catalonia, and to that end, 7000 Germans were
detacht from the Armies on the Rhine, under the Command of the Prince of Hesse,
to join the English and Spanish, who were already in the Field, in the Leaguer
of some important place; which afterward proved to be Palamos: The Germans
being arrived at Final, some English and Dutch Transports were sent to take 'em
in; and when they joined the Fleet, the Galleys were ordered out of the Mole to
attend us, and to carry ashore such who were to disembark.

At this time there was an Order for some of the great Ships to be sent back to
Cales, and there to Join others who were cast for England, and together to make
the best of their way home: The remaining part of the Fleet Steered for
Palamos, and being come before it, the Army landed, and joined the Spaniards,
who were about 18000 Horse and Foot: The Germans being 7000, and the English
4000, when they were together, they made up a Considerable Body. The French
were about the same Number, and hearing that the Enemy intended to Besiege
Palamos, they marched their Army within Sight of the Town, and of the
Confederates. Both Armies now being in view of one another, seemed to Watch
each other for the Rising Blow, but neither caring to Fight, the Town was
invested, and the Siege begun. I need not acquaint you with the general Story
of the Siege, without question you have Read it in the Prints, but I cannot
forbear telling what a hideous sight this Spanish Army was: They had about 4000
Horse, which was their only Serviceable Body; for the Foot was the most
Miserable rout of Vagabonds, that ever took the Field. They had neither
Clothes, Arms, nor Provision; the English out of Compassion supplied 'em with
what they wanted, but they made no use of any thing but the Food. Among such a
Number, there were not 1000 Tents in all, but the greatest part of 'em lay on
the parcht Earth without any Covering but the Heavens. However, with the
Germans and the English, the Siege was carried on, and in 5 days, even in sight
of their own Army, the French quitted the Garrison, and dismantled all the
Works.

There being nothing more to do, the English embarkt again with the loss of
half a Score Killed, and about 40 Wounded; though they Sustained the Fire of the
Garrison, and were the principal cause of it is desertion; when we returned to
Barcelona, we heard the Camp was broke up, not without a Battle which the
French forced upon the Spaniards, in which, as the Spaniards themselves report,
they had the better; and you may be sure there was nothing wanting to Celebrate
the pretended Victory with the greatest Ostentation. It was a Deplorable
Spectacle, afterward to see those Naked Wretches come home, without Clothes,
or Arms, and almost Famisht with Hunger: And though it may be supposed, the
Infantry had but a small Share in the Fight, yet they spared not to give out,
that they alone had defeated the French, and overthrown all the Glory of France
down to the Ground.

The Prince of Hesse, at his entering Barcelona, had all the Honors that were
due to his Character and great Services; and afterward for a Reward of his
Signal Performances, was possessed of the Vice-Royalty of that Kingdom. But the
Catalauns (who are an uneasy People) grew Emulous of his Power, and were busy
to Prejudice him, in the Favor of the Court, and to mis-represent him; which
they did at last, with such Success, that he had much ado to preserve his
Government, but that he had a Party at Court, and the Queens Inclination to
support him, and even with all his address, he had much ado to keep himself
upright, against the frequent Complaints of the Catalonians, and the Kings
Indulgence to 'em.

The Fleet now Steered for the Straits Mouth, and when they were opposite to
Algier, the Dutch Squadron, which was always to Wind-ward, saw two Ships of
that Republic, which stood into the Fleet, to pay their Complement to the
English General, his Country being at Peace with the Re-publick, but the Dutch
at War: After they remained one Day and Night among us, they Saluted and were
dismissed. The Dutch Admiral seeing an opportunity of two such considerable
Prizes, made the Signal for two of his Men of War to give 'em Chase; who with
some difficulty came up with 'em, and brought 'em to their Fleet. The English
General was highly exasperated at his breach of Discipline and Hospitality; he
knew that as the Dutch were absolutely under his Command, that this was an
insolence he could not Pardon, and that the Admiral might know he resented such
an Affront, he sent an Officer to order him to release 'em, but the Obstinate
Churl refused, returning in answer, that they were the Enemies of his Country,
and that he would keep 'em. The General having more Consideration than to use
any means of Violence, became his humble petitioner, and in the Language of
Humility, besought him, that as they had put 'emselves into his Protection, and
came but with a design to pay their friendship to the King of England, that he
would suffer 'em to pass unmolested, and that he would answer it to the States,
his Masters: So after much Entreaty they were discharged.

Almost such another Punctilio of Honor was disputed between the French Envoy
at Algier, and the Captain of an Englishman of War, who was sent there to
renew the Peace between England, and that Re-publick; for when the Man of War
arrived, which was a Ship of 70 Guns, the Envoy told the Dey she was but a
Frigot, and that all the Ships of England were no better: The Captain hearing
how the Dey had been abused, waited on him, and told him the Envoy had imposed
upon him; and for his satisfaction, begged that he would do him the Honor of
his presence Aboard her: The Dey consented, and after a splendid Entertainment,
the Captain took him to view her all over, and the Dey in his own Person
counted all her Guns one by one, and found 'em, as the Captain had told 'em,
70. When he saw the Deceit, he was enraged at the Envoy, and at his Return,
sent for him in the presence of the Captain; and being come, the Dey, with his
open Hand, hit him over the Face, spit at him (which are the highest Marks of
Infamy in these Countries) and turned him out of Doors. I had at first some
Suspicion of the Truth of this Story, but when I heard, that it was carried to
France, and that our King Resented, and threatened to Revenge it, it was no
longer to be doubted. I was extremely mortified at this pitiful shift of our
Envoy's, and am heartily sorry his Zeal made him so indiscreet: Our Master has
no need of such impostures, and if he had punished his Minister instead of
menacing the Dey, his Justice had been more commendable. Our Passage down was
now a delight, we kept near the Shore, and had the Pleasure of beholding the
Country all the way we Sailed: From a wonderful distance, we perceived the
Hills of Granada, always covered with Snow, though they lay in the Hottest
Region of Europe.

In Murcia, is the City of Cartagena, first Built by Asdruball of Carthage, as
a receptacle, for Men and Money, arriving from Africa; Situate in a Peninsula,
but so impregnably Fortified in the time of Scipio, that but for a Stratagem he
would never have taken it: Memorable likewise for the Piety of that General,
who would not see those Spanish Beauties, which were presented to him, least
they should betray him to Incontinency. By Constantine it was made the chief
City of the Province, which took its Name from it; but this not being intended
for a History, I have done. It Is now a Populous and Beautiful City, well
Fortified, and has a good Harbor. I should have mentioned Alicant in the
Kingdom of Valentia, famous for the Wines it sends to all Parts. Over this City
is a Castle on the Top of a Prodigious High, and Steep Hill; it is a hard
Journey to it, if you set out at Noon, as we did, and when you are in it, you
meet with very little to reward your Labor: the only thing I Remember worth
Writing, is, that at our going in, our Company were stripped of their Swords, but
had them restored at their going away; this Caution may be necessary, for
it would be no difficult matter, for half a Dozen Brisk fellows to roll the
Garrison down the Hill. At the bottom of this, stands that Celebrated Place,
well known to the English Sailors, by the Name of Mount-Whoredom, and it well
deserves such an Epithet; for there is not such another spot of Ground in
Europe, for all manner of Pollutions. Lower down, lies Malaga, and Velez
Malaga, the first (not to mention the History) is a Town of great Traffic for
Almonds, Raisins, and the Wines of that Name: It Is a Rich, Populous, and Strong
Place, full of all Nations, but especially of English, whose Merchandise is its
chief Reputation: The latter is still Famous, for being in the Neighborhood of
those Hills, where there is a small remnant of the old Moors, who still speak
the Arabic Language; from those hills may be seen the whole course of the
Straits of Gibralter, the Cities of Ceuta and Tangier in Africa. Next we come
to Gibralter, formerly Heracela, Built by Hercules, at the very entrance into
the Mediterranean, a small Town, but very Strong, of little or no Commerce; the
English Consul here being in Deputation from him of Malaga: Here the Sea is so
narrow, that it is a common thing for the Moors from Africa, to cross and Land
in the Night, and carry a way whole Villages into Slavery. On the point of the
Calpe, one of the Fabulous Pillars of Hercules, stands a little Chapel, sacred
to all Catholics who sail by, who always Salute it with their Guns, because
it is the most Westerly in Europe.

I Will Close this Letter with acquainting you, That after a Pleasant Voyage, we
arrived at Cales, where we were Welcomed after a more grateful manner than
ever, and where nothing was to be heard, but Universal applause of the General,
for the whole Series of this Summers Expedition; Health and long Life to him,
and Prosperity to the Arms of England, remaining, in the Sincerest manner,

Your most Devoted Friend and Servant, R. --
Cadiz, September 18th. 95.
LETTER V.
My Dear Brunett,
THE Winter being again our long Vacation, I began to indulge my ^elf in all
the Pleasures so much leisure might afford me. The first undertaking I had, was
to Ride to St. Lucar, in company with my old Friend, the French Merchant, who
had an acquaintance in that place: But before I would undertake my Journey, I
would make my Comrade promise, to Club for a Calash, having had enough of their
Pack-saddles, and Mules, in my ramble to Xeres: I found no difficulty in
persuading him, I sound much more to prevail with him, to let me bear half the
Charge, in which I would not be denied. I had not rid one of the 4 Leagues, we
were to go, but the damned Calash was so uneasy, that I could not choose but
think of the death of being broken on the Wheel: Certainly next to the Wheel,
there is no Rack on Earth, like this sort of Carriages; but though our Calash was
the Devil, our Mules were swift, which in an Hour and a half, ran us to St.
Lucar, which was four long Leagues, and the end of our Stage.

St. Lucar was the Templum Luciferi of the Ancients, from the Temple of Venus
which stood there, that Star being sometimes called Lucifer, and of later years
very famous for being the Port belonging to Sevil, where that Wonder of Cities,
loaded and unloaded all her Bullion which came to her from America. But since
Cales has got the Ascendant of Sevil in her Trade, she is mightily decayed, and
consequently this Town, which sits upon the Channel that goes up to it, is
proportionably lessened: Not that it is now poor, or ill built, but as formerly
she was so large, that she contended for the place of the Second City in
Andaluzia, so we now wonder there should be so little to show for all that
Boast which she made in the fullness of her Glory. It is still a good Town, and
has daily Intercourse with Cales and Sevil by its Barco Longo's, which pass
every Tide between the two great Cities, and is indifferently supported by this
Second-hand Trade: The Governor has a stately House situate on a Hill, almost
inaccessible, that looks all over the Town, the River, and the Country, almost
as high as Sevil. Here are but few Monasteries, but those very well built, and
richly endowed: Among 'em is a little College, erected for the English
Refugees, and dedicated to St. George. The Foundation of this College, is just
as Ancient as what the English call the Reformation; that is, as their Apostasy
from the Catholic Church, and was laid for the Reception of those persecuted
Catholics, who fled for their Religion in the Reign of that Scourge of the
Catholic Faith, Queen Elizabeth.

At this time there were but three Fathers in it, but they live the better for
their being so few, having all the Revenues in their own disposal. We saw but
little here to please our Curiosity, unless you will esteem this one, that though
the Fathers were Englishmen; born and bred in England, yet by so long a disuse
of their own Language, they had almost forgot to speak it; and when I would
have talked to 'em in their own Tongue, they answered in Spanish, and were not
to be got out of that Language into their own. In my many Conversations with
these Religious, I had more than once met with such an Adventure before;
particularly after I had seen the Carthusian Monastery at Xeres, I went into
the Town to visit an English Nun, who had been much famed for her Beauty: She
indeed deserved that Character which was given her, for I never saw any thing
more Charming. Her Name was Philippa Ward, Daughter to an eminent Merchant of
that Name, who lived at Puerto desancta Maria, and in her Infancy had put this
Girl into this Convent: When I found this fair Creature so agreeable, I devoted
to her all my spare hours, while I remained in that Town, and at other times,
when I could be spared from my Attendance on Shipboard.

I found her in every respect so Charming, that it was a Violence to take my
self from her: And to this very day, I feel such a tenderness for her that I
never think of her without Pleasure. This Beautiful Maid had in her first
prattling days, learnt the English Tongue perfectly well, her Father's Family
had generally English Servants in it, and while she was at home it was
impossible for her to forget the Language of her Parents, but she no sooner
went into the Nunnery, and associated with those of another Tongue, but she
left off her own, and in some Years after, so entirely forgot it, that when I
went to see her, she hardly knew how to pronounce her own Name after the
English Accent. And now I have mentioned this poor Creature, suffer me to
digress a little, to ease my spleen of those resentments, which every generous
Man ought to have against the usage commonly practiced in the dedication of
these young Women to Monastic lives.

If a family be over loaded with Children beyond the Father's Capacity of
preferring, the youngest are Sacrificed to Cloisters, at an age wherein they
are not able to understand what they are to undergo. This Lady was a
deplorable instance of that sort of Cruelty: Her Father died when she was
young, and there being other Children elder than she, the Estate was divided
among them, and but a Competency for this to introduce her into the Monastery,
with some inconsiderable allowance for her Life, entrusted in the hands of her
Uncle, her Father's Brother, who as she told me her self, lives now in London;
but the Condition of the Will ran thus, That if she should survive her Brothers
and Sisters, that then all their several Fortunes to descend upon her, and this
Uncle to take it into his hands, and to see it paid: When she first was put
into the Nunnery, she was but 5 Years of age, in her 6th her Father died; and
before she was 12, she was the only Survivor of of all his Family: She now
having a Title to the whole, applied her self to her Uncle for her ample
fortune; but soon as the rest were Dead, he seized all into his own hands, and
came away into England, and 'twas in vain to require the performance of her
Father's Will, from one whose temper was not to do her Justice. In short, he
cajoled the Abbess with bribes, to wheedle the unhappy Girl to remain in the
Convent, and while the Abbess on one side was enchanting her with Stories of
that blessed kind of Life, the Uncle on the other side, trifled her out of her
hopes of her due; so that at length, when it was proposed if she would profess
for good and all, she seeing no likelihood of receiving her Fortune, took the
habit, and devoted her self forever to the Monastery. After this, it was
impossible to think of geting out, and he being now secure that she would never
trouble him more, enjoyed her Estate, and lives upon it to this day. To such an
extremity was she at last reduced, that even her small annuity was stopped, and
she lived with no other subsistence but that of the House, and about 4 l.
Sterling Yearly, allowed her by one Malbrank a charitable English Merchant in
Cales. In this Condition she was when I came acquainted with her, and when she
told me this Melancholy Story, I could not choose but suffer with her in her
misfortunes. So great was my concern for her, that though I knew the danger of
taking her out of the Convent, yet a Thousand times I importuned her to trust
her self with me, and I would have run the hazard of my Life for her
deliverance, if she would have consented, but 'twas too bold an undertaking for
her, and all my prayers were lost.

I expect it will here be objected, that no body is compelled to take the
habit: but when the time of profession is appointed, the Person who is to
profess, is at liberty to stay or go; but of how little advantage is this
liberty, when the poor Victims have been spoiled of their Fortunes, and Nursed
up in a superstitious Faith of the Sanctity of a Religious Life, which wants no
allurements to make it grateful during the time of the Noviciate? Not but that
I know several who have, after a long abode in a Nunnery, released 'emselves
again, particularly a Dutch Woman in Cales, who lived 45 Years there, came out
and was married. But these are such who have no Estates to Tempt their covetous
Guardians to keep 'em in, and are of so little account, that the matter was not
much what became of 'em. Thus far I have digrest -- but to return to my company
--

From St. Lucar, I was persuaded to take a tour to Sevil, the chief City, not
only of this Province, but of all the Kingdom, for Beauty, buildings and
antiquity. And here I found Entertainment for my Eyes, and every Sense I had;
for in all my life I never saw any thing pleased me more. Paris, Lions, and
Roan, and 20 such places afford not such variety of wonders. Not but that I had
heard and Read much of its Fame, which did in some measure prepare me for what
I was to expect, but I found it all infinitely short of the Truth, as much as
they, who drawn by the great Report of our Kings Palace at Versailes, find it
so prodigiously surpassing their expectation: As 'twill be impossible to give
you particular descriptions of every thing I saw, so I am prevented by several
Books which are published of it, to which I referr you. I shall only in gross,
acquaint you, that for the Elegancy of the public and private Structures, the
strength and beauty of its Walls, the number and opulence of its Monasteries,
the prodigious revenues of their Endowments, and the Pompous Furniture within
'em, its extent and spacious streets, its Antiquity and Reputation for the
Moorish Wars, and other innumerable excellencies, there is not within the whole
Compass of the Globe a finer City. I could not for a whole week be drawn from
this pleasant contemplation, though my friend, who had less Curiosity than I,
importuned me every morning to be gone: But after I had remained here 7 days, I
took my leave with as much reluctance as I should have done with a Mistress I
had been so many years courting for her company, and was that moment to leave
her forever.

Our next design was to return to Cales, but because I had been twice jaded on
Land, first by their Mules, and now by their Calashes, I was resolved, ill as I
loved the Water, (for I never had a disposition for it but for my Curiosity) to
trust that Element with my Body; so hiring Places in a Barco-longo, we shipped
in the Morning, and rouled down the stream with Pleasure enough, till we came
to St. Lucar, and there we entered on the Ocean again. These Barco-longo's (if
you will pardon the ill Grammar) are excellent Sailers, and will lie nearer the
Wind by two Points than any of our Ships. They are extremely sharp before and
behind, and that makes 'em fly when they are before the Wind, but when they
come to be close halled, then are leewardly, and make but little way.

There are several dangerous Rocks between St. Lucar and Cales, and though the
Pilots of these Boats are dextrous in avoiding 'em, yet for want of a fair
Wind, they are sometimes put to their shifts; and when they attempt, as
sometimes they do, to go to windward of 'em, they hazard by their obstinacy
their own, and the lives of their passengers. It fared just so with us, for the
Wind taking us short, just as we were abreast of Rota, where there runs a great
Sea, our Pilot thought to weather the Rock, but was forced in all have, to bear
away and go to leeward of it. This was the devil again I thought, and now I was
ready to Conclude there was no safety in travailing this Country, neither by
Land nor Water, and to aggravate my ill Humor, just as we entered the Bay, we
we re again beset with another Rock, called the Diamond, which we had much ado
to shun. But at last the danger was past, and we got safe in to my great
Satisfaction, who was heartily vexed to think of being drowned in a Bay, who had
tempted the Main in so many Voyages.

I shall not trouble you with any thing that past this winter, having met with
no adventure worth relating, only such as Regarded the Church, which I am a
littte tender of repeating, and wish with all my heart, I had no occasion given
me of being Scandalized at 'em. But I hope it will be no offense to say, that
really the present Clergy are exceedingly corrupted, and that the artifices,
with which they delude the ignorant multitude are the highest reproach that any
Communion can sustain. Among many more, give me leave to name one, which is one
of the most reigning scandals in our Churches, and that is, the protection they
give to every Rakehell and Villain, from the punishment of his Crimes. What a
defamation is it to the Altars of the holy Catholic Church, to defend
Murderers and Assassins? And yet nothing is more frequent all over the Roman
Christendom, especially in Spain, Portugal, and Italy. In France, though our
Churches have the same Sacredness, yet we allow no shelter but in cases of
great Oppression; for there Justice can force its execution, and this
indulgence is not granted to Wretches, who for their evil deeds stand forfeited
to the Civil Power. I could tell you surprising stories of the Transactions of
the inquisition, which come to the purpose I am speaking of, but it is a
dangerous topic, and I shall forbear meddling with it. But that this evil is
notoriously Eminent in Spain, let this story inform you, which is directly
true, and told me by one who was an Eye Witness. The Calla Nueva of Cales (as I
told you) is the Exchange, where the Merchants meet in the Morning to Negotiate
their affairs; this street at that time is extremely crowded, and was so, when
a Boy pressing very rudely through the Crowd, happened to tread on a Gentleman's
Toes, the Gentleman being hurt, turned round, and seeing the boy, who stood
staring at him as if he dared his anger, hit him over the Face, and put him
away. The lad taking this for an affront, went away murmuring, and presently
after came back with a Stiletto, and finding the Gentleman still there, got
behind him, and with his Dagger Stabbed him into the Reins, and at that one
stroke laid him flat: His fall drew the Eyes of all the Exchange that way, and
when they saw the boy with his Stiletto bloody yet in his hand, every body was
inquisitive to know the cause of such an accident, the Gentleman's company knew
how he had struck the Boy, and now they had seen him Revenge the affront, they
as well as the rest opened a way through the Crowd, and made a lane for the young
Murderer to escape to the next Convent, which he immediately did, and was there
protected by the Friars, till some account could be given of the Wound. The
Gentleman in three days dyed, and still the Boy remained in his Sanctuary, and
was afterward made a Servant to the Convent, and lives there to this day,
unpunish't and unexamin'd. Now what can be more derogatory to the Sanctity of
our Religion than thus to protect such impieties? Believe me, my friend, it
gives great occasion of reproach for the Enemies of our Faith to lay upon us,
and I cannot well blame 'em for speaking truth.

The Winter being now far advanced without any memorable adventure, the General
was called home, and another ordered to receive him. He Sailed for England with
the greatest part of his Fleet, and a Numerous Convoy of Merchants, and I still
remained on board the same Ship I was first imbark't in. I can give you no
further account of what the English did in those Seas, but that I afterward
heard, they did all they could to way-lay the Toulon Fleet which were now on
their Voyage to Breast, but that they miscarried in their designs, and the
Renowned Tourvile brought it home in safety to the great disappointment and
disgrace of his Enemies.

When I came to England I was discharged with the rest of the Ship's Company,
and got Money and my Liberty, and sufficient Satisfaction in what I undertook,
especially if I have contributed to your Diversion, and acquitted my self of
the Charge you laid upon me according to the desires I had of pleasing you,
which is the Sum of all my wishes and Happiness. Adieu:

Yours R --
London: January 15th, 95.
FINIS.

