Shinkin ap Shone HER PROGNOSTICATION FOR The ensuing Year, 1654.

FORETELLING What Admirable Events are like to fall out in the Horizon of
Little Britain beyond Mawburn Hills, and in all other places in Europe, Asia,
Africa, and AMERICA

As also a true Story of the beginning of the Welsh-men, their Rise and
Progress, and how they came first to inhabit the Welsh Mountains, never
heretofore discovered either in Print or Writing, and now published for the
comfort and consolation of aul her countrymen now living, and for the benefit
of Posterity.

Likewise an Astrological Prediction, concerning the Gazing Star, seen by
thousands of people in and about London, the 22. and 23 of February 1653.

Calculated for the Meridian of Mawburn-hils, where the Pole Artick is elevated
eight foot and twelve inches above the Welsh Alps, and may serve indifferently
for all Kingdoms, Countries and Continents.

Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at his shop at the Sign of the Cows
Bobby behind the Wesh Mountain.

Shinkin ap Shone her Prognostication.
IT was spoken long since by her cosen, a wise and learned Welsh Shentleman,
that art had no enemy but ignorance; and therefore her shall not speak much by
way of Preface, Preludium or Exordium, for her do not doubt in the least but to
give her understanding Countrymen good content, and for carping zoiluses and
mumbling Mommuses, her takes no care to please, but for her ingenuous sons of
art, her hopes her will take her pains and industry in good part, and so her
begins her Prognostication; and because diverse of her learned Astrologers,
especially her own cosens and her Country men, differ about which month should
be the first in the year, some taking it to begin in January, others in March,
therefore her will deliver her sense concerning that point, and says that in
her judgment the year begins in March, and that for these her welsh reasons:
First, because according to her rules of her welsh art, the first day of March
is St. Taffies day, at which time the Leeks be ripe and fit for her pot, and if
her mistake not, there will be a new Moon about the eighth day of March, five
quarters of an hour past 5 at night; and therefore her doz conclude, by these
her welsh reasons, that the year begins in March. Another of her reasons is,
because her own cosen and countreyman Lewis ap Shone, being a fery learned
shentleman in the Mathematical Science, doz confirm her in her judgment; and
now to her prognostication. In this Month her shall have fair weather if it be
not foul, in this month also is a very good time for her to eat Leeks and
Onions, especially in her welsh porrage, it will moke her good plood, and will
cleanse her veins from excrementuous humors: in this Month her is fearful
diverse of her cosens and countrymen will be in great danger, by reason of some
malevolent Planets influence upon her deer countrymen; for if her be not
mistaken in her Annals, her Cosen Lewis Keeg Guidon was hanged at Presteign
much about this time of the year, and if her countrymen be not serry careful
of their own safeties, there will be many of her Countrymen go the same way:
for her know, that when the sign is in the neck, as it is on the 11 day of this
month, her Countrymen are in much danger, of which her is ready to give them
warning, which her prays all her Countrymen to take in time; for if her do
not take her counsel in time, it will be worse for her, and therefore if her
love her neck peware apout this time, creat plots and conspiracies are like to
he found out, but hope, though her be not fery sure, that her honest
countrymen will have nothing to do with such deeds of darkness, for her own
part, her do declare her shudgement freely, her thinks it best and safest to
sleep in a whole skin, and her say again, and again, tat for her own part, let
whose neck will come into a halter, her is resolved to keep her neck out, if her
can; for her do well remember, tat if her head be once cotton in, its hardly
cotton out again quickly; for her own father was a Shentleman of cood quality,
for a Welshman, and was shoakt with a halter, and yet her was no plotter nor
conspirator, but a fery honest shentleman of cood repute among her neighbors,
only her borrowed five yoke of Oxen of her near kinsman Rice ap Hugh, without
her consent; which misfortune, her cannot attribute to any thing but her
destiny and malevolent stars; and terefore her shall conclude tiss months
Observations with te words of a wise man, xiz. He tat pewares not pefore, shall
pee sorry afterward.

Aprills Observations.
Tiss month pegins te firft day, according to te shudgement of the ancient,
and for her own part, her is of the same shudgement, and tat for tiss reason,
pecause as her humbly conceives, tere is a new Moon te seven day, apout three
quarters of an hour past three of te clock in te morning; and du^ her think a
new Moon can pee made in less time than seven days, and some few odd hours and
minutes? Truly her thinks not for her own part, neither duz her pelieve tat te
best or most skilfullest in aule her country can make one new moon in twice te
time, let her prate what her will, if her knows not te Law her duz but lose her
labor, and make her self pee laughed at; for her tat wants knowledge art and
science is but the outside of a man, without an inside: For now her call to her
memory, her have read a Story of Alexander and his great horse, for they were
both wise: it is reported of his horse, tat when he had his trappings and rich
furniture on, he would suffer none but his Master Alexander himself to come
near him, but when his rich furniture was off, he was so gentle that any one
of his Masters servants might get upon his back and ride him at pleasure: for
which her wisdom, as her humbly conceives, it was that her Master Alexander
loved her so well, for Alexander was a man, that loved learning and learned men
entirely, her made so creat account of knowledge and learning, tat her would often
times say, tat her thought her self more peholding to Aristotle for her
learning, than to Philip her father for her life, pecaus as her conceived, the
one viz* Learning, is immortal, and te other, viz. Life, but short and
momentary. But her must not dwell here, her hope her countrymen will pardon her
long and needful digression, peing in commendation of learning and learned men,
and now to her business. Tiss month as her have read in fery cood Authors, was
te Mountains of Wales first inhabited by her Ancestors and Predecessors, and
pecaus many profane and ignorant Englishmen have presumed to traduce her teer
friends and countrymen with sundry opprobrious languages, as first, tat her
countrymen sprang first of all from a horseturd left upon te top of
Maburn-hills by Bucephulus, Alexanders creat horse, others of them say, tat
when Brutus first entered Wales her horse left a Surreverence upon te top of
Mawburn-hills, and from thence came her countrymen, and terefore tey call her
Countrymen Brutes, as if they were Beasts, others of tem say, tat te first
peginning of her countrymen sprang from a Baw Guithie, or a Goose -- breathed
upon Pigmalions Image, te Poets feigning tat te gods made her alive, and te
first time she blew her nose she threw te snot from her, which falling upon a
Goose -- from that precious compound came te Welshman: But in all tese tings
tey are deceived, not having read te writings of te Ancients: For first, her
cannot find in all her Welsh Histories, tat ever Alexander te creat ever was
in her Country, and if ever her was at Mawburn-hills, which her cannot
peleeve, Mawburne-hills is not in her Country, and terefore tat can pee no
disparagement to her, or her Contrymen, and for calling her countrymen
brutes, or beasts, her understands not in te least, nor her thinks no body else
tat ever her knew, or could ever hear of; and therefore her will wave that, and
the rest, and give her Countrymen a clear demonstration of her pedigree from
the first inhabiting of Wales, her Ancestors ancient Inheritance, and to the
everlasting praise of her Countrymen be it spoken: It is thus. It was in
ancient time, but her thinks it was since Noah's Flood, England was governed by
several Kings, and at that time Carnwall was a Kingdom of it self, distinct
from the rest, and the King of Cornwall having occasion to use a great number of
Oars at Sea, more then her own Domnions was able to furnish her withal,
whereupon the King of Cornwall called a Council together to advise with her
about her business, being of great weight to her small Commonwealth; whereupon
it was unanimously agreed, that her Majesty of Cornwall should write a Letter in
Cornish to her Majesty of France for a supply of French Oars for her Cornish
Galleys, but when her Majesty of France had received her Majesty of Cornwals
Letters, and her Majesty of France not well understanding the Cornish tongue,
understood these Oars to be Whores, of which kind of good creatures France did
abound, insomuch that they might be well spared, her Majesty of France
willingly consented, and accordingly sent over to Cornwall eight ships well
fraught with French whores, which when her Majesty of Cornwall perceived, her
was horn mad, especially for that her French whores were almost naked, whereby
her Majesty knew that her had gotten a great number of idle people into her
Territories more then her had, though her Countrry was well provided before, as
her own Country is to this day: But to proceed in her discourse, her Majesty
of Cornwall being willing to cloth these French whores, and to set them to
work, and there being little store of cloth in Cornwall, because few good
Huswives dwelt there, her Majesty of Cornwall writ a Letter to the King of
Jreland in the Cornish Tongue, to send him over as many Irish Rugs as would
cloth those French whores; but when her Majesty of Jreland had received her
Letter, and not well understanding the Cornish Tongue, her understood the Rugs
to be Rogues, of which Ireland was well stored; whereupon her Majesty of
Jreland mustered up as many Rogues as was expressed in her Letter, and more
too, because her would be rid of them, and sent them over by shipping into
Cornwall, which when her Majesty of Cornwall perceived, her was worse mad then
before; whereupon her called her Council together to consult what was fit to be
done in such a case; whereupon, after much time spent in debate, some moving to
hang them, others opposing that, alleged, that would make Hemp dear; and
therefore in her judgment, it was best and the cheapest way to throw them all
into the Sea, and drown them all: But against that was alleged, that that was
the worst way that could be to dispose of them; for that was the way to breed a
scarcity of fish in all the Nations round about, because the French whores and
Irish rogues were such nasty stinking Cattle, that if her Majesty should throw
them into the Sea, they would poison all the Fishes in the Sea, and so not only
bring famine into her own Territories, but also provoke all the Princes round
about her to war against her Crown and Kingdom; and if her should hang them, it
would not only make Hemp dear, but destroy all her loving Subjects with a
pestilential air, or ill smell; and if her drown them, it would poison all the
fishes in the Sea, and bring famine upon all her Subjects, to her exceeding
great detrement; wherefore there was a necessity to find out some other way,
whereupon it was resolved, that forasmuch as Wales was not then inhabited, and
that it was but a short cut from Cornwall to Wales, and that as there was many
hills, there could not choose but be some Dales, and they being there, they
could neither make hemp dear, nor poison the fish, but if they poisoned any
body, they must poison one another; For these, and the like reasons it was
unanimously agreed Nemine contra dissente, that they should be forthwith sent
over, which was done accordingly, and of their Offspring came her welsh cosen
and countrymen, Who since by Procreation,
Are now become a nasty Nation.


Thus her hopes her have done her Country good service in freeing her
Contrymen from calumnies and aspersions, also humbly craving pardon for her
prolixity, it being fery needful to clear her self and her countrymen from
such aspersions usually cast upon her and her countrymen by profane and
ignorant Englishmen; and as her have been long and large in some things, so her
shall be prief and short in some other, and so her comes to give her Judgment to
the gazing Star, or Stella nova, seen in and near London, about the 22 and 23
of February, 1654.

Her duz humbly conceive, that this Star duz portend (if any thing at all)
either peace or war, or both, but which her do not fery well know, because her
have not consulted with her Authors, because her Library was burnt at the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorah, which neither her self, nor any body else for
her is ever like to recover; but her have borrowed one of the Modern
Astrologers books, which tells her, that Stars at that time of the day,
signify only fair and dry weather, her duz confess if there be no rain, it is
like to be a dry summer, but her can give no great credit to Modern Astrology,
because things new are not always true, but if her had her Library, before
spoken of, her would undertake to resolve her all her doubts, and so her bids
her farewell.

FINIS.

