AN ACCOUNT Of the Behavior of Sir John Fenwick, at his Execution on
Tower Hill; with the Copy of the Paper delivered by him to the Sheriffs of
London, etc.
SIR John Fenwick, on the Day of his Execution, arose at Four a Clock in the
Morning, and was private until Seven: At Ten he came out of Newgate into a
Mourning Coach, was received by the Sheriffs and Guards, and conducted to
Tower Hill; in his passage he fixed his Eyes on a Prayer Book, and spoke not a
word to any person. So numerous were the Spectators, that it was past Eleven
half an Hour before he came upon the Scaffold; where it was observed at first,
that he seemed to be somewat surprised, and for a few Moments stood Speechless,
but soon after appeared with great composure of Mind; and after saluting those
on the Scaffold, desired Dr. White to pray with him: Which being over, he
thanked the Sheriffs for their Civilities, and delivered them a Paper, desiring
them to do him that Justice as to give it the King. He then prayed again, and
having forgiven the Executioner, prepared himself for the Block, and the Sign
being given, the Executioner, at one blow, severed his Head from his Body;
which was brought in a Hearse to one Mr. Metcalfs, an Upholster, at the Helmet
in Fleet Street, and thence, that Night, privately Interred in the Church of St.
Martins in the Field. The Sheriffs, according to his desire, delivered the
Paper to the King; which is as follows.

SPeaking nor Writing was never my Talent; I shall therefore give a very short,
but faithful Account. First, Of my Religion; and next, What I suffer most
innocently for, to avoid the Calumnies I may reasonably expect my Enemies will
cast upon me when Dead, since they have most falsely and maliciously aspersed
me, whilst under my Misfortunes.

As for my Religion; I was brought up in the Church of England, as it is
Established by Law, and have ever professed it; tho, I confess, I have been an
unworthy Member of it, in not living up to the strict and excellent Rules
thereof, for which I take shame to myself, and humbly ask forgiveness of God. I
come now to Die in that Communion, trusting, as an humble and hearty Penitent,
to be received by the Mercy of God, through the Merits of Jesus Christ my
Savior.

My Religion taught me my Loyalty, which I bless God, is untainted; and I have
ever endeavored, in the Station wherein I have been placed, to the utmost of
my power, to support the Crown of England, in the true and lineal course of
Descent, without interruption.

As for what I am now to Die, I call God to witness, I went not to that Meeting
in Leaden-Hall-Street with any such intention, as to Invite King James by Force
to Invade this Nation; nor was I my self provided with either Horse or Arms, or
engaged for any number of Men, or gave particular consent for any such
Invasion, as is most falsely Sworn against me.

I do also declare, in the presence of GOD, that I knew nothing of King James
his coming to Calais, nor of any Invasion intended from thence, till it was
publicly known; and the only Notion I had that something might be attempted,
was from the Thoulon Fleet coming to Breast.

I also call GOD to witness, that I received the knowledge, of what is
contained in those Papers that I gave to a Great Man that came to me in the
Tower, both from Letters and Messages that came from France; and he told me,
when I read them to him, that the Prince of Orange had been acquained with most
of those things before:

I might have expected Mercy from that Prince, because I was Instrumental in
saving his Life; for when, about April 95, an Attempt formed against him, came
to my knowledge, I did partly by Disswasions, and partly by Delays, prevent
that Design; which, I suppose, was the reason that the last Villainous Project
was concealed from me.

If there be any Persons whom I have Injured in Word or Deed, I heartily pray
their Pardon, and beg of GOD to Pardon those who have injured me; particularly,
those who with great Zeal has sought my Life, and brought the guilt of my
Innocent Blood upon this Nation, no Treason being proved upon me.

I return my most hearty Thanks to those Noble and worthy Persons who gave
their Assistance, by opposing this Bill of Attainder; without which, it had
been Impossible I could have fallen under the Sentence of Death. God bless them
and their Posterity; though, I am fully satisfied, they pleaded their own Cause
while they defended mine.

And now, O God, I do with all humble Devotion commend my Soul into thy Hands,
the great Maker and Preserver of Men, and Lover of Souls; beseeching thee, that
it may be always dear and precious in thy sight, through the Merits of my
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Printed at London, for John Salusbury at the Rising-Sun in Cornhill.

And Reprinted at Edinburgh, 1697.


