Another bloody FIGHT AT COLCHESTER IN ESSEX, BETWEEN The Forces commanded by
Sir Charles Lucas, Col. Washington, and Col. Lunsford, and the Lord General
Fairfax's With the Generals Message to the L. Goring, and his Lordships Answer
thereunto concerning his Majesty's pardon.

With a perfect List of the number that were slain and taken prisoners on both
sides; and the drawing off the Army, with his Excellencies Letter to the
Inhabitants of Suffolk, for the pulling up of the Bridges, and blocking up the
Highways.

Likewise another great Fight in and near the City of Cambridge, between the
Parliamentiers, and the Royalists and Scholars of the several Colleges.

With the number that were slain and taken prisoners, and a great Victory
obtained. With a Proclamation thereupon concerning the raising of Forces for
the KING.

London, Printed for G. VV. Anno Don. 1648.

A Terrible FIGHT At COLCHESTER in ESSEX.
SIR,
ON Wednesday night last being the 13. of this instant June, the Lord Generals
Forces (who attended the motion of Gorings party) fell upon them near the City
of Colchester, killed and wounded great store, and took some prisoners: this
fight was maintained with much gallantry on both sides, for the space of two or
three hours, and after a most fierce and violent Encounter the Enemy retreated
into the Suburbs, our men pursued, and diverse fell on both sides: it is said,
to the number of 3 or 400. the Enemy is denied entrance into the Town, the
Gates are shut against them, and the walls maintained by the Inhabitants
thereof, playing continually upon Gorings Papisticall Rout: the Generals Forces
are drawn off, and have blocked them up, and to prevent their escape, has sent
to the Inhabitants of Suffolk, to pull up Bridges, and lay trees in the way,
which if they do, they will be good savers, but if not, they must take as
falls; We hear that Col. Lunsford, and Col. Washington are dangerously wounded,
if not slain, with diverse other eminent Commanders, We have lost 3 Captains,
and some few inferior Officers, but not many of the private Soldiery: The
full particulars whereof are not yet known, but by all probability, the Enemy
has lost three for one. By the next I shall give you a more just account, and
remain

Your assured friend, R. Webb.
From our Randezvous on Stanway Heath, this 15. of June, 6. in the morning,
1648.
An exact Relation of another great sight in the City of Cambridge.
SIR
YOu would not imagine to what a great height we are grown unto here, we, who
upon little or no allarms, were use to ride and run, are become the sons of
Mars: the last week grew a quarrel between the Parliamentiers and Royalists,
occasioned by some disgraceful expressions in the Schools, against the
Parliament and Army, which their friends not enduring pull down the Orator and
Moderator, thereupon they fell to blows, both parties increase, the Royal
Townsmen readily assisting the scholars of their party, the other not
appearing, each drew into a Body, charged with much gallantry, and after a long
and hot dispute, the victory first on one side, then on the other, at last the
Parliamentiers prevailed, and the other left the field, about which time
Captain Piokering came in with a troop of Horse to assist the Parliamentiers,
who upon his coming into t^ field, made Proclamation, That if any person or
persons what soever should presume to raise any insurrections or tumults, to
disturb the peace either of City or County, he would use his utmost endeavors
to suppress them, and to bring them to condign punishment.

Then he marched into the Country where he understood some were, and finding
them, charged ane routed them, killed about 9. and took three or four of the
chief Actors prisoners. The next day there was another great skirmish near this
City, which continued some time in a very ^ot dispute, diverse falling, and the
number great.

We hear that there has been another great Fight in Essex between the Forces
commanded by Col. Whaley, and Sir Thomas Hony-wood, and a Troop of Horse who
came from London, who were going to join with Goring and his forces there to
remain until the Prince of Wales came over, and then to be a Guard unto his
Highness; the manner whereof is as follows.

Col. Whaley having received intelligence of their coming, prepared to receive
them, who upon their approach, charged them, killed many, took diverse
prisoners, the rest fled, but in pursuit some of them fell. This Troop were
most of them Gentlemen, consisting of 80 in number, well mounted and gallantly
armed.

The Copy of a Letter from the North.
SIR,
Our affairs here, are in a very sad and dubious scale, the enemy very active
and strong, you have I question not, heard of the taking of Pomfract Castle
being betrayed b, a Sergeant and a Captain (that formerly served the Enemy who
were upon the guard, the Governor Mr. Cottrell having left the keys with them
at that time (which he never did before) till he took a little rest about six
or seven a clock in the morning after his watching the whole night himself as
he used to do, he is a man which all men Judge faithful, he refused to take
quarter, and was shot in the thigh and cut in the Arm but is living and like
to recover, Lieutenant Col: Morris, who once served the Enemy delivered up
Liverpool and since served the Parliament, was the main actour and now Helmsely
Castle was lately attempted to be taken in like manner, but the fidelity of the
Soldiers applied themselves to whom was offered 100. li. in hand and 500. li.
more upon bond and to be knighted prevented it for he discovered parties and
apprehended them prisoners and now they are in the Dungeon at Helmsley Castle
Langdale is in Westmerland and we hear is unwilling to fight, if he can prevent
it, but our forces are now in a body and are upon the edge of Westmerlard,
about Bones watching an opportunity to engage though fewer in number, it is
thought he will wheel about for Pomfract if he can possible and miss
fighting: Pomfract is blockt up with abont. 800 horse and foot which all the
men can be spared for the present the enemy there increase and are as we hear
250. horse and 400. foot so that, that party cannot lay close siege, I remain.

York 9 Junly 1648 Your assured friend


Since the writing hereof news is come that Col. Lambert was drawn near to
Langdale and endeavored to engage them to fight but Langdale would not stand
retreating with his forces toward Cumberland and Colonel Lambert is in pursuit
of him.

June 12.

From Northwales this day came letters to the House, of the Routing and
dispersing the Rebel rout, and Cavaliers that were risen there with Sir John
Owen and had besieged Carnarvan Castle, the Relation according to the letters
runs thus. That col. Carter, and Lieut. col. Twisleton, with the assistance of
30. Horse, and 70. of Foot from col. Darkensield from Chester, marched into
Carnarvanshire, where Sir John Owens, with 150. horse, and 120. foot, had
streightted the Garrison of Carnarvan, wherein with the Governor Col. Mason
was General Mitton, and about 60. Soldiers, besides those of the Garrison;
with whom Col. Carter and Lieut. Col. Twisleton intended to join; but Sir John
Owen, having notice thereof, prevented their joining, advancing with his
Forces, and upon the Sand betwixt Chonoway and Carnarvan met our men, the
forlorn of both parts was of the best horse. ours were commanded by captain
Carter of Cheshire, whose Resolution was very great, but being overpowred was
forced to a disorderly Retreat, The Enemy pursued advancing their whole body
over Vferre was ready to receive them, and after a hot dispute, put them to a
rout, captain Tailor singly encountering Sir John Owen, after he had broken his
Sword upon his head to the bilt, closed with him, and dismounted him, and took
him prisoner, the Enemy immediately fled, we slew 30. and took 100. Sir John
Owen with diverse others of quality, and 60. private men, we lost 4. men, and
had diverse wounded, many horse of each side slain, this mercy was seasonable,
the loss of our party now, had hazarded the loss of the Parliaments interest
in Northwales, whom we make no question will now be quiet.

Yours, etc.

Honored Sir,
WE have had another hot dispute with the enemy, and since my last the enemy
has entered Colchester, and fired part of the Suburbs, and have made a sally
out with three great Briggads, the one commanded by col. Lunsford, the second
by col. Washington, and the third by Mounsier D'Marcels, who were gallantly
received by a party of our horse, and upon the first charge dismounted ten of
their Frontiers, and as we hear, Lunsford received a mortal wound in the said
charge, and was immediately carried into the town. This dispute continued the
space of half an hour, great execution being done, but at last the enemy
retreated, our men pursued, and in their pursuit took about 300. prisoners: but
when they were in the midst of the Suburbs, another party of the enemies horse
and foot appeared, who upon a sudden motion, discharged two Drakes, and killed
12. of our men, and about 20. horse, but notwithstanding all which, they
violently rode up to the very Canon mouths, beat off the Enemy, killed 2
Gunners, and about 40. Officers and soldiers, took 100. prisoners, with the
loss of 14. men. In which onset it is said, that, col. Washington was slain, a
Lieut. col. and 7 Captains. We have killed in all about 200. of them, taken 400
prisoners, 400. arms, 10. horse, with the loss of 40. men, and about 30.
wounded.

Col. Needum, and Capt. Coxe wounded of the Parl. party his Excellency sent to
Goring, that if he would disband and lay down his arms, he would endeavor to
make his peace with the Parl. and Goring returned him this answer, that i^ he
would be obedient to his Maj. commands, he would procure him his Maj. pardon.

Colchester Suburbs this 15. of June, 1648.
FINIS.

