AN ACCOUNT Of the Late Most hahpy rnd Glorious Victory, obtained by the
Imperial Army, Commanded by His Highness Prince Lewis of Baden, over that of
the Turks, Commanded by the Grand Vizier The Killing of Ten Thousand of the
Turks on the Spot, taking 160 Pieces of Cannon, all their Baggage, etc, with
Diverse other particulars.
Licensed,

August the 31st. J. Fraiser.



THE Ottaman Army, commanded by the Prime Vizier, having not Repassed the Save
into Bulgaria (as was lately reported) but, being Advanced to a Plain, Four
German Leagues from Belgrade, in the Road that Leads to Buda, there designing
to Entrench themselves: Of which his Highness, Prince Lewis of Baden, having
timely Notice, Advanced toward them with the Imperial Army: And on the 19th
day of August, early in the Morning, Prince Lewis Attacked the Grand Vizier in
his Camp, before he had time to Entrench himself. The Fight lasted for near
Five hours, with great Obstinacy and Resolution, and much Slaughter; each
General being Emulous, to show the utmost of his Conduct and Skill, on this
great Occasion: The Success of which, being of the highest concern to both
Empires.sThe Victory was very disputable, and even in the Gold-Ballance, for
several Hours, before any Decision could be made. But, at last, it so pleased
the Omnipoient, and All-wise Rector of the Universe, by his special provider
(...) so far to favor the Just and Righteous Cause, of his Imperial Majesty,
against those Barbarous Infidels, as to turn the scale of Battle, by giving the
Turks a Total Defeat, and that with an Horrible Carnage, or Slaughter of the
Infidels; who retired with all the Precipitation imaginable, toward the Save,
leaving behind them all their Artillery, which consisted of 160 Cannon, most of
which were Fieldpieces; all their Ammunition, most of their small Arms; and,
which Crowned the Work, all their Rich Baggage; there being an Incredible
Number of Camels, Mules, and Wagons, laden with riches of an almost
Inestimable Value, (it having been an old Custom, for the Turks, to carry the
chief of their Treasure to the Wars.)

As to the Exact Number of Turks 8lain, it is not yet known, in regard when the
Express came away, the Germans were in pursuit of them over the River Save into
Bulgaria; and that so closely, that its thought, they had not time to break
down any of the Bridges, they had made over the aforesaid River, after them.
Some Accounts say, 13000, others say 10000, Killed on the Spot, and 60000 more
in the ^ursuit and drowned crowding for have, in the River Save; but the most
modest Account, is Ten Thousand.

The lost on the side of the Imperalists are Computed at about 5000 killed and
Wounded; among the latter of which are the Duke de Aspremont, who Commanded the
left Wing, and the Duke de Arschat, The Imperial Army, both Officers and
^oldiers, behaving themselves on this Occasion, with all the Courage,
Resolution, and Bravery imaginable.

The next Day (being the 20th.) Prince Lewis of Baden, dispatch Prince Charles
^o Lorrain, (Son to the Duke of Famous Memory) to the Court at Vienna, with a
Letter to ^is Imperial Majesty; to give an Account of this most Important
Victory; and ikewise three other Letters of the same Account: One to the King
of Great Briain, a Second to the Marquess de Castinago, and a Third to the
Prince de Vaudemont.

The Ottoman Army, before the Fight, consisted of near 80000 Men; the
Imperialist, of 50000. The French, a little before this great Action happened
gave out in their New Conquest, That the Imperial Army was Totally Routed by
the Turks: It Is not doubted but that this great, and most glorious Victory will
so far Influence the Council at Constantinople, that the Emperor may conclude a
Peace, even upon what Terms he please.

LONDON, Printed for J. Sanders in St. Jame's-street, 1691.


