AN ACCOUNT OF THE METHODS AND MOTIVES Of the late UNION AND SUBMISSION to the
ASSEMBLY; Offered and Subscribed BY Mr. THOMAS LINING, Mr. ALL EXANDER SHEILDS,
Mr. WILLIAM BOYD.


Philip. 3.15.16. Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded: And
if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.

Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule,
let us mind the same thing.

Printed in the Year, MDCXCI.

An Account of the Methods and Motives of the late Union and Submission to the
Assembly, offered and Subscribed by Mr. Thomas Lining, Mr. Alexander Sheilds,
and Mr. William Boyd.
AMONG other Characters that Commend Presbyterial Government, as the only Order
and Plat form of Government, which Christ Jesus, the only Head and Lawgiver,
has instituted in His Church, above all other Forms, introduced by the
Inventions and Usurpations of Men; This is one, that it is the best Antidote
for Schism, that ever was found: And where ever it is erected and exerted in
its full Freedom and Power, it brings all that acknowledge Subjection to it,
unto Union and Harmony keeps them in it, and reduces them into it, when it has
been broken. The Impression of its Divine Authority, being so Authentic, that
it enforces a Conviction upon all that have regard To the Law and the Testimony
and extorts a Confession from all, that have a Conscience, that there is
nothing in it, when established, in its due Dimensions, which may not and must
not be subjected unto, (nay the greatest of its Enemies, even the Papists and
Prelatists themselves, tho they plead for many Additions, are forced to
acknowledge, that there is little or nothing in Presbytery, which is not of
Divine Institution, and which is not also admitted in their own Government, tho
depraved and corrupted by their audacious Additaments: And a challenge may be
given, to all of them, to instance any thing in its whole Nature, Tenor,
Order, Power, Rules, or Administrations, that is not founded upon, deduced
from, and consonant unto the New Testament Oracles) whereas there are several
things in all other Forms of Government, which the more conscientious a Man be,
he will readily be found the more hesitant to submit to. The Eutaxie, comely
Order, and Beauty of this Ordinance of Christ (making the Church, both Comely
and Terrible, and as Jerusalem compactly built) having likewise an attractive
Virtue to allure all its Subjects and Members, to an amicable Amity, and to
constrain to Concord, as well as an Awful Majesty (tho no way Magisterial) to
restrain from divisive disorders. And its course of Administration, being in
such a Gradation of Subordinations, of Inferior Judicatories to Superior, that
hardly can any Schism, have footing ere it be crushed, or rooting ere it be
suppressed, when the Government is in its Integrity: Which was the reason
rendered by K. Ja. the 6th. why in Scotland there was so little Heresy, or
Schism known. Hence whatsoever the Patrons of the Prelatick Hierarchy, Papists
and Prelatists, who in this Symbolize, say to the contrary, in favors of
Episcopacy, as if it were the best expedient to prevent and remove Schism; And
to the reproach of Presbytry, as if it were a Government, that did engender and
increase Division and Schismatic Courses: It is so well known in Scotland,
that Prelacy is the Mother of Schism, and Presbytry the Medicine of it, that it
needs not a laborious Probation. The Probatum est of 130 years experience, may
serve instead of many Proofs. Let it be instanced since the Reformation, When
was there ever Union when Prelacy was established? When was there ever Schism
when Presbytry was redintegrated? When was there ever Concord when Presbytry
declined? When was there ever any thing but Discord when Prelacy was on its
ascendant? Where or when was there ever a Division which had not Prelacy, (or
the Projects or Practices of those that inclined and declined to it) for its
cause and occasion, rise and spring? And how or when was it ever removed and
remedied; and Union restored but by and under Presbytry? All the Divisions and
Breaches of this Church, from the Reformation to the year 1650, were occasioned
by, stated for, and continued only under Prelacy: And even that from thence to
1660, about the Public Resolutions, was stated upon, and occasioned, abetted
and continued, by the Projects and Practices of Malignants, striving to ingyre
themselves, into places of Power and Trust, on design to re-introduce Prelacy.
Which Division then commenced, and at that time not cured, because Presbyterial
Government then declined, and the Authority of General Assemblies was then
enervated, has continued to this day, as the wretched Rise of all our woeful
Rents, which has racked, and almost ruined the Remnant, that adhered to the
Reformation, who before that were as much feared and envied for Union, as since
that, they have been flouted at, and despised for Division, and yet want
nothing to make them as much admired and respected as before, but to recover
their former Union, by returning to their former Order, and repenting for their
Deviations from it.

But since the year 1660, the Rise and Continuance of all our Divisions, either
with the professed Enemies of the Covenanted Reformation, or among the
professed Friends thereof, has only flowed from the Usurpations and
Impositions, of the Popish, Prelatical and Malignant Party, which some imposed
upon, complied with, and others opposed. And the only reason of their
incureableness hitherto, has been the want of Presbyterial Government in its
full Force and Freedom: The happy Restitution whereof in the measure it has
already arrived to since the Arrival and Advancement of King William to the
Government of these Nations, under whose Patrociny, and in whose fight the Lord
has extended this Mercy, to give the Church this reviving, to set up the House
of our God, and to repair the Desolations thereof, and to give us a Wall in our
Judah) has already reduced some who had continued in an abstracted and
separate way for several years, unto Union and Communion with the rest of their
Brethren in the Ministry, and has engaged them into an orderly Submission to
the Authority of this Church, in all Her respective Judicatories. Which may
gave ground of hope, that as this has been the fruit of the first Assembly,
after the Restoration of Presbyterial Government; So the re-din tegration
thereof, is its full Vigor and Authority, and recovery of its former
Faithfulness, and Zeal in Administration, in following Assemblies, will through
the Mercy of GOD, heal all remaining Breaches.

But designing here to give a short Relation of our Methods in prosecuting, and
our Motives that induced us to endeavor this Union; It will not be amiss, for
the better understanding of the same, to hint a little more particularly, at
the Causes, Means, and Measures of our Divisions. They all proceeded, as was
said before, from the Usurpation and impositions, of the Popish, Prelatical,
and Malignant faction: For when Prelacy came in by force and fraud, and by the
yeeldings of these that should have ventured their All, in withstanding its
Introduction, the Introducers of it were enabled and encouraged, at their own
leisure and pleasure, without control, to break down the Carved work of our
Reformation, and the Walls and Hedges and Legal Bull warks of Righteous Laws and
Solemn Covenants, that fenced it, with the Axe of an Act Rescissory. Some gave
all the Countenance and Submission then required by Law, to the Intrusion of
Prelates and their Curats, by frequenting their Churches: Others thought it
their duty to stand at a distance, and venture upon the hazard of disobedience,
in a Testimony against that sin. When again they advanced the blasphemous
Supremacy, to its hight (exauctorating Christ Jesus, of being only Head, King,
and Lawgiver, to His Church, and declaring it to be a mortal Kings inherent
right, to be Co-partner with Christ in that His incommunicable Prerogative) And
by the usurped Power thereof (presuming they had now totally and finally
overcome Christ's Ministers, and intending to flatter whom they could not hector
out of their duty of contending against their Usurpations) Obtruded a sort of a
Liberty, to some of them to Preach, under the Notion of an Indulgence, but such
as flowed from, stood upon, and was modified by the Supremacy: Some embraced
this; others opposed and witnessed against it. Lastly when by wicked Oaths,
Tests and Bonds, imposed to debauch Consciences (which some inclined to comply
with, or connive at; Others thought it necessary to testify against) a passage
was prepared for the introduction of Popery: And a gap was opened for it, by
the late Popish Toleration: Some thought it fit to purchase the opportunity and
Liberty of Preaching by addressing for and embracing of it: Others durst not
have any thing to do with it, Nor forbear a Testimony against it. These
Usurpations with the defections flowing therefrom, in Compliance therewith
(while they stood as stumbling blocks and snares, and as we conceived as Idols
of jealousy, in the entry of the House of the Lord; So that we thought we
could not have access unto the Sanctuary, without being interprered, to give
some respect or acknowledgement, or subjection, directly or indirectly, to
those Idols and Encroachments, so dishonorable to the LORD and offensive to
our Consciences) did scar and deter us from Communion with many Godly, Reverend
and Honored Ministers of this Church, so Indulged and Tolerated, in these
Circumstances, and obliged us to continue our Testimony against them, in an
abstracted way, when the Church was in that broken state, deprived of the
remedy of Church Judicatories, whereunto we might apply (in which case, we
always held there should be no separation without previous Application to
them, and before their Judicial Sentence) And ween the case was so
circumstantiate, that we judged their Ministry, in the then exercise thereof,
at that time, in the place where they Preached, under the Authority of the
Indulgence and Toleration, could not be countenanced or concurred with by us,
without participating of the guilt of submitting to, and symbolizing with Men's
sinful Encroachments. Yet we never owned a Positive or Active, Total or Stated
Separation from the Church of Scotland; Or the Ministry thereof: Nor did we
form separate Churches under another Government or Ministry, distinct from, or
independent upon the Presbyterial Church of Scotland; tho with this we were
branded. Only for the time, we avouched a Negative, Passive, and Conditional
Abstraction, from these Ministers in the circumstances above specified: Not
because only we thought these were the Personal Sins of the Ministers (for we
always declared our abhorrrance of that notion so deservedly exploded by the
learned Divines of this Church, that the Personal Sins of Fellow Worshippers,
Ministers or Professors, did pollute the Ordinances, or made Communion with
them therein sinful) but, because we had reason to fear, they should be our
Sins, as well as theirs, if, as they had given the submission to these foresaid
Usurpations required of them by Law, so we should give the submission to them
required of us by Law, by joining.

This was the case and cause of our Divisions, until the Lord was pleased in
our greatest extremity, by sending over King William, as a renowned Instrument
in His Hand, to rescue us from Popery and Slavery, to remember this broken and
bruised Church, and to give us a reviving in our Bondage, with a high Hand, and
in a surprising manner, and to remove our Yokes, under which we groaned, in a
measure surpassing our expectations. By which Emergencies of Providence, in
such a manner, removing causes of our Divisions, we could not but encourage our
selves in the Hope, that the effects should also be in time removed. And that
He that healed our bruises from the yokes of long oppressing Enemies, might
also lend His Hand and Help, to heal our Breaches of Divisions with our
dissentient Friends and Brethren which we expected to obtain, if ever
Presbyterian Government, and Ecclesiastic Assemblies, in that beautiful Order,
should be established again in this Land, which we longed for, even for the
recovery of Union, as well as for other Advantages. In this Encouragement and
Expectation, after some little endeavors used in the opportunity of that
Interregnum, to demolish and destroy the Popish Monuments of Idolatry, and to
purge the Churches of the West-Country of the Episcopal Curats we emitted an
Apology at Douglas. The Tenor whereof here follows.

An Apology of the General Meeting of the United Societies of some
Presbyterians, Dissenting from, and Protesting against the Toleration, for
their Rising and Continuing in Arms, in the present Juncture.
THE various Clamours and Constructions made of our Rising in Arms at the
time, and the reproaches of Disorders, fastened thereupon (tho in it self
innocent, and never intended by us, for the offense of any, but such as all
Zealous Protestants and good Patriots, will own to be Enemies of GOD, and of
all Mankind, and such as we are under indispensible obligations in our Places
and Stations, to endeavor to suppress and extirpate; Yet because it is our
present unhappiness, to have all our Actions misconstrued, and censured under
the most odious and invidious Character, that the Malice of some can put upon
them) Do seem to require, for the vindication of our Testimony for the Cause of
Christ, Exoneration of our selves, and removing any Jealousies or Suspicions,
which through misinformation, or prejudice any may conceive of us; That before
we dismiss, We Declare to all concerned, That it is not by any Contrivance of
ours, that we have either gathered, or continued in defensive Arms hitherto,
but have been drawn and called to it, by a special surprise of astonishing
Providence. For, tho indeed, in the sense of the indispensible and indisputable
necessity and expediency of giving some active Testimony against Popery, and of
the duty of throwing down the Monuments of Idolatry (formerly erected, and
lately more and more encouraged under the Patrociny and Protection of this
Popish Toleration) we have been several times consulting about some endeavors,
in our poor Capacity to discharge that duty, with the least tumult or trouble
to the Country that was possible (not being able any longer to endure to see
this purely Reformed and Covenanted Land, polluted again with Idolatry, and
impunity of the Entycers thereunto, and thereby exposed to the ineluctable
Wrath of the Most High, without some witness of our indignation at the same)
and thereupon had appointed this same concurrence of our Brethren, at this
present Meeting, this same day, to conclude upon some Course to effectuate it;
Yet as many of our Brethren, in several corners of the Land, without any
Corespondence or Communication with one another, were animated and encouraged
at one and the same time to set about this work, with others that the Lord
stirred up to Zeal against Popish Idolatry: So the extraordinar Emergent,
alarming the Country with fears and many reports, of the Papists intending and
Attempting to raise fire and Sword through the Land, did prevent our
appoyntments, and provoked us to go to Arms, for the preservation of our
Religion, Lives, and Liberties, defense of the Country, and Relief of our
Brethren, that lay nearest the hazard then threatened and feared. In which
posture some of our Number, that were furthest remote, from the sure
intelligence of the truth of these Allarms, have continued hitherto, not being
willing to disperse until by this Meeting formerly appointed, somewhat should
be concluded, with common consent, as expedient for the present juncture, and
emitted for their vindication from some disorders, falsely imputed, and most
grievous to us.

We do therefore further doclare, That whereas Reports have come to us, that
some have robbed Gentlemen and some Episcopal Curats, of their Horse and Arms,
Money or Household stuff. As for Horse and Arms, taken in these Tumultuary
Confusions, if any be amongst us, as we have endeavored, so we shall endeavor
Restitution: But as for money or any other thing robbed from these, we neither
know the guilty persons, nor are partakers with them, but do disowne Disclaim
and Detest all such disorderly and abominable practices. And further, the we
own and avouch it as our duty, bound upon us, from the Word of God, Solemn
Covenants, and Constitutions of this Church, to endeavor by all approven
means, the Extirpation of Prelacy, as well as Popery; And therefore do resolve
through the Lords help, and as He shall give us Call and Capacity, to
contribute our outmost assistance, for the removing and dispossessing the
Prelatical Curats, from the Churches, upon which they are intruded: Yet we do
not approve, nor shall we attempt the taking of any thing that belongs to them.

Moreover, we mean not now, nor whenever we may be constrained, or called to
rise in Arms defensive, to wrong or encroach upon the Privileges of any City,
Burgh or Town whatsomever, or disturb the Peace of the Country, either by
Tumults, or continuing together in Arms unnecessarly, to oppress either one or
other: But as now we intend, so at any other time, when we are together, we
shall dismiss and go hame, and live in quiet so long as either Duty or Safety
will permit us. For tho we be (through Grace) as ready as ever to suffer
Persecution, upon the same Heads of Truth, that we have hitherto contended for,
and resolve rather to loss our dearest blood, then to part with one hoof of
them; And are as resolute as ever to defend our selves and all our Covenanted
Brethren, in the common Cause and Testimony, against all Assaults of our
Malignant Enemies; so far as we can resist: Yet if they will forhear to persist
in their Persecuting and Murdering us, for the time, we intend not to take or
seek revenge of them, until we see what access the Lord our Avenger, will give
to a Legal Prosecution of them; Only this much opposition, they must expect,
that we will not embodie with them, in any association for the Cause, which
they have betrayed and destroyed, nor with any other known and avowed Enemies
of Truth and Godliness, Religion and Liberty. But since the Lord has in His
wonderful Providence (which we adore) raised up, helped and honored the
Illustrious Prince of Orange, to be an Instrument in His Hand, of breaking in a
great measure, the unsupportable Yoke of that Absolute Tyranny, under which we
have been long howling; As we pray the Lord, so to incline his Heart, to favor
the Lords righteous Cause, and that he may pity and not permit, the yet
remaining Ireacherous and Truculent Promotters, Abettors, and Executioners of
that Tyranny, to devour and destroy us any more: So we mind in due season to
remonstrate to his Highness, the unparalelled Grievances and Severities, we
have sustained from them: And in the mean time, do our best, in dependence on
the Lords strength, to defend our selves against their Insults:

Finally, we conclude, declaring our cordial and constant Adherence to the good
Old Way and Cause of Scotlands Covenanted Reformation, in all its received and
established, Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the
Word of God, Confession of Faith, Catechisms, National Covenant, and Solemn
League, Solemn Acknowledgement of Sins and Engagement to Duties, Causes of
Wrath, Acts of General Assemblies, both the ancient unrepealled Acts, and those
from 1638. to 1650. And all the Testomonies, Protestations, Remonstrances, and
Declarations, of old and of late, founded upon and consonant to the same,
against Popery, Prelacy, Erastianism, Sectarianism, Tyranny, and all the
Encroachments of Absolute Power over Laws and Liberties of Church and State
either by Persecution or Toleration. This in short is the State of our
Testimony, transmitted to us, from our renowned Ancestors, sealed by the
Martyrs and Confessors of CHRIST, in our day; Which we hope the Lord will more
and more Vindicate and Propogate to Posterity.

Published at Douglass the 4th. of January, 1689.


THereafter beginning to get more Converse with some of our Brethren, which the
violence of Persecution precluded all access to before; And this Converse
begetting more desires of Unity and Amity with them: We entertained the first
Motion from some of the Reverend Ministers of Glasgow, to confer with them
about Points of Difference, and Methods of Composing them. The Conferences at
that time, produced only some janglings, and at length some Overtures, tendered
on both sides, wherein we could not agree. These Reverend Brethren proposing
(after some premitted Considerations pressing the necessity of Union) That an
Act of Oblivion be agreed upon for all Faillings, about points or Practices
controverted among Presbyterians, since the year 1650, to this day; And that
the Basis of our Union, be the Holy Scriptures, sensed and applied, for the
Resolution of all controverted practices amongst us, according to the laudable
Constitutions, Customs, Practices, Acts of our National Assemblies, Books of
Discipline, Gonfession of Faith, Covenants, etc. That caution be observed from
all Reflections, etc. That after sighting and approving their Ordinations and
Licenses, those Ministers and Preachers, who have formerly acted Independently
upon their Brethren, preach Collegiatly with some Minister settled in a
Presbytry, for removing of former Stumblings. -- And finally, that such
Failings be laid to heart, by all sorts of Ministers and Preachers, as they are
convinced of, that they be set down in order, and pitched on as Causes of a
Public Fast, and Humiliation upon some week day, through all the Meetings of
Presbyterians within this Kingdom, and that the Sins of the People, be
intermixed among these Causes, etc This was the sum of the Overtures offered by
these Reverend Ministers, only in their own name, but they promised to meditate
with the rest of the Ministers, for according thereunto. In Answer to these, we
proposed these Overtures premitting also some Motives, together with the
qualifications of the Union we desired) That the Basis of our Union be the Word
of GOD, Confessions of Faith, Covenants, Books of Discipline, Acts of General
Assemblies, and the whole Contexture of the Order of this Church, before the
Public Resolutions, in the purest Periods of this Church, which we may with
one mind seek to have redintegrated. That we might search and try our ways,
and Unite first in Confessing Sins, in keeping days of Humiliation for the
same; Wherein we offered to Confess our Offenses, so far as we could be
convinced any manner of way, that Church Judicatories should appoint: And
desired the Ministers from whom we differed, to Confess Doctrinally their
Offenses, that have been most stumbling, viz. Hearing the Prelatical Curats,
the Late Indulgence, Addressing for, and Accepting of the Toleration, etc And
concur in procuring the Condemnation of these things, in Ecclesiastic
Assemblies. That the Covenants might be Renewed, with accommodation to our
times-and a Solemn Acknowledgement of the public Breaches, and Engagement to
the Duties thereof, applied to the present day. That to prevent all future
Divisions, the former Offenses might never hereafter be complied with, under
pain of Church Censures, nor any other Mould or Model of Presbyterian
Government, than what was established between the years 1638 and 1650. Nor any
State Contrivance or Constitution whatsoever, be admitted or submitted unto,
which may infer a recognizance of any Erastian Usurpation. That in the mean
time, the Ministers settled in Paroches, under the late Indulgences and
Toleration, might declare, that now they have another Holding, than either of
these; And that they now officiate in places where they are fixed, according to
the old Presbyterian Order. And finally, that endeavors should be used to
check and suppress the Foments, that nourish and increase Division, on either
hand, as heart Animosities, Alienations of Affection, Passion, Prejudice,
Jealousies, receiving and reporting Misinformations, and all other things of
that nature tending thereunto.

These Mutual Overtures, being refered to farther Consideration, we thought it
a good Expedient, both to promot and direct a desirable Union with our
Brethren, to Renew the Covenants, with a public Accknowledgment, both of their
and our breaches thereof, and Engagement, to the Duties of the Covenants, with
accommodation to our present Circumstances; which we Solemnly Accomplished at
Lesmabego March 3. 1689. In the Acknowledgement, we confess with relation to
bygone differences ( Art. 2. Page. 56.) That as many by defection, both in
Compliance with Prelacy and Erastianisme, has broken the Churches beauty and
Bands, Order, and Union, in making a faction repugnant to her established
Order, and censurable by her standing Acts, in bringing in Novations in the
Government, and making a rent in the bowels of the Church, by causing
Divisions, and Offenses, contrare to the Doctrine of this Church, have made
themselves guilty of Schism; So others on the other hand have upon slender and
unsufficient Grounds, separate both from Ministers (even the most Faithful and
Zealous, and such as were not chargeable with Complyances) and from Christian
Societies and Families, because of Differences in judgment, in incident
debates, not necessary, nor material, nor wherein the Testimony of Christ was
much concerned, or because of personal Offenses, easily removed, not observing
the Rules of Christ, for removing them, nor having respect to His great
Commands of Charity, forbearance, forgiving one another, or condescendency: And
between divided Parties, which in our day, have long been biting and devouring
one another, there has been too much both of sinful Union and Confederacy, in
terms prejudicial to Truth and Duty, on the one hand, and of sinful Heats,
Animosities, Jealousies, Pride, Passion, and Prejudices, on the other hand;
Grieving the Spirit of GOD, eating up the Power, and much hindering the holy
Practice and spiritual Exercise of Religion. And too much also of sowing
discords among Brethren, and promotting our Contentions by too credulous and
sedulous taking up, and spreading reports and reproaches one of another. And in
our Renewed Engagement to Covenant Duties, with relation to present
differences, and Union with our Brethren, we declared our resolved Endeavors
and Vows, On the one hand to labor to recover and preserve the Liberty and
Purity of the Worship of God, from all Corruptions, Novations and Inventions of
Men, Popish, Prelatical, Erastian, or any other; And if we could not get those
Corruptions reformed or removed, to study to keep our selves free of Communion
and Participation with the same, (according to Artic. 1.. 2. Page 68.) And to
refuse, withstand, and witness against all Encroachments on the Liberties of
this Church, in all time coming; And withdraw our selves from Communion with
all such Meetings and Congregations, that hold their Freedom from, and are
modified by such Usurpations (as Indulgences and Tolerations, according to
Artic. 2.. 3. ibid.) And on the other hand, That we shall guard against all
Schism and sinful Separation, or unjust, rash, and disorderly withdrawing from
Congregations, Society, etc or any part of the Communion of the true Reformed
Covenanted. Church of Scotland, holding purely and entirely the Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline and Government of the same, in Principle and Exercise,
according to the Rules of Christ, and standing Acts and Constitutions of this
Church: And that we shall neither gather nor set up formed separate Churches or
Societies, under other Ordinances, Government or Ministry, distinct from the
Presbyterian Church of Scotland; Nor withdraw from Minister or Member of that
Body, for any offense in any Case, where either the Offense may be Legally
removed, without our withdrawing, -- or is a thing to be condescended on,
forborne, or forgiven: But shall study to maintain Union and Communion in Truth
and Duty, with all the Ministers and Members, of the said Church that do, and
in so far as they do follow the Institutions of Christ (As in Artic. 2.. 4.
Page 69.) And in Artic. 6. Page 71. We engage that we shall likewise desire,
design and endeavor to get the defections, unworthy Neutralities, and unhappy
divisions, that have long and Lamentably wounded and wrecked the Church
removed, Differences settled and breaches healed, in such a way and upon such
terms, as may be Honorable and Advantageous for the Cause. And if our
Brethren and we, between whom such Differences have fallen in, and have been
sadly Fomented on all hands, will search and try our ways respectively, how far
they and we have receded from the good old way of the Church of Scotland. And
in our impartial search shall find out our respective defections, and breaches
of Covenant, on the one hand, and on the other, and unite in confessing these,
by joining, in this, or the like Acknowledgement of public Sins, and keeping
days of humiliation, and mourning for the same. And as we offer and promise to
confess our Sins here acknowledged, or any other so far as we can be convinced,
any manner os way, that they shall desire or appoint; So if they, at least will
confess theirs Doctrinally, and they and we both forsake them mutually, and
forsaking concur in procuring the Condemnation of them, in Ecclesiastic Synods
or Assemblies, and so return unto, and fix our ground on the old Established
foundations, according to the Word of God, and Constitutions of this Church
settled, before the Covenanted Reformation stopped, We will then embrace and
maintain Union and Communion with them and submission to them in the Lord: And
shall not suffer our selves, Directly or undirectly, by whatsoever Combination
persuasion or terror, to be divided or withdrawn, from this blessed Union and
Conjunction. Thus far we advanced in these steps with one accord.

Thereafter, in the remembrance of these Resolutions and Engagements, which we
looked upon, as at last inferring an obligation lying upon us, to make some
Endeavors, in pursuit of this Union, which is a Duty, Materially, Morally,
and Antecedently obliging in it self: Being invited also by some reverend
Ministers in Edinburgh, we had once and again Conferences with them: Wherein at
length after we had still insisted on the necessity of confessing and
condemning these Defections and Corruptions, which caused us to stand so long
at a distance from them, and proposed the Difficulties we had in our
Conscience, to return to Communion with them before these were removed, as is
said. They condescended upon some Expedients for our satisfaction, that it
should be allowed to us, to exhibit to the next Assembly, our Testimony
against all these courses and practices in Ministers, that did offend us, and
to plead for recording of it, in the Books of Assembly, which might exoner our
Consciences, and absolve us from all participation with, or Communion in the
guilt, that we conceived to be in any of these things.

Whereupon, taking this Condescension to further consideration (which indeed
gave us more clearness than we had before) and declining any further procedure
in it, until we consulted the mind of the People, whom we desired to be tender
of, and guard against all appearance of imposing upon them, or overdriving
them, unto things they could not be suddenly clear in. We had a Meeting with
them, to deliberate upon this matter, at Douglas, wherein we proposed the Case,
and offered several Considerations to bring things to a temper, endeavoring to
satisfy and solve several Scruples and Objections, adduced by tender, zealous,
and serious People; Alleging they could not have freedom or clearness to join
with these Ministers, from whom they had formerly withdrawn, until they should
acknowledge their defection, for without that, they could never be counted
faithful, and would never faithfully urge others to confess their Sins, when
they would not acknowledge their own: And that Union without this, would bury
the Testimony against these defections. And several other difficulties of this
nature, very weighty to them, and affecting to us. To all which we endeavored
to give solution, by showing, That the not confessing of Sins, not in present
practice, was never, and can never be owned by us, to be a ground of
Separation; And that we found in Scripture, the Godly had Communion in
Churches, where there were several Corruptions not confessed nor reformed. And
that if the Church came to recover Her Authority and Assemblies, we must
submit, and unite in Reformation, and would not be required to unite in
defection; telling them also of the forementioned Condescension, and of our
purpose to give in Papers to the first Assembly. And persuading them, (tho we
would not urge them against their Conscience, to hear all, or any of the
Ministers, against whom there were greatest exceptions) to try and search
through all the Country, where such might be had, that were most free of these
offenses, or most faithful in confessing them, and join with these, in the
first place. In the mean time, because it was a grave and greatly important
matter, not rashly to be determined, we agreed that a day of Humiliation should
be set a part, for praying for Light in the case; And that the business should
be suspended to another Meeting.

Thus the Matter was kept in suspense, for a considerable time; And in the mean
while, we were now and then upon occasion, in conference, and sometimes in
preaching, pleading for endeavors of Union; wherein perhaps our weakness,
sometimes has vented it self in expressions of too great fervor, to the
offense of tender People; as formerly it might have its Eruptions, to the
offense of others, in the prosecution of our differences with them. And in
seems (tho the manner of managing a business, should not prejudge People
against the matter it self, yet) several have been stumbled upon this. For at
the next Meeting, at the forsaid place, some did move in the debate with more
fervor, than before, against Union, except the foresaid defections were
confessed. And other Objections and Scruples were adduced, both verbally and in
Papers, sent from several Societies, bearing they could not return to a
declining party, until they should return from their declinings; And that
confession and forsaking of Sin, is so frequently inculcate in the Scriptures,
that without this, they could not expect the blessing of God, upon the Ministry
of those who retained and defended causes of wrath; And that the Church was not
yet settled, and the Government not yet established, and so they could not
tell, but their might be Corruptions in the very constitution of it. Whereunto
we offered several Answers, and at the close of that Meeting, it was earnestly
desired by the People and promised by us, that, some thing should be write, and
spread amongst them, that might inform them, and clear from the Scriptures, the
difficulties of this controversy, and the necessity of Union and Communion
with the Church in the present circumstances; Which accordingly so soon as was
possible, was prepared, and may be hereafter published. Afterward the business
was more remisly followed, both sides being more abstract, and kept in
suspense, waiting to see the constitution of the Church established, and a free
General Assembly, unto which they might make application, whence all expected
more light and resolution would accrue. At length, the General Assembly
indicted by Authority approaching, we had another Meeting, in which after some
little debates, we came to a more sedate agreement, to apply to the Assembly,
and that we should give in Papers to them: We told them that we had a mind,
after exhibition of our Testimony, protesting against the Defections that
offended us, to Submit and Unite; and per-swaded them to do the like; But they
were resolute to suspend offering Submission and Union, until they should
understand, what notice the Assembly, would take, and what use they would make,
of our Papers. Upon this we concluded to give in our Papers, and agreed to set
a part a day before the sitting of the Assembly, to pray for Counsel and
Conduct from the Lord, in prosecution of this affair.

Before this time, tho we had in several places, and at several times given a
Specimen of our inclinableness to Union and intense and impatient desire of
Communion with our Brethren, in joining with some, both in the North and South,
to show that we did not scruple now, to incorporate with them, when the grounds
of Separation were taken away: Yet hitherto we suspended Submission and fixed
Union, until the Metting of the General Assembly, both because, this was a
matter proper for an Assembly, the differences concerned the whole Church, and
could only be cognosced upon, and composed by an Assembly, and all the parties
concerned in them, dispersed through a great part of the Church, could apply or
answer to no Judicatory, inferior to an Assembly, representing the whole;
Therefore we thought it proper and expedient, to depositate our Testimony
there, and so take occasion to make our Union as public, as our division was:
And indeed our intention to Address the Assembly, was almost as universally
known, at least through the West and South, as our differences were, tho our
design in the Address was unknown to many. For both in traveling through the
Country toward Edinburgh, and when we came there, we found very many and
multifarious opinions and reports of it: Some of a Malignant temper, telling
that we were come to fire the Assembly, and create confusion among them:
Others, that we had a mind to give in Papers declining their Authority, and
protesting against their Constitution and Proceedings: Some alleging little
less, then we had got Gold from the Jacobites and Prelatists, to sow discord
among them: Others expressing their wishes and hopes that for our former
Practices, and present Purposes and Papers, they should see us well paid home,
and made to confess on our knees, our scandalous Schism, and to subject to the
severity of Censure, when we had done all. Yea even among the best affected
toward us, both Ministers and others, whom we consulted in the Affair, we
found tho they had Charity for the design of the Workers, yet they had a great
jealousy of the end of the work it self.

The Assembly, having sat several Sessions, our Paper, and the purpose of it,
was motioned in the Committee of Overtures, before it was fully prepared; And
the Motion favorably entertained by that Reverend Committee, they were pleased
to appoint a Subcommittie of their Number to see it, and confer with us about
the contents of it, who after hearing it read, did object little against the
matter of it, but did urge the smoothing of it, and that we should take out
some particulars, that might irritate and offend some, that would look upon
themselves as injuriously reflected upon by them, which might provoke heats,
and stop all other business, whence the Church might sustain great
disadvantages, and our selves have little peace; We answered, we could not yield
to the expunging of any particulars in it, which were matters of offense, and
understood by us to be Corruptions, which our purpose was to witness against,
without any design to irritate any by Reflections: And if any should be
provoked to raise heats, we should be sorry for it, but we could not foresee
how any could rise to that hight, as to brake the Assemblyes Harmony, since we
were resolved to seek concord, and not Contention: And what ever they should do
with the paper, if we might once have access to table it, our Contention would
be at an end, for then our Testimony would be given in, and lie at their door,
to be considered, as they should think fit, which would exoner our Conscience,
and declare to them, as the Representatives of the Church, that our Communion
with the Church at present, could not infer an approving of what we condemned
before, nor a condemning of what we approved before. These things being
favorably represented to the Co^mittee of Overtures, they added some Reverend
Brethren to the Subcommittee, to whom it was read a second time: They told us,
they feared it would not be well received, and that it might have bad effects,
if it should be read, but desired to know further what we resolved to do, if it
should be rejected: We answered, we would still adhere to it, and could not
change our Sentiments about the things contained therein; Yet because the
things in Controversy, testified against in the paper, were not in the present
Constitution of the Church, and therefore our Submission at present, could not
be looked upon, to be an Homologation of the things therein witnessed against;
Therefore if we be allowed to exhibit our Paper to this venerable Assembly, we
would stand to the Union and Submission, therein offered, let them dispose of
it as they will. They further desired there might be a short Paper drawn, to
introduce the larger, showing the scope of it, and out design in it: which we
did, and therein made an offer and promise of Union and Submission, after the
Exhibition of our foresaid Testimony.

These Papers both larger and shorter, being presented to the Committee of
Overtures: After some Debate, they condescended to hear both Read: which done;
after our removal a little, The Moderator told us the Opinion of the Committee,
That they were sensible the large paper contained many sad Truths in it, but
upon several weighty Considerations did judge it in convenient to present it to
the Assembly, because of some Mistakes, Reflections and Unseasonable and
Vnpracticable Overtures it it: To this, we could accord, but urged the giving
of it in; whereupon it was recommitted to the Subcommittee, with an addition of
more Members, instructed to labor to persuade us to sist, and move no more in
it. Their Endeavors and Arguments not prevailing with us, we were again called
before the Committee of Overtures; And pressed to condescend, and rest content,
that the Papers were exhibit to them, and read before them: We answered we
could not, except the Reverend Committee, would assume to themselves, or get
devolved upon them, the power of the Assembly, to cognosce on the matter, then
we would sist; Otherwise our business was with the Assembly and therefore we
pleaded that the Papers might be tabled before them. Hereupon they Condescended
to transmit them, with Overtures prepared concerning them, that we should be
received, that the Large Paper should not be read, for several reasons etc.
Next day both Papers were exhibited in open Assembly, The short Paper was read,
with the Overtures of the Committee concerning the Large one. The matter coming
to a vote, Some proposed the State of it thus, Read the Large Paper or not;
Others thus, Approve the Overtures concerning it or not. Its commonly believed
the Vote went so, which has stumbled many; we being removed knew not how it
was expressed, but when some of us challenged it afterward, as being very
illegal, to vote a Paper should not be read, for reasons giving a Character,
and Condemning the Paper, when the Assembly knew not what was in the Paper; a
Reverend Minister and Member of the Assembly assured us, that the vote did not
go so, but that it was proposed in the last place, and Condescended to, that it
should be voted thus, Approve the first Overture, (touching our being received)
and the other (that the Paper should not be read) or not, without mentioning of
the reasons. The whole Assembly voted Approve, Nemine contradicente. We being
again called before them, the Moderator exhorted us to Order and Union. To
which one of our number made a short Reply, wishing the Venerable Assembly had
thought it fit to read the Paper, but seeing it could not be obtained, such was
our love to Peace and Union, that we would submit, but as to the reasons given
for the not reading it, because of the Mistakes and Reflections in it, we were
not conscious of any such thing: And desiring that it might be on Record, that
such a Paper was exhibited, which accordingly was Minuted. There was only one
more of us then present, who, after his Brother had concluded in a few words,
offered to speak, and at greater length, to enlarge his Reply to some things
expressed by the Reverend Moderator in his Exhortation. But it seems that some
of the Assembly had a suspicion, that possibly he might, in his accustomed
fervor, bring forth something, that might have been irritating: (which yet he
was so far from designing, that he had resolved and premeditate, to say
nothing, but what might corroborate and justify the Union, and to show what
were his Inducements to it, and how consistent it was with his former
Principles and Practices:) For, when he offered to speak, the Moderator, and
others also, requested him to forbear: Whereunto he yielded, not at all
suspecting or foreseing that any would stumble at this ordinary piece of
Discretion; at which we understand since, that some Friends have been offended,
interpreting this Silence to have been a receeding from our Testimony. But
Truly, as he had intended not to have been silent, and if he had thought this
could have been stumbling to any, would rather have ventured upon the censure
of his Discourse, then to be so misconstructed for his silence: So, considering
the Assemblies reiterate urging him to forbear, (by way of Request, not of
Command) and how necessary Condescension is in these Circumstantials of Union,
what his Brother also had said before him, and how there was no other Testimony
ever designed by us, but that in the Larger Paper exhibited in write, he did
not think, he was called to contend for speaking any more at that time.

This is the true, short, and yet full Narrative of the whole Transaction which
we thought needful to publish, in all the particulars of it, to discover the
falsehood of the various misreports industriously spread of it, by those that
envy the Union of Presbyterians, reflecting upon the Assembly, as well as
reproaching us, and imposing upon the People, who are informed sometimes, that
the Assembly carried very imperiously, in imposing upon us, as the condition of
our being received, to confess on our knees, many Errors and Extravagances, in
witnessing against these Courses, we called Corruptions, and to condemn and
renounce all our Testimonies. And that we resiled and receded from every point,
for which we could contend with a great deal of clamor on the Hills, but had
nothing to say when we came before the Assembly. And sometimes again, that we
carried very insolently before them, and in our Paper upbraided the whole
Assembly. And yet others interpret our condescending to the Assemblies,
disposing of the Paper as abovesaid, to be a betraying and burying of it, and
the Testimony that is in it, against the sins of the Land. To confute all which
Calumnies, and to submit our Papers to the censure of all that will take notice
of them, as we have offered them to the censure of the Church Representative,
we shall here subjoin the Papers themselves.

The SHORT PAPER.
To the Moderator and Remanent Members of the General Assembly of this CHVRCH.
WIth the greatest earnestness of longing we have desired, and yet with a
patience perhaps to excess, we have waited for an Opportunity, to bring our
unhappy Differences (of which, all Parties concerned are weary) to a happy and
holy close: And for this end to have access to apply our selves to a full and
free General Assembly of this Church, invested with Authority and Power, in
foro Divino and Humano, to determine and cognose upon them. The want of which
an Assembly, constitute in that Vigor, to which through the Mercy of GOD, this
Venerable National Synod has arrived, has been the great let and impediment
of our composing the said Differences, in a way wherein not only we, but all of
the same Sentiments would Acquiesce. Now having obtained this much longed, and
long prayed for Privilege, We cannot forbear any longer humbly, to Accost and
Address this Venerable Assembly, with a free and ingenuous Representation of
our Minds and Desires: The scope of which is to Represent those things, which
have been most stumbling to us, for the Exoneration of our Consciences; And to
declare our Design, after we have exhibited our Testimony against these
Courses, which we understand to have been Corruptions and Defections in this
Church, and laid it down at the Assemblies feet, to be disposed of, as their
wisdom shall think fit, That we shall in all required Submission, subject our
Selves, our Lives, and Doctrine, to the Cognizance of the Judicatories of this
Church, and shall equally oppose Schism and Defection, in any Capacity, that we
shall be found capable of. And here by these Presents, we bind and obliege our
Selves, faithfully, to live in Union, and Communion, entire subjection, and due
Obedience, in the LORD, to the Authority of this Church, in her Respective
Judicatories; As witness our hands at Edinburgh.

Tho. Lining. Al. Sheilds. Will. Boyd

The LARGER PAPER.
To the Moderator and Remanent Members of the General Assembly, now Conveened
at EDINBURGH. The Humble Proposals of Mr. Thomas Lining, Mr. Alexander Sheilds,
and Mr. William Boyd.


IF our Eye could sutably affect our Hearts this day, Right Reverend, we might
find much matter, both of Rejoicing and Mourning, in the wounderful
Commencement and Advancement of this Work of Reformation. As at the Jews return
from Babylon to Jerusalem, the Priests and Levites, and all the People shouted
with a great shout, when they praised the LORD, because the foundation of the
House of the LORD was laid; Tet some of them, that had seen the first House,
wept with a loud voice, so that the People could not discern the noise of the
shout of joy, from the noise of weeping. So at this time, we are called to
rejoice, with thanksgiving for, and we should indeed be very ungrate and
unworthy, if we did not acknowledge with Praise and Admiration, the Mercy of
God, which endures for ever, manifested and magnified in the progress of this
Work hitherto; That at the time appointed of God, the least expected by us, at
the time of our greatest extremity, and our Enemies greatest insolency, the
Lord has been pleased in Sovereign Mercy, instead of overtaking us with
judgments threatened for our sins, and without waiting on our Repentance and
Preparations, by turning unto Him, to prevent and surprise us, not only, with
an outward enlargement of Rest and Peace, without prejudice to Truth, in a way,
wherein we are not beholden, to the ensnaring favors of his Enemies, but with
such a reviving in our bondage (in the midst of Wrath remembering Mercy)
brought about by the repression of Tyranny, suppression of Popery, and
depression of Prelacy, as that we have yet a Nail in His Holy Place, to set up
the House of our GOD; Yea the Altar also is set again upon His Bases, and the
daily burnt Offerings are offered by number, according to the custom, and the
foundation of the Temple is laid again: When the Doctrine of this Church is
asserted, and the Confession of Faith formerly received, is read, voted,
approven, and established by Parliament, and even several controverted Truths
formerly much condemned and obscured, under a load of many Calumnies, are now
justified and vindicated; The Worship and Ordinances of Christ, are administered
in great Purity, Plenty, and Peace; The Government of Christ's Institution, by
Kirk Sessions, Presbiteries, Synods, and General Assemblies, so long born down,
is at length restored to what it was Anno 1592. And all Acts and Laws contrary
or prejudicial unto, inconsistent with, or derrogatory from Presbyterial
Government are rescinded, with this honor, that it is declared by Act of
Parliament, that this is the Government most agreeable to the Word of GOD, and
most conducible to the advancement of true Piety and Godliness, and
establishment of Peace and Tranquillity within this Realm: And the Discipline
retrieved to such a fond of Freedom, that all Ecclesiastic Courts, may without
restraint, or being accountable to any Exotic Usurped Power in the Magistrate,
assert all the Authority, and exerce the Power, wherewith Christ has entrusted
them. Which power if duly and diligently improved, and put in execution, may
through the Blessing of GOD contribute very much to the reducing Order, and the
redress of many Disorders in this Church. And now also the causes of our
Disunion and Division in times of defection, being in a great measure removed,
when Erastian Usurpations are abrogated, the Churches intrinsic Power
redintegrated, and the Corruptions introduced by Complyances, so far abdicated
and antiquated, that they are not in the constitution of the Church, and do not
continue to be the scandal and snare of the times: We hope and expect a Remedy
may be found for the Breaches and Divisions, that we thought incurable, and
Union and communion in the Lord may be attained. But tho for these things we be
called to rejoice, yet we are no less obliged to mourn, when we observe this
House of the Lord, so unlike the former, wanting many things, the former had,
and pestered with many things the former wanted. As at the building of the
second House, after the Captivity of Babylon, they that had seen the first
House wept with a loud voice, when they observed its Constitution and
Structure, so far short of the former, for Order and Beauty, and wanting some
glorious Prerogatives the other had; as the Urim and Thummim, the Fire from
Heaven, the Ark of the Testimony, etc. So, they that have seen our former
Reformation in its Integrity, before the late Deformation, can hardly refrain
from weeping at the sight of the sad, disproportion, between this and the
former. In the former, as the constitution was calculate in the nearest
conformity to the Divine Pattern; so the Builders, had always a care to pull
down what was to be demolished, before they established what was to stand, and
to purge away the rubbish from the Foundation, before they promoved the
Superstructure: Accordingly when Prelacy was reintroduced at several times, the
first thing they did when they recovered their power, was always to exert it
in condemnation of that Corruption, and of these Assemblies and Meetings, that
promoved, abetted, favored, or complied. And when the Erastran Supremacy began
to encroach upon the Churches Liberties, and to bring the Ministry into
Bondage, they did not think it enough to wrestle against it by Personal
witnessings; but by the good Hand of GOD upon their Endeavors, never ceased
until it was condemned by Acts of Assembly. They proceeded also with great
earnestness and vigilance, to purge the Church of corrupt and scandalous
Ministers; sadly regrateing afterward, when they saw the effects of the
continuance of some of that Character in the Ministry, that they had not done
more in that purging work. But now, after all the Rubbish and Filth, brought
into the House of GOD, by the Invasions and Usurpations of the Enemies, and
Defections of Friends, when now Opportunity and Capacity is given to Rebuild
and Beautify the House of the LORD, and to Repair the Desolations thereof, the
present building is so far advanced, without pulling down and purging away the
Rubbish, and condemning these corruptions and defections, in compliance with
them, or confessing and forsaking them, as our Fathers used to do: Now these
courses have (...) rather left us, than we have foresaken; And the Lords
returning in Providence, without our returning to Him by Repentance, has made
any Reformation yet attained, while these Defections are neither confessed in
humiliations, nor condemned in Judicatories. And the Prelatical Clergy, after
all the evil they have done, and bitter fruits they have produced, are yet kept
in many places, and like to continue as a Seminary and Nurserie of a corrupt
Ministry. As long as all this Rubbish stands, there can be little hope, either
of Purity or Stability in the Superstructure. In former Reformations also, the
Advancement used to be Progressive, beginning where the former Reformation
stopped, and going forward, after they had got removed, what obstructed it. But
now the motion is Retrograde, going as far back, as that in 1592. missing many
Excellent steps of Reformation, attained after that to 1649. In former
Reformations, our worthy Ancestors used to begin with Renovation of the
National Covenants, and Acknowledgements of the Breaches thereof, which
hitherto has been neglected, to the great grief of many. It is also matter of
Lamentation to reflect, that in former Reformations, tho the Adversaries
troubled the Builders, and hired Counselors against them, to frustrate their
purpose, yet being Furnished and Spirited of the Lord, for that Generation
work, they never studied to please men, but to acquit themselves as faithful
Servants of their Princely Master Jesus Christ, in witnessing against all Sins
and Corruptions of great and small, impartially; and in Acts of Assembly
ordaining and recommending to all Ministers, this faithfulness in applying
their Doctrine to the Sins of the time, under pain of Censure. But now tho
there was never greater freedom and encouragement for, and necessity of
faithfulness, when the Adversaries of Judah are seeking to Build, but on design
to mar the Work, and many are too much inclining to join in affinity with the
People of these abominations: Yet it is sadly wanting, and much Desiderated
among many Ministers, who being long accastomed to fears, and constrained
silence, under former hazards and tentations, have not yet recovered their
Confidence and Courage, to cry a loud against, and not spare the iniquities of
the time. We desire also to join in that common regrate, that tho informer
Reformations, this Church was not only for Order and Authority, beautiful as
Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, and terrible as an army with banners, but for
Union, got the Name of Philadelphia, being then as much admired for Unity
(which is the fruit of Presbyterian Government, wherever it has place) as for
any other Privilege, which rendered her the Envy of all the Nations about. Yet
now alas! The Crown has fallen from our heads, woe unto us, that we have
sinned. This Holy and Beautiful Fabric, has been burnt up, with the fire of
Enemies fury, with the fire of our Divisions, and with the fire of the Lords
indignation, burning against us for our defections, whereby the Lord was
provoked to forsake his House, and since his departure, there has been nothing
but disorder among his Children and Servants. The Popish Prelatical and
Malignant Party, have come in by Force and Fraud, and by the Cedings of those,
that should have stood in the Gap, and broke down the Carved Work of our
Covenanted Reformation, as with Axes and Hammers, Rescinding all the Legal
Bul-warks of Ecclesiastical Constitutions, Civil Sanctions, and National
Covenants, wherewith it was fenced, Wherein alas! They were too much encouraged
by our faint resistance, and too universal involvement in the sin of submitting
to and Countenancing of the intrusions of the Prelatical Party. At length
having set up these their Ensigns for Signs, in Sign of complete Victory,
obtained over the Servants and Subjects of our exalted Prince, after they have
invaded His Kingdom and Palace, and made Havoc and Sloughter of such, as would
not yield, they offered some tempting terms, whereupon they would suffer them
to live in subjection to these Usurpations; painted indeed with pretenses of
Favors, but really, at least indirectly requiring a recognizance of the
Usurpers power, and a Cessation from opposing the peaceable possession of their
Robberies. These and the like defections on the one hand, together with many
Extravagances on the other, have brought the Godly into many confusions,
stumbled them into many tontations, racked, rent, and almost ruined them with
many Divisions, promoted too much an every hand, by Passion, Pride, Prejudice,
Jealousy, too credulous and sedulous taking up and spreading reports, and
reproaches one of another, whereby the Spirit of GOD has been grieved; the
Power, Practice, and Spiritual Exercise of Religion obstructed, the Gospels
success marred, the Ministry and all Ordinances brought into contempt,
ungodliness encouraged, the mouths of the ungodly opened, their hearts hardened,
and their hands strengthened against us. And as the effect of all these, we may
lament another sad and very sensible want, the Lords Power and Glory not seen
in the Sanctuary, as sometimes in the former House it was, with a speciality of
brightness; And the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, Repentance, and
Reformation, public Zeal for the Interest of Christ, and the Gospel Spirit of
Love and Tendernsss toward Brethren, is not yet poured from on high. But it
may be, if the Tabernacle were once reared up, that the cloud of the LORDS
Presence would cover it, and the Glory of the LORD would fill it: And if we
were ashamed of our iniquities, we might then measure the Pattern, and see the
form of the House, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the
comings in thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and the whole limit thereof
should be holy, which is the Law of the House: Then the glory of this latter
House should be greater than of the former.

Nevertheless, We are so far from despising the day of small things, that in
weakness and humility, we would desire to say, it is our highest ambition to
enjoy the Communion of this Sanctuary of the LORD, in this Land, if it were but
to be Doorkeepers in the House of our GOD: And it is the matter of our greatest
longing to see the day, when all the Dissintient and long Dissevered Children
of Zion, shall together with one heart take their Mother by the Hand; and with
one Lip praise their Father, in the Beauty of Holiness. For when the Courts of
the LORD are amiable in Order, it cannot but be pleasant and desirable for
Brethren to dwell together in Unity; And so much the more, that we have felt
the sad effects of our unhappie Divisions, which not only now, but even in
their greatest heat, made us with much longing, desire and pray for a
comfortable Union, and to bemoan the Causes and Effects of the delays of it;
upon all occasions declaring our dread and detestation of Schism, as a very
heinious, hurtful and hateful sin. We did indeed demure to concure with and
follow, and did think it our duty, pro tempore, to withdraw from these
Ministers (tho still we owned and esteemed them as godly Ministers of this
Church) who promoted courses of defection after specified; and to adhere to
those (tho but few) who were more steadfast and faithful, in that time of
Divisions, Gonfusions, and abounding snares, when the Church was in a broken
state, deprived of the Remedy of Church Judicatories, whereunto we might
recurr with Complaints and Supplications, for removing these Offenses: And when
the Government was so Tyrannical, that if there had been Church Judicatories,
neither durst, they have corresponded with us, nor we make Application to them,
for hazard of our Lives. When also the case was so stated, that we thought
communion could not be kept by us with them, from whom we withdrew without sin,
while the very exercise of their Ministry, in the then circumstances, was so
far depending upon, subordinate unto, complying with, modified and authorized
by, unlawful Usurpations, that our joining would have inferred, at least in our
conscience, a submission to, symbolizing with, and approving of their offensive
yieldings, to these encroachments. Yet we never thought this a Schism; We never
judged it, to be a separation from the Church of Scotland, either in Her
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, or Government, as it stood Reformed and
Covenanted to be preserved; Nor did we gather, or set up formed separate
Churches or Societies, under another Government or Ministry, distinct from,
and independent upon the Presbyterial Church of Scotland; nor did we ever
maintain, but always abhorred that Sectarian notion, that the Personal Sins
and Scandalls of Fellow-worshippers, Ministers or Professors, did pollute the
Ordinances; nor did we ever own, but always disowned, a positive or active,
total or stated Separation, from all the Ministry, or from any, for any
Offense, in any case, where either the Offense could be then legally removed,
or was in it self a thing to be condescended upon, or forborne, or did not
hazard our Involvement in the sin of it: And only for the time, owned a
Negative, Passive, and Conditional Abstraction from some, refusing to follow
the Backsliding part of the Ministry, in their courses of Defection, and
choosing to abide by that Part that persevered in their Integrity. But now that
Tyranny, that chased us from one another, being through Mercy removed, and
these Snares and Stumbling Blocks, which scared us, from Communion with many,
being so far taken out of the way, that they cease to be Tentations involving
us in sin, and bones of Contention engaging us in continual janglings about
them: Church Judicatories being now in capacity, to give some remedy to these
Evils, since Providence also has so far altered the case, and matter of our
Contendings, for the Faith delivered to the Saints, that it calls all
dissentient Parties, among Presbyterians, to concenter in one common Testimony,
for the common Reformation, against the common Adversaries. We hope this much
desired and long looked for Union, is, and shall be more accessable and
attainable: Therefore, to the end, that this happy and desirable Union, may be
Holy and Comfortable, in a way that may procure, and secure our Union and
Communion with the LORD: And as the famous Voetius says, Ut nihil de veritate
and professione nostra remittamus atque ad eo a perfectione ad quam cum DEO
pervenimus non relabamur ad imperfectionem. Considering in all the Periods of
this Church, from her first Reformation, a Witness has never been wanting,
against the same, or equivalent Corruptions, that have offended us: And no
method can be more adapted, for recovering and restoring Union, than that which
was used, for preserving it: And that having aimed hitherto, to offer and keep
up our Mite of a Testimony, tho weak and insignificant, against the same; if
now under the convictions of its remaining righteousness, we shall pass from
it, and so seem to condemn what we approved before, and approve what we
condemned before, it will leave an indeleble reproach, not only on our selves,
but on our Contendings and Sufferings. Because likewise in a Conference with
some Reverend Brethren, and Members of this Assembly, about these things it was
proposed and conceded, as an expedient, for easing our Consciences, that we
should have liberty to remonstrate and represent, to the Assembly, what was
offensive to us. We earnestly desire, Right Reverend, you would be pleased to
condescend to us, in some things, that we humbly conceive, are very needful,
just to be sought, and easy to be granted. We know and are confident, your
Zeal for Truth and Peace, will suggest the same means and measures, for
obtaining this end, and will urge you to take notice of the same things, we
desire without our advertisement: Nor do we take upon us to preseribe the
Methods, Terms or Conditions, necessary for Composing these unhappy
Differences, and restoring the holy and happy Union in the Lord; But we think,
the Word and Works of God this day, points at these, which we crave leave in
the Bowels of Christ, to remonstrate unto your serious Consideration.

That to the end the causes of our Divisions, the Anger of the Lord, as the
Holy Cause, and our Mutual offenses, as the sinful Cause, May be removed, that
the effect may cease, a Mutual, impartial, and accurate search and trial may be
made into our ways, to find out, and remember from whence we are fallen, and
discover our manifold and manifest defections, from the right ways of the
Lord; That the great wrongs and indignities done to our Great Head and King, by
Enemies Encroachments on his Prerogatives, and his Kingdoms Liberties, and our
Complyances therewith, on the one hand and one the other, may not be past in
oblivion, but diligently inquired into, and what accession to them, or
Participation with them, all of us have been involved in, these 30. years
bygone: Particularly that it be laid to Heart, what Indignity to the Lord
Jesus, and Injury to his Church, was done by the introduction of abjured,
Diocesan and Erastian Prelacy, and the several degrees of Compliance therewith;
As Ministers leaving their Pastoral Charge, at the Command of the Magistrate,
and laying aside the Exercise of their Ministry, giving way unto, and not
testifying against the Intrusions of Prelatick Curats; Particularly owning and
submitting to their Ministry, and receiving ordinances dispensed by them, and
by Counsel and Example, Encouraging others to do the like: Which we cannot but
Plead and Protest against as sinful and Scandalous. 1. Because they were, and
are inanifest Intruders, not entering in at the door, in the way and order of
Christ, not having, yea despising and renouncing a Call from the People, and
Ordination by the Presbytrie, and having no other external Call, Authority or
Right to officiate in this Church, as its proper Pastors, but the Collation of
Bishops, and Presentation of Patrons, who are none of Christ's Officers, and
forefaulting and foregoing any other Right, that any of them formerly could
pretend to, by palpable defection to the Enemies of this Church. 2. Because
both in Principle and Profession, and in the way af their Entry unto their
Pastoral Charge, they were, and are Erastians, deriving their Power from, and
subjecting it in its exercise to another Head then Christ, the Magistrates
Supremacy by which only they were Authorized, without Christ's warrant, or the
Churches consent. 3. Because they were, and are Schismatics, who caused
Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine of this Church, breaking her
Union and Order, going out themselves from the fellowship of this Church, and
leading People away from her vowed Reformation; yea who violently thrust out,
and persecuted her faithful Pastors and Children, for adhering to that
Reformation, which they designed to raze and ruin. 4. Because they were, and
are perjured Covenant breakers, avowedly disowning our Covenants, and stated in
opposition to that Reformation, which is therein sworn to be maintained. 5.
Because they were, and are in several Points Erroneous, in their Doctrine, many
of them tainted with the Leaven of Popery, Arminianism, and Socinianism, and
all of them Heteradox, in the point of the Magistrates power in Church matters,
in the matter of Oaths, and in condemning the Work of our Reformation, and
Covenants; seducing thereby their Hearers, and both positively by these
Doctrines, and privatively by withholding other necessary Instructions, and
Warnings, Murdering their Souls. 6. Because they were, and are upon all these
Accounts Scandalous, and the Objects of the Churches Censure: And tho through
the iniquity of the times, their deserved Censure, hitherto has not been
inflicted, yet they stand upon the matter convict, by clear Scripture Grounds,
and by the standing Acts, and judicial Decision of this Church, in her Supreme
Judicatories. 7. Because this hearing and sumitting to them, was required as a
Badge, Test, and Evidence of Due Acknowledgement of, and hearty Compylance with
Erastianism and Prelacy, or His Majesty's Government Ecclesiastic, Act. Parl.
1. Char. 2. July 10. 1663. which made it a case of Confession to withstand it.
8. Because by our Covenants, we are obliged to stand at a distance, from such
courses of Defection, and to extirpate them; yet in contradiction hereunto, we
were commanded by the Rescinders of the Covenants, to bear the Prelatick
Curats, as a Badge of our yiedling to the rescinding of the Govenants. 9.
Because this Course was Offensive and Stumbling, both in hardening those that
complied with Prelacy, and weakening the Hands of those that opposed it, and
inferred a condemning of their Sufferings upon this Head. Especially, 10. When
Communion with them was so stated, that therein was not only a Case of
Controversy among the Godly, in which always Abstinence is the surest side,
nor only in the judgment of many a Case of Confession, which is always
dangerous to contradict and condemn, but undenyably a Case of Competition,
between the true Church of Scotland, her Ministers and Professors, owning and
adhering to her Holy Establishments, claiming a Divine Right to their Offices
and Privileges, contending for the Churches Reformation; and a Schismatical
Party, setting up a new Church, in a new Order, under a new Head, robbing them
of their Offices and Privileges, and overturning the Reformation.

We must presume to Plead also, That Enquiry be made unto the Heinous and
Heaven-daring Affront, done to the Holiness of GOD, in the horrid Violations of
our Holy Covenants, National and Solemn League, not only how the Popish,
Prelatical, and Malignant Party, have broken them, enacted the Breaches of
them, by Law, Burnt them, and endeavored to Bury them, by making it a Capital
Crime to own their Obligation, and by bringing in and substituting in their
room, Conscience ensnaring Anti-covenants, Oaths, Bonds, and Engagements
renouncing the former, and obliging to Courses contradictory thereunto: But
that it may be considered, how many ways, Ministers and Professors, in this
time of tentation and tribulation, have been guilty of breach of these holy
Covenants: particularly by consenting unto, subscribing, swearing, and taking
any of the new multiplied, mischievously contrived, captiously conceived, and
Tyrannically imposed Oaths, Tests, or Bonds, in matters of Religion, since the
overturning of the Covenanted Reformation, and establishment of Prelacy; and by
persuading People to take them, and forbearing a necessary warning of the
danger of them, and leaving People in the dark, to determine themselves, in the
midst of these snares. All which we Plead and Protest, against as sinful and
scandalous. (1) Because all of them, did infer, import, and imply a sinful
unitive conjunction, Incorporation, Association, and Confederacy, with the
People of these Abominations, that were promoting a course of Apostasy from
GOD. (2) Because all of them were incapable of the Qualifications, required in
Sacred Engagements, to be taken in Truth, Righteousness, and Judgment. (3)
Because all of them, in the sense of the Imposers, interpreted by their Acts
and Actings, were condemnatory of, and contradictory unto the Covenants, and
some part of the Covenanted Reformation. (4) Because by the Ancient Acts of
Assembly, all public Oaths imposed by the Malignant Party, without consent of
the Church are condemned. July 28. 1648. Ante merid. Sess. 18. And

Those Ministers are Ordained to be Censured, who subscribe any Bonds, or take
any Oaths, not approven by the General Assembly, or by their Counsel,
Countenance, or Approbation, make themselves accessory to the taking of such
Bonds and Oaths. In like manner we dare not forbear to Cry and Crave, that it
may be considered, what wrongs Christ has received from the Erastian and
Antichristian Usurpation of the Supremacy, encroaching upon the Prerogative of
the Lord Jesus Christ his incommunicable Headship and Kingship, as Mediator,
giving to a Man, a Magisterial, and Architectonick power, to alter and
innovate, Authorize and Exauctorate, allow or restrain, and dispose of the
Government and Governors of the Church, according to his pleasure; invading
the liberties of the Gospel Church introducing a civil Dominion upon her
Government, contrare to its nature, being only a Ministerial-Stewardship,
distinct from the Civil Government, in its Nature, Causes, Ends, Officers, and
Actings, and giving to the Magistrate the power of the keys, without and
against Christ's Donation and Authority, even the Dogmatick, Critic, and
Diatactick, Decisive Suffrage, and Power, in Causes Ecclesiastic, which Christ
has entrusted to the Church Representatives; and denying to the Church, the
Exercise of these Keys and Powers, without the Magistrates warrant and
Indulgence. We crave also, that it may be inquired into, how far this
encroachment, has been connived at, submitted unto, complied with, homologate,
strengthened and established, by receiving and accepting, without consent of
the Church, yea against the express dissent, and testimony of some faithful
Ministers, to the contrare, the Indulgences, anno 1669, and 1679: And by the
silence of others, not witnessing against the same, and others censuring the
Faithful, for discovering the sinfulness thereof. Which we Remonstrate upon
these grounds complexly considered. (1) Because as the contrivance and end of
the grant thereof, was to advance and establish the Supremacy; to engage
Presbyterians, either to cooperate toward the settling and strengthening
thereof, or to surcease from opposing the peaceable possession of the Granters
Usurpation, and to extort from them, at least an indirect Recognizance, of
acknowledged Subordination in Ministerial Exercises, to his usurped power, in a
way which would he best acquiesced in; To suppress the Preaching and
Propagation of the Gospel in persecuted Meetins in houses and fields, so
necessary at that time; and to divide and increase differences and animosities
among Presbyterians, by insinuating upon these called the more Moderate, to
commend the Indulger his Clemency, while other Non-Conformists, adhering to
interdicted duties, were justly complaining of the Effects of his Severity. And
as the woeful effects of it, strengthening the Supremacy, weakening the hands of
these that witnessed against it, extinguishing Zeal, and increasing many
divisions, did correspond with these wretched designs; So these could not be
counteracted, but very much strengthened and promotted, by the Acceptance of
the Indulgence, which in its own nature, was so palpably subservient thereto,
even tho there had been a Testimony against these designs and ends, yet when
the means adapted to these ends, were complied with, it was rendered irrite and
contra factam. (2) Because as the Supremacy received much Strength and
Increment from the Indulgence, so reciprocally it had its Rise, Spring,
Conveyance, and subsistence from the Supremacy; from which it flowed, upon
which it stood, and by which at length it was removed: And in the grant and
conveyance of the Indulgence, all the power of the Supremacy, was arrogate,
asserted and exerted, in first taking away the power of the Keys, from CHRIST'S
Stewards, and then restoring only one of them, to some few, with Restrictions
bounding, and Instructions regulating them in the exercise of that. The
Acceptance whereof, so clogged with these complex Circumstances, without a
clear and distinct Testimony, in that case of confession, has at least a great
appearance (which should have been abstained from) of a conniving at,
submitting unto, complying with, and homologating of that Erastian Usurpation.
(3) Because, as it was interpreted to be accepted in the same Terms, wherein it
was granted, without a Testimony against the Supremacy, so the Entry of those
Ministers to their Churches, by this Indulgence, was prejudicial to the
Churches Privilege: Some of them being fixed in particular Churches, whereunto
they had no peculiar Pastoral Relation before, and some transplanted from one
Church to another, without the interposure of any Ecclesiastic Presbyterial
Authority, without the free and orderly Call of the People, being in many
respects prelimited, and in the way of Patronages, at the Councils Pleasure and
Order; and those that were Restored to their own Churches, being there
admitted, not by virtue of their Old Right, and claim of an undissolved
Relation, but by virtue of a New Holding on the Indulgence. (4) Because the
embracing thereof, and the continuing therein, was a faint yielding to
prevailing Erastianism, and a course of Defection from former Integrity of
Ministerial Freedom and Faithfulness, in which the Servants and Witnesses of
Jesus Christ, were Famous and Eminent in former times, who for writing,
Preaching, and protesting against the Ecclesiastic Supremacy, in the
Magistrate, and all Erastian courses, did bear the cross of Christ, with much
stedfastness; Yea a receding from, and foregoing of a very matterial part of
the Cause and Testimony of the Church of Scotland, which till then, did
constantly wrestle against such encroachments: And in this respect scandalous,
because hardening to Erastian Enemies, stumbling to many Friends, and offensive
to Posterity. (5) Because it is contradictorie to our Covenants, to receive
Indulgences, contrived and conferred on purpose, to divide (by the terror of
persecution on the one hand, and the persuasion of this pretended Liberty,
taking off the Legal restraint on the other) Ministers and People from the
Cause and Testimony of the Church of Scotland, against the Supremacy, and from
their former blessed Conjunction therein, and to induce them to make Defection
to that Party, that were Advancing Erastianism. And it is expressly
contradictory to the Engagement to Duties, Anno 1649, where the Obligation
bears, Because many have of late labored, to supplant the Liberties of the
Kirk, we shall Maintain and Defend the Kirk of Scotland, in all her Liberties
and Privileges, against all who shall oppose or undermine the same, or
encroach thereupon under any pretext whatsomever.

Likewise, we Plead and Obtest, that a Search may be made, into, and a review
taken of the late Toleration, the Addressing for it, and Acceptance of it,
complexely considered: The sinfulness whereof, we could not, and now cannot
forbear to Witness against. (1) Because as the Design of the Granter, and
Tendency of the Grant it self, in its own nature, being the Introduction of
Popery and Slavery, could not in any probability be counteracted, but rather
corroborated, by this Addressing for it, and Accepting of it, even tho there
had been a Testimony against the design thereof, as there was none, and could
be none consistent with the continuance thereof; so being conveyed from
Absolute Power, which all were required to obey without reserve, Stopping,
Suspending, and Disabling all the Penal Statutes, against Papists, thereby
undermining all the Legal Bulwarks of our Religion: The Addressing for, and
Accepting of it, so conveyed, without a witness against this Despotical
Encroachment (yea the very condition of enjoying the benefit of it, being
exclusive of such a Testimony, which might any way tend, to the alienating of
the People from such a despotical Government, in all its Encroachments) did
indirectly, at least, imply Compliance with, if not the Recognizance and
Acknowledgement of that Usurped Power, and the Arbitrary Exercise and Effect of
it in suspending the Penal Statutes. (2) Because it was extended, not only to
Prelacy, but to Popery, Quakerism, and all Idolatry, Blasphemy, and Heresy,
which was highly provoking to the Lord Jesus, and prejudical to the Peace and
Purity of His Church; contrary to the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament;
contrary to our Confession of Faith and Gatechisms, Chap. 20.. 4. and Chap.
23.. 3. Being placed also among the sins of the second Command, in the Larger
Catechism; contrare to the Principles of the Church of Scotland, being
condemned, warned of, and witnessed against, by Acts of Assembly, anno 1649.
And by her faithful Pastors Preaching, Writing, and Protesting against such
Tolerations, (and sometimes, even when Papists were exccluded, as that, against
which the Ministers of Fife and Perth did testify) And contrary to our
Covenants, wherein we are bound to preserve Reformation and Uniformity, in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, to extirpate Popery, etc. to
free our Souls from the guilt of other Men's Sins, defend our Liberties, and
consequently never to comply with a Toleration, eversive of all these Interests
we are sworn to maintain, and introductive of these things, we are sworn to
endeavor the Extirpation of. (3) Because it was clogged with such Conditions
and Limitations, as did exceedingly hamper the Freedom of the Ministry, being
Offered (in Proclamations) and Accepted (in Addresses and Obedeince) with
Restrictions to Persons, who might Preach, (allowing some, and discharging
others, who had as good Authority, as they, to exercise their Ministry) To
Places where they should preach (only where Intimation was given of the Name of
the Place, and of the Preacher, to some of the Lords of the Council, etc.) And
to the matter What, or at least what they might not preach, to wit, nothing
that might have any tendency, to alienate the Hearts of the People from a
Popish and Tyranical Government, and consequently nothing against the
wickedness, or of the Misery of Tyranny; nothing against the Toleration, and
the open Sins proclaimed therein, and wicked Ends designed thereby; nothing
against disabling the Penal Statutes, or for the Obligation of them, and Ties
of National Covenants strengthening them (4) Because of the manifold Scandal of
it, we cannot but witness against it, being so disgraceful to the Protestant
Religion, and prejudicial to the Interest thereof. It was reproachful to our
Religion, sometimes established by Law, then only Tolerate, under the Notion of
an Evil to be suffered; How Confounding and Consternating was this, to all the
Reformed Churches, that sometimes admired and envied Scotlands Establishments,
now to see her so dispirited and deceived, as to Accept and Address for a
Toleration, without a Testimony, whereby instead of all the Laws and Covenants
securing her Reformation, the only Tenure and Security for it, she had now
remaining, was, the Arbitrary Word of an Absolute Prince, whose Principles
obliged him to break it? What occasion of disdainful Insulting, did it give to
the Prelatical Party, then Pleading for the Nations Laws, to observe
Presbyterians, acquiescing in that which suspended and stopped the Penal
Statutes? Yea, what matter of Gloriation, and Boasting was it to Papists, to
see Presbyterians sleeping and succumbing, and not opposing, when at this
opened Gap, they were bringing in the Trojan Horse of Poperty and Slavery?

Moreover with respect to some things at present, which we account Corruptions,
and are offensive to many, we cannot forbear to Remonstrate and Plead, that
Consideration may be taken, of the sinfulness of the too universal Defect and
Neglect, of Zeal and Faithfulness, in reviving the buried National Covenants,
when now they seem to be laid aside, and many Ministers, forbear to Preach
plainly the obligation of them, and discover particularly, the Breaches of
them, and to mention them in Engagements, which they require of Parents, when
they present their Children to Baptism, according to the continved Custom of
faithful Ministers, these many years bygone: And it is stumbling to many, that
in all Addresses to King and Parliament, the Renewing of them has not been
desired. This we think very grievous (1) Because in the Scriptures, as we have
many Precepts, Promises, and Precedents for Renewing them, and Demonstrations
of their Perpetual, indissoluble obligation being in their matter and form
aggreable with the Word of God; So we have many Denunciations and
Certifications of unavoidable threatenings of all evils, National, Personal,
Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal, against forsaking or forgetting them. (2)
Because as there is no other way to prevent the Curse of the Covenants, and
this threatened wrath iminent upon the Land, for breach of Covenants, but to
acknowledge the breaches of them, and engage again to the Duties of them; So
these omissions, cannot consist with that faithfulness, required of Ministers
in such a Case. (3) Because it is a plain defection from first love, and former
Seize of our Fathers, who commenced all Reformations, with Renovations of
the Covenants: And in their Ecclesiastic Constitutions, enjoined to all
Ministers, to Preach up the Covenants, and Witness against all defections from
them, and indifferency or Luke-warmness in them, which also is a breach of
Covenant in it self.

Hence more Particularly, we cannot but siguify how much, we and many others
are offended, at the too general keeping silenee at, or very ambigvous speaking
against, and omitting the plain and Impartial Doctrinal Rebuking of such Crying
sins and scandalls of the times, as cannot be Controverted among Presbyterians;
Such as the impossing and taking many Bonds and Oaths, repugnant to the
Covenants and work of Reformation, which many Complied with to shift
Persecution, and many others to Purchase preferments unto places of Trust; The
accession of Nobles and Rulers to the wicked establishments and framing
mischiefs into Laws in former times; The manifold involvements of great and
small, in the guilt of Persecution, by delating and informing against honest
suffering People, Riding with Armed Foree, to pursue and Apprehend them,
appearing under displayed Banners for the defense of Tyranny, on Expeditions
against them, at Pentland, Bothwel-Bridge, etc. Sitting in Courts Juries and
Assyses, to condemn them, putting them out of Houses and Tenements under them,
because they would not Comply with sinful impositions: And especially the
defyling of the Land with Blood, which has yet a Cry in the Ears of the Lord
God of Sabbath: All which the Servants of the Lord, are obliged by the Word of
God, and the Constitutions of this Church, to Cry against, and not to spare,
and to reprove and rebuke in Season and out of Season.

Finally, we must presume, to lay open our own, and the general Complaints,
through several corners of the Land, of the sad Slackness and Remisness of
Discipline: The Report and Fama Clomosa whereof, at least does wound our Ears,
aad pierce our Hearts; To wit, That some who had gone a great length in the
abovementioned Complyances, even to the Swearing the Test it self, besides
other wicked Oaths, and to the persecuting of the Godly sundry ways, are
admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and to present their Children to
Baptism: And that others, are admitted to the Charge of Elders, who had not
only habitually complied with Prelacy, and had born the Name of that Office
under that Government, but had taken these scandalous forementioned Oaths; yea
and that of late, some are admitted to the Ministry, that constantly followed
Episcopacy, and were trained up to be Curats, and were deeply involved in the
foresaid Complyances, without due Trial of their past Conversation, and
requiring of their public Profession of Repentance, and Resentment of these
respective Scandals; whereby the Precious are not taken from the Vile, and a
little of that old Leaven, may quickly leaven the whole Lump, and Offenders are
not like thereby to be gained to Repentance, but rather hardened in, and
tempted to think little of these destroying Sins.

We plead not here, that every one of the defects, or every degree of these
offenses, should be in the case of this Epidemick Involvement, proceeded
against by disciplinary Censure, nor do we urge, that all chargable with these
offenses above taxed, especially such as are in Controversy, should be either
Personally rebuked in public, or obliged publicly to confess their own degree
of the guilt of them, tho it would give glory to God, and Comfort to the
Church, and peace to their own Consciences, for all to confess their offenses,
that have been most stumbling to the Godly, so far as from the Word of God, and
known Principles of this Reformed Church, they may be convinced. Nor do we
propose, that the condemnation of every one of these steps of defection, that
are questioned, should be so far stretched quoad momentum rei, as either to be
stated by us, as a ground of Separation formerly, or now required as a
necessary condition of Communion; Tho still, we conceive the complication of
them together, when they stood, was a ground that necessitated our withdrawing,
from many in the then Circumstances. We only desire, they may be so far
inquired into, that what guilt is in them, before the Lord, may be in some
measure discovered, and the wrongs done to Christ thereby, may not be passed
over in an Act of oblivion: But as the Right honorable the Estates of
Parliament, have found and declared, these Acts, and Actings of the Overturners
of our Reformation; and the mischiefs of Prelacy, Supremacy, and Tyranny,
established by wicked Laws which were the Foundations and Fountains of all the
Offencesive Complyances abovementioned, to be Grievances against the Laws of
the Land; So the Right Reverend, the Members of this Venerable Assembly, may
find and declare, these wicked establishments and Complyances Supporting them,
and defections flowing therefrom, to be sins against the Laws of Christ; And so
far as they can find Iniquity in the foresaid offenses, may provide by
Ecclesiastic Constitutions, for the future, that the like Complyances, with
the like Contrivances of usurping Enemies, may never again be allowed, under
pain of Church Censures, to prevent and peeclude all fears of divisions, to be
occasioned by the like defections, in time coming. And as we offer and Promise,
so far as we are, or may be convinced, to confess our offenses, any manner of
way, that Church Judicatories shall appoint; So, for the satisfaction of all
concerned in the late Differences, and removal of Offenses, given or taken, we
desire and expect, that such Failings in the above specified particulars, or
others be laid to Heart, by all sorts of Ministers and Preachers, as they are
convinced of, or after search, may be discovered to them, by this Reverend
Assembly: And that these, among the Sins of the Land, be set down in order, as
causes of a public Fast, upon some week day, through all the Meetings of
Presbyterians, within this Kingdom, and that the Sins of the People be
intermixed among these Causes.

Further, As we humbly conceive, it would prove a very proper and promising
expedient, for promoving, preserving and propagating Reformation, for settling
and keeping Order and Union, for preventing and precluding innovations or
corruptions, for discovering and discouraging Apostates or Schismatics,
Malignants or Sectaries, and excluding them from access to do further hurt; so
we hope, we shall be approven and seconded by many in this Reverend Assembly,
in craving the Renewing of the Covenants, either both the National, and Solemn
League, with accommodations to our Times, or one made up of both, with
Additions or Explications, suiting our present Case and Day, with a Solemn
Acknowledgement of the public Breaches, and Engagement to the Duties of the
Covenants: Humbly moving, that none be forced to Swear or Subscribe the same,
or so much as admitted to it, except they be such, as may be judged in Charity,
to have a competent knowledge, and sense of the Sins and Duties thereof.

In Fine, tho we will not take upon us, to propose the time or the way, of
purging out the Episcopal Clergy, yet we cannot and dare not forbear, to Plead
and Obtest that they may not be continued, nor kept in the Churches, whereunto
they have intruded, nor readmitted that are, or may be laid aside, until they
give approvable evidence of their Repentance, for their sinful Conformity. (1)
Upon all these Grounds, exhibited above, against hearing of them. (2) Because,
former experience of the hurt, received by the entertainment of the Episcopal
Clergy, anno 1638, does now plead for their care to prevent it in time coming.
(3) Because the People under their Ministry, have hitherto been, and are
perishing in Ignorance and Irreligion, being either starved for want of
Faithful and Spiritual Instruction, or poisoned with false Instruction; and
therefore Pity to them, and Zeal to propagate the Gospel, should prompt to all
endeavors, to purge them out. (4) Because, the Settlement, Purgation, and
Plantation of the Church, will be exceedingly obstructed, by the continuance of
them, that unsettled it, corrupted it, and pestered the Lords Vineyard, with
Plants not of His planting, and whose Leaven will be always in hazard to
leaven the whole Lump. (5) Because, all of them are among these, whom the Laws
of Christ do oblige, the Constitutions of this Church do ordain, and the
present Civil Sanctions, for establishing Church Government do allow the Church
Representative, to try and purge out, being all of them either insufficient, or
negligent, or erroneous, or scandalous, if these Characters may be applied, or
interpreted, according to Scripture Rules, or as the Church has extended them
heretofore. We are content that none of the Curats, be put out, but the
unsufficient and Ignorant, if this be one part of the trial of their knowledge,
to inquire not only unto their Gifts but their Graces, if ignorance of
Conversion, Regeneration, Sanctification, and Communion with God; both as to
the Doctrine of these Benefits, and as to their own Experience of them, so far
as may be discovered by humane Judgment, be reputed unsufficiency; We are
content, none by put away, but the negligent, if so be they that do not warn
the Wicked of their destroying Sins, that feed themselves and not the Flock,
that do not strengthen the Diseased, nor heal the Sick, etc. -- That omit the
pressing of necessary Duties impartially on Persons and Families, and the
censuring of Scandals, without respect of Persons, be comprehended in that
Character: We are satisfied, none be removed but the Erroneous, if they be
judged to be such, who not only own Points of Popery, Arminianism, and
Socinianism, but are unsound in their Explanation of the Kingly Office of
Christ, of the Perfection of the Scriptures in the point of Church Officers and
Government, in the matter of Oaths, and of the Magistrates Power, and do
maintain Erastianism, an exploded and abjured Error in this Church: And we seek
no more but that all be removed who are Scandalous, and none but they, if
Intruders, Covenant-breakers, perjured Subscribers of Scandalous Oaths and
Tests, Schismatics, and Persecuters, be counted among the Scandalous.

It were perhaps, Right Reverend, more suitable for us, who make so mean a
Figure, among either Preachers or Professors, to lay our Hand on our Mouth, in
submissive silence, waiting what your own Wisdom and Zeal will produce by the
good Hand of GOD upon you, for our satisfaction: But conceiving a chief Let and
Impediment of our desired comfort of Union, to consist in the want of
opportunity, of laying open our Hearts to you, and longing with much impatience
for it, we could not forbear any longer, giving you the trouble of hearing us,
wherein we request, for the favor of laying aside all preconceived Prejudices,
and beg rather your charitable construction of our ingenuous Freedom, and
deprecate your critical scanning the Infirmities, that may be obivous therein.
Some things are indeed extraordinary, which we here urge, but as extraordinary
Exigences do force us, to move without a Precedent, so they furnish you a
Power, to make a Precedent for the like cases, thereafter: We confess also, it
may seem precipitant to press all these things so hard, and so soon, in a
bruckle time, before things be better settled; but we fear if new delays be
procured till all things be fully settled, that the observing of Wind and
Clouds shall hinder both Sowing and Reaping-But if laying aside the Plasters,
wherewith the Wounds of our Backslidings have been slightly covered rather than
cured, you put to your Hand to the healing of our Breaches, in condescending to
these our humble Desires, you shall win the Blessing of many Souls, rent, and
racked with these Divisions; You shall disburden the Land of many weights and
woes, whereof it is weary; you shall send to all the Neighboring Churches a
Pattern, transmit to the Posterity an Example, and Erect to all Ages a Monument
of self-denying, Zeal and Wisdom; a work to be paralelled with the Glories of
former times. If herein our hopes shall fail us, we shall not know whether to
wish, we had died with our Brethren, by the Enemies hand, and had never seen
this Reviving in our Bondage, for it will be a death to us, and not a reviving,
if there be not a returning together to the LORD, searching and trying and
discovering the iniquities of our ways. But however, we intend not to separat
from the Church, but to Union and Communion, in Truth and Duty, with all the
Ministers and Members of this Church, that do, and in so far as they do follow
the Institutions of Christ, and to approve our selves, GOD assisting, as much
for Peace and Concord, as ever we were suspected to be Men of divisive
Principles; hoping it shall appear, we are seeking where He feeds, and where
He makes His Flock to rest at noon, and are not as such who turn aside by the
flocks of his Companions, but going forth by the footsteps of the Flocks,
besides the Shepherds Tents: Yet with this protested Dissent from, and
Testimony against all the above mentioned corruptions, defections, and
offensive Courses, which obliged us to stand at a distance, in times of
Deformation, that our present joining, in these circumstances, when these are
removed, may not infer or be interpreted, an Approving of what we formerly
Condemned, and be free from all partaking in these Defections, by Consent,
Connivance, Compliance, or Communion therein. For which we bumbly Supplicate,
That these our Humble Proposals, may be Recorded in the Books of Assembly.

Tho. Lining. Al. Sheilds. Will. Boyd.

The Act of Assembly hereanent (which the Reverend Ministers that were
appointed to draw it, were Pleased first to let us see, and upon our objecting
against some Expressions of the first Draught, did Condescend to amend it) is
here annexed;

Edinburgh. 25. October. 1690. Ante Merid. Sess. 9.
WHereas Mr. Thomas Lining, Mr. Allexander Sheilds, and Mr. Wil-Boyd, have
presented to this Assembly two Papers: One containing the expressions of their
Purpose and Promise of being subject to the Authority of this Church, as
formerly Constituted, and now Restored in its several Judicatories: The other
offered for the exoneration of their Consciences. Which Paper, containing their
Submission and Subjection, did after the exhibition of the other to the
Assembly, become binding upon them, according to the promise therein made. Like
as after that other and longer Paper, had been read before the Committee of
Overtures, it was exhibit to, and Received by the Assembly, together with the
Reasons from the said Committee, why it should not be publicly read in full
Assembly. Which Reasons being duly considered; And the said other Paper of
Submission and Subjection publicly Read, and Judicially owned by the forenamed
Persons in presence of the Assembly. The Assembly did conclude by one single
Vote, that the foresaid longer Paper should not be read; And that the above
named Persons should be Received into the fellowship of this Church, on the
terms of Submission and Subjection contained in the said Paper: And after
passing of the said Vote, and that they were gravely Admonished by the
Moderator to walk Orderly in time coming, in opposition to all Schism and
Division, it was Declared to them, by the Moderator, in the name of the
Assembly, that the Assembly did receive them into the Fellowship of this
Church, to enjoy the Privileges thereof, and perform the Duties therein,
whereof they are, or shall be found Capable. Whereupon, and at their Desire, it
was Ordained, that the Act should be made, and an Extract thereof given to them
in good Form. Extracted out of the Records of the Assembly.

JO. SPALDING, Cls. Syn. Genesis

From which Act, we shall only take notice of two things. One is, That our
Paper of Proposals was neither refused or rejected, but Received by the
Assembly; Nor was it canvassed or cognosced upon; because judged inconvenient
to be Read; Nor was it condemned, without Cognizance or Decision, by the
Character given of it in the Overtures, since it is plain the Vote of the
Assembly was not, whether the Reasons or Character given in the Overtures
should be approven or not, But it was concluded by one single Vote only, That
the foresaid longer Paper should not be Read, And that the abovenamed Persons
should be Received, etc. As the Act Declares, There is a great Difference
betwixt the Voting that it should not be Read, and Voting that it should not be
Read for these Reasons of the Overtures. A second is, That it appears we are
received into the Communion of this Church, upon no Terms condemnatory of, or
contradictory unto our former Testimony; But only on the Terms of Submission
and Subjection contained in the Shorter Paper; Which shorter Paper did
introduce our Testimony and obliged us to Submission and Subjection after the
Exhibition of it; And therefore the Submission could not be contrary to it.

But now to conclude, with a hint at our Motives, that induced us to this
Union, which may be as variously misconstructed and misrepresented as our
design was, in applying to the Assembly for it, and as the manner and effect of
that application was, the mistakes whereof are touched above. We can with some
singleness of Heart say, as far as Infirmity or Corruption may allow, that we
were not induced to it, from any Carnal motive, or for any selfish end: It was
not any lucrative prospect of outward Profits or Emoluments in Settlements, or
Anxiety for provision, that prompted us to it: Neither was it the alluring
Pleasures of Peace and Ease, and the expectation of better Accomodations, then
we could have in an unsettled Lot, or Impatience under the inconveniences
thereof, that persuaded us to it: Nor was it the hope of airy honor and
popular Applause which we had in greater measure, and with greater noise, as we
stood before, and which we could not well expect by Svbmission, but rather the
contrare; Tho to get the honor of being Peaceable and Faithful, and the
Blessing of Peacemakers, was truly the matter of our Ambition: Nor was it any
provocation from, or dissatisfaction with that part of the Lords People, with
whom we had sweet fellowship, that tempted us to join with these, from whom
they and we, were disjoined before: Nor was it any Levity of Mind, Inconstancy
of Judgment, or change of Principles, that moved us to this Union and
Submission: For tho there had been such a change of Thoughts about these
thornie Points, upon which our Differences and Divisions were stated; yet as in
that case, we, who require such plainness of Confession, in others, could not
but think our selves obliged to declare such a Change in some open Recantation,
So it would not have been our shame to Confess our Errors. Our Sentiments are
shallow, and changeable, as other Men's, having the imperfection of Mutability,
as well as Fallibility, common to all, in this side of time; nevertheless it
was not any change of Sentiments, but only change of providential
Circumstances, that made us now submit, and not before. For as we adhere to our
Testimony, exhibited to the Venerable Assembly, and to the substance of all our
former Testimouies; so we know no Truth or Duty, that ever we asserted or
contended for, but what we think, we could Seal with our Blood, if we were
called to it: And we know no Corruption, Defection, or Sin, that ever we
witnessed against, or withdrew from, but what we would yet contend against, and
withdraw from, in the same manner, if we were in the same Circumstances, and
yet think our selves obliged to contend and witness against, but not in a
divided way, but in a way of Order and Union; according to the Apostles way of
the Spirits of the Prophets being subject to the Prophets.

Our True and Sincere Motives then, inducing us to Union and Submission, which
in these Circumstances, had such force on our Consciences, that we durst not
resist for a World, were these.

I. It was ever our Judgment, that Union and Communion is necessary among the
People of GOD, when ever it can be attained, or entertained without Sin: In
that Case, at all times Opinionum varietas, and opinantium Vnitas, may well
consist. Which Truth is founded upon Scripture Precepts, Promises, and
Precedents, Commanding, Confirming, and Commending the Duties of mutual Love,
Reconciliation, Peace, Union, and Communion, among the People of GOD, even when
there were several Dissentions, Faintings, Faillings, Offenses, Corruptions,
and Defections, among them, in several circumstances, nowayes involving the
Joyners in sin. But so it is, in the present circumstances; We may have such
Union and Communion, without partaking of their guilt, with whom we join. For
the sins and scandals that scarred us from this benefit, in times of defection
and division, are so far happily removed and antiquated, that they are neither
established in the Constitution of the Church, nor ratified and approven in
Acts of Assembly, nor persisted in by present Administrations, nor any way
affecting Ministerial Exercises; nor do they continue to be our Snares, and
Stumbling Blocks, either to involve us in the guilt of them, or to keep us
still jangling about them, and consequently must cease to be grounds of
Separation, There is now no part of the Presbyterian Ministry, that in
Ministerial Exercises is hampered with, or has any dependence on Exotic
Erastian Usurpations: None of their Meetings do now hold their Freedom from,
nor are modified by the Supremacy, or any encroaching power: And therefore in
our present Communion, we keep our selves free of all Participation with these
Corruptions now removed. And our Joining can not so much as be interpreted a
Submitting to, or Complying with any Defection directly or indirectly. Its
true, the guilt of these Defections remains, as long as they are not
acknowledged; but the establishment of them, the practice of them, the present
offense and tentation of them, does not remain. It remains to be their guilt,
that will not acknowledge them; and they that are convinced of the guilt of
them, and will not confess, so far as they are convinced, from searching the
Scriptures, and their own Conciences, show themselves no Friends to the
Churches peace. But if, because they will not hear, our Soul shall weep in
secret places, and as we are called, we do not omit a witness against these
Defections, the want of that Confession, through want of Conviction, of the
sinfulness of these Courses offending us, can neither be a Sin to us, nor a
ground of Separation, being only a difference of judgment, which we always
disclaimed to be a ground of withdrawing.

2 It was always our Judgment and Intention, that when ever Presbyterial
Government, in its Courts, Power, Order, and Freedom were established, we
should submit to it: Nay it was not only our resolution, but our Engagement, at
the Renewing of the Covenants, that we should not Separate From any part of the
Communion of the true Reformed Covenanted Church of Scotland, holding purely
and entirely, the Doctoine, Worship, Discipline and Government of the same, in
Principle and Exercise, according to the Rules of Christ, and standing Acts and
Constitutions of this Churth. And that then we should study to maintain Union
and Communion, in Truth and Duty, with all the Ministers and Members of this
Church, that do, And in so far as they do follow the Institutions of Christ.
And that when they return unto, and fix their ground on the old established
Foundations, according to the Word of God, and Constitutions of this Church
settled before the Covenanted Reformation stopped, we should then embrace and
maintain Union and Communion with them, and Submission to them in the LORD.
But so it is, that all the Ordinances of Christ are established in Purity and
Freedom. The Doctrine, is asserted, in the Confession of Faith, now ratified in
Parliament, and several controverted Truths formerly obscured by Calumnies, are
now victoriously vindicated. The Worship now, not Tolerated, but Established
and Authorized, and Administered in Purity, Plenty, and Peace; and the Lights of
the Church are no more hide under Beds or Bushells, but set and shinning on the
Candlestick, to give light to all that are in the House: And the Discipline and
Government Presbyterial is now restored to what it was anno 1592. Wherefore we
must needs return to our Ancient Union, Communion and Order, when the Church is
now returned to the enjoyment and establishment of her Ancient Constitutions,
when the Prelatick, Erastian, Antichristian and Tyrannical Usurpations on the
Churches Rights, and the Defections and Corruptions flowing therefrom and
introduced thereby are removed, And the Churches intrinsic Power and Capacity
to remove legally all remaining Offenses is restored and redintegrated, we
could not but submit our selves, and pay that deference to Ecclesiastic
Judicatories, fenced in the Name of our only Head and King Jesus Christ, as to
subject our selves to them. We never owned a division from the Church, but only
from a party carrying on defection, in a broken and declining State of the
Church, and therefore when the Church is not now in that State, but recovering
her freedom from these breaches and backslidings, we could not now maintain
such a division. As long as they were involved in, and promoting courses of
Deformation, we stood aloof, but now when they are promoting Reformation, in
asserting the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, and opposing
Popery, Prelacy, Erastianism, Sectarianism, and what is contrare to sound
Doctrine, and the power of Godliness, we could not but join with them. Its true
several Corruptions yet remain unreformed, as some of the former are not
condemned: But as all those Corruptions, on which we founded our Separation,
because of the hazard of our partaking of the guilt of them, are removed; So we
could not suspend our Union and Communion, until those that remain should be
Reformed, and the former Condemned, but rather thought it expedient to Unite,
that they may be the soonner Reformed; as it is more probable we may sooner
obtain a Reformation of the present, and a Condemnations of past Corruptions in
an United way, then in a Divided way. Its foolish to expect the Church can be
settled without Corruptions, all at once, in one Day or one Year, but must
crave time, as the building of Solomon's Temple, and the second Temple, after
the Babylonish Captivity, which was not accomplished in several years: Nor can
it be planted over again all at once, no more then in Joshuas days, or the
Judges, or in the time of the Reforming Kings of Judah, until the Canaanites,
and other Enemies be subdued; Nor can it be purged totally altogether, but
gradually, lest it be in hazard of a Superpurgation.

3. It was ever our Judgment, that Division was a great Misery, and when
Unnecessary and Unseasonable, a great Sin: And even when we could not avoid it,
we were weary of it, and Longed and Prayed for a time of healing, and an
opportunity of bringing it to a Close. But if ever there was a time, when
Division was a Misery and a Sin, because Unnecessary and Unseasonable, now it
is; And if ever there was an opportunity of healing, now there is: When the
Causes and Occasions of our Divisions are removed and antiquated; When the
Object of them, is so far altered that the providence of this day, call and
encourage, all Divided Parties among Presbyterians to contend together for the
common Reformation against the Common Adversary. When the sad effects of them
have made all the Godly weary of them; And the future effects of their
Continuance at this time more to be feared then ever, when the wicked
Contrivances of Enemies to Divide and Destroy the Church, and hinder its
Reformation, are so many and mighty; When Errors and Ignorance making the
People a prey, are so abounding: When also the proper Remedy of them is now in
our offer, having a Nail granted to us in the holy place to set up the House of
our God, and to repair the Desolations thereof, by access to Assemblies: And
when things are now come so such a Chock and Crisis, that if there be not
present application of the Remedy, and some Endeavors used for Union, now in
the tide of it, the breach in all probability will grow wider, and more
incurable. When we considered both the Mercies of the times, the Matters of
praise, bringing forth so many considerable Advantages to the Cause, and our
selves, we could not but think our selves called to another Work, than breaking
what God is healing, and retarding the Work by our Divisions: And when we
considered the Miseries of the times, and matters of Mourning, the Past and
Present Causes and Effects of the Lords anger, burning up and like to consume
this Church and Kingdom, we could not but see other work shapen out to us, than
this biting and devouring one another, when the Lord in his holy Judgments,
and the Antichristian Party, in their wicked designs are threatening to devout
us all.

4. We were always of the opinion, that Holy Union, was a necessary duty, and
comfortable Blessing, being so frequently Commanded, Commended, Promised, and
Prayed for as a Blessing, and the want of it, threatened and lamented as a
Misery in Scripture: And as we always prayed for it, and longed for it, and
bemoaned the miss of it, so we always desired that it should be, and waited
until we obtained access to get it qualified as the Scripture requires it, that
it might be both happy and holy, and as Aarons precious Ointment, that ran down
to the skirts of his Garments, composed according to Divine Art, made up, not
of carnal and corrupt politics, in a sinful Confederacy or Conspiracy for
Defection, but composed of Gospel Simples, by the wisdom, which is from above,
first pure, then peaceable, that it might be in the Lord, and for the Lord, in
Truth and Holiness, having pure Love for its motive, Bond and Beauty, Christ
for its Foundation, and His Word for its Rule. But tho we could not get every
thing in this present Union, that might make it Comfortable and Acceptable to
all, nor every thing removed, that is Gravaminous, and impairs its Comfort; Yet
we know nothing in the matter of it, which is offensive, upon the account of
its sinfulness. For it will abide the trial of these repuired Qualifications:
It is not an Union of Confederacy in Compliance with wicked Usurpations, but in
subjection to the Churches Intrinsic Power and in the use and enjoyment of the
Churches Liberties: It is not an Union of Conspiracy in Deformation, but in
Endeavors to promote Reformation: It is not an Union in, or with, or under
Prelacy, Supremacy, or Tyranny, Indulgence, or Toleration etc. but in, and
with, and under Presbyterial Government, which is an holy ordinance of Christ.
It is not an Union, that obstructs any Duty, foregoes any Truth, or involves us
in any sin: It is not an Union with sin, tho it be of Sinners with Sinners, now
mutually returned to their Common Duties. All the Common Rules of approven
Union agree in this: There is no ground of Division standing, which could
warrant a breach, if there had been none before, and therefore there is no
ground to continue it in the present circumstances. There is nothing in it, to
involve us, in the guilt of past or present sins of the time. There is nothing
in it, obliging us to condemn Duty or justify sin, or restraining us from any
Duty, we are called to. We were neither required to justify defections, nor to
Condemn our Testimonies against them; Nor to subscribe to any sinful
Imposition, in the terms of Communion, putting us in hazard of partaking with
any sin. On the Contrare, we were allowed to exhibit our Remonstrance and
Testimony, against all the past or present Corruptions, stumbling to us. And no
other Basis is stated, whereupon we Unite, but the Word of God, Confessions of
faith, Books of Discipline Acts of General Assemblies, National and Solemn
Covenants, and the whole Contexture of the ancient Order of this Church.

5. We always thought indeed a Testimony was needful, against all the
defections of the time, and that this was not to be receded from nor buried in
oblivion; We are of the same mind still. And if Union could not have been
obtained, on any other terms, than such as imposed the receding from, or
condemning of our former Testimony against Defections, we would neither have
sought it, nor embraced it. But as the particular Testimony, of every time, in
several respects must change with the times, according as the Enemies of Truth
change their assaults and Weapons against it, and defections from it,
perversions of it, and contradictions to it, do vary. And as it can never be
buried so long as all Truths and Duties are witnessed for, and errors and sins
are witnessed against by us, in our respective stations; And nothing is
condemned by us, that was approved before, nor approved that was Condemned
before, and there is no Engagement to forebear any Duty: So having been allowed
to exhibit our Testimony to an Assembly, in a more public manner, than ever
we had access before, and being not required nor resolved, to alter the matter
of our Testimony, only the manner of it by Separation; We think our present
Union and Submission, is so far from burying our Testimony against defections,
that it tends much for its honor, to give occasion of recording it, that such
a People continued it always, under all discouragements and difficulties,
while deffections stood; But as soon as ever they found themselves in any
Capacity to join with the Ministry without sin, they had such respect to the
Ordinances, and the peace of the Church, that they would no longer Separate,
notwithstanding all former provocations. On the other hand we think to continue
Division and Separtion at the time, would tend rather to the Scandal and
Reproach of all our former witnessings, than to the strengthening of the same,
for it might verify what used to be alleged against us, that we maintained
such principles as would dissolve all Union and Order in the world. The best
Confutation of which reproach, is now to make the contrare appear, by Union, as
soon as ever we have gor a fond for it. Which now there is, when we have all
one common Testimony against Papery, Prelacy, Erastianisme, Tyranny and
Schism, and every thing contrary to sound Doctrine, and the Power of Godliness.

PEACE be within JERVSALEMS WALLS, and PROSPERITY within her PALACES.
FINIS.

