AN ACCOUNT of the late VIOLENCE committed by some Soldiers upon the General
Assembly OF THE KIRK OF SCOTLAND.

Printed in the Year, 1653.

A LETTER.
THe last Wednesday being the twentieth of July 1653. was the saddest day that
ever I saw on Earth, and I thought not that any that calls themselves Reformed
Christians and Covenanters, would have Enterprized such an Act. It was the day
of the meeting of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, at which Mr
David Dickson did Expound in the Gal. 2. and taught on 2 Cor. chapter 13. verse. 11.
Mr Robert Douglas taught afternoon on 1 Cor. 12.25, 26, 27. both of them very
holily, prudently and honestly, for healing our Rents. After these Sermons
about four of the Clock, the General Assembly met in the usual place; and
immediately after prayers conceived by Mr Dickson the last Moderator, there came
in one Lieutenant Colonel Cotterel, and Captain Cliftown Captain of the Castle
of Edenborough, and another Captain with them, whose name I know not. The
Lieutenant Colonel standing upon a bench, said with a loud voice, Gentlemen, I
am commanded to ask you by what Authority you sit here: If you have none from
the Parliament, Commander in Chief, or Judges, you are to go with me. Now at
this time he had some Musketteers at the door of the House within the Church,
and some Horse and Foot about the Church: Mr Dickson desired all that were in
the house and not Members of the Meeting, to remove, that they might give a
discreet Answer to the Gentleman that spoke. After all removed, Mr Dickson
said, We sit here by the Authority of Jesus Christ, and by the Law of this
Land, Whereby we are Authorized to keep General Assemblies from year to year,
according to the several Acts of Parliament, and every Assembly meets by the
Appointment of the Former. The Lieutenant Colonel required them to arise and
go with him presently, or else he would make them rise on other terms. Mr
Dickson desired time to call the Rols to constitute the Assembly, and appoint
the next Diet. By this time some Musketteers with fired matches entered the
House; whereupon Mr Dickson prayed, and in time of Prayer the Commanders
aforesaid kept on their Hats, and one of them spoke all the time; the Prayer
was short: Mr Dickson protested that this violent raising of the Assembly
should not hinder the next meeting to be at such a time and place as he should
think meet to appoint at a fitting opportunity; whereupon they were forced to
rise, and as they went out at doors were guarded about with Foot and Horse, the
Officers going before: They went up the West Bow, and down the Bow to the
West-Gate, and from thence to Brunsfield-Linkes, and there they took up all
their Names, and gave Orders to them to go to their own homes at the nearest;
and not return to the Town: But when some told him that their way was through
the City, and all of them had something to do there: He commanded them that
returned to the City, to give up their own names and the names of their
Lodgings to the Captain of the Guard that night at seven of the Clock, and to
depart the City to morrow by eight a Clock in the morning at their peril; and
that no three of them should meet together; Whereupon M. Dickson again
protested to the purpose aforesaid: It would have grieved any Christian soul to
see the Members of that Grave Assembly so disgracefully carried through a great
part of the City and Suburbs. Especially Reverend M. Dickson late Moderator,
and to have heard the Groans and Sighs that were among the People for the
violence done to the Highest Court of Christ in Scotland; Yet in this time and
all the next day the Remonstrators or Protestors against the decliners of the
Assembly sat in the West-Kirk without any to raise them, but on Thursday at
night a Proclamation was made at the Market-Crosse, that all Lords, Lairds, and
Ministers should depart the City by too morrow at eight a Clock, except such as
had to do in the Laws, or before the Judges, or could give other necessary
cause of their stay: By whose instigation this was done God will bring to light
in his good time, but the Order is under Colonel Lilburn's hand: We expected
better things at their hands who swore sincerely, really, and constantly
through the grace of God in their several places and callings, the
preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government, then to overturn our Discipline and
Government. As for my self I found the word of 2 Chronicles. 20.6. made very lively
and sensible to me; and I got great liberty to pray and believe accordingly.

God is Just, and will not forget a broken Covenant, He will be a speedy
witness against Covenant-breakers, but in his own time, which is best, and
till then here is the Patience and Faith of the Saints.

FINIS.

