ANOTHER BLOODY FIGHT AT SEA Upon the Coast of Cornwall, on Sunday the 13. of
this instant June; between the Parliaments Fleet commanded by Sir George
Ayscue; and the French and Dutch Navies, commanded by the Lord Admiral
Chasti^lon.

With the particulars of the fight; the manner of the Engagement; the great
loss on both sides; and the number or ships sunk and taken.

Also, the advance of Van-Trump toward the North; and Fifty of the Parliaments
Men of War gone after to fight him: With the sinking of Captain Tailor; and the
number of English ships taken by Captain Bradshaw.

London, Printed for George Horton, 1652.

Another bloody Fight at Sea between the English, French, and Dutch, upon the
Coast of Cornwall, on Sunday the 13th of this instant June, 1652. With the
particulars of the Fight, the manner of the Engagement, and great execution
done on both sides.
SIR,
ON the Twelfth of this instant June, 1652. there happened another great and
bloody Fight within three Leagues of this place, between the Parliaments ships,
under the immediate conduct and command of Sir George Ayscue; and the French
and Dutch Fleet commanded by Vice Admiral Chastillon: the manner thus: Sir
George Ayscue having received advertisements of about 30 Sail of ships, that
were coasting the Western channel, resolved forthwith to weigh anchor and make
after them: in order whereunto, he hosted sail from Plymouth Bay on the
eleventh instant and, having a fair gale of wind, about six of the clock the
next day in the afternoon, made a discovery of a great Fleet near Pendennis
Peer: whereupon he sent forth the Eagle Frigate, to demand what they were, and
from whence bound; who answered, That they were to give an account to none, but
the Lord Admiral Vantrump, from whom they had received both their Commission,
Power, and Instructions: Then they were commanded to strike sail; but
peremptorily refused to yield obedience thereunto, saying, That they were
resolved rather to die, then be guilty of violating the least point of honor:
Whereupon Sir George gave them a salute with one broad side; which was
answered: Then he fitted his ship for the second broad side, and fired on him,
but was again answered by the Admiral, who bore up his Helm, and stood before
the wind: whereupon another of the Parliaments ships coming up to him,
presented him with two broad sides, and laid him aboard the star-board; which
the enemy perceiving, blew up the Upper-Decks; so that the English were
enforced to desert her, with some loss: But upon Sir Georges tacking about the
third time, he presented them with a Volley of threescore Guns, which did great
execution, both above Decks, and between wind and water; for soon after she
sunk, and about one hundred men were drowned.

The sight whereof caused great astonishment to the French and Dutch; who, by
reason of the near approach of the night, declined engagement; till the next
morning about five of the clock, where an exceeding sharp dispute happened, and
continued for the space of seven hours, which was performed with great
gallantry on both sides; till at last, after many hundreds of shot, it pleased
the Divine Power of Heaven to crown the English with Victory, and to vanquish
their Enemies: for, of these thirty sail, not seven got off from being
exceedingly rent and torn; five were taken, and three sunk; but not without
some loss: there being five (at present) missing. The Enemy was at least three
to one; yet so gallant a Resolution do the English retain, that they dare
attempt to fight upon any disadvantage.

We hear that Captain Bradshaw (the great Pyrat) does much annoy the English
upon the Irish Seas, and that he has lately taken four or five Vessels, and
chased some others into Port-Patrick. Many other Pirates there are, who do
exceedingly infest those parts.

Michael Mount 17. June, 1652.
From the Downs we have received intelligence, That the Hollander is very busy
upon the North Seas, in catching of Herrings; and Van-Trump has sent a great
Fleet to them to secure and convoy them: Whereupon, General Blake having notice
thereof, immediately gave instructions to Major Bourn, to hasten after with
fifty sail, so that if they meet, a great engagement is expected.

Great are the preparation of both States for the defense of both Nations,
notwithstanding the present Treaty between the Parliament and the Lord
Ambassadors; and diverse ships (by express command from the Council) are ordered
to expedite out of the River to the Downs, and those that want provisions, and
other necessaries, are suddenly to be supplied from other shipping. Yet
notwithstanding, a happy Reconciliation is much desired, and a firm peace and
union settled: For effecting whereof, the sum of one hundred thousand pounds are
proffered to the Parliament of England by the States of Holland, in reference
to their Liberties, Freedom, and Fishing. But it is given out, that the
Parliament demands for future security, the rendition of Brill, flushing, and
certain other Garrison Towns, for the placing in of English Garrisons, and
preventing of future differences.

We hear that upon some further action between the English and the Hollander,
that Captain Tailors ship is sunk, together with the great James; the truth
whereof, I dare not affirm, conjecturing it to be only a Rumor: Many of the
Dutchmen are exceedingly inclining to peace and unity; but on the contrary
part, others there are, who thirst after blood: but whether such as may or
shall foment this division, do not act the policy of the Wolf in the fable,
that persuaded the sheep to give over their Mastives? Or, if Venice may not
unproperly be called the signet on Neptunes right hand: and whether England and
the Netherlands being in a straight Confederacy, may not be styled his two
arms. Again, whether your Maiden-Towns, as you call them, may not long enjoy
that Title under the alliance of England, who has many as rich and beautiful
Harbors, as of France, that cannot justly brag of the like plenty, or
convenience for situation? But for this, as all good things else, let glory,
honor, and praise be given to God.

The Report concerning the James being sunk, is fabulous: And the Tiger
(commanded by Captain Peacock) being for some time missing, is with safety come
up to the Fleet; and has brought in three Dutch Prizes.

FINIS.

