The ANSWER of a LETTER from a FRIEND, Concerning ELECTIONS for the Ensuing
CONVENTION.
SIR,
TO Answer Yours, without repeating, that the Prince, by his Circular Letters,
has recommended our Elections to all Burgesses, cannot be looked upon as any
Infringment or Diminution of our Liberties and Privileges; Seeing that you
know, that all our Liberties and Privileges, whither by Custom, or express
Acts, are given to the Burgh it self, and only to its Magistrates, in any Case,
as Representing the Burgh: But this has be^n a great part of the unhappiness
of our late times, that what has been allowed to the Magistrates, as
representing, and in behalf of the Burgh, they have assumed to themselves, as
their own Property, and thereby distinguished themselves from the Body of the
Burgesses, as their Masters, rather then their Representors: Now it being
evident that it is the Privilege of the Burgh to choose it is own Magistrates,
according to the Agreement called the Set, as also to choose and send
Commissioners to Conventions and Parliaments; And it being evident, that the
Burgh has for several years been deprived of the Liberty of choosing their own
Magistrates, by having Persons imposed upon them by Court Letters, at pleasure,
and the present Set of Magistrates and Council, being still (whatever may be
pretended of a little Formality of Freedom in the last Election) of this Court
and Arbitrary Composition, what could be more just, than that since our
Magistrates and Counsel, to whom in the Ordinary course, the Electing for
Conventions and Parliaments, has been allowed in behalf of the Burgh, are not
now our Magistrates and Council, that is to say, of our pure and free Election,
but the Courts, The Call we have got to this Convention should be directed to
the Body of Burgesses, to whom the Privilege of sending to Conventions is
principally given, and not to our Magistrates and Council; since in effect they
are not Ours, nor can be called our Representors: And by this, you may also
understand, that seeing they ly under this just Prejudice, as not to be allowed
to Elect in the Ordinary Way, they can yet far less pretend that any of them
should be Elected, whatever the former use was. But the Truth is, Elections at
all times ought to be free; and if any of the Magistrates pretend an Interest
in them as a Property, it is an abuse which now they should be made to
understand by a just disappointment. And to enlarge a little this Reflection,
is it not the blessing of the Prince's coming that we be relieved of former
imposings, and restored to our Liberties; and has he not already, for that end
freed our Elections of all the Limitations of Oaths and Engagements, whereby
formerly they were restrained; seeing then it is certain that it has been by
these Oaths and Engagements, that Good men has been secluded from the
Magistracy, and a Knot of Men got into the Possession of it for many years,
who viis and modis, too well known, whether in Latin or English, have
appropriated it to their own Caball, to the enriching of themselves, and
ruining of the Town; what can be more reasonable and agreeable to the Mercy
that God offers, then that we should lay aside that whole Gang, and choice men
incorrupt and untainted with their Practices. And to proceed, since the Prince
has already set us upon the true Foot, in order to the restoring of our
Liberties, and that now all Burgesses are equally called, as well as concerned
in the Election* it is further evident that whatever course the Magistrates, in
Possession, may lay down for keeping of Order in the manner of Electing, every
Burgess has an interest to inspect it; And whatever List the Magistrates do
make of Electors, and in whatsoever manner, every Burgess may be present to
remark that he may object in due time; seeing otherwise by bringing in of men
that are no Burgesses for Electors, he may be deprived of all the benefit
intended for him; But this is so plain from reason it self and the parity of
the Act of Parliament, concerning the Elections of Shires, whereby all the
Electors are ordained to make, Revise, and alter their Lists, that it were
needless to insist on it. And therefore all Burgesses ought undoubtedly either
to have free Access to the observing of the making of the Lists, or at least,
the List ought to be timously published before the day of Elections that every
man may know his Coelectors, and be in case to Object against such as have no
Interest to be there; and when both these are done, the Electors have still a
further privilege of demanding a pole, wherein men are not to be barely
numbered, but every one to be impartially questioned and examined by Persons
appointed by both sides. By which things I hope ye may rest well satisfied,
that all the concern of the Neighbors that bestirr themselves in this matter,
is to assert and restore the Liberties and Privileges of the Burgh, and no
ways either to Violate or Usurp them. But men, who have found it their Interest
in Times past to Inhance and Usurp at Pleasure may now cry out of Faction, and
endeavor to Prepossess the weaker sort, as if these who intend to deliver the
Town from their Dominion, were seeking it to themselves: But let all honest
Neighbors in the sense of GOD 'S Mercy, and the just Consideration of their
own Rights and Privileges, Examine things as they are, and concure as they
ought to do: Then both you and I may be most assured, that they will find
nothing intended, but the good of the Burgh and Kingdom, and the entire
satisfaction of all honest Men.

Farewell.

