THE Form of Consecration OF A Church or Chapel. And Of the Place of Christian
Burial.

Exemplified By the R. R. F. in God LANCELOT Late Lord-Bishop of Winchester, In
the Consecration of the Chapel of JESUS in the foresaid Diocese.

LONDON, Sold by T. Garthwait at the little North-door of S. Paul's. 1659.

portrait of Lancelot Andrews Dog of Ecclesiae The Forme-of CONSECRATION of a
CHVRCH or Chapel, and of the place of Christian Buryall,

Exemplified, by the R. R. F. in God. LANCEL. ANDREWS late L. Bishop of
Winchester.



To the Christian Readers.
THat some Memorial might be transmitted to Posterity of the Piety of the
Church of England, and of the religious care of our Reverend Fathers, in
seperating select and special places, such are Churches, Chapels, and
Oratories, for the Public Service of God, and Celebration of the Divine
Mysteries, here is presented to you, Christian Readers, a Form of Consecration
drawn up by the Right Reverend Father in God, Lancelot, late Lord Bishop of
Winchester; a person of so great learning and piety; and therefore justly of
eminency and honor, not only in this National, but also in the Catholic
Church of God, where He is admired by all judicious and Knowing-persons, for
his most excellent Sermons, acute Discourses, and pious Devotions, That the
Publisher hereof makes no question, but he shall hereby do an acceptable
Service to the Church of God, and in some measure stop the mouths of the
profane Novelists, who never more then now, shoot out their arrows, even bitter
words, Ps. 64.3. against such H. Places, as by the Word of God, and Prayer are
solemnly dedicated and set apart with religious Ceremonies, to the alone
worship and Service of Almighty God.

It is not his intent to draw either end of the Saw of contention, to justify
the Consecration of Churches in general, or this Form in particular; as being
well assured that nothing can be rationally objected against the One or the
Other, but what has either been long since answered by the invincible hand of
the judicious Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity; or will fall flat on
his face, as Dagon before the Ark, at the very mention of the great name of the
renowned and victorious Bishop of Winchester; against whom neither of the
Factions betwixt which the Church of England has been Crucified, as her
blessed Savior between the two Thieves, has been ever stirring hand or
tongue, but like the Soldiers, which came to apprehend our Lord, they went
backward, and fell to the ground.

This said, He recommends it to the Public benefit, not without some
confidence that it may, by the blessing of God, have some influence and
operation on the stony hearts, and iron hands of the Sacrilegious generation of
them; Who roar in the Congregations, and set up their banners for tokens; of
them, who break down all the carved work thereof with axes and hammers; of them,
who have set fire upon the Holy places, and have defiled the dwelling places of
Gods name, even to the ground; Ps. 74; Of them, who say, Let us take to our
selves the Houses of God in possession; of them, who have cast their heads
together, and are confederate against them. But if not, sperabo autem and adhuc
meliora, let them beware of the Psalmists imprecation, O my God, make them like
unto a wheel; and as the stubble before the wind. Psalm. 83. Which curse that
by timely repentance it may be prevented, is another ground of the publication
hereof; and a part of his daily prayers who promoted the Impression, with the
longings of St. Paul. Romans 10.1. Brethren, my hearts desire, and prayer to God
for our Israel is, that they may be saved.

May 29. 1659.
A Note of the Reverence given to the Worship of God in the Israelites Ordering
their Troops, out of Sr. Walter Raleghs History, Book 2. Part 1. Cap. 5.. 1.
page 249. Edit. 1648.
THis was the Order of the Army of Israel and of their incamping, etc. The
Tabernacle of God being always set in the middle and center thereof The
Reverend care which Moses the prophet and Chosen servant of God had in all that
belonged even to the outward and least parts of the Tabernacle, Ark and
Sanctuary, witnessed well the inward and most humble zeal borne toward God
himself. The industry used in the framing thereof, and every the least part
thereof; the curious Workmanship thereon bestowed, the exceeding charge and
expense in the provisions, the dutiful observance in the laying up and
preserving the Holy vessels, the solemn Removing thereof, the vigilant
Attendance thereon, and the provident defense of the Same, which all Ages have
in some degree imitated, is now so forgotten in this superfine Age by those of
the Family, by the Anabaptist, Brownist and other Sectaries as all cost and
care bestowed and had of the Church wherein God is to be served and worshipped
is accounted a kind of Popery and as proceeding from an Idolatrous disposition,
in so much as time would soon bring to pass (if it were not resisted) that
God would be turned out of Churches into Barns, and from thence again into the
Fields and Mountains, and under the hedges; and the Offices of the ministry
(robbed of all dignity and respect) be as contemptible as those places; All
Order, Discipline and Church Government, left to Newness of Opinion and men's
fancies: yea and soon after as many kinds of Religions would spring up as there
are Parish Churches in England, every contentious and ignorant person clothing
his fancy with the Spirit of God and his imagination with the gift of
Revelation, in so much as when the Truth, which is but one, shall appear to the
simple multitude, no less variable then contrary to it self, the Faith of men
will soon after dye away by degrees and all Religion be held in scorn and
contempt, etc.

Consecratio CAPELLAE JESV, ET COEMETERII, PER LANCE LOTVM Episcopum Winton.
JVxta Southamptoniensem villam Ecclesia Beatae Mariae collapsa cernitur, solis
Cancellis ad sacros usus superstitibus: paucae aliquot aedes ibi in propinqua
part numerantur; coetera Parochianorum multitudo hinc inde sparsim inhabitant
in villis, tum loci longinquo intervallo, tum aestuario long periculoso divisi
ab Ecclesia. Ex ea accedendi difficultate non profanae modo plebeculae animos
facile invasit misera negligentia atque dispretio divini cultus, sed and viri
proli sedulique pietatis cultores remoram in trajectu saepe experti sunt, haud
ipso quidem: capitum discrimine eluctabilem; consortem hujus infortunii cum se
factum sentiret (dum ibi loci familiam poneret) Vir ^renuus Richardus Smith
Armiger, heroicos plane animos gestans, atque inspiratos de Coelo, commune hoc
Religionis dispendium privatis quingentarum aliquot librarum expensis (aut plus
eo) redemit, and Capellam egregiam, quam Deo divinisque officiis dicari supplex
vovet, in altera part fluminis magnifice extruit.

Spectato probatoque Capellae hujus Jesu omni adparatu, adest tandem
Reverendissimus in Christo Pater, Honorandissimus Lancelotus, Episcopus
Wintoniensis, Septembris 17o. Anno 1620. hora ectava matutina aut circiter;
erat autem dies Dominicus: Episcopus Capellam statim ingressus induit se
pontificalibus, quem secuti itidem (qui ipsi a sacris domesticis aderant,)
Matthaeus and Christopherus Wren, SS. Theol. Bacc. Saecerdotalibus induuntur;
Egressus dein cum illis Episcopus, convenarum magna stipante caterva,
Fundatorem affari orditur in haec fere verba.

Captain Smith, you have been an often and earnest Suitor to me, that I would
come hither to you: now that we are come hither to you, what have you to say to
us?

Tum ille praefata humillime Reverentia schedulam porrigit, quam suo nomine
recitari cupit per Willielm. Cole, qui Episcopo a Registris erat: eam ille (ad
nutum Episcopi) clara voce sic perlegit.

IN the Name of Richard Smith of Peertree in the County of Southampton Esquire,
Right Reverend Father in God, I present unto you the state of the Village of
Weston, and the Hamlets, Itchin, Wolston, Ridgeway, and the part of Bittern
Manor (being all of the Parish of S. Mary's, near Southampton in the Diocese
of Winton) as well in his own, as in the name of the Inhabitants of the said
Village, Hamlets, etc. wherein are many Households, and much people of all
sorts, who not only dwell far from the Church, but are also divided from the
same by the great River of Itchin, where the passage is very broad, and often
dangerous; and very many times on the days appointed for Common Prayer, and
that Service of God, so tempestuous, as the River cannot be passed; and so the
people go not over at all; or if any do, yet they both go and return back in
great danger, and sometimes not the same day. Besides, in the fairest weather,
at their return from Church, they press so thick into the Boat for haste home,
that often it proves dangerous, and ever fearful, especially to women with
child, old, impotent, sickly people, and to young children; many times also
they are forced to baptize their Children in private Houses, the water not
being passable; and when they lie sick, they are without comfort to their
souls, and dye without any Ghostly advice or counsel; their own Minister not
being able to visit them, by reason of the roughness of the water, and other
Ministers being some miles off remote from them.

And thus much formerly having been presented to your Predecessor, he
favorably gave leave to the said Richard Smith to erect a Chapel on the
East Side of the said River, at the only proper Cost and Charges of him the
said Richard Smith: which Chapel being now finished with intent and purpose
that it may be dedicated to the worship of God; and that his Holy and Blessed
Name might there be honored and called upon, by the said Richard Smith his
Family, and the Inhabitants aforesaid, who cannot without great danger pass
over unto their Parish Church, I, in the name of the said Richard Smith, and in
the names of them all, do promise hereafter to refuse and renounce to put this
Chapel, or any part of it, to any profane or common use whatsoever; and desire
it may be dedicated and consecrated wholly and only to religious uses, for the
Glory of God, and the Salvation of our Souls.

In which respect he humbly beseeches God to accept of this his sincere intent
and purpose, and he and they are together humble Suitors unto your Lordship, as
Gods Minister, the Bishop and Ordinary of this Diocese, in Gods stead to accept
of this his Free Will offering; and to decree this Chapel to be severed from
all common and profane uses, and so to sever it: as also by the Word of God and
Prayer, and other Spiritual and Religious Duties to dedicate and consecrate it
to the sacred Name of God, and to his Service and Worship only; promising that
we will ever hold it as an holy Place, even as Gods House, and use it
accordingly; and that we will from time to time, and ever hereafter, as need
shall be, see it conveniently repaired, and decently furnished in such sort as a
Chapel ought to be; And that we will procure us some sufficient Clerk, being
in the Holy Order of Priesthood by your Lordship, as Ordinary of that place,
and by your Successors to be allowed and licenced, and unto him to yield
competent Maintenance, to the end that he may take upon him the Cure of the
said Chapel; and duly say divine Service in the same at times appointed, and
perform all other such offices and duties, as by the Canons of that Church, and
the Laws of the Realm every Curate is bound to perform.

Post haec Episcopus.

Captain Smith is this the Desire of you and your Neighbors?

Quo affirmato, Ille:

In the Name of God let us begin.

Orditur igitur a Psalmo 24o

THe earth is the Lords, and all that is therein, etc.

Alterni vero respondent uterque Sacellanus; and sic deinceps ad finem Psalmi:
dicta autem (...), paulatim se promovet Episcopus ad portam Capellae, atque
recitat e Psalmo 122o.

I Was glad when they said unto me, we will go into the House of the Lord. Our
feet shall stand in thy Gates, O Jerusalem.

Substitit itaque prae foribus universa multitudo intrante Episcopo et
Fundatore, cum Sacellanis, qui genua statim flectunt, ubi spectari commode
audirique possint a plebe: atque Episcopus infit.

Let us dedicate and offer up unto God this Place with the same prayer that
King David did dedicate and offer up his: 1 Chronicles. 29.10.

BLessed be thou O Lord our God, and the God of our Fathers for ever and ever,
etc. usque ad finem verse. 18. paucis mutatis. Deinde

MOst glorious God, the Heaven is thy Throne, and the Earth is thy Footstool;
what house then can be built for thee, or what place is there that thou can
rest in? Howbeit we are taught by thy Holy Word, that thy will is not to dwell
in the dark Cloud, but that thy delight has bin ever with the Sons of Men; so
that in any place whatsoever, where two or three are gathered together in thy
name, thou art in the midst of them; But specially in such places as are set
apart and sanctified to thy name, and to the memory of it, there thou have
said, thou will vouchsafe thy gracious Presence after a more special manner,
and come to us and bless us.

Wherefore in all Ages of the world, thy Servants have separated certain places
from all profane and common uses, and hallowed unto thy Divine Worship and
service, either by inspiration of thy blessed Spirit, or by express Commandment
from thine own mouth.

By inspiration of thy holy Spirit. So did thou put into the heart of thy
Holy Patriarch Jacob to erect a stone in Bethel to be an house to thee, which
act of h^s thou did call for, and highly allow of.

By express Commandment from thine own mouth. So did Moses make thee the
Tabernacle of the Congregation in the Desert, which thou did honor by
covering it with a Cloud, and filling it with thy Glory. And after, when it
came into the heart of thy servant David to think it was in no wise fitting
that himself should dwell in an house of Cedar, and the Ark of God remain but
in a Tabernacle, thou did testify with thine own mouth, that in that David
was so minded to build a House to thy Name, it was well done of him, to be so
minded, though he built it not.

The material Furniture for which house though his Father plentifully prepared,
yet Solomon his Son built it and brought it to perfection. To which House thou
were pleased visibly to send fire from Heaven to consume the Sacrifice, and to
fill it with the Glory of thy presence before all the people.

And after, when for the sins of thy people that Temple was destroyed, thou
did by thy Prophets, Aggai and Zachary (by showing how inconvenient it was
that they should dwell in seeled houses, and let thy house lie waste) stir up
the spirit of Zorobabel, to build thee the second Temple anew: which second
House likewise by the fullness of the Glory of thy presence, thou did show thy
self to like and allow of.

Neither only were thou well pleased with such as did build thee these
Temples, but even with such of the people afterward, as being moved with Zeal
added unto their Temple, their Mother Church, lesser places of prayer, by the
names of Synagogues, in every Town thorowout the Land; for the Tribes to ascend
up to worship thee, to learn thy holy will and to do it. Which very Act of the
Centurion, to build thy people a Synagogue, thou did well approve and commend
in the Gospel.

And by the bodily presence of thy Son our Savior at the feast of the
Dedication, testified by S. John, did really well allow of, and do honor to
such devout Religious services, as we are now about to perform.

Which also by thy holy Word have taught us, that thine Apostles themselves,
and the Christians in their time, as they had houses to eat and drink in; so
had they also where the whole Congregation of the Faithful came together in one
place, which they expressly called Gods Church, and would not have it despised,
nor abused, nor eaten, nor drunken in, but had in great Reverence, being the
very place of their holy Assemblies.

By whose godly examples the Christians in all Ages successively have erected
and consecrated sundry godly houses, for the Celebration of Divine Service and
Worship (Monuments of their Piety and Devotion) as our eyes see this day.

We then as Fellow-Citizens with the Saints and of the Household of God, being
built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the head cornerstone, walking in the steps of their most holy Faith, and
ensuing the examples of these thy Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles have
together with them done the same work (I say) in building and dedicating this
house, as an habitation for thee, and a place for us to assemble and meet
together for the observation of thy Divine Worship, invocation of thy Name
reading, preaching and hearing thy most holy Word, administering thy most holy
Sacraments; and above all in thy most holy place, the very gate of Heaven upon
earth, as Jacob named it, to do the work of Heaven; to set forth thy most
worthy praise, to laud and magnify thy most glorious Majesty, for all thy
goodness to all men; especially to us of the Household of Faith. Accept
therefore we beseech thee, most gracious Father, of this our bounden duty and
service; accept this for thine house; and because Holiness becomes thine house
for ever, sanctify this house with thy gracious presence, which is erected to
the honor of thy most glorious Name.

Now therefore, arise O Lord, and come into this place of thy rest, thou and
the ark of thy strength; Let thine eye be open toward this House day and
night; Let thine ears be ready toward the prayers of thy children, which they
shall make unto thee in this place, and let thine heart delight to dwell here
perpetually: And whenever thy servants shall make to thee their petitions in
this House, either to bestow thy good graces, and blessings upon them, or to
remove thy punishments and judgments from them, hear them from Heaven thy
dwelling place, the Throne of the glory of thy Kingdom, and when thou hear
have mercy; and grant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that here and elsewhere thy
Priests may be clothed with Righteousness, and thy Saints rejoice in thy
Salvation.

And whereas both in the Old and New Testament thou have consecrated the
measuring out and building of a material Church, to such an excellent Mystery,
that in it is signified and represented the fruition of the joy of thy Heavenly
kingdom, we beseech thee that, in this material Temple made with hands, we may
so serve and please thee in all holy Exercises of Godliness and Christian
Religion, that in the end we may come to that thy Temple on high, even to the
holy places made without hands, whose Builder and Maker is God; so as when we
shall cease to pray to thee on Earth, we may with all those that have in the
like manner erected such places to thy Name, and with all thy Saints eternally
praise thee in the highest Heavens, for all thy goodness vouchsafed us for a
time here on earth, and laid up for us there in thy Kingdom for ever and ever;
and that for thy dear Sons sake, our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, to whom, etc.

Blessed Father, who have promised in thy holy Law, that in every place where
the remembrance of thy Name shall be put, thou will come unto us and bless us,;
according to that thy promise come unto us and bless us, who put now upon this
place the memorial of thy Name, by dedicating it wholly and only to thy Service
and Worship.

Blessed Savior, who in the Gospel, with thy bodily presence, did honor and
adorn the Feast of the dedication of the Temple; at this dedication of this
Temple unto thee be present also, and accept, Good Lord, and prosper the work
of our hands.

Blessed Spirit, without whom nothing is holy, no person or place is sanctified
aright, send down upon this place thy sanctifying power and grace, hallow it,
and make it to thee an holy habitation for ever.

Blessed and glorious Trinity, by whose Power, Wisdom and Love all things are
purged, lightened, and made perfect; enable us with thy Power, enlighten us
with thy Truth, perfect us with thy Grace, that both here and elsewhere
acknowledging the glory of thy eternal Trinity, and in the Power of thy Divine
Majesty worshipping the Unity, we may obtain to the fruition of the glorious
Godhead, Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity to be adored for ever.

God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost accept, sanctify, and
bless this place to the end whereunto, according to his own Ordinance, we have
ordained it, to be a Sanctuary to the most High, and a Church for the living
God: The Lord with his favor ever mercifully behold it, and so send upon it
his spiritual Benediction and Grace, that it may be the House of God to him and
the Gate of Heaven to us. Amen.

Haec precatus Episcopus Baptisterium adit, atque imposita manu ait,

REgard, O Lord, the Supplications of thy Servants, and grant that those
Children that shall be baptized in this Laver of the New birth, may be
sanctified and washed with the Holy Ghost; delivered from thy wrath, received
into the Ark of Christ's Church, receive herein the fullness of Grace, and ever
remain in the number of thy faithful and elect Children.

Suggestum dein:

GRant that thy Holy Word, which from this place shall be preached, may be the
savor of life unto life, and as good seed take root and fructify in the hearts
of all that shall hear it.

(...) quoque.

GRant that by thy Holy Word, which from this place shall be read, the hearers
may both perceive and know what things they ought to do, and also may have
Grace and Power to fulfill the same.

Sacram etiam Mensam.

GRant that all they that shall at any time partake at this Table the highest
blessing of all, thy Holy Communion, may be fulfilled with thy Grace and
Heavenly Benediction, and may to their great and endless Comfort obtain
Remission of their sins and all other Benefits of thy Passion.

Locum Nuptiarum.

GRant that such persons as shall be here joined together in the holy estate of
Matrimony by the Covenant of God, may live together in holy Love unto their
lives end.

Vniversum denique Pavimentum.

GRant to such bodies as shall be here interred, that they with us, and we with
them, may have our perfect consummation and bliss both in body and soul in
thine everlasting kingdom.

Tune flexis genibus ante sacram Mensam pergit porro.

GRANT that this place which is here dedicated to thee by our Office and
Ministry, may also be hallowed by the sanctifying power of thy holy Spirit, and
so for ever continue through thy Mercy, O blessed Lord God, who do live and
govern all things, world without end.

Grant as this Chapel is separated from all other common and profane uses, and
dedicated to those that be sacred only, so may all those be that enter into it.

Grant that all wandering thoughts, all carnal and worldly imaginations, may be
far from them; and all godly and spiritual cogitations may come in their
place, and may be daily renewed and grow in them.

Grant that those thy servants that shall come into this thy holy Temple, may
themselves be made the Temples of the Holy Ghost, eschewing all things contrary
to their profession, and following all such things as are agreeable to the same.

When they pray, that their prayers may ascend up into Heaven into thy
presence, as the Incense; and the lifting up of their hands be as the morning
sacrifice; purify their hearts, and grant them their hearts desire, sanctify
their spirits, and fulfill all their minds, that what they faithfully ask,
they may effectually obtain the same.

When they offer, that their Oblation and Alms may come up as a Memorial before
thee, and they find and feel that with such Sacrifices thou art well-pleased.

When they sing, that their souls may be satisfied as with marrow, and fatness,
when their mouth praises thee with joyful lips.

When they hear, that they hear not as the word of man, but as indeed it is the
Word of God, and not be idle Hearers, but Doers of the same.

Populus interea tacit ingressus in imis substitit, dum haec in Cancellis
agerentur; quibus finitis, seeds quisque suas jussi capessunt, atque ad
solennem Liturgiam Sacellani se parant.

Alter Sacellanorum coram sacra mensa venerans sic incipit.

IF we say, we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth, etc.

Confessionem, Absolutionem, Dominic. (...) recitant, etc. Psalmos canunt pro
tempore accommodos, Ps. 84.122. and 132. alternis respondente populo quibus
facultas erat and libri: Lectio prima definitur ex 28. Genes. a ver. primo ad
finem. Hymn. Te Deum, etc. Lectio secunda ex secundo capite S. Joh. a versu 13.
ad finem. Hymn. Psalm. 100.

I Believe in God, etc. and post usitatas Collectas hanc specialem addidit
Episcopus.

O Lord God, mighty and glorious, and of incomprehensible Majesty, thou fillest
Heaven and earth with the Glory of thy presence, and can not be contained
within any the largest compass, much less within the narrow walls of this
Room; yet forasmuch as thou have been pleased to command in thy holy Law, that
we should put the Remembrance of thy Name upon places, and in every such place
thou will come to us and bless us; we are here now assembled to put thy name
upon this place, and the Memorial of it, to make it thy house, to devote and
dedicate it for ever unto thee, utterly separating it from all worldly uses,
and wholly and only consecrate it to the invocation of thy glorious Name,
wherein supplications and intercessions may be made for all men; thy sacred
Word may be read, preached and heard; the Holy Sacraments, (the Laver of
Regeneration, and the Commemoration of the precious death of thy dear Son) may
be administered; thy Praise celebrated and sounded forth, thy people blessed by
putting thy Name upon them; we (poor and miserable creatures as we are) be
altogether unfit, and utterly unworthy to appoint any earthly thing to so great
a God; And I the least of all thy servants, no ways meet to appear before thee
in so honorable a service, yet being thou have often heretofore been pleased to
accept such poor offerings from sinful men, most humbly we beseech thee,
forgiving our manifold sins, and making us worthy by counting us so, to
vouchsafe to be present here among us in this religious action, and what we
sincerely offer graciously to accept at our hands, to receive the prayers of us
and all others, who either now or hereafter entering into this place, by us
hallowed, shall call upon thee; And give us all grace when we shall come into
the house of God, we may look to our feet, knowing that the place we stand on
is holy ground, bringing hither clean thoughts, and undefiled bodies, that we
may wash both our hearts and hands in innocence, and so compass thine Altar.

Jam alter Sacellanus denuo exiens, and venerans ante sacram Mensam, incipit
Litaniam; in fine eujus recitavit hoc ipse Episcepus.

O Lord God, who dwell not in Temples made with hands (as says the Prophet)
yet have ever vouchsafed to accept the devout endeavors of thy poor servants
allotting special places for thy Divine Worship, promising, even there, to hear
and grant their requests; I humbly beseech thee to accept of this days duty and
service of dedicating this Chapel to thy great and glorious Name; Fulfill, O
Lord, I pray thee thy gracious promises, that whatsoever prayer in this sacred
place shall be made according to thy will, may be accepted by thy gracious
favor, and returned with their desired success to thy glory and our Comfort.
Amen.

Post benedictionem populi cantatur Psalm. 132. conscenditque suggestum M.
Robinson, Theol. Bac. Fundatoris sum mo rogatu; Episcopus hoc ei tandem
concessit; (geminas sorores ille atque Fundator in uxores duxerant, sed utraque
defuncta jane tertiis gaudebat thalamis Concionator.)

Thema ejus desumptum e 28. Cap. Genesis verse. 16, 17. inter coetera docte egit de
omnipraesentia Divina, ubivi^ Locorum tum speciatim (pro beneplacito suo) in
Ecclesia, deque reverentia and veneratione ibi debita.

Pergitur in Liturgia, qua Mulier quaedam paupercula purificanda ad limen
Cancellorum accedens, genua flectit, gratiasque post partum (solenni Ecclesiae
ritu) agit: Baptizandus autem vel Matrimonio jungendus, nullus aderat.

Itur dein ad Coenae Dominicae administrationem, Sacellanorum altero ad
Australem, altero ad Septentrionalem partem sacrae mensae genn flectente and
dicente;

OUr Father, etc.

Ante Epistolae lectionem hanc specialem Collectam (una cum Collecta solita pro
Rege) recitat Sacellanorum alter.

MOst blessed Savior, who by thy bodily presence at the Feast of Dedication
did honor and approve such devout and religious services, as we have now in
hand, be thou present also at this time with us, and consecrate us into an Holy
Temple unto thy self, that thou dwelling in our hearts by Faith, we may be
cleansed from all carnal affections, and devoutly given to serve thee in all
good works. Amen.

Epistolam secundus Sacellanus ante Sacram Mensam stans, legit ex 1 Cor. cap.
3. a verse. 16. ad fluem: SS. Evangelium prior Sacellanus ibidem stans recitat
ex 100. cap. S. Johannis, a verse. 22. ad finem: Dein Symbolum Nioenum, omnibus
etiam stantibus.

Post illa Episcopus sede sua egressus, coram sacra mensa sese provoluit atque
ait.

Let us pray the prayer of King Solomon, which he prayed in the day of the
Dedication of his Temple; the first Temple that ever was, 2 Chronicles. 6. ab initio
verse. 18. ad versum 42. quo finito ait,

THus prayed King Solomon, and the Lord appeared unto him, and answered and
said unto him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place for my self,
to be an house of Sacrifice, 2 Chronicles. 7.12.

Thus did God answer; We have prayed with Solomon, answer us, O Lord, and our
prayer, as thou did him and his. Behold the face of thine Anointed, even
Christ our Savior, and for his sake grant our requests.

Dein in Cathedram ibidemse collocat, ( assidentibus Thoma Ridley Cancellario
Episcopi a dextris, a sinistris vero Doctore Barlo Archidiacono Winton.)
Actumque Consecrationis (pileo tectus) promulgat in hanc formam.

IN nomine Domini Amen. Cum strenuus vir Richardus Smith de Peertree in
Comitatu Southampt. Armiger, pia and Religiosa Devotione ductus, Capellam hanc
in quodam solo vasto vocato Ridgway-heath, juxta aedes suas communiter
nuncupatas Peertree ( infra Parodhiam Ecclesiae paroch. Beatae Mariae juxta
villam Southampt. Dioceseos and jurisdectionis nostrae, continentem intra muros
ejusdem in longitudine ab Orient ad Occidentem 50 pedes and dimid. aut
circiter; in latitu dine vero ab Aquilone ad Austrum 20 pedes and dimid. aut
circiter, propriis sais sumptibus aedificaverit, erexerit, and construxerit;
eandemque Capellam Cancellis ligneis distinxerit; sacra Mensa decenter
instructa, Baptisterio, Pulpito, sedibus convenientibus, tam infra super solum,
quam supra in modum Galeriae, Campana etiam alliisque necessariis ad divinum
cultum sufficienter and decenter ornaverit; nobisque supplicaverit, tam suo
nomine quam aliorum inhabitantium in villa de Weston, ac Hamlettis de Itchin,
Ridgway, ac quorundam etiam inhabitantium in Manerio nostro de Bitterne, de
Parochia praedicta, quatenus nos authoritate nostra ordinaria and Episcopali
pro nobis and successoribus nostris dictam Capellam ab usibus pristinis
communibus and profanis quibuscunque separare, and in usus sacros and divinos
consecrare, and dedicare dignaremur.

Nos Lancelotus permissione divina Winton. Episcopus, pio and religioso tam
ipsius quam aliorum in villa et Hamlettis praedictis habitantium desiderio, in
hac part favorabiliter annuentes, ad Consecrationem Capellae hujus de novo
propriis sumptibus dicti strenui viri Richardi Smith, sic ut praefertur erectae
et ornatae authoritate nostra ordinaria et Episcopali procedentes, eandem
Capellam ab omni communi et profano usu in perpetuum separamus, et soli divino
cultui ac divinorum celebrationi in perpetuum addicimus, dicamus, dedicamus: Ac
insuper eadem authoritate nostra ordinaria et Episcopali, pro nobis et
Successoribus nostris licentiam pariter et facultatem in Domino concedimus, ad
rem divinam ibidem faciendam, nempe Preces publicas, et sacram Ecclesiae
Litwrgiam recitandam, ad Verbum Dei sincere proponendum et praedicandum,
Sacramenta Sacrae Eucharistiae et Baptismatis in eadem ministranda, Matrimonia
solemnizanda, Mulieres post puerperium ad gratiarum actionem publicam
recipiendas et adjuvandas, Mortuos sepeliendos, caeteraque quaecanque
peragenda, quae in aliis Capellis licite fieri possunt et solent. Ac tam
Presbytero in Capella praedicta deservituro preces divinas dicendi, coeteraque
praemissa faciendi, quam Domino Ric. Smith, et Familiae ejus, reliquisque in
dictis locis habitantibus, preces divinas audiendi, coeteraque praemissa
percipiendi, plenam in Domino potestatem concedimus. Eandemque Capellam ad
levamen ( Anglice, a Chapel of Ease) sub dicta Ecclesia parochiali B. Mariae
juxta villam Southamp. tanquam Matrice Ecclesia sua, quantum in nobis est, et
de jure divino, Canonibus Ecclesiae et Statutis hujus Regni Angliae possumus,
in honorem Dei et sacros inhabitantium usus, nunc et in futurum consecramus,
per nomen Capellae JESU in Parochia sanctae Mariae juxta villam Southampt. et
sic consecratam fuisse, et esse, et in futuris perpetuis temporibus remanere
debere, palam et public pronunclamus, decernimus, et declaramus; et per nomen
Capellae JESU nominamus et appellamus; et sic perpetuis futuris temporibus
nominandam et appellandam fore decernimus: Privilegiis insuper omnibus et
singulis in capte usitatis, et Capellis ab antiquo fundatis competentibus,
Capellam hanc JESU praedictam; ad omnem juris effectum munitam munitam et
stabilitam esse volumus; et quantum in nobis est, et de jure divino possumus,
fic munimus et stabilimus per praesentes; Absque praejudicio tamen ullo, et
salvo semper jure et interesse Ecclesiae Parochialis sanctae Mariae juxta
villam Southampton. tanquam Matricis Ecclesiae; et Rectoris, Guardianorum,
aliorumque Ministrorum ejusdem pro tempore existentium (in cujus Parochiu dicta
Capella JESU notorie sita and situata est) in omnibus and singulis decimis,
oblationibus, obventionibus, vadiis, feudis, proficuis, privilegiis, juribus et
emolumentis quibuscunque ordinariis et extraordinariis eisdem respective
debitis vel consuetis, ac infra praecinctum seu limits Capellae JESU
praedictae orientibus et provenientibus, et ad dictam Ecclesiam Matricem
sanctae Mariae, Rectori, Guardianis vel aliis Ministris ejusdem de jure vel
consuetudine quoquo modo spectantibus, vel pertinentibus; in tam amplis modo et
forma, prout eisdem debebantur, aut solvi solebant, ante hanc nostram
consecrationem hujus Capellae praedictae.

Proviso, quod praedictus strenuus vir Rich. Smith, ac ejus haeredes et
Assignati, aliique in dicta villa et Hamlettis, etc. habitantes, non solum
dictam Capellam quoties opus fuerit, impensis suis propriis reficere et
reparare, sed etiam ad reparationes praedictae Matricis Ecclesiae sanctae
Mariae juxta villam Southampon. et Coemeterii ejusdem Ecclesiae, ac adomnia
alia onera, ad quae coeteri Parochiani dictae Matricis Ecclefiae teneantur.

Proviso etiam, quod tam dictus strenuus vir Rich. Smith, haeredes et assiguati
ejus, quam reliqui omnes in dictis villis et Hamlettis, etc. habitantes, in
signum subjectionis Capellae hujus sub Ecclesiae Matrice Beatae Mariae juxta
Southamp. ac senioritatis ejusdem Ecclesiae supra dictam Capellam, singulis
annis de tempore ad tempus ad Festum Paschatis, vel ad Festum Pentecostes, ad
dictam Ecclesiam Matricem venire, et in dicta Matrice Ecclesia tantum, non in
dicta Capella, (si tuto ad Ecclesiam Parcchialem venire possint) Preces audire,
et Sacramentum Eucharistiae ibidem percipere; vel si tempestate aut alio
impedimento detineantur, quo minus tunc venire possint, tum die Dominico, quo
tuto venire possunt, subsequente, venire et Eucharistiam accipere omnino
teneantur, absque speciali Licentia nostra, sen Vicarii nostri generalis in hac
part obtenta.

Proviso etiam quod in dicta Capella Sacramentum Baptismatis non ministretur,
nec Matrimonia solemnizentur, neque Verbum Dei praedicetur, neque Saecramenta
vel Sacramentalia aliquibus profanis conferantur, praeterquam solis
inhabitantibus seu degentibus in villa, Hamlettis, etc. praedict. nec etiam
reliquis dictae Matricis Ecclesiae Parochianis in Occidentali part ripae
inhabitantibus, inscio vel invito Rectore Ecclesiae Matricis sanctae Mariae
juxta villam Southamp. praedict. seu absque assensu, consensu et licentia
ejusdem prius habita et obtenta.

Et ulterius dicto strenuo Richardo Smith, Haeredibus et Assignatis suis,
liberam et plenam potestatem in Domino concedimus per praesentes, idoneum
Presbyterum de tempore in tempus nominandi ad deserviendum, et divina officia
in dicta Capella exequenda, a Nobis et Successoribus nostris de tempore in
tempus approbandum, et licentiandum: Ac quodictus strenuus vir Rich. Smith,
haeredes and assignati sui, and reliqui in dictis villa and Hamlettis, etc.
inhabitants de tempore in tempus in futurum propriis suis sumptibus dictum
Presbyterum sive Curatum in eadem Capella deserviemem, and authoritate nostra,
vei successorum nostrorum ut praefertur approbatum and licentiatum, alent and
sustinebunt, ac annuale stipendium viginti marcarum ad minimum eieidem
Presbytero vel Curato praestabunt, and solvent ad quatuor Festa; Nativitatis
Christi; Annuntiationas; Nativitatis sancti Johannis Baptistae; and sancti
Michaelis, per aequales portiones, sine ulla tamen diminutione, vel
defalcatione juris Ecclesiastici, decimarum, oblationum, vel obventionum
quarumcunque ad dictam Ecclesiam Parochialem sanctae Mariae, seu ad Rectorem
ejus pro tempore existentem, quo modo de jure vel consuetudine spectantium seu
pertinentium.

Et ulterius quod pro sepulturis in Capello praedicta, et in Choro seu navi
ejusdem, omnibusque aliis in dicta Capella vel extra gerendis, vadia, quoad
defunctos tam in domo dicti strenui viri Rich. Smith, Haeredum and Assignatorum
suorune, quam in dicta villae, Hamlettis, etc. Rectori dictae Ecclesiae
Matricis pro tempore existenti, et successoribus suis, et Guardianis
respective, et Clerico, caeterisque Ministris dictae Ecclesiae Parochialis
debite solvantur, in tam amplis modo et forma, prout pro sepalturis in Choro
seu intra Cancellos, seu etiam in navi dictae Ecclesiae Matricis, solvi
consuetum fuit, et prout solvi solet et deberet, si personae praedictae intra
Cancellos seu navim dictae Matricis Ecclesiae sepultae fuissent.

Quod si autem aliquando defuerit in dicta Capella Presbyter, Curatus legitime
per nos aut successores nostros licentiatus et approbatus, tune praedictus
strenuus vir Rich. Smith, Haeredes et assignati sui ac reliqui in dicta villa,
et Hamlettis, etc. inhabitants, ad Matricem Ecclesiam convenire, aut ibidem
precibus interesse teneantur, prout ante solebant, donec dicta Capella de
legitimo Curato, ad ibidem divina celebrandae idonee provideatur et idem
admittatur. Quod si autem aliquo tempore in posterum, quod Deus avertat, per
continuos sex menses per culpam aut negligentiam Parochianorum defuerit idoneus
Curatus in dicta Capella, qui ibidem divina celebret, aut si Curatus sit qui
per sex menses continuos non celebret, tunc nobis et successoribus nostris
potestatem reservamus pro ea vice tantum, idoneum Curatum, ad dictam Capellam
nominandi, ad supplendam negligentiam dictorum Rich. Smith, Haeredum and
Assignatorum suorum. Quod si autem dicta Capella decenter non fuerit reparata
vel instructa Libris, aliisque ad cultum divinum necessariis per tempus
praedictum (nisi ex legitima in ea part causa per Episcopum approbanda hoc
contigerit) tunc in perpetuum post dictos sex Menses continuos sic elapsos,
teneantur omnes infra praecinctum, seu limits dictae Capellae inhabitants ad
Matricem Ecclesiam convenire, pro divinis, audiendis, prout ante hanc nostram
consecrationem tenebantur; aliqua in hac concessione seu consecratione nostra
in contrarium non obstante, ac perinde ac si haec concessio seu consecratio
facta nunquam fuisset.

Postremo reservamus nobis and successoribus nostris, Episcopis Winton.
potestatem visitandi dictam Capellam, prout alias Capellas infra nostram
Diocesin situatas, communiter nuncupatas peculiares, ut nobis eisque constet,
an decenter in reparationibus aliisque conservetur, and an omnia ibidem
decenter and secundum ordinem fiant. Quae omnia et singula sic reservamus;
quoad coetera vero praemiss a quatenus in nobis est, et de jure possumus, pro
nobis et successoribus nostris decernimus et stabilimus per praesentes.

Actu demum recitato veneratur denuo, atque infit.

BLessed be thy name O Lord God, for that it pleased thee to have thy
Habitation among the Sons of Men: and to dwell in the midst of the Assembly of
thy Saints upon earth; Bless we beseech thee this days action unto thy people,
prosper thou the work of our hands unto us, yea prosper thou our handy work.

Finitis precationibus istis Dominus Episcopus sedem separatim capessit (ubi
prius) populusque universus non communicaturus dimittitur, and Porta clauditur;
Prior Sacellanus pergit legendo sententias illas hortatorias ad Eleemosynas,
interea dum alter Sacellanus singulos Communicaturos adit, atque in patinam
argenteam oblationes colligit: Collecta est summa 4. l. 12. s. 2. d. quam
Dominus Episcopus convertendam in Calicem huic Capellae donandum decernit.

Caeteris rebus ordine gestis, demum Episcopus ad sacram Mensam redit
(Sacellanis utrisque aliquantulum recedentibus) lotisque manibus, pane fracto,
vino in Calicem effuso, and aqua admista, stans ait,

ALmighty God our Heavenly Father, etc.

Eucharistiam ipse primo loco accipit, sub utraque specie: proximo loco tradit
Fundatori (quem jam coram sacra Mensa in genua supplicem collocarant) dein
utrique Sacellano. Ad coeteros vero pergentem Episcopum atque panem iis
tradentem, prior Sacellanus subsequitur and Calicem ordine porrigit. Cum vinum,
quod prius effuderat, non sufficeret, Episcopus de novo in Calicem ex poculo,
quod in sacra Mensa stabat effundit, admistaque aqua, recitat clare verba illa
consecratoria.

Finita tandem exhibitione Dominus Episcopus ad Sacrae Mensae Septentrionem in
genibus, recitante quoque populo, ait,

OUr Father, etc.

O Lord our Heavenly Father, etc.

GLory be to God on high, etc.

Concludit denique cum hac precatione.

BLessed be thy name O Lord, that it has pleased thee to put into the heart of
this thy servant to erect an house to thy worship and service, by whose pains,
Care and Cost, this work was begun and finished. Bless (O Lord) his substance
and accept the work of his hands: Remember him O our God concerning this, wipe
not out this kindness of his that he has showed for the house of his God; and
the offices thereof, and make them truly thankful to thee, that shall enjoy the
Benefit thereof, and the ease of it; and what is by him well intended, make
them rightly to use it, which well be the best fruit and to God most acceptable.

Post haec vota populum stans dimittit cum Benedictione hac.

THe peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and Minds
in the Knowledge and Love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: and the
Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost be amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.

Consecratio COEMETERII.
STatim a prandio (quod in aedibus suis vicinis Fundator Capellae satis laute
appararat Domino Episcopo, atque convenarum magnae frequentiae) ad rem divinam
reversis, alter Sacellanorum praeit.

OUr Father, etc.

Post Responsas, Psalmus 90 recitatur alternis.

Post Psalmum Episcopus cum universa multitudine egreditur Capella, atque ad
Orientalem Coemeterii partem stans, denuo sciscitatur.

Captain Smith, for what have you called us hither again?

Ille schedulam, ut prius humillime porrigit, quam praefatus a Registris
recitat in haec verba.

IN the name of Richard Smith of Peertree in the County of Southamton Esquire,
R. Reverend Father in God, I present unto you the state of the Village of
Weston. etc. ut prius, usque ad, the River cannot be passed, whereby it often
comes to pass that they have bin constrained to bury their dead in the open
fields, the water not being passable, or if they durst venture over, yet the
dead Body was followed with so little Company, as was no way seemly.

And thus much formerly having bin presented to your Predecessor, the R. R. F.
in God, James late Bishop of Winton; and Petition to him made to give and to
grant leave unto the said Richard Smith, to enclose a piece of ground for a
burial place on the East side of the said River, he favorably gave license and
granted power unto the said Richard Smith so to do, as may appear by an
instrument under his Episcopal Seal, bearing date the 23. of February in the
year of our Lord God according to the Computation of the Church of England 1617.

Which place of Burial being now enclosed with a decent Rail of Timber, at the
only proper cost and charges of him the said Richard Smith, with intent and
purpose that it might be dedicated and consecrated only and wholly for
Christian burial, for him the said Richard Smith, and his Family, and the said
inhabitants, and none other.

In which respect I beseech God to accept of this sincere intent and purpose,
and both he and they are together humble Suitors to your Lordship, as Gods
Minister, the Bishop and Ordinary of this Diocese, in Gods stead to accept this
his free will offering, and to decree this ground severed from all former
common and profane uses, and to sever it, as by the Word of God and prayer, and
other special Religious duties to dedicate and consecrate it to be a Coemeterie
or place of Christian burial, as aforesaid; wherein their bodies may be laid up
until the day of the general Resurrection; promising that they will ever so
hold it for holy ground, and use it accordingly, applying it to no other use,
but that only; and that they will from time to time, and ever hereafter, as
need shall be, see it conveniently repaired and fenced in such sort as a
Coemetery or burying place ought to be.

Hoc ipsum vero (ab Episcopo paucis interrogati) viva voce confirmant Fundator,
and qui e vicinia

Lectio prima desumitur e 23. Genesis Secunda Lectio destinabatur e prima Epist.
ad Cor. cap. 15. a verse. 15. ad finem, propter angustias temporis omissa.

Tum Dominus Episcopus in genua ibi submissus precatur.

O Lord God thou have been pleased to teach us in thy holy Word, as to put a
difference between the soul of a Beast, and the spirit of a Man; for the soul
of a Beast goes down to to the earth from whence it came, and the spirit of man
returns unto God that gave it; so to make diverse accounts of the Bodies of
Mankind and the Bodies of other living Creatures; in so much as the Body of
Adam was resolved on, and was afterward the workmanship of thine own hands,
and endued with a soul from thine own breath: But much more since the second
Adam, thy blessed Son, by taking upon him our nature, exalted this flesh of
ours to be flesh of his flesh, whose flesh thou sufferedst not to see
Corruption; so that the Body returns to the earth, and the soul to him that
gave it. It shall from thence return again, it is but a rest, and a rest in
hope (as says the Psalmist) for it is a righteous thing with God that the Body
which was partaker with the soul both in doing and suffering, should be raised
again from the Earth to be partaker also with the soul of the reward, or
punishment which God in Mercy or Justice shall reward, not to one of them
alone, but jointly to them both.

There being then so great difference, it is not thy will, o Lord, that our
Bodies should be cast out as the Bodies of Beasts to become dung for the earth,
or our bones lie scattered abroad to the sight of the sun; But when thy
servants are gathered to their Fathers, their Bodies should be decently and
seemly laid up in the bosom of the Earth from whence they were taken.

Neither is it thy pleasure, o Lord, that they should be buried as an Ass in
the open fields but in a place chosen and set apart for that purpose.

For even so from the Beginning we find that the holy Patriarchs Abraham (the
Father of the faithful) would not bury his dead in the common fields; nay nor
amongst the Bodies of the Hethites who were heathen men, but purchased a
buriall-place for himself in the plain of Mamre which became as it were the
Churchyard of the Patriarchs, therein they laid the dead bodies of Sarah his
Wife, of himself, his son Isaac, and Rebeccae his wife; after them Jacob and
Leah were buried there.

After this manner did the Patriarchs in old time, who trusted in God, sever
themselves places for Burial: whose children we are so long as we do their
works, and walk in the steps of their most holy Faith.

Ensuing then the steps of the Faith of our Father Abraham, we for the same
purpose have made choice of the very same place, wherein we now are; that it
may be as the Cave of Mamre, even Gods storehouse for the bodies of such our
Brethren and Sisters to be laid up in, as he shall ordein there to be interred;
there to rest in the sleep of peace till the last Trump shall awake them; for
they shall awake and rise up that sleep in the dust; for thy dew shall be as
the dew of herbs, and the earth shall yield forth her dead.

We beseech thee good Lord to accept this work of ours in showing mercy to the
dead; and mercifully grant, that they whose bodies shall be here bestowed, and
we all, may never forget the day of putting off the Tabernacle of this flesh,
but that living we may think upon death, and dying we may apprehend life; and
rising from the death of Sin to the life of Righteousness, which is the first
rising of Grace, we may have our parts in the second, which is the rising to
glory by thy Mercy, O most gracious Lord God, who do live and govern all
things, world without end.

Priorem dein formulam per omnia secutus, in Cathedram ibi se collocat, atque
Actum consecrationis promulgat.

IN DEI Nomine. Amen. Nos Lancelotus permissione divina Winton. Episcopus hunc
locum jacentem in vasto solo vulgo nuncupatum Ridgway-heath, infra Parochiam
Ecclesiae parochialis sanctae Mariae, etc. and jam propriis sumptibus strenui
viri Richardi Smith de Peertree Armigeri in circuitu Capellae noviter ab co
quoque propriis sumptibus suis constitutae, palis inclusum and arboribus
consitum; continentem in longitudine 148 pedes, aut circiter, in latitudine 124
pedes, aut circiter, in toto vero circuitu 435 pedes aut circiter; a pristinis,
aliisque quibuscunque communibus usibus and profanis in usus sacros separandum
fore decernimus, and sic separamus; ac cundem inhabitantibus vel degentibus in
familia Ric. Smith, in villa de Weston, Hamletti^ de Itchin, Wolston, Ridgway,
and in part Manerii de Bitterne, quae est de Parochia sanctae Mariae juxta
Southampton. in Coemeterium sive locum Sepulturae pro corporibus inibi
decedentium Christiano ritu humandis, quantum in nobis est, ac de jure and
Canonibus Ecclesiastic is, ac de statutis hujus Regni Angliae possumus
authoritate nostra ordinaria and Episcopali assignamus: ac per nomen Coemeterii
Capellae JESU designamus, dedicamus, and in usum praedictum consecramus: ac sic
assignatum, dedicatum, and consecratum fuisse and esse and in futurum,
perpetuis temporibus remanere debere palam ac public declaramus; Ac
Coemeterium Capellae JESU deinceps in perpetuum nuncupandum decernimus:
Privilegiis insuper omnibus et singulis Coemeteriis et locis sepulturae ab
antiquo consecratis et dedicatis competent. Coemeterium praedict^m sive locum
sepulturae ad omnem juris effectum munitum esse volumus, et quantum in nobis
est et de jure possumus, sic munimus et stabilimus per praesentes.

Proviso tamen, quod praedict. Richardus, Haeredes et Assignati sui, ac reliqui
in dicta villa, Hamlettis, etc. inhabitants, propriis suis sumptibus dictum
Coemeterium de tempore in tempus, in decenti sta^u conservabunt, et clausuras
ejus quoties opus fuerit sufficienter et convenienter reparabunt. Salvis etiam
et omnino reservatis Rectori Ecclesiae Parochialis sanctae Mariae praedictae,
ac Guardianis aliisque Ministris dictae Ecclesiae protempore existentibus in
perpetuum, omnibus et singulis oblationibus, mortuariis, Feudis et vadiis, pro
omnibus et singulis sepulturis Mortuorum in hoc Coemeterio; aut ratione
eorundem de jure, sive consuetudine debitis, et in tam amplis modo et forma, ac
si personae praedictae sepultae fuissent in Coemeterio Matricis Ecclesiae
praedictae. Quas quidem oblationes et mortuaria, feuda et vadia omnia et
singula sic de jure ac consuetudine debita Rectori, Guardianis et Ministris
dictae Matricis Ecclesiae pro tempore existentibus in perpetuum solvendi,
quantum in nobis est, et jura patiuntur, reservamus per praesentes: salva item
nobis et successoribus nostris, tanquam loci Ordinariis, potestate visitandi
dictum Coemeterium de tempore in tempus, et inquirendi an sufficienter
reparatum fuerit in clausuris; et an omniae ibi decenter et secundum ordinem
fiant; et, si minus fiant, per censur as Ecclesiastic as corrigendi.

His finitis precatur denuo.

LOrd God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who because thou art the God, not of the
dead, but of the Living, show hereby that they are living and not dead, and
that with thee do live the spirits of all them that dye in the Lord, and in
whom the Souls of them that are Elect, after they be delivered from the burden
of this flesh, be in joy and felicity; Thou have said thou will turn men into
small dust, and after that wilt say, Return again you Children of men: Thou art
the God of Truth, and have said it; thou art the God of power and might, and
wilt do it; by that power whereby thou art able to subdue all things unto thy
self, and bring to pass whatsoever pleases thee in Heaven and Earth, with whom
nothing is impossible.

Lord Jesu Christ, who art the Resurrection and the Life, in whom if we
believe, though we be dead yet shall we live; who by thy death have overcome
death, and by thy r^sing again have opened to us the Gate of everlasting life,
who shall send thine Angels and gather the bodies of thine Elect from all the
Ends of the Earth, and especially those who by a mystical union are flesh of
thy flesh, and in whose hearts thou have dwelt by Faith; We humbly beseech thee
for them, whose bodies shall in this place be gathered to their Fathers, that
they may rest in this hope of Resurrection to eternal life through thee, O
blessed Lord God, who shall change their vile bodies, that they may be like thy
Glorious body according to the mighty working whereby thou art able to bring
all things, even death and all into subjection to thy self.

Holy and blessed Spirit, the Lord and giver of life, whose Temples the bodies
of thy Servants are, by thy sanctifying Grace dwelling in them; we verily trust
that their bodies that have been thy Temples, and those hearts in which Christ
has dwelt by Faith, shall not ever dwell in corruption, but that as by thy
sending forth thy Breath at first we received our being, Motion, and Life in
the beginning of the Creation, so at the last by the same Spirit sending forth
the same breath in the end of the Consummation, Life, Being and Moving shall be
restored us again; so that after our dissolution, as thou did show thy holy
Prophet, the dry bones shall come together again, Bone to his Bone, and Sinews
and Flesh shall come upon them, and thou shall cause thy Breath to enter into
them, and we shall live; and this Corruption shall put on Incorruption, and
this Mortal shall put on Immortality.

God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, accept, sanctify and
bless this place to that end whereunto according to thine own Ordinance we have
ordained it, even to bestow the Bodies of thy Servants in, till, the number of
thine Elect being accomplished, they with us, and we with them, and with all
other departed in the true Faith of thy Holy Name, shall have our consummation
and Bliss both in Body and Soul in thy eternal and everlasting glory.

Blessed Savior, that did for this end dye and rise again, that thou
might be Lord both of the Living and the Dead, whether we live or die thou
art our Lord, and we are thine; living or dying we commend our selves unto
thee, have mercy upon us, and keep us thine for evermore.

Reintrantes igitur Capellam cantant priorem partem Psalm. 16. Conscendit
Suggestum Magister Matthaeus Wren; Thema ei posterior pars verse. 17. cap. 2. S.
Joan. Zelus domus tuae, etc. Agit de affectibus in Christo, Zelo inter
coereros; nec illo falso, sed pro Deo; nec coeco, sed secundum scientiam, pro
Domo, pro Cultu Dei; de praesentia Dei, praecipue in Templis; magno non Morum
solummodo nostrorum, sed spei quoque et Fidei incremento fulcimentoque: Denm
Locorum distinctione gaudere confirmat, tum exemplo mirifico Jacobi tantopere
distinguentis Bethel; tum maximo omnium miraculo, quo Christus Mercatores e
Templo ejecit. Enarratis Christi per hoc factum devotionibus concludit in
debitam a nobis Templorum reve: entiam, atque istius Fundatoris Encomium
meritissimum

Cantatur pars reliqua; and Vespertinae precationes (incipiendo jam a Symbolo
Apostolico) secundum communem Ecclesiae formulam, finiuntur.

FINIS.

