ANGLIA GRATA: OR, A Hearty-English-Welcome TO King William AFTER A Successful
Campaign

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin, near the
Oxford-Arms-Inn in Warwick Lane, 1695.

ANGLIA GRATA: OR A Hearty-English-Welcome TO King William.
WElcome Great Prince from the Field of Mars! from the Renowned Siege of Namur!
covered with Laurels, and charged with Spoils; Victory waited only your
Approach, Triumphs attend your Return, and Trophies are your Reward.

Thrice Welcome Great Sir, to a Joyful, Gallant and Grateful Nation! Who both
know and prize your Worth. You are the Joy of Our Hearts! The Delight of Our
Eyes! Our Good Genius! Guardian-Angel and Tutelar Saint! Vollies of Huzza's,
and Floods of Mirth are ready for your Reception; Loud Acclamations Echo every
where, the Streets are filled with Nothing else; Joy sparkles in our very Eyes,
and Mirth dwells in our Hearts. Your Safety and Success was the Blessing we
prayed for, and we have it. All Europe is concerned for You, for You are The
Soul of the Union, The Life of The League, The Darling of the Soldiers, The
Delight of the Officers, and The Wonder of your Enemies. Thy Prowess was early
felt in the Field, Thy Courage and thy Conduct Stupendous in themselves, were
admired and owned even by the Generals in Arms against Thee, who gave a lasting
Character to thy Great Name. Great in the Camp! Great in the Court! and
Wondrous-Great in the Cabinet. Thy Glories Darken and Eclipse Those of Thy
Haughty-Enemy, and Cloud his Achievements. Thou art the True Spur of Honor,
and have roused up the Martial-Spirit of Old- England, almost lost and
extinguished in the Late Lewd and Ease and Luxury, the Constant Companions of
those Times. Nature her self speaks loud for you, New Prodigies appear; Whales
leave the Sea, and come to thy Happy Land; New-Stars in our Horizon presage Thy
Future Greatness; New-Prophets arise and confirm the same; Heaven and Earth,
all the Four Elements Concur; New Poets adorn Thy Reign, and Celebrate Thy
Praises, which shall be as long and lasting as Time it self! New Songs are
daily made in Honor of thy Illustrious Actions; Oracles are not ceased, which
Predict the Blessings thou give the World; the Age of Miracles is returned,
of True Ones too! No Cheats, or Impostures offered, all Natural and Genuine!
Wondrous Things have thou performed, but Greater yet remain behind, for thy
Hand and thy Head to Complete; Great is the Care of Heaven over Thy Life,
destined to Uncommon Acts! All the World resounds with what is past, Europe is
too Narrow and Confined, the whole Globe alone has but space enough!

And Thou Great Apollo, inspire me at this Time with Raptures, with Elevated
Thought and Lofty Speech. The Theme it self admits no Common-Words or
Expressions; It Is God-like! All Divine! The Ancient Heroes all come short of
Thee! Great William! tho Fame and Merit pronounce Them truly Great. Alexander
and Caesar if here, would cry and blush indeed, as they are both said to have
done, one for the Smallness of the World, and the other for being so Old without
a Name; Their Laurels would wither, and Yours, Great Sir, only remain Green:
How Beautiful and Bright will your Glory stand in the Annals of Time! It needs
no History to Embelish it; each Campaigne brings Fresh Fame, and gives Renown
above the Power and Reach of Words! Thy Actions speak thee Great! and are the
Best and Truest Heralds, the Clearest and Loudest-Trumpets. No Luscious
Lying-Poetry, or Base-Court or Town-Flattery, are required to varnish over thy
Story. The Simplest Colors and Plainest Words will do it best; and the Hearts
of thy Subjects and thy Foreign Friends will be the Truest Tables, and Fairest
Books. Your Glories, Great Monarch, are Unspotted, and Unfullied, not the least
Tincture of Violence, Oppression, or Injustice appears on Them; They are
Virgin-White, Pure, and without Blemish. Such Mighty Merits without Allay, draw
all Tongues, all Pens, all People, all Nations, both Sexes, and all Ages, the
Present and the Future, to admire Great William.

What a Glorious Pattern have you set! what a Royal-Example have you given!
which to imitate will be difficult, but to come up to, almost Impossible. Your
Sun is not yet arrived to his Meridian, but Lewis's is long since past that
Point, and hastens apace to the Western-World. He has already survived his
Glory, and outlived his Good-Fortune, and now declines apace, will fall
unpittied, unlamented, and unrevenged: He loaded with Curses, and You, Royal
Sir, crowned with Praises, both at Home and Abroad. He Stinks and Putrifies,
even while Alive, Your very Dust will smell sweet, beyond the Noblest Perfume.
He Destroys, and you Preserve. He Murders, and you keep Alive. He Robs his
Neighbors, and you make him Restore. Your Great and Immortal-Ancestor, William
the First, Your Great-Grand-Father, laid the Foundation of, and Established a
Mighty Commonwealth, and broke the Heart of the Spanish Pride and Ambition,
and ruined (with the kind Help of your Renown'd-Female-Predecessor) all his
Pretensions to Universal Empire. And you, Great Prince, are destined by Heaven
to Preserve that very Republic, and all Europe too, from their insulting
Neighbor, that in this Age threatened no less than the Austrians in the Last,
both alike deceived. You are the Bulwark of Europe, the Ne plus ultra to the
Spaniards and French, Those Stiff Contenders for more than comes to their
share, The Fifth Monarchy. If ever Prince merited such an ample. Extent of
Territory, surely King William has bid the Fairest for it, Has most Suffrages,
and seems to be intended for no less: At least, thus much may be pronounced,
and which will really be a greater Honor, Your Majesty has it in your Royal
Hand, to give a Happy and Welcome Peace to all Europe, which will more
Embellish your Name and Character, than the Conquest of a New or an Absolute
Dominion over the Old World.

To enumerate Thy Virtues and Victories, Mighty Monarch, would be to write the
History of Thy Matchless Life, fit only for the Pen of an Angel, or at least
something more than Human, Who can penetrate into the very Recesses of Thy
Soul, and communicate to Us thy Faithful Subjects the Beauties of it.

'Twill exceed the Limits of a Panegyric, to dwell upon this Glorious Theme,
which would soon swell into a Volume, it is so transpor^ing; The Subject it self
warms all Loyal Grateful-Hearts, that are sensible what Great Things the King
has done for Us: He has out-gon the Famed- Henry's and Brave- Edwards too!
Those Gallant Princes, that stand so fair in English-Annals, that carried their
Victorious Arms into the very Heart of France, and received the Gallique-Crown
at Paris.

The Famed Battles of Seneffe, Mons, the Boyne and Landen, are True Testimonies
of thy Undaunted Courage, which was Invincible, though surrounded with Enemies,
and charged with Trible the Number of thy Troops. The Spirit of Great William
appeared every where, from the Right to the Left, in the Front and the Rear,
penetrating through, and inspiring the whole Army, from the General to the
Sentinel, diffused all over the Mighty Body was thy Native Warmth; Thy very
Enemies pronounced Thee Insuperable.

Straits and Difficulties though to others Formidable, You, Royal Sir, have
vanquished and broke through; and though you have been environed with many and
mighty ones, both at Home and Abroad, e're since You drew Your Sword, and
appeared in Arms, in Field of Mars, yet Nothing was too hard for You to cope
with. Your Constancy of Mind is not to be shaken, the same in Adverse-Fortune
as when she Smiles; Your Patience above Price, and Your Resolution Immovable.

What Bars and Remora's have you not met with, and removed? Have Cemented
different Opinions, Religions, Politiques and Interests, and made 'em all one:
Supplying the Weakness and Defect of some Members, with the Strength and
Ability of Others; The Greatest and Most Skilful, nay, and Successful too,
State-Physician in the Universe.

That Glorious Union now in Europe, so Terrible and Boding to the
Bourbon-House, You, Great Sir alone, have happily Conducted and Continued
against all the Efforts of France, which, nor her Power, Artifice or Gold could
e're dissolve: Well may we call thee Blessed! Great! Good and Just! It Is you
alone have baffled all the Gallique Engines, and this Themselves are forced to
own.

The Stopping the Victorious Arms of France, in the Former as well as Present
War, the Stemming that Impetuous Tide of Conquest, and snatching the Laurels
from the Greatest Generals of the Age, at the Head of the best Troops in the
World, was surprising and amazing, and this with Men Undisciplined and Raw,
without Officers or Soldiers, and at a Time so Fatal, when Civil-Commotions
invade the State, and Threaten naught but Ruin: The Balm you brought Sir,
healed all these Wounds, Foreign and Intestine; You restored Private-Peace and
Public too! You Faced your Foes in Field of Battle, repelled 'em, and regained
the Lost Provinces!

But above All, and beyond Compare, was the Stupendous Revolution here at
Home! How Swift Great Prince, You flew to Our Rescue! How soon you came to
Guard Us from Bondage and Destruction! Saved Our Religion and Our Laws, Those
Inestimable Jewels, and with the Hazard of Your Royal Person, bravely
contending with Winds and Waves, Ice and Snow! Your Hand alone preserved Us
from Impendent Danger, When You Our Glorious Sun appeared, Our Foes soon Fled,
quitted the Sacrifice, though near the Altar, and ran in Confusion.

Scotland and Ireland owe their Peace and Plenty to You, Rebels and Foreigners
expelled and gone, naught resists Your Conquering Hand, Victory proud of Your
Presence, only wants to see you, and Fortune her self, as blind as she is
thought, can find the Head fit only for Laurels, can distinguish True from
False-Merit, and extend her Rewards; The Tribute she brings and Lays at your
Royal Feet, is but Your Due.

But what shall the English Nation return for Your Bounties and Royal
Residence, for the Graces and Blessings that issue from Your Sacred Breast? For
thy Strong Arm that Defends and Protects them against their Cruel and Voracious
Neighbor. Monuments shall be erected to thy Goodness, and to perpetuate thy
Name and History, more Costly and more Durable, than ever yet were seen: Gold
is too Mean, too Base, and too Cheap for thy Statue; Pearl and Diamonds too
Common and Contemptible to be employed therein. New Metals and more Refined,
more Beautiful and more Lasting, will meet a Discovery for thy sake alone. All
England shall contribute to the Work, and Express their Gratitude by their
Generosity.

The Senate is Impatient to let You into their Bosom, and thence to their
Purses opened wide for your Service; New Honors are Decreed You, greater than
Rome could ever give, or Caesar receive. All Hearts are Open, all Bags Untied,
all Treasuries Expanded to express their Joy and Duty; More shall be given than
Demanded; Supplies readily Voted, and early Levied, all swiftly dispatched to
render Your Next-Campaigne the more Complete. All Things shall concur to your
very Wishes, and Your Majesty shall have Fresh Experience of Our Loyalty and of
Our Gratitude.

Italy the once Renowned Mistress of the Universe, sends forth thy Eulogies,
and by their Ambassadors Court Thy Alliance, and value Thy Friendship beyond
all the Worlds; They own their Obligations to Thy Conduct and Assistance, with
Thy Formidable Fleets and Powerful Armies, they have regained Cazal, the
Enemies Strongest Frontier, and almost expelled the Fluttering- French out of
their Paradise: Such Huge Navies were never heard of in Their Seas; The
Sovereign Pontife Himself stood amazed at the Report of Their Approach, sent
his Compliments to the Admiral, and ever since has slighted Monsieur. The Rich
and Mighty Duke of Florence, soon saw his True-Interest, and Embraced it; The
State of Genoa Huff'd and Scorned by France in Former Times, tho lately much
caressed, now nor Fears nor Values her Menaces, Slights her Amity, and
Addresses K. William. The Venetian Republic politickly applies in Time to
Thee, by her Envoys, and though deep in French Interests, yet seems to abandon
all, and hastens to be a Party in this Happy Conjunction. Thy Royal-Armada has
wrought more Real-Wonders, than the Popish-Female-Virgin e're could on That
side, who deaf to all their Prayers, could bring them no Assistance: But on the
Opposite Coasts, what Mighty Miracles has Thy Navy not produced? Taught
Civility to the Wild, the Barbarous and Unrefin'd; The Moors Themselves Admire
Thy Prowess, Adore Thy Person tho Distant, call Thee more than Man, and Little
Less than God! Often have they felt the English Power, and heard Their Cannon
roar, but never yet so Great a Force United: Africk's Amazed, hasts to Thy
Feet, and begs Thy Protection.

Spain thy Ancient-Enemy pays Thee Adorations more than Human, Flies for Refuge
to Thy Arms; No more pretends to be Invincible, but gives That to Thee; Her
Power is lost by Sea and Land, Her Navy dwindled into Galleys, and Those almost
to Cock-boats, no longer Formidable, Calls for Thy Royal Hand, and there alone
can meet her Safety; Swallowed in Part by her Devouring Neighbor, rescued by
Thee: At thy Fleets-Approach, her Enemies sneaked away, Left her Ports, and
hastened to Their Own, and there lie locked up, nor dare to peep Abroad, resign
Dominion all to Thy Prevailing Hand; Their Barricado's and Their Booms, Their
Chains and Forts hardly can secure 'em; and thus Confined and Pris'ners-like,
they lie in Harbor. New Courage comes to Spain, warms her Drooping-Spirits, and
bids her March to Glory; Inspired by her Friends, she gains NewLife, Flies to
Arms, and beats her Foes; her very Peasants are Victorious over the French,
defeat their Parties, then their Bodies, force 'em to abandon almost all they
gained, and this before their Army takes the Field.

Persia and China are no Strangers to thy Prowess; Whites, Blacks and Tawneys,
all hear thy Fame; the Worlds Remotest Ends rehearse Thy Name, Thy Sword
reaches over all the World; Whole Colonies of thy Enemies at once are rooted
out in Canada no more pretend to fooling there; America calls Thee Lord alone,
forgets the French, and quite disowns Them; resigns her Wealth to thy
Industrious Subjects, and Courts their Commerce.

Flanders ows her Salvation only to Thy Arms; long since had she been swallowed
up, a Morsel only, a Luscious-bit for Lewis; she pays Thee Equal-Honours with
the Spanish Kings, Calls Thee her Protector, forgets her Ancient Jealousy and
Inbred Enmity, knows her Ruin was designed by France, by Thee Preserved,
Supported and Defended; lays all her Angry Sentiments aside, and courts Thy
Saving Hand; and though thy Ancestors reduced her Haughty Brow, restored
Religion, Law and Liberty, taught her the best of Virtues, Humility: Yet You,
Great Prince, are now the only Prop can bear her up; sunk as she was, she
pierks her Head, and by Your Influence receives New-Life, and hopes again to
bid for Empire; Worried almost to Death by her Unruly Neighbor, is rescued by
Thy Potent-Hand alone. The Austrian-Eagles Tower aloft, Revive by your
Assistance, and keep at Distance Infidels, and French, the Worse ot'h Two, by
Thy Successes the Frontiers of Germany are secured.

Thy Native Holland by thee preserved alone, skreen'd from their Raging Foe,
and sheltered from all Future Harms, pay their most Hearty Thanks, and own the
Debts too great to be discharged in whole, the Interest only can be spared, the
rest shall all be faithfully made up by their Descendents, who with Duty and
with Gratitude, shall all declare thy Worth. 'Twas you, Great Sir, that stem'd
the Tide, that startled all the World; the Flood of Power and Gallique-Force,
was brought to stand at Bay by You; the Dutch took Breath, and banished all
their Fears; and though the Blows were smart and heavy, amazing and
destructive, repeated over and over, yet soon they were returned; a Change was
wrought, and all by your Commanding Hand; Your Breast was the Cabinet and the
Treasure too! Your Councils animated the Drooping State! Your Presence in the
Field was an Army, and made Troops tho in Themselves Feeble, soon Formidable:
And that which damped all ordinary Courage, gave more heat to Thine; the
Difficulty of the Enterprise, was but an Earnest of the Success; You changed
the Scene, and made 'em scorn the Thoughts of Peace, to which they had lent an
Ear, tho neither Safe nor Honorable: 'Twas You, Brave Prince, that was
resolved to hazard all, fall with the Cause, nobly expire in Honour's-Bed,
rather than submit to Terms so Infamous, so Base, and so Destructive toward the
True-Interest of your Native-Land, of which you were the Sole and Valiant
Guardian, Tender of Their Liberty and Their Trade. The People all inspired by
Thee, resumed fresh Vigor, and were sure Thy Name alone would them Preserve,
that 'twas the Virtue of thy Great-Fore-Father formed their State, and Yours
was destined to recover it; And this You did, Immortal Sir; and now again, when
France Pretends to Insult her Peaceful Neighbors, You beard the Monster, force
him recoil, and think of Peace in Time; and to that End, all Parties, all
Interests are engaged, no Stone unturned to gain his Aim, but all in vain; the
Allies are now too weary grown, to be seduced again by his smooth and false
Pretensions of Amity; he must Restore, give up the Towns and Provinces which he
unjustly seized, and yet detains: The Sword will make him do it; No Faith can
be allowed him, His Honor and his Word are pawned and broke long since; His
Oaths and Vows were made in Jest, and so not worth the keeping; The Present
Union now in Europe, promises Great-Good, and Threatens France more than ever;
She Trembles at the Prospect so doleful and so hideous; her Force abates, her
Strength and Heat declines apace, her Treasures low, her Commerce lost, and all
make way for Ruin; all the World combine to strip her of her Borrowed Plumes,
and make her only France her self, a Land of Beauty, Wealth, and all that is
good, but now Reduced, Destroyed, and near abandoned by her Prince's Pride and
Cruelty; all must be Sacrificed to his Flaming Glory, the Subjects Blood and
Treasure too little to assist; and this alone has been the Attractive of Their
Neighbors Hate, England, Holland, Germany, Spain and Italy Unite against Him,
resolve to Humble and Abase him, and return their Rights to all the Injured
Princes; and these Designs are Great and Noble, and hasten on apace to be
Effected. What Shifts Poor Lewis makes to oppose his Angry Foes are plain to
all the World; he drains his People's Pockets, and has Taxed no less than Three
of Four which We call Elements, Fire, Earth and Water, all submit, and so must
Air to his Long Arm, but that it cannot be confined. The Gallique-Church is
Moody, Grumbles at the Long Continuance of the War, Appeals are sent to Rome,
where French-Interest falls, when it can no longer be supported by French-Coin;
That Godly Court is very Greedy; Avarice and Pride attend the Place; Point d'
Argent, Point d' Grace. No Money you must have no Favor. A Happy Juncture of
Affairs! Good Omens, Sure Prognostics of Future Good Success. The Glorious
Campaign is almost near an End, and the Court of France in Pain for the
Approaching, which menaces much deeper Wounds, bids 'em prepare for Fire and
Sword. 'Twas They began the Sport, and if my Skill deludes me not, they will
receive their due. The Gallique Crown begins to totter, and Lewis shakes in's
Throne, Amazed to think that all his Perjuries, his Rapines and Oppressions are
now a coming strait to him: The Just Reward of all his Barbarous Acts is near
at Hand, almost within his View; a State deplored he Feels, his Sentiments are
all chagrin, he must for ever lose hopes of Empire, all his Glory and his
Flattring-Honour, are now envelop'd in the Clouds; The Rising Sun no more shall
be his Motto; He blazes, and he glares more like the Western Light, appears no
more in this Horizon.

And now Great William, the Tribute of all Loyal Hearts lies at Thy Royal-Feet,
With Open-Arms We meet Thee, and with Thanks we load Thee. The Stupendous
Siege of Namur Crowns Thy Fame, and speaks Thee Wondrous-Great; The Manly, Fair
and Martial Taking of the Place, Inch by Inch, with Sword in Hand, and Hearts
of Temper high as Steel; No Gold, No Treachery, No Artifice was used (like
France) to hedge in Towns; but what resounds more high, Relief though
threatened, came too late, yet had the Pleasure all to View the Place
surrendered to their Foes; of Evidences no less than a Hundred Thousand all in
Arms, nor dared to strike a Stroke to Save it; the Fate of Flanders and of
France the same.

For This, Mighty Sir, all Europe stands engaged to Your Happy-Conduct; All the
World admires (...) Your Bravery, and Gratulates Your Success: Thy very Enemies
own thy Merit. Unborn Babes are obliged to Thy Sword, which is now cutting out
Peace and Prosperity to usher them into the World; Blessings fit only to Adorn
Thy God-like Reign; the Result of all thy Cares and Hazards so frequently
repeated for Our Sakes; for which we all Huzza, Long Live King WILLIAM the
Third.

FINIS.

