TO THOSE that sit in COUNSEL For Ordering the AFFAIRS OF THE NATION, etc. A
Visitation, by one of the LORDS SERVANTS Called a QVAKER.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

To those that sit in Counsel for (...) the affairs of the Nation, etc.
A Visitation, by one of the Lords Servants called a QVAKER.
FRIENDS,
THE Lord will visit his Seed in righteousness, that the Nations of the earth
may know and see that its the determination of the Lord to exalt his Son upon
the holy hill of Sion, to Rule and Reign in the Kingdoms of men, until all
principalities and Powers are subdued, and brought subject to his righteous
Government, the borders whereof shall reach from one end of the earth to the
other, and of the increase thereof there shall be no end. And whosoever will
not bend and bow to his righteous Scepter, he will Rule them with an Iron Rod,
he will shake and overturn all the powers of the earth, and scatter the wicked
in their Imaginations, he will turn the wisdom of the wise into foolishness,
and bring the understanding of the prudent to naught, he will arise unto the
prey, he will gather the Nations, he will assemble the Kingdoms, and upon them
will he pour out the vialls of his wrath, then will he return, and give his
people a pure Language, even the Language of Canaan, where songs of deliverance
shall be sung, and everlasting peace and rest shall be known, even in the
Prince of peace who is now appearing the second time without sin unto
salvation. And the prince of this World must be Judged, and all those condemned
by the Ever^asting Light of the Son of God, that obey not the everlasting
Gospel, now again to be preached to all Nations; even that Light which is in
the World, but the World knows him not, which shines in the hearts of all men
(in the darkness) and gives them that believe in it, and follow it, the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, and brings them that
are turned to it out of darkness into the light of life, from under Satan's
power, into the power of God.

In such glory and excellency of power shall Christ Jesus the Light of the
World appear, that the Nations of them that shall be saved shall be gathered to
the brightness of his appearance, even those that love the light, and bring
their deeds unto the light to be tried by the spirit of Judgment whether they
are wrought in God, through which all the redeemed ones must pass, even
through the sirey trial, that they may be purified, and all their dross done
away and consumed, that they may be a pure and holy people unto the Lord for
ever, a people of his praise, the converts of righteousness that must inhabit
the holy City of our God, into which no unrighteous thing can enter, where
shall be peace and fullness of Joys for evermore.

But with the wicked it shall not be so with them, Woe and misery shall be their
portion for ever, even to such as obey not the Gospel of God, but account the
blood of the Covenant, the life of Christ, the Light of the world an unholy
thing, such as will not return at the reproofs of the Lord, but cast his
Counsel behind their backs, that continue the servants of sin unto death,
shall for ever have their portion with hypocrites in that lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, they that hate and will not turn to the Light, shall know
the torment of everlasting burnings, their worm shall not dye, their fire shall
not be quenched,

Therefore let all men every where, while it is called to day, repent and
return at the reproofs of the Lord, which are the Instructions of life, that so
they may not perish, but be saved in the Lambs light of Life: The Master of the
house is risen, Strive therefore to enter while the door is open, Neglect not
the day of your visitation, least you be for ever shut out of Gods Kingdom; the
time hastens, the Spirit of the Lord is grieved and shall not always strive
with men. Though ye have eaten and drunk in his presence, and he has taught in
your streets, yet ye would not hearken to his voice, Depart therefore ye
workers of Iniquity, shall the Lord say, I know you not.

And now ye that are the Rulers and people of these Nations, Know that our God
is the mighty God of Jacob, a God gracious, long suffering and of great
goodness, who has wrought wonders for the deliverance of his people out of
captivity and bondage, his promise being unto the Seed in whom we are the
called of the Lord, for whose sake the Lord has lengthened out the exceeding
riches of his love and unutterable mercies to the people of these Nations, to
the end that if they would yet at length, after so many overturnings, return
and own the Lord Jesus Christ the light of the world to be their King and
Lawgiver, on whom the government is laid, whose right it is to reign, in whom
Reformation and Liberty is known, even that wherein the Truth makes us free,
They might in him be the beauties of holiness, the glory of Nations, even the
first fruits of the first resurrection from the dead forms and worships of the
World, which are abominable in the sight of the Lord; yea, they have been so
long dead, without the Spirit of life, that they even stink in the nostrills of
our God who is the living God, and the dead praise him not.

Many have been the opportunities put into the hands of those in authority in
these Nations to do the work of the Lord in their generations, but alas they
standing not in the Counsel of the Lord, have had a prize put into their hands,
but have not had hearts to make use of it, which shall be reckoned to their
accounts in the day of the Lord; Nay, in stead of doing the work of the Lord,
which is to break the bonds of the wicked, and to let the oppressed go free, to
punish and to be a terror to evil doers, and to encourage those that do well,
they have (for the most part) strengthened the hands of the wicked against the
Just, which has long cried for Justice and righteousness in the earth, they
have formed terrible weapons against the Lords people, but they have not
prospered, they have sought deep to hide their counsels from the Lord, they
would not have him to reign over them unto whom all power and authority in
heaven and earth is given, but have taken counsel with the ungodly to put the
Heir of life to death, to crucify and destroy his appearance, in themselves,
and in his chosen ones, unto whom all the Nations of the Earth must bow; he who
has been from the beginning to the Greeks foolishness, and to the Jews a
stumbling block, at which the Great ones in the wisdom of the World, which
knows not God, have stumbled and have been broken, ve^ shame and confusion has
and shall follow all those that join themselves to Babylons builders, which are
in their own inventions, which is in the transgression and alienation from God,
who reject and set at naught Christ Jesus the chief Corner Stone, whose
building is in spirit and truth, a City whose Maker and Builder is God, in whom
we trust.

That little stone cut out of the Mountains without hands, and so contemned by
the Worlds builders, is laid to the foot of the Images set up in all the Earth,
before which Dagon shall fall, Bell and all the Gods of the Heathen (the great
devourers of Corn and Wine, and the fat things of the earth) shall be
confounded and perish, and they that have made them and trust in them, shall be
like unto them; and no Image (though the head and face thereof be of Gold and
Silver) shall stand in the earth, but the Image of our God in Christ Jesus, who
is the express Image of the Father, made manifest in the Saints in
Righteousness and true Holiness, where the reformation into the likeness of
Gods image is to be known, Christ in us the hope of Glory.

But alas, alas, the leaders of this people have caused them to err, and to
worship the Golden Image of the Beast, even a thing of naught, yea and his
image that in truth and simplicity must appear, has been marred more then any,
by this crooked and perverse generation of men, who are in the subtilty,
wherein the enmity stands against the seed of God, in the flesh they are, which
lusts against, and persecutes that birth which is of the spirit which does
the will of God.

A horrible thing has been committed in the land, they have forsaken the Lord
the fountain of living waters, and have hewn out unto themselves broken
cisterns that will hold no water; The Priests have spoken lies in the Name of
the Lord, and the people love to have it so, being made drunken with the golden
cup of the whores ^ornications that they have reeled and staggered to and fro,
from one form in^o another, and never knew a forming again into Christ Jesus;
nay they have even made agreement as it were with death and hel^ to slay and
bury the just, and have prevailed with the rulers of the people for a
Commission even by a Law to seal the Sepulcher, that the witness of God (the
Lamb slain from the foundation of World in the transgression of man from the
life in God) may not rise again to trouble and torment the World which lies in
wickedness, and to execute righteous judgments upon the workers of iniquity,
this is he that the World hates, because their deeds are evil.

And amongst other bad Laws of this Nation that burdens the conscience of the
just, which the sufferings of Gods people have declared to the Rulers of these
Nations, those for payment of Tithes are most abominable and unjust; was ever
the like heard of, that theft, oppression and wickedness should be maintained
by a law, amongst a people called a Christian Commonwealth? the Priests of the
Nation (which come not in by the door into the sheepfold, are thieves and
robbers) having stolen the words of Christ, the Prophets and Apostles (in
their conversations denying the life and power;) yea and not singly and only
so, but bringing forth the divinations and inventions of their own brains,
which are dead and raven from the spirit of life, that such wares and
merchandise should be enforced upon a people at so dear a ^ate, whether they
will, or no, like them or not, they must pay for them, as the blood of many of
the Lords people, and the barbarous spoiling of their goods does sadly witness
in this Nation; Is not this unjust and even a rape upon the Consciences of Men?
I am sure of it, it is that the Lord hates, and his wrath is kindled and burns
like an oven against this wicked generation of men, (that will not have the
Lord to be the Teacher of his people) those from whose lies and lightness
abomination is gone forth into all the Land, that the people perish for want of
knowledge; yea and the blood of the slain shall be required at the hands of
those that have a power given them, and do not remove and destroy all the high
places of Baal, those stumbling blocks set up, that have caused thousands to
err from the pure worship of God, which is in spirit and in truth, and have
commi^ted abominable whoredoms with the Gods of the Heathen, even those
inventions and likenessles that men in their corrupt natures, wills and wisdoms
(which is out of the sear of God) have set up, acted and worshipped, which
manifests it self to be a deceiver, for the comers thereunto are not cleansed
and saved from their sins, they are not made perfect, but plain to all the
children of light, that these worshippers wax worse and worse, which is the
character of deluded persons; They do not confess that Christ is come in the
flesh, for they live in the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the
pride of life, and this is the spirit of Antichrist, they are of the World,
therefore the World loves them and hears them, but us it hates.

What was the error of Bal^am? was it not the setting up of stumblingblocks to
the people of Israel for the wages of unrighteousness? and was Bal^am a false
Prophet? and can these be true that are lovers of themselves, seek their own,
honor and praise of men, and make merchandise of souls for unjust gain? what
can the highest professor among them all (without the spirit of li^^ which is
able of i^self to lead into all Truth, the which they may confess in words but
in deeds deny) do more from the letter of Scriptures then the vagabond Jews,
the sons of Sceva, the exorcists, could do, who would cast out Devils in the
name of that Jesus, whom they knew not, but as Paul preached who was a witness
of the life and power in himself, that casts the unclean spirit out of the
Creature; if they have a Gospel, let them freely preach it, as the truth of the
Gospel directs, or let them that hires them (...) them their wages.

And let not such an invented Idol of preaching any longer devour by by a Law,
so many hundred thousand pounds a year in the land, and shed the blood of the
innocent; I deny not the preaching of the Gospel, but own it, and such as are
able Ministers of the New Testament, which are not of the Letter but of the
spirit; but such merchandise upon the letter of the Scriptures I utterly deny;
Yet verily I dearly own the Scriptures of truth, and in my measure witness a
unity with the spirit that gave them forth, which shows to every member his
place and part in the body, and how and when to speak the word in due season,
which is the rule and order of Saints.

But some may say; Has not the Lords presence been amongst these people? They
may plead that they have eaten and drunk in his presence, yet workers of
iniquity, ye must depart, I know you not says the Lord. And it may be granted
that sometime since the war began in the Nation when they (...) could forsake
all for that measure of truth they then knew, when in straits they had not an
arm of flesh to trust to, when this day they knew not what to do the next,
they ceasing from man, and waiting upon the Lord in singleness of heart for
council, he did oftentimes appear in deliverances according to and beyond their
and our expectation, even so long as Israel followed the Ark of Gods covenant,
the Tabernacle of Testimony where the Council of the Lord was known, they went
up to battle and prospered; but when they went out of the Council (from the
witness) of God, then they fell by the hand of their enemies; there are many
in this Nation that in a measure did begin in the spirit, that will end in the
flesh; And salt that has loft its favor, what is it good for, but to be east
to the dunghill. Come all again to know and follow (the Tabernacle of God which
is with men,) the witness of God in every particular, which shows men the way
they ought to walk in, and therein they shall prosper.

Were all those that were (in times past of their own accord) joined to
Baal-peor to be destroyed from amongst the people of the Lord? And is the zeal
of those in authority in this Nation, once so eminent for the beginning of
reformation ^liberty (after so many revolutions, deliverances, engagements, and
experiences of what is good, and what is evil) now so cold for the Lord of
Hosts, as not to remove and make void all those bad laws that join people to or
maintain false worships, or other wise burden and grieve the Conscience of the
Just, and as much as in them lies, restrain the free operation of the spirit of
life in Gods people, and binds them as it were to seek for the living amongst
the dead.

How long, how long will men halt between two, If God be God then follow him,
if Baal be God follow him; no man can serve two masters, God and m^mmon; Verily
the Lord will not be mocked, and the Rulers and people of this Nation must not
much longer stagger at the work of the Lord, but in faithfulness follow him in
the work of Reformation and Liberty in Truth, or else those that have the
present opportunity given into their hands, which is very great, shall be
broken in pieces as those that have consulted with flesh and blood, and asked
not Counsel of the Lord, but gainsayed the Sp^^^ of our God which works in
his Saints and servants, and cries out for Reformation, which must have free
Liberty to manifest it self without the restraint of man's Laws, or else the
Father of spirits will manifest his power to break the opposers to pieces, even
as a potters vessel, for he will ease him of his adversaries and avenge him of
his enemies, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, the Decree is gone forth and
the execution hastenes.

Despise not prophecyings, quench not the Spirit which burns like a fire
against the wicked, and shall not cease until they be utterly consumed.

Verily the burden of the Lord is great in this matter, and the blood of the
slain cries loud for Justice upon the oppressor, yea the dumb creatures cries
out against cruelty, and the spirit says, How long Lord, how long shall it be
ere Truth and righteousness shall be brought forth in the earth, where the Lord
must reign, yea the whole Creation groans to be delivered from the bondage of
Corruption; and shall not the God of the wh^^^ (...) do just? yea verily he will
perfect deliverance for his people, and make speedy inquisition for the blood
of the slain, and take an account of all the cruel sufferings and oppressions
of his faithful witnesses and servants; And all this will the Lord require at
the hands of those in power in this Nation, that have had, and now have a DAY
to remove cruelty, tyranny and oppression from amongst this people, and do not
prevent his judgments by a speedy and diligent going on with the Lords work
required of them, and that in faithfulness and uprightness of heart to the
Lord. That just and Righteous Laws may be established and executed in the
earth, answering the witness of God in all men, that righteousness may run
down as a river, and Justice and true Judgment as a mighty stream, to the
terror of the evil doers, and to the refreshment and joy of those that fear the
Lord in the land, whose fear is not taught them by the precepts of men, as much
of the Nations is, whereby most of the people are swallowed up.

The eight month, 1659. This in the Lords fear do I give forth and testify,
who am a Lover of Righteousness, and a Friend to the peace and welfare of the
Nation, JOHN ANDERDON.

THE END.

