A TREATISE CONCERNING Religions, In Refutation of the Opinion which accounts
all INDIFFERENT.

Wherein is also evinced the Necessity of a Particular REVELATION, And the
Verity and preeminence of the Christian Religion above the Pagan, Mohammedan,
and Jewish rationally Demonstrated.

Rendered into English out of the French Copy of MOSES AMYRALDVS Late Professor
of Divinity at Saumur in France.

London Printed by M. Simons for Will. Nealand Bookseller in Cambridge and are
to be sold there and at the sign of the Crown in Duck-lane, 1660.

Lactantius de Falsa Sapientia, lib. 3. cap. 15. Nulla itaque ratio vel
scientia vel lex been vivendi, nisi in hac unica and vera and coelesti
sapientia constituta est, quae Philosophis fuit ignota. Nam illa terrena,
quoniam falfa est, fit varia and multiplex, sibique tota contraria est. Et
sicut unus est hujus mundi constitutor and rector Deus, una veritas; ita unam
esse ac simplicem sapientiam necesse est: quia quicquid est verum ac bonum, id
perfectum esse non potest, nisi fuerit singular. THE PREFACE.
IN the beginning of the precedent Age, upon the liberty taken by some persons
to discover and inveigh against Abuses crept into Christian Religion, and their
importunate instances for extermination of the same, succeeded in a short space
a division of all Europe into two Parties; either of them strangely addicted
and ligued to the Cause their inclinations lead them to. For, as on the side,
such to whom the novelty was acceptable, were transported with so incredible an
ardor to change the whole face of the Church, that gibbets and flames and even
the most horrid usages of ex^uisite cruelty were insufficient to deter them; so
on the other, they who would admit no alteration in the Belief of their
Forefathers, that they might restrain the former from effecting any, did not
scruple the counsels and practices of greatest violence; esteeming the same
necessary, where others were too short for rescuing and maintaining the
Religion received from our An^^stors: Insomuch that no barbarism was left
unacted, which could possibly be supplied by Zeal and Fury. Now it is beyond
all doubt, that both the one and the other of these Parties were impelled to
such extremities only by a strong persuasion, that the Doctrine which they
respectiv^ly contended for, was the true and sole mean to arrive at that
Happiness whereunto we all aspire. For there is no appearance, that men
composed of flesh and blood, and framed (as may seem) by Nature to Gentleness,
should either have exposed themselves to so many mischiefs, unless upon a
confidence that the matter, for which they suffered them, was worthy to be
maintained at the expense of all that is desirable in the world; or given
themselves over to the execution of such severities against their
fellow creatures and compatriots, had they not conceived that the Zeal of
Religion ought sometimes to extinguish all the sentiments of humanity it self.
And in truth, the conscience being the most exquisitely sensible part of man,
there is nothing more powerful then it to excite more vehement agitations, and
even more turbulent passions in his mind.

Since those days, there is risen a third sort of people, who imagine they have
discovered a middle way between these two, secure (they say) to avoid falling
both into the calamities, whereinto headiness and inconsiderate zeal
precipitated the one side, and into those inhumanities to which an immoderate
affection toward an ancient Religion induced the other. The Expedient is this:
That it is meet for a man to accommodate himself to that manner of serving God,
which is received by custom or authorized by the Magistrate, every one in his
respective Country, without much solicitousness and enquiry whether it be
Christian or Jewish, Pagan or Mohammedan; And moreover to fortify this new
Doctrine, they have provided themelves of certain reasons, to the end that in a
matter of such importance they might not be accused of departing rashly from
the common judgments of other men. It is their opinion, that God is of his own
nature so good, and the manner of rendering him exact and absolutely sincere
service, without the least blemish of error, so dubious and unknown, that
provided a man venerate him devoutly in his soul, and otherwise live honestly
and virtuously, he does not so narrowly regard our other services, but of his
elemency dispenses and bears with us if in so great a confusion of Religions we
do not discern all their deficiencies, or even in case we come to understand
them, we do nevertheless continue our conformity thereunto, out of tenderness
to the public peace and tranquillity: this gentle compliance conjoined with
the interior piety of the Heart, and upright comportments of Life, being a
Service far more acceptable to the Deity, then that furious Zeal for certain
particular. Opinions, which occasions so many troubles and miseries. This, they
determine, is sufficient, and that we ought to be satisfied with the same,
arresting our curiosity of more profound disquisitions; so far ought we to be
from imbroiling of States, or putting Commonwealths in combustion, and fleshing
our selves with such animosity one upon another, only for the cause of
Religion.

Certainly, if this opinion were true, these men would have brought to light an
Expedient so importunately beneficial to Mankind, that scarce any elogiums
could be excogitated equal to their praise. This would be the way to reduce the
minds of men to that happy quiet and composedness which we so tedously wish
they were brought to; it would conciliate mutual amity between such Nations as
variance in Religion has divided, and restore tranquillity to those States who
have been harrassed by wars and commotions bred on that occasion; It would
reunite Princes to their Subjects, and Subjects to their Princes, whom
dissensions in matters of Conscience have alienated; and return to our Europe,
which is more shattered with factions, and rent into Sects and different
Professions then any Part of the World, the peace and concord which is so
necessary unto it. And my particular suffrage, in case the verity of their
Persuasion could be made out, should be one of the forwardest to erect even
Temples and Altars to them, for being the authors of so inestimable a Good. But
although there may possibly be some persons to whom this Indifference is
chiefly acceptable out of the consideration of Peace, and the desire all good
men ought to have of seeing those great wounds closed up which Discordance of
Opinions has made in the most flourishing Kingdoms; yet my judgment of the
Contrivance is this, That how goodly pretext so ever it bears, there was
never a more pernicious opinion brought forth into the World, never any that
more artificially stifles all true sentiments of piety, or was more destructive
of true virtue; and consequently which ought to be more abhorred of every good
Religious conscience: And should they which maintain it, have conspired to
banish out of the Earth all mention of the Name of God, they could not have
invented any other effective complot then to imprint this belief in our mind^.

Now although this sort of people do not as yet make so numerous a Party as the
two other, and has not hitherto ventured abroad wholly unmasked; yet being it
is growing every day, and the Opinion of Indifference begins to bear a great
vogue, and particularly in France, insomuch that a considerable number of those
Persons which are esteemed the most polished either by the education of
Litterature or of the Court, are become imbued with it, and even some, it
seems, amongst those which wear the title of Divines incline to favor it; I
have judged it my duty, with the good leave of all true Christians, to engage
against this Error in this Treatise; both to undeceive, if possible, such as
are already mislead into it, and to pre-arm others against its poison, that
they be not inveigled by the bait: Hoping, that besides the bened ction of God,
to whom my purpose cannot be unacceptable, I shall find as well those who style
themselves Catholics as they who are termed the Reformed (notwithstanding the
r mutual Controversies) candid and favorable, the Error which I attaque being
equally enemy to both.

There are three kinds of men that esteem the exterior profession of all
Religions indifferent. The first acknowledge no Providence, and do not admit
God to be concerned with humane affairs, notwithstanding they believe him of a
nature so excellent in it self, and transcendent above all other beings, that
for this consideration alone be deserves our reverence and devotions: and this
was sometimes the Religion of Epicurus, to which these men have given new
birth. The second order confess a Providence governing the World, but
acknowledge no express revelation of the the Will of God in reference to his
Service: an Opinion held by the greatest part of the Philosophers. And thirdly,
another sort, who besides the instruction which may be collected from
Providence ruling the Universe, and the study of Nature, do assent that God
has revealed something particularly concerning himself and the manner of
service fitting to be rendered to him; yet esteem not themselves thereby obl ged
to follow a certain and determined Profession of Form of Religion: a Sect
unknown to the Ancients, and born in our own times. Suitably hereunto, I have
purposed to dispute against each Order apart, to the end the Discourse may be
more amply satisfactory, and the series of the contexture more dependent and
conspicuous: in which regard I have divided my Work into three Parts; of which
the First shall serve as a step to the Second, and that to the Third; and so
each of them distinctly treat the Question particularly assigned to it. But if
in some places the Discourses seem to divert a little from the subject, which
the Lemma's of the Chapters promise; besides that I do it not out of
incogitancy, and have my reasons for it, which perhaps shall appear in their
duo time; I hope to manage my Digressions which such moderation, that reducing
the Reader speedily into his way it will not be offensive to him to have been
drawn aside for a few moments to the consideration of things which I have
deemed convenient to the Universal design of my Work, One advertisement there
is I am to give him before hand, That I shall take the greater part of my
reasons from the emanations and motions of our own nature, and from conscience,
without dilating my self into those prolixe discourses, in which the
incomparable advantages of the Christian Religion above all others have been
sufficiently demonstrated by arguguments drawn from other topics, and from the
testimonies of the Ancients. For as those excellent persons that undertook it,
have outdone all that I am able to attempt, so verily I do not believe that in
treating with such as are endued with some sense of piety, there are any
reasons preferable to those which are desumed from the motions of the same; or
that toward such as have none at all, any other course of argumentation can be
very powerful and effective. I am not ignorant some writers have conjoined this
method with their other reasons; and so far is it from me to go about here to
detract any thing from their commendation, that on the contrary I wish the
labors of those great Men were as carefully perused, as their peculiar worth
and the importance of the matter deserve. But seeing Books, how good soever
they be, and in whatever language written, have their Time, at the end of which
they remain neglected in the dust of Closets, and almost buried in oblivion;
and that on the other side this profane humor is immortal, and gathers youth
every day, sprouting and enlarging to the shame of our Age; It ought not to be
accounted strange, if after others I bring my Endeavors to the rooting of it
up, or at least to intercept its future fertility. And possibly my design of
employing no other instrument then that of argument and reason will not be less
profitable to the greater part, in regard all the world is able to use it, then
the diligence others have had to enrich their Writings with Disquisitions of
rare and profound erudition, of which the Learned only are capable judges.
Besides, it many times happens, that what is produced upon the credit or
testimonies of Antiquity, has not much weight in this matter, with the
Intelligent. Because if it be ascribed to God, these Indifferents accuse it to
have been forged, by such as were infatuated by affection to Religion: and if
the original of it be referred to men, they are ready with a return that in all
ages men have deceived themselves: So that there remains scarce any other
principle from which to dispute against these people then that of Nature and
Reason, to which they would not be thought to renounce. The Eternal God, to
whose glory I undertake this work, guide my Mind and my Hand in the conduct of
the same.

A TABLE OF The Chapters contained in this TREATISE.
The first Part.
CHAP. I. THat according to the Doctrine of the Epicureans there can be no
assurance of the existence of a Deity. page 1 CHAP. II. Wherein the Service of
God consists; And what that is the Epicureans can rend^r him according to their
Principles. p. 17 CHAP. III. With what kind of adoration the Epicureans*
according to their Principles can ^e^erate the D^ity. p. 29 CHAP. IV. A more
particular consideration of the Honor which the Epicureans pretend to render to
God in respect of his Power, Goodness, Justice and Wisdom. p. 41 CHAP. V. The
Continuation of the Arguments evincing that the Epicureans cannot adore the
Deity in a due manner; with the solution of some Objections. p. 58. CHAP. VI.
Of the natural difference which is between Vice and Virtue; and of the Terrors
of Conscience: Whether it can be deduced from them that there is a Providence.
p. 80 CHAP. VII. Of the Epicurean Opinion concerning the Immortality of the
Humane Soul, and the Supreme Good, and what may redound from it.
The second Part.
CHAP. I. Of the Universal Consentment of all Nations in this Point, That there
ought to be one Certain Religion; And that it is Necessary that God himself
prescribe the model of the same. p. 137 CHAP. II. How greatly it imports true
Piety, That every man be thoroughly assured that his Religion is Good; And, that
this cannot be, unless it be of Divine Revelation. p. 158 CHAP. III. Of the
Immortality of the Soul, and of the Creation of the world: How greatly it
imports true Piety to be fully assured of both; And that a man cannot be so
without a particular Revelation. p. 183. CHAP. IV. How much true Godliness is
concerned in the certain knowledge, That the whole world is governed by a
special Providence; and That the same is no otherwise attainable but by
Revelation. p. 207 CHAP. V. Of what great moment it is to know whether Death be
a natural accident, or not; And that such knowledge cannot be attained without
Special Revelation. p. 220 CHAP. VI. Of the corruption of mankind; How much it
imports true piety to know the Original of it: which we cannot do without a
particular Revelation. p. 223 CHAP. VII. Of the Remission of sins; what
knowledge men naturally have thereof; And how much it is the interest of true
piety to be assured of the same. Also, of the Resurrection of the Body. p. 246
CHAP. VIII. What understanding can be had of true virtue without a particular
Revelation. p. 264 CHAP. IX. What the principal tokens and evidences are by
which this particular Revelation may be known and distinguished. p. 278
The third Part.
CHAP. I. THat such as acknowledge a particular Revelation cannot allow
indifference improfession of Religion. p. 295 CHAP. II. Which have been the
principal Religions: That profession of any sort is indifferent, even by the
verdict of the Pagan: In which the Divine Revelation is not found. p. 313 CHAP.
III. Whether the Profession of all Religions be Indifferent according to the
Religion of Mahomet. And that this Religion is not of Divine Institution. p.
340 CHAP. IV. Of the Religion of the Jews; whether it allows Indifference: And
how it ought to be held of Divine Revelation. p. 367 CHAP. V. That the time of
the duration of Moses's Law is expired: and consequently that some other must
be come in it is place. p. 389 CHAP. VI. That the Christian Religion, being more
excellent, has succeeded the Jewish. p. 404 CHAP. VII. That according to right
Reason and the Old Testament, the means of obtaining Salvation ought to be such
as the Christian Religion holds forth. p. 437 CHAP. VIII. That the promised
Messiah ought to be both God and man; whence it follows that there are several
persons in one simple Divine Essence: Also, of the Divinity of the Old
Testament. p. 459 CHAP. IX. That Jesus is the Messiah promised by the Old
Testament. Also of the Divinity of the New. p. 492 CHAP. X. That those who
affirm Christ took upon him the appellation of God, though he was not so, only
that he might thereby render his Doctrine more authentic, are apparently
destitute of all reason. p. 511 CHAP. XI. That Indifference in the professing
of all Religions is not justifiable according to the Christian Religion, which
darty soever be embraced. And for Conclusion, the Refutation of the pretext
propounded in the Preface. p. 525
A TREATISE Concerning RELIGIONS, Against those who esteem all Indifferent. The
first Part.
CHAP. I. That according to the Doctrine of the Epicureans there can be no
assurance of the Existence of a Deity.
ALthough the name of Epicurus was detestable to Antiquity, in regard that
placing the supreme attainment of human felicity in Delight, he seemed to
deprave and adulterate whatsoever is sublime and Generous in Philosophy; and
moreover, though succeeding Ages* have had it in as much or g^^^ter abhorrence,
(...) reason Time confirmed them in this opinion, that (...) End he aim^d at,
was to ex^^^^uish by his Maxims all the seeds of Honor, P^^^y, and Virtue; yet
it is not my design, in terming those Epicureans, against whom this
Dissertation is enterprized, to fasten that appellation upon them, as a piece
of infa^y, but only ^o ^^note and specificate them by the Conformity ^^y have
with that Person in his most capital Opinions. My purpose is not to represent
them in any other odious dress then that of the enormous and ill-beseeming
appearance of their Persuasions in matter of Religion; and the sequel of this
discourse shall manifestly enough discover, whether or no it has been with
Reason and Justice, that this Sect has in all times been regarded with a sort
of execration, not by popular judgment only, but also amongst the other
Philosophers. Now whereas there is no Nation so projectedly Savage, as to be
aliens to the belief of existence of some Deity, which mankind ought to adore;
no people, who do not essay by some kind of performances to express the
sentiments of Devotion and Honor they bear toward him; it is difficult to
imagine there should be any persons found of minds so immensely distant from
the common conceptions of reason, as to be able resolvedly to deny it. And the
reason of the difficulty is this. That Notices which are so Universal, having a
necessary foundation and firm root in Nature, it must needs be that such as
stifle the same in themselves, have in the first place violated and defaced
That. Hence it is that I would not formally accuse them who maintain that the
Deity does not intermeddle in the affairs of this lower World, and conceive we
ought to venerate the same only upon the account of its excellence, although
there is not to be attended from it either Punishment for Wickedness or
Compensation for Virtue; to have absolutely banished the knowledge of it from
amongst them, and to make profession of believing there is a God only to
escape the infamous title of Atheist. Cicero indeed reproaches Epicurus with
this artifice, and raises the suspicion upon his Followers; which nevertheless
shall not engage me to believe that the corruption of our Age could possibly
afford birth to such monsters. But howsoever that particular be, certain it is
beyond contradiction, that the Opinions of this Philosopher lead directly to
Impiety; and that if they who have embraced them believe the existence of God,
it is Nature which prevails in them, and which is never conquerable by all the
attempts and outrages they employ to conquer and suppress her.

Three things alone inform us there is a God; his Word, the World, and Man; and
they teach us in truth, so evidently, and represent him so livety, that such
eyes must be lostly obtenebrated, which do not perceive him therein. In his
Word we meet with wonderful Revelations, and Predictions ratified by Events
after diverse Ages, and with such Histories as no man knew, or could know; which
notwithstanding, after they came to be discovered, the World it self has
consented to, the mind of man acquiesces in them, and the shadows which have
remained of them in the Fables of the Pagans do serve for even indubitable
evidence and testimony unto them. On the other side it contains a doctrine of
that excellency, that no men of howsoever transcendent accomplishments, could
ever have invented the same; which is so conformable to our Reason, that
although it be admirably sublime, there is nothing in it which subverts or
incounters the soberness of our judgments; in a word, all the parts of it have
such excellent proportion amongst themselves, that so many different spirits
which have left it us in writing in several Ages, could not have carried on so
unitedly and with such uniformity a design of like grandeur, without a guidance
other then humane. Above all, there is remarkable in it a marveilous efficacy
to comfort a man in his misery, after it has first given him to understand it,
and unvailed his mind from the ignorance of himself and his own calamity; which
without doubt are effects, whereof our conscience instructs us we cannot be the
cause. Lastly, this Divinity, wh^^ men have sought after, as it were, groping^y
in all Ages, is manifested to us therein with such clearness, that after so
long experience which we have made of our natural blindness, it can be nothing
but enormous stupidity not to see that God reveals himself therein, and that no
other could have spoken so suitably of his nature and of his perfections. In
the mean while the Epicureans do not receive this Revelation as proceeded from
God, nor attribute so much to it by far as to the Writings of Plato, Cicero,
and Aristotle. If they may be believed, all the Prophets were men of alienated
understandings, and the Apostles vagabond circulators, who went about abusing
the greatest part of the World. So that it is not from these men that they have
learnt this truth, That there is a God; for if they gave credit to them in this
particular, and avouched to hold it from them, why should they disbelieve them
in the rest? Or how is it credible that so great and frontless Imposters as
they imagine the Prophets and Apostles were, should be the first discoverers of
so excellent a truth? Or if they did not first discover it so as to merit the
title of its Inventors, and that notwithstanding we hold it from them, whence
can it be conjectured they should have drawn it? It remains of necessity, that
if they had it not from Divine Revelation, they attained it by study and
contemplation, either of the World or of themselves.

As to the World, it is easy that it could not be made by it self, and
consequently must have an Author. The construction of so vast a fabric speaks
the power of its Architect; and its ^dmirable motions, which have remained so
re^^lar and constant after so many Ages, offer to our wonder his
incomprehensible Wisdom. In the Harmony of such variety of things, and contrary
qualities, linked one with another, and in the convenient disposure of all the
creatures to a subserviency in mutual offices, without which the World could
not subsist, his Goodness is presented visible, as it were to our eye, and
palpable by our hand. In the shaping of every thing and the apt Symmetry of its
parts, appears an Art not only inimitable by us, but even such as we are not
capable perfectly to comprehend. The conservation of the Universe, and
administration of all it contains, clearly evidences a Providence conducting
natural causes to their effects, and animating them with powers to produce
them, which disposes of all evenements of things agreeably to his will, wisely
ordering the most casual and contingent. And although there are not wanting
some to complain of his regiment, and to reproach to him oftentimes the
prosperity of the Bad, and calamitous estate of the Good; yet it does visibly
enough defend and recompense Virtue, and on the contrary avenges Wickedness
frequently, sometimes even to the displaying of dreadful judgments upon
eminent impieties. Insomuch that there is not a Star in the Heavens, nor a
Flower upon the Earth, whether considered in the gross or in parcel; but
declares aloud that there is a God, Crea^^^, Cons^rvator, and Governor of all
things. Nevertheless the Epicureans do not acknowledge that the World ever had
a Beginning* or if it had according to their opinion, yet they will not confess
that it was framed otherwise then by the fortuitous concourse of infinite
pete^t Atoms; And for what concerns the regiment and conservation of it, they
will not have the Deity employed in the Government of Nature and things here
below; and do not behold, as they profess, in all the Universe any footstep of
his Providence. For it is their general Apophthegm, that God has no affairs of
his own, and takes no part in those of another, least he should interrupt his
repose and the serene tranquillity of his eternal beatitude. So that if we
believe them, all things come to pass in the World by a fatal necessity, or as
it pleases Fortune, who being blind and wonderfully temerarious, has neither
counsel nor aim in her actions. There remains the consideration of Man.

In our selves we may in the first place observe the structure of our Bodies,
which are composed after so fair a Symmetrie, that the most excellent
entendments are ravished and confounded in the speculation; and even the
illterate and they which regard it more superficially, cannot but express their
astonishment at the same. In effect, were there in them only the Masterpiece
of our Eyes, and that Activity of our Hands which renders us so expedite to all
sorts of services, there would be enough to raise amazement in us, and direct
us to the knowledge of that infinite Wisdom whereunto we ow our Originals.
Moreover, besides this Life which is the Energy of our Soul, and that
imperceptible dispensation of spirits, which she manages with so much diligence
for the motions of our Members, and the functions of our Senses; The light of
our Intellect, its agitations so vivid, regular conduct, and great capacity to
comprehend all things, The faculty which inables us to reason concerning the
Deity and dispute of it one against another, sufficiently evidences that there
is some Principle of Understanding without us, from which this ray we posses is
derived into our Nature. For it must needs be that we have drawn it from
without us; since by it we so far surpass our selves that our Fathers confess
themselves unable to have communicated it to their chr^^ten; as also, for their
own particular, that they did not receive it from their fathers or Ancesters.
More signally, the Fear which men naturally have, when they apprehend the Deity
will revenge their misdoings; and the Hope to find support from it, with which
they comfort themselves as often as straits and necessity afflicts them; two
Passions which are almost the sole motives that ordinarily induce men to
Religion; these discover indubitably that there is some Power, which makes it
self universally perceptible to all, as well in punishments as in benefits and
recompenses. For how could it come to pass that all men should so conspire with
an equal consentment in the knowledge of one and the same object, so remote as
they are one from another, and separated by so many Mountains and Seas, but
especially so divided and different in every thing else, in all manners,
sentiments, rules of Life, garbes and customs; u^^ess Nature the common ^other
had imbued them with the same instinct? Whence it comes to pass that as they
vary even to admiration in the establishment of their Policies, either the
diversity of the Climats of their habitation and the difference of their Temper
and affairs obliging them thereunto, or being carried by the levity of their
minds; and nevertheless all accord in this, That some form of Policy is
necessary, since the society of men could not otherwise subsist: So we may
remark an incredible variety in the Mysteries and Religious Ceremonies of
diverse Nations, accordingly as they have received them from the tradition of
their Ancestors, or respectively followed the guidance of their own humors and
imaginations in the invention and continuance of the same; but yet they are
unanimous in this, That there ought necessarily to be some form of Religion,
because the piety of man toward God could not otherwise subsist. Now as it is
the evidence of the thing it self which obliges the Reason of men to judge that
they ought to maintain some Societies amongst themselves; so that whoever
acknowledges not the same, but denies to follow these natural inclinations,
seems to have put off humanity; in like manner it is the evidence of the thing
which constrains them to acknowledge it requisite to have some sort of Piety
toward God; insomuch that he that rejects these suggestions of Reason, does no
less then renounce the nature of man. But according to the Doctrine of
Epicurus, we do not hold our Being from God, and have nothing either to hope or
sear from his Providence. On the contrary, if their suffrage be creditable,
that Philosopher, in having delivered men from the frights which conscience
gives them in reflecting on impious actions, deserves incomparable glory, and
such as might in some sort equal him and his disciples to God. The life of
mortals (says La^retius, Lib. 1.) lying before as it were oppressed and
groaning under Religion, which appeared from the Heavens against it with a
dreadful aspect, Epicurus was the first amongst men who dared to advance
against it and encounter it.

Quare Religio p^dibus subjecta vicissim
Obteri^^ ^^os ena^^^t victoria coelo.
Whereas therefore all these things have not been effectual to persuade them
that God created the world, and that he preserves and rules it; whence have
they taken those reasons which have any appearance of sufficiency to prove to
them that there is such a Being? It were a strange thing, that they should not
see a whit amongst so many marveils which are resplendent on all sides, and
have ravished all Nations, however naturally enemies of the Deity, with
beholding them, and enforced them to submit themselves to do homage to him ^^d
render him some kind of veneration; ^^d y^^ be so quick-sighted in other
reasons which no other persons besides themselves could ever comprehend.

It is true, Epic^^us sometimes affirmed that this truth, There is a God; Also,
It is meet that all men honor him* was of the number of those which are called
Common Conceptions, or Proleptical Opinions, because without instruction of
others, ev^^ one is teacher of the same to himself. And peradventure these men
will also aver that they have drawn the knowledge thereof from this fountain.
But this will in no wise warrant them; For whence come those Common notions,
and from what source have we anticipated them? Indeed we do not deny but there
are certain Verities which are so evident that the Faculty whose office it is
to contemplate them and discern the true from the false, cannot mistake in the
judgment it makes of them; and we know also that the humane Intellect has a
natural disposition to such acting; whence it proceeds that all Nations have
consented thereunto, and always passed a uniform judgment of them. Upon this
consideration, they have been termed Common Conceptions by the Ancient
Philosophers, because they were not peculiar to the Athenians or Spartans,
Peripateticks or Stoics; but were received by all that have the use of Reason.
Such is for example, this Proposition, The whole is greater then its part: But
others of deeper intelligence have believed that we do not bring them with us
every man out of his mothers womb, but that they are produced from objects
which have offered to us occasions of reasoning and collecting those general
Maxims from several particular experiences. So that the first person that
divided a thing into two parts, repeating the bipartition over and over, and
always observing that the parts of it were less then the whole in its
intireness; and then coming from these particular observations to consider the
nature of the thing in it self, the discursive Faculty sum'd up that universal
Theoreme. The original knowledge of which is consequently deduced from the
presence of objects, which furnished the matter to the ratiocination, from
whence such conclusions do emerge. Now the Epirureans cannot aver that they
attained the knowledge of the Deity by this means; since they maintain that
nothing has presented them with any shadow or footstep to raise their
discourse to the Nature of God. For if the knowledge of him be deducible from
the contemplation of sensible things, it must be in the way of mounting to
knowledge of the cause by the mean of its effects: but according to the
Epicureans, there is no such relation of affinity between God and the objects
of our senses. How then? Would they assert a like correspondence between the
understanding of man and this proposition, There is a God, to cause us
acquiesce in it forth with without further ratiocination, as there is between
the Eye and Corporeal Light, to acknowledge it as soon as it is seen? I conceive
this is not their opinion, or at least it ought not. For Light carries it is
credential in it is natural splendour, as all other sensible qualities of bodies
have something in them to make themselves perceived, and which Characterises
them; so that to know them there is no need of (...) thing more then to apply
them (...) to the Organ of sense; Whereas this proposition of the existence of
the Deity does not demonstrate it self, nor immediately prove its verity to the
Understanding. Reasons must be fetched from elsewhere to demonstrate it, and
other principles employed, which are naturally more known to us, and have
greater proportion with our Faculties. Wherefore, he that receives not any of
those proofs which are brought from with (...) to support it, can be no more
assured of it; then he that is not yet come forth of his Mothers Womb can be
certain of the truth o^ this Enunciation, There is light in the Sun, were he
capable of understanding the words in which it is conceived.

I know not but some of these Worthies may oppose, that we hold this verity
from tradition of the Ancients, seeing they have left us very many others, of
which we are not at all in doubt: For prudent persons have always ascribed much
to the opinions of their Ancestors, especially if they were such as achieved
any thing toward the establishment and conservation of Commonwealths, or made
provision for containing men in the respect due to Religion. The reason of
which is a persuasion that they were more illuminated then their Posterity,
either because the world was not so invaded with corrupt manners in their time,
or for that they were not yet much removed from the Beginning of things. But in
case this should be urged by them, yet it will be perpetually necessary that
those Ancients received this truth from without themselves, since they could
not have it from themselves any more then we. Shall it therefore be likewise
from tradition of their predecessors? If so, we shall run back to infinity; and
whereas all other traditions have necessarily had some beginning, this will be
found to be eternal. Now this is a thing which has not so much as the
appearance of reason, especially in the mouths of them who are obliged to
confess that the World it self had a beginning, being fabricated by the casual
coalition of Atoms. For if the World began to be, there is no ascending by
diverse generations of men to eternity; but we must at length subsist in the
first of all, who cannot have had this important truth from himself any more
then we, but from the revelation of God, who must have discovered the same to
him, to the end he might ascertain his Descendants thereof, and leave it to
them in deposito to the end of the world. Now in what place was it that God
made this revelation, if, as these people contend, there is not, nor ever was,
either in man, the world, or any Oracle whatsoever, any trace or token of the
existence of his Being and of his Divine Virtues? And if God had so much care
at the beginning to reveal this Truth to the first of men, to the end they
might not lead a life altogether semblable to that of Brutes; why do they deny
his Providence, of which this is an effect supremely important? Again, If God
was pleased his Providence should appear in this occasion, why should he
instantly after arrest the actions of it; as if after having let escape either
constrainedly or by inadvertency a beam of his Divinity he retired himself
incontinently from before our eyes, and became envelopp'd in darkness eternally
impenetrable? Lastly, what will be the certainty or incertainty of this
tradition, I will use no other proof to show, then such as I shall draw from
the confession of the Epicureans themselves. It is a tradition as ancient and
as constant amongst men in general, That God takes care of the concernments of
mankind, as is in the School of Epicurius the tradition That there is a God.
Moreover, the world, and the occurrences that arrive in it every day, present
the humane understanding with proofs incomparably more evident that there is a
Providence which governs us, then this proposition, There is a God, furnishes
us alone with assurances of its proper verity. For on what side soever it be
regarded, wholly naked, as I have laid it open, it affords not any means to the
mind to close with it for true, and settle it self upon it; whereas on all
hands we meet with the materials of our reasonings upon which we ground the
belief of a Providence. Nevertheless Epicurus and his Disciples have dared to
reject flatly the conduct of Providence, without weighing either the tradition
of their predecessors, or the evidences which support the same with such
apparent firmness. What will hinder all the remainder of men from being as
inclinable to deny the existence of God, if we have no other assurance of it
then so wild and vagous a tradition?

Let us allow Epicurus a little more, and suppose the case that Nature alone
has imbued us with this truth from our birth, without any need of receiving
the impression of it by the contemplation of objects we have before our eyes;
Yet it is incomprehensible how certain Idea's of truths, purely intellectual,
could be ingraved* and preserve their lineaments in the materials of which we
are framed; besides that experience teaches all our fathers, that when they
gave being to their children, it was at such time as they least of all thought
of these Common Conceptions. But grant it possible; yet what is it which they
understand by Nature? For if by that word they pretend to denote the concourse
of those indivisible Particles, of which their fancy will have the the world
composed; or rather that Order which is between causes purely natural and their
effects (however other Philosophers describe it) seeing this kind of nature
has not it self any apprehension of these verities, how has it communicated
that to man which it has not, and whereof it is incapable to receive the least
lineaments or seeds? It must needs be therefore, that it was God who writ them
in the Understanding of man, either in him that had them first, to transmit the
same to his Descendants, which is absolutely unimaginable; or in every
individual person, from the instant of their conception, which would be highly
necessary. Now if God has had so great care of mankind as not to suffer one
single person to come into the world, in whose breast he has not first
imprinted this divine Conception, how irrational is it to esteem him negligent
both of us and of that which concerns us? And seeing he has taken this care of
us at a time wherein we could not render him any honor; why should we not hope
to obtain new benefits from his hand by our gratitude and by our prayers? I
conclude therefore, that notwithstanding the pertinacious gainsaying of these
people, and with whatever artifice they endeavor either to maintain or disguise
their sentiments, they believe not at all the existence of a God; or if they do
believe it, they have such persuasion from arguments which induce to the
acknowledgment of his Especial Providence.

CHAP. II. Wherein the Service of God consists; And what that is the Epicureans
can render him according to their Principles.
ALthough the precedent Discourse should not yield us this result, That the
Epicureans being constant to their own Principles, cannot be assured of the
existence of a Deity; and albeit we should have received this Common Notion
from the faint impress of that which is called Nature in our Soul, without
owing it to God: Yet this knowledge being so loose and uncertain, it is
impossible it should lead us in a due manner to render that honor and worship
to God which our duty obliges us to; because it is natural to us to be but
little solicitous of such things, of whose Being we are not indubitably
assured, and especially if they be such as utterly inconcern us. We reverence
our Kings out of regard to the eminence of their Dignity, but they govern and
protect us, and the peace of the Commonwealth and safety of every particular
person depends on the homage and obedience which is rendered to them. But how
few are there, that in the whole course of their lives have so much as one
reverential thought for Princes and Potentates, who are separated from them
with only an arm of the Sea or a Mountain? and how much less do we intertain
any thoughts of alliegiance and awfulness toward the Mogal, or Prester John,
or the great Cham of the Tartares? Yet if there should be any one so sensibly
respectful of Royal Dignity, as not to think of the Kings of Persia or China,
but with some veneration; in such case nevertheless it is requisit^ that he be
absolutely persuaded, that there are Kings in Persia and China, and give an
entire belief to the relations that affirm it. But I imagine there is no man so
unboundedly superstitious in this particular, as to bear honor in his breast
toward those that rule in the Southern Continent, only upon inducement of
having seen such a Part of Earth drawn in the foot of a Map, and that there is
some likelihood they are inhabited. In like manner who can doubt that the
worship which the Epicureans render to God is extremely cold and languid, and
that they would not bear it patiently if the remembrance of him were
exterminated out of the world? Nevertheless, being they seem desirous men
should believe otherwise of them, let us undertake the inquiry, into the
measure and rate of that honor they pretend to express toward him according to
their Principles. For in regard Epicurus once writ a Tract concerning Piety
toward the Gods (as Diogenes, Laertius and Cicero have recorded) he seems to
have been willing it should be conceived that his intention was not to banish
Religion from amongst mankind.

To pass by at present the particular of outward Ceremonies, which occur in all
Religions, whereof we shall treat hereafter; and to confine my self to that
only which is most essential to, and as it were the soul of, Religion, I
assert that all the service mortals are able to render to the supreme Being is
reducible to these four principal Heads; First, Adoration of his excellent
nature above all other Beings in the Universe; Next, Affiance in his goodness,
with expectation of assistance from him in exigencies. Thirdly, The expressing
of Thankfulness for benefits already received. And lastly, The embracing and
practice of Virtue, in the conduct of life, out of regard and obedience to him.
As to the trust and dependence upon his goodness, the most devout Nations have
always with good Reason esteemed it a principal part of his honor and of his
service. For if there be any thing that can challenge veneration in the World,
it is the power to do good; if any thing love and commendation, it is the will
to put that power in use. Wherefore, for that whatever is venerable and
praiseworthy in the inclinations of men, must be in a degree infinitely more
eminent in the Deity, as well because of the infinite perfection of his being,
as in that he is the source from whence all other things derive the perfections
they own; of necessity these two properties are to be found in him; One, that
he takes pleasure to expand himself in acts of goodness toward his creatures,
and particularly toward mankind, in whom his image is resplendent; The other,
that his power to do Good is incapable of circumscription. Hence it was that
the most Religious people, as I said above, have accounted that God became
offended if men had less confidence in him then was suitable to the merit of
that infinite power and eminent goodness; and in the Books we receive for
sacred, such persons are expressly praised and commended, whose minds were
reposed with greatest assurance upon his care, and which remained unshaken by
the assault of great distresses and perplexities.

Now as to performance of this sort of service toward God, it is absolutely
renounced by the Epicureans, in as much as they recount it amongst the
principal requisites of the Divine Beatitude, that as he is without all
participation of our necessities, so he does not give himself the trouble of
having any resentment or solicitousness concerning them. Whereby, under pretext
of advancing the glory of his felicity, they blemish the splendor of his
Goodness, in which consists the principal perfection of his Being. It is, most
certainly, a happy condition to enjoy such an affluence of all sorts of good
things, as not to stand in need of others, and to be sufficient to ones self.
But it is also beyond denial incomparably more honorable to afford to another
some participation of this happiness, especially when it is incapable of any
diminution, saving by a perpetually reserved and solitary enjoyment, without
communicating to any other person. They ought to have ascribed to so perfect a
nature at least as much commendation of benignity as Ennius gives him that
shows the way to deviating travelers, or bestows fire upon his neighbor, or
lights his Candle. For so are his words recited by Cicero; Homo qui erranti
comiter monstrat viam,
Quasi lumen de suo lumine accendit, facit,
Vt nihilo minus ipsi lucea^t, cum illi accenderit.


For the next particular, Prayer, they are so far from allowing it a part of
the service of God, that on the contrary they look upon it as a thing rather
meriting scorn or laughter, being either an evidence of poorness of spirit in
the adverse accidents of fortune, or a token of abject slothfulness in such as
refusing to take the pains for providing by industry and vigilance to their
needs, recurre to God for support of their worthlesseness.

Certainly if there be any good consolation to be had in the sufferance of
calamities, it will as soon be found among those that follow a Religion,
whatever it be, as among those by whom all sorts are universally rejected; and
if examples of magnanimity are to be met with, they must not be sought for
amongst such as place the supreme Good of mankind in corporeal Pleasure. This
opinion is too soft and effeminate of it self, to inspire men with vigorous and
masculine sentiments in the midst of adversities. This is not from the School
that gave us Cato's and Regulus's; but a more likely Seminary of such as
Aristippus and Heliogabalus. Whereas on the other side, the Doctrine that
instructs men to address to the Deity in time of their afflictions, does not
prescribe them to abandon the ship to the incertainty of the tempest, and to
lay aside the practice of prudence, under color that all is within the care of
divine Providence. Not the Christians only, but likewise the Philosophers
themselves have constantly believed, that the Providence of God and Prudence of
man do very well consist together. But the Epicureans manifest that they are
not at all indebted to themselves in point of good opinion, in that being no
more then the dream of a shadow (as Pindar expresses it, (...)) they
nevertheless esteem themselves sufficiently foresighted and intelligent to
pourvey and take order for all their necessities, without the assistance of a
sovereign power. Is it in them to prevent the Hail from frustrating the hopes
of Harvest in the destruction of their Corn, or to hinder the Inundations of
Rivers from ravaging their fields? Can they forecast against Pestilences and
Mortalities, or secure themselves from the Gout and Stone? So far short is
their ability in these particulars, that they know not how to warrant
themselves from being strangled by the seed of a grape or a ^ly, if such a
contingency should betide them. But this is not the only Virtue they vaunt of;
for another part of their glory is in the invincible firmeness of their
courage. What strength soever Virtue may have attained to amongst them, by
serving as a handmaid to the pleasure of the Body, and pourveying all ways and
means to foster the same, which it seems is the main employment they assign it;
yet it can be hardly imagined, that an Epicurean should fall into the
calamities of Priamus, or feel the pains of poor Philoctetes, without a sigh or
exclamation. And that magnificent boast, that the Sage of Epicurus would cry
out, even in the Bull of Phalaris, that he was at ease, was never accounted in
the censure of the truly judicious but for a vain and extravagant Rodomontade.
Religion, on the contrary, is purposed to show men their vanity, of which
experience convinces them; it teaches them to depend absolutely on Heaven, and
thereby frames them to humility, the Virtue best becoming mortality; affording
them in the mean time a support in God incomparably more firm, and a refuge of
greater assurance, then all they are ever able to fancy or invent of themselves.

Of grateful acknowledgement for the benefits which we enjoy as Tenants from
the divine Liberality, there is no mention at all among those who esteem
themselves not obliged to it for the least hair of their heads. For whereas
they affirm that the Universe was modeled in the excellent order we behold it,
by the accidentary coagmentation of infinite little bodies; it must needs be
consequent to their opinion, that the first men were framed by the tumultuous
and turbulent concourse of those small particles, and that the Architecture of
all our members, and the admirable vivacity of our Understandings, do also ow
their Original unto the same. Verily, these men are much to be wondered at,
whose gross belief determines the world and man, in the fabric of whom appears
so great Art and Wisdom, to have been made by chance; notwithstanding they are
convinced that of a million of letters huddled together and scattered upon the
ground, they can never with a thousand experiments by the same chance compose
the two first verses of the Aeneis. What reason therefore can they pretend to
justify their perversity, in choosing rather to ow the wonderful Machine of
their Eyes, and the Understanding which is the Eye of the Soul, to Fortune,
which has none at all, then to God, whom themselves make profession to
acknowledge for a wise and intelligent Nature.

It remains then, to inquire, whether from the exercise of Virtue, which is
practiced amongst men, there may, according to the opinion of this Sect, any
honor accrue to the Divine nature. We dispute not at present whether they can
be virtuous, or not; although it be difficult to conceive they should hold
Virtue in any esteem, who have none at all of Piety; and what charity they can
have toward men, who are void of gratitude for the benefits they receive from
God; and lastly, what discrimination they can make between Vice and Virtue, who
believe not God ever distinguished them one from another by Laws, or that
Justice and equity have any thing more to recommend them besides the authority
of Legislators, and advantages of State. Our search only is, whether from the
Virtue of the Epicureans, admitting them not destitute of all, there redounds
any glory to the Divine Nature. If there do, it consists either in this that
they devote themselves to render obedience to him; for it is glorious to great
persons to have their inferiors obey them; or in regard it is he that produces
whatsoever is good in them; as the commendation of the effect reflects upward
to the cause; or because, in imitating him, they represent the image of his
Virtue in their own; being we cannot praise a pourtraict for the excellency of
its air and Beauty, without intimating as great applause of the fair
countenance, it represents. Now in the first place, whereas God has not
manifested his will to men in this point, how can they obey it? For where there
is neither law nor commandment, it is an easy truth there is no place either
for transgression or obedience. And here it is fruitless to fly to the umbrage
of those Proleptical Opinions, which are naturally imprinted in our spirits.
For if Nature has ingraved in the soul at their first conception, that God
commands them to be Virtuous, how is this consistent with their denying that
the Supreme Being is interessed in that which concerns us, seeing he has taken
order in the most important particular of our life, which is to give us rules
for the conduct of the same agreeably to reason? And how could Nature, of her
self destitute of all knowledge of Vice and Virtue, endue us with these Idea's
and common Notices, without the instinct of the Deity? Moreover, how is it come
to pass that Nature has principled them to discriminate between Honest and
Nesarious actions, without instructing them at the same time, that to these
latter belongs Vengeance, and to the other Recompense and Praise; and that
there can be no other then God, from whose hands both the one and the other is
to be expected. For true it is, the Difference between Vice and Virtue is not
more naturally known, then it is naturally known that Virtue challenges some
Commendation, and that Vice ought to be attended with Blame for its
retribution; Commendation and Blame, I say, which are but slight matters, and
of small consideration, if they be hoped or feared only from the mouths of
Men. Are the Censure or Estimate we make one of another of equivalency to what
Nero and Sardanapalus have merited by their Villainies and Abominable
turpitudes? How are they hurt now, in that their Memories are infamous and
execrable? And the Applause which we give in these days to the Virtue of
Regulus, is it a recompense proportionate to the miseries which he endured for
love of his Country? But these Opinionists manifest that it is not in obedience
to God that they live honestly and uprightly, if at least there be discernable
any Tract of Honesty and Justice in their Lives.

Nor do they more liberally ascribe to God the glory of their Virtue, as being
the Author of the same; otherwise, they should of consequence acknowledge that
they received some benefit from him, yea the greatest of all benefits, and
without which all the rest together deserve not to be called such; a confession
which they would not make even upon the Rack. So that it remains only, that
the Image of God himself is relucent in their Virtue. But how will that hold
good? Since according to the principles of this singular Discipline, the Nature
of God, how luminous soever it be in it self, is so abstruse from mortals
knowledge, that we cannot comprehend the least resemblance of the lineaments of
Virtue with its Prototype. We may sooner come to understand what are the
properties of the Loadstone, or the causes of the Reciprocation of the Sea, or
the most unknown influences of the Stars: because it is possible at least to
discover something of them in their effects, and the assiduous contemplation we
spent upon them would perhaps clear up a little portion of the obscurities
which enwrap them. But God being not revealed to us in any effect, on what
rocks shall we climb up into the Heavens to behold him there, or with what
instrument shall we sound his Abysses? Now there is no way to comprehend the
resemblance which is between the Model and its Image, but by having either both
before the eyes, or at least a lively Idea of both in the mind. Add hereunto,
that whosoever should imitate the Deity according to the Maxims of these
Teachers, should never do good to any man: he should never afford succor to
the Miserable, because God does not suffer himself to be moved at their cries,
and cannot admit his Beatitude to be disquieted by resentments of compassion in
such cases: he should take no care of the Societies of men, since God leaves
them at random: he should punish no malefactors, being God connives at their
crimes and is not at all offended with their enormities; good men should never
find relief and support from his hands, seeing God has no regard to the
oppression that afflicts them; or if he behold the same it is with neglect and
inflexibility: he should enjoy all his pleasures by himself, because God does
not communicate his felicity to any other person. But in as much as God is
eternally happy, and injoys ineffable contentments, it is absolutely impossible
they should resemble him. For who is he in the World that can boast himself to
be happy? and in this brevity of our Life, who is there so foolish as not to
despair of immortality. But in that wherein they can imitate him, if they
undertake to do it, they render themselves the most unprofitable men of the
Earth, and cannot so much as exempt themselves from the reproof of being
vicious and wicked. The nearer they approach to that God whom they describe
with such qualifications, the greater infamy will they draw upon their
conversation; on the other side, the further they recede from him, the more
recommendation will be due unto them. But I do not conceive, but such persons
in whom is remaining any spark; I will not say of conscience and respect
toward God, but of judgment and common sense, will account this Doctrine yet
far more abominable then it is false, extravagant and inconsistent. Now all the
Piety of the Epicureans amounts to this, that they adore the Deity out of
respect to his Virtues, and the excellence of his Nature; which in what manner
they can perform, is our next inquiry.

CHAP. III. With what kind of Adoration the Epicureans, according to their
Principles can venerate the Deity.
WE do not gainsay to Epicurus, or those which follow his steps in our times,
but that the Deity in respect of the excellency of his Nature is to be adored,
although neither the punishment for wickedness, or the reward of Virtue lay in
his hands: so far are we from pretending that, that by attributing to him
perfections incomparably more excellent then they do, we represent him, in
himself worthy of much greater veneration. Notwithstanding, we judge, that this
consideration alone, if his care and government of humane affairs be renounced,
is insufficient to induce men to render him such honor as is proportionable in
any measure to what we ow him; for, as to the performance of such as
correspendent to this natural excellence, it is a point too high for the utmost
vigor of our Understanding to attain to, however exalted by culture and
industry. There are three motives which use to be most prevalent with us, to
conceive any esteem of things; namely, The profit we receive by them, The
pleasure we find in them, and Their natural beauty. Now there is no person whom
experience has not taught, that this last consideration is the least powerful
of all, and that there is rarely found any affected with it, where at least one
of the other two, or both do not accompany it. Hence it comes to pass, that the
number of those is small who devote themselves to the searches of things of no
great use to humane Life; few that study those Sciences which lie in
Contemplation in comparison of them which apply themselves to the Arts which
afford some fruit or benefit; and even the greatest part of those speculative
Inquirers make their Theories subservient to the exercise of the Sciences,
wherewith they support themselves; as Natural Philosophy to Medicine, Geometry
to Architecture and Peinture, Astrology to Agriculture and Navigation, and in
like manner of the rest. The Metaphysicians themselves, do not willingly spend
their pains in that Science, which is the chief and most eminent of all, and
has for its object the things which most deserve our knowledge, but to the end
to teach the same, and that only for the further end of profit which accrues
to them by it. Wherefore if it should once come to be imprinted in the sancies
of men, that there is nothing to be expected from the Deity, all thoughts of
him would soon be worn out of their minds; and there would not be found so much
as the thousandth part of mankind, that would concern themselves with any
greater care of him, then they do of the valor of Hector, or the exploits
achieved by Hercules and Theseus. Concerning the second attractive, Pleasure
which has a very powerful influence over our affections, it is difficult to
imagine that there is ever so little in the knowledge of God, such as Epicurus
represents to us. For all the delectation which the knowledge of things
affords, when there arises no other benefit from them, is in a manner derived
from one of these two fountains; either in that they are worthy to be known
because of their natural beauty, as the Heavens with their motions, and the
constant courses and revolutions of the Planets; or for that we behold Truth
most lively and clearly displayed in them, which in what subject soever it be
found, is supreamly agreeable to the Mind of man. As for example, One esteemed
it so amiable in this proposition, That in a right angled Triangle, the side
which subtends the right angle, makes a square equal to the squares made of the
two sides containing the same, that in great ravishment, having been the first
that found out the demonstration thereof, although he could hope no profit from
it, it is recorded that he went home and sacrificed a whole Hecatomb. Now
besides, that to be in a capacity of receiving Delectation from the knowledge
of such things as these, it is requisite to be gifted with a quick, piercing,
and comprehensive Wit, and that the number is not great, which Nature has
favorably framed hereunto, and of consequence only a few persons will be
affected and drawn to the knowledge of Epicurus's Deity by that motive; the
contentment even of them that employ themselves in the same cannot be
considerable. For, as to the certainty, and assuredness of such knowledge, I
would demand wherein it must consist; seeing according to their assertion, all
that can be known of God is drawn from I know not what natural vagous and
indetermin'd notion, which has not been of force enough to restrain all
Nations from ascribing an innumerable variety of shapes to the Deity, this of
one sort, and that of another, not seldom repugnant and contradictory. And
whereon is the confidence of Epicurus grounded, when he boasts in particular of
the clearness of his knowledge in this regard, whilst the God which he
sometimes fancied to himself is rather a Chimera, or the extravagance of a man
in a Phrenzy, then a conception suitable to a Philosopher or deducted from
sober inference of reason. The Deity (says he in Cicero) has not a body, but
as it were a body: nor blood; but something of near equivalence to blood.
Notwithstanding, he teaches that this nature, consisting neither of body nor
spirit, and consequently whereof it is impossible for him to frame any rational
Idea in his imagination, is shaped after the resemblance of a humane body,
because that is of all figures the most agreeable and commodious. But if all
the Conceptions wherewith Epicurus and the other Philosophers have offered to
represent the Deity be thus confused and uncertain, it is incredible they
should yield any solid* pleasure* and so the Adoration which will result from
thence, cannot be but very slight, flitting and defective.

In effect, the first consideration which ought to be made of the nature of
God, is to know whether he be finite or infinite in his essence; forasmuch as
infinity of essence implies infinity of all properties and Virtues; and on the
other side, if the essence be limited, it is necessary that all faculties or
Virtues which are in God be reduced and proportioned to the measure of his
extention. And this is absolutely important to be known, for the rendering unto
God the honor which appertains to him. For if his essence be limited, and
consequently, if the attributes which are in him worthy of adoration be
likewise limited; although they should far surpass what ever can be venerable
in our nature, yet it follows, there will be always a proportion between him
and us. So that the Adoration of the Deity will be an honor but of the same
species with that which we render to some Worthy Person, and there will be no
difference between the one and the other saving of Greater and Lesser, that is,
in regard of degrees only; suteably to what we observe in lights which proceed
from luminous bodies, in which there is this difference, that some are more
dusky, and others more glittering; which because they agree in this that they
are emanations of principles of one and the same nature, such as the bodies
are, we love them with the same sort of affection, and measure that affection
by the degrees of clarity or obscurity we perceive in them. Did I say, there
would be a proportion between God and us? There would undoubtedly; but we
should scarce contain our selves from believing the advantage to be on our
part. For as we esteem the Light by the knowledge which we have of it, and the
benefit which arrives to us by it; so that a man, to whom the Sun should be
eternally absconded, would make more account of the Moon, or even of a candle
that inlighten's him then of that: So they that love Virtue would have greater
esteem for Socrates and Aristides, or some other grand personage, such as they
were, upon the account of knowing them, and being able to advantage themselves
in the imitation of them, by taking from them some prudent rule or custom for
conduct of their Lives, then they would do of the God of Epicurus, who reserves
himself invelop'd in obscure Clouds, and does not afford us so much as a
glimpse of the least splendour of his Nature.

On the contrary, If God be infinite in his essence, and, which necessarily
follows, in all his Properties, he deserves an Honor, altogether of another
kind from that which is competent to Men. For there being no proportion between
a Being Finite and Infinite, there likewise can be none between whatever
results from them. Certainly whosoever should value a man only so far as he is
a Living Creature, without any regard to the Reason that infinitely differences
him from Brutes, he would do him a greater affront and outrage then could admit
of any reparation: and on the other side he that should esteem a beast almost
at the same rate that we repute a man in as much as he is endued with reason,
would attribute a worth to it, to which it is by no right intitl'd, and would
brangle the rules of the Nature of things. Therefore he that shall ascribe
honor to God after the same sort with that which is performed toward Men,
unquestionably sins against him in case he be infinite, and abases him
infinitely below the condition of his Being: whereas, contrarily, if he be of a
nature finite and circumscribed with certain bounds, to adore him as an essence
immense in himself and in his properties, would not be to adore the Deity but a
fantasm of a man's own brain and a Chimaera. And in the imagination of the thing
it self, besides the vitiosity attending the Adoration which is framed
accordingly, there would be an error too gross and insupportable, whereby that
which is finite should become transfigured into that which is not so, contrary
to the Laws of nature her self, which knows not to allow any thing for
Infinite, if God be not.

Now forasmuch as the motions of the Body follow those of the soul, and
represent the same; if there be, as is evident, a difference so great between
those two sorts of adoration in reference to the inferior acts of the
Understanding; of necessary consequence the Corporeal Gestures which proceed
from the same, must be extremely different one from another. So that as the
Adoration of an infinite thing is an ingulphing of the cogitation in ravishment
and admiration of it is object, conjoined with as profound humility as the soul
of man is capable of, without limitation, restriction, or reserve; so the
exterior comportments appendant to the same ought to be such as may most
express the acknowledgement of our selves to be nothing, and our deference of
all honor and glory to that which we venerate. But since the honor which is
rendered to a finite thing is exactly confined and determined by our mind,
only to so much as it is judged worthy of the same, that is, according to the
measure of its Virtues: humility also bounding it self where it deemes the
extent of those Virtues to be so; it must needs be that the Gestures of the
Body likewise in representing our submission, will represent that we do not
offer it without some limitation, and that we esteem not the thing beyond the
value of its being. Hence it is evident that in so great an incertainty of the
Nature of God, which we see according to the Doctrine of the Epicureans, a man
cannot boast to know assuredly, it will be consequent that his Disciples be
brought to render him such honor as is no more competent to him, then that
which one should assign to a beast in respect to the excellence of its
Understanding, and so mock him with impertinent service: Or rather, in stead of
adoring him as God, we shall honor him as a man; like as if one should make the
same account of a Grand Personage, and a Handsome Horse: which would be no
Worship rendered to God, but an outrage done to him and a Sacrilege. Or lastly,
in case a man should happen to be in the right, it would only be by hazard;
And with what zeal can that service be accompanied, or how can it be acceptable
to God, which is rendered inconsiderately and at a venture?

The second consideration requisite to be perpended concerning the Nature of
God, is, whether he be corporeal, or not; of which they can in no wise be
assured, if they will hold themselves to their Principles. For if there be
nothing in the world that declares him clearly to them, how come they to have
so raised and sublime a spirit, as to be able to divine of what his substance
is composed? But, because heretofore their predecessors in disputing this Point
against the other Philosophers, found themselves wonderfully implicated, what
side soever they took, they answered in a kind of illusion of the World, that
it was not a corporeal, but in a manner a corporeal essence. And although they
assever that to enjoy the Pleasures in which the Felicity of the Deity
consists, it is necessary the same should be instructed with some kind of
Organes correspondent to the senses of our Bodies; from whence it seems to
result that they hold it to be really corporeal; yet when they are pressed to
speak affirmatively, they have not the presumption to determine it so, but
recur to those illusions of words, which place it between Bodies and Spirits,
as it were in an Imaginary Predicament. Now this is of greater consequence,
then they deem it to be. For if God be a substance that partakes nothing of the
nature of Bodies, to possess our imaginations with an Idea of him of corporeal
shape, how excellent soever it be, is, in stead of honoring him, to defame his
glorious Majesty; in as much as a Nature absolutely simple and spiritual, far
surpassing in dignity the condition of Bodies, whoever conceives the same under
the Idea of a body, debases it many degrees beneath the worth of its being.
Wherefore, if besides the image they so frame of it in their thought, they
proceed further to represent the same in Marble or Copper by artifice of the
hand, what is this less then doing the same wrong, which should be done to an
Excellent Understanding in saying it resembled a Gourd. And if he be corporeal,
and they do not conceive him so, they will fall into the same inconvenience I
mentioned above, of worshipping, not the truth of the thing to which they
pretend to render honor, but the dreams of their own fancy.

To what I have already evinced I shall further adjoyn, that it is natural to
men, when they think upon any thing, to transmit their Minds to the place in
which they imagine such thing to be; which is the reason, why, although we
never were among the Mores and Toupinemboults, yet we cannot restrain our
selves, when we sometimes call them to remembrance, srom sending our thoughts to
the places of the Geographical Charts, in which the Regions of their
habitations are designed. And if a Peasant happily hear mention of those remote
people, he presently fancies before his Fys the Sea that lies nearest his
habitation, because he has understood it is necessary to pass over that to
arrive at the place of the world where those Savages abide. It is, indeed,
nothing at all Incongruous or strange, that Nature should have given us such
inclinations, because they serve in some measure to recreate and arrest ou^
^inds, whose thoughts being otherwise roving and without guidance would be lost
and vanish of themselves; as the irradiations of our eyes are dissipated in the
wide Acr, when there is nothing before us to arrest our view. And
notwithstanding we are conscious it is thus in all occasions, yet it is more
particularly remarkable when ever we find our selves agitated with some
vehement passion of Love and Desire, Fear or Hope. Now if the Epicureans
represent to themselves a Deity of a finite Nature, whether Corporeal or
Incorporeal it matters not; I would demand of them to what side of him is it
that their thoughts guide them? Have they credible intelligence where God is?
in the Heaven, or in the Air? in the Sea, or in the Center of the Earth? For as
for other men, they indeed are persuaded that he is in the Heavens, because
they believe he has there displayed at the beginning, and does likewise still
display more Effects of his eternal Power, and inexpressible Goodness. But the
Epicureans are persons that acknowledge no tract or appearance of these
Attributes, imagining that admirable and glorious Machine of the Celestial
Fabric to have been composed of so many Spheres in the fair order we behold,
only by the accidental meeting of Atoms. But if the Splendour of that Radiant
Arche seems to them a more suitable residence for the Deity, then habitation on
the earth or in the recesses of the other Elements, who has informed them in
which Hemisphere he is, whether in ours, or in that of the Antipodes. Then if
by that chance, to which they ascribe all things, they should hit so luckily,
or determine their sancies to think him on the side of our Hemisphere, will not
the Epicureans that are on the other side of the world be very much mistaken,
if they should likewise have this imagination on their part that God resides in
that moiety of Heaven which covers them, and which they behold? Add hereunto
that neither the one nor the other can have assurance that God sees them, or
that he understands their hearts, and esteems their motions and thoughts
acceptable unto himself. Now is it possible that a man that doubts whether God
hears and sees him, should have any rational devotion toward him? In what
fashion can that person serve God in the secret of his Thought, that is not
assured whether God has Eyes piercing enough to know the inclinations of his
Heart? If they conceive God to be of an infinite nature, as in truth he is, so
that he is present to all things, even to their most secret and profound
meditation, (which without question they never learnt from the discipline of
their Master) there will su^ely remain no trouble to them to what part they
should direct the thoughts of their minds; besides that I understand not how it
is more unworthy of the Majesty of God, or more interruptive of his eternal
quiet, to govern all things in the Universe, then to know them so nearly, and
penetrate into them with his essence. As the infinite comprehension of his
Wisdom gives him the understanding of all things exempt from solicitude and
perplexity; and as the inviolable purity of his essence renders him their
presence, and (if I may so say) their contact exempt from the contagion of
their immundicity; so the infiniteness of his power frees the government and
administration of them from being troublesome, and the invariable firmitude of
his being secures him from receiving any alteration in his Eternal Felicity.

CHAP. IV. A more particular consideration of the Honor which the Epicureans
pretend to render to God in respect of his Power, Goodness, Justice, and Wisdom.
BUt after these General reasons, let us proceed to Survey those which may be
drawn from a more particular consideration of the Properties of the Divine
Essence, and in the first place inquire what Honor the Epicurean Doctrine
ascribes to him in reference to his Power. They who acknowledge God to have
created All things of Nothing (a position indeed which we owe to Revelation
from Heaven, yet such as the right renson of Man subscribes to) have a very
powerful inducement to become absolutely ravished, and swallowed up in
admiration of his Omnipotence. For whereas there is a chasme of infinite extent
between Entity and Nonentity, of necessity the Power that has produced some
thing from Nothing to Being, must be likewise infinite. Wherefore in case they
had no more before their Eyes but this one Proof that God has given concerning
what He is, they ought to be so far convinced as to separate him from Parity
with all other things, and render him an honor of Adoration wholly different
from that which they exhibit to Creatures. For seeing the power wherewith they
are capable to be endued bears no proportion to that of the Creator, they
cannot be intitl'd to the same sort of Honor with him, not so much as in the
lowest degree; if it were possible to admit degrees in the honor due to an
Infinite Being. They which conceive the Matter of sensible things to be
eternal, but that God composed the World of the same, as a Potter frames his
vessel of his Clay (which seems to have been the opinion of Plato) do not
consider the Divine Power in so eminent a degree; albeit they do indeed
attribute an effect to it, which to serious perpension seems only atchievable
by an infinite cause. For any power below infinite could never have been
capable to bestow so excellent a Form upon a Chaos devoid of all, nor to impart
the like to all other things which the World contains, by distributing forms
to them, so different as they are, according to the diverse rank that each holds
in the Universe, and the various functions to which they are designed. So that
likewise those of this judgment have ample argument and occasion to proclaim
the wonders of it. As for them, who assert the world, such at it presents it
self to our eyes, had never any Beginning, but that it proceeded from God by
emanation, as Light does from the Sun, and by a necessary and natural
production, they do in truth very much detract from the glory of this Virtue,
notwithstanding they always imply an acknowledgement that the Universe owes its
Original unto him, although that great Effect were not produced by that Cause
by the disposure of free Volition, but by the necessity of an inevitable
dependence. Yet this Order also, were there nothing else but the Circumgyration
of the Celestial Orbs, of which they repute God the first cause, has cause to
admire the force that is requisite thereunto. For whether God move the Heavens
immediately and by himself, without the intervening assistance of any other
thing (as one applies his hand to a wheel to turn it) notwithstanding any
aptitude they may have to circular motion by reason of their natural figure,
yet there needs a mighty strength to stir all that great Machine, and to govern
so many different revolutions, to preserve them in harmony, and to hinder them
from clashing or interferring for ever. Or whether he moves the same by the
Mediation of Intelligences, according to the conceit of Aristotle who was
father to this Opinion of the Worlds Eternity; nevertheless God will always be
the first Efficient of their motion; and if the Intelligences, which are far
inferior to him, can do that, He is without doubt able to do much more.
Moreover we know that Philosopher speaks very advantageously of the dignity of
the First Mover, and attributes to him the glory of being the primary Principle
of all things. But in reference to the Epicureans, they want our charity to
make up so much as a probability that they believe the Supreme Being is endued
with any power at all. For what evidence have they for such a persuasion from
his effects, if He has not created the least Mushrom, nor given impulsion to
so much as one of those small Bodies, by whose concurrence they hold the World
had its contexture. Certainly, if they measure this power by the knowledge they
have of it, and their knowledge by the effects they behold of it (and it is
clear they cannot know it otherwise) it must needs be extremely inconsiderable,
or rather none at all, in case they keep themselves to their Maxims.

But peradventure some among them will answer, that being there is a God, it is
necessary he should possess all Perfection required to the constitution of so
excellent a nature, and that among those perfections there ought to be a power
also proportionate to the excellence of that nature. We will not scruple to
concede this to them, although we shall afterward show where they learnt to
reason in this manner: for the discipline of their ancient Master is of a
different strain. However, all this will not secure them from falling foul upon
the difficulties abovementioned, of determining the extent of estimation which
ought to be had of this Attribute: because it will follow that there is some
measure between It and the Essence of God. Now it remains absolutely unknown to
us whether the essence of God be infinite or not, whence consequently the
measure of Veneration which we ow him in regard of that Perfection is to us
equally unknown. Besides, whereas the Faculties of all things are destinated to
certain functions, it will be difficult to be resolved what portion of power is
necessary to render the Divine nature accomplished, since it cannot be
understood that God either has, or ever will employ the same to the production
of any effect. And though it were frankly granted them that right Reason
informs us, either that there is no Deity, or that it owns a power without
circumscription; Yet I dare maintain, Men would make but small account of that
Perfection, which they knew no otherwise then by a simple ratiocination without
having any actual testimony or proof of the same. Who is he amongst us that
cares never so little for the Great Mogul, of whom it is related, that he keeps
thirty thousand Elephants? or for any other mighty Potentate like him in those
Oriental Countries, because perhaps he is able to bring two or three hundred
thousand armed men into the field when he pleases? Does not every one more
value the authority of the meanest Gentleman in the Country where he lives, if
he be Lord of his village; because he sees it and feels it; and for that in
case he offend him, it serves to punish him; and if he obey it, he finds
support by it? These people assuredly have strange Imaginations, and are made
of principles wonderfully discordant. Observe, I beseech you, the discourses of
Epicurus, when he is treating the question of the Supreme Good; They are
universally drawn from the sentiments of the Body, and from Pleasure, to which
our appetites naturally incline us. He affirms that Nature does not only
aspire but pine and groan after her Ease; such is the violence of her
inclination toward it: He prescribes his Sage to refer all to his own utility,
and the contentment of his Senses; as if he consisted only of Body, and were
born for none but himself. Does he speak of the Deity, and of the Honor which
ought to be rendered to him? He abstracts the thoughts of men so far from their
proper Good; he allows himself so little to be touched with the natural
affection we bear toward our selves; he alembicks his wits in such manner in
the speculation of things purely intellectual and fantastical, without having
any regard to his particular profit, and his own satisfaction, that you would
judge he were all Spirit, and had forgotten the care of himself and his Nature.
But to Character him compleately in one word; he perfectly resembles that God
whom he describes so negligent of humane affairs, and such a lover of his own
felicity. For as according to his dictates, God contents himself with the
solitary enjoyment of his eternal repose in delectation, and profound vacancy
from action, without concerning himself with any care either of us, or of our
interests; so Epicurus gives himself no other trouble then to seek out means
how to pass his days in delights, without anxious perplexing himself concerning
God or things pertaining to him, and so allows himself the same kindness. Yet
there is this difference; that Epicurus does not believe that he offends God in
proclaiming openly that he takes no cognizance of things here below; but dare
not plainly aver that he is unco^cern'd with the care of those in Heaven. And
nevertheless it really turns as much to the reproach of the Deity, to leave all
to go at random, as it is horrible to make open profession of Impiety toward
him. But let us now proceed to the other Divine Proprieties.

Although the greatest part of Mankind has always been lead to serve God by
Fear of Vengeance, which he inflicts on the contemners of his Majesty; yet
there was never any Nation but did acknowledge some remarkable Appearances of
his Goodness in the Government of the Universe. The whole world has ever
placed amongst his most resplendent Perfections this propensity which he has
naturally to do good, to succor the Distressed, to relieve the Oppressed, to
defend such as are injuriously outraged, and even where no necessity impells or
otherwise obliges him, to expand himself in Liberality, the Quality peculiar to
benign and generous Natures. Hence have those glorious Titles been attributed
to him by men upon this consideration, as particularly by Homer, who ordinarily
styles his Jupiter, The Father of the Gods and Men; not only in as much as he
is the Author of their Being (as another Poet expressly, (...).) but also for
the care that he has of them, and the paternal affections he bears toward
them. In effect, the luster of his Majesty dazles them when they list up their
eyes toward the Heavens, to contemplate there the umbrage or reverse part of
him that appears in their splendour. His Power astonishes them, when they feel
the Earth tremble under their feet, or hear the tumultuous murmurs of Thunder
in the clouds. The admiration of his Wisdom confounds them, when they come to
consider that he beholds all things with one glance of his eyes, and one simple
indivisible apprehension, the Heavens, the Elements, the Bodies that are
composed of them, the innumerable variety of their faculties and operations,
the cogitations of our minds, and of all Intellectual Beings, all things which
are only in possibility, the Idea's of which are multipliable to infinity,
their accordances and relations, their opposttions and Antipathies. His Justice
strikes them with dread, when they Survey the strokes and examples of it in
mankind by Pestilences and Wars, by Famines and Tempests, by over-flowes of
Rivers and Inundations of the Sea, by lightnings discharged from Heaven, and
other like demonstrations of his Vengeance. In a word, all his other Virtues
excite either Fear or Wonder in the Spirits of men; but the reflection upon his
Goodness, and the experience they have of it, is that which rejoices them, and
makes their Lives sweet and desirable. As for Christians, they not only admire
and venerate the other Attributes of God, more then ever any other people did,
but likewise set a higher estimate on this then other Nations ever have done,
and make it the prime basis on which their whole profession is supported. On
the other side the Epicureans, if they have any knowledge of it, it can be
only in an imaginary speculation, in the same manner as we above convinced
their conjectures concerning the Power of the Deity to be; and if it fall out
that they at any time praise and magnify it, it cannot be otherwise inferred
but that their Devotion must be very cold and languid. For they will not allow
any acknowledgments to God for giving them a body, or for that he has
gratified them with sense and corporeal appetites, in the satiating of which
they place their Supreme Good; since according to their doctrine, they are not
the work of his Hands, either in their Matter or Form, of which the one owes
its being to the eternal seed of Atoms, the other to the contingency of the
coalition that so fabricated them. Nor will they more extol the same Goodness
for that soul that animates them; being they look not upon it as a present of
his Liberality; they received it (they conceive) from their Fathers, as Colts
do theirs from the Stallions that engender them.

Then for the particular of Conservation of Life, which consists in the supply
of Aliment, and Deliverance from such an innumerable variety of Accidents,
which the tender Providence of God averts from our heads, they arrogate it
partly to their own Circumspection, and partly impute it to Chance, deriding
those that either return thanks, or make complaints to Heaven about it. In so
much, that if we subscribe to them, we owe all the obligation of our Being and
of our Happiness to our selves and to Fortune; and in the Miseries, wherewith
this Life is plentifully encumbred, all the consolation left us is to vent our
reproaches and exclamations against Her. Questionless, we shall be amply
revenged when we have reviled her with the appellations of Turbulent and
Furious, Blind and Inconsiderate, unreasonable and extravagant in all her
actions. For as for that invincible Magnanimity, which causes the Epicureans to
triumph gloriously in the most deplorable calamities and exquisite pains, it is
a commendation to which they alone can attain, who are not only initiated in
the mysteries of the Wisdom of Epicurus, but have been admitted to contemplate
the most venerable of his Secrets, and have there beheld Pleasure in so high a
degree of grandeur and generosity, that Virtue her self does homage to her, and
reputes it honor to be received in the quality of her servant.

Concerning Justice, to whom it pertains to inflict punishment for offenses
perpetrated against the laws of Nature and Reason, the Doctrine we meet with in
this School is so far from ascribing due Veneration to God in respect of the
same, that their main design has been to eradicate and extinguish out of the
minds of Men such scruples as they are possessed with concerning it, and to
implant in their room most impious impressions reflecting to his dishonor. I am
not so severe as to account them of so horrid profaneness as to deny that God
detests Vice and Loves Virtue; and that being an excellent Intelligence and a
perfect Nature, he cannot be destitute of the knowledge of the former's
demerit, and the latter's worth, by reason and proportion whereof the love and
aversion which he bears to the one and the other of these objects is
enhanced. Now if God be powerful, which they dare not deny, and if he has an
abhorrence and hatred of Vice, as is necessarily requisite to the sanctity of
his Nature, what is it should hinder him from exercising Vengeance against it?
Is it because mankind is not under his Jurisdiction, and so he has nothing to
do to superintend over their Lives? That very same eminent worthiness of his
Nature, which obliges men to adore it, gives him a right over them, if he
please to use it, at least as much as they take one over another. And indeed
the eminence of the Nature of a Thing, and it is perfection above the condition
of other Beings, is one of the grounds of the authority that it challenges
over them. For this cause the Philosophers teach that according to the Laws of
Nature such persons as are endued in a degree extraordinarily eminent both with
Intellectual and Moral Virtues, and particularly with Prudence and Fortitude,
which are the Qualities necessary for Government, ought to be the Princes of
the World. Now Authority is a Right to rule as Superior, by administering the
rewards of Virtue and penalties of Vice. So that if God be of a Nature so
transcendently accomplished, that in regard thereunto men ow him honor and
veneration, Obligation to honor and veneration being an indubitable testimony
of the eminence of that which is honored, it is also a firm argument of his
Right and of his Authority. And truly, if men be exempted from subjection to
the Deity, it will be no impiety to affirm that they are Gods themselves. For
it is one of the Conditions peculiar to the Deity alone, to be independent of
any other thing, and to be sovereign to it self, that is, to acknowledge none.
Wherefore if God does not punish the crimes of Men, it must be because he will
not. But not to will that a fact be punished which deserves it, especially in a
person that is in authority and power to do it, is in some sort to consent unto
it, or surely at least to connive at it; which is unworthy and incongruous to a
nature perfectly eminent in Virtues, and almost it self deserving correction
and vengeance. Moreover, what justice can there be in this, that all men serve
God, some more, others less, and the Epicureans themselves confess that all
universally ought to do it; and nevertheless he takes no consideration or
cognizance of it, but loves those that blaspheme him as much as those that
magnify and praise him, and ordinarily suffers the Good to be oppressed by the
Wicked, and equally shuts his ear to the suits and cries of the one, and the
blasphemies of the other? and this for the only respect of not troubling the
serenity of his quiet, and that profound peace in which he continues after so
many Ages? I am not ignorant that it is one of the ancient complaints of men,
and one of the objections of Epicurus against Divine Providence, that the Good
are here below insulted over by the Wicked, and that it is not at all seen how
Heaven provides against such Inconvenience. But the other Philosophers have
indeavored to refute it, and some of them have even gone so far as to ass^rt
that if God does not punish the Wicked in this World, he will assuredly do it
in the other. Nor could any thing of fairer reason be expressed by the mouth of
a Pagan or that more nearly approaches to the sound judgments of Christians
concerning this truth then that which Plutarch (Lib. de Sora Numinis vindicta.)
has delivered upon this subject. But the True Religion is that which alone
discovers these Mysteries to the bottom, and represents them to our
contemplation wholly naked, with unspeakable satisfaction to those which
consider them. Only Epicurus cannot exempt God from this blame which is
unworthy of his Goodness and Justice, if he has any, of suffering, that which
he has power to redress, the Wicked here to devour and tyrannize over the
Good, and the virtuous and religious to become in recompense of their piety,
most frequently miserable. He might have ascribed to him at least as much care
of Mankind in this particular, as every Magistrate has of his Commonwealth,
and every inferior Judge of his Precinct or Village. But under pretext that
there happen diverse things, whose causes and ends they are not able to
comprehend; and that many crimes are committed, whose punishment is not
inflicted before their eyes; and that sundry upright men are in miseries, whose
deliverance they behold not when they esteem it timely to appear, they infer
that therefore God sees nothing of all this, or that he regards it not. As if a
King had abandoned the government of his State, because such a one is not taken
out of prison so soon as in their opinion he ought, or that another escapes the
Whip in the place where he deserved it, who perhaps two days after is broken on
the Wheel for another crime in the neighboring Province. So likewise it may be
reasonably said that in these cases they imitate the rash and precipitous
judgment of an ignorant and impatient spectator, that does not expect till the
last act of the Tragedy.

It may be further inquired whether the Epicureans do not yet in a greater
measure blemish and obscure the Wisdom of God then they do his other
Perfections. For when they deny that there is a Providence in God, seeing
Providence is nothing but a foresighted and rational conduct of things to their
end, and of every particular thing to the purpose consentaneous to it, it seems
they consequently deny that there is a Wisdom in God. For it is the part of
Wisdom to propose to it self such a convenient end in the administration of
things, as it is of Providence to conduct them to that which they are designed:
whence as Providence cannot be without wisdom, so is it likewise scarcely
imaginable that Wisdom can consist without Providence. Unless perhaps they here
turn about to their abstracted speculations, and attribute to God that
Intellectual Virtue of which Aristotle speaks, and composes of Knowledge and
Understanding joined together, and makes to consist in the perfect cognition of
all things and their principles. But yet, I know not how according to the
doctrine of Epicurus, this sort of Wisdom can find place in God. For
considering that there is an infinite number of things which depend on the Will
of Man, and that the inclinations of his will depend on the reasons and objects
which persuade and move him; how shall God see those things, if himself has
naught to do to look into the Understanding of man to a^fect him with those
reasons, if he has no regard to the objects presented to us to move us, if he
does not manage them to such effect as to persuade and attract, if he neither
incite nor restrain, neither bend nor correct the motions of the Will? If they
say, that he beholds events, and by the events may divine of the causes from
which they proceeded, we reply that that is no more then the atchievment of
conjecture and humane divination, not of the Wisdom of a God who ought to
behold effects in the womb of their causes, and not the causes in the aspect of
the effects. In brief, according to them, God may perhaps know the things which
exist, but he cannot know the things which are to come any more then We, and
the next morning is to him in as much darkness as it is to us, who are
naturally very ignorant Creatures. Lastly, to speak openly, he is a very
wretched God, if he be not as wise as the Sage of the Philosophers, whose
wisdom consists in governing himself reasonably, and the things which are in
his disposure according to the same rule. I am not ignorant that Epicurius
prohibits his Sage to intermeddle in the government of the World, and the
administration of the Commonwealth; An Opinion so strange and pernicious to
Humane Society, that verily in this appears a signal effect of the Providence
of God, that he has not permitted all other men to become as absolute fools as
his pretended Sage. For what would the World be, in case wise men should
forbear to meddle in it, but a most horrid and tumultuous confusion, without
Laws, order, and Society, and no better then a crew of cutthroats and robbers.
Plato without question had more Reason, when he wished that either those who
seriously employ themselves in the study of Philosophy were Governors of
States, or they which govern States would seriously employ themselves in the
Study of Philosophy; and affirmed that in such times Empires would be happy.
But (to proceed) I will admit the Sage to leave the Commonwealth to go at
random; yet certainly he will take care of his Wife and Children, unless
Epicurus represents us a Sage worse and more unnatural then Beasts. Shall not
God therefore take care but only to provide himself new pleasures perpetually,
and employ all his wisdom to effect that they never fail and be spent,
unmindful of those in the mean time that ought in some sort to be to him in the
quality of children, if not for being made by him, at least for the affection
they have to imitate his Virtues, and become conformable unto him. To conclude,
what kind of admiration can any one have of such Divine Wisdom? What other
characters can be given of God then that he is a person wonderfully dextrous
and industrious to invent means to produce his own contentment, and render his
felicity abundant and permanent; that imploys all the powers of his
understanding, and directs all the sufficiencies of his Wisdom to that end: but
for any thing else, he knows none of the transactions here below, or if he do,
only slights and derides them? Are not these very fitting reasons to
inducement to venerate the Deity in regard of his Wisdom? Is it not very
suitable to Epicurus to have been the inventor of such noble Philosophy, to
insult arrogantly over them that ascribe glory to God for having framed the
World in the fair order wherein we behold it, and poised the Earth in the
middle, extended the Sea about it, and given air for respiration to animals,
for having modeled all the Spears of Heaven, and infused into the Stars the
Virtues of their influences, for presiding every day over the mixture of the
Elements in the composition of bodies, and uniting Nations one to another by
commerce; for maintaining States amidst the contrariety of so many different
humors, and conducting the Universe like an Artificial Machine according to the
genius of each of the parts that compose the same? Certainly it is very easy
to judge which of these two Opinions best deserves that exclamation of
Lucretius (Lib. 1.)

-- Deus ille fuit, Deus, inclute Memmi,
Qui princeps vitae rationem invenit eam quae
Nunc appellatur Sapientia; quique per artem
Fluctibus e tantis vitam, tantisque tenebtis,
In tam tranquillo, and tam clara luce locavit.
CHAP. V. The Continuation of the Arguments evincing that the Epicureans cannot
adore the Deity in a due manner; with the solution of some Objections.
SInce the Epicureans cannot render any suitable honor to the Deity, either in
consideration of his Power and Goodness, or of his Justice and Wisdom, which
they wholly exclude out of the World and our knowledge; it remains that they
worship him only, either because he is Happy, or because he is Eternal, or
because we behold him not, or merely because he exists, without having the
least regard to the Perfections of his Nature. And it seems the Poet Lucretius
refers all his excellence to these two points, that he is supreamly Happy, and
is of an Immortal Nature. For to this purpose he speaks in these following
verses ( Lib. 1.) Omnis enim per se Divum natura necesse est
Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur,
Semota ab nostris rebus, sejunctaque long:
Nam privata dolor omni, privata periclis,
Ipsa suis pollens opibus, nihil indiga nostri,
Nec been promeritis capitur, nec tangitur ira.
But concerning that profound Quiet, and immortal felicity, it is difficult to
comprehend of what nature it is. For to make up a Happiness, t is requisite not
only to be exempt from the Evils of which we complain, otherwise Trunks of
Trees and Rocks would be capable of the greatest; there must also be an
enjoyment of such contentments as are consentaneous to nature. What therefore
shall we apprehend those of the Deity to be? Are they such as consist in
corporeal pleasures? Certainly to fancy to our selves a God eternally rejoicing
himself with drinking delicious Wines, and eating exquisite Viands, and
sleeping as often as he becomes weary with doing so, must needs make us
conclude him more brutish then Brutes themselves. What appearance is there that
the supreme happiness of the Deity should consist in such things, in which a
good man would account it shame to take any? If the disciples of this Divine
Philosopher speak as they are taught, wherein are the conceptions wherewith he
describes the beatitude of his God superior to the extravagancies of the
ancient Poets, who seem expressly to have written of the Deities which they
celebrated out of design to asperse them with infamy. If God place his
contentments in the contemplation and admiration of his own Virtues, being he
knows none in himself, or if he does, they must be such as are very small and
inconsiderable, that beatitude consequently cannot be in any great degree, nor
consequently the honor which the Epicureans perform toward him in regard of
the same. In effect, if there be no more Virtues in God nor fairer perfections
then those which their Maxims assign to him, so improbable is it that men
should become ravished with admiration of his beatitude, that without doubt he
cannot but turn away his eyes from beholding them, out of shame and regret to
find them so defective; Like those persons that are imbued with some seeds of
Virtue, who reflecting to consider a little attentively their defects, become
displeased and blush at the same. Besides all this, admitting God to be indeed
most happy; yet if so be we partake nothing at all of his felicity, it will
rather be an incitement of our envy and hatred against him, then of our love
and reverence. First, of envy; for who is there that does not resent some kind
of maligning passion when he considers the happiness of another, and finds
himself extremely miserable? Then like, wise of hatred; for what can he be
accounted but a great Miser and hold-fast, and unworthy the love of any one
whatsoever, that is able to make others very happy without making himself less,
and notwithstanding does it not; who refuses to direct wanderers into their
way, and will not permit his neighbor to draw water out of his fountain? And
although there were amongst men so much moderation of spirit, that the supreme
felicity of God should not induce them either to envy or hatred against him,
yet is it credible there should be so much piety in them as to be drawn to
adore him because of it? If he be rich (we say proverbially of one from whom we
expect no good) let him dine twice; and in such cases we do not apprehend we
commit any offense, when we proceed so far as to contemn the person and his
wealth.

Now in truth, inasmuch as the God of Epicurus is immortal, and never suffers
alteration in his nature, he far surpasses our condition: Nevertheless the
Duration of things, if they have no qualities to recommend them besides, is
below being the true object of honor and veneration. The World and the Elements
have been esteemed eternal by many among the Philosophers, yet none ever adored
them: and they which account the Matter of which all things consist, to exist
from all eternity, do not yield us one example of any person into whose thought
it ever came to prostrate himself and render Religious veneration to it. And
yet there is no question but he has greater obligation to the World then to
the Deity of Epicurus; as being indebted to it for his body, which was framed
out of it; Whereas Epicurus's God has contributed nothing either to the
constitution or subsistence of his being. Ought we therefore to adore him
because we see him not? I beseech the Readers indulgence to me to bestow a few
words in laying open to these people the vanity and impertinence of their
imaginations. Certainly, if we do not at all behold him, it is either because
he is of a nature spiritual and imperceptible by the senses of our bodies, or
because though he has a body, he withdraws it from our eyes, and hides himself
far from our presence. Now whereas some Philosophical Sages have believed God
to be of a nature not mingled with a body, they were induced to that persuasion
by observing such admirable effects of his Wisdom and Power that they
positively concluded a corporeal Being could not be a capable subject of so
many transcendent Proprieties. And indeed being they judged by the productions
of their Understanding, that it was necessary for the soul, in which the same
is seated, to be of a nature infinitely elevated above that of the body, it was
but reasonable they should have no less good opinion of the Diety, whose
productions are infinitely more worthy admiration then those of the humane
Intellect. But Epicurus not owning such Perfection and Virtues in God by their
effects, he also cannot reason in the same sort. And if he could, though
immaterial things have a great advantage above those which are corporeal here
below, yet it principally consists in this that they are thereby exempted from
corruption and mortality. Now besides that there are certain bodies accounted
not less incorruptible then spirits, as the Heavens, and which might therefore
deserve as much veneration as the Deity, we have already shown that the
perpetual duration of things, without other qualities to recommend them, does
not render them subjects requiring our adoration. On the contrary, if God has
a body, and never discover the same to our eyes, we should make but small
account of it, although it were more luminous then the Sun. For whereas several
Nations have adored the Sun, it has been only in consideration of his light
so radiant, quickening, beneficial and necessary to the World, and which makes
it self known to us in so many manners, which he distributes into all the parts
of the World, and is therefore named the Eye and Heart of the Universe. Had he
never ascended above our Horizon, no Nation had ever made an Idol of him in our
Hemisphere, for all the descriptions that could have been made of him. To
conclude in a word, so far would men be from being drawn to the service of the
Deity, because they do not see him, that there is even a natural propensity in
our minds to contemn that which we do not see, and rather to form Gods of Wood
and Stone to our selves, then to have such as fall not under our sense: A
vicious inclination indeed, and condemned by the Wise among the Pagans; but we
are under the influence of an Institution that is powerful enough to correct
this defect, and root this vitiosity out of our nature; Which the Epicurean can
never attain to. For that which has caused great and discerning persons, to
penetrate so far into the knowledge of God, that they have been as it were
enforced thereby to conclude that he ought to be honored with the exactest
purity of the Understanding (without framing any material Idea of him in the
fancy, much less to carve him in gold or represent him in silver) has been
only, as I said above, the contemplation of the mighty effects of his Virtues,
of which Epicurus has no apprehension. Moreover concerning his mere existence,
forasmuch as that is common to him with all other things, good and bad,
honorable and contemptible, high and low, corruptible and secure from mutation,
reasonable and unreasonable, endued and destitute of sense, the Heavens (I say)
the Elements, Brutes, Insects, and Plants, he can challenge no degree of
eminence above us in that respect, nor by consequence can we own an obligation
from thence, to render him our submissions and reverence. As for the expression
of Plato, that the Being of God is the only true Being, and that ours is no
other then a shadow of that, infinitely inferior to it in dignity, he did not
consider it simply as a Being, but as an eternal Being, that wastes not away
with duration, nor is obnoxious to any kind of change, that includes in its
eternity all the several successions and revolutions of times, and all whose
Proprieties and Virtues are as invariable as its essence. But this is not the
subject of our present consideration, no more then it is the meaning of
Epicurus. Hereafter, I shall no longer doubt that the piety of the Epicureans
is worn only on the outside, and lies wholly in shows and countenances.

Of which we can scarce have a more pregnant or evident argument then
experience. In the Christian Religion all the inducements are found, that ever
led men to the service of God among the Pagans, and an infinite number of
others besides. For it presents us to contemplate in him an immense Power, an
ineffable Wisdom, an exquisite Providence, an inexorable Justice, an
incomprehensible Mercy; and in the conduct of all things agreeably to the
design of his eternal constitutions there appears an administration
transcendently admirable. One Religion proposes not so great recompenses for
piety and Virtue, and another denounces less horrid punishments against Vice
and irreligion. So that all that which the most devout Nations have ever
believed of God, as we shall see in its due place, has comparatively been
nothing but darkness; and all the devotion which their measure of knowledge
enkindled in their breasts, has only been a dream of piety, and a very languid
and faint zeal. And notwithstanding all this the number of people is very small
whom Christianity has incited seriously to fear that Great God who has
revealed himself unto us. What affection therefore can men have for the
doctrine of Epicurus? If the fire it self cannot inflame piety in us, is it
possible we should be warmed by his Ice? Certainly if the representation of
those rich compassions, in that God has sent his Son into the World to redeem
us from our offenses by an ignominious death, are not effective to incite men
to his Love, there remains no hope any other thing should have power to do it.
Wherefore how can we expect the same from this imagination, that God beholds
from Heaven the calamities of men here below, without being at all affected
therewith, unless it be with resentments of joy because they do not reach him:
like as one should enwrap himself under the coverings of a warm and
close-curtain'd bed, while others are half dead with cold, or should stand on
the Seashore beholding a Ship in inevitable danger of being wracked.
Furthermore if Religion be not powerful enough to induce us to the love of God
by sentiments of gratitude which we ought to have for his benefits, at least
the fear of his justice impressed on our minds, serves as a boundary to check
the overflowing of our Passions, and to retain them in some outward show of
esteem of Virtue: should this Fear once be removed out of their breasts
(although it is impossible wholly to root it out thence; what pains soever be
taken to do it) there would be such disorder in the Lives of men, and so
dreadful an irregularity in all our passions, that there would not be left so
much as a shadow of Virtue and probity upon the face of the earth. For seeing
there are in our Souls, as the Philosophers themselves have observed, such
appetites as naturally war against reason, subjecting and captivating the same
upon all occasions, as experience also demonstrates; and the Pleasure of the
body meeting with so many baits and incentives, there is no vice to which we
should not without all regret abandon our selves upon hope of impunity. They
which are subject to Laws, peradventure might abstain from those wickednesses
which are punished by them, yet would permit themselves to act such as fall not
within their cognizance; and if they used any kind of Prayer, it is likely it
would be no other then that of some in Juvenal; -- Pulchra Laverna,
Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri,
Noctem peccatis and fraudibus objice nubem.


Besides that there are yet several persons, whose madness, being above the
checks which the representation of punishments used amongst men suggests, is
notwithstanding awed with the apprehension of Everlasting Pains. And then for
such as do fear the punishments inflicted by the stroke of Magistracy, or even
by the hand of nature, who recompenses debaucheries with the Gout and Stone and
other such afflictions, at least they would not restrain themselves from being
wicked in thought and will. Now what acceptable service can that person render
to God whose mind is possessed with evil desires? Or how can any thought of the
Deity find admittance in that soul in which reason is dethroned to yield the
rule to heady and precipitous passions. Wherefore it appears, that whereas we
are in search of a doctrine capable to subordinate the appetites of men to
Reason, and Reason it self to true Piety, which is the only source of Virtue,
that of these people perverts the right use of Reason in stifling and effacing
Piety, and by that means gives up the reins to the insolence of our lusts and
affections.

It may perhaps be demanded by some, how it follows, that because the ancient
doctrine of Epicurus is incapable of exciting men to piety, and repressing
those violent inclinations which naturally hurry us to vice; that therefore in
the present times, in which men have sublimer apprehensions of the Deity then
he had, not to mention that they are more fully assured of this Truth, That
there is a God, the doctrine of the modern Epicureans should be no more
effectual thereunto? Is it reasonable to bound the effects of the knowledge men
have now adays according to the measure of what they had in the Ages of old?
Should any advocate of that sect make us this objection, we are not unprovided
of many things to return him in answer. And first in reference to that truth
which is the foundation of all others, That there is a God, supposing the
Epicureans of our time to retain the discipline of their predecessors, That the
world was not created by him, that he does not govern the same, nor ever
revealed himself particularly to us by any oracle, how is it come to pass that
we have a more certain knowledge of his Being? seeing we have no other reasons
nor testimonies thereof, then those which men had heretofore. And for that
Common notion to which they recur, how comes it to be more lively and deeply
impressed in our minds at this day, then it was in the minds of those that
lived a thousand years ago? Are not they always the same race of men? and is it
not always the same Nature that brings them into the World? But concerning the
knowledge of the nature it self of the Deity, I shall readily admit, that a man
whose brain is better made then that of Epicurus was, would not be guilty of so
many absurdities as he is. Aristotle or Plato would never have described God
after that fashion which he has imagined him. But so it is, that this
knowledge has never been so well displayed by those who have had no other
guide besides the light of reason, as to yield a possibility of founding a more
distinct belief thereof upon their imaginations at this day. For I am of
opinion, they have gone as far as the mind of man, in the condition it is since
the first Lapse, is capable to attain, without being extraordinarily assisted
by God himself. And notwithstanding how great variety has there been among
them in this particular? What absurdities and impertinences have they not
asserted? The beginning of Cicero's Books De natura Deorum, supply us with
abundant evidence hereof, where the opinions of the Philosophers concerning
this matter are recited. Good God! What dotages and extravagances do we meet
with! Anaximander makes the Gods equally liable to being born and to death with
us; and determine to them their intervals for the duration of their being.
Pythagoras affirms that God is a spirit diffused through the Universe, from
which our souls are clipped off like pieces severed from the whole, and so
divides him into a thousand millions of fragments. Parmenides fancies him to be
a crown of luminous fire wherewith the Heavens are environed. Empedocles
distinguishes not the nature of the Gods from that of the Elements, which he
conceives to be divine and immortal, although they undergo an infinite variety
of Forms. Antisthenes will have an infinite number of popular Deities, and one
natural. Xenocrates is contented to assign us eight, of which he says the Sun,
Moon, and other Planets make seven, and the eighth is distributed amongst the
fixed Stars. Chrysippus holds that there is an innumerable multitude of Gods,
though he seems to establish one Principal, consisting in a certain power of
Reason expanded through all the parts of Nature. Perseus acknowledges no other
Deities then those which men have consecrated accordingly as they conceived
some considerable benefit bestowed on them by any one. Cleanthes esteems the
whole world to be God, which also was afterward the opinion of Pliny. Diogenes
Apolloniates imagined that God was made of Air. Protagoras knew not what he is,
nor whether there were any at all. Democritus jumbles him and hurries him like
his indivisible bodies, framing an infinite variety of images of him. In a
word, it is deplorable to consider how ignorant, forlorn, and extravagant the
mind of men is in its imaginations: and although Aristotle and Plato have had
something more rational conceptions in this particular, yet there is
discernible in them always abundance of weakness and inconstance. Nevertheless,
those Philosophers, whose Fancies are rehearsed in that Treatise with so much
derision, were men of as good entendments and sufficiencies as the Epicureans
of our days; and the greatest part of them had moreover to assist them in this
Meditation the belief of a Providence, which was a light to conduct them to a
clearer knowledge of what they were in search after. Therefore what are they
able to do at this day, who besides being not more intelligent then those of
old, do renounce the assistance of that aid. For in so difficult a chase, the
former have undoubtedly more advantages in traversing the thickets, by being
acquainted with the footsteps of that they are in pursuit of, although but
obscure, lightly impressed and passed over by bad searchers, then they who take
no notice of any at all, and who if any presents themselves to their sight,
shut their eyes that they might not see them, or on set purpose expunge and
confound them. The knowledge of arts is indeed growing by degrees to greater
politeness, accordingly as men improve them by other inventions and
experiences. As it is probable Physic is more skillfully practiced at this day
then it has been heretofore, by reason of new observations made in Anatomy,
and new trials of the Virtues of Drugs, Plants and Minerals. But in case no
dissections had been made of humane bodies for this two thousand years, or no
new proofs experienced of medicaments, it would be necessary to remain
contented with the measure of knowledge which the Ancients had attained to in
that art. Now being in the opinion of these people, God is not in any thing
more particularly revealed to us then to our Predecessors, If the Epicureans
will keep themselves to the Maxims of their Sect, they must either content
themselves with what they have received from them; or if they will establish
any thing of their own devices, they must frame out new models of the Deity,
which will not be less exorbitant: and the Instance of Cicero will be found
such as cannot at all be discredited. In his time the study of the Sciences
flourished extraordinarily, and the wits of men were polished to as high a
degree, as ever they were in any other Age. Besides their own Inventions, they
had the benefit of their labors, who lived in the World before them at such
time as Learning was in the greatest honor in Greece; and indeed it appears by
their writings, they made use of them very happily. Cicero himself was, among
those great personages, of most eminent and rare accomplishments; to whom as
none was worthy to be rival for the Garland of Eloquence, so that there was
scarce any that surpassed or so much as equaled him in all kinds of
Literature. And notwithstanding all this, at what rate does he speak of the
Deity? Having introduced three Philosophers of diverse Sects discoursing of
Providence, he concluds his Book with this determination, That he judged the
Discourse of Balbus the Stoic who maintained it, more probable then that of
Velleius the Epicurean, who opposed it with the greatest violence. Wherein it
is observable, that Cicero keeping himself in this matter to that doubting
manner of answering which was practiced by the Academicks who dared not be
confident of the truth of any thing whatsoever, and had for their Device that
saying of Pliny, That the only certain thing is, that there is nothing certain;
nevertheless when he disputes concerning the nature of the Supreme Good of man
against the Tenets of Epicurus, he speaks so determinately to the disparagement
of Pleasure, that he seems to have forgotten the style of the Academy.

But let us a while consider how the truth of the matter stands. The Christian
Religion teaches two sorts of doctrines. Of the former of which men have some
notions, but confused and dark, beforehand. Of the other they never had any
apprehension or intelligence, nor was it possible they should. Now although the
latter sort contain nothing that is absurd or repugnant to reason, but on the
contrary corresponds and conspires admirably with the other, composing
therewith a Body of doctrine of most rare and absolute harmony, yet
notwithstanding they are rejected by the people against whom we dispute upon
such grounds and pretenses as shall be hereafter declared. Of the other, which
being illustrated by Religion, seems so much the more consentaneous to reason
for that there were before some seeds of them scattered in the humane
Understanding, they admit those only that please them best, and then reproach
the sacred discipline from which they learnt them. And this is the reason by
which it is come to pass that even amongst them that do not receive the Word of
God, they speak in these days with more certainty and evidence concerning the
Nature of God, his Infinite essence, Invisibility, Eternity, Omnipotence,
highest Goodness and Wisdom; hence it is that they discourse more positively of
the spiritual and immaterial being of the humane Soul, and of its immortality;
and that they understand more exactly the natures of Vice and Virtue, and the
natural difference that is between them. Nevertheless after all this they do
not scruple to accuse them of Lying and Imposture, to whom they are engaged for
the illustration of these important truths: whereas they ought rather to have
collected two things from thence; First, that seeing the Writers of the Old and
New Testament have clearly taught those truths whereof men spoke before so
doubtfully afterall the endeavors that the acutest Wits of the World had used
for their discovery, it must necessarily be that they received illumination
from some other person; considering that they profess every one of himself and
of one another, that as to the natural vivacity of their Understandings there
was nothing extraordinary in them, and openly confess that there is no praise
at all due to them for the same. For if we have regard to the good opinion
which men naturally have of themselves, and how gloriously they vaunt of their
inventions, what praise might not those Persons challenge to themselves for
having taught us what God is; seeing we meet with One in the records of Story,
that exalts himself to the skies for explaining a passage of Demosthenes,
better then they had done who attempted it before his days, and for having
explained an intricate verse of Pindar? Had they had the least part of the
vanity which Epicurus had for himself, when in the midst of his Fits of the
Stone, he found such cordial and sovereign consolation in the memory of his
excellent inventions in Philosophy; or of the vanity which his Disciples had in
his behalf, when for the same reason they placed him in the rank of the Gods,
they might on better grounds have filled the Universe with their boastings. A
second thing is, that since they were so happy in the bringing to light things
of such excellence, and to which the Reason of man subscribes, we ought not to
disparage their veracity in that which we are not able to comprehend; in regard
they make prosession themselves that they do not absolutely comprehend the
same, and acknowledge their weakness thereunto. For it is hereby most apparent,
that they have not sought the commendation of having a mind able to soar above
the common flight of others, nor affected obscurity to the end to render their
doctrine more venerable, or to reserv the understanding thereof for some of
their familiar disciples, as we find related concerning some of the writings of
Aristotle.

It would therefore be an honest modesty to yield them as much at least as
Socrates did to Heraclitus, when judging that which he understood of his Book
excellent and admirable, he adventured to promise himself that what he did not
understand was so also. There appears to be no doubt but that there is a
proportion between the Circle and the Square, since none would have employed so
much pains in the search of it, unless they had esteemed those two Figures to
be commensurable. Nevertheless all the great Geometricians of our own and
precedent Ages, have labored unsuccesfully in finding it out; and by how much
they have been more accurately learned, and their wits more subtle in this
speculation, so much the more have their imaginations concerning it been
attended with impertinence. Wherefore, if peradventure any person should be
found at this day that were able to teach us the Quadrature of the Circle with
such clearness, that the minds of all men should become enforced to acquiesce
in the evidence of his Demonstrations (although it be but a thing of the nature
of those that seem proportional to the strength of our minds) it were scarce
reasonable to question, but that he was savored by some Understanding more then
humane. And the inducement to believe that he was so, would be so much the
greater, in case he were known to be otherwise one of mean capacity, little
versed in the subtilty of such high speculations, and that he should disown the
glory of having discovered that truth by his own endeavors. I add moreover,
that if such person should offer to our approbation some other Geometrical
Propositions, which we should not be able to understand, yet it would be unmeet
to reject and condemn them, after having had such a singular proof of him in a
matter so desperate. It would be necessary to wait till some other should rise
up either in the present times or the future, to explicate them, as he had
resolved a difficulty unprofitably attempted, and at last abandoned by all the
great Mathematicians in all Ages. Certainly, therefore, it is greater justice
to practice that modesty toward those, who in a matter of most divine
sublimeness have revealed secrets to us which are incomparably more difficult
to be found out by the mind of Man, then any Problems whatsoever of Geometry,
and which since they have been discovered, give more abundant contentment then
the most evident Mathematical Demonstrations. But these people manage the
matter like those Plagiaries that pilfer the Manuscripts of learned men, of
which they retain what they please, and publish the same under their own Names,
to have the reputation thereof, and then in other things which they cannot
relish, they endeavor to cast affronts upon them, whose glory they have
fraudulently intitl'd to themselves.

Lastly, what I beseech you, are the particulars of their accusation, whereby
they arraign the Holy Writers of Ignorance, or Impertinence? First, that they
avouch the Deity to be the Creator of all things; and next, that they attribute
to him an especial care of humane affairs: two points which they cannot digest,
because prejudicial to his Quiet, and inconsistent with the profound calm of
his Beatitude. What bars (they demand) and Iron-crows did God make use of, to
raise and adjust the pieces of this great Fabric? What anxiety and solicitude
would continually possess him, if he should concern himself in the innumerable
affairs of mankind? What regrets and perurbations would be caused to him by all
the provocations of injuries and indignities that are committed amongst us? How
greatly troublesome it would be to him, like criminal judges, to have always his
hands in blood? How it would excite him to tenderness and compassion to behold
the piteous condition of so many miserable wretches as are in the world? Poor
people! that fancy such a God as resembles themselves, and that can do nothing
but with labor, because themselves know not how to place a beam in an edifice
without Levers and Cranes? If he be a God, he is infinite; and if he be
infinite, his power is not at all confined. Now to an infinite power, what
needs there more then a twinkle of the eye, one single motion of his will, to
build not only one, but a thousand worlds? For why is it that men employ so
many engines, but only to aid themselves with the same where there own power
is too short? why do they make use of Pulleys, but to supply the weakness of
their arms? and why of their arms and hands, but because things are not
obedient to their wills, unless, they apply them thereunto? But to him that is
infinitely powerful, there needs neither hands nor Engines, because his will is
alone sufficient to produce the effect. And there is the same facility in
government of the World, as in his Creation. Things require our industry and
pains to know them, because we are not able to penetrate far into them, and
remain ordinarily arrested on their surface, like the Dog that licks the
outside of the glass wherein the Pulse is enclosed. Moreover, it is necessary
for the Ideas of the things we comprehend to enter into our minds successively,
because they are too narrow to admit the same all together; agreeably to what
we observe in Looking-glasses, which receive but one image at a time; so that
he that attempts to represent more, confounds all. In like manner we move about
to dispose things in order; because we are but in one place, and thence it is
requisite for us in referring several things to one and the same end to remove
our selves often from place to place; as also in case they be difficult to
manage, we are necessitated to employ the hands of another, and so frequently
create substitutes to our prejudice and loss. But he that beholds all things
with one glance, that is present every where, that penetrates all things in the
abstrusities of their nature and essence, and manages them all according to his
Will, without any reluctation or resistance, what pains can we imagine it to be
to him to govern the World? The Events of things fill us with anxiousness and
perplexity, because they are not in our hands, and for the most part their
issues are contrary to our hopes. But as for him that decrees them, and by
consequence foresees them infallibly, what solicitous suspense can they create
in him? They fear least he should suffer interruption of his Rest, by being
continually incensed against some, and affected with compassion toward others,
Will they therefore have him to know the things that are done here below, or to
be ignorant of them? If he be ignorant of them, it will follow that the God
which they adore is scarce so knowing as we. For not beholding the transactions
of the World, and there being nothing done out of it, he will have nothing for
the object of that his supreme Understanding, except his own nature: his
nature, I say, which we have demonstrated above cannot be but wholly
contemptible according to their doctrines. And if he knows nothing of the honor
we bear toward him, it is lost labor to render him any. But if the worlds
affairs be known to him, they do not give him less trouble by not reducing them
to due order, then if he should stretch forth his hand to provide for the
welfare of the World. There is no appearance of reason why his Passions should
be more moved by being provident concerning it, then by leaving all to go in
confusion. But these people are as Saint Paul says, become fools by their
pretended wisdom. For all these objections have no other grounds, but our
clothing of God with our passions, and framing of him according to the model
of our own Being. If he be made in the same manner we are, if he resents our
perturbations in himself, he is not God, he is Man. Which is as if a Pismire
should apprehend of a great King, that it were not competible to him to trouble
himself with the care of any thing, because she toyls with drawing a grain of
wheat to her little cave, or is forced to encounter with a worm that devours it
from her. Verily God inflicts punishment on the wicked for their wickedness,
without being thereby obnoxious to any emotion interruptive of his quiet,
because his vengeance is not executed in choler as ours is, being carried
thereunto by no other motive then for that he is Just. But Justice is a Virtue
exempt from all passion and turbulent agitation. He has a tender care over the
Good, without feeling the agitations and heats in his bowels which we do. For
he is not subject to our Evils. Wherefore having no communion of nature with
us, he does not behold or acknowledge the image of his natural condition in our
calamities, and fears not least the like should befall himself; which is the
principal and usual cause of our compassions. He has regard to them because he
is Good. Now Goodness is a propensity to do Good, and not a perturbation
excited in our affections and accompanied with regret or anguish. But these
frivolus objections are professedly answered in whole Treatises, to which I
refer the Readers, to avoid detaining them with fruitless repetitions. Let us
therefore proceed to some other considerations which are more important to the
matter in hand.

CHAP. VI. Of the Natural difference which is between Vice and Virtue; and of
the Terrors of Conscience: Whether it can be deduced from them that there is a
Providence.
IT is not my intention to be prolixe in deduction of the reasons which are
employed against the Epicureans in behalf of Providence. It has been done so
often, and by so many excellent personages, as well Pagans as Christians,
ancient and modern, Poets and Orators, Divines and Philosophers, that to begin
the same over again, would be a work unprofitably undertaken, And I cannot but
wonder that especially in our times there should be people that yet call it
into question, and who have not been able to learn neither from Earth, nor
Heaven, nor Men, nor Angels, nor from the mouth of God, a thing that publishes
it self so loudly and clearly. I shall only make some reflections concerning
the natural motions of our Hearts, which may afford us some understanding
thereof. I would therefore willingly demand of these people, whether they judge
that there is any natural difference between Vice and Virtue, so that Vice is
naturally blamable and evil, Virtue, on the contrary, honest and commendable in
it self: or, whether they conceive this distinction to have been introduced
only to keep men in order, and to discipline Commonwealths, although otherwise
they are things in their own nature indifferent. For if they be of the Opinion
that Archelaus was of (from whom Epicurus, Aristippus, Carneades, and many
others learnt it) that there is nothing in the naked essence of things that
discriminates them, and that the difference we find in them is proceeded only
from custom, and as they speak, from Positive Law; whence comes that desire we
are all possessed with, of being, if not really, at least seemingly honest
persons; in so much that the most wicked are offended when they are taken for
such as they are, and endeavor as much as possible they can to cloth their
wickednesses with the appearances of uprightness and probity. Certainly, that
desire could never be so universal, were it not also natural; and it could not
be natural, unless there be an essential difference between that from which we
are desirous to attain honor, and that for which we fear to meet with blame.
For why should Nature have inspired and principled us to prize the one more
then the other, or rather to love and affect the one, and have a kind of
abhorrence of the other, if she her self had not placed more value and esteem
on the one, and blasted the other with some marks of her improbation and
hatred? And seeing there is oftentimes difficulty in the exercise of Virtue, by
reason of the conflict of our sensual appetites, which resist the influences of
that upon our minds; and that on the other side, it seems there are so many
delights and pleasures in Vice which give it an easy victory and dominion over
our appetites, how comes it to pass that that which we call Virtue has
notwithstanding so much power over our minds, as to oblige us to render it this
advantageous testimony? Indeed, as there is, perhaps, no vice of so universal
extent as that of hypocrisy, so neither is there any that more clearly attests
the excellence of Uprightness and Honesty. For if Justice and Honesty is not
able to obtain the rule of our affections, which are in subjection to its
enemy, it appears at least that its Idea cannot be driven out of the
understanding, and that it enforces the Vicious to give sentence of
condemnation against themselves. Epicurus instructs his Sage to be careful of
his reputation so far, as not to suffer himself to be contemned; because, say
his followers, Contempt brings along with it very many inconveniences, which
cannot consist with Pleasure, but are destructive to it; so that if he owns no
other motive to maintain a good esteem of himself but that, then provided he be
able to secure himself from contempt by any other means, he will not be
solicitous of having a good reputation. Now he that sets no value at all upon a
good repute, is as careless of the actions that produce it. For Renown stands
in relation to the actions and habits of Virtue, as the images that are emanent
from the qualities of sensible things are to them and the bodies clothed with
them. And the minds of men that judge of us and our actions are as the Mirrors
that receive those images. Therefore, as, if it were indifferent to Epicurus in
what manner a Looking-glass did represent him, and what images proceeded from
his body, fair or foul, of a pleasant or horrid color, well proportioned in
their parts and lineaments or deformed and extravagant, he would give us to to
judge that he did not trouble himself about the qualifications and structure of
his Body; so likewise the contempt that he should make of his reputation would
sufficiently discover the little care he had of the constitution of his Soul.
But to be thus qualified a man must be both wicked and impudent in the highest
degree; which would be a wonderful quality for the perfection of a Wise man.
However, as it is extremely suitable for an honest person to Love Virtue for it
self, and to endeavor to imitate him of whom the Athenians gave this Character,
He desires not to seem Just, but to be so; So that the perverse judgment that
is made of him and his actions, do not drive him to desert it and discourage
him from continuing such: so it is natural to men, and principally to the most
Virtuous, to desire that their Virtue be acknowledged, and esteemed according
to its due value; because, as Aristotle says, this is its natural recompense.

But to come nearer to the matter in hand, If it be indifferent of it self to
be Vicious or Virtuous, I demand, whether it be also an indifferent thing to
render honor to the Deity, or not. For if it be indifferent, the Epicureans are
in the wrong when they enjoin it as meet to venerate the Deity, in regard of
the eminence of his Being and his natural perfection. Because that excellence
of his Being is not from Positive Law, but natural; otherwise men might make
and unmake Gods at their pleasures, as they do their Statues. Either,
therefore, the Epicureans are absolutely without Religion, and as much aliens to
it as Beasts; or the honor which they make profession of rendering to the Deity,
they do not ascribe to him out of obedience to the Laws of Commonwealths, every
one in his own Country, but because they find themselves naturally obliged
thereunto. For in case it befell them to be in some place, where it were
forbidden to serve God, would they comply with such prohibition? And if it were
also commanded there to blaspheme him, or preach that there is none at all,
could they obey those Laws without doing violence to their consciences?
Wherefore if there be of necessity some natural difference between piety and
impiety toward God, there must in like manner be some between Vice and Virtue
in comportments amongst men. For as the excellence of the Nature of God obliges
us to certain duties toward him, so also consanguinity conciliates and
contracts certain obligations amongst us one toward another. And when I
mention consanguinity, I do not only understand that of Brethren and near
kindred amongst themselves, but also that of Fellow-Citizens and Countrymen,
and even of men in general; because there is an universal consanguinity between
them all, which has its root in the communion of one and the same nature, and
in the dependence and derivation from one common stock. And as the eminence of
the Divine nature is the foundation of the honor which we render to it, so the
equality of ours should be the foundation of the justice which we use one
toward another.

This the Pagans themselves well observed, when they affirmed the World was a
great City, and the several Nation as diverse Quarters of the same Town; so that
though there be certain duties that oblige us more strictly to our next
neighbors, yet there cease not to be other general ones, which are incumbent
upon us toward all men. Add hereunto, that if piety toward God be a natural
and immutable obligation, and yet Vice and Virtue indifferent in themselves,
and only good or evil by the authority of a Constitution which is subject to
alteration; If the law which sets a value upon Virtue happen to suffer a
change, and the Vice which is contrary to it become recommended by a new
constitution, there will result a consequence absolutely insupportable. For so
it may come to pass that a man may be at the same time desperately vicious, a
thief, adulterer, false-witness, murderer and parricide, and notwithstanding
very Religious toward the Deity, who will love and favor him in consideration
of his piety, if he has any knowledge of the same. Which is a prodigious
conceit, and such as without further debate the common sense of men abhors.
Moreover there is no person so devoid of eyes and understanding, who
acknowledges not some natural difference between the Beauty and Deformity of
our Bodies, and that the advantage of the one above the other does not consist
merely in the opinion of men and custom, as the comeliness or ill-beseemingness
of the greatest part of habits and fashions does, I am not ignorant that
Opinion bears a great stroke in some singularities, and that we may account
that for Beauty at this day, of which in Ages past they did not make the same
esteem: as black eyes, such as those of Venus were, are more pleasing to some,
to others, those that have something of blew, as those of Minerva are
described. But that is in things, wherein the natural difference is not so
evident, and where every one may have his particular sentiment, without
digressing very much from reason. For otherwise, I do not think any man would
deny that Achilles or Nereus was handsomer then Thersites, as Homer paints him
out to us; and that a strait man, and of a proportionable stature is better
made then a crooked Dwarf, whose arms reach down to his heels, and his legs
are distorted. Is it then likely, that there should be according to Nature, a
Beauty and an Ugliness of Bodies, and none of the Soul? so that to estimate
things agreeably to reason and not after common opinion, the chastity of
Lucretia should not be more to be prised then the lightness of Lais, nor the
Virtue of Cato then the dissoluteness of Sardanapalus? If it be so, imagine a
Commonwealth among the Antipodes, in which it were as indifferent for a man to
kill his Father as his neighbors Dog, to rob in the corners of Woods as to hunt
Hares or Deer, to lie with his Sister as with a Wise espoused out of the
degrees of consanguinity which circumscribe Marriages, and to be as honest a
thing to Lie and perjure, as we account it here to be sincere in words and
proceedings; it will follow that that Republike is regulated with as good
constitutions and laws as the best polici'd that is in Europe. For such is the
nature of things indifferent, that they take their tincture from the most
received opinions, and weigh only according to the standard of policy and
Positive Law. But these are not barely extravagances, they are distempers and
frensies, which the consent of all people gives the Lie to, and that relick of
shame, which Nature has left amongst the most corrupted Nations, utterly
disowns and flies from. In sincerity, is there something in Truth that
advantages it naturally above a Lie? or is it preferred merely by reason of
custom? As much, without doubt, as there is of difference between Being and
not Being, so is there of distance between Truth that results from the Being of
things and is the representation of them; and Falsity, which is as the image of
not-Being. Hence it is, that the perfection of the Understanding of Man
consisting in the knowledge of things which Are, conformably to their Being,
and consequently in Truth: there must of necessity be an inviolable relation
between the Verity of things and our Understandings, which are improved and
perfectionated thereby; whereas they reject a Lie by a natural aversion, as
soon as they know it to be such. And this Love of Truth has ever appeared
uniformly in all generous souls. Even little children do not readily take
pleasure in stories that are told them, unless so far as they fancy them to be
true.

Now is there a Thing naturally determined to ennoble our Understandings, which
cannot be changed by Customs or Laws, Opinions or Fancies, and which remains
always equal to it self and unvariable, and is there not also something
naturally determined to render our other faculties perfect? I mean our
Appetites and our Wills over which our Understandings preside. Certainly, it
would be a very extravagant thing, if Reason, whereby a Man is a Man, should
find its perfection in the sole knowledge of Truth, and that in this we excel
the condition of Beasts who are not capable of comprehending it; and in the
mean time, for our Affections, which ought to follow reason, there should be no
difference between us and Creatures that are destitute of it, by reason of
which their appetites are wil'd and undetermined, without subjection to any
Laws of Vice or Virtue. But it would be a thing yet more absurd and
extravagant, if Living Creatures unfurnished of Reason, having every one their
proper and natural goodness, which consists in a certain perfection of their
actions (as we give the Title of Good to a Horse and a Dog, for the strength of
their Limbs, agility of their motions, vivacity of their sent and swiftness)
and yet a man should not be styled Good, in regard of a constant and immutable
perfection of his operations, measuring them by the eternal rules of Truth and
Reason. Hesiod understood this better then these pretended Philosophers. For he
delivers this excellent Lesson ( Operum and Dierum, Lib. 1.) (...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
Et tu Justitiae quidem animum adjice, violentia vero obliviscere prorsus:
Namque hanc hominibus posuit legem Saturnius.
Piscibus quidem and feris and avibus volucribus
Se mutuo ut devorent, quandoquidem justitia carent.


But if there have been sound Nations heretofore, or be any such this day,
amongst whom that brutish Custom of devouring one another is in use; or if
some other such brutality, of the number of those that the right Reason of Man
abhors, be practiced any where without scruple or punishment; yet it cannot be
inferred from thence, that their custom of doing so changes the nature of the
thing in it self; or that the thing being indifferent in its essence is
diversely authorized according to the various fancies of Men. For there are
People in whom Barbarism has subjected Nature, and imbued them with such
monstrous sentiments, which ought no more to be drawn into consequence against
the consentment of all other Nations, then the Prodigies which emerge besides
the course of Nature, and violate the Laws which she ordinarily observes in the
production of her Works. To these people may be applied that sentence of
Petrarch; Hanno dal mondo ogni virtu sbandita;
And e dal corso suo quasi smarrita
Nostra Natura.
Since Virtue from the World they have exiled,
Our Nature's grown unsettled, savage, wild.
Whereas the Epicureans desire to pass for Philosophers they ought to have
remarked that Nature has distinguished our faculties, to the end they might
never be confounded; that she has assigned them their operations in such
manner, that one cannot produce those of another; and that to those operations
she has determined certain rules, in the observation or Violation whereof,
consists the Good and Evil, which invests them with the reputation of Goodness
or Improbity, The Faculty of vision which we have in our Eyes, is clean another
thing from that of Hearing, which is in our Ears; and the difference which
distinguishes them, is so essential to their Nature, that it cannot be
separated from the same without their entire destruction. The action of seeing
is so proper to the Eye, and that of Hearing to the Ear, that whosoever should
employ the former to receive and discern Sounds, and the latter to distinguish
the Colors and Figures of sensible things, would demonstrate that himself had
his Understanding perverted, in going about so to pervert the established order
of Nature. That action of seeing, to which the Eye is destinated, is performed
in such manner, that he that should attempt to see with his eyes shut, or
applying the thing to be seen immediately upon the Organ of the eye opened, or
removing it from the eye to too great a distance, or lastly putting some body
not diaphanous nor illuminated between the eye and it, should find it were to
no purpose, because Nature has so ordered that to the act of seeing all the
conditions opposite to these should be exactly observed. Now what she has done
in the faculties of our Bodies, the same she has also practiced in those of
our Minds. There is in us one faculty of the Intellect, and another of our
Appetites. And as our Understandings are designed for the knowledge of objects,
so are our Appetites conferred on us in order to our desiring or eschewing
them. The operation of the Understanding is neither good nor rational, unless
it be accommodated to the condition of the object, to judge of the truth or
falsity thereof according as the nature of the thing requires; Neither is that
of the Appetite good or commendable, further then it is conformed to the
condition of the subject toward which it is carried forth, to desire or avoid
the same, according as it is naturally desirable or worthy our aversion. And
lastly, as the rules of which we make use to frame our Understandings to
legitimate ratiocination, and by that means to acquire the habitude of
Sciences, are drawn from the nature of the things themselves, so that even
Epicurus, although he were no excellent Logician, composed a certain number of
Canons by which to regulate his reasonings; So the Maxims whereof we serve our
selves to steer our Appetites, to desire or reject the objects presented to us
as is fitting and requisite, and to contract the habitude of Virtues, are in
like manner drawn from the natures of the things, whence we have a certain
systeem of Morality by which to conduct our actions.

And this is of so much greater necessity, in relation to the things which
concern Virtue, in as much as the operations of our other faculties are
competible to us as we are Living creatures; which state is not the principal
of our condition: whereas moral actions belong to us as we are Men; which is,
as I may say the apex or highest atchievment of our being, and makes the most
excellent piece of our Definition. For it would be an excessive irregularity in
Nature, if the most excellent Being amongst all corporeal things, should be
able to attain a certain term of his perfection in the operations which are
common to him with Animals destitute of Reason, and yet he should have no
certain and determinate perfection in reference to those faculties which
advance him so far above Brutes, that he thereby approaches in some sort to the
image of the Deity. In which consideration Plato affirmed that the Supreme Good
of Man consisted in his conformity with God; which was excellently well
declared, and is supremely advantageous, if whereas God is of invariable
Holiness, Man would give himself to imitate him by the constant exercise of an
eminent Virtue. But if there be nothing fixed and certain in the Nature of our
Moral operations, so that it is indifferent to be Vicious or Virtuous, what
advantage can there be in our conformity with God? For it will be consequent,
that the Nature of God is likewise indifferent to Vice and Virtue, and that he
is as an Unwritten Tablet, or Wax, susceptible of all impressions whatsoever,
without being either more or less worthy of Veneration or contempt, dishonor or
Praise, for being either pure or polluted with Crimes, just or Tyrannical,
Good or Evil.

If the Epicureans acknowledge, what all sorts of arguments constrain them to
do, that there are certain Laws established by Nature, according to which things
are accounted Good or Bad, and actions likewise Vicious or Virtuous, in as much
as they disagree from or correspond to the same, they must also of necessity
confess that there ought to be a Providence, which after the last Act is
concluded will repay the rewards of Goodness to them that have merited them,
and heap Vengeance upon such as have stored up the same for themselves by their
evil actions. Semblably, as he that offends his Father or Mother, deserves
chastisement; so in sinning against Nature, in whose Laws is comprehended that
of Fathers over their Children, and who is the common Mother to us all, without
doubt we shall be obnoxious to correction. For every deviation from the right
way requires a correction or reducement: wherefore the correction of a Person
that departs from the precepts of Nature is his amendment; but the correction
of a vicious action is the punishment of him that committed the same. Truly,
the Political Laws by which penalties are appointed for Crimes, are not only
just in as much as they are necessary for the conservation of Commonwealths
which their violation would ruin; they are also so, because that wickednesses,
though they brought no damage to the State, are of themselves punishable, and
that Nature teaches us that as well in moral matters as in others, Monstres,
which so far transgress its rules, ought to be exterminated, to the end their
enormity do not turn to her dishonor. But whereas Political Laws establish
penalties only to corrupt actions, and do not punish intentions and thoughts;
it is not for that bad thoughts and intentions are not as deserving of
punishment as actions; but because the will and intention is not apparent
either to the Magistrates or Witnesses; besides, if all evil aims and purposes,
and such crimes as are committed in the mind only, were liable to penal
animadversion, the number of criminals would be so great, that the frequency of
executions would beget too much horror, and the world would soon become
depopulated and desert. Now it is not reasonable to punish any offenses but
such as are proved by good evidence; and it were better the world should be
peopled with tolerable inhabitants, then to be reduced to so ghastly a
desolation by punishments and deaths. Yet there are a sort of intentions, which
coming to the knowledge of Judges are capitally punished; as those which lead
to attempts against persons in Soverainty. In which there is not only a bare
regard so far, as if such forethought design had grown to effect, the
Commonwealth, which is under the Magistrates care, might have suffered
considerable prejudice: but it is considered in as much as, the prejudice set
aside, the design it of it self is too abominable to be passed over with
impunity; such horridnesses requiring to be expiated with proportional
punishments. Therefore seeing the counsels of which wicked actions are
produced, are naturally as vicious as the actions themselves; and which is
more, the actions are not vicious, unless as far as they proceed from bad
counsels; Whereas actions are punished because of their enormity, there would
be too notorious a Defect, and too great a Disorder in the nature of Things, if
there were not some power superior to that of Sovereign Magistrates, which may
give laws to thoughts and deliberations. Now if there be any such Power, it is
necessary that the same have a clear cognizance of thoughts and deliberations,
that it call those to account that are culpable therein, making their
Conscience intervene as a witness against which there lies no exception, and at
length begin to punish them by such remorse as the apprehension of judgment
begets in their breasts, till afterward it take a severer vengeance on them.
Now this is that which we call the Providence of God, which punishes a part of
those things which are done in this Life, to take away all misapprehension that
he endures others without exemplary punishment out of connivence; and to give
every one grounds of belief that he refers them to another time, in which the
Vengeance he will execute on them shall compensate its deferring by a greater
measure of severity.

Of what I have now represented, every man has ten thousand witnesses in
himself. For the terrors which all men experience, when they have committed
some wickedness, and whereof they do not cease to feel the effects though they
be assured of exemption from penalties constituted by public laws, do
sufficiently declare that there is some thing that frightens us within, with
the denunciation it there makes of another sort of vengeance. Certainly, if
there were nothing to be dreaded besides the punishment which every Magistrate
inflicts in his Territory; what reason is there that sovereign Magistrates
themselves should be terrified with the same? It is true, these people object to
us in this particular that those terrors are not natural, but are bred of the
false opinion which has possessed the minds of all men that the Deity is
incensed by reason of our offenses; to which they add, that the profound
ignorance of people has augmented those affrightments to them, as little
children sear bug-bears in the Dark; so that if we had not been prepossessed
with such a perverse opinion by our Ancestors, we should have always lived free
from that fear in a perfect security. They adjoin moreover, that if there be
any such natural Apprehensions wherewith men are discruciated, they are those
of the Accidents of Fortune, which may arrive to all, the dispensation of which
is erroneously ascribed to Providence Divine. For so speaks their Poet; Nec
miser impendens magnum timet aere saxum
Tantalus (ut fama'st) cassa formidine torpens;
Sed magis in vita Divum metus urget inanis
Mortales, casumque timent quem cuique serat sors.


But in case this were no better grounded then on a false opinion men have been
continued in, whence comes it to pass that the same should have so universally
possessed the minds of all Nations? For who is he amongst all the people of the
World that can avouch himself an exemption from these Fears? In every Nation
what person has not at some time or other had more or less experience of them?
Certainly that which is universal, has some foundation in Nature; and that
which persists constantly, and maintains it self always in the same sort,
cannot but be very deeply rooted therein; on the other side, vain and panick
fears are incontinently dissipated, and are of very short duration. Time (says
Cicero) wears out the Errors of Opinion; but it confirms the judgments and
sentiments of Nature. But there is something more in the matter; which is that
although some have more apprehensions of them, and others less, yet all are
desirous to be delivered from them, and to find out some remedy against them.
For there is nothing that so harrasses the mind or gives it such anguish as
Fear does; and there is no man finds any pleasure in being tormented in that
manner. How therefore is it come about that men have been so susceptible of
these vain terrors, seeing we naturally repel those things that are enemies
unto us? And is it not so much the more considerable, that there have been
always found some people, although they have been very rare among others, that
have endeavored, as Epicurus, to deliver men from such affrightments, by openly
preaching Impiety either by words or example. For David complains that there
were some even amongst the Jews, that were so devoid of sense as to deny that
there is a God; or if there be, that he takes any consideration of humane
actions by his Providence. A strange thing, that they which would imprint such
vain Fears in the mind of Men, should have succeeded so happily and so
universally therein, notwithstanding all the natural repugnances in us against
them; and they which would deliver us from them could never effect their
purpose, although they had the assistance of natural profaneness to favor them
thereunto? Does not this surpass all astonishment, that the Fear of Divine
Justice naturally disquiets the souls of men, and causes such painful
agitations therein; and yet notwithstanding, if Epicurus should have mounted
upon the Theater at Athens, and the Poet Lucretius gone into the Pulpit for
Orations, and there preached to the people the contempt of God and his
Thunders, that instead of recompensing them for attempting to free men from
such a tyrannical opinion, the greatest wretches would have been ready to beat
out their brains with stones? And that those Nations being so inflamed with
love of their Liberty, and an ardent hatred against Tyrants which affected the
Domination over their Goods and Persons, that they erected statues in their
streets in honor of them that killed them, should have so great an abhorrence
against those which went about to disabuse them from a fancy which oppressed
and tyrannized over their souls? Surely it must rather be acknowledged that
Nature prevailed, and the wrath of God, which is in a high degree revealed to
men from Heaven, and Quae caput a coeli regionibus ostendebat. And it helps not
to allege that it has not been possible for us to be delivered from these
Terrors, because we have not been instructed in the Doctrine of Epicurus. For
whosoever looks narrowly thereinto will, not without admiration, remark two
things. First, that there are very few men, but have a propensity to
Profaneness; and consequently every one is an Instructor to himself in the
Epicurean discipline. Yet nevertheless the number is so small that has
delivered themselves from the inquietudes of conscience, that perhaps there
never was so much as one person that became absolutely freed from them, not
even Lucretius or Epicurus himself. In some men, the more resistance they
employ against those assaults, the greater is their importunateness; and they
are re-enforced by the endeavors that are used to repel them; so that from
Impiety, to which they would resign up themselves to sin more at ease, without
being molested by such alarms in the midst of their pleasures, they fall into
Superstition; like a fugitive slave, that is drawn back by the throat into his
Masters house, where he is enforced to obey whether he will or no, for fear of
the Scourge and the Torture. Others, indeed, go so far, that the pleasures
wherein they swim, and wherewith they almost totally subvert their reason,
remove in a manner such sentiments out of their minds, so as sometimes to make
a mockery thereof. But it is as when Criminals give themselves to debaucheries
in the Prison. For when the fumes of wine are a little exhaled, and they begin
to think of their crimes with a settled consideration, they fret and are
excruciated with the horror of Gibbets and Wheels which are preparing for them.
But if it happen to them to be always drunk (which yet is rarely so) yet they
are in their sleep tormented with horrible visions and affrighting dreams. The
second thing observable is, that the honester part of mankind are they which
feel those Terrors least; by reason that a good conscience which has knowledge
of the Goodness of God and his inclination to Mercy, assures and reposes it
self in the same: and notwithstanding such good men abhor that doctrine from
the bottom of their hearts, that removes all fear of the Deity out of the Mind
of Man. In so much that they which are least disquieted with these Troubles,
are the men that esteem them to have their foundations in Nature, and to be
grounded upon Truth. On the contrary they which believe them vain and
groundless, are the most severely assaulted with them, without being able to be
released from them. In which on the one side shines the Goodness of God toward
them that love him sincerely, and fear him awfully; and on the other side, his
Justice upon them that disesteem him. What man was ever more outrageous against
God then Caligula, or who ever so audaciously contemned his Vengeance? And for
all that, when so ever it thundered, as if the Deity had spoke to him from
Heaven, he hid himself under his Bed, as if he intended to make a Buckler of it
against the Tempest. Whereas in the midst of the Darkness in which the Pagans
lived, Socrates maintained his mind in that same tranquillity at his Death,
wherein he had passed the whole course of his days.

But there is one thing highly worthy consideration, which is, that the stings
of Conscience are never so sensible and so quick as when men approach near
Death, or behold themselves in some eminent danger that menaces them. And
whence should it be so, but only that by the instinct of Nature they presage
and anticipate with their fear the misery that attends the Wicked after this
Life; Misery, I say, which is so much the more horrible in the apprehensions
they have of it, by reason that they know not what it is, and because all men
have a persuasion that their souls are immortal. For if Death did extinguish
the Soul with the Body, and so rescued both the one and the other from the
Divine Vengeance and the jurisdiction of Fortune at the same time, there would
be nothing at all to justify those fears in reason. In case, I say, those
terrors were not natural in us, there would be no person but would free himself
from them with this consideration, There was a time when we were not in Being,
and one day we shall exist no more: which was the consolation of Epicurus. But
on the contrary, then is the time that those Alarms are redoubled, and the
tempests increase their violence. Insomuch that where there is lest one sparkle
of piety and hope of pardon, men would not have this opinion true, That God
has no care of men, and that he prepares neither Good nor Evil for them in the
other world. And where there is not so much as the least seed of piety,
although they are very desirous that Opinion were true, yet they are not able
to persuade themselves that it is so. And hereof the Epicureans themselves
supply us with an evident Instance: For what else intends their Poet in these
lines?

Vsque adeo res humanas vis abdita quaedam
Obterit, and pulchros fasces, saevasque secures
Proculcare, and ludibrio sibi habere videtur.
What is it, I beseech you that he denotes by that hidden Power? Is it Nature?
No surely: for Nature takes pleasure in the production and conservation of
things, not in their ruin: besides that these Accidents which he mentions are
not dependant on the ordinary laws of Nature. Is it Fortune then? No, much
less: For wherefore should he say that she takes pleasure to shatter the
grandeurs of the World disdainfully at her Feet, seeing she has no knowledge
either of little or great, nor whether those be the bagdes of Power or not,
which she tears in pieces, and dashes to powder? It remains therefore, that it
is that which we call the Providence of God, which indeed sometimes takes
pleasure in convincing men of their vanity, and overturning the highnesses and
excellencies of the Earth. And this is that which extorts from Horace (a
disciple of the same School) that handsome confession, that having been
formerly a contemner of the Gods, the dreadful violences of thunder made him
renounce that foolish wisdom wherewith he had been imbued, and pronounce this
memorable sentence; -- Valet ima summis
Mutare, and insignem attenuat Deus.
So great is the power of truth, that even from the mouth of its adversaries it
draws testimonies to its advantage.

CHAP. VII. Of the Epicurean Opinion concerning the Immortality of the Humane
Soul, and the Supreme Good; and what may redound from it.
HItherto I have touched but transiently upon the Questions of the Immortality
of the Soul, and of the Supreme Good of Man; and I now come to examine what
they judge of the one, and wherein they place the other. Which, though they
both require to be treated of distinctly, I shall dispatch with brevity,
according to the universal design of this Work. And forasmuch as they of former
times thought that the Soul survives not the Body, and the opinion of the
modern Sectators is doubtful thereof, some affirming, others denying the same;
it is necessary for me to show, that if they grant that the Humane Soul is
immortal, they are also obliged to confess that there is a Providence. I shall
not scruple in the first place to allege here for proof of the
incorruptibility of our minds, The consent of all Nations, although I have
already made use of that Argument in another matter. For it seems such to me,
as ought in no wise to be rejected, unless by contentious spirits, who when
they have contradicted a truth, of how great evidence soever, think they have
achieved an exploit of great applause. For I beseech you, if the soul of man
be not immortal, if there be no firm reasons to induce us to believe that it is
so, how has such a fancy been able to become so rooted in our Minds, that
there is not any opinion that has a greater vogue in the World? Not only the
Greeks and the Romans, who seem to have been better refined then other
Nations, have been imbued with it; but the Barbarians, and least civilized
people have equally had this persuasion of the perpetual duration of their
Minds; although the quality of their estate after death was almost equally
unknown to them all. What therefore are those reasons that persuaded them of
it, and rendered that persuasion so firm and unalterable? Should I say, that all
Nations have received it from hand to hand from their Ancesters, perhaps it
would stir the Epicureans spleen to mockery; yet I should not affirm either an
absurdity or an impertinence. For all Mankind being derived from one single
person, and he having been endued with a more clean and particular
understanding of his Being then others have had since; (because the race of men
has been gradually depraved and degenerate according to the distance at which
they have been removed from their originals;) he imparted the principles and
knowledge to his descendants, which are ingrasted in them and entertained from
Age to Age. And although it were no more then a tradition from hand to hand,
which has been altered in diverse manners by Lapse of time, yet the principal
part thereof, which consists in the belief it self of the Immortality of the
Soul, has such a foundation in Truth and in Nature, that it has been
impossible, even for many Ages of time, which ordinarily decays all things, to
prevail against it, or at least to deface it out of the minds of Men. Now no
Relation ought to be discredited, which is accompained with these evidences.
First, that no solid and indubitable reasons can be brought against the same to
convince it of falsitie; as I am well assured there is none to be found against
this of any reasonable probability: And Secondly, which is equally spread
through out the whole Universe, and has been with extreme forwardness received
by all Nations; and Lastly, which has born up against the encounters of time,
and constantly maintained it self in the midst of so ^any revolutions of humane
affairs; so that it has passed into the remotest Islands, and the territories
separated from us by so great seas, that they have lain undiscovered to us till
within these last two hundred years. Is it not a thing worthy our marveil that
in such places where men had lost all knowledge of their Original, and of the
streights over which the people passed from whom they are descended, and where
they have in a manner forgotten humanity it self; they should notwithstanding
have preserved this belief, that there is some other thing in them besides the
Body, of greater excellence, and which subsists beyond their fate and ashes.
But if there be people sound in some other part of the New World, which are
fallen to so low a degree beneath themselves and to such a measure of
brutality, as not to have retained amongst them any shadow of this Sentiment
(though I much doubt, whether there be any such) their testimony ought not to
be of any consideration, not only because they are very few in number in
comparison of the rest of the World, but also because that it would not be
strange if they whom barbarism has unmanned in all other things, even so far
as to have no inclination to society, should likewise have extinguished in
their Minds that impression of Nature and the tradition of their Ancestors.
But, praised be God, there are other reasons, which induce an entire belief of
this important verity, and which hinder that this tradition is not worn out, as
so many others have been, which had less firm rooting in our Minds.

All men have been alike persuaded that there is a God; and very few have
doubted that he is a Rewarder of Virtue, and Punisher of Vice. Now neither the
compensation of the one, nor the Penalty of the other, is always fully
administered in this World, even in the judgment of those who have had no great
knowledge of the Nature of Sin, nor what punishment is competent thereunto. And
this is the observation from whence they inferred that there must be some other
time then that of our sojourning in the Body, in which that retributive justice
should be executed.

Whence the Opinion of the Souls immortallity ingrafted on the stock of the
persuasion of such a Deity, has fixed its roots so deep, that it has been
impossible ever to be eradicated. And we have above demonstrated, that it must
either be acknowledged that those two Propertys, must be in God, or that he is
necessarily ignorant that they are in him. But there is hardly sound any one
yet, that has suppressed Nature in himself to such a degree. Wherefore there
must be an other time then that of our abiding in the Body, which is appointed
to render recompenses and punishments to Souls, since they are here dispensed
so disproportionately to Vice and Virtue. I know well that Pomponatius, who
under the pretense of defending the Immortality of the Soul, has fought
against it, and making profession to be a Peripatetick, has embraced the
sentiments of Epicurus in this particular, answers, that although the soul of
man should be mortal, yet it would have recompense enough for the exercise of
Virtue, in the possession of Virtue it self. Since it is a thing so excellent
in its own Nature, that it is contented with it self (as the Stoics speak) and
that all remuneration which it receives besides, is either superfluous or not
necessary unto it. But supposing this to be true of Virtue, that they which
practice it, are sufficiently recompensed by enjoying it; yet it would not be
equally true of Vice, that they which addict themselves thereunto, are punished
enough by doing so. For the Impious possessing very frequently so great
contentments of Life, that the most part of Good men which have lived in all
Ages, have been scandalized thereat, can it reasonably be thought that there is
satisfaction enough in this Philosophical speculation, that in as much as Vice
is the greatest of all Evils, it is therefore a sufficient penalty to their
Crimes? Nature teaches us, and the practice of all Nations confirms it, that
Vice being a Moral Evil, that is, such as consists in a thing which is of it
self dishonest and meriting blame, the punishment thereof ought to be in
suffering a Physical Evil, that is, such as consists in the feeling of
something which is contrary to nature, and painful to it. And there was never
yet such a Lawgiver heard of, that established a constitution to punish a man
for Robbery by causing him to commit adultery. It is so natural to men to
esteem not only that the Punition of Vice consists in Pain, but that it is
congruous to the natural order of things, that whosoever commits Evil in the
First manner should be repaid Evil in the Second, that they number Nemesis
amongst the Virtues, which denotes the indignation that we are inflamed with in
beholding Good arrive to those that are Evil, and on the other side Evil betide
them that have otherwise deserved. Whence, because they believed it proper to
the Deity to maintain the orders of nature, and to correct the irregularities
and deviations that happen therein, they have sometimes been carried so far as
to doubt that there was a God, in as much as they observed according to their
apprehension the Just and Pious evilly entreated, and the Wicked passing their
days in ease and delectation as ample as their wishes. Every one knows the
verses of Claudian in reference hereunto touching the life and death of
Ruffinus; and Antiquity furnishes us with store of other the like testimonies.
Yea it has befallen even the Prophets themselves to exclaim upon this
occasion; Does God in Heaven see what is done here below?
Does he observe events, and govern Fate?
For, lo, Ungodly men like Palm Trees grow.
And Righteous languish in forlorn estate.
Either, therefore, there is a strange Irregularity in Nature; or, being crimes
escape with impunity in this world, contrary to what they deserve, there must
of necessity be vengeance reserved for them in that which is to come.

Now concerning Virtue, although it be natively embellished with many beauties
incentive of our Love, yet so it is that it cannot be it self the price and
recompense which appertains to it. For what is Virtue, but the fair habits of
our minds, and particularly the good actions which proceed from them? And what
is a recompense, but that which is given in consideration of such good actions,
and which consequently ought to come other where then from themselves? In
truth, there is not less natural correspondence between Virtue (in which Moral
Goodness consists) and Physical Goodness, which is placed in the enjoyment and
preception of what we naturally desire, then there is between there contraries.
And the coffeehouse which we conceive in beholding them which take pleasure
in Virtue, to suffer remarkable calamities in their Lives, does not appear less
reasonable to us, then the displeasure which we apprehend at the Prosperity of
the wicked. Which disorder, when it happens in the nature of things that good
men become miserable, does not less perplex the belief we have of Providence,
nor less incite us then the other, to doubt of the existence of the Deity.
Witness that complaint of Ovid upon the death of Tibullus; Cum rapiant mala
sata Bonos, ignoscite fasso,
Solicitor nullos esse putare Deos.
And although the Inclinations which induce Providence to compensate Virtue,
are not of the same nature with those that oblige it to the punishment of Vice,
because the inducements to this Latter are sounded on his Justice, the
rectitude of which ought to be exact and rigorous; whereas the former arise
from pure Goodness or Mercy; yet the notions which we have of the Deity not
permitting us to have a less good opinion of his goodness and Mercy then of his
Justice, the scandal is equal to us in both the one and the other defect. Thus,
you see, the same Prophet, after his hesitancy at the belief of Providence by
reason of the Prosperity of the Wicked, immediately after complains that his
integrity and his innocence were unprofitable unto him, seeing they did not
repreive him from the Evils which he continually endured. And he professes,
that this thought gave him so much inquietude and trouble, and the inequality
of things seemed to him so preposterous and scandalous, that he could not well
reassure himself till he was entered into the Sanctuary of the Lord of Hosts,
and had considered the End that is reserved for such people. And Claudian
likewise declared his dissatisfaction, till afterward. Abstulit hunc tandem
Ruffini poena tumultum,
Absolvitque Deos.
But seeing Death arrives equal to all, and that that of the Wicked (as the
Prophet says) is very frequently without regrets; and although it should be
accompanied with some thing particularly terrible or painful, yet that
punishment does not by much equal the atrocity of the crimes which they have
committed; if there be not some other chastisement reserved for the Wicked to
come, and some other recompense prepared for good men, the Conduct of the Deity
does not remain fully enough justified therein.

This consideration ought to suffice rational men, to evince that our Souls
subsist after our Bodies: but we have other evidences besides of such firmeness
that they could never be defaced by Barbarism it self. For he that pleases to
consider never so little attentively the capacity our Understandings have to
comprehend so many and so different things, their agitations so sudden as to
fly from East to West, and from North to South in a moment; their
inconceiveable swiftness in climing up in an instant even to the highest
Heavens, there contemplating their motions, and the Earth which they environ as
a point; the power which they have to remember past things, to connect them
with the present, and thence to frame conjectures of the future, which are
sometimes so certain that they seem to be Prophecies; to embrace when they
please in one gross all the mass of the Universe, and also when they please to
single out of it the most minute parts only; the faculty which they employ to
discover the beginning of the World, and its annihilation; to keep a register
of times past not by Ages and years only, but by Months and Weeks, and Days
and Hours and Minutes, to almost an infinite division; the exactness they
attain to in calculating so perfectly the courses of the Heavens, that they
divine and point out the Eclipses even for several Ages to come; and their
dexterous vivacity in inventing so many excellent Arts and industrious
Mysteries; in polishing, illustrating and piercing into so many, occult
Sciences, and difficult and intricate questions: what can be said upon
consideration of all these perfections, but that there is something in us of
greater excellence then our Bodies, yea a spirit issued from the breath of God
himself? And herein I dare appeal to the testimony of the Epicureans
themselves. They do not stick to publish that their Philosopher is worthy of
immortality, and even to be acknowledged for a God, in respect of his rare
inventions in Philosophy; although the rest hold him for a person absolutely
ignorant of the things which he undertook to meddle with, and impertinent in
those which he treated of and imagined he understood. Do they think then that
that Divine personage (as they call him) who first dared to display the mighty
power of his ardent spirit, to break and wrest open the gates of Nature, to
dive into secrets formerly unknown, to pass beyond the flaming Walls of the
World, and post over that immense space of things with his understanding to
bring from thence the victorious knowledge of the Causes of the universe; that
he I say, had no other Soul but a little Breath of Air that is dissipated in
dying, and I know not what kind of vital heat, which is extinguished with this
corporeal Mass? And were it not a strange disorder in the Nature of things,
that Epicurus should have merited the immortality of the Gods, and nevertheless
could not arrive to the third part of the Age of a Raven? For what advantage is
it to him now, while he is mingled with the dust of so many men dead before and
after him, that others speak of his singular devices in Philosophy? And if the
cause of his Life differed in nothing from that of a Horse, whence came those
faculties, for which they pretend men are obliged to consecrate Temples and
Statues to him? Truly, as an immortal faculty is requisite to serve and honor
the Deity, so for certain, in case he had had no other principle of his Life
but a pitiful mortal puff of Air, he would not have dared so audaciously to
encounter the sentiments of other men, and taught Irreligion with so mad an
impudence as could not be repressed by any terrors or respects whatsoever. Quem
nec fuma Deum, nec fulmina, nec minitanti
Murmr compressit coelum; sed eo magis acrem
Virtutem inritat animi, confringere ut arcta
Naturae primus portarum claustra cupiret.
For there needs almost an equal strength of wit to do so well and so ill.

Moreover if our Souls be corruptible, they result undoubtedly from the
temperature of the Elements in our Bodies, and by that means are (howsoever
subtle they be) corporeal themselves. If so, how can they have any conception
of spiritual substances, which are absolutely separated from matter? For there
is required some proportion berween the thing understood and that which
understands; for which reason Philosophers affirm that by means of the
conception of things the Understanding becomes in a manner of the same nature
with them. How then, if we be nothing but Bodies, do we comprehend that there
are things which are not such? and how do we enter into discourse of the Deity
it self? Must not he be a very Brute, that imagines that the Faculty whereby
we comprehend that there is a Deity, and dispute of a spiritual and eternal
Essence, and its Properties, differs not but in a degree of heat and refining
of our humors, from the Faculties of Beasts? Aristotle taught that an
Understanding was either an act of the Fancy, or at least was not performed
without the intervention of those Images which are formed in the Fancy upon
occasion of objects that strike our Senses. And like a cautious person as he
was, made use of that Dis-junction, to the end he might not shake the doctrine
of the immateriality of the Intellect, of which in truth he seems sometimes to
speak dubiously, but in other places renders such advantageous testimonies
thereunto, that there appears no ground of doubting but that he had very
rational sentiments concerning it. Pompanatius, as great a Peritatetick as he
is, has liked better to determine that the act of Understanding is nothing but
the formation of such Images. What picture then does the Fancy delineate in it
self, whereby to represent the Deity, and principally in them who are so
clearly persuaded of the spirituality of his Nature, that if it ever happens to
them to conceive any Idea of him according to the similitude of Bodies, they
presently condemn their conceptions, and endeavor as much as possible to
abstract their Mjnds and raise them above all corporeal Beings, to the end they
may have no other thoughts thereof, but such as are purely intellectual? It is
true, they are sensible objects which furnish us either the matter or the
occasion of all our speculations. But there is no man but knows that from those
sensible things of which our Fancy receives the forms and representations, our
minds elevate themselves to considerations infinitely more purified, and which
retaining nothing of the Nature and condition of Bodies, sufficiently confirm,
that there are faculties in us, which, though they make use of corporeal organs
for some few of their operations, are nevertheless immaterial themselves.

To proceed yet further; There is no person in the World, but is desirous of
Immortality, and every one is convinced in his conscience of such an
inclination. Whence therefore comes that desire to be so Universal amongst us,
if there be nothing that is able to satisfy it? For the same Aristotle has
written, that the natural appetites are not given us to no purpose, but that
there are certain things naturally designed for their satisfaction; and that
Philosopher is provided with irrefragable reasons to justify his opinion.
Therefore, where is that Immortality which we all seek after? Not in our
bodies; Since all men yield to the stroke of fate. Nor yet in Statues or Books,
nor in the Memory of men, nor in triumphal Arches, nor the Inscriptions of
Monuments. For the number of those is very inconsiderable who have provided
themselves Memorials, that they have been; and of those which have been erected
to this day, there are not above two or three in a manner whose durable
materials have secured them from the silent depredation of consuming Time. At
the utmost, although the ancient Monuments should have still survived, as the
Arches of triumph, Pyramids, and Mausolaeum's, yet they could not give the
Immortality we seek; they are no more but testimonies that we are not to expect
the same in this world; as they which want issue, take pleasure to keep little
Dogs, and to behold their Breed. It remains then, that we have a complaint to
make against nature, who has given us a desire, without hope of being able to
content it; which is unworthy and disagreeable to the care which she has had
of us in so many other things. For as for what some may possibly allege that
Brutes have almost alike inclinations, and that even insensible things are lead
by a natural instinct to their own conservation; it is a frivolous objection:
Shall we say, that because a Stone naturally tends downwards, it desires to be
there perpetually? being ignorant of the impulsive cause that moves it, or the
place whence it comes and whether it goes, and even of its own being, it
cannot, to speak properly desire its own conversation. The cause is, for that
every thing which is heavy, falls naturally downward; if a Stone should not do
so, it would have no gravity, and were not a Stone. In a word, heavy things
have as little desire to descend down, and light to mount upwards, either from
the regions of Heaven or the centure of the Earth, as the number of Two being
doubled has to make Four. It Is the nature and order of things, which knows not
it self who would have it to be so. As for Animals destitute of Reason, all the
care they have of their Preservation lies in that which we term the estimation
of things present, which accordingly as they are hurtful or profitable are
desired or avoided by them, without all knowledge of the future, or any thought
that reaches so far: much less are they able to do as men, who anticipate not
only entire Ages, but thousands and millions of Years to come. And who so
compares that blind instinct of Pismires, which seem to provide in Summer
against the necessities of Winter, with the thought of immortality, must either
be an Idiot or a mad man. For, can any man of common sense imagine that those
little Animals have an apprehension that the Sun being returned to the Tropic
of Capricorn, will have no more power to make the Earth produce what is
necessary to their subsistence? Surely no: But that small insect being
naturally theevish, as long as she finds food in the fields, steals it from
thence, and carries it to her little Cell, without dreaming that there will be
a Morrow, and far from foreseeing the Rain and Frosts of Winter; being
notwithstanding all Elogies of her, -- Ignara atque incauta Futuri. But that
Providence which governs all things and takes care of their conservation,
because it created them, gives these creatures those blind instincts and
inclinations to theft, to cause them to lay up a store of necessary sustenance;
as a Falconer makes use of the swiftness and rapaciousness of Hawks, to cover
the table of their Masters with excellent fowl, without their understanding of
the design. But for us, our desires are ardent, and our thoughts extend
themselves wonderfully forward to the Future: and forasmuch as the inquietude
of ardent desires, when we see no hopes of contenting them, is extremely
importunate; in case we have no part in Immortality, Nature will not only have
put the desire of it in us to no purpose (which she has done in nothing
besides) but also to deject and torment us, which were a cruelty beyond the
spleen of Stepdames.

Moreover, experience it self teaches us that there is such a difference
between the Body and Mind, that they seem oftentimes to have no communion one
with another; so different are their functions, and so little mutation does a
great and universal change in the one work in the other. You may see a man
blasted or lamed in all his Members by some accident, who yet has the motions
of his mind as strong, plyant and nimble as when he was in perfect health. You
may see another upon the borders of the grave, emaciated like a skeleton,
without vigor and pulse; whose understanding nevertheless is more sublime then
before, and his thoughts more refined, who will judiciously discourse of every
thing that is propounded to him, and that which is the greatest wonder will do
it with so little astonishment at death, as if to divest himself of his body
were of no more value to him then to stripoff his clothes; although he
apprehend full well on the one side what death is, and do not contemn it out of
stupidity, and is on the other absolutely persuaded of the immortality of the
Soul. But it is true, this is not universal; and great mutations of the body
sometimes produce remarkable changes in the Mind. Nor do I deny but that the
Body is so constituted in its particular temper, and so nearly ligued with the
Mind, that the disposition of the one contributes very much to the functions
and operations of the other. As when a Lute is untuned, how skillful soever the
Musician be, he can never make any tolerable harmony; so in the total dyscrasie
of the Body and its principal instruments, the Soul sometimes remains stupefied
and astonished. But seeing this happens not equally in all men, and that there
are as many experiences of people who amidst aches and mutilations and losses
of their limbs have preserved the whole strength of their Minds entire, till
death, it must needs be that this Tabernacle lodges something else that is of
a more durable temper. Whence it is easy to conclude, that since it is not a
Body, it must be an immaterial substance, and consequently incorruptible. For
being of a spiritual nature it cannot be assailed by external things which
offend us, nor suffer from any accident that befalls it from without; and
holding nothing of the matter of the Elements, or their contrary qualities,
which naturally encounter one another to their mutual destruction, it involves
not in it self any seed of corruption which seems to attend every thing that is
composed of them.

I shall add moreover, what has been above demonstrated, that there is so
great a difference between Vice and Virtue, that he that does not acknowledge
the same, is unworthy the name of a man. Which how is it possible for us to
acknowledge, if the Faculties of our Minds be not different from those of
Brutes, since they have no understanding at all of it? For it is certain, that
we argue from the disproportion of effects to the difference of causes, and
from the diversity of actions to that of the Faculties which produce them; and
lastly from the difference of Faculties to that of the essence it self of the
things in which those faculties reside. If therefore Brutes have no knowledge
of Good and Evil, as every one sees they have not; and if we perceive an
infinite distance between them, as reason informs us, and our conscience
acquiesces therein, and the consentment of Nations has declared in all the
World; it follows that there is an infinite disproportion between our Faculties
and theirs, and consequently that the like distance is found between the
essence of their Souls and that of ours. And I appeal to reason whether, being
the perfection of a Man consists in the knowledge of the most excellent
objects, and in the exercise of Virtue, and the perfection of a good Horse lies
in the strength of his Limbs, and in the agility of his motions; whether, I
say, it be not abundantly evident that the excellence of the one lies in his
Body, and the excellence of the other in some thing, wherewith the body has
scarce any communication or commerce. Whence it necessarily follows, that their
natures differ wholly and absolutely in regard of reason, which alone is
capable of conferring that perfection on man; as weighty things differ from
light by the massive solidity of their matter, in which gravity is seated; and
as the circular Figure is discriminated from the rest by the roundness of its
circumference equally distant from the center. Of which the luctation and
combat of reason against the corporeal appetites (which even Aristotle and
other Philosophers have plainly acknowledged) affords a testimony
satisfactorily manifest. For since there is no shadow of such reluctance in
Brutes, who follow their sensuality without any rule, or check, and that the
same is sound in the most dissolute men, in whom conscience cannot be
absolutely extinguished; it follows that it must have its original from
something which is naturally destitute of that sensuality, and consequently
which is also not corporeal. Because it is manifest, that those appetites which
are called sensitive, and are common to us with Brutes, have their seat and
root in the Body, and depend on that Soul by which we have resemblance with
them, in as much as we are Animals. Wherefore, whether there be in man two
distinct Souls, one Sensitive (as it is called) by which we are Animals, and
the other Reasonable, by which we are men; or whether there be but one only,
which is endued with different faculties, whereby we are provided to perform
all the Functions appertaining to those two respects; it is clear that that
sensitive faculty is not displayed but in the Body, being so linked to it as
never to be separable from it; and that on the contrary the other is not seated
in the body, since it is designed to check our appetites, which it performs
oftentimes with very great violence and power. And this is so true, and so
universally received, saving by the Epicureans (who think they have won the
Palm for noble inventions in Philosophy, because they have degraded themselves
to the rank of Brutes) that the most excellent persons have been so far from
believing the Soul to perish with the Body, that on the contrary (not being
able to conjecture how after the dissipation of the Body, they could ever be
reunited and render the whole man immortal) they have affirmed that the Soul in
which the Understanding resides is really the man, and that the Body is not,
but as the receptacle and prison. But by the grace of God we shall see
hereafter that man was created for immortality as well in reference to his body
as to his Soul; and that being fallen from this prerogative by sin, he has
been restored thereunto by the Divine clemency and mercy.

Seeing it is so therefore, that the Soul of man subsists after separation from
the Body, and consequently is of an incorruptible substance, it follows of
necessity that there is something to be hoped and feared from the Deity; and
that though his Providence were not so clearly intelligible in the world here,
yet at least his justice is to be dreaded in that which is to come. For what
will become of the soul after Death? Will she act, or will she be buried in
eternal sleep? Certainly she is of a nature so active, vigilant and averse from
idleness, that it is with regret that she allows the body its necessary
intervals of refreshment. Even as plunged and immured as she is in it, when
that is at rest, she is not surprised with sleep, but is ever employed on some
kind of speculations how unprofitable and extravagant soever they be. Like as a
Musician, that is affected to the exercise of his Art, chooses rather to play
on his Lute, though half untuned, and at the inconvenience of making false
Music and committing dissonances, then to suffer his fingers to become torpid
by continued disuse. And the more excellent she is, that is, the more exercised
in generous contemplations, the more she hates repose, even to the abandoning
all care of her habitation, though she otherwise loves and is a good companion
unto it. So that she would be clean diverted from the end to which Nature has
designed her, if she were condemned to a perpetual sleep in eternal night.
What then will her occupations be at that time? Will she frequent in Towns, or
will she resort to unhabited placs? Neither of which is worthy of her, nor
suitable to her inclinations. Whilst she is here by reason of the body confined
to sensible things, yet she quits her self from them oftentimes, to busy her
vivacity in the contemplation of those which are intellectual. For whatsoever
beauty the World has, it all referres to the body, and so it feeds and
satisfies the corporeal eyes only. If there be any contentment for the Mind,
it is in the consideration of that Wisdom, from which all the excellent order
we behold, proceeds: Which is an object destinated to the Understanding and not
to the corporeal sight. Much more therefore, when she is no longer in this
lodging of Earth, will she contemn sensible things, to give her self to such as
are conformable unto her. And indeed the most excellent faculty of the Soul is
the Understanding, and the perfection of that consists in contemplation of
noble and excellent objects. Now there is in the perfection of every thing its
supreme end and contentment; by reason of which, either the Soul must be
extinguished, which we have shown is impossible; or she must be employed in the
contemplation of things worthy so sublime an intelligence. And what can there
be, even in the opinion of the Epicureans, more worthy to be considered, loved,
and adored then God, or consequently which so much perfectionates the soul of
man and his understanding, or which gives him so much satisfaction and joy?
Therefore his supreme Pleasure will be to approach unto God, to behold and know
him, to dive into his wonderful nature, as much as is possible to be founded in
so great an Abyss. And this cannot be done, unless God communicate himself to
the Soul, and suffer himself to be (as I may so speak) touched and tasted by
it. But what? If that be the perfection of the Soul, and consequently its aim,
is it consentaneous to Reason, that those which are polluted with all sorts of
wickedness should likewise have free access to the Deity, and receive as high
contentment from his communication, as he will admit the Good unto? Or shall
Fortune have then also a Sovereign power over spirits, to bring some of them
fortuitously to their supreme Good, and as rashly debar others from it?
Certainly altogether otherwise. As they which have most revered the Deity and
his image (which resplends in Virtue, and not in sensible things) or who (to
speak better) have not esteemed sensible things further then as they are
necessary to the body to render their Minds more free to its functions, and
dextrous to the exercise of Virtue, shall in reward of their affections, obtain
the enjoyment of that which they loved here below (which is a thing agreeable
to the Goodness of God:) so those shall by his justice be deprived of the same,
who have slighted it in comparison of things visible and transitory. Now to be
deprived of the contemplation of the Deity and of that delectation which it
affords in communicating it self to the creature, is that which we account the
punishment of sin committed in the body; which also cannot be without
transcendent sorrow, and unspeakable distress. We refer these things as much as
we can, to the experience of all men.

It is not questioned by any, but that we are designed to a supreme Good, and
that such supreme Good is of it self so great, that all our desires ought to
concenter in tendency thereunto. The debates of Philosophers concerning its
Nature, are infinite, and their dissenting opinions about it can never be
composed by the help of Philosophy. Not to amuse my self in rehearsing the
Fancies of others, which are almost without number, in the first place the
Epicureans place it in the Pleasure of the Body. The Stoics determine it in
Virtue. And the Peripateticks define it in the exercise of Virtue; yet account
it not complete, unless it be attended with the Pleasure that accrues from
enjoyment of corporeal and external things; such as Beauty, Health, Riches,
Peace, the love of ones Fellow-Citizens, and Prosperity in Enterprises. As for
Bodily Pleasure, the Philosophers have long since driven that out of the
School, as too soft and effeminate, wherein to place the sovereign happiness of
good men. For is it equitable to attribute the same to Lais with Cornelia the
Mother of the Gracchi? or to Marcus Brutus with Heliogabalus? And what a
strange supreme Good is that which renders men of near resemblance with beasts?
Yet supposing it were so, experience shows that it is impossible to be obtained.
For who ever tasted a Pleasure in the world, so pure, that had not in it a
touch of bitterness? If any one has tasted such, yet who has been able to
continue and relish it for a long time? Whether soever Pleasure be placed in a
sensible jollity for the enjoyment of some desired thing; or established in the
Absence of all Evils, which they call Indolence; those Pleasures which tickle
us are but of a moments duration, and no man ever yet passed an entire day,
without complaining of something. Now the supreme Good is a thing firm and
constant, and which not only ought to be difficultly shaken (as Aristotle
observed) but absolutely immutable. They who have confined it to Virtue, were
without doubt more generous and worthy the prerogative of men. But there never
yet lived any person, that attained to such a degree of Virtue, as it ought to
be had in, to make up a happiness: for it is requisite that it be accomplished
in all its degrees and parts. The Stoics indeed were arrogant enough, to
imagine themselves to have attained thereunto; but we have too much experience
both of their imbecility and our own, to believe them. And although some one
should have reached to that high pitch of Virtue, yet cannot he be called a
happy man, who is subject to fall into the misfortunes of Priamus, and who
really falls into them. If there have been any Sages amongst the Stoics, Cato
Vticensis and Brutus were the men. And notwithstanding Cato in despair of ever
beholding the affairs of the Commonwealth restored, disputes in the first place
against the Providence of God, and accuses its conduct of a strange instability
and prevarication, as if it had favored the tyrannical attempts of Caesar; and
then kills himself, to go seek his happiness in another place, since his Virtue
could not give him it in this world. And for the other, being transported with
the same despair, he slew himself with his own hand, after he had reviled
Virtue, calling her weak and wretched, as if she were no more then a mere name
or shadow. Which deportments of theirs sufficiently detect and convince the
vanity of those magnificent words of the Masters of their School; That a Wise
man is invulnerable by all the Accidents of Fortune, and that he can never lose
the support of Virtue, so unmovable is she in him, and always like to her
self. Aristotle ordered the matter better, when to the enjoyment and practice
of Virtue he adjoined the felicity which accrues from things external. Which
opinion is no doubt more conformable to our desires and natural inclinations.
But though he had a capacity quick enough to discern that where one of those
two things is wanting, the supreme happiness is defective, yet had he no more
power then other men to conjoyn them actually and really together. In which
impossibility of amassing a supreme Good in the World of so many pieces, and
consolidating them so well together, that their Union be never discomposed, who
sees not the necessary despair there is of all humane power to obtain the same?
Which despair of obtaining cannot of consequence, but cause the pursuit to be
abandoned. So that as Nature has given us the Desire to be happy, Necessity
will have bound us down to a perpetual despair of being so. And the most
excellent of all things in the world, and for which all the rest seem to have
been made, shall never arrive to its end, but shall appear as if it were
purposely framed to be tormented continually with the despair of never being
able to reach it is enjoyment. In which respect that of Horace to a Miser, will
be as applicable to every man; Tantalus a labris sitiens fugientia captat
Flumina: quid rides? mutato nomine de te
Fabula narratur.


I shall proceed yet something further. The desires which men have are of two
sorts; Of which the first are conformable to Nature, and do nothing at all
encounter reason. The second are extravagant and repugnant thereunto; As if a
man should desire to be all spirit, and to have no Body at all: this were an
extravagance, to which right reason cannot assent. For it is to desire not only
a thing which will not, but likewise which cannot be, being involved in a
manifest contradiction, in as much as a man cannot be a man without having a
body, nor have a body and be all spirit together. And if he should desire to be
metamorphis'd into the nature of those simple Intelligences, which we commonly
called Angels and are not destinated to be conjoined to Bodies, his wish would
not be less absurd. Because in case he should become such a simple and
immaterial Intelligence, he were no longer the same person, but should in
effect desire the abolition of his own being: for that in transmutations
wherein the form it self of the thing (as they speak) perishes, the thing
perishes also: Whence it would concern him as little to be an Angel as to be a
Dog, and to desire one as the other. It is not from such desires as these that
we are to deduce arguments to show what is the nature of man and of his Soul;
because they which make them, deviate from the rules of Nature. The other sort
of wishes, which are suggested by her, and are not thwarted or checked by
reason, which, I say, do not destroy the form of our being, but ennoble and
advance it, are they which ought to be taken for manifest indices either of
what we naturally are, or at least of what we ought to be. For whence should
those desires happen to us, if they be not inspired by Nature? And to what end
should they have been placed in us, if that of which we received of them, never
intended to give us the satisfaction and enjoyment they aim at. Admitting it
were possible for us to compass all those things which are necessary to make up
the supreme Good of Aristotle; and that we were in full possession thereof;
besides that natural desire of the supreme Good which might seem to be
contented in the enjoyment, there would be left another not less vehement or
less inrooted in us, which is that of the perpetuity of such felicity without
any alteration or interruption whatsoever. Now when we should with all
imaginable care have cemented the parts together that compose it, when we
should have nailed, linked and invested them so that there would be nothing but
death able to dissolve the junctures, yet it would last but for our Life, and
our Life could not last to the end of an Age. And then what would become of
those desires of enjoying the same for millions of years even to perpetuity?

But some may here arrest my course, and demand whether experience shows not
that it is impossible to obtain a beatitude durable for ever? For who is he
that is exempted from Death? Wherefore since wise persons do not only not
consult about things absolutely impossible, but do not so much as desire them;
or if they happen to let a wish escape from them by some sudden impetus of
nature, they presently bring the discourse of reason to repress it; it follows
necessarily, that such desire of a perpetual felicity is out of the limits of
reason, and by consequence ought to be checked by it, rather then cherished and
encouraged. For death which happens universally, without privilege to any,
renders not the enjoyment of a perpetual Good more impossible to all men, then
the weakness of our minds, the inclination which we have naturally to vice, and
the infinite multitude of inevitable miseries attending humane condition,
renders impossible the possession of the Happiness which Aristotle describes
and terminates within the duration of our Lives. And nevertheless none ever
condemned that desire in man of his felicity, none ever accounted it but both
natural and reasonable. Moreover, it is manifest that all the World desires
Immortality, and the things which we have already deduced, demonstrate the
same. Yet there never was any person that attained it. Must it therefore be
concluded that the desire of it is absurd, and besides the rules of reason and
Nature? Epicurus himself did not account it so, who amidst the gripings of the
Stone, and upon the very confines of death, comforts himself with the immortal
glory which his Philosophical contemplations had acquired and should preserve
for him to perpetuity. Cicero professes Death is terrible to them who leave
nothing of themselves after departure out of this life, but not to those whose
praises cannot dye. Alexander esteemed Achilles happy in that he had Homer to
celebrate his Virtues and high atchievments of Arms, being his memory would
remain consecrated to eternity in the Poem of the Iliads. And himself made
profession, that he did not at all fear death, because he beliv'd his victories
would render him immortal. And not so much but Ennius the Poet, presaged he
should live for ever in the mouths and memories of men by means of his Verses.
Ovid and Horace promise themselves nothing less from their Works, then that
they shall continue their names throughout all successions of time, speaking of
them as trophies erected to exempt them from the Power of the Fatal Sisters.
Such as cannot hope the same from their works or great exploits, expect at
least to survive in their children; and would be very effectually comforted
against death, if they could be assured that by help of their Pictures or Front
of their Houses, their posterity should retain the remembrance of their
countenances from age to age. Therefore as the impossibility of obtaining from
this Life, the supreme Good described by Aristotle, does not hinder but that
man was framed by nature to possess it; and as the impossibility of obtaining
immortality does as little evince that man was not destinated by nature her
self to an incorruptible condition; so this impossibility of obtaining, as we
desire, the perpetuity of the Supreme Good, does not argue that we were not
made to enjoy it, by him to whose power and goodness we are indebted for our
Original. It must follow then, that either those natural desires which are not
at all thwarted by reason, were given us to no purpose at all (which is a
conclusion that true Philosophy disdaines to own) or that there is a supreme
Felicity which is of perpetual duration. Now the enjoyment of that immutable
Happiness is the compensation allotted to Virtue by the Divine Goodness; as the
privation thereof is the retribution and penalty constituted by Divine Justice
to Vice. The cause of the whole mistake, is the ignorance of what we were in
beginning, and what we are become since by our own fault: for at our first
creation we were constituted in full enjoyment of that Felicity, of which
Aristotle fancied some kind of Idea; but Sin has dispossessed us of it. The
Soul and the Body were both created to Immortality; but the Body is become
mortal by our revolt; Both of them were destinated to durable Happiness without
diminution or interruption throughout all Ages; but disobedience has separated
both the one and the other from it. The Privation of that blisseful Estate is
an effect of the Justice of God; but the Hope that God has by his Truth given
us to recover it, is an effect of his Mercy; and both indubitable testimonies
of his Providence, in as much as they are the most remarable instances and
parts of it. For although God takes upon himself the care of Governing the
motions of the Heavens, though he orders all the mutations of the Elements, and
their mixtures for production of all things in Nature; and though he afford
daily supply of sustenance necessary to the Fish of the Sea, the Beasts of the
Field and ths Fowls of the Air; and all this most manifestly bespeaks his
Wisdom, Power and Goodness; yet there is not in all this conduct any thing so
worthy of himself as the exercise of his Justice in punishing, and the works of
his clemency in rescuing those from condemnation which deserve it. In as much
as in the former instance he uses goodness toward creatures which have not
offended him, he follows his natural inclinations, and the inviolable relation
which is between Him and Them. But in punishing, he is enforced to commit a
kind of violence (as I may so speak) to retain the effects of his Benignity,
and to inflict those of his indignation out of the only consideration of his
Justice. And when he comes to pardon, his Goodness, as it were overflows of it
self to swallow up his Justice in Mercy. Now although I have been somewhat more
prolixe in this dispute, and principally in the deduction of these last
particulars, being lead to it by regard of their importance; yet I conceive I
have not been tedious to the Reader, who understands how fruitful and thriving
that Doctrine of Epicurus is, and with how much obstinacy and opiniastry his
successors of the present time labor to defend it. I omit to meddle with those
sentiments of theirs that purely relate to Natural Philosophy: wherein the
Glory of God, and Piety, and Virture are not so nearly and particularly
concerned. Though I must not dissemble, that it is to be feared that some of
those which so much recommend the Physics of that Sect, do it chiefly to
prepare some good impression for their Theology and Morality. I shall only add
in reference to such as openly declare themselves for Epicurus in that which
belongs to Religion, that they have a very high opinion of the strength and
subtilty of their wits, and bring a great obstinacy to the defense of their
Tenets. For which reasons it was necessary to discuss their subterfuges
exactly, either to reduce them to a better mind, which I confess cannot be done
but by the sole grace of God, or to make them hold their peace, if they have
not altogether with piety abandoned all shame. And this I believe, I have
performed in such a manner, that no man ought hereafter to be scandalis'd if
they esteem the profession of all Religions indifferent. For since, to speak
plainly they have no Religion at all in their Heart, it is no great matter to
them what it is which they carry in their Lips. I shall therefore orderly pass
over to examination of the Opinion designed to the second Part of my Work.

A TREATISE Concerning RELIGIONS, Against those who esteem them all
Indifferent. The second Part.
CHAP. I. Of the Universal Consentment of all Nations in this Point, That there
ought to be One Certain Religion; And that it is Necessary that God himself
prescribe the Model of the same.
AS all the World consents in this fundamental Truth, That there is a God
(which the Epicureans themselves dare not deny) and likewise that God governs
all the transactions upon Earth; (since the number of those that deny it is
inconsiderable in comparison of its assertors; and they which profess to
indubitate the same, are constrained, as we have formerly shown, to confess
that they have no other knowledge of God but by the traces and instances of his
Providence) So we may observe an universal Instinct of Nature in this that all
Nations have accounted it necessary to the rendering to God the honor belonging
to him, that there be one certain determinate form of Constitution called
Religion, containing the rules according to which men ought to guide and
comport themselves therein. For never was there any Nation that thought it
enough to serve God in thought only, without making demonstration of their
devotion by gestures, and external actions, and observation of certain
ceremonies; unless, perhaps, some one among those where Barbarism rules all,
and which in that respect we usually term Savages. But the actions of such
people are not to be drawn into consequence, except we account it also an
indifferent matter to live on humane flesh as they do, and to be ignorant of
all things that are honest and worthy recommendation. And yet there will be
sound very few people but have at least some shadow of Religion, even amongst
the Cannibals. Now that such Instinct of Nature is not brutish, but is either
accompanied with or proceeded from reason, is no hard matter to make appear with
irrefragable evidence. Man is naturally a Lover of Society, and was not created
to live in solitude: they which so affections to renounce converse with other
men, must be (as One said long since) either some thing more or some thing less
then Men. Now we have for the principal objects of our affections, God, and Men
like our selves; which are also the two chief, and perhaps only things to
which we owe any Duties. Concerning those duties, in which we stand obliged one
toward another, it has been requisite to establish certain Societies upon
good constitutions as upon firm bases, to the end there might be certain Laws
to regulate those duties, to correct our excesses, amend our defaults, restrain
the licentiousness of some, and excite the supinity and negligence of others;
that by such means all things might be preserved in good order. And nature her
self first gave the model thereof in families, where Parents and Children are
held in reciprocal obligations, and so brethren one toward another, and
likewise servants themselves. For from that Pattern were Cities first formed,
which are as great Families, and Kingdoms which are as great Cities; in like
manner as a Family is like a small City, or a narrow Kingdom. And he that
sequesters himself from humane Society to live by himself, is looked upon as an
Enemy of Mankind, as Timon the Athenian was; a sort of Monster wonderfully rare
in the World. As for the Duties incumbent upon us toward the Deity, men have
likewise appeared sociable therein, and have not chosen to serve God a part by
themselves; but have constituted an other kind of Society, in which they might
serve him all in common, and in some sort partake in the devotions one of
another; and this according to certain sacred constitutions, serving to
regulate the mind of man, and to bind every one in conscience. So that in this
Society, yet much more then in the other, whosoever separated himself from it,
has been by common judgment of all the rest held for an enemy of the Deity,
and as a beast unworthy to live upon the face of the Earth. And that this is
so, experience and evidence of Truth attests beyond all contradiction.

But behold the pretension to justify their dissent; Namely, that men are so
obliged to follow one determined and settled constitution, that it is not free
for them to discede to others, when occasions are presented to do so. For there
are some that grant it natural to men to have some communion in Religion; but
they judge that such communion depends on the Pleasure of each respective
Nation, being an indifferent thing in it self. They conceive likewise that the
invention of Religions has for the most part been a contrivance of cunning
persons, whose diffidence of power to keep m^n in sufficient subjection by the
consideration of civil Society, occasioned them to invent another of Religion,
by means of which because of the opinion of the Deity, to which men ascribe a
sovereign authority and without reservation, they might hold the minds of their
fellow-Citizens in greater awe, and govern them better according to their
fancy. Thus you see why they are not so pervicacious as to separate themselves
wholly from such a Society, but communicate willingly in the Religious
ceremonies of their own Country, for fear of imbroiling the World, and to avoid
singularity, which has been always declined by rational and intelligent
persons: but otherwise they account it lawful for a man to comply with the
places where he happens to be, according to the Adage, Si fueris Roms, Romano
vivito more. Which they back with this reason, that Nature indeed inclines men
to such a Society, but that God himself having not determined the form thereof,
has left the same to the will of them which govern Commonwealths. Now were not
this Opinion professed and owned by men which are otherwise very intelligent,
it needed not to be looked upon but with contempt. For the slight esteem which
might be had of its authors, together with the invincible opposition all
Nations bring against it, would secure it from making impression on the mind of
any one, and so it would die and bury it self. But being that for many years
there have been persons esteemed highly for their profound knowledge, or their
great prudence in management of the affairs of the world, or some other
commendable qualities of the mind, who have maintained or favored it; and that
in these days in which Profaneness is overflown, there are many lead by the
authority of men of great reputation; I find my self obliged to encounter it
vigorously, as far as the design of this work will permit me.

In the first place, it seems to me exceeding strange, that these men should be
more indifferent in that which concerns the Laws of Religious Society, in which
we perform our duties to the Deity, then they are in Civil Life, where they
make no question concerning the offices which men owe mutually to one another.
For putting the case that God has made no particular declaration of his will
thereupon (although we shall see in the sequel of this discourse that it is not
so) yet as in Civil Society there are certain natural Laws which are equally
and perpetually inviolable, so there are likewise some in Religion. For
example; Whosoever should come into a Commonwealth framed according to the Idea
of that of Plato, that is, wherein a community of women were enacted; or in
which thest were publicly established, as in the Island De los Ladrones; it
would not be fitting for that man to frequent the beds of all sorts of women,
and abandon his own wife upon his first coming; the Laws of reason and natural
honesty being repugnant thereunto; nor to rob his neighbor of his purse when
he found him abroad from his house. It would become him to say to the
Magistrate as Antigonus did to Creon in Sophocles; (...)
(...)
(...).
No more lawful would it be for a person pious toward the Deity to participate
in a Religion wherein there were impious and blasphemous ceremonies, although
they which established them did not think them such. If a man should happen to
come into a place where they portrayed the Deity with the belly of a Swine and
eyes of a Dog, were it meet to adore him under that figure? Or is it free for
those which travel to the East Indies to mingle themselves in the impieties of
the Pagans toward their Pagods, and to bear a part in the adorations and
services which they render to Devils? Certainly, I do not conceive an honest
man can consent so much as with one twinkle of his eye to such abominable
customs. And truly it was with good reason that Tacitus held the Jews in that
detestation which he discovers in his writings, being persuaded that they
worshipped the Head of an Ass. But in this he was very much blamable, that being
otherwise a grand personage, and who by his profession of being an Historian
was obliged to impart to others the knowledge of the truth of things, he was so
ill informed in this particular, that he ought not to have grounded so
important a censure upon so slight a rumor. But that there have been Religions
in former times, wherein such abominations were committed, is too manifest from
History: and the Relations brought us from the East and West parts of the
World, give us present testimonies of the like. Wherefore they against whom I
now dispute ought at least to allow as much strictness in reference to the
service of God, as to the Duties which they render to men. That is, they should
readily conform themselves to such ceremonies as are consentaneous to right
reason, or at least not manifestly dissonant and repugnant to it; but where
they violate the Laws of Nature so rudely, it is not free for any one
whatsoever to condescend to them.

But the matter is something further considerable. For it also seems not to be
more natural to men to conspire together uniformly in matter of Religion, then
it is natural to them to think that it is the part of God to found and give the
model of such a Society. All Nations have referred the invention of things to
the Deity, which although they concern not God at all, yet seem hard and
admirable; so as to esteem the first authors of them not only inspired by God,
but worthy to be Gods themselves. The Art of waging War, those of Physic, and
Poetry, and even of Embroidery had their inventors and patrons amongst the
Gods. And as for things necessary to Life, the tilling of the Earth for the
advantage of Corn, and the means of pruning the superfluities of vines to
procure wine from them, were not found by men without the same help. It is true
that if only the meaner and ignorant sort of people had been imbued with this
belief, it might have been said that their ignorance occasioned the admiration
which they had of all excellent inventions; because perceiving that they
surpassed the power of their own wits, and measuring others by themselves, they
might have imagined that men could not have invented them of themselves. And
hence it also came to pass that the Epicureans have within a small degree
placed their Master amongst the Gods; because being for the most part but
little instructed in commendable Sciences, when they beheld him far above them,
they conceited that he had somewhat of Divinity in him; although, without
regard to the truth or falsity of his sentiments, he seems to have been but
meanly qualified with gifts of the mind or acquisitions of knowledge. But
whereas we observe the wise and learned to have likewise held that opinion,
that the first Inventors were illuminated by some ray of Divinity, it must be
confessed that it is a natural propensity in all men, and I know not what kind
of constraint by the evidence of truth. Socrates being condemned to die,
professes that it was God that raised him up to teach Philosophy, and to
reform the manners of his fellow Citizens by his precepts; and pronounces
resolutely, that though they should open the Prison doors to him with
injunction never to Philosophise more, he would not go forth, but would rather
obey God then men. And Pythagoras when he had found out an excellent
demonstration in Geometry, went and sacrificed a hundred Oxen: for what reason,
saving that he acknowledged that God had favored him with his assistance
therein? And truly they had reason on their side. I would not so much derogate
from the dignity of the humane Mind, as to take from it all power of inventing
excellent things, and of profound disquisition. But there appeared such a
Providence of God in what I have alleged, that he that bears not a great
measure of obstinacy in his breast will suffer himself to be persuaded that God
presided therein. Sometimes one Nation bears away the glory of Sciences and
Arts, sometimes another; and diverse Ages give birth to diverse Inventions.

Egypt of old for skill in Arts,
Greece after had the fame.
Rome gloried in their height a while,
Now Paris bears the Name.
Archimedes performed such wonders in the Mechanics, as none in the world ever
effected since. And of late days the singular Inventions of Typography, and
that terrifying one of Artillery, declare that God did not exhaust all his
treasures in the Ages of old, but reserves some or other particularity to every
Generation. It is true, when things are once found out, there is no body almost
but observes a great obviousness and facility in their discovery; which yet is
not so much, even in such things as are now (...) days accounted the most
easy, but that the would never have come into any man's thoug^ without the
influence of Heaven; or if they had, yet the atchievment and execution of the
design would have seemed impossible without assistance from thence. Who
observes not such an orderly concatenation in the Propositions of Euclide one
with another, that they correspond together, and propagate in a continual
series with infallible truth; and that consequently the power of humane wit may
seem capable to have found out such a contexture of it self; since the only
thing considerable is to perceive what follows indubitably from certain
principles by the means of ratiocination? And nevertheless I cannot persuade my
self (upon estimate of the great difficulty there was in the first discovery of
those things, and of the admirable vivacity of imagination and vigor of
judgment, requisite to the concinnation of their first compages) that that
Person could possibly have drawn so many subtle and solid consequences from the
first Principles laid down by him, and erect so firm a structure of a noble
Science upon the same, without some especial favor of the Deity, who was
pleased to provide by such means for the advantage of humane affairs, and for
the adorning of our Minds with the Understanding of Sciences. What a mavelous
thing was it to find out the Polar inclination of the Loadstone, and to make
that discovery the foundation of the great Art of Navigation, by help of which
these latter Ages have discovered so many unknown Lands and brought so many
eminent advantages to our times above those of ^ld? But moreover Homer, who
perhaps was the most clear sighted among the Pagans, notwithstanding his
decryed blindness, not only ascribes to God the invention of abstruse matters;
but referrs even our ordinary cogitations to him in these verses; (...)
(...).
Talis nempe men's est terram-incolentium hominum,
Qualem in dies indit pater hominumque Deumque.
And his Poem is throughout beset with advertisments directed to men from the
Gods, as so many pourtraicts of the Divine Providence, sutably as the obscurity
of the times and the ignorance of the true God could permit him. And hereunto
likewise all intelligent men agree, especially the Poets, who seem to have been
the Divines of the Pagans, and the Priests of their Mysteries. Now whereas they
believed that humane Arts and Sciences, could not be invented without God, what
would they have said of the Sciences of knowing and serving God himself? But
although there may have been some dissonance of opinion among the Ancients
concerning this Production or Birth of things; yet the foundation of these two
kinds of Societies, Civil and Religious, has been considered by them as a
thing altogether divine. Whence it is, that there never was any celebrated
Legislator, but made mention of the Deity in the beginning of his Laws, as
having received them in some sort by his inspiration, and so conciliated
reverence to them from that suprem authority. And we find that all of them were
generally believed by their subjects therein; although Political Laws are drawn
from principles of Honesty and Equity derived from those wherewith nature has
imbued the minds of men: So universal and deep has the persuasion been, that
such things as are commendable only for speculation or are beneficially
practiced, or difficultly found out and digested in beseeming order, are
derived from Heaven, as their primary source. And concerning Religion, it is
likely never any Nation would have reverenced each their own respective
ceremonies of Religion, unless they had esteemed them to have proceeded from
Divine Revelation. For not to mention the Jewish people at present, who boasted
thereof heretofore, nor the Christians who glory therein now with a just title,
and prove it by irrefutable demonstrations; can it be imagined Mahomet would
ever have found so many Followers, unless he had pretended to a Prophetical
Commission from God, and that the Deity had given him instructions of such
things as he ought to do by the information of a Pigeon? Are not we told that
to that purpose he published his Alcoran which he persuaded his Disciples was
delivered to him from Heaven? It is not credible that so ridiculous a Law
should be harbor'd in the minds of men so obstinately against all the attempts
to suppress it by the Truth, were it not fixed by these kind of roots. As for
the Pagans, Nums Pompilius, who established the ceremonies of the Romans,
pretended to have been taught them by the Goddess Aegeria; and in general, all
Nations have respectively attributed the origin of their Mysteries to their
Gods. They were in truth, all of them mistaken; but yet their belief was
founded on this reason, that none can either speak or think aright of God, much
less serve him as is meet, unless he be taught by God himself; as it is
impossible for creatures destitute of Reason to pay him what is due to him, and
contrive the ways of honoring him, like men. But as although Horses are
incapable of inventing the rules of their management, and yet are reduced to a
regular observance of them by exercise; so Men not being able to attain so high
as to find out the means of forming their souls to Piety, nevertheless they can
comprehend the same when they are revealed to them. But here I meet with an
objection laid in our way; Does it not appear, say they against whom we
dispute, that Religions have been invented by subtle and politic persons, to
obtain a more absolute empire over the minds of others? For who can believe
that Mahomet was really inspired by God, unless he be as great an Ignorant as
that Impostor was? or that Numa had communication with a Goddess? And truly I
do not gainsay, but there have been many Rulers that have made advantage of
this pretext to abuse the credulity of their people. Nor will I say that all
those which boasted of revelation have had correspondence with God, and
instructions from him in reference to the ordaining and establishing matters
pertaining to his service. Only I avouch men have been lead to believe it by
the natural instinct of judging that Religion could not be given saving by the
hand of God himself. And it is not difficult to render the reason on which it
is grounded. Every Religion, whether good or bad, consists of two parts; In one
of which are contained the laws of the Honor which is due to God; In the other,
the means whereby the needs of men's souls are provided for, and how to infuse
consolation and hope into them. But if one ceremony include both these
particulars together, so that both the Deity is honored and consolation
procured to the soul of man; such ceremony, although it be but one, yet it
cease not to comprehend both those respects, and appears (as I may so speak)
with both those two countenances. Now in reference to that which concerns the
Deity, it has been already declared that we live beset with too thick darkness
to be able to know him of our selves; and we shall make it more amply manifest
hereafter. Touching the Wants of man, being every one's heart dictates to him
that he has deserved punishment for his offenses, his consolation can consist
only in the assurance of remission: but we are as much or more ignorant of the
true means to obtain it, then we are in the knowledge of God himself. Whence it
has proceeded that all Nations have been so obnoxious to the frauds of
Deceivers, who could never have found any credit amongst them, had they not
been favored by those inclinations and sentiments which naturally possess us.
For there is in all souls not absolutely degenerated unto brutishness an
extreme avidity of knowing the Deity, and especially a natural consciousness of
their sins, with a lively apprehension of punishment and vengeance, and a
despair of ever being able of themselves either to find out the means of
comforting the conscience or of sounding the bottom of that infinite abyss.
Whence the first of those that declared any thing concerning the Deity, and the
means of making propitiation for sins, if men had never so little an opinion
that those teachers were excited thereunto by God, and they were able to stamp
the least impression thereof in their minds, they soon gathered a great stock
of credit in the world. As they who are sick of some desperate disease, and
which is inexpugnable by ordinary remedies, easily yield themselves up to the
cozenage of Empiricks, who make boast of great secrets unknown to all men
besides. Or as they who are possessed with a violent passion for the
Philosophers Stone although otherwise perhaps intelligent enough, leave
themselves open to the first impostor that promises them kingdoms and worlds.

Hereunto our Adversaries usually object two things: First they say, if men
cannot of themselves found a good Religion without particular revelation from
Heaven, it is impossible for them to serve God aright, if he have not made such
a declaration of his will: which if he has done, it is a wonder how there come
to be so few people that inquire after it or receive it. Secondly, whereas
nature has provided a supply of all things that are necessary to other
creatures, it is not probable that she has neglected man, and left him in
utter privation of the principal thing he has need of, and without the
knowledge and use of which he cannot but be miserable; in which regard she
would have been a mother only to other Animals, and to man, the most excellent
of all, a cruel malevolent Stepdame. But it is no great business to satisfy
these complaints, and we shall begin with the last. Did we in the other things
of Nature behold such order as is competent to their perfection, there would be
a just occasion of complaint that she had strangely forgot her self in the
particular we have in hand. For she would have produced man endued with an
excellent faculty of understanding, without giving him any knowledge of the End
or of the means destinated to lead him thereunto; and consequently, whereas all
other things seem prudently designed to a certain end, man alone should have
been brought into the world inconsiderately to discharge all his actions at
random, and permit his natural appetites to run unguidedly at a venture. Which
were unworthy of that Wisdom which we all acknowledge extremely admirable in
diverse things in the world of much less importance. But who is there that does
not observe a lamentable irregularity in Nature? Sometimes the seasons fall out
preposterously and intricately: Sometimes vermin devours the buds of the Trees
of the field: sometimes the air is vitiated in such manner that it begets fatal
pestilences; sometimes the Sea breaks in upon a Country and swallows it up with
its inhabitants; and sometimes in another place the inundation of a River
drowns great and flourishing Cities. What wonder is it therefore, that
disorder, being diffused throughout the whole world, should also be found in
the condition of one of its principal pieces. It Is true, will some of them
reply, but have not these things their natural causes? Surely, yes; but it is as
diseases have theirs. For a Fever is not without inflammation of the spirits
and humors, and the humors are not inflamed except they have had some
propensity to be so, either by reason of their corruption, or their abundance,
or from the impression of some violent external cause. Now these causes which
are here called natural, had never been, if there had not been a disorder in
the nature of the bodies themselves. But those irregularities in particular
things are proceeded from the disorder of their nature in general. As
therefore, if the nature of humane bodies had continued in its integrity, a
perfect and immutable healthfulness would have had its natural cause in an
exquisite temperature of pure humors; so in the disorder which has befaln it,
diseases have their natural cause in the abundance or deficiency, corruption or
distemperature of the humors also. Now all the world is like one Body, of which
all the parts, had no change befallen it, would have been disposed in so
excellent an harmony, that the accidents we mentioned could never have
happened, which are like diseases surprising one or other of its members. And
therefore as in Nature well regulated, fertility, an uniform succession of the
seasons, and a good constitution of the aer would have had their natural causes
in the perfect harmony of the Whole; So the disturbances which have suceeded,
have theirs also in its discord and discomposure. But above all things
whatsoever, that disorder is apparent in man, not only in the calamities which
befall him more frequent and great then to any of the rest of the Creatures;
from which it may seem Providence ought to have secured him: but chiefly in
himself, in his affections, in the perturbations of his mind, in the reluctance
and contest of his Appetites against his Understanding, and in the darkness and
perversity of his Understanding it self. And this has been the subject of high
complaints in all Generations. Insomuch, that whosoever beholds the Nature of
things in the estate she is in at present, perceives her like a broken or
unorderly Watch, of which the springs are some too stiff, and others too laxe,
and all its Wheels displaced; Or like a Great City, formerly full of
magnificent dalaces and stately buildings disposed in a perfectly handsome
order, which time or the fury of some provoked Prince ^ha's by fire and sword
turned into rubbage and desolation.

The Traveller for Rome in Rome inquires;
And not to find her in her self, admires.
Therefore to expect that Nature should now produce the same effects in man,
which she would have done in her integrity, is as if one should require of a
blind man to walk as directly as when he had good eyes; or of a mad man to have
settled thoughts and agreeable to reason. Indeed, that which we affirm, that a
particular revelation for ordaining the means of serving God, and for providing
for the needs of man's soul, is absolutely necessary, is not to be referred to
nature in its integrity, who perhaps would have furnished us sufficiently
wherewith to have performed our duty and comforted our selves. Like as a man
that is both healthful, discreet and intelligent, is capable enough to preserve
himself from things which may be hurtful to him; but when he is surprised with
a disease, and the vapors of a Fever perturbe his Fancy, he wants the
assistance of another to prescribe him Physic, and rules for his recovery.

And the second difficulty is resolved with the same facility. The greatest
part of men imagine that the Religion of which they make profession is true;
and are so far from taking pains to seek out any other, that on the contrary,
when novelties are presented to them, they reject the same without further
examination; being possessed with this prejudice against them, that since they
have for a long while been owners of the truth, any other novelty cannot be but
an Imposture. And this is usually strengthened by the natural affection which
we have toward the fashions and uses of our own country, and the constitutions
under which we have been educated from our infancy. For not only the mountains
and rivers and fields of our own Country have a kind of pleasingness and
attraction which allures our minds, but also the manners of the inhabitants and
the customs practiced amongst them. And it is no great wonder if we easily
deceive our selves in such things. For the same imbecility of our
Understandings which hinders us from finding out the true Religion of our
selves, does likewise hinder us from judging so sincerely and distinctly as we
ought, of such things as are propounded to us. Besides that the opinions
wherewith We are already imbued, are a greater hindrance to us in this matter,
then if we were ignorant of all Religions; because it is requisite that we
first unlearn what we conceive we already know for certain; which is a very
difficult thing: as Wool which has received some tincture beforehand, is less
fit to be died into pure and native colors, then that which is altogether
crude. As for those whose happier Understandings have enabled them to perceive
the vanity of false Religions, and yet have not been instituted in the true,
'twas the despair of being able to discover it, which made them give over the
inquiry; as if a man that had experienced the weakness and improfitableness of
the Balm of Empiricks, should utterly despair of Physic, and abandon the care
of dressing his ulcer together with the hope of healing it. And if Diagoras and
Euemerus, two persons branded by the Ancients with the title of Atheists
suffered themselves to be carried to a total and absolute contempt of the
Deity, there is great probability, that it was occasioned by the ill opinion
which they had of their false Gods, and there being at a loss in finding out
the means to substitute the true one in their room. But certainly I do not
conceive that any other reason induced Socrates to reclaim men from the
contemplation of divine and celestial things, which had been the principal
employment of the Philosophers which lived before him, to the study of a Civil
Life, and of the Laws of Policy and Virtue, after the vain attempts of his
predecessors and his own. Whence it came to pass that he was condemned as a
despiser of the Religion of his Country, because he saw that all their doctrine
of the Gods was erroneous, and their ceremonies, superstition and vanity; and
so finding no other Religion which satisfied him, he addicted himself to things
in which the mind of man sees somewhat more clearly, such as is the doctrine of
Virtue, and of the Laws upon which Governments are founded. As it is natural to
us to take pleasure in things which are easy, and which we understand, and to
disesteem those which are high and which we perceive are too remote for us to
attain. But all this is not sufficient, unless we show by evident reasons that
the particular declaration of the will of God in this point is absolutely
necessary. Which shall be my undertaking in the ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. II. How greatly it imports true piety, That every man be thoroughly
assured that his Religion is Good; And, that that cannot be, unless it be of
Divine Revelation.
ALthough there be certain verities in Religion so evident, that the greatest
part of mankind assents to them unanimously; as, that there is a God; and, That
he ought to be honored; That men are obliged to live agreeably to Reason and
Nature; and, That the Deity which commands it so, rewards the observation of
that commandment, and punishes those severely which transgress it: yet as to
the manner of serving God aright, and also of living consentaneously to Nature
and Reason, there has been always a thousand differences amongst those who of
their own motion have gone about to teach it to others. For scarce can there be
found any Commonwealth among those which have been esteemed the best polici'd,
in which some grand and signal vice has not been excused or permitted, or even
sometimes recommended by public Laws. But though they had accorded much better
in the description of the duties incumbent on men one toward another; as it
cannot be denied but that they have less disagreed therein then in that which
pertains to Religion; there is no person so meanly versed in the history of the
Pagans ceremonies in matter of Religion, but observes a wonderful strange
dissension about them. For under the name of Pagans, I comprehend not only the
Greeks and Romans, although there was a great medley in their mysteries; but I
also understand all other Nations, which either have been heretofore or are
still destitute of the knowledge of the true God, in several parts of the
World. And this is not to be marvell'd at. For since they have differed so much
concerning the Nature of the Elements, and the principles of the composition of
things; and have disputed so hotly touching fire, air, and water, things which
fall under the notice of Sense; how was it possible they should agree in that,
which with common consent surpasses all the power and acuteness of the mind of
man? And in so great and almost unimaginable confusion of opinions, what wit
had been capable to discover and sift out the truth, if there had been any in
them, and to assure himself certainly that he had found it? In which regard the
most prudent and moderate amongst them affirmed, that it was the safest way not
to penetrate too far into things, and that God is a Being improportionably
transcending humane comprehension. And the story of Simonides is too well known
to need relating. How then could they know the means of serving God as they
ought, seeing the reverence which we bear toward any thing is naturally
measured according to the knowledge which we have of its nature? So that in the
incertainty in which the mind of man fluctuates perpetually without any stay or
guide, what could the devotion of those be, who could not be solidly instructed
in that knowledge; or what could the zeal of those be toward any Religion who
hold all to be of humane institution and indifferent? For there are but two
guides in us, under whose conduct we are able to compass any thing; namely,
Reason, and Appetite. Reason is moved by knowledge of the becommingness and
profitableness of that which is offered to it, when it apprehends them in one
object conjointly: for right reason will never account that profitable which is
not honest too: but where it perceives honesty conjoined with apparent utility,
it is carried forth toward the same without scruple. Passion is excited to
motion by an infinite variety of incentives, of which none can be commendable
when they are repugnant to reason, as has been very well observed by the
Philosophers themselves. If therefore a man be uncertain whether the Religion
he professes be good and profitable, that is, commendable in it self and
congruous to reason, and that it teaches the means of obtaining the favor of
the Deity; which is the aim all Religions drive at: one of these two things
will necessarily happen; either he will be very coldly affected toward it, or
in case he be carried to it with zeal, it will be but a vehemence of Passion in
his mind destitute of the guidance of reason, without which a man can do
nothing worthy of commendation. For if Passion principally move him to it, the
incertainty of the Nature of his Religion being considered with reason will
keep his affection in suspense: and if he be lead on only by the bent of
Passion, it will neither be a legitimate affection, nor a just and rational
zeal. Now on the one side, I do not conceive these people make any account of a
Devotion which is not but only in appearance, without the heart being affected
therewith; since they would scarce allow their slaves to owe them such a kind
of service; and on the other, that there is no appearance that they think the
Deity accepts the worship which is performed by a blind passion and destitute
of all rule and knowledge.

It is indeed true that I meet with some, even among them which we are the name
of Christians, who are of opinion that God looked with a favorable eye upon the
devotion in which all Nations pretended heretofore to serve him in so many
different forms; and that even their piety, although blind and dark, in that
profound ignorance wherein they lived, was oftentimes followed with the
benedictions of Heaven. But herein they do not concur with the principal
Ministers of the Author of Christian Religion, who tell us that all devotion of
the Pagans was a service performed to Devils. And as for the number of benefits
which the Pagans received from Heaven, they were not conferred on them upon the
account of their ceremonies, which were rather impieties and detestable
abominations then Devotions; but proceeded merely from the consideration of
God's being God, namely as he is good, and does not cease, notwithstanding any
ingratitude of men toward him, to do good to them, as being naturally
inclinable so to do, and a lover of the race of mankind. But whereas his
purpose was to invite them to him by his benedictions, as soon as they had
received them, they went to return thanks to Devils or certain Chimera's of
Deities which themselves had invested with Divinity. But if he seems to have
gratified some few more particularly, among whom there appeared a greater
measure of devotion, as he favored the Romans with numerous victories and
other great advantages, which raised their Empire to so renowned a grandeur;
they were ordinarily rather judgments executed upon other Nations, then
testimonies of the favor of God toward the Republic of Rome. For it is
certain, and the Prophets themselves foretold the same, that God expressly
purposed to render that State potent and terrible, as if he would give a fierce
and voracious beast teeth of Iron to destroy all that came in its way, to the
end that by devouring other Nations as it did, it might execute the divine
vengeance upon them, yet without understanding the secret end such actions
tended to. And truly I know not how the Roman Arms could be acceptable to him
by reason of their devotions, which were all abominations, since there is no
appearance they could be so for their justice; For as the Pirate of old said to
Alexander the Great, that himself was called a Pirate because he robbed on the
sea with a Shallop, but Alexander was styled a Great King, though he practiced
the same trade, because he had a Fleet of five hundred sail; the same reproach
may with good reason be applied to the Romans. What difference was there
between them and Thieves or Ravishers, saving that these cannot pillage but
some few persons they meet with traveling in Woods, or some remote houses in
Forests, and they plundered Kings and Kingdoms? Who sold that vagabond Romulus
the jurisdictions of the Potentates of all the world, to transmit the same to
his Descendants? There is then less reason to think that God took pleasure in
their superstitions, which were inept and ridiculous, though they had had no
reference to Devils. Can it be believed (for example) that God punished a Roman
Consul with an overthrow of his Army, because he had despised the Augury they
used to take from young chickens, who did not devour the food cast to them
greedily enough? Or that Marcus Crassus was defeated and slain by the
Parthians, because he had made light account of I know not what imprecations or
cursings, which had been made for him by Caius Atteius? Certainly there was
never in the world a greater contemner of Auguries and Presages, and other such
fopperies, then Julius Caesar; nor yet any Warrier that ever succeeded so
fortunately and gloriously in so many Battles? For he seemed to have took up a
resolution of trampling upon those superstitions, and braving his own Gods; and
nevertheless all this hindered him not from atchieving his Enterprises. It were
to have an ill opinion of the Wisdom of God, to imagine he was pleased with
the devotions and ceremonies, which the Roman Priests themselves despised in so
high a degree, that One says in Cicero, they had much ado to contain from
smiling when they met one another in the streets. But if God sometimes heaped
some particular favors upon Nations, whose Justice and Virtue were more
commendable then their devotions, it was to show how grateful true Virtue is to
him, since he regarded so graciously that which was no more then a shadow of
it. Which tended to the incitement of other people, to the imitation of those
whom he favored so, because, as I said above, he loves the Society of mankind,
and such Society cannot subsist without men bear at least some kind of
affection to that which has the appearance of Virtue and Justice. But as for
their pretended Religions, he was ever so far from having any esteem of them,
that he always had an implacable aversion against them. It is not my intention
here to judge of the favor which he may have shown toward some in his great
mercies. For it is in truth most certain, that upon judgment of things not
according to appearance only, but by the Rules we have in the Word of God and
by the Economy he has followed toward all Nations, besides the people of
Israel, all the Gentiles were subject to a dreadful Curse. But it suffices that
it is not my design at present to insist further upon this point; besides that
it would be a great temerity to limit God in the dispensation either of his
Wisdom or his other Perfections, or to pronounce determinately of things which
are not revealed to us. I shall only say, that it is a thing directly
repugnant to truth, reason, and Nature, that the Religions of the Ethnicks
should have been grateful to him. For it cannot be concluded that for that many
amongst them were lead with a good zeal to such devotions (by a good zeal I
mean the desire of being well-pleasing to the Deity therein) they therefore
performed an acceptable or so much as excusable service to him. The aim and
design of an action does not render the same good or praiseworthy, unless it
be so in effect of it self, otherwise all things considered apart by themselves
would be in a manner of the same value, and it would be only the End that made
the difference between them. And because that opinion, That the intention alone
is capable to denominate and put a price upon actions, is a Rock on which I
observe many fall foul upon, I esteem it not impertinent to spend a few pages
in explication of the matter.

There are generally two sorts of things in which men are deficient either
toward God or toward one another. The first are those in which men offend when
they are transported by the violence of their Passions, although reason either
by its own natural instinct, or advertisement by some express command of God,
makes them hold out for a while. For where Vice has not wholly clouded and
subverted reason (which happens only to such as God abandons in an
extraordinary manner) men do not commit many considerable crimes without
reluctance of conscience; but at length, after some contest and encounter,
Reason becomes captived by the violence of Passion. Now no person can on any
grounds account these kind of actions excusable. For since the private
conscience of those which perpetrate the same, does not acquit them, how can
they be excused thereof by others? No question, every one is the most
favorable judge of his own actions. But where we are condemned in our own
censure of any fault, it would be great folly to expect our absolution from
that of others. And nothing is more absolutely conformable to the Principles of
Nature and Light of Reason, then Saint Paul's justifying the righteousness of
the judgment which God will pronounce upon the Gentiles at the last day, by
the condemnation which their own thoughts pronounce against them in their
breasts. I am not ignorant that Passion is sometimes so vehement, and obscures
the Understanding so far, that after the commission of an evil action, attempts
are made to defend it, and reasons sought out to color it with the dress and
appearance of Good and Fit. But this proceeds from the affection which we bear
toward our selves, and from the obstinacy of our passions; which yet are of no
moment to justify the deed. Otherwise the more wicked any one were, the more
excusable would his wickedness be; for they are the most wicked, who have most
given themselves up to the precipitous swing of their unreasonable appetites.
Besides it often falls out that an action is notwithstanding condemned in the
heart, though it be in show defended and excused; but men are unwilling to
appear to others what they know themselves to be. If Passion troubles the
judgment of reason in any one so, as to take from him the knowledge of the
vitiousness of his action, there needs only to give him leisure till the same
be somewhat appeased and to bring him if possible to consult his thoughts with
composedness and serenity of mind. For when once the Passion has remited its
violence, and gives room for reason, there is scarce any man in whom conscience
does not perform the office of a judge which cannot be corrupted. If this be
not effectual, but particular interests keep reason absolutely in subjection,
it is requisite to separate the man and his fact, and represent to him the same
action which he has committed, under the name of strange persons disguising
the story a little with some slight circumstances, which do not at all concern
the groundwork. Thus the Prophet Nathan made use of an Apologue to David,
after his adultery with Barsheba, and the murder of her Husband, to the end he
might draw the King wholly from his own interests and prejudices which he might
have in favor of himself. The consequence of which was, that he brought him to
pronounce without hesitation a most equitable judgment, which immediately
after he observed was applicable to his own crime. In effect, if a man does not
in such case pronounce his own condemnation, it must be confidently affirmed
that Vice is so much rooted and incorporated into his mind, that it has
extinguished all the seeds of Honesty which Nature had sown in it, and triumphs
completely over his conscience and his reason.

The second sort is of those things in which we fail by some error of
judgment, without being transported by our Passions, and consequently without
any repugnance of conscience. In faults of this nature we are sometimes
excusable, and sometimes not. As for instance; If a man thinking to rid
himself of his enemy kills his Father in the darkness of the night; the fact
considered strictly is Parricide; but the ignorance of him that committed the
same renders it a degree less, and excusable. Yea it may so fall out that his
intention may make it commendable; as in case he understood himself to be with
an enemy of his Prince or Country in an alarm, and that he could not possibly
distinguish by any token, or suspect by any occasion or conjecture, that it
were his Father. The true character which can manifest his purpose in the
action, is, as Aristotle says, if upon beholding his Father dead, he is
displeased with his misfortune, and affected with a sensible regret and sorrow,
and plead nothing in his own favor beside his total ignorance of the thing,
and the false appearances which tempted him to the mistake. So it may be judged
that Oedipus was extremely unfortunate, but neither a parricide nor incestuous:
and that Thyestes eat the flesh and drank the blood of his children, and yet
it ought not to be concluded that he was therefore any thing the more unnatural
or barbarous. The pitious lamentations wherewith they both deplored their
unhappiness, sufficiently bespeak their innocence of those crimes, and that the
same were befallen them by a pardonable ignorance. One of them cries out to
Jupiter, in Seneca, Me pete; trisulco flammeam telo facom
Per pectus hoc transmitte --
And the other, as soon as he came to know whence he was, brake forth into
these words, in Sophocles, -- (...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
And thereupon in a furious despair tore his eyes out of his Head. But all
ignorances are not alike, For there are some things we are ignorant of, because
though we do know them, yet we take pleasure to delude our selves by vain
reasons on purpose to obliterate their knowledge out of our minds; like bad
servants who construe their Masters orders to a contrary sense, because they
are not according to their humor, and endeavor to persuade their
misinterpretation to others, till at length they are drawn to believe for true
what they so strongly desire should be so. Thus some man that in the
commencement of a Lawsuit, understood at first that he had the wrong side, is
by the eagerness, slights and subtleness of Barretry so perverted from the
knowledge of justice, that at last he takes up an assurance that his cause is
Good. Now is the injustice which he commits afterward in pursuit of such a
persuasion, any wise excusable by his ignorance? If it be, there is no command
but may be securely infringed, when it is free for servants to gloss upon the
words of their Masters: no sort of in justice, which does not become right and
equitable; nor fraud but may be converted into sincere and commendable
proceeding, if it be lawful for a man to blind himself with his passion, and to
perplex the knowledge he has of Truth in affected difficulties. Where there is
an absolute commandment and which proceeds from a sovereign authority, such as
God's is, we ought to be so humble and obedient, as though we should not
comprehend all the reason of such command, yet the authority of the person that
gives it supplies what is defective in the understanding of the same. And
Verity and Justice ought to be of such esteem as where they appear clearly to
us, though it be not easy to unty all the difficulties which may arise, we
ought to hold them always notwithstanding for sacred and venerable. As on the
contrary, that perversion of Reason which is effected by the subtilty of
cavillations and Sophistry invented to abuse men, ought to be esteemed an
intoxication of the Understanding. But do we hold him excusable who being
disturbed with excess of wine commits a wrong or an indignity? No, certainly;
for since he is the cause of his own error, his ignorance ought to be imputed
to him together with the rest of the mischiefs consequent to it, what intention
soever he had during the perturbation of his debauchery.

Lastly, There are some things which we are ignorant of, because we have been
too supine in searching to know them. But if through such ignorance a man
commit something against Nature and Reason, is there any just cause to acquit
him of the fact? No more surely then in the other. For the documents of Nature
and Reason are sufficiently clear, if diligence be employed to comprehend them;
and in such cases the negligence it self is a crime, every man being obliged to
be attentive and circumspect in that which is duty. Now it is not at all
reasonable to excuse one fault with another, or to judge the duty not incumbent
on a man, because he is ignorant of it at such times as he might have known it.
So the Pagans were ignorant that the Statues which they erected to the Deity,
were a disparagement to his glory, and thought they well discharged the duties
of Piety, when they burnt incense to him before those Images. It is not doubted
but they had a good zeal therein, that is to say, a desire of performing
somewhat well-pleasing to the Deity. But yet their Worship was no other then
detestable Idolatry, seeing it was possible for them to have learned by
contemplation of the Universe and the Providence which governs it, that God is
of an infinite and spiritual nature, and which has no resemblance with ours.
For to speak plainly, they did him as little honor as they would have done to
Augustus, if after they had heard wonders related of his Wisdom, Valor, and
other rare qualities, they should have represented that great Emperor under the
figure of a Beast. For if their good intent justified them, the Egyptians might
have as much to plead for themselves when they adored God under the likeness of
irrational, yea even of dead and insensible creatures. Because the duty of the
Conscience toward the Deity is like that of a Wife toward her Husband, namely,
as precise and incommunicable to any other; and to defend the Idolatry of the
Pagans with the pretext of a good meaning is as if a man should go about to
excuse a Wife who had amorously entertained some other person in her Husbands
absence, under color that she fancied some resemblance between them, and
should not dissallow that being she could not enjoy her Husband, she was for
his sake much affected toward his image. In a word, in the ignorances of which
we are not our selves the cause, the Action takes it is tincture from the good
intention, and is judged accordingly: but in ignorances proceeding either from
a manifest affectation, or apparent negligence to obtain the truths which offer
themselves to the Understanding, the intention, how good soever it he, follows
the nature of the Action; so that if the Action be bad, the intention cannot
possibly be good.

But to return to our purpose; Certainly God is not only the principal, but
the only object of Religion; so that the knowledge of Him is the foundation of
all Piety: which if it be solid, the structure built upon it will be firm; if
bad and faulty, all that is raised upon it will fall to ruin. He that pleases
may read in Cicero, the relation which Velleius there makes of the opinions of
the Philosophers concerning this matter. I have recited some of them already,
but there are more remaining; for we may find there about four or five and
twenty, ready counted; besides several which he forgot. Diogenes Laertius also
affords better store; but they all agree in this particular, that they are in a
manner equally false, extravagant and unworthy the name of their Authors, who
were generally commendable persons and of great reputation; Otherwise, they are
strangly discordant in all circumstances. Yet every one of them conceived he
had reason on his side, and that his fancy was dressed up with rational and
handsome probabilities and appearances. In which horrible jarring what means is
there to distinguish the voice of truth, if it were amongst them? Who is he of
mankind whose intellectuals are subtle and versed enough in this matter, to be
able to discern her in the midst of such confusion, and to assure himself that
he has observed her by her peculiar characters? But surely there is none that
bethinks himself to find truth in that medly of sentiments and opinions
although his Understanding were quicker-sighted in these matters then naturally
it is: for most certainly it is not to be found there; and I dare readily give
those against whom I dispute their choice to maintain without blushing the most
tolerable of them all: Except perhaps that of Anaxagoras, who (according to the
relation of Cicero) affirms that the order and excellent disposition of all
things owes its original to an infinite Understanding, but Diogenes Laertius
does not express that he determined whether that Understanding were of a finite
or infinite essence. And Anaximenes, whose disciple he had been, contented
himself with saying that the Principle and Element of all things is infinite;
leaving it to be conjectured whether he meant the Matter thereby, as the Air,
or Water (which was the opinion of Thales) or some other like thing; or rather
that which endued the same with Form and Order, which Anaxagoras termed (...).
But if the opinions of these two be put together, it may be Anaximenes
attributed infinity to the Matter, and Anaxagoras added to the sa^e an infinite
Understanding, not only to frame and dispose it, but also to serve for its
Form. From whence it results that the World is an infinite God and yet composed
too, such as Pliny fancyes it in the beginning of his Natural History, and
Virgil describes in the verses which I here subjoyn; Principio coelum ac terram
camposque liquentes
Lucentemque globum Lunae Titaniaque astra
Spiritus intus agit, totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet.
Now this conceit is implicated with a thousaud absurdities and impertinences.
And yet Philosophers of the present Age have no cause to boast that they are
naturally more knowing in this particular then their predecessors were. All
that the strength of the mind of man is able to reach to in reference to the
knowledge of the Deity, was attempted in that interval of time which interceded
between that wherein Philosophy began to flourish in Greece and the declination
of the Roman Empire. It was in that period that we experienced all our power,
and found at the upshot of our knowledge that we understood nothing at all of
it.

How then (will some say) Are there not instances enough in Heaven and Earth
and the Government of the world, from whence to extract at least some good and
solid knowledge of God? If there be not, why then are arguments drawn from
thence against the Epicureans, to prove providence to them, and to refute their
opinions concerning the nature of God? If there be, why cannot a man make use
of them, to guide him at least in some measure to the knowledge of those
secrets? God forbid that we should so much forget our selves, as to forget how
clearly God has revealed himself in the World. The manifestation which he has
made therein of his Perfections is one thing, and the faculty which we
naturally have to understand them, an other. Reason indeed, but that which is
right and in its integrity, not such as we now possess, might have thence
collected the means of serving God in a due manner. But as it is depraved,
blind, and maimed in its powers and apprehensions, it is utterly incapable of
discerning the truth therein, or forming certain rules of piety from thence.
There is light enough in the Sun to make it be seen; but it is by those who
have eyes: to these who never had any, or have lost them, it is as dark as the
Earth on which they tread. In like manner an infinite number of bright and
excellent truths are held forth in the World and its Government, to him that
has the eye of his Understanding sufficiently clear and serene. But the Eye of
the Understanding, which we call Reason, in the conditition we enjoy it at
present, is so distempered, clouded and perturb'd, that it beholds the truths
which are there, notwithstanding all their clearness, but very obscurely; and
though they are most certain and steadfast in themselves, yet when it
contemplates them, it perceives them only as if they were inconstant and
wavering. Nor are men in this Age more free from these natural impediments then
they were two thousand years ago, and consequently can be no better assured of
their knowledge. For to say that it is a Science which may as well have been
improved as others, they which lived since having taken from the Opinions of
the Ancients what was pure and rejected the unsound and bad, is a thing of no
moment to our discourse, because it is untrue. Perhaps Aristotle built his
Philosophy up with the opinions of Elder Philosophers, by refining them from
that which he found faulty, and serving himself with the truths before
discovered by them, as well to employ the same as materials to his structure, as
to find out others which were yet abstruse aad unknown. And indeed it has been
observed that Hippocrates furnished him with the grounds of his Physiology, so
that he had no more to do but to build upon them; and some have moreover
believed that in diverse places of his Writings and particularly in his Epistles
he supplied him with many singular advantages to the composing of his Ethics.
And although he refutes Plato in several of his Opinions, yet it is certain
that he took many excellent instructions both from the discourses which he
heard him make in his Academy, and from the reading of his Works. But, I pray,
observe how this came to pass. Aristotle was endued with an understanding
capable to discern distinctly enough in matters of Philosophy, the truths which
his predecessors had brought to light, and distinguish the same from falsities;
he was able to cull out and to place some apart from others, and so to compose
out of his own inventions and those of others, a Body of Science better
contrived then any had been before, and whose parts were more correspondent
amongst themselves. But here the Question is concerning truths, which the mind
of man, in its present estate, is not capable to perceive clearly; so that if
he were put to make his choice of those different Opinions, it would betide
him, that instead of happening right, he would rather choose the worst; and thus
it has fallen out to all them which took imperfect humane reason for their
guide therein; If this reason be not satisfactory to my Adversaries, let them
pay themselves with experience. Why did not Cicero garble all those different
Opinions of Philosophers touching the Nature of the Gods, to frame a good one
if possible, and leave posterity a rational doctrine in so important a matter?
But in stead of doing so, the consciousness of his weakness makes him content
himself with reciting them: and after all his stories, he knows as little of it
as he did at first; as if they had been nothing but clouds and darkness cast
before his eyes. Or why do not they show us the writings of some Philosopher
either ancient or modern, who being no otherwise assisted then by the mere
light Reason, has had more sound and sober opinions concerning it then his
predecessors? On the other side, it will be found that some Philosophers, who
heretofore impugned Christian Religion, and the Books of the Old and New
Testament, and who ought to have purified that doctrine from the old
absurdities it abounds with, to the end their adversaries might have less
advantage against it, have been guilty of as many impertinences as they of
preceding times, and afforded as much cause to be insulted over in regard of
the stupidity and ridiculousness of their conceits. The unhappiness is, that
being naturally blind in these things, we nevertheless conceive we see clearly;
and are so possessed with a good opinion of our selves, that we will not admit
any one to teach us; or if we have been taught by some bodyelse, we are so
ungrateful that we will not acknowledge it, but reproach and execrate those
persons from whom we have received all the purest of our knowledge. For it is
the same case with these people and the Epicureans: who having been enlightened
by Christian Religion in many truths, in the ignorance or incertitude of which
they had otherwise eternally staggered or fluctuated, they arrogate the glory
of having of themselves drawn them out of the bottom of Democritus's Well, or
established the belief of the same amongst men by the strength of their reason.
For, why are they not (say they) as capable to invent them, as they are to
apprehend and receive them since they are revealed? A wonderful Question truly,
and worthy of such subtle persons! As if there were not a capacity in children
of a dozen years old to apprehend the most difficult Geometrical
Demonstrations, when they are taught the same by some skillful Master; who
notwithstanding could never of themselves have invented the least Theorem in
that Science; Or as if we did not see them every day learn the Arabic Tongue
readily by help of a knowing Instructor, although they were as well able to
pull the Stars out of Heaven (as we say) as to have disentangled the confusion
of that Language and reduced it into Grammatical Rules. It is indeed by the
same faculty of Understanding that discovered truths are comprehended, and
those found out which are unknown; but there is required a far greater strength
and vivacity of Intellect to make new discoveries then to comprehend things
which are offered ready framed to our hand. Semblably as the difference is
which uses to be put between the Intellectus agens and patiens; of which the
latter is capable only to receive the Ideas of things arriving to it by the
representation of objects; whereas the former refines and illuminates them, and
purifies them from what they have of terrestrial or material, that so they may
become absolutely worthy of our contemplation. Since therefore it is
demonstrated that without a supernatural revelation, the mind of man can have
no certain understanding of the nature of God, it is necessarily consequent
that without such revelation he is not able to render any acceptable service to
him. For if he frame Ideas of God which are unsuitable to him, he will not adore
God when he designs to do so according to those Ideas, but only a vain
Phantasme of his Imagination. And it cannot be thought, but that in the natural
darkness of our minds we are unable to frame other conceptions of him then what
are infinitely below his excellence, and which attribute nothing to him but
such as disparage his dignity. But upon a stricter inquiry, we shall find yet
something further. For supposing a man were so happy as casually to light upon
the knowledge of the true God, yet the incertainty which accompanies such a
knowledge of chance, hinders all good and lawful exercise of the Religion which
he so found out of himself. For either the probabilities which adjudge it good,
and the appearances which on the other side indubitate it, will be equal in our
judgment; or we shall esteem those which induce to believe it bad of greatest
moment; or those most rational which incline us to judge favorably thereof.
Whence if in the first place the mind of man remain in suspense, when any
religious action is to be performed, whether he ought to do it or not, he will
become poised between contrary probabilities, and indetermin'd (as they speak)
not knowing on which side to propend. If he makes any resolution, it will be
wholly to abstain from the same, upon this consideration, that as in a doubtful
case whether Wine would be hurtful to a sick person or not, it is better to
give him none at all, since it cannot be so profitable but it may be as
noxious; so it is better to abstain from a dubious action in matter of
Religion, because being done at a venture, it cannot so much please God in case
it should be good in it self, but it may equally offend him if it should be
bad. And his conscience will readily flatter him with this thought, that God
will take it better from him that he has abstained from doing a thing
well-pleasing to him, out of fear to offend him, then if he should offend him
by putting it to the chance of performing a thing well-pleasing to him. For the
omission of that which is good, is criminal indeed; but the perpetration of
evil is a double guilt, first in the commission it self, and next in abstaining
from doing the contrary good. But if he judge the reasons which dissuade the
thing as bad, to be preponderant, then he will either abstain from doing it,
according as reason injoyns him; or if he commit it, yet, how excellent
otherwise soever it be, it will not be a good action in regard of him, but a
crime. For he will have committed a thing with deliberate purpose which he
judged offensive to the Deity; which would be no less then to trample on all
respect which we ought to have toward God. And this Cicero has well observed
in things simply moral. For he teaches expressly, that a good man ought to do
nothing contrary to the dictate of his conscience or judgment, and accounts
that to offend Jupiter and to go against the motion of a man's own conscience
in any thing whatsoever is one and the same thing. Lastly, when the appearances
which induce to believe the thing good, seem somewhat more plausible and
reasonable then the others, if he be not a profane person (whose religious
actions the Deity cannot behold with a favorable ey) he will scarce be able to
guide himself therein without being driven by the natural timerousness of his
conscience into irremediable perplexities. For like as when a man has eaten
something which he suspected was poisonous, if afterward he happen to feell
the least alteration in his body, he is troubled for so doing, because the
danger wherein he conceives himself disturbs his Understanding, and augments
his suspicions, quite dispelling those reasons which overweighed the same at
first: so our conscience being of it self very easily terrified with
apprehension of the judgments of God, at the least cross accident which befalls
it, repents of its action with incredible anguish and regret. In which
condition a man is very prone to take up a persuasion that the most safe
Religion is to have none at all, and so follow the maxim of those who account
it better to miss of gain then to put themselves in so great a hazard of loss.
Now if any one should demand how then it came to pass that all Pagan Nations
have each of them had their particular Religion, and that these considerations
have not been available to divert them from embracing some or other; the reason
is not difficultly given thereof. Amongst the Pagans some were contemners of
the Gods; and if they did addict themselves to Religion, it was but by a manner
of caution, least they should incur the universal hatred of the world; and so
never entered at all into so profound a disquisition concerning these matters.
Others had not indeed a Religion revealed from Heaven; but yet they thought so
at least: and this false opinion obliged them to the exercise of their
devotions, almost as strongly as if they had assuredly known them to be true
and good. For whether the reasons that persuade us any thing be good or bad,
yet the same motions in a manner are excited by such an opinion which the clear
and solid knowledge of the truth would raise in us. There is no considerable
difference, saving in the vehemence, and principally in the constancy of those
motions, no more then there is between the joy of one that has ^ound a true
Diamond, and another that has found a false one, so long as he believes it to
be a precious Stone. But it is time to pass on to other more particular
considerations.

CHAP. III. Of the Immortality of the Soul, and of the Creation of the World:
How greatly it imports true Piety to be fully assured of both; And that a man
cannot be so without a particular Revelation.
IN this contention against the Epicureans, I ought to have questioned whether
they believed the Humane Soul to be Immortal, because they which anciently were
of this sect accounted it mortal as that of Brutes is; so that if they of the
present Generation will follow the traces of their predecessors, they must also
consent with them in this opinion. And nevertheless I can scarce be persuaded
that our Times could bring forth men so unnatural against themselves; unless
perhaps some wild dissolute young persons, whose minds are wholly taken up with
Wine and Women. But being now to dispute against those that acknowledge a
Providence in God by which he governs the Universe, I must presuppose that they
esteem their Souls survive their bodies, and that death has no power over
them. So we find that all such as believed a Providence, have likewise taught
the Immortality of our Souls, as things inseparably conjoined; excepting the
Saduces, who having the Books of Moses to instruct them, ought to be judged the
blindest people of the World, that could not discern this truth therein. For
all Religion being founded on this Hypothesis that our Souls are incorruptible,
seeing they acknowledge God to have been the Author of the Religion taught and
commanded in those Books, why should they not likewise acknowledge that God did
by the same means establish and confirm this Common Hypothesis. Truly all
Religion aims at a double End, The illustrating the glory of God's Providence
and Perfections, and The comforting good men in their afflictions. Now whereas
good men fall into so many calamities in the World, but Wicked oftentimes
prosper, and that even the Good are oppressed by the wicked, what glory would
redound to that Providence from a Religion, which should constitute no time at
all after this Life, in which the Good might receive comfort for their
sufferings, and the Bad vengeance for their crimes. What great commendation
were it to preside over the mixture of Elements in the composition of Things,
and to cause every one to follow its nature regularly, and in the mean time to
take no care of those which reverence the Deity, but connive at the lewdnesses
of such as contemn him? Not to conduct the course of Nature in a due manner,
might speak some defect of Wisdom; But not to compensate the Virtue of the
Good, nor punish the crimes of the Vicious, besides the defect of Wisdom in not
adjusting things aright sutably to their qualifications, and crossely coupling
prosperity with Vice, and Misery with Virtue, there would be a too notorious
defect of goodness and justice. And perhaps it would not be less expedient to
follow the doctrine of Epicurus (which notwithstanding we have convinced of
infinite absurdities and impieties) then to ascribe a Providence to the Deity,
and not to believe the immortality of the Soul: it being less unworthy the
Divine Nature to neglect the Universe altogether, then to administer humane
affairs with so much negligence, injustice and irregularity. But if there
redounds little glory to the wise, good and just Providence of God from such a
Religion, there accrues no more consolation to men; there being so small
grounds to expect the remuneration of Virtue in this Life, that the greatest
admirers of it, perceiving themselves fall short of their attempt, at the end
of their account, term her a mere vain shadow; and most deserving persons
complain, that all things fall out preposterously to their hopes, while they
observe unjust men flourishing in the midst of Pomp and Pleasure, and
themselves insulted over and oppressed by arrogant and haughty Wickedness. For
as for what is alleged, that all the Blessings which God promises in the Books
of Moses to those whom he prescribes a Religion to upon his Covenant, are of
Temporal things, which have no further relation then only to the durance of
this Life, and therefore there can be no certain proof of the Souls immortality
drawn from thence; if it were so, the Covenant would be frustraneous and to no
purpose. For I dare boldly affirm that of all those which are therein recorded
with praise for religiously observing it, not one did attain, I do not say a
perfect felicity of the present life so long as it lasted, for recompense of
his Piety, but not so much as might countervale the afflictions which he
suffered. In so much that God himself in attesting their constant observance of
his Covenant, should accuse and condemn himself of being deficient toward
them; since they lived miserably for the greatest part of their Days. And those
words of Jacob, My days have been few and evil, would be an eternal reproach to
his promises and his Providence. Wherefore it must either be denied that there
was any Religion constituted by the command of God in the Books of Moses, or
the Saducees must confess that the immortality of the Soul is presupposed
therein and confirmed by the testimony of God himself; since the belief of the
corruptibility of our minds subverts the foundation of all Religion in the
World.

Nevertheless, although the Doctrines of Providence and the Souls immortality
are inseparably allied, and the latter is also demonstrated by invincible
reasons which we deduced briefly a little above, yet it has happened to it, as
to diverse other fundamental verities in Religion, namely that men remaind in
suspense concerning the same, till they were acertain'd of it by a divine
revelation. So that the most knowing Grecians (from whom Learning descended to
the Romans) spoke so doubtfully of it, that it is not plainly known what they
conceived about it: and they which most inclined to believe their Minds
immortal, never declared themselves very positively that they thought so. Some
have related that Thales was the first among the Philosophers that believed the
Immortality of our Souls, and indeed he is the first of whom Greece boasted for
Philosophy. Before he and the rest which were termed Wisemen in his time set
themselves to refine and regulate it, all that had attempted any thing, left it
but in a rude dress and unseemly equipage. And it is a great evidence of the
truth of this Doctrine, and a fair instance of the Providence of God in favor
of it, that that Schole of Wisdom among the Pagans began to be polished and
perfected by it, and was as it were built upon this foundation. But into how
many sects did Philosophy soon after degenerate, of which there were some that
expressly denied it, and others which made a doubt of it as of all other things?
With what ambiguity and incertainty have even they spoke of it, who seemed
desirous to teach it? Aristotle is extremely intricate about it, and seems
sometimes to affirm one thing and sometimes another. Nor can it be conjectured
why he so dubiously explicated himself in this point, being otherwise
wonderfully eloquent and happy in his expressions, unless either because he
knew not well what to hold, as he declares freely in one place, That it is not
yet evident what the Understanding of men may be; or because he believed that
the Soul is extinguished with the Body, and yet would not pronounce it openly,
for fear of giving scandal; as there are found many brave spirits, who living
amongst men of condition are content to dissemble their opinions in matters of
this nature. So likewise he seems to have dissembled what he thought of the
best Form of Government, for fear of offending Aristotle. I am willing to
ascribe my self into the number of them who believe that there is greater
appearance that Aristotle was of the Opinion that affirms the Souls immortality,
and I know many excellent passages may be produced out of his Writings which
favor it. But yet so it is, that in other places he seems to lay down
principles which are incompatible with the same, and some of his most famous
disciples have believed that he held the contrary. Socrates, as we find in
Plato, knows not how to be confident of it, and persuades himself by reasons
which for the most part are but of slender moment; and always speaks of it, as
of other things, with doubting, and not determining any thing: although through
the desire he had that his Soul were immortal, he inclined more willingly to
this opinion, and accounted it of most probability: which is Cicero's judgment
in his Tusculan Questions. And, truly, I conceive that in all things of this
Nature the vulgar had better apprehensions then the Philosophers; yea, that the
Philosophers corrupted the sentiments of Nature, which remained more lively and
genuine in the breasts of the people. For they had wit and knowledge enough, to
frame objections against the common conceptions of men, but yet they had not
sufficient to resolve them; whence their minds became unsettled and wavering.
Whereas the people, who understood not so much subtilty, held themselves more
firmly to that which was taught them by nature it self, and they had received
from her, though doubtingly, in regard of the weakness and ignorance of humane
reason. As it often falls out, that a man that knows nothing in Civil Law, and
yet has some natural faculty of understanding, better discerns the right of a
certain Case, then knowing Professors who have their heads full of Statutes and
Paragraphs; great skill rather perplexing and confounding then resolving them
in the knowledge of things. But Philosophical disputes being spread from the
Schools into Towns among the people have obscured and disordered such natural
notions, much more then the people by their own ignorance and negligence could
have depraved and embroiled the same of themselves. However, were they much
better assured then they are that their Souls do not perish with their bodies,
yet they must necessarily be extremely ignorant of the estate of them after
their separation. For how blind so ever the reason of man be in that which
concerns the Deity, his Nature, Perfections and Providence, yet the arguments
which satisfy us of them are so clear and resplendent in the World that in
spite of all the darkness of the humane Intellect, there is always some beam
that breaks through, affording that dubious and confused knowledge we mentioned
was found amongst the Nations of the World. And how entangled soever the
disputes of Philosophers were, the rational soul of Man gives always so many
proofs of its incorruptibility, that the knowledge thereof cannot be totally
extinguished. But as to its estate after this Life, it is not only impossible
for men to divine of themselves what it will be, by reason of the corruption
and irregularity which is befallen their faculties, but though the eye of their
reason were as clear and luminous as could be desired, yet they were hardly
able to make the least probable conjecture concerning it, because God has
written nothing of it in the book of Nature, from which we draw all our
knowledge. But they which are instructed by Religion in the History of the
Worlds Original, can very easily give account thereof. For God having produced
Man in the Nature of things, in such an estate that if he had persisted in it,
he should not have feared death, the revelation of that estate which must
follow this Life would have been unprofitable to him, who was made, in case
that the design of his creation had been pursued, to live perpetually in the
World, and never to undergo the separation of his Soul from his Body. For that
Truth teaches us (and likewise reason being informed in this particular either
consents to, or is convinced of it) that it was the Offense which the First Man
committed, which introduced death into the World. To what purpose therefore
should God have imprinted in Nature any evidence or token of the estate of man
after death, since in that first integrity of nature, there was no suspicion
nor shadow of Death it self? It is true, indeed, that God denounced to man,
that if he degenerated from his integrity, he should dye; which might have
occasioned some thought in him of the pains which follow death, being he knew
that his Soul was immortal. But the apprehension of punishment after sin, and
also of that which follows death, does not infer any other of remuneration,
unless God reveal mercy and hope of pardon after the transgression. Which God
had not as yet done in the integrity of Nature. So that man having from God
neither hope of pardon in case he should sin, nor any cause to think of death
in case he should not sin, he had no occasion to raise his mind higher toward
a better life. But if any one conceives some scruple touching the perpetuity of
the life of man upon the Earth, if he had not fallen into sin, and imagines
rather that God, after he had lest him for some Ages in the World to practice
obedience and virtue, would have at last taken him to himself, and given a
greater recompense then that which he could have enjoyed in a terrestrial
felicity, he must also confess that to instate man in the enjoyment of such
remuneration, there would have been no need of Death, and so that it was not
necessarily for him to know what the estate of his Soul after separation from
his body should be. Moreover, whatsoever that compensation would have been
which man should have received for his Obedience and Virtue, insomuch as it
would have been a condition and a glory supernatural, some revelation of it
must necessarily have been made by another way, then nature; namely, then by
the evidences which may be had from consideration of the Works of God, and the
Government of the World. And in truth, to hear the Poets and Philosophers speak
of it, sufficiently evinces that such as have had no other light to guide them
in search of these things, but that of Nature and Reason, have only groped in
the dark. For how ridiculous is the description which they make of the Infernal
Regions and Elysian Fields? Is it not pleasant to behold the Landscape which
Virgil has drawn of them in the sixth Book of his Aeneids? where he speaks of
Rhadamanthus, and the severity of his sentences; and forgets not to paint out
Tysiphone with her scourges and serpents, together with the Furies. He also
places there hideous Hydra's, and I know not what kind of other vile beasts at
the gates of Hell; and in that horrible prison which he represents twice as
deep as heaven is high above us, he lodges the Titans, the Aliodes, and
Salmoneus. There is also Tityus, who covers nine Acres of Ground with his body,
and whose growing entrals are perpetually devoured by a Vulture. And not far
from him the Lapith^ with Ixion and Pirithous, over whose heads hang great
rocks ready to fall upon them. He assigns there to some for their punishment,
to roll a great stone eternally; and fastens others to the Spokes of a Wheel
that turns about incessantly, and tortures as it turns. He fixes the poor
Theseus upon his seat, and condemns him never to stir from it, being a torment
fitted to a man that loved to travel; and at last concludes that if he had a
hundred tongues and as many mouths, he could not recount all the sorts of
punishments wherewith sinners are tortured in that place. As for good men, he
allots them more liberty of air, and a more spacious habitation, where the sky
is displayed with a fair purple light, and they behold their Sun and their
Stars as we do ours: there some exercise themselves in various sorts of
combats, as leaping, running on the grass, and wrestling on the Sand: others
dance to the Music of Orpheus's Violin; and so others divert themselves with
other sports and recreations. Are not these whimsies very capable of giving
satisfaction to those which read them? Nor can it be said these extravagances
are peculiar only to the Poets, but that other men and especially Philosophers
held more rational opinions. For, as I formerly said, the Poets were the
Divines of the Pagans, chiefly in these matters, so that the Philosophers
themselves admitted their fancies into their doctrines. Indeed Plutarch in the
Treatise which he writ upon this Motto (...), seems to offer at some more
reasonable interpretation of those follies, then what they present to the
understanding at the first view: but nevertheless all the explication which he
gives of them, amounts only to this that the wicked Souls are plunged and
overwhelmed in the perpetual oblivion of all things. And in his Consolation
directed to Apollonius, he adheres to the opinion of Pindar concerning the
place and state of the Happy, which Pindar in the place which he alleges,
describes almost after the same manner that Virgil does, who seems to have
imitated him. If an Author so grave and judicious as Plutarch was, suffered
himself to be deluded with these fine imaginations, what shall we think of all
other people, who were of meaner capacities then he, not of the vulgar pitch
only, but even among Philosophers? But truly, their blindness in this matter
must be favorably censured; since in other things they could discourse and
argue against Fables, and observe perhaps that the combats of the Gods one
against another, their Loves, Hatreds and Jealousies, their employments of the
Forge and Spinstry, their Nectar and Ambrosia, were but pleasant fictions, or
Romantic fancies of Homer and his posterity of Poets. The light of Reason
ennabled them wherewith to encounter these stories, so that they were not only
convinced of their vanity, but invented somewhat of greater solidity: but in
this particular, if they beheld absurdities which they were not able to
maintain, they were not able to substitute any truths in their place. So that
it was necessary for them either to admit such Trifles, as some did, or to live
in a most profound ignorance of the estate of their Souls after the dissolution
of the body, which was indeed most ordinary. And Epicurus knew no better way to
interpret the Allegory of those ^ables, then to bring Hell up into the Earth,
and to affirm that all which the Poets relate of the things below, as of the
rock which hangs over the head of Tantalus, and the Rowling-stone of Sisyphus,
and Tityus's Liver which is continually devoured by birds of prey, and the Tun
of the Danaides, which could not be filled wtth all their pains in lading water
into it, is felt only in this life by covetous, ambitious and fearful minds
exagitated with their own exorbitant passions. In a word, the soul of man being
extinguished when the body dies, all that is reported of Hell and things done
there is frivolous; and Cerberus and the Furies, -- Et lucis egenus
Tartarus horriferos eructans faucibus astus,
are nothing at all in his opinion; but Metus in vita paenarum pro malefactis
Est insignibus insignis, scelerisque luela,
Carcer and horribilis vesano jactu deorsum;
Verbera, carnifices, robus, pioe, lumina, taedae:
Quae tamen etsi absunt, at men's sibi conscia facti
Prametuens, adhibet stimulos, torretque flagellis.
Now it cannot be expressed of how great importance this ignorance is to the life
of men. For as the hope of recompense is a quick spur to Virtue, so is the fear
of punishment a most efficacious bridle to restrain from Vice; so that the
study of that and the hatred of this increases or diminishes according to the
proportion of knowledge which we have of the reward prepared for us. And the
more men are corrupt, as experience shows they are infinitely, the less do they
prize Virtue for it self, and on the contrary their inclinations are more
violently carried forth to vice. Which is an argument, that it is only the fear
of punishment and the hope of compensation which moves them, not the native
beauty of Virtue or deformity of Vice. Whence in so gross an ignorance of their
condition after this life, it was impossible that they should be effectually
reclaimed from the one or duly excited to the other. So that the conclusion
clearly results that God must reveal himself from Heaven to be the rewarder of
Virtue, and the severe avenger of Vice, not only in this Life, but also in
that which is to come, by giving a sufficient information of the quality of the
reward. And because so long as we are clothed with this body and accustomed to
sensible and corporeal things, we can scarce comprehend any thing but by the
Ministry of the Senses or under the image of sensible things; if such
revelation be expressed in Allegorical speeches, taken from what is most
ardently desired or feared in the world, it is requisite First that such
description be grave, and savouring nothing of the weakness of the mind of man,
which is evident in those of the Poets. In the next place, there must be in
such a revelation in which the penalties and recompenses to come are veiled
under the shadow of corporeal and sensible things, other simple descriptions,
to explain such as are typified, and give us to understand that both what it
promises, and what it threatens shall be in a manner proportionable to the
nature of humane Souls, and not extravagant or incompatible therewith.

And lastly, it is necessary that such revelation be accompanied with so clear
evidence of its celestial and divine original, that the assurance which it
gives that those promises and threatenings come from God himself, as if he had
pronounced them with his own mouth, may beget an immutable certainty that
although the expressions be Allegorical, yet the reality equals or surpasses
them; which unquestionably produces wonderful effects. Whereas the opinion,
that other descriptions found in the Books of Poets are humane inventions,
disparages their authority, and so renders them wholly ineffectual. Let us
proceed now to the other point of this Chapter.

Because, as it has been shown, all knowledge which we have of God comes
either from a particular revelation, or from contemplation of his Works; and
that all our piety is derived from, and regulated according to the measure of
such knowledge: it is of high importance especially to those who acknowledge no
particular revelation, to the end they may become truly pious toward God, to
have an exact knowledge of his Works; namely of the World, and the things
contained therein. I demand therefore whether they believe that God is the
author of the World. For if they do not, but deny that he created the matter
out of nothing of which it is composed, or introduced the form into the matter
which we behold in it, they are as much at a loss, as Epicurus, to make out
whence they learned that God is powerful, or what is the measure of his power;
so far are they from being able to assure themselves that it is infinite. There
is indeed a great Virtue requisite for the administering of Providence, and
which being duly considered by right reason, is found to be infinite. But if
there has ever been one person among the Philosophers that reasoned in this
manner, God governs the world, Therefore his power is unlimited (which I do not
meet with any that has done) there are found a thousand who conceived that God
employed his utmost skill and ability in the government of the World, and that
his object was proportionable to his power; so that being but sufficient to all
the World, he was not able to remove so much as one straw besides, unless he
should during that little space surcease his action by which he moves all this
great mass of the Universe. Whereas they which believe that God created the
World, and that he created it of nothing, do necessarily imply in that belief
this other, that his power is immense, since there is an infinite distance
between Being and Not-being, and those two terms (as they speak) cannot be
conjoined, nor the one be passed from to the other, but by a power of infinite
extent. Wherefore these people cannot adore God with assurance in reference to
the infiniteness of his power. For that right reason which is necessary to
frame reasonings from the conduct of Providence which may infer the immensity
of the power of God is not to be found in any of mankind since the corruption
which befell it. Moreover they deprive themselves of the fairest inducement to
praise and thanksgiving which can be imagined. For if God did not create the
World, he has not manifested any proof of his goodness in giving Being to the
Creatures, which is infinitely better then Not-being, and consequently deserves
an infinite gratitude, if man were capable of performing it. If particularly he
did not create the World for man, nor gave him that dominion which he
challenges over all things by imagining himself the King of the Universe, he
does not ow him one word of thanks, and has no reason to say as a great King
once did; Lord, how illustrious is thy Name!
Whose power both Heaven and Earth proclaim!
When I the Heavens, thy Fabric, see,
The Moon and Stars disposed by Thee:
Oh, what is Man, or his frail Race,
That thou should such a shadow grace?
Next to thy Angels most renowned,
With Majesty and Glory crowned;
The King of all thy Creatures made;
That all beneath his Feet have laid;
All that on Dales or Mountains feed,
That shady Woods or Deserts breed;
What in the Airy Region glide,
Or through the rolling Ocean slide.
Lord, how illustrious is thy Name!
Whose power both Heaven and Earth proclaim!
Which is reasonably a hymn more agreeable and well-pleasing to the Deity then
the sum of all the Incense of Arabia. But in the next place, what duty will
man think he owes to God even for his Being, if he believes not that he
received it from him? And will he not rather be ready to place himself equal
with him, being not dependant of him for his Being, since there is nothing more
renders things equal one to another then Independance.

It is true, it may perhaps be said, that men are obliged to the Deity in as
much as they depend of his Providence, because if that did not preside over
natural causes and cause them to produce things necessary to the support of
Life, we could not subsist, and therefore he which gives the conservation of a
being obliges as much or more then he which gives the being it self, and he
that feeds and defends then he that begets.

But this is a gross mistake of theirs, and their pretended reason deludes
them. For if God be not the Author of the World, how is he the Preserver of it?
Does it not belong to him that made the Work to take the care of it? Whence
has he authority to intermeddle in the Works of another; or the World the
necessity of being guided and preserved by the hand of God, if it was not
framed by the same? And indeed God must either be the author of the World; or
Chance, as Epicurus affirmed; or as others, Nature; or it had never any
beginning, but has existed from all eternity. If it was Chance that made the
world, then consequently it is also preserved and governed by the same hazard.
And truly Epicurus was consistent with his own Principles when he denied
Providence. For if the World was thus framed by the fortuitous concourse of
Atoms, there is no need for Providence to put its hand to support it; since it
might be preserved in its Being by the same means by which it was produced; the
conservation of things being not more difficult then their first production. If
it was made by Nature, I demand, what that is? For if by Nature they mean the
order which is in the things of the World, according to which causes produce
effects suitable to themselves, certainly and determinately, namely, both
universal causes, as the Heavens, and particular, as Animals and Plants; they
are not greatly mistaken. We desire to know who is the Author of that order;
seeing order cannot be the author of it self. For besides that nothing is able
to produce it self into Being, order is an effect of a Cause endowed with
Understanding, but has no understanding it self; in as much as Order is a
disposition and relation according to which things are both conveniently
marshalled among themselves and rationally subordinated to some certain end.
Now who will say that this relation and disposition of things among themselves
is it self endued with understanding. And if the order of things did not
produce, neither is it able to preserve it self. It belongs to the same faculty
to preserve and make it. If by the Word Nature, they understand the world it
self, composed and contrived with all the things in the order we behold it, or
as the Author of the Book De Mundo speaks, the well ordered compages of all the
parts of the Universe, How could that make it self? For the thing which makes,
exists already, and that which is making is not yet existent. The Carver is
before the Statue, and the Watch-maker before his Springs that point out the
hour, yea even before he begins to make them. But the Statue or the Watch,
though begun, are neither of them such; nor yet when they are in making; till
the whole work be completed, and all the parts adjusted and united in due
order. In like manner, if the world made it self, it was before its own being,
namely the world producing before the world produced, though but one and the
same World. Which is a like folly as if a man should say that he begat himself,
without a father. Whence also it follows, that it is not able to govern or
support and maintain it self; no more then a Watch is if there be no body to
fit and guide its Wheels and Springs, and to wind it up, and duly order it.
If they say that the World is eternal, is it so without dependence on God, or
is it eternal by emanation from him; as the Light of the Sun is of as great
duration as the Sun it self? If it be eternal with dependence on the Deity,
then God having produced the World as naturally as the fire burns or the Sun
shines, must also preserve it in the same manner: and because it will be a
natural action, there will be no obligation to him for it, in as much as he can
do no otherwise, as the Sun cannot restrain its beams nor withhold its light
from illuminating the Universe.

And moreover such conservation of the World will be no longer an act of
Providence. For that can never be termed Providence, which is an inevitable
necessity of things depending on their indissoluble natural connection. So that
I wonder with what reason the Stoics called their Fatal destiny Providence, or
thought those two things compatible together. For whereas Providence
administers things with a freedom of Will, what Liberty can there be in the
conduct of that which depends on a fatal and Determinate necessity; which is
precedent to any act of Providence? If it be eternal without dependence on the
Deity, it is it self God, as some heretofore accounted it. And because that
which is eternal is also immutable, and maintains it self always uniformly,
neither shall God have any right to meddle in the government of the World,
which does not depend on him, nor the World any necessity of being governed or
preserved by him; since there would be no change to be feared in it, its own
eternity exempting it from all subjection to alteration. Wherefore it must
either be confessed that the World had God for its Author, or denied that God
is any thing at all concerned in the government and preservation of the World.

Now there is one thing considerable above others. Which is, that though these
reasons be so evident that nothing can be brought against them to refell them,
yet there was never any man that perceived them clearly, unless he were first
instructed of the creation of the World in the Books of Moses. Aristotle
believed it eternal; Plato attributed eternity only to the Matter; and in his
Dialogue of the Creation he commits so many impertinences unworthy so great a
Philosopher, that he that has the patience to read, will partly laugh at his
conceits and partly pity his extravagances; and esteem it as easy to combine
the Atoms of Democritus together, as to conjoyn the minute subtleties of those
Platonical speculations. Besides, I am not satisfied (and the opinion of those
which affirm it has very great probability of truth) but Plato might have
learned all he knew of this matter from tradition of the Egyptians and Syrians,
who had received it from Moses; for he had traveled into those Countries, and
was there imbued with truths formerly unknown in Greece; but afterward
endevour'd to cloth the same in the dress of Philosophy, to the end they might
be more readily entertained by his Countrymen. And being passionately devoted
to Geometry, and observing, what is most true, that all things were framed with
a wonderful wisdom, as it were by weight, rule and measure, he interweav'd his
Discourse with splendid conceptions of Lines, Proportions and Numbers. Whence
it came to pass, that Aristotle, who did not attribute much to the tradition of
others, but examined all things by his own reason, and otherwise observed an
insufferable confusion in all these Numbers of Plato, and moreover, perhaps
took too much pleasure in opposing his Opinions, designing to get all the
reputation to himself, which he detracted from his Master (as Plato himself
complains in Diog. Laertius, that he had used him as rudely as young Colts that
kick their Dams) and so disceded from his opinion, and introduced that of the
eternity of the World, with dependence on the Deity, although such a dependence
as infers a necessary and natural production. And upon this consideration, as
God willing we shall show more amply hereafter, he seems to have had so cold a
respect for the Deity.

Nor is there any ground to imagine that the Philosophers of latter times are
more intelligent in these matters then those of old were; since the World
furnishes them with no new arguments, nor Nature with new faculties or
otherwise disposed to comprehend the same. They know, indeed, that the World
was created, and have a clearer understanding of the truth of arguments which
confirm it, then the ancients, and even then right reason it self could supply
them with: but it is since the thing was acertained by revelation. And if they
would be ingenuous to confess it, they learned it from the Books of Moses. But,
what (will some say) could not Moses perhaps have a greater reach of wit then
Plato or Aristotle, and so invent arguments of himself, and sound the truth to
the bottom, and then communicate it to others; and that without any especial
revelation, although he boasted thereof, to gain greater authority amongst his
people? Truly a very vain objection, and a pitiful subterfuge. For what should
have hindered him from declaring his reasons, as well as Aristotle has done
his? And nevertheless he makes a very plain Narration of it, as Galen
reproaches to him. And if his design were to enhance his authority, and so
render those over whom he commanded more pliable and flexible out of respect to
the Deity, why did he refuse that charge of exercising authority over that
people and to conduct them? And how does he boast of so many miracles, which
might have been contradicted by men then living, if the relation of them had
not been true? Why did he refer all to the glory of God and nothing to his own?
Or if his project were to credit himself only by misprising and debasing his
own worth, why did he not at least leave that authority to his children, rather
then to his domestic servant? But he was so far from that, that contrarily to
what natural affections dictate to men, he made one of his attendants heir of
his grandeur, and left his own issue to fall into a low and contemptible
condition in comparison of his own. Certainly, it must either be said that
Moses was an impostor in forging both the history of the creation and others
which he relates; or, if any credit be given to him in the narration of that
History so remote from his own times, then much rather ought he to be believed
in his recital of things which befell himself, of which there were so many
witnesses either to confirm, or convince them of falsity. And surely they are
abundantly confirmed in that they were never so much as accused or suspected.
Besides that their Posterity has received them from hand to hand as divine
irrefragable truths, and religiously maintained them for the space of many
Ages. Which they would never have done, if the tradition of those ancient
miracles had not from time to time been rendered authentic and worthy of
perfect belief, by extraordinary actions, predictions, judgments and
deliverances in which appeared the singer of God. I shall say something more,
since the matter leads me to it: Namely; that if the Philosophers, against whom
I dispute at present, have vivacity and quicknes enough of understanding, to be
certainly perperswaded of the Creation of the World by reasons which their Wit
is able to suggest to them, and the Ancients did not observe, I dare aver that
would they take pains in reading the Books ot Moses with as much attention as
they use in their own ratiocinations, they would there more certainly remark
that they are proceeded from divine inspiration, then they could know of
themselves that God has created and governs the World. For there are not more
lively and evident arguments in the World, that God is the Author of it, then
there are in the Books of Moses alone, to induce a belief that they are not of
humane invention. As I conceive, if a man should have from the hand of
Archimedes himself the description of those admirable Engines which he made,
and that he had replenished the same with as many tokens of his incomparable
skill in the Mathematics, as there are traces of the Deity in the five books
of Moses, he would find therein as much or more cause to admire the
extraordinary grandeur of that Personages Wit, as in attentively considering
his Machines and his Engines.

CHAP. IV. How much true Godliness is concerned in the certain knowledge, That
the whole World is governed by a special Providence; and That the same is no
otherwise attainable but by Revelation.
HItherto we have discoursed largely of the Providence which governs the World,
and treated with the Philosophers of our Times as with persons that acknowledge
it; and yet we are not fully assured what their judgment is really concerning
it, although it be a thing highly important to our dispute. For the Opinions of
the Ancients have been very different about it, and the Moderns hide
themselves, and do not willingly appear in public, in regard that the
Christian Religion being universally received in Europe, such as do not believe
the same, are looked upon as Monsters; so that it is very difficult to know
distinctly what opinion they have of it. If therefore they be of that
persuasion which is attributed to Aristotle (though some undertake to excuse
him from it) their piety toward the Deity must consequently be wholly cold and
languid. For Aristotle is accounted to have believed that the world being from
eternity by emanation from God, as the light proceeds from the Sun, things are
so necessarily disposed, that God being the first Mover of the Heavens, whether
immediately or by the intervention of what he calls Intelligences, he is also
by consequence the Author of all things. Because the other less universal
motions depend on the Heavens, and from those other less universal motions
proceed all things which are produced in the World; every cause acting suitable
to its own Nature; as the Water moves the wheel of a Mill, and the wheel the
Axeltree, and that another less wheel, and this also another, till at length
the motion arrives at the stone which bruises the corn and reduces the same
into flower. So that God is indeed author of all things, but as a universal
cause, which has under it an infinite number of other subalternate and
subordinate, which are the proximate causes of effects which come into Being,
and which receive their power of acting from the influence of the first and
most universal of all by the means of motion. And forasmuch as things which are
termed fortuitous and contingent, do not depend on certain determined causes
which are ligned by a sort of train to that superior and universal one, and
consequently if they be administered by God they are administered by an Especial
Providence; they which discourse at that rate take no notice at all of them, no
more then of a thing which does not agree with their Principles. Nor can it be
denied but that grand Philosopher seems very frequently to lay down the grounds
of this Divinity, although sometimes excellent sentences escape from him to the
honor of a Particular Providence, which is extended even to casual things or
such as depend not on the concatenation of natural causes. But it is to be
feared that they are words spoken out of design to avoid the reproach which
would have lain upon him of being too little religious, or at most the
eruptions and flashes of Nature, which oftentimes surmounts the most deeply
imprinted perverse opinions, and causes a man to forget his own Maxims when
they are contrary unto it, how constant and resolved soever he be to maintain
the same. The Author of the Book De Mundo, dedicated to Alexander, seems to go
a little higher, and speaks of God and his Providence in more magnificent
terms. But in the first place the style evidently shows, that Aristotle never
writ it, and I should readily incline to their opinion who father it on Philo
Judaeus, whom the Books of Moses had imbued with many better and sounder
opinions in relation to piety, then all that ever was met with in Greece: but
he disguised himself on purpose, and accommodated that elegant Treatise after
the Greek mode. Secondly, in case it had proceeded from the hand of Aristotle,
yet it always terminates in this, that God keeps himself in the Heavens only,
and that it is not suitable to his glorious nature to be amongst frail and
visible things, and that he governs the World by means of subordinate causes in
nature, as the great King of Persia does his Providence by his Lieutenants and
Satrapae. Lastly, so little does he think that a special Providence takes care
of all particular events of things which are called contingent, that he
excludes God as much as he can from their administration, and from all little
inconsiderable accidents, as esteeming them unworthy of his excellence: so far
is he from admitting God to preside absolutely over the Understandings and
Wills of men, and that he governs all their most inward and abstruse thoughts.
All the Rhetoric which he imploys to deduce this most elegantly, and adorn it
with the choicest flowers of Oratory and Poetry, amounts only to this, without
carrying it further. Now this doctrine can by no means be judged capable of
begetting true piety in the hearts of men. For since they describe that action
of God in the government of the World, as a natural thing, and by consequence
necessarily determined, so that nothing can be attributed to the Goodness or
free will of God, what obligation can men think they have to him, any more then
they have to the Primum mobile which hurrieth all the Celestial Spheres along
with it with a natural violence, which they are not able to resist. For though
he be the supreme cause of all, and involves all others; yet if a man be once
persuaded that God is bound to that action by a natural necessity, he will not
conceive himself more beholden to him for it, then to the Fire because it
burns, or to the Air in regard it fills all the extent of Nature. Yea, it is
questionable whether in stead of being incited to venerate him, men would not
rather esteem his condition miserable, to be perpetually confined to the
Heavens to move them, without being able to slacken one moment, any more then
Ixion to stay his wheel. But putting the case that men notwithstanding account
that action to proceed from the free will of God (which yet is not consistent
with their principles) and let us see on what inducements they will render
praise and thanksgiving to God. Namely, for that he moves the Heavens, and the
Heavens transmit their influences to the Earth, and impart their virtues to the
Elements, that so herbs may grow and fruits ripen, for the supply of
nourishment to its inhabitants, and lastly for that by the same ways he gives
animals the power to bring forth young ones, for the propagation and perpetuity
of every Species. Now in an unexpected danger of which there are so many and
various sorts which threaten men continually, and oftentimes overtake them, how
will they turn their eyes and minds toward the Heavens to implore the
assistance of God, seeing he has no care but of what he does naturally, and
abandons contingent things to fortune? And when a man shall be delivered from
the danger of the fall of a house, or the assault of an Assassin, or the
enterprise of a Poisoner, with what zeal will he thank the Deity, who has no
regard thereof? Now our whole Life is full of such misfortunes; and that which
befalls us according to the ordinary ways of Nature, is that which is most rare
in all her course. Moreover experience is to every man the mistress of this
truth, that things, which are common to us with all other men, how excellent
soever they be, yet they do not much affect us: only particular accidents make
a lively impression in our minds. So that a man will look upon himself as more
obliged to a Physician, that secured him from loss of one of his Eyes, which a
defluction threatened him with, then to God that gave him both, with the
enjoyment of the light of the Sun at his birth. But above all the rest, the
ignorance of that Singular Providence which presides in the minds of men
themselves, and over their thoughts, will cause a signal prejudice to true
piety therein. For Wisdom and Virtue being the most excellent of all Presents
that can come from the hand of God to humane creatures, if we do not conceive
that we hold them from him, we shall never return him the praise of them; we
shall pride up our selves and become presumptious, even so far as to rank our
selves equal with him, yea above him, accordingly as we find in Cicero and
Seneca such brave sentences as these; That a Wiseman owes his Being indeed to
the Deity; but as for his Well-being, which consists in Wisdom, he ows the same
absolutely to himself. And moreover, that in this the Sage does in some manner
go beyond Jupiter; in as much as Jupiter is good by the necessity of his
Nature, and cannot be otherwise; but the other acquired his own Virtue by
combating with discourse of reason against his corporeal appetites. A Soul
tainted with this Philosophy, and pust up with so rank an arrogance, how can it
ever perform any thing considerable in relation to piety? And yet thither it is
that ignorance of this Providenc^ carries us. But if they have a better opinion
of Divine Providence, and subject not only natural, but also contingent
things, and our very thoughts to his conduct, we shall always return to demand
of them, how they know it so thoroughly: the World and the administration of it
presents us with arguments enough, if we were capable to comprehend them; But
how do they know it? Indeed the Philosophers and Poets sometimes utter in their
writings excellent elogiums of God: as among others, Plutark in his
incomparable Discourse De Sera Numinis Vindicta; and Socrates in an ancient
Dialogue, attributed to Plato (whether it be his or not) says that Virtue is a
thing that is not learnt as Arts and Sciences, but is given by Inspiration, as
some divine and celestial beneficence. And Homer, as we have intimated
elsewhere, ascribes to the Deity the greatest part of the extraordinary Motions
of the Heart, especially such as are Heroical, as likewise does Virgil
following his example.

-- Pauci quos aequus amavit
Jupiter, aut ardens evexit ad aethera virtus.
And in another place he introduces Alethes, a personage of high merit, thus
speaking upon occasion of the generosity of Euryalus and Nisus; Dii patrii,
quorum semper sub numine Troja est;
Non tamen omnino Teucros delere paratis,
Cum tales animos juvenum, and tam certa tulistis
Pectora --
And Juvenal showing that the best and perhaps only wish which men ought to
make, is that the Deity would give them Mentem sanam in corpore sano, seems to
acknowledge that we hold both the one and the other from his liberality; which
is a very authentic advowing of Providence. And it were easy to produce
plenty of the like instances. But how little firm were all those people in this
belief? And of what inconsiderable efficacy were those excellent sentences
amongst the vulgar, yea amongst Philosophers and the Authors themselves?
Plutark one of the most religious of all, relates very exactly how Timoleon was
miraculously delivered from the conspiracy of two murderers, by the meeting of
a certain person who to revenge the death of his father killed one of them as
they were upon the point to give him the fatal blow, though he knew nothing of
the business. But in stead of acknowledging the Providence of God therein, he
contents himself with saying that the spectators wondered greatly at the
artifice and contrivance which fortune uses, how she carries on one design by
help of another, and unites things so remote by liguing and chaining the same
together, how different soever they be, for producing the effect she resolves
on. And without inserting any judgment of his own concerning God or his
Providence, he only says, that the Corinthians, understanding the deed,
conceived good hopes thereby of success in the war of Sicily, because the
General that managed it, was a sacred person and favored of the Gods. Leaving
his Reader to divine what his own sentiment was of the matter. So in like
manner when he speaks of the different apprehensions which the Fall of
Dionysius caused in the minds of them that lived in those days, he declares
that some were glad of his misfortunes, as if they would have trampled him
under their feet whom Fortune had cast down; others beheld him with some
compassion, considering the great power secret and divine causes have over the
weakness of Men, which appeared so remarkably in this Masterpiece of Fortune.
What other words does he use to represent the wise Providence of God, then that
by which blind and temerarious chance is signified? And lastly that no man may
think that by the term of Fortune he understood the provident Wisdom of God, I
shall here rehearse his own words in his first book of the Opinions of
Philosophers, which I believe will cause astonishment in them who have any
knowledge of that person. After having said that Anaxagoras held that before
God put his hand to the fabric of the World, the bodies which we behold in
motion were at rest, but the Mind of God contrived and ordered the same; and
that Plato on the other side, maintained that the particles of matter had a
confused motion, till God ranked and marshalled them, knowing that order is
much better then confusion, he adds, That, Herein they are both guilty of the
same mistake in esteeming that God concerns himself with humane affairs, and
that he made the World on purpose to govern it. For a nature so happy and
incorruptible, and replenished with all sorts of goods without any
participation of evil, wholly addicted to preserve its own beatitude and
immortality, cannot be engaged in the care of things belonging to men;
otherwise it would be unhappy, by being employed like a Labourer to carry great
burdens, and to take pains in fabricating and governing the world. You would
think he had forsaken the Academy, and passed into the School of Epicurus. How
could a man that is susceptible of these rare opinions, have any thing certain
in the knowledge of Providence, however some excellent passages sometimes fall
from him in its commendation? Moreover, let us call to mind what Cato himself
said and we touched above. This person, whom Nature had endued with incredible
gravity, as Cicero reports, which was augmented and confirmed by the doctrine
of the Stoics, the most severe of all others, and who extolled Providence to
the highest, when he perceived the affairs of the Commonwealth to decline under
the conduct of Pompey, and those of Caesar, who aspired to Tyranny, to thrive
and gather strength, he complains that he beheld as he said, a fallacious
instability in the government of the Gods, in that Pompey was always prosperous
while he did no good, and all things were unsuccesseful when he took up arms
for the conservation of his Country and defense of the public liberty. If
therefore that great personage could be so scandalized at the Providence of
God, what must we judge of them to whom nature had not given so great a
capacity, nor so high a courage, or deep knowledge in Philosophy and even of
that sect which would be accounted the most religious? Could it otherwise be,
but that the least accident of Fortune (as they spoke) falling out contrary to
what humane Understanding judged fit and reasonable, should unsettle and
transport their minds with amazement? And indeed, what were the opinions of the
Philosophers in those days? Some maintained a fatal Necessity, such as it were
impossible to avoid; inferior causes being so connected by Destiny with the
superior, that not only men could not resist it, but the Gods themselves were
tied up by it: in like manner as Sarpedon died in the War at Troy by the decree
of Destiny, though his Father Jupiter had a vehement and ardent desire of the
contrary. And this because they had sometimes indevoured to prevent certain
accidents by their industry and prudence, which Divine Providence that
penetrates all obstacles, did not suffer them to bring to their desired end.
Whence it came to pass that the weakness and ignorance of man, and the
invincible power of the Deity in executing its purposes, brought a contempt
upon Providence. For nothing can be imagined that renders the Deity more
subject to be contemned, or that more deadens the hopes of men upon all
occasions, then this fatal destiny, nor yet that renders them more impudent in
excusing their enormities; witness that Varlet in the Comedian, who after a sly
trick which he had done, said, It was the will of the Gods; and had they not
decreed it, I could never have done it. Others observing that there fell out an
infinite number of things in the world, of which no account could be given, nor
the causes assigned of such effects, esteemed that all went at random, and that
God took no care of any thing. Yea sometimes they expostulated the cause of
their calamities with the Deity, and complained that he took pleasure in
beating them down and bandying them to and fro. And the Writings of the
Ancients are frequently strewed with such complaints, as so many blasphemies
and tokens of impiety, which their ignorance of Providence caused them to
utter. Besides what I have recited above out of Claudian, Ovid, and others,
Jason in Seneca the Tragedian beholding Medea fly away in the Air after she had
murdered his children, says to her, Testare nullos esse, qua veheris, Deos. In
Virgil, a mother that had lost her Son by an immature death, reviles the Deity,
Atque Deos atque astra vocat crudelia matter. And of this enough of other
examples may be found, which have been collected by learned men. But if there
have been some among the Pagans, who in these scandals have contained from
blaspheming (which were very rare in comparison of others) at least it cannot
be denied but that in that ignorance of the cause that governs the Universe,
they were deprived of a great consolation, being dubious and wavering in a
perpetual perplexity, whether God took care or not of their Life and affairs.
Now as much as the opinion of God's good will and vigilant care for the good
and conservation of men is rebated, so much without question is defaulked from
their piety toward him. And, whereas (as we shall see in its due place) man is
by nature alienated from God, and extremely averse and reluctant to be reduced
to him how clear knowledge soever he has by his word of this wise Providence,
how could those doubts and darkeness ever introduce him to an ingenious and
free devotion? I conclude therefore that all the Religion of the Ancients, who
lived without a particular Revelation, had there been no other particulars to
make it so but this, was either languid or forced; and that consequently to
beget in the hearts of men a true and since respect toward God it is needful
that himself instruct us in the knowledge of his Providence. But that which
follows shall show the same more evidently.

CHAP. V. Of what great moment it is to know whether Death be a Natural
Accident, or Not; And that such knowledge cannot be attained without special
Revelation.
DEath is the most ordinary thing in the World; For all that are born must
necessarily dye. Yet there is nothing of whose Cause and End Philosophers have
been more ignorant. All of them looked upon it as a thing purely Natural, which
befalls us as inevitably as naturally; because our bodies being composed of the
Elements which include discordant qualities, hot and cold, dry and moist, so
long as these continue in good harmony, and are mixed in a perfect temperature,
they are maintained in vigor; but when one comes to prevail against another, or
one of them fails through absumption of the moisture in which it consists, or
any other way, there necessarily follows a dissipation of the compages. Which
happens in like manner to all other bodies which have the same principles of
their generation; the union after a certain time being dissolved and the bodies
corrupted. Indeed if the Soul of Man were mortal as his body is, they would
have reason for this opinion, and Death would be natural to us as it is to
other creatures: but it befits only Epicurus, who believes the humane Soul
corruptible, to hold Death for a thing simply natural, if every one will speak
agreeably to his principles, and not run into absurdities and extravagances.
For Man is not the Soul only, he is the body to; that is to say, the body is
not only the case of his Soul wherein she is included for a time, but a part of
man, which enters into his composition, and without which he cannot be called
man. Now what a disorder is it in the Nature of man, that half of his essence
should be extinguished at the end of forty or fifty years, and the other half,
his Soul, remain for ever after despoiled of it? Unless the wild Metempsychosis
of Pythagoras be admitted, and that our Souls do not cease to go out of some
bodies, and re-enter into others, sometimes into a horse, and sometimes a bird,
and sometimes a man; or if it be confined only to humane bodies, that he who
was a great Philosopher two thousand years ago, is now a Cow-heard, and that
great Prince who discomfited Darius near the City of Arbela, at this present a
Porter in the Market. An Opinion, I conceive, they against whom I dispute will
not own. Shall the Soul then, remain eternally a Widow? She, that cherishes the
body so much, that she forgets her own interest to be complacent to it? She
that is not separated from it but with so great regret, that the best marriage
in the world is not dissolved with so much reluctance and tears? In which
respect, since these people acknowledge a Providence, how come they not to
observe that if death be a thing purely natural, a good part of that Providence
is lost, death taking the body from its jurisdiction, so that it cannot repay
it the rewards of Virtue, nor make it feel any penalty for its Vices? Or if it
be a punishment to the Body to exist no more, why do those die who in
consideration of their Virtue and Piety ought to obtain some recompense for
their bodies? For the course of the World is such, as we noted above, that in
this life neither the greatest part of crimes are sutably punished, nor the
least part of compensations distributed; and the Colicks, Megrims, Catarrhs,
Palsies, Goutes, and Stone hinder us from boasting of having found our
corporeal beatitude here. Yea if death be a thing natural, as they conceive, it
cannot be a punishment to the body for the Vices to which it is addicted. For
that which is natural may indeed be an infirmity or misery, but not a
punishment; which has no place but in retribution for sin; and because things
which are purely natural arrive to us, whether we sin or not. And besides the
Vicious would be no otherwise treated then he which is not so, and he that is
not Vicious would have no better a condition then he that is culpable. Which
perverts all order of Justice and all Wisdom of Providence.

But there daily falls out a certain accident in Life, of which, in case death
be natural, noman can give a pertinent reason nor acquit the Providence which
governs the world of blame. Namely that Infants dye at their birth, and even
some are extinguished in the Womb. To what purpose were it to have lodged a
Soul so little a time in a body, that it had not so much leisure as to know its
habitation? And since, as they teach, it is the Soul it self that fashions and
disposes and contrives its mansion, why is it ruined before she can enjoy it,
without hope of ever seeing it re-edified. And as to the poor wretched body
which is not yet sensible of its condition, what is it the better for having
been so little a while, or what has it committed that it must be no longer? I
know well that it is taught that it is better to Be then Not to be, and I do
not gainsay it: but yet a Being of so little duration is of no great comfort:
and he would seem not to satisfy right reason, who being asked why he breaks
an excellent piece of workmanship incontinently after he had made it, without
having reaped any use of it either to himself or any other, should answer that
it was sufficient that he had given it a being of half an hour. For it was not
to experiment his art that God framed little Infants; there are Proofs enough
of that in so many millions of men; he knows it without trial; and is so expert
therein, that every work of his being perfect, he has no cause to repent of or
be displeased with it. If it be answered that it is for the exercise of Parents
to train them to patience; were there no more in it but this, the action indeed
would have for its end to frame men to Virtue, in which their resemblance with
the Deity consists; but the means that God used to bring them to it, would seem
to carry something of inhumanity, of which it is incongruous that he should
propose himself an example. God, who is so good, and has so many other means
in his hand to lead men to Virtue, would never willingly employ any thereunto,
for which he might be accused of barbarousness and cruelty; especially seeing
it is an accident so frequent, that in a Town of a thousand families, there
does not pass one day in the year in which it does not happen. It Is true, for
certain great and important considerations Kings are excused if they sometimes
commit some act of injustice or violence. But this must be very rarely done,
and only when the safety of the State is concerned. Yet Lucretia could not
contain from crying out, upon the death of Iphigenia, who was sacrificed for
the safety of all Greece, Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum! But that there
should dye five or six times as many Children in the Cradle, as attain to man's
estate, seems an irregularity which not only an Epicurean, but the most devout
and pious amongst the Philosophers cannot but judge unsupportable.

Above all other considerations, the Fear which the thought of death begets
naturally in all men deserves our animadversion. For how courageous so ever any
may endeavor to appear, it is as Aristotle calls it, the most terrible of all
terrors. And as one has observed, if Julius C^sar, who was magnanimity it
self, said that the most unexpected death was the sweetest and most desirable,
which testifies that he resented some dread when he thought of it, what may we
think of the horrors, which other men have of it. And this Fear does not arise
only from the apprehension, that a man shall exist no more, but it has
something of I know not what other violence and bitterness. For otherwise,
nature and reason being two things which accord very well together, if death
were purely natural, reason would find something in that consideration
wherewith to be comforted, and gently drink off that Cup. But experience shows
that the consolations taken from the necessity of Nature, and the example of so
many other deaths, are too weak, and of too little efficacy, when the business
is to strengthen a soul that trembles at the presence of death. Which if there
have been some that were generously resolved to undergo, they have been very
few in number, and almost none in comparison of so many men, yea Nations, to
whom the alarms of death have been terrible and hideous. For I do not put in
the rank of such as resolve generously against it those Caitifs that tie the
rope to their own necks, and drink to their companions upon the Ladder. For
this is so far from true generosity conjoined with the discourse of reason,
that it is mere stupidness and more then bestial brutality. And it is
diligently to be observed, that they who believe not that their Soul is
immortal, comfort themselves more easily then others do with the consideration
of the necessity of death, and say that as the Generations which preceeded
their Birth belonged nothing at all to them, because they were not yet in
being, so they ought not to care for those which follow after their death, in
regard they shall be no longer; and that Agamemnon is dead, and Romulus, and
Patroclus, and the Scipio's.

Qui multis quam tu meliores, improbe, rebus. And I believe the greatest part
of those that have shown so high a courage in contemning death among the
Pagans, had not much consideration of their future condition. As it is clear by
Socrates, who says, in Plato, that he knew not which was best to live or to
dye, and that it were a folly to redoubt a thing of which there is no certain
knowledge whether it be desirable or to be feared. Whereas they that think
seriously of immortality, find nothing in nature that encourages or comforts
them. A sure evidance that death has something of terror in it which does not
proceed from nature, but from something else: for they would at least have more
ground of consolation then the others, in the subsistence of the better part of
their essence. Now whence can that horror be, but only that death is the
forerunner of divine vengeance, and makes up a part of it already?

If hereupon they agree that it is a punishment for sin; certainly, since all
other Philosophers have held it to be simply natural, they cannot know it to be
so by any other way then that divine revelation, that has informed us by what
gate it entered into the World. For none of the Ancients ever found out or could
so much as divine in a dream what was the cause of it. And so far were they
from having it come into their minds, that on the contrary some have believed
that Death was rather a gift and gratification to us from the Deity, then a
punishment inflicted by his Justice. Which opinion the innumerable miseries of
humane life greatly concurred to render authentic: the undergoing whereof
being looked upon as so dolorous, that sometime the deliverance from them has
been accounted the greatest good that could arrive. Or if some few have not
dared to affirm absolutely that death was a Good, yet they maintained at least
that it was no Evil, since it rescues men from all calamities which they
suffer. To fear death, said Socrates to his Judges, is nothing else but to seem
to be wise, and not to be so. For it is to pretend to know that which we do not
know; because none knows what death is, nor whether it be not the greatest good
that can befall a man. To which Plutark refers that exhortation of an ancient
Greek Poet, (...),
Metuenda non est mors arumnarum exitus.


So also the greatest part of the reflections of Cicero upon this matter in the
first of the Tusculane Questions fall into the Dilemma of Socrates; To wit,
that if the soul be extinguished with the body, and so the sense of all things
be absolutely abolished, death cannot really be an Evil; because a man being
thereby wholly deprived of existence, and exempted from among the nature of
things, that which is not, is equally incapable both of Evil and Good. But if
the soul survive the Body, death is so far from being an evil, that it ought
rather to be accounted in the number of the greatest goods; seeing it delivers
from the evils of this present life, and puts a man in possession of the
contentments of a better: upon which he does not omit to mention the converse
with the Heroes, wherein Socrates placed the greatest part of the hopes of his
joy. But the business is of higher importancy. For though the Light of Nature
should have taught men that death is an effect of the justice of God, yet is it
impossible (as we shall see in due place) for the same to discover to them the
remedy thereof. And I conceive, that though the reason of man should have been
able certainly to conjecture what the cause of death is, God himself would have
purposely hid it from them, least, not being able to discover the remedy of it,
despair should sink and ruin all the World. All other ignorances have been
prejudicial, and very often pernicious to men; to this alone we owe the
conservation of humane Society. So that we may pertinently apply to this in
particular, that which Horace speaks generally of the ignorance in which it
has pleased God we should live, touching events to come; Prudens, futuri
temporis exitum
Caliginosa nocte premit Deus.
The sole Word of God (which is the special revelation we are in quest of) is
that which accords all these differences, and clears up all the difficulties
and confusions. We shall not dispute at present, whether in his first creation
the body of man was naturally so well constituted, that through prudence
whereby he was able to avoid all hurtful things, and the use of aliments (which
the blessing of God rendered as efficacious for the conservation of life by the
good and pure qualities which he at first endued them with, as now they are
often full of noxious juices, since the curse of God blasted them for our
offense) he might without other assistance from the Deity, avoid all alteration
and corruption either by disease or Age. God has in the composure of Gold and
Diamonds and other like things, given sufficient proof of his power; and has
so exactly tempered the contrary qualities of the Elements in the constitution
of certain bodies, that they seem not subject to any corruption whatsoever. And
the long life which the first Men lived, even after sin, and the examples of
the like we meet with in several profane Histories, and some also, though few,
which may be found in the Histories of these latter times, give us enough to
judge how firm and durable the life of man would be, were he as exactly and
perfectly framed, and the aliments that support him as good, as the estate of
Nature in its integrity could have promised. We only affirm, that though, as
the Philosophers thought, the body of man being composed of the Elements, and
consequently including contrary and repugnant qualities, would have carried in
its self the seeds of death; yet this revelation teaches us that the Wisdom of
God would have so provided therein, that if no disorder had hapened in the
World through sin, the propensity which our bodies have to their own
dissipation, would have been restrained and hindered by his Providence. For he
would have repelled all sorts of eternal accidents; he would have hindered the
intemperature of the humors, both by preserving them in right harmony, and
supplying man with aliments endued with excellent faculties and void of all
noxiousness; and by infusing new vigor of life in time of necessity, to hinder
the approach of Old Age, would have maintained man in a vigorous and
flourishing consistence, and so given him the immortality, of which we have now
nothing left but the desire. Whence likewise the union of the Soul and Body
would have continued to eternity, not subject to any important change or evil
accident. So that admitting death to be an accident that suits with the natural
principles of the composition of their bodies, yet the cause that they do dye
is, because it having been covenanted that the consequences of a mortal
condition should be hindered upon condition that man continued in obedience, sin
supervening has changed the dispensation of all that, and effected that death
is become in quality of a punishment and vengeance. And this ought nor to be
deemed strange; For there are things which considered in themselves have
nothing so shameful in them, but that they may well endure either the presence
of another, or the public daylight, which yet through the disorder befallen
in nature are become ignominious. Nakedness, which of it self is not dishonest,
is become unseemly through sin, which has caused rebellion in the corporeal
appetites against reason. So that they who affirm it indifferent to go naked or
clothed, show that extreme profaness has worn out of their foreheads that
shame which causes others to express their consciousness of sin and the
unseemliness of the irregularity of our sensual faculties, so as to be ashamed
of their impudence who are not so themselves. Wherefore though death were a
natural accident, which yet it is not, the horror of it is too great, to
acknowledge no more in it but pure nature and its motions. For why then do
Infants dye? We learn from the same revelation that that so sudden separation
of the soul from the Body is not for ever: but that the being which is given
them, though at first it seems to have been allotted for a moment only, and
by consequence little better then not-being, shall endure eternally, when the
considerations shall cease for which it suffered the Eclipse of the time that
it was to appear in this Life. For the being of man, when it has once had a
beginning, is of perpetual duration; and the time of Death is but as an Eclipse
of his course. But this is not the place for this discourse, and therefore we
shall add but a word more and pass forward. Whether we consider the justice or
the goodness of God, this revelation amply furnishes us what to answer in
defense of both. He takes away little children at their birth, and
notwithstanding does not incur thereby any blame of cruelty; because before
they were born they deserved that punishment by reason of the natural infection
of sin which they drew from those that begat them. And indeed as we crush the
Eggs of Scorpions before they are hatched, not because they have as yet deserved
to be destroyed for any wound which we have received by them, but because in
growing up, the seeds of venom which that brood has by nature will infallibly
be exerted to our mischief; so is it sometimes expedient for God to stifle from
the womb such children as have so many seeds of vice in them, that coming to
years would do much more mischief then any Scorpion in the World. This the
Philosophers never understood, and therefore could not return in answer: But if
there opinion were admitted, it would be requisite to defer judging of the
merit of Infants till they come to the age that ennables them to manifest and
display their Vice. Moreover God resumes some of them back to himself, whom he
pleases to render happy by his goodness. Nor is it necessary that he should
permit them a longer abode in this life, that so they might be capable of
happiness for their practices of Virtue: because he does not give it as a
Salary deserved from his justice by our Virtues, but as a beneficence purely
out of his liberality: which likewise the Philosophers never thought of; for
according to them, if there remains any beatitude to be hoped after this Life,
it cannot be aspired unto but by Virtue. How then can Infants obtain the same
which dye in the cradle, and so are prevented of ever exercising themselves in
Virtue? So great are the advantages of them which have this particular
revelation above those which reject it; to wit, that we know for what reason we
dread death so much, and why it is indeed to be feared; what the sources are
from whence we are to draw our consolations against its agonies; and lastly
what is the way to ascribe glory always to the Deity, whatsoever accident
happens in the World.

CHAP. VI. Of the Corruption of Mankind; How much it imports true piety to know
the Original of it: which we cannot do without a particular Revelation.
THe excellence of the Nature of man is such, that he cannot be considered
either in his body or his mind, or in the dominion which he claims over all
things, but there are presented very eminent testimonies and tokens of it. The
Stature of his body is comely and graceful; not despicable for its smallness,
nor unsightly and incommodious by too great bulk: the Symmetry of his members,
his delicate skin, and tender flesh, have an air so transcendently pleasing
that all other Animals may seem coursely composed, and made for laborious
services, but man alone formed and designed for empire. Especially in his
countenance shines a majesty, that speaks him made to contemplate the heavens,
no less then to command on earth. And whereas Brutes have their heads inclined
downwards, Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad Sydera tollere vultus.
As for his Mind, the Sciences and Arts of which he is Author, the capacity to
govern Societies and conduct Armies; the Dexterity of forming a design with
understanding, and carrying on the same with prudence; of contriving the means
industriously to their end, and guiding them thereunto by courses that seem
oftentimes contrary; the faculty of conceiving the Ideas of things which are
not as if they were, although compounded of parts absolutely discrepant; the
sagacity of knowing how to make use of expedients for long Navigations, and
tracing ways in the Sea by direction of the Stars, are sufficient proofs and
evidences to evince its excellence. So that they are without comparison more to
be excused, who conceived that the Spirit of Man was a small particle derived
from the Deity, then they which reduced it to the condition of Beasts.
Phocylides had indeed some reason when he said, (...). As if God in creating
man, and indowing him with so divine an understanding, had lent him a little
portion of his essence. In like manner, the Empire which he has over all other
creatures shows sufficiently, that it is not for nothing that his mind and body
have been endued with so many eminent qualifications above all other things.
The Earth produces for him the necessities and pleasures of life to his
contentment, and like a sovereign he employs its stones, marbles and metals to
build his palaces, and guild the roofs which he makes of its Cedars. He covers
himself with the wool of animals, and insects spin silk for his service.
Notwithstanding his own weakness he ranks Elephants in battle, and makes them
subservient to his passions without their knowing that they are so. He has put
the bridle in the mouth of Horses, and tamed that proud and fierce animal for
his convenience. Even the life of poor beasts is nothing to him for his
sustenance; and how terrible soever the Sea be, yet he has found out means to
fail upon it securely, and to conjoyn nations by commerce, whom vast distances
of Oceans have divided.

But notwithstanding all this, his corruption appears so manifestly, that there
is none but has observed it. For one comely and perfectly well composed
person, there will ever be found a hundred that have somewhat of difformity.
There are always some impotent and less-favoured by nature, some one-ey'd and
lame, and even some persons born to Kingdoms, whose structure and conformation
of members is pitiful or ridiculous. We are subject to so many diseases, that
sometimes one single person suffers more of them in his life then all other
animals together of a whole province.

The corruption of his Mind is extremely great. Not to speak at present of that
ignorance which is common to all, and the most knowing complain of with good
reason; although it may seem that man having been made to serve himself with
all things, he ought at least to know them: The Evil which he commits both
against others and himself, has given occasion to One heretofore to say, That
as it were better to give no wine to sick persons, because if it profits one,
it hurts more; so it would have been better not to have allowed man the use of
reason, since for one good that it does, it causes ten thousand evils in the
World. There are nothing but Wars of Nation against Nation, yea of the same
Nation in its own bowels. In Cities there are seditious, in families tumults;
The Husband and Wise do not accord in the same bed, whose souls notwithstanding
ought to be cemented together. And that which is more strange: every one is not
at agreement with himself, our natural instability disquiets us, our passions
turmoile us, our desires and jealousies fret and devour us; and which is a
lively token of our corruption, in what condition soever we be, I do not say
tolerable only, but even honorable and desirable by others, we are never
contented with it. That which a while since we ardently desired, we soon after
despise; and what we made no account of when we enjoyed, we resent its loss
with sorrow; thus condemning our own judgment of error, frequently with
remorse for suffering our selves to be transported with passion and appetite.
Witness that excellent Satyr of Horace, in which he introduces old soldiers
complaining that they are not Merchants, and Merchants envying the happiness of
the military life. The Lawyer there extolls the tranquillity and peace of the
Husbandman, who also esteems himself miserable in comparison of those that
dwell in Cities. So that whether it be chance, or the wish and choice of
reason, that puts men upon their course of life, yet there is not one but finds
something to dislike in his own, and repines that he is not well at ease, nor
so favorably treated as his Neighbor. And notwithstanding, were a proffer
tendered to exchange conditions: and the Merchant sent to the Camp, and the
Soldier to traffic at Sea; as also were the Husbandman become a Lawyer, and
engaged in the toilesome affairs of Law-Courts, and the Lawyer obliged to drive
the Waine, there is none of them but would as much disapprove the change. Lastly
we need not much exalt our selves for the Dominion which we have over other
things; for the Earth produces nothing but with the labor of our arms and
sweat of our brows, and besides recompenses us ofttimes with briars and
thistles. The Frost and Mill-dew blast our Vines and Corn, the Caterpiller and
Locust devour our hopes; and the rebellion of animals against us is such, that
we are put to defend our selves even against vermin, not only against
Serpents, Dragons, Lions and Tigers. Whence it is come to pass that the
Ancients were so inconstant in the judgment which they made of man and his
nature. For after having spoken so much to his advantage that the title of King
and God sometimes was not sufficient for him, who can but wonder at Jupiters
repenting in Homer for having given Peleus horses to become partakers of humane
misery, where he says that man is subject to more miseries then any other
animal upon the face of the Earth.

So some wept upon the birth of their children through compassion that they
come into this Scene of troubles, and laughed upon the death of their Parents,
out of joy that they go out of it; and Euripides says that we ought to do so.
In a word, the most usual comfort which they took in death, is that it puts an
end to our miseries; and their histories, or fables, affirm that it was sent as
a present from the Gods to the greatest and most excellent persons in
recompense of their Virtues: as to Cleobis and Biton, for their piety toward
Juno; to Agamedes and Trophonius, for their pains in building the Temple of
Apollo at Delphos; and likewise to Pindar. What therefore can we say that man
is? In truth, considering mankind in general, it cannot be better resembled
then to the present estate of Rome, which is but as the carcass of what it was
of old. There are remaining indeed some ruins, and some old inscriptions
not-intelligible, some fragements of ancient Statues, and defaced monuments and
ponderous tombs since the time she was Emperess of the World. But in the whole
all this is of so little proportion, that had we no other knowledge of her
grandeur by histories, it were as impossible to conjecture thereby what she was
fifteen hundred years ago; as it is to guess at the integrity that flourished
in the first ages by the manners of the present times.

Now of the cause and origin this so deplorable ruin all the ancients both
Poets and Philosophers have been ignorant; all their conjectures thereof are
dubious and unresolved, and all their assertors false. Nor is it difficult to
judge how much this ignorance has hindered them from rendering to God what
belongs to him upon this account, and tasting any true and solid consolations
in their miseries. For how could they acknowledge his justice in the punishment
of mankind, whilst they knew not that this disorder happened by their own fault?
How could they admire his goodness in conservation of the Universe, when they
were ignorant that man deserved to be reduced to nothing from his birth? How
could they have recourse to God for obtaining of him a remedy against such
misery, seeing they knew him not; or how could they beseech him to repair their
ruins? How could they learn not to murmr against him, if they knew not that
the evils they suffered were worthily inflicted on them, and as due to their
crimes? Lastly, how could they restrain themselves from suspecting the wisdom
or power of him that governs the World, while they were ignorant of any
pertinent reason of all this disorder. For as when we observe in a Commonwealth
good and bad laws, and commendable and unseemly customs mixed together, we
conclude that either the first Legislators failed in some particular things,
though they happened right in others, or that later Magistrates degenerated from
the Wisdom and Virtue of their Ancestors: so beholding order and confusion
jumbled together in the World, it remains only to conjecture that either the
wisdom of him that contrived it at the beginning was defective, or that he
could not support and maintain his ancient laws through want of power. I
mention not at present the natural avidity of knowledge in us, which can be
little satisfied without a particular revelation, as in other abstruse things,
so in this which is of such moment, and continually presented to our minds,
namely, what should be the cause of so many evils that reign in the World.

In the next place the consolations which they employ against them are very
strange. Some comfort themselves with the consideration of necessity; against
which it is unprofitable to struggle. And indeed I deny not, but it is good
counsel to give to such as are miserable, that when there is no means of
deliverance from calamity, to endeavor at least to support it with the least
impatience that may be, because necessity is invincible. It is good, I say, if
it could be put in practice. But as he that should exhort a man that is in the
paroxysm of a violent Colic, to be cheerful, would show himself ridiculous and
void of understanding; so he that should counsel a man fallen into some great
and irrecoverable distress, to comfort himself because it cannot be otherwise,
would deservedly be accounted troublesome and almost barbarous. Can any imagine
that it would have been any great heartning to the poor Philoctetes, when he
made the Sea and rocks resound his lamentable ejulations, and wished that some
body would cast him down from the precipice of a rock into the waves beneath,
for one to have said to him, Friend, there is no remedy, Destiny will have it
so; and to wrestle against her decree is to swim against the stream? For this
is the cause of his despair, that there is no remedy: were there any hope of
it, he would not cry out so loud, but sustain himself with those excellent
words of Epicurus, If pain be great, it will be but of short durance. And it
would be to no purpose in such a case for a man to boast of the invincible
strength of his courage. Hercules himself groaned and cried out in the midst of
the flames. In effect, there is no constancy, which the assiduous perseverance
of pain does not at length overcome. Nature has not made us of Iron or Steel;
but has given us a tender and delicate flesh, and quick and lively sentiments.
In a word, the consideration of Necessity may indeed cause a man to resolve to
travel through a bad and dirty way, or to swallow a bitter potion that is soon
down; but there is no constancy which is not undermined and worn out by a
continual suffering. Others have solac'd themselves with the commonness and
generality of the misery conceiving it both injustice and folly, for any
particular person to complain of his own case, where all are equally involved:
As the Proverb has it, It Is the comfort of sufferers to have companions. Thus
the Poet Antimachus composed an Elegy, wherein he reckoned up all the disasters
befallen to any people that ever he knew, to comfort himself upon the loss of
his wife. But as the Sun, though he shines in common to all that have eyes, yet
his light ought not to be accounted less grateful and sweet; and as the use of
respiration is not less necessary, because all animals equally breath the air:
So the condition of unhappy persons is not less painful and grievous, by being
common to all, nor the sentiment of great calamities more light by seeing
others groan under the same misfortunes. Besides, this kind of consolation
seems to me to have something of barbarism and inhumanity in it. If it happen
to any one to be condemned to the Gibbet, either justly or unjustly, is it meet
for him to desire to behold other of his compatriots executed with him for the
diminishing of his unhappiness? It was a thing which discomforted Phocion at
his condemnation to death, that he had fellow sufferers; his great humanity
inducing him to wish, that if possible that heavy sentence might have fallen
only upon his own person.

But they may seem to have had more reason who comforted themselves with the
hope of death, that would put an end to all things. Yet who sees not that this
was but the consolation of desperate people? For what difference is there
between a man that desires death through impatience of his pain, and him that
kills himself; saving that one has more courage, or is transported with
greater despair then the other? Death is naturally accounted an Evil, and even
by most men the greatest of all Evils; nor is there any shame or pain but they
will undergo for preserving their Lives, even so far as to suffer the
mutilation of their arms and legs. Cut off my feet, and after that my legs
(said Mecoenas) and my thighs also, if you please. Provided I do but live, it is
enough. What kind of consolation then can that be which is naturally so much
abhorred? And how great must their misery be, who place all their comfort in
that which is naturally abhorred? Must not nature have reduced us to a
deplorable extremity, when there remains no other comfort for us, but such as
theirs is, who being stretched forth on the Wheel on a Scaffold, are told that
their sentence is mitigated only to be hanged? But yet they which think of the
immortality of their Souls, cannot comfort themselves by all these means,
unless they be well persuaded of the pardon of their sins which have drawn all
these miseries upon them. For if they endure so great evils in this life for
their offenses, what can they expect in the other? Certainly we see for the
most part, such a person that desired death through impatience of his pain,
timerously slinks from it when he sees it approaching, and would bargain with
any body that could make his Gouts last for fifty years.

Lastly, there have been some that would draw matter of glory from humane
miseries, and who held that they were the trials of Virtue, esteeming it best
for a man to endure evil, because otherwise he can have no knowledge of
Patience, which is the most excellent virtue of all. One suffered himself to be
brayed in pieces without groaning, and another in the violent fits of the
Stone, said, Do thy worst, Pain, yet I shall never confess that thou art evil.
But in truth this is a foolish wisdom; this Indolence, as Plutark says, is not
bought but at the price of brutality. To be a Philosopher of this fashion, a
man must put off all humane passions, and be converted into a Stone. As if it
were not natural to man to sigh and complain, and when he is wrestling with an
extreme pain, to wish his deliverance. But yet those are greater fools, who
find cause of pride and vanity in their suffering. Is it such a cordial
chearing to a man who has the Colic, Gout, Megrim, or Toothache; who is
afflicted with poverty, shame and contempt of the World; who has lewd children
that threaten the Gallows; that is oppressed and tyrannis'd by great
adversaries; hated, tormented, persecuted and reviled by inferiors; for one to
come and tell him that his patient suffering of all this will acquire great
glory to him in the world? Certainly if the glory and the sorrow were weighed
one against another, I conceive there is no man of sense and that is subject to
all these evils, but would give all the glory which Caesar and Alexander had
both together, to be delivered from them.

The most ordinary consolation (as we touched above) has been to reproach and
accuse God and Nature, which they affirmed was a good mother to other
Creatures, but to man an incompassionate Stepdame; thus adding impiety to
misery. And they have been even so foolish, as to conceit that the greatest
part of our mischiefs proceed from I know not what malevolence in the Deity, as
if he bare a hatred or envy either to the condition or to the prosperity of
men. One faith, (...). Another, (...)
(...).
And a third, (...)
(...).
And indeed I see not, how in the natural impatience of our minds, men in so
many miseries as they are beset with in the world, could contain from accusing
the goodness of God, unless they had been instructed by the Word of God, of the
source whence they flow upon us. It Is that alone teaches us, that it is a
beginning of vengeance upon the Wicked, and a fatherly exercising of
chastisement upon the Good; Who therefore receive the same with humility in
reverence to the will of God, bear it with patience as a thing which they have
deserved and far worse, and rejoice themselves in hope that his wise Providence
will so proportion their afflictions and their strength, that they be not
overwhelmed with the burden. And that which surpasses all humane imagination,
It reveals such a glory to them, for the enjoyment of which they are prepared
by these sufferings, that in comparison of its weight and its eternity, all
that they endure here is light and scarce of a moments duration. There it is
that this encouraging exhortation becomes effectual, Tu ne cede malis, sed
contra audentiorito.

CHAP. VII. Of the Remission of Sins; What knowledge men naturally have
thereof; And how much it is the interest of true Piety to he assured of the
same. Also, Of the Resurrection of the Body.
WE have proved above against the Epicureans, that there is such a difference
between Vice and Virtue, that it is not Places, or Times, or Laws of
Magistrates, or Customs of Nations that renders the one commendable, and the
other worthy of blame; but their proper nature and essence, which abides
eternally equal and uniform. We also showed consequently, that as the
recompense of goodness is congruous to virtue, so vice has a due right to
punishment. For otherwise, what is the meaning of all those terrors of
conscience, which we showed above to be natural to men? And to what end were
the Providence of God himself? Who should have taken the rewards of Virtue out
of one of his hands, and the arms of vengeance against Vice out of the other?
Wherefore I take it now for granted; besides that though I had not proved it,
yet they with whom I treat at present, do without longer dispute yield it. So
that I shall pass directly to speak of the Remission of Offenses which merit
that punishment, and of what great concernment it is in order to being truly
Religious toward God, to know by what means to obtain it, and get full
assurance thereof.

Now there are only four motives which induce men to piety and Virtue. The
first is that of which alone the Epicureans boast they make any account,
namely, the knowledge of the excellence of the Deity; to which must be
conjoined (though it agrees not with the principles of Epicurus, who places the
Supreme Good of man in Pleasure) the knowledge of the natural honesty which is
in things, and which is lovely and worthy to be followed for its own sake. The
second is the sense of benefit we receive and profit that accrues from both the
one and the other. For when we are favored by the Deity with some great
beneficence, we ought earnestly to be incited to honor him in acknowledging the
same. The third is the hope of obtaining some compensation for being Virtuous
and exercising piety. And the fourth is the fear of incurring his indignation,
by failing in the respective duties of Piety and Virtue. As for the first of
these motives, we have already shown, that unless God reveal himself in an
especial manner, men live in a profound ignorance of his nature and his
excellence; in which respect it cannot be of much force to excite men to piety.
And the case of the second is the same. For although the goodness of God be in
infinite manners extended toward men, in their creation, and the conservation
of their being, and in such an admirable variety of things which he has
created for their use; yet so it is that none of mankind has ever acknowledged
the same as is meet, nor indeed could they, as shall more amply appear.
Concerning the hope of recompense (not in this life surely, unless very scantly
and after a fashion that does not correspond to the infinite goodness which is
in God, but in another) all that men can have of it by the light of nature is
unquestionably drawn from the consideration of the benefits which good men
receive in this Life, from whence to argue, that he will enlarge his bounty in
that which is to come. But diverse things hinder a man from being able of
himself to take from thence a certain argument for the future. For besides that
those benefits consist only in temporal and frail things, and that it is hard
for a carnal man to conjecture by them of eternal and spiritual benedictions,
they are blended with so many calamities, with which our Life is continually
persecuted, that a man can scarce clearly behold the goodness of God through
the instances of his justice, unless he bring a very great attention thereunto;
and we on the contrary consider them very negligently. As therefore when a
Prince checks and strikes as much or oftener then he caresses, it is hard to be
assured of his good will, or to hope great favors from him, unless one has a
most intimate knowledge of his nature and his counsels, and diligently weigh
his actions and their circumstances, his words and gestures, thereby to see to
the bottom of his thoughts: so man being naturally so negligent in considering
the ways of the Deity, in the medly of effects of his justice and his goodness
which appears in the whole conduct of the Universe, cannot without doubt but
have all his cogitations and reflections thereupon confused and unsteddy. Is
there so much as one to be found in an Age, that sets himself to contemplate
the benefits which God has conferred on him, from thence to conceive an
assurance for the future, and behold the light of his favor through the
darkness and death. His Understanding is naturally too weak-sighted; there are
too many things in the world which divert it, too many affections in it that
fasten it to the Earth. But principally because there is nothing so suspicious
as a bad conscience, man well knowing his own great inclination to things
displeasing to the Deity, and even to the slighting of his honor and service;
his conscience hinders him from hoping any thing from the goodness of God, and
objects to it self only his vengeance. So that the knowledge of Gods benefits
toward men being so obscure and dubious in them, and on the other side the
sense of their own demerit so quick and lively, they cannot but be possessed
with a great measure of fear, without almost any hope at all. Now if the hope
of obtaining recompense by serving God be none at all, or as good as none at
all, the piety also will be none which uses to be produced by such hope. But
there remains fear enough; which is that alone which, to speak clearly, has
induced men that have had no other guide in his service but reason, to address
to him devotion after their own fashion (as Statius intimated in this sentence,
Primus in orb Deos fecit timor) which we will undertake to examine. By fear in
the present discourse, I do not understand a reverence arising from
consideration of the Majesty of him before whom a man presents himself, which
when he does not find himself guilty of any o^fence committed against him, may
be conjoined with a cordial love. For a thing that is excellent, great, and
adorable of it self, naturally causes fear, and fa tremar altrui di Maraviglia,
as the Poet Petrark speaks, makes the spectators tremble with astonishment. But
this is no impediment to a violent love and a calm assurance in the
conscience. But I understand that sort of fear which springs from the sense of
a man's own vitiousness, and from the knowledge of a vengeance which he foresees
will follow. Now the Nature of this fear is such, to speak generally, that the
greater it is, the less there is of hope to escape punishment, and likewise
less love then ought to be had for him whose indignation and choler we dread.
For as the old Poet says in Cicero, Quem odimus, periisse cupimus. And this is
peculiarly verified when things stand in such terms as they do between God and
mankind; namely when he that fears, takes supreme pleasure in the things by
which he deserved the punishments he is afraid of: So that instead of
renouncing his vice by repentance, he would not have so much as the least
desire of amendment enter into his soul, so troublesome is it to him to be
deprived of the contentment which he receives in the satlating of his lusts. As
a dissolute youth hates his Master to the death that scourges him for his
debaucheries; or as a Thief that hates the Magistrate far more, for causing a
Gibet to be prepared for him to punish his robberies. Wherefore man being
corrupt and a sinner, as every one is convinced in his own conscience, and not
doubting (however otherwise ignorant) but that God is severe and just; it must
necessarily be (things being judged according to the motions of Nature) that
instead of being attracted to piety by Fear, he will rather be induced thereby
to disclaim it wholly; and instead of being inflamed with the love of God, his
fear will give him strong aversions against him, and possess him with hatred.
But which is more, the less hope there is of obtaining his pardon, the less
also is the care to reform his wickednesses. For Vice being full of baits and
pleasure, who is he that will deprive himself of a present good and that is in
his hand, without hoping that his so doing will turn to some benefit or
advantage to him? Every one without question chooses rather to solace the fear
of evil to come, by present pleasures; which lessen the bitterness of fear
according to the rate that they produce delight. So that if a man hopes to
drown his fear absolutely in the pleasures of sin, he takes no care but to
indulge his lust, and take his swinge without all restraint. And on this manner
are formed the most part of those Atheists so disorderly in all their
comportments; who having felt the terror of Gods wrath, have on purpose plunged
themselves into drunkennese, uncleanness, and all other sorts of horrible
dissoluteness, to divert the same out of their minds. So that by the custom of
sining they have so worn out the sentiment of the Deity in them, and are by
degrees become so hardened, that they have scarce lest the least spark of fear
in their conscience. It is true that sometimes (as a drunkard will start up out
of his sleep at the sounding of an alarm) when God reveals his justice in an
extraordinary manner, these monsters of men apprehend some sentiment of terror.
But as when the Cry is over the drunkard falls down again on his pillow, and
betakes himself to his former snoring; so the peril is no sooner passed in
which these people found themselves, but they return to their accustomed
insensibility.

Wherefore the means to withdraw men from sin, when they are once awaked with
the fear of vengeance, is the hope of pardon; which beginning to appear,
excites repentance, and with that the love of him from whom favor is hoped.
But what can that hope be in this calamitous estate of our nature, if God
himself do not present the occasion of it? Can a man find it in the Heaven, or
in the Earth, or in himself? What argument is there to be had of any from all
these things on which he may build a certain assurance? Perhaps it will be
objected, that by the same ways whereby we know the Justice of God, to wit, by
the consideration of his judgments, we may come to the knowledge of his
goodness, namely, by the experience he affords of his benefits which he powers
down so liberally upon men. Which I readily concede, and shall add this
further, that since men have sinned from the beginning and beyond the memory of
all time, and notwithstanding their continual offenses God does not cease to do
good to them, there may an argument be drawn from thence, that God invites men
to repentance; Now he would not invite them to repentance, unless there were
hope of pardon for them; for he does not mock or illude us: but all his actions
are serious. Therefore God presents us in the government of the World with
grounds to believe that he is just, in exercising judgment upon the wicked;
and good also, in extending his beneficencies toward the good; and merciful,
in doing good even to such as are wicked: and right reason is able to discern
him such in following him by these traces. But there are motions in the corrupt
nature of man which frustrate the effect, if God did not provide for it after
another manner. For man flies from the presence of God through fear of
punishment, and cannot hinder the prevalence thereof in his Soul; so that as a
man affrighted beholds nothing steadfastly, but always imagines new occasions of
terror, and represents hideous phantasmes to himself; so we are not able to
allow our selves leisure to consider attentively this dispensation of the
goodness of God toward the Wicked, nor thereby to assure our selves of
obtaining mercy and pardon. As a lewd wretch, whose conscience bears him
witness of many heinous crimes, though he should perceive some connivence in
the Magistrate for a time, and his judge show him some good countenance, cannot
but be distrustful of him, and suspect that he dos but differr his punishment
till another time, and assuredly reserve it for him; Especially, if he has an
opinion that the Magistrate is not such a one as himself, but abhors the
wickednesses committed by him. Now we are universally thus principled, that as
we hate those whom we feat, so we never bear good will toward them of whom we
have some diffidence. And the distrusting the goodwil of anyone being a step to
fear, is likewise by the same reason a degree to hatred; unless the distrust
proceed to such a measure as to be an absolute fear, for then the coldness of
affection is turned into perfect hatred. Wherefore Man thus distrusting the
good will of God toward him, consequently can have but a very slight affection
to him; yea he will even become his enemy, inasmuch as the distrust in this
case cannot but be extremely great.

But perhaps it will here be demanded, Whence then came it to pass that all
Nations have each of them had its Religion? And why are not all men dissociated
instead of liguing together in a religious Society? To which I answer, that the
mind of man is not ever agitated with the same emotions, nor constant in the
same thoughts; the same passion not always possessing him, nor the same vice.
They take their turns, and succeed or mingle one with another. Two things
therefore have hindered that men though possessed with fear, have not abandoned
all service of the Deity; Profaness, and Pride: God permitting the profaness of
some and the presumption of others to temper the terror of conscience. First
profaness; because not weighing sufficiently how much God abominates Vice, and
how inexorable his justice is, they often have flattered themselves with this
thought, that he scarce takes any notice of small offenses, and such as are in
the intention and purpose only, that is, in the affections of the will and not
in actions really executed. Moreover they thought that he was not much incensed
but with crimes that turn to some notable detriment to the Commonwealth, or
carry some blot of infamous improbity; although masculine lust was either
justified, or excused or tolerated by the most civilis'd people of Greece. And
they were sometimes so besotted in their devotions, that they thought not but
crimes of the greatest turpitude might with no great difficulty be expiated by
their sacrifices, lustrations, religious processions, mysteries, and Bacchanal
solemnities. On the other side Presumption; because not sufficiently
acknowledging how much they ought to the Deity, they imagined that their good
works, their offerings, and the exercise of that shadow of Virtue which they
pursued, might countervale the offenses they committed: so that if they were
balanced together, there might be hope not only to avoid punishment, but
moreover to obtain recompense. Upon which ground it was that Socrates being
near his end, and discoursing of the immortality of the Soul, speaks largely of
his hope (in case the Soul be not extinguished with the body) to go and live
with Hercules and Palamedes and the other persons of high account. But as to
asking God pardon of the offenses, he had committed, he makes no mention at all
of it; because though he spoke always dissemblingly of himself, he had in the
bottom of his Soul a great opinion of his own Virtue, and made no great
reckoning of his vices, from which notwithstanding he was no more exempt then
others. And had his life been of such purity, that the eyes of men could not
discern a blot in it (although some have written infamous matters of him) yet
when the account is to be made up with God, there needs an other perfection of
Virtue then that of his, to satisfy so exact a justice. But yet further.
Oftentimes these two Vices of Profaness and Presumption have met together in
the same subject, and lulled men with vain hopes into absolute supinity. Whence
the excess of Fear has been retrenched, which would otherwise have at last
turned into despair, and consequently not only dissipated all communion in
Religion, but likewise ruined all humane Society. For Fear restraining man on
the one side from absolute contemning the Deity by profaness, on the other side
profaness and presumption hindered it from precipitating men into that furious
despair which would have overthrown all, and caused more horrible agitations
in the mind of man, then ever the most outrageous Bacchides were sensible of.
So that by the mixture, vicissitude and variation of these diverse humors has
Religion been maintained in the World. But it is easy to judge how sincere
that devotion was, which was bred of Fear (a passion that is naturally
terminated in hatred) Self-presumption, and Misapprehension of the justice of
God. Whereas the certain knowledge of the remission of Sins, of which the
especial revelation from Heaven can only give us assured hope, is a
marveillous powerful attractive to piety, out of gratitude toward so
inestimable a goodness.

But if the Ancients, both Poets and Philosophers were so much at a loss
concerning the preceding particulars, that they extremely needed some other
light then that of nature, to direct them to a firm knowledge of them, they
have been much more uncertain in the point of the Resurrection of the dead; of
which they have been so far from determining any thing, that scarce so much as
a slight shadow of it has been discerned by some few in so many Ages. The
Stoics, indeed, were of opinion that there would come a day that should turn
the Universe into flames, which should be incontinently followed with a
restoration of all things into their ancient estate. And others thought, that
after a certain revolution of time, the Stars being returned precisely to the
point in which they were when all things began to be, all should be renewed,
every thing returning again in its order, time, and nature. And one Theopompus,
according to the relation of Diog. Laertius, affirmed that by the doctrine of
the Magi, who were Philosophers amongst the Caldeans, all men must revive again
one day, and become immortal. That Passage of Phocylides, an ancient Poet and
Philosopher is singularly excellent; (...).
(...)
(...).
Non honestum est hominis compagem resolvere;
Et mox e terra speramus in lucem prodituras
Reliquias defunctorum; postea vero dii erunt.
And I deny not but this is sufficient to show those that accuse the Christian
Religion of teaching absurd and impossible things, that those famous persons
amongst the Pagans would not have accounted them such, if they had understood
them; since having only a dubious and obscure tradition of this transmitted
from the hands of their ancestors, yet they published and maintained it with
some confidence. For if they attribute that power to the Stars, how would they
have impaired the credit of Religion which refers the Resurrection to the power
of him that made the Stars themselves? But notwithstanding, these glimpses of
light have been so rare, and so suddenly disappeared, that scarce any perceived
them, not even they from whose mind and hand they proceeded; for I do not
conceive Phocylides distinctly understood himself. Besides that there was a
great deal of extravagancy in their opinion. For did Seneca think that after
that great combustion he should come again into the world and write anew to his
friend Lucilius, and once more be under the Tyranny of that monster Nero? Or
Lucan, that C^sar and Pompey should act over their wars again, and himself
compose the Pharsalia again in verse? After which first there must also be
another burning of the world, and another Palingenesie or renovation of things.
And so to all eternity, the world should after certain revolutions be consumed
by fire, and like the Phaenix arise again out of its own ashes. But if this
must be done perpetually for the future, I see not why it should not have been
done from all eternity hertofore; so that there have been already infinite
worlds, and infinite more are yet to come: which beside the contradictions that
a knowing Philosopher finds in so many infinite things existing actually and so
successively some after others, is strangely extravagant and absurd to be
conceived. Moreover, what piety is that which this opinion begat in the minds
of them that held it, that thought it thus determined by an inevitable
necessity of Destiny? For according to them God shall have no hand in the
matter; but the same destiny that shall carry all things to their period when
they are consumed by that universal conflagration, shall likewise give new
being to all things. Now there is no obligation to return thanks to God nor to
acknowledge his goodness for being restored into being by the might of destiny,
over which God has no power. Nevertheless men are so wedded to their own
opinions (howsoever extravagant) that there being Stoics at Athens at the time
of Saint Paul's preaching there (for as for the Epicureans, it was no wonder if
they called him a Babbler) and the Stoics being a Sect to whom the doctrine of
the resurrection and universal judgment ought to be agreeable, as bringing
much light to their own Tenets, yet there were few or none that received it.
Some (says the Historian) derided it and others desired more satisfactory
information of the thing. And yet of how great importance is it to true piety
to be fully assured of this truth? For otherwise how shall the goodness of God,
which we have abundantly shown is the liberal rewarder of Virtue, render to the
body the free recompense of the service it has done the Soul in the practice
thereof, and of the obedience which its natural appetites have yielded to
reason, unless it be raised again from the dust? Certainly, as we said above,
man is not only the Soul, he is the body also; both which contribute
respectively to Virtue, of which man is capable. Wherefore they ought both to
be interested in the reward. And that justice, which is the avenger of sin, and
without which the Providence of God would be too narrow and defective, how will
that acquit its charge unless it equally punish the body with the soul? Seeing
they are usually the affections of the body that debauch the mind, and it is the
pleasure of the senses that prevents and misguids our reason. But the
punishment would not be equally proportioned and distributed to the Soul and
Body, if the soul were miserable to eternity, and the body wholly exempted from
it to exist no more. And the condition of the body would be happy in comparison
of that of the mind, although the defect of both were equal. Moreover the
penalty increasing proportionably to the dignity of him against whom the
offense is committed (for an outrage done to an inferior person is punished
otherwise then that which is committed against a Soverain Magistrate) the
justice of God being an infinite power, an immense and unlimited dignity and
authority, how could the punishment of the body, by being no more, be
proportional to the justice of God? Or if the justice of God can be satisfied
for the offense committed against it, with the extinguishment of the body
without revival to perpetuity, why is not the soul also extinguished with the
body without remaining exposed to a continual and perpetual punishment?
Certainly it must either be that the body suffers with the soul eternally for
satisfaction of the justice of God sutably to his infinite dignity, or the soul
must be extinguished together with the body. But neither the justice of the
God, nor the nature of the soul suffers the same to perish or be abolished, and
therefore the body must be raised from death to partake of the same
compensation with it. Moreover of how great importance is it for consolation of
our minds against the fear of death? For death being naturally terrible to all
men, and the separation of the soul from the body full of bitterness and
anguish, what more effectual comfort can be received, then to expect after a
peaceable repose in the grave to be raised by the hand of God from it, not to
restore us the enjoyment of this life, that so we might dye over again, but to
live an eternal life in unexpressible contentment? Besides, what sweeter
consolation in the loss of our friends, which is oftentimes more grievous to us
then death it self, then the hope that they and we shall one day arise from the
earth to dwell together in celestial glory? Certainly, he that represents to
himself what joy friends receive here, upon an unexpected meeting after diverse
years absence, may in a manner conjecture with what gladness we shall resent
the day of that happy resurrection. Whence I conceive that, excepting the
assurance of pardon of sins, which delivers the soul it self from the
apprehensions of death eternal, there is nothing so capable of inflaming the
mind of man with love toward God, as the hope of resurrection. For next to
deliverance from the death of the soul, which consists in the sense of a
remorse and eternal distress, what can be more sweet then the deliverance from
the death of the body, which is to have no more sense, nor motion, nor life,
nor being? And from the doctrine of the Resurrection (however profane men
gainsay it) results an admiration of the Wisdom of God, in reuniting things
which nature had so straightly conjoined together. For since death (as we have
shown) is not a natural thing but an accident superven'd contrary to the
purpose of nature, and the design of the first formation of man, who in regard
of the excellence of his soul ought to be an immortal creature, though in
reference to his body he was composed of the matter of the Elements; what is
there more suitable to Divine Wisdom, then to reunite without injury either to
his justice or his goodness, what death had separated by a kind of violence?
For, to repeat those words of of Phocylides, it is not meet to dissolve the
fair harmony of man. And lastly, though the power of God may be well understood
other ways, yet herein is one of the greatest and most admirable testimonies of
it; to wit, that from the earth, and the Sea, and the entrals of birds and
beasts shall be required the bodies of men; and that their ashes which are
dispersed and confused amongst the Elements, shall be recovered and recollected
with so much art that every one shall resume his own body without confusion or
mixture. Whence is it therefore, that this doctrine gives offense and scandal
to some? Is it repugnant to the Wisdom of God? We have proved it agreeable
thereunto. And it would argue defect of wisdom in God, if he knew not to
distinguish in this confusion of the Elements the places from whence to retake
one day the relics of our members. Is it impossible to his power? Surely no,
if we account the same infinite; and it is verily infinite, if it be divine. To
conclude, does it encounter reason? There is none of us but would naturally
desire the resurrection of his body, if he esteemed it a thing possible.
Wherefore seeing God reveals to us both that he will and can do it, what is to
be doubted more, but that reason consents in this desire with nature.

CHAP. VIII. What understanding can be had of true Virtue without a particular
Revelation,
HItherto we have shown that in the things which relate directly to God and his
service, and the motives of true and sincere piety, men have either been
without a particular revelation, or absolutely blind, or so unresolved and
wavering in what they knew thereof, that they could not from thence render any
true devotion to God, nor receive any solid consolation to themselves. Our next
task should be to show that they likewise needed a particular revelation for
the knowledge of true Virtue, which ought to be followed amongst men: but my
design will not permit me to deduce that point at length; only I am to desire
the Reader to take notice of two things. Indeed I will not question but that
they have had far more knowledge of true virtue by the light of nature alone,
then they had of the requisites and concernments of true piety. The excellent
instructions of Philosophers, commendable Laws of Republics, virtuous deeds of
great personages, and the universal consent of all Nations any thing civilis'd,
show by the account they made of Virtue and its excellence, that they were
clearer sighted therein then in other particulars. Yea there have been found
men amongst them, who being considered only on the outside and by their
actions of valor, justice, honesty, moderation, reverence toward parents and
love to their country, might seem in a manner worthy to be paralleled with
those that have been illuminated by a clearer light of truth; I mean
comparatively, as to things of that nature. And the reason of this is not
difficult to be rendered. For besides that the knowledge of the duties of men
one toward another is somewhat more proportionate to their understanding, then
of those which regard the Deity (whence it is, that Cicero is much more certain
and positive in the description of our mutual obligations in his Books de
Officiis, then he is in the doctrine of the Nature of the Gods) there has been
herein an influence of the divine Providence. For God having purposed that the
world should subsist till a certain time which he has prefixed to exercise
judgment, and that amongst all sorts of Nations the seed of them should be
preserved whom he would elect for his people, for which cause he yet maintains
the earth in its secundity; has presided in an especial manner over the minds
of Legislators and Philosophers, to guide them to teach things suitable for the
conservation of humane society, and over the minds of the people in general to
cause them to comprehend and conform to the same. For if men had been as
ignorant of right and honesty, as of God and what directly relates to him,
instead of assemblies of men, Cities and Commonwealths, there would not have
been seen in the world but troops of savage beasts and great parties of
robbers; whence all had been reduced into an horrible chaos. Nevertheless as
well in this as in other things the particular revelation of the will of God,
would have been not only profitable for the better civilizing of them, but
also of absolute necessity in order to giving them a saving knowledge of him.

For in the first place, since God is the author and Lord of all the world, and
its sovereign Legislator and governor, was not man made to glorify him and to
direct all his actions and cogitations to that end? And as his supreme good
lies in his communion and conjunction with God, ought not also his glory be his
highest aim? And notwithstanding, where is there any amongst the Pagans, even
of those who were the greatest admirers of Virtue, that proposed as the end of
his actions the glory of the Creator of the World? that so much as thought that
was the end to which they ought to tend? Some have aimed at their own glory,
and to gain a reputation among their fellow-Citizens, and to draw them to
admire their Virtues, in stead of ascribing them to God. Others have made
Virtute subservient to avarice and pleasure (as Epicurus) and believed her
lovely only in that regard. And others, though extreme few, held virtue in
esteem indeed because of its natural dignity; but virtue being as it were the
image and resplendency of God, it was not half reflected by being esteemed,
since it was not thereby referred to the honor of its model, and the source
from whence it was derived into the world. Further, what miserable valuers were
they of its dignity? The greatest part condemned only Vices that appear in
exterior actions: as if virtue ought not to be as well the rule of purposes and
intentions, as of the works of the hand or corporeal deportment; or as if
external actions were not good or had only so far as they represent the
internal disposition of the heart, and take their tincture from it. But if some
have not only regulated the actions of men by virtue, but also their wills and
counsels; yet all have generally erred in this point, that they have not
retrenched the corruption of vice near enough to the quick, but have excused
the first motions that swerve from reason, as not being in our own power; and
could not understand that there ought to be in man such a harmony of all his
faculties amongst themselves, that not the least rebellion might arise in his
appetites against right reason. Of which too if some have spoken; it has been
one of a thousand, and as it were by chance. Besides, how shameful are the
enormities which the greatest personages amongst them have committed in that
which nature teaches most clearly? What was in Plato's mind to introduce a
community of women into his Republic? who can but blush at the reading what
Plutark has written concerning love? yea who is not rather astonished then
ashamed at it? What were the Lupercalia of the Romans, and the Bacchanalia of
the Greeks? How laudable was the custom amongst both those people of lending
forth their Wives, if not received and practiced commonly, yet at least not
condemned, but authorized by the example of Cato himself? Was it not needful
therefore for God to reveal himself from heaven, for the reducing marriage to
its primitive honesty, and teaching men by his own voice what they could not
learn from nature, how loud soever she speaks therein. And I do not now mean
the vulgar people, whose virtue was very scarce, and only a little in show,
but the most eminent, and who by the opinion of their virtue drew the eyes and
admiration of others.

It is not impertinent here to insist upon what we touched briefly and
transiently above, to wit, that they knew not what true patience was. For it
consists not, as they conceived, in the not feeling of evil, no more then a
stock or stone, nor in the yielding to necessity because it were to no purpose
to resist it; but it consists in a most humble acquiescence in the will of God,
who disposes of all by his Providence; and in bearing such a reverence to his
Majesty, as not only not to murmur against him because it would not profit any
thing to do so, but not to be at all impatient, because it is not fitting or
lawful. The Creature being bound to obey his Creator even to that point, that
if God should purpose to acquire glory to himself from undeserved afflictions
laid upon it (though he never does so) yet the creature ought not to repine,
but rather venerate his wisdom, so as not to inquire why he does it, and to
have such an humble sense of it self in comparison of his Majesty, that God
might without doing any wrong, even make use of its ruin for the illustration
of his glory. For who does not find this true upon a due perpension? who
comparing the nothingness (as I may so speak) of man with the infinite Majesty
of God, can think we ought to complain of him in case it should please him to
treat us so? Us, I say, who use so absolute a right over other animals, who
have neither made nor supported them, and have none but a borrowed authority to
do it. Although there is this proportion between them and us, that we are
equally creatures; whereas between God and us there is no commensurability in
any thing whatsoever. Even Kings and Monarks claim such a right over their
subjects, and very many generous Nations concede the same to them without
reservation.

But besides all this there are two most excellent virtues taught by divine
revelation, which the Pagans were so far from ever reckoning such that they
accounted the vices contrary to them for laudable virtues. The first is
Humility, of whose recommendation there is no footstep nor shadow to be found
in their writings. For it has been as an epidemical disease of their minds, to
consider themselves in their own plumes and to esteem not less gloriously of
them and of our nature then if we were as little Gods upon earth; in which
respect they sometimes dared (as we have seen) to compare, yea to prefer
themselves before the Gods themselves. Whereunto the ignorance of the true God
has contributed more then can be imagined, and likewise the fictions of the
Poets concerning all those Romantic Divinities which were adored by the
vulgar. And in truth I see not why any honest woman ought not prefer her self
before Venus, according as she is described to us; since Immortality by which
alone she surpassed humane condition, gave her no other advantage saving to
practice her infamous dulteries to eternity: as Aristides and Phocion had
grounds to prise themselves much above a theevish Mercury, or a cruel and
bloody Mars, whose Deity had no other excellence but to be a shelter of
impunity from their crimes. It was fit therefore to make men know in the first
place, that though they should have continued in the state of perfection in
which they were placed at their first creation, yet in comparison of God they
are but inconsiderable worms upon the earth. Next, that they are fallen so far
below themselves, that there is no proportion between them and their first
being; and so to teach them to despise themselves in comparison of God, yea to
think low of themselves in comparison of themselves; and, which is an
infallible sequel of the little esteem we make of our selves, not to contemn
any person whatsoever; but to prevent and go beyond all the world in respect,
and to reverence all such in whom God has put any mark of his eminence,
whether in rare qualities of the mind, or in authority and power.

The other Virtue consists in the obedience which we render to Kings and
Magistrates and all superior Powers. For because the Pagans did not perceive
any particular Providence of God in the establishment of politic or civil
order in the world, but thought that it was an institution either purely
humane, every people having transferred into the hands of one or more of their
fellow-Citizens the administration of their common laws, and the avengement of
their violation; or at most but natural; in as much as those to whom nature had
been more bountiful in respect of understanding or prudence, to conduct others,
undertook the management of Republics as the best experienced pilots take upon
them the steering of the ship; whence they made no scruple where they conceived
the persons entrusted with power abused the same, or that the case were
irregular and preposterous in nature, the less worthy possessing themselves of
the government, to rebel against their authority, and even to lay violent hands
upon those whom they called tyrants, and unjust invaders of the liberty of the
people. And there is scarce any thing found more ordinary among their writings
then Elogiums of Assassins that had slain Tyrants, nothing more honored in the
public places of their Cities then their Statues, nothing that they proclaim
so loud as the defense of their liberty, nor any thing that has been more
advantageously mentioned then the killing of the Tyrants of Thebes, and the
murder of Julius Caesar for the deliverance of the Commonwealth of Rome. But
divine Revelation has carried our knowledges much higher, and corrected the
deficiency of their sentiments who were not guided by its light. It has taught
us first, that there ought to be two kinds of societies in the world; The one
Religious, which respects the service of God; The other only Civil, in
reference to the affairs of this life; and that God has so dispensed things
that he has empowered each with its authority, and established over each its
governors and rulers. So that as the Civil Power has nothing to do to
superintend in the Religious Society, to give laws to the consciences of men;
but ought to submit it self to those which God has established therein: So the
Spiritual Power has no right to partake with the Secular, which is ordained
for the conduct of the world; but ought likewise to be subject thereunto,
without pretending to any prerogative over Kings and Magistrates. Moreover, it
has taught us, that although it be not forbidden to people truly free, that
is, which have no soverain power above them, but have themselves the authority
of their affairs in their hands, to defend their liberty against such as would
oppress it; yet when once they have been subjected, and themselves owned those
that subdued them for their soverains, they are obliged to render faithful
obedience to them. And in reference to the other Society, which concerns
Religion, when once it has gained some reasonable form in a place, and order
is established therein, it is the duty of particular persons to obey willingly
the constitutions which are made therein by those who have the power so to do.
So that neither the one of these Societies may attempt any thing against the
other, because their rights are separate, and their administration distinct;
nor any one whatsoever in either of them disturb the public order by
rebellion, because every man in his station is obliged to own it for superior
to which he owes obedience. And this obligation ought to be esteemed
inviolable, not only in reference to conservation of order thereby in either
of these two Societies, of which every good man should be desirous; but
moreover because they have God for their Author, and therefore they ought to be
honored with reverence, by reason of the authority of him from whom they
derive their Original. So that as piety toward God is as it were the Pillar of
the Religious Society, and Justice of the Civil, so there are only these two
cases in which it is lawful for particular persons to disobey these two Powers:
First, when in the Religious Society something is commanded contrary to piety:
for at such times as the superior abuses his authority directly against God,
and imposes upon the conscience impious, idolatrous and superstitious laws, the
inviolable commandments of God ought without contradiction to overweigh the
decrees of men. Secondly, when Magistrates ordain something contrary to Justice
and Virtue; for in such cases using their authority directly contrary to the
end for which it was given them (to wit, to induce men to things honest and
commendable, and to contain them in the observation of the same) none are bound
to yield obedience to them. Thus in the One the will of God is the rule, and in
the Other that honesty and equity which nature it self teaches. In other
things, wherein piety does not suffer, nor honesty and the natural right of
things is violated, there is nothing so well-pleasing to God as a ready and
willing subjection, though it were even painful and laborious: So far is God
from permitting attempts against the one or the other, of those whom he has
constituted in the government, either to diminish their authority or deprive
them of Life. In effect, though Brutus and his companions thought they had done
an heroic action in the assassinate of C^esar, and Cicero extolled it as
highly as if it had been commanded by some Oracle of God himself; yet it is
certain that it was an evil and culpable attempt, with which their memories
will for ever be stained. I shall not here speak of the ingratitude of which
they that executed it may be justly impeached, there being none of them but had
received some remarkable benefit from Caesar, or had their lives preserved by
him. Nor shall I insist upon the success that came of it, that instead of
freeing the people of Rome, they were the cause that they fell under the hands
of three or four masters more rigorous then Caesar was, and who reigned after a
more absolute and bloody manner. I shall also omit to press what was so
carefully observed by the ancients, that there was not one of the Murderers of
that Prince but perished by a violent death, and some by their own hands, and
with the same sword wherewith they had slain him: although the vengeance of God
be manifest enough therein. I shall only say, that when Caesar was after his
victory created perpetual Dictator, the people themselves all together had no
power in them to take his authority from him; much less had fourteen or fifteen
particular persons any just cause to conspire against his life. For the
perpetual Dictatorship being a Soverain Dignity and independent on any other
but God, the people of Rome had indeed a power to confer the same, by
voluntarily surrendering up their liberty to him; but after they had conferred
it, it was not in their power to revoke or annull it, so long as the person
they had invested with it was living. Wherefore it ought not to be doubted but
that the death of Caesar was a horrible parricide.

Hereunto ought to be conjoined the precept we have not to exercise our own
revenge our selves. For since Revenge, if good and lawful, is an administration
of justice, and not a satiating of our passions; there being none but God that
administers justice in the World, as being the sole governor of it, either
immediately and by himself, or by the intervention of Magistrates (whom he has
appointed guardians of Laws and conservators of humane Society) he that
receives an injury, ought not to do himself reason for it, in as much as
thereby he would indulge and content his own passion, and not execute a just
and lawful vengeance; but it is fit that reparation be done him for it by their
means to whom the care of right and preservation of laws is committed. And if
these fail him, he must attend that God himself do it for him, having a
persuasion that he is the preserver of the rights of all, and that when men
sail in their duty he does not forget to correct their faults.

For a man to attempt satisfaction of his wrong himself, would be to invade the
government of God; and to slight or implead the Magistrates, would be an
express overturning of things established by God himself. To him it belongs to
revenge the injuries of private, and the injustices committed by public
persons. Nevertheless it is evident that if they have little understood the
moderation which ought to be held in point of revenge, and the means of
pursuing satisfaction of an injury; they have been yet more ignorant of that
precept which Wisdom it self gives us (and right reason too, if we would
hearken to it) Of loving our very enemies, and procuring good to those that
offend us. And yet if the excellence of Man's nature consists in resemblance
with God; since God is so good and so patient toward the Wicked, and
notwithstanding their offenses, their crimes and blasphemies, awaits their
amendment with so great indulgence, and invites them thereunto with perpetual
clemency and goodness, how can man ever attain his perfection, if he do not
imitate God in this example? Moreover since the public good is without scruple
to be preferred before that of any single person, and that if there be any good
in the hatred which we bear to our enemies, it lies only in some particular
contentment, which we receive by following the motions of our nature (if the
pleasure of letting loose the bridle to one's passions may be called good,
which ought rather to be restrained by right reason) and since on the contrary
the good of the Commonwealth and humane society receives advancement by the
virtue and prosperity of our enemies; how much more prevalent reason is there
to love then to hate them, that is, to desire that they may become good and
happy for themselves and ornaments of the Commonwealth in general, rather then
to wish their shame and calamity for the gratifying a particular passion?
Lastly, since Hatred is a desire of seeing evil befall the person we hate, and
no man ought to undergo evil but he that deserves the same by his wickedness;
how can we be virtuous our selves, if we desire that others should become
vicious; seeing a good man should wish that if possible all the world might
become like himself, and virtue is a good that naturally desires to be
communicated and expanded? Or how can we desire that they were virtuous and yet
calamitous together? Nevertheless the Philosophers have scarce seen so much as
a shadow of this doctrine? Wherefore we conclude in brief, that even in the
knowledge of true virtue as well as in what concerns the nature of God and his
legitimate service, humane reason is so defective, that without the aid of a
supernatural light, it can neither constitute nor practice any thing
consideable and of worth.

CHAP. IX. What the principal tokens and evidences are by which this particular
Revelation may be known and distinguished.
BUt admitting (will some say) That the reasons above alleged induce to
confess that a particular and celestial revelation is either highly important,
or absolutely necessary; yet where shall we find it? For all sorts of Nations
have boasted of the same; and the mind of man is so uncertain in its judgments,
that in this variety and confusion of voices, wherewith every one pretends to
it, it is difficult if not impossible to be resolved. We are sufficiently
sensible of our need, but we are at a loss in finding wherewith to satisfy it;
and in case we should have found it, yet we can scarce be assured that that
were the true remedy of our evil. For as some person may swallow poison while
he conceives he uses a good medicament, so another when he uses a safe remedy,
may yet think that he takes some noxious poison. To this difficulty we must
give an answer before we pass further to the examination of their opinion, who
acknowledging an especial declaration of the will of God in reference to his
service, do nevertheless esteem the external professions of all Religions
indifferent.

It is most certain that if it were so, that some person had the true
revelation of the will of God in all these things and in the declaration of all
these truths, and yet did not believe that it was proceeded from God, it would
be in no wise profitable unto him. No, not if he were but in suspense
concerning it. For it is not with this as it is with drugs. A good medicine may
be given to a man of distempered fancy, which will not fail to do him good,
though he believe it an envenomed potion. Because the Physic needs not the
intervention of opinion or understanding to produce its effect, but directly
acts upon the humors of the body and the parts affected. But here the medicine
is taken and digested only in the mind, and works not but by the mediation of
belief, and that a certain, clear, and settled one, which excites the passions
and affections; for this is the property of all persuasions that are impressed
of a thing that must be reduced to practice, such as the doctrine of piety and
virtue is. But if on the other side, we receive and embrace with a firm belief
that doctrine of truth revealed from Heaven, it is absolutely impossible for it
not to display its power, and make us feel its efficacy. So that all the
difficulty lies in being persuaded, and finding certain tokens or evidences
which may make it be indubitably owned. All Nations indeed boast of having it;
neither ought it seem strange that they do so. For though the Understanding be
to the soul as the Eye is to the Body; yet there is this difference in the
resemblance, that when a man is born blind, though by the many slips and
stumbles that befall him at every step, he observes well that there is
something necessary for his guidance wanting to him, yet cannot one impose so
far upon him, how desirous so ever he be of sight, as to make him believe that
he does really see: His own sentiment and experience invalidating the credit of
those that should go about to abuse him with such an imagination. And if there
wasever found a blind person that imagined that he saw, he had not only
darkness in the eyes of his body, but also distemper and disorder in his mind.
In the understanding the case is not the same; Because it is not become
extinguished by sin in us, but we discourse and reason upon the appearances of
things, and endeavor to discern the true from the false; and there being many
things absolutely false, which are partly colored with false shows, and partly
find a faculty in us easily to be deceived; hence, I say, it happens to us,
that receiving the false for the true, we nevertheless imagine we have embraced
the pure verity it self. And there are principally two things which here render
us liable to imposture: The first is, that not being able of our selves to
invent or discover the truth in the point of the knowledge of God and of his
service, and having not in our corrupted and obscured minds any certain rules
to examine what is proposed to us concerning the same, all that seems to
surpass our capacity, and has any thing of strange and extraordinary, if it be
presented to us as divine, is readily admitted, and our ignorance conciliates
authority and reverence to it; as Lucretius says, Omnia enim stolidi magis
admirantur amantque
Inversis quia sub verbis latitantia cernunt.


As a man that should have never seen true Diamonds, but only heard some body
perhaps as ignorant in Jewels as himself, speak of them, might be easily gulled
by the first counterfeits that were presented to him, and would take that to be
brought from the bottom of the Indian Seas which was but gathered from the
rocks of his own country. The second thing is the sense of our necessity, which
causes that as famished people eat and make good cheer with Garlic and Husks,
so men receive all sorts of Religions as divine, by reason of the sense that
the conscience has of its natural want, though they scarce ought to be counted
amongst Sciences purely humane. Which though it be so, yet the truth of God is
but one, uniform, and like to it self, and is not found but in one certain
place. For would God who is one and immutable, reveal the manner of serving him
in one place, after one fashion, and after another in another? It is not in
this case, as it is with Princes who have diverse Kingdoms, whereby it is
perhaps necessary for them to comply with the customs of Nations, their laws
and languages, because it would be incommodious and difficult to rank them
under the same constitutions, every people having their peculiar inclinations,
and every climat its manners of acting, which is impossible to be altered
without danger of involving all in great disorder. And though the general
maxims of Policy, and the foundations it has in the natural justice and
honesty of things be ever immutable and uniform, yet this does not hinder but
that several Commonwealths may be constituted after different forms, and the
particular laws upon which they are founded be accommodated and varied
sometimes in one case and sometimes in another according to the diversity of
circumstances. But the nature of God being always like to it self in all Ages,
and the nature of man always one in all Nations, there must be always one and
the same service to God, and to men one and the same rule of piety and virtue.
If there be a difference found therein at any time, it is (as we shall see God
willing in due place) in things which are not essential to Religion, but in
some external show of things of a midde quality and indifferent in themselves.
So that either God has declared this his will but to one Nation alone, or if
he has declared it to more, it has been by an equal and uniform revelation.
And whereas Religions are extremely confused, this must have some tokens to
distinguish it from all others, whereby it may be infallibly known: which are
now the business of our enquiry.

Without question the best knowledge that can be had of the nature of a
medicament is from the good, ready and certain relief received by it in a
disease; After which experience there is no need of searching further into its
qualities, unless to gather occasions of admiring it more. In like manner, the
best knowledge that can be had of the revelation of heavenly truth in this
point, is by proof of the comfort that it affords to the souls of men, and by
its efficacy of cleansing them from the corruption of sin; of which if we do
not complain, we are more then stupid and insensible. But on the one side they
that know the truth by this evidence, scarce require any other; and on the
other side we have now to do with them that cannot know this truth by the
experience of its virtue, till they have first had some taste of it by an other
way. Wherefore it is necessary for us to speak of it in another sort, and to
show briefly, that provided a man brings the like docility to attain it that he
does to the study of humane Sciences, that is to say, a mind clear of all
prejudice, affected to truth, and free from importunate and contentious
quarrelling, the search is not laborious, nor the attainment difficult; so far
are the pains employed therein likely to be unprofitable.

Indeed, I conceive, there is none will deny but that if there be a Religion in
which all the truths we have above considered, are found, either wholly
revealed, or illustrated sufficiently to determine the irresolution of the mind
of man, and to fix his agitations, by contenting the insatiable desire of
knowledge which is in us, that this Religion is divine. For since there never
was not only any Nation, but not so much as one single person in any Nation
that comprehended all these truths together; What God is in his own nature, How
he has created the World, In what manner he governs it, What is the cause and
origin of Death, Whence all the disorder we behold in man and in the world
came to pass, where we are to seek the knowledge of the means to obtain
remission of our sins, What hope there is of the Resurrection of the body, yea
What certainty there is of the doctrine of the immortality of our souls; nor
any of them solidly and distinctly: does it not follow that the doctrine which
has so cleared up all these truths, that for the future there remains nothing
to be doubted concerning them, or known, for the satisfaction of our minds
therewith, must necessarily proceed from some other then the mind of man? For
there is no more to be expected after trial of the utmost power of our
understanding in the discovery of these points. New Countries have in our times
been found in the East and West Indies, which were unknown to the Ancients. But
the Sea and the Wind carried the discoverers thither; there needed but a little
more daring, to sail forth from the coasts of one's country into the main Sea,
and a something exacter observation of the Needle and the Stars to direct the
course: and the arrival upon, and beholding of those regions was an indubitable
manifestation of their existence. But should the World be turned about from
East to West, and from North to South, there would be seen but one and the same
Sun and the same Heavens, Lands, Seas, Rivers and Men, and the same order in
the nature of things, which the Philosophers contemplated in Greece and Italy,
the Druyds in Gallia, the Brachmans and Gymnosophists in India, the Magi and
Astrologers in Chaldea, and Priests and mysterious divines in Egypt. The very
Scythians had their Sages who addicted themselves to the search of things
humane and divine. Therefore there must either spring up an other new kind of
men, or it must not be hoped that any should see clear in this wherein all
others have been blind. Now if this revelation be not proceeded from the mind
of man, it must be come from God; no other could have given it us. For Demons
cannot here reasonably be brought into the Scene. If they be, I demand whether
they were good or bad. If good, they did it by the instinct and command of God;
and so we have what we drive at. If bad, how could they which are the authors
and lovers of lying teach us truths which oppose and condemn them, and ruin
the dominion which they bear over the minds of men by means of ignorance? And
since all such truth tends to the glory of God, and the welfare of mankind,
these especially, how could wicked Demons be induced to communicate the
knowledge of them to men, being equally enemies to Heaven and Earth? And in as
much as every Religion professes either to teach things or to contain mysteries
surpassing the apprehension of humane understanding (for there never was any
but pretended to deep secrets not to be sounded by the Reason of man, that so
it might be more venerable) if there be sound one in which there are certain
doctrines raised above our reach, so interwoven with truths which we
comprehend, and whereof it has given us an absolute certainty, that they
illustrate and confirm one another; so that what we understand assures us of
the truth of that which we do not fully comprehend, and what we do not
perfectly comprehend connects truths together already understood, as a
necessary cement to hinder the dissipation of the whole work: who can doubt but
that it is God that connected those truths together by an indissoluble
concatenation? For without doubt they are truths, though we do not comprehend
them; seeing they support others, of whose evidence reason is convinced, which
would otherwise be ungrounded and infirm; their verity, I say, appears from
this consideration; and it must needs be some other then the mind of man that
has employed them to this purpose, since that is not capable to comprehend
their nature.

Furthermore, whereas it was well said by One, That things of greatest
antiquity are best, and the Philosophers themselves, when they treat concerning
God and Religion, extremely cry up Antiquity, and attribute much to the
dictates of their Ancestors; as if nature it self had suggested to them, that
there was a source of all these things, from which they that were nearest it
drew the purest and sincerest waters, whereas accordingly as they are derived
through several minds as so many several conduit-pipes, they become corrupted
and tincted with extraneous qualities and contract impurity; If there be found
a doctrine that has all the marks of Antiquity, and there appears nothing in
the world that equals it, it ought not to be doubted but that the same is
proceeded from him that is more ancient then all, as being author of all
things. If the language in which it was revealed be as the mother and stock
from which others, though very ancient, are sprung; if it describes the history
of the world and of men, and their propagation upon the earth; if it affords
the demonstration of times, and that without it the knowledge of Chronology
would be more intricate then a Labyrinth; if it deduces its history from point
to point with an exact correspondence, if it clearly and certainly relates
histories that are as the body of the fabulous shadows that we see in the
writings of the most ancient authors in the World, who will doubt but all which
they have is taken from thence, and that we ought to refer what is therein
depraved and corrupted thereunto as to its principle, and have recourse thither
to learn what we are ignorant of?

Moreover, as the minds of men are so various, that we scarce see a son follow
the design of his fathers building, when the foundations of it are laid, and
the walls already erected; much less do they willingly conform throughout to
their predecessors in Sciences and disciplines, every one being ambitious of
the glory of having augmented, corrected or invented some thing (which
occasioned so many sects of Philosophers and Lawyers) If there be found a
Religion, all whose parts accord together with an excellent harmony (although
it has been propounded at several times and by several persons in several
places) and are so far from difformity, that they consist and unite together
with a perfect proportion, though several workmen have labored therein; can it
be denied but that it was one and the same Architect that always presided over
the work, seeing it is managed with so equal and uniform a conduct? Whereas
even the Palaces of Kings are composed of parts oftimes so disagreeing that
they dispaparage the edifice, according as successors have had different
fancies from their ancestors: yea even such as have been built by one alone,
always represent something in their contrivance which argues the inconstance
and imbecility of man. But especially if there be found a Doctrine, whose
revelations or supernatural truths having been very little and obscure at the
beginning, so that it was impossible for the mind of man to explain them, have
yet many hundred years after been multiplied in so suitable a manner, that it is
dubious which to admire most, either the consentaneousness between the
principles and their sequels, or the faculty that was requisite to deduce the
same from them and to unfold them after a manner perfectly admirable; There is
no question but he was the same that cast the seed into the earth and made it
grow, that first presented those invelop'd sparkles of light and afterward
illustrated and unveiled them. Moreover, inasmuch as God is the author of all
things, his glory ought to be their natural end; but as none of the most
knowing Philosophers ever proposed the same to himself, or indevour'd to show
the tendency of things thereunto, yea on the contrary the most part speak nor
of God, or if they do it is with some notorious disadvantage to his glory; If
there be a Doctrine that aims wholly and all whose parts conspire unanimously
thereunto, must it not be said that God intended the same as a means to redress
the distraction and wandering of humane minds, and to reduce them into the
right way? For how could it be that men should so prodigiously neglect the
glory of God, unless they were estrayed from their end, since they were made
for it? And how were they able, when once lost in a strange Country, so well to
recover the direct path again of themselves? Every Religion ought to contain
the testimonies of Gods good will to mankind, and the duties of men toward
him. If therefore, there be a discipline, a doctrine, a book, a society in
which God himself speaks to men in a style and manner agreeable to the eminence
of his Majesty, displays his justice to them most terrible in its appearance,
discovers his power in its highest magnificence, and gives them to sound the
breadth and length, depth and height of his infinite mercies, after a manner
which cannot but ravish the thought of man with admiration, who can imagine
that ever any man durst speak so? And lastly if examples of an incomparable
virtue be found therein, with incitations and instructions to piety, such as
are not to be paralleled any other where in the world, it is an indubitable
argument that they are proceeded from some other then the humane mind or the
School of man.

It is natural to men to aspire after a supreme good; it is inseparably rooted
and fixed in our minds. Yet never any man attained it, or could so much as
certainly tell wherein it consists: and it is lamentable to observe how
different, inconstant and incongruous the opinions of Philosophers have been in
a matter of so great importance. Therefore if there be any Doctrine that
discovers the variety and solly of those that so grossly deceived themselves
about it, and which brings to light and exposes to the eyes of all the earth a
Beatitude that comprehends all the excellencies the Philosophers were able to
express in this point, and infinitely more, who can doubt but that it was God
himself that has lighted this torch to dissipate all the darknesses of our
minds? Lastly, Man being fallen from so high a degree of perfection into so
great a corruption, of which Heaven and Earth and his own conscience bears him
witness, and there being by that means so large an abyss between God and him,
a war so irreconcilable between his justice and our offenses; If there be a
Doctrine that teaches an expedient to fill up this gulf, and, as I may so
speak, to build a bridge over it, to renew the commerce and correspondence
between God and us, procuring satisfaction to his justice, and raising us up
from our ruins, is it not necessarily consequent that it was God himself that
revealed it? For what edifice ever erected it self when it was fallen, and
emerg'd anew out of its rubbidge? To him that is fallen from the favor of God
into his indignation, who can show the hope and means of his reconciliation but
God himself? And I shall not fear confidently to assert that such a Religion
ought besides the preceding evidences be authorized from Heaven, maintained
against its enemies, and be effectual to be persuaded after an extraordinary
manner. Wherefore if there be one to which God has born witness by great and
signal miracles, which surpass both the power of humane nature and the
illusions of Magic, and even the faculties of any malignant spirit and the
highest intelligences, seeing they could not be performed but by the power of
God, and that it professes to be proceeded from him, who can be so bold as to
gainsay it? For without dispute God could never have afforded his power to the
confirmation of a lie, or revealed himself from Heaven expressly in such
miraculous works to favor an imposture, that pretends to his name with a false
title. Moreover, if being conversant in the world as a stranger, contradicted
by all Nations, ardently persecuted by malignant spirits, and by such as they
had seduced by their illusions, and drawn to their service, it has been as it
were visibly defended by dreadful judgments discharged both upon the persons
and Nations that opposed it, by pestilence and mortalities, by famines and
wars, by subversions of Cities and dissipations of Kingdoms; it must needs be
particularly loved by the Deity, since he so terribly revenges the injuries
that are done to it. Lastly, being wholly designed for reclaiming men off from
Idolatry and superstition to the service of the true God, and conforming their
irregular appetities to reason; a thing impossible to be done, because men
naturally love Idols as debauched men do courtisans, and are yet addicted to
their own concupiscences as much or more then they are to idols: nevertheless
if it has surmounted all resistance, overcome the most obstinate hearts, and
triumphed gloriously over the humane understanding, leading their thoughts as
prisoners by the force and clearness of its truth, so that it has subjugated
even the greatest Empires, and all other Religions, doctrines, and sects have
fallen and been scattered before it; Who can doubt for the future but that it
is a divine truth and accompanied with divine assistance? Especially since for
the propagating of it into all quarters of the world there was employed neither
arms nor factions and conspiracies, nor the favor of great men, nor commotions
of people nor the subtlety of Philosophers, nor the eloquence of Orators, nor
any thing else that bears a splendour and luster in the eyes of men, but only
the naked proposal of a simple truth, and a firm and invincible resolution to
endure all things for it. Certainly, where the means which men ordinarily serve
themselves of are rejected, and such as are contrary to them used, the design
cannot but be some other then humane. And if it prosper in spite of the
world's and men's opposition it must needs be through a divine and celestial
virtue. Now we shall see (by the help of God's grace) in the sequel that there
is a Religion in the world to which all these tokens or evidences do suit and
agree, and that they cannot be found but in that alone: and this in order to
evince (as my first purpose obliges me) that they who acknowledge a particular
or special revelation from Heaven in matter of Religion ought not to account
all kinds indifferent as to external profession: which must be the subject of
the third part of my Work.

The end of the Second Part.
A TREATISE Concerning RELIGIONS, Against those who esteem all Indifferent. The
third Part.
CHAP. I. That such as acknowledge a Particular Revelation cannot allow
indifference in Profession of Religion.
HAving shown by manifest and necessary reasons that in order to performing a
service agreeable to God, and beneficial to the salvation of men, there needs
an other light then that of Nature, and that they ought to be enlightened by a
special revelation; and having declared the most evident tokens by which the
same may be known, it should be our next business to enquire where they are
found, in as much as Religion will infallibly be there found also. And this
ought without longer dispute to be sufficient against those, who acknowledging
the necessity of this particular revelation, and likewise confessing that there
is such in the world, do notwithstanding account the external profession of all
Religions indifferent. For where God has revealed his truth, and declared his
will in things that concern him and his service, what humane imaginations are
to be preferred before him, or what excuses can be pleaded for disobedience
unto him? But the obstinacy of men, and the importance of the matter requires
further discussing and illustration.

In man there are three distinct faculties, of which each has its respective
influence in the profession and exercise of Religion: The understanding,
wherewith we apprehend the truth of things: The Will, in which are the motions
of piety and habits of virtue: And the Senses, which are subservient to both.
For it is by the Senses that objects arrive to the Understanding, and by the
Understanding they excite suitable motions in the Will. Upon which account there
must be three sorts of things in Religion that correspond thereunto. First,
such as are propounded as truths to be believed, that so man, who is otherwise
buried in ignorance, may attain a wisdom worthy the excellence of his nature.
For how can Religion subsist without a true understanding of the nature of God
and his Attributes, and other truths dependent thereon, so far at least as
humane understanding is capable of the same? And since the supreme perfection
of man consists in the legitimate practice of the true Religion, how can man be
rendered perfect, if his intellect remain notwithstanding clouded with darkness
and ignorant of the most excellent of all natures, and from which alone all
other things derive their perfection? The second sort of things include such as
are proposed not only to be believed but to be done, and which lie in
practice; as the precepts of piety toward God and charity amongst men, the
duties of which are diffused through all the parts of humane life. Lastly, the
third comprehends all external things, as the actions and ceremonies designed
to give instruction of that which must be believed, and to beget affection
toward that which is to be done, with that regularity according to which the
Religious Society is administered. Now all these particulars ought to have such
an accord among them, that the truths proposed to be believed be of a nature
proper to beget piety and virtue in the minds of men; n as much as there is so
strait an alliance between the Understanding and the Will, that the Will
follows the steerage and government of reason, which is the guide and conductor
of it: Whence that the motions of piety may be sincere, and worthy of the
person in whom they are and to whom they are directed, it is requisite that the
wisdom of the understanding be very pure, and its light very serene and clear.
In like manner it is requ^site that the precepts which contain the duties of
piety and virtue have no repugnance with the truths in knowledge of which
consists the wisdom of the understanding, but as they mutually depend on one
another, so there may be a perf^ct correspondence between them. And lastly, it
is meet that the ceremonies and external government of this society have such a
congruity with all other things of Religion that first they be in nothing
repugnant to the truths in which wisdom consists, and next that they be
peculiarly instrumental to the begetting and exciting of piety and virtue. For
as the internal part of man is much more excellent then his external, and
Religion is destinated to perfectionate his soul; so is it fit that the
exterior and sensible things employed as instruments thereunto be proper to the
end to which they are adressed. And it would be a great absurdity to employ
means to attain to such an end which were not only uncongruous therewith but
opposite and contrary.

These things being thus premised, I demand whether they that believe a
celestial revelation necessary and think there is one in the world, and
nevertheless account the external profession of all Religions indifferent,
place this indifference in the belief of truths proposed to the understanding,
to give credit thereunto more or less as seems good to us; or whether they
place it in the practice of that piety and virtue which is principally seated
in the Will, to perform which of those precepts we please and no more; or
lastly, whether it be in external communion of those ceremonies, and visible
government by which the Religious Society is administered, to dispose of the
same according to our humor, to omit such as are enjoined by this revelation,
and embrace such as are opposite to them when we think sit, retaining in the
mean while both the belief of those truths inviolable and the internal practice
of piety, honesty, and virtue in our deportments amongst men. Certainly, it is
not probable that they account the belief of those truths indifferent which are
offered to the understanding to be believed by a divine revelation. For even in
things not relating to Religion, and in themselves of little importance, the
knowledge of truth is without comparison better then the belief of falsehood.
And I do not conceive there is any person so brutish and unworthy the name of
man, as to think it indifferent what sort of Philosophy to embrace, in case it
were absolutely known in which sect the truth and certain intelligence of
things were to be had. Truth is so beautiful and admirable that she ravishes
the minds of men into her love; and the more purifyed and sublime they are the
more violent is the love they be^r naturally to her. What did not those persons
of old do, whose names are so celebrated in the world, to find her out where
they believed the discovery possible? What transports of joy did they resent
when they happened on any footstep or trace of her? What vows and wishes did they
make to find her? And what an expression was that of Plato, when he protested
that if he could have found a man that knew how to Define aright, he would have
cast himself at his feet to adore him? And neve^theless the business was
perhaps only concerning the knowledge of a Goat or Caterpiller. But if God
himself had declared in which sect of Philosophy the truth were, who would
afterward have esteemed the profession thereof indifferent? And who would have
had so little regard not only to the dignity of truth, but to the authority of
God and to his testimony? If, I say, he had commanded that the Tenets of
Aristotle should be believed rather then those of Plato, as being of more
truth, who would afterward be a Platonist, with an absolute contempt of truth,
whose value is inestimable, and the testimony that God had given it, the weight
whereof is of sovereign authority, and his express commandment whose majesty is
inviolable? Now if this be true, in reference to Philosophy, with which humane
life might easily dispense, how much more does it hold good in Religion, whose
truths revealed from God are so important not only to the present time but to
all eternity? Truths, I say, to which he has rendered such testimonies?
Whereof he has given such express commandment, with terrible threatenings
against incredulity, and abundant and gracious promises to those that embrace
the same with a steadfast belief? But much less will they place their
indifference in the practice of internal piety, which is seated in the
affections of the heart. For as for piety it self, Epicurus durst not question
whether it ought to be exercised toward the Deity, or no; how therefore do
they that acknowledge both a Providence of God in the government of the world,
and a particular revelation of his will in matter of his service, presume to
dispute it, or place it in indifference? And as for the manner of performing
it, if God himself has declared what fiducary recumbence we ought to have on
his goodness, what reverence of his glorious majesty, what dread of his
justice, what gratitude for his benefits, or what ardour and assurance in
calling upon him in necessity, and what obedience to his commandments, who will
be so bold or stupid as to use or oppose humane imaginations against the
declaration that it has pleased him to make thereof. It Is a thing we would not
tolerate in our children or servants, to comment upon or dispute our
commandments even in small matters when we have once signified our intentions;
much less can we endure that they slight the same to follow their own fancies.

It remains therefore that they place this liberty in the communion of
external ceremonies; which yet they have no better grounds for then in the two
preceding particulars. For first, the communion in external ceremonies in
matter of Religion has always been esteemed an open declaration of the consent
that is yielded by the heart to things proposed therein to be believed as
truths, and to be practiced as good and honest. And as naturally, in point of
conscience, the mind refuses to communicate in the ceremonies of a Religion,
whose maxims are contrary to its sentiments, and the precepts which refer to
manners contrary to what he esteems just and honest; so it has ever been a
universal sanction in all societies that have born the name of Religion, not to
admit any to the ceremonies relating to it, but only such as profess to
receive both the precepts and doctrines of the same. What a strange opinion
therefore is this? That it is lawful for a man to abstain from things to which
God has enjoined testimonies to be expressed of the internal consent that is
yielded to the truths revealed by him and to the commandments which he has
given, and contrarily to communicate in such which are the types or sequels of
lies and errors abhorred in the inward sense of the soul? It is the custom,
when the external profession of a Religion, which consists in the practice and
communion of its exercises, is deserted, and a different taken up, to renounce
solemnly such things as were believed before, and to protest engagement into
new beliefs. Dare they say it is lawful for a man to do so against his
conscience? That is to attest both his conscience and God that sees it, that he
condemns that for a Lie which he believes in his heart to be truth, and to
embrace as a truth that which he knows in the sense of his soul to be a Lie? If
they think thus, I do not dispute against them. For I declared from the
beginning that I would take my reasons from the motions of nature and
conscience; which these people have quite extinguished, with all remains of
natural generosity and ingenuity. I refer them to him that will deservedly
revenge perjury, and before whom that plea will do them no service, Juravi
lingua, mentem injuratam gero. But supposing this were not so exactly observed,
yet the participation alone in the ceremonies of a Religion is a declaration of
approving its maxims. Therefore perhaps they account it lawful to allow by
external profession the doctrines which we condemn in our minds, and on the
contrary to condemn by outward behavior that which we tacitly and inwardly
approve. If it be so, sincerity and candor, the qualifications so worthy all
honest persons, are perished from the earth. For if this be lawful in that which
belongs to the truth of God and things that concern him, why is it not as
lawful in the conduct of humane life? It must be lawful to wear the liver of an
enemy to one's King, to lie at every turn, to betray and deceive; and instead
of the countenances of men free and fair in their conversation we shall see
nothing but visards and disguises. Moreover, since the ceremonies of Religion
ought to be of a nature apt to excite piety and virtue in the minds of men, to
which the doctrines and precepts of Religion tend, how can it be lawful to
abstain from partaking in those which God has appointed for that end, to
communicate with such as are remote and averse from it? Is it not to disclaim
the exercise of virtue and piety it self, and to be addicted to vice and
Idolatry or irreligion whereunto the contrary lead? For the ceremonies of a
false Religion as well as of the true correspond with that which is taught for
truth, and conspire to the same end. Those which are conjoined with the truth
revealed by God aim at sincere piety, and the perfection of the mind of man. On
the contrary, those which accompany falsehood, lead to the corruption and
perversion of the soul: And it is like as if a man should purpose to sail from
the South with a Northen Wind, or rid much ground forward by drawing his feet
backward. Furthermore, the communion in ceremonies is a part of service
performed to God in a Religion; for man as composed of body and soul, owes
homage to God with both. But he can render no religious homage with the body
but by participating in some sacred ceremonies. Wherefore if God has not
approved by his command nor any other manner whatsoever, the ceremonies to
which we conform, who has secured us that they will be acceptable devotions
unto him? And if we abstain from such as he has commanded, who gave us this
authority of dispensing with his commandments and to order the rules of his
service at our pleasure both without him and against him? And lastly, since
Religion is a society which ought to be the more strict, sacred, and
inviolable, in as much as it confederates men with God and between themselves,
whereas civil governments are contrived only for the society of men together;
and being the ties that ligue us to God do equally concern the soul and the
body (the soul by the belief of truths and communion of pious and moral
precepts, the body by external ceremonies) whereas civil polities bind men
only in relation to the body and bodily concernments: what reason can there be
thus to separate the things which God has conjoined, and to dissipate that
society which he would have be permanent?

But behold their main reason, with which they think themselves impregnable;
namely, That all external things are neither good nor evil of their own nature;
and therefore being indetermined in themselves as to those respects, it depends
of our intention, and the end to which we design them, to give them, in a
manner, their specifical being: So that they which make them subservient to
Superstition and Idolatry, corrupt them; but such as destinate them to another
end, use them well, and render them good. Now it is the part of the mind to
destinate them to certain ends, and therefore they ought to be judged of by the
thoughts of the heart: As when a thing is equally counterpoised on both sides,
it depends on him that manages it, to incline it either this way or the other,
and to determine the dubious propendency he observes in it. But this is easy
to be refell'd by any that considers well the nature of indifferent things; for
there are some things, in which whether considered in themselves, or as they
have respect to a certain end, there is nothing that can warrant them the title
of good or evil, according to that kind of goodness or badness from whence men
are denominated vicious or virtuous. I demand therefore, Whether in the
revelation which God has made concerning his service, he has commanded or
prohibited any things of this nature? or whether he has mentioned none such?
If he has commanded any, then the usage thereof is not free for the future;
his Law ought to be obeyed, not disputed or dispensed with; nor is the
exception allowable, that the thing of its own nature obliges neither to
performance nor abstinence; for the Commandment of God has changed its nature,
and though it obliges not considered in it self, yet it does so upon account of
his Authority that commanded it: If there be any forbidden, the case is the
same, the doing thereof is no longer indifferent; Indeed the nature of the
thing, setting aside the prohibition, allows us liberty to use it, but that
liberty is annulled by the prohibition: And it is an equal sin not to do the
indifferent things which God has commanded, and to do the indifferent which he
has forbidden; namely, the violation of his Command; Otherwise there would be
left no pre-eminence to God above man, not so much as men claim over one
another. But if God has made no mention of such things in this Declaration of
his will, the exercise thereof is partly free, and partly not; It is free, if
the same be not referred to Religion, but ranked amongst things purely humane:
For then every man's prudence is a Law to him to use them or not; if he does not
trust his own judgment, the prudence of those whose advice he may consult,
ought to serve him for a rule in such a case; For it is the will of God and
Nature, that they which are not able to conduct their lives in a due manner,
should suffer themselves to be directed by others. And hence arose the
Institution of Magistrates, to whom the Government of humane life is committed;
so that where the Magistrate interposes his injunction concerning such things,
his Law ought to be obeyed, as the counsel of a public and superior
Prudence, whom God and Nature have entrusted with the dispensation of such
things with suitable Authority: But the practice of them is no longer
indifferent, when they are referred to Religion, and made a part of the service
of God; because it belongs to God alone to make Laws in reference to his
service, and therefore to place his service in things which he has left as
indifferent, would be to usurp his place, and to invade his Authority. But this
requires a more particular consideration.

Things wherein the service of God consists have a double respect; one, as they
are acceptable to God to whom they are performed, and obtain his favor; the
other, as they oblige the Consciences of men, upon the account of being Divine
and Religious: Wherefore whosoever takes upon him the Authority of enjoining
such things for Religious, and requisite to the service of God, which are in
their own nature free, and lest by God in their indifference, he commits
several high crimes in one single attempt: For he offers to make a thing, not
at all ordained by God, a means to obtain his favor, and to be well-pleasing
to him. Now God is not delighted with things according to the fancy of man, but
according to his own will. In the next place, he arrogates a dominion over the
Conscience, and encroaches upon the Authority of God; for he places himself
between him and that, though between God and the Conscience of man there is no
intermedium, no more then there is between husband and wife; and God
communicates to men the power of disposing that which concerns this life only,
whereby some are bound to yield obedience to others: But as for what relates to
the Conscience, he has reserved the Empire over it wholly to himself. In fine,
he usurps what is proper to none but the Deity, by claiming the right of giving
the Nature and Essence to things, and making them of free and indifferent, as
they were, to become good or bad: For it may be truly affirmed, that it is as
much in the power of men to create things of nothing, as it is to render such
good or evil which were not so before. In the one there is requisite an
infinite power, in the other an infinite authority; and consequently, as it is
not permitted to any to usurp this right, so it is not lawful for any to obey
him that usurps it; that is, to account those things for good by virtue of his
Prescription, which were before indifferent: Because this would be to allow and
favor a tyranny in prejudice of the glory of God; to inthral his Conscience,
which God would have free in this regard; to pretend such things are acceptable
to him, which he has not commanded, and to measure him according to our own
will: In a word, to own for Divine and Religious by humane command such things
as the wisdom of God would have be esteemed purely humane and indifferent.

What then (will some say) is it not lawful for the Religious Society to
establish certain Laws and Ceremonies, which private persons are bound to
observe, when they are constituted by public suffrage of the Society? or if
God has appointed certain persons to be Governors of this Society, as he has
placed the conduct of Justice in the hands of the Magistate, has he not given
them Authority to make Constitutions, concerning things in their own nature
indifferent, which oblige those that are subject to their rule? Yes certainly,
and we have touched above upon the manner how; but it will be here convenient
to explain the same somewhat further. Magistrates in a Civil Society make two
sorts of Laws; in some they expound the very Laws of Nature only, and do not
constitute; as when they forbid Theft, Adultery, Murder, and Blasphemy; for
they are not the Authors of these Laws, they are only the Proclaimers and
Interpreters: So that when we obey them in this case, we do not so much obey
them as Nature it self. Others are such as they judge profitable for
consetvation of that Society, over which they superintend, although they be not
expressly grounded upon the Dictates of Nature; such are the Edicts concerning
Commerce, Tributes, Taxes and Gabels; which when they ordain, they only
advance, and have respect to the public good, and do not pretend the same to
be the Law of God or Nature: Whence when we obey them in this case, we have
regard to them, and not to the nature it self of the things; we do the same out
of consideration of their Authority, and the benefit arising thereby, namely,
the conservation of Society, and not as if these things were of themselves
sufficient to be authentic and inviolable grounds of Laws. In like manner,
they that are entrusted with the Government of the other Society, have the care
of two sorts of Constitutions committed to them. In the first of which, they
only expound the Laws of God, whereof they are not Legislators, but mere
Guardians and Depositaries; and when they promulgate the same, they do not
pretend that they are their own Decrees, but the Ordinances of God himself: So
that when we yield obedience thereunto, it is not properly in respect to them,
but because of the express command of God, and the very essence of the thing.
The second sort is, of those which they esteem profitable only in reference to
order and seemliness, or the conservation of the Society which they govern, and
do not recommend the same but under that title, and not as founded on the
command of God; So that in submitting to them, we have regard to the Authority
which God has given them concerning the ordering these affairs, and to the
benefit arising thereby, as peace and concord, by which the Society is
preserved: And so far ought they to be obeyed, when they attribute nothing more
to themselves. But when in either of these Societies, their Superintendents go
about either to command and forbid, that which God and Nature have forbidden
and commanded, or to change the very nature of things, or to impose their own
Laws as Divine and Natural, we are not only not bound to submit unto, but
commanded to resist them, inasmuch as they set themselves in the place of God,
and instead of preserving the Society, ruin and overthrow it. And from all
this it evidently follows, that it is not lawful in these kind of things, to
have Communion in a Religion which thus tramples on the bounds wherewith God
and Nature have circumscribed it.

Moreover, there are some things, which considered in themselves, are free, and
of a middle nature, which yet are not so, as they are referred to a certain
end, but are determined by the very nature of the thing to which they are
designed. For example, the knowledge of those truths in which consists the
Wisdom of Religion, is without doubt a thing good in it self, and which God
commands by the same Revelation whereby he has declared them: To attain
thereunto, certain means must be employed, and there is no other then to
expound them in common, in the most fitting and convenient manner that may be,
as to be present in some places to hear such as discourse of them, to
communicate thereof with them, in order to be resolved of any difficulties that
arise. Whence, though to resort to a certain place at a time prefixed, be a
thing purely free and indifferent, if considered precisely and separately in it
self, yet in case God had not expressly commanded the same, the commandment of
that which is ordained, as the scope and end, encludes also tacitly and
necessarily that of the means which conduce thereunto. By the same reason
therefore things, which though free in themselves, yet naturally refer to a bad
end, and which is forbidden by God or Nature, ought to be accounted bad: For
which cause, all Ceremonies which are in a false Religion, being destinated to
an end bad of its own nature, and expressly forbidden by God; whosoever esteems
them indifferent, overthrows all the order and natural relation, which is
between the end, and the means that lead unto it. For example, they with whom I
treat at present, will not deny, but that amongst all those Nations which have
been destitute of the particular Revelation which they confess necessary, there
were diverse that adored false gods, and so committed Idolatry; but their
Sacrifices, Mysteries, and Solemn Processions, were things destinated to that
service rendered to false gods, as the means are destinated to their end;
Therefore although the murdring of Beasts, and the various grimaces and
external gestures of the body, and marching to Temples in great crowds, are
indifferent, considered in themselves; yet regard being had to the devotions to
which they appertained; they were as severely forbidden as Idolatry it self;
for it is the same case with this spiritual uncleanness, and that of the body,
the accesses and approaches of Stews, visits, and wanton aspects, because they
are the inveglements to incontinence, are forbidden by the same Laws of honesty
which forbid impudicity it self. But though this general discourse might
perhaps be sufficient, yet I shall not decline to bring into the lists more
particular reasons that encounter this irreligious Indifference, examining one
after another, all Religions that are at present, or ever were in the world.

CHAP. II. Which have been the principal Religions That Profession of any sort
is not indifferent, even by the verdict of the Pagan: In which the Divine
Revelation is not found.
ALthough the different Sects of Religion have been almost infinite, every
Nation by practicing some particular Ceremonies, distinguishing their own from
that of others; yea, the same Nation sometimes dividing into factions upon this
occasion; Yet generally all that ever bore any vogue in the world, may be
reduced to four principal (each of which was respectively the stem from which
all the rest sprung) namely, the Pagan, the Mohammedan, the Jewish, and the
Christian: For under the Pagan, I comprize all the Religions of the ancient
Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, of the Druyds, Brachmans, Gymnosophists, and the
rest, that had neither Moses, nor Mahomet, nor Christ, for Author of their
Religious Ceremonies: For, though as the minds of men are different, they have
varyed in this respect by some light circumstances, yet they all agree in what
is essential, and make no scruple of communicating together in their mysteries.
Under the Mohammedan must be comprehended not only that which is the National
Religion of the Turkish Empire, but also that which is professed by the
Persians, whom the Turks account Heretics of their Law, and what other Sects
soever there be of the same, As for the Jewish, we must make distinction of it
rather according to times then Sects, inasmuch as though there was some times
among the Jews some diversity of profession, between certain persons addicted
to devotion after a special manner, as the Esseans, the Pharisees, and
Saduc^es, yet this did not happen, till toward the declination of their
Religion, which for many ages after its first institution, had continued
uniform throughout the whole Nation. Moreover, their differences were not in
the fundamental and princ^pal points of Religion (excepting the Sad^cees, who
denied the Resurrection of the body, and the immortality of the Soul) but in
certain inconsiderable matters, which chiefly concerned their rule of ordinary
life; as Monks among the Christians differ not in Religion from the people, but
only in a more austere and restrained manner of life. And though there were
the Saducees that differed in principal points of Religion, nevertheless, as to
external polity or government, they were all of one accord, and had neither
Temples nor Synagogues apart by themselves. But indeed there has been a great
diversity amongst them, if we have regard to several times; for the Christians
not only confess, that the ancient Jewish Religion was of Divine Institution,
and that God revealed his Laws to that Nation alone, but prove the same against
the Pagans by irrefragable Arguments. Nevertheless they say, that this
Religion, in reference to what concerns the external service of God, and the
Law upon which it was founded, was but for a time, in expectation till the
Christian were fully revealed, whereof the Jewish contained only the types and
shadows; And that the Christian having been established by the Messiah really
and de facto manifested in the fullness of time, from thenceforth all that
ancient Worship is abolished, and has given place to that which was to come in
its room. The Jews on the contrary maintain, that that Jesus whom the
Christians adore, is not the Messiah, but expect him still to come, retaining
and preserving as much as they are able in their dispersion, that ancient Law,
although they have very much altered the Doctrine of their Ancestors: Therefore
I call that the Jewish Religion, which the Jews profess at this day. Lastly, by
the Christian, though it also be divided into several parties (from which it
has been as little able to warrant it self as the rest, nor to avoid the rent
of Sectaries) I understand here only these two, under which all others may be
ranked; namely, Those who acknowledge no other Revelation of the will of God,
but that which is found written in the Book called the Bible; and those, who
besides that Book, receive as Divine Revelation, certain Doctrines which they
affirm to have been left by tradition from the first birth of Christianity, and
continued along unto the present times; which they call, The unwritten Word.
For as for certain Heretics equally detested by both parties, who deny the
Divinity of Christ, the Author of Religion, they are justly accounted
undeserving of the name of Christians, because they take away the Basis upon
which all the Christian Doctrine is founded. Let us now examine, whether the
Doctrine of Indifference, be competible with any of these Religions, and to
which of them the commendation of being Divine of right belongs.

As for the Pagan, it is true indeed, the Greeks might well partake in the
mysteries of the Egyptians, and the Romans in those of the Greeks, because they
all served almost the same gods, however they gave them different names, and
sometimes followed distinct forms of Ceremonies. And in truth, we see not that
they made any scruple of conscience in so doing: For though the Philosophers
should have been more scrupulous herein then the vulgar, inasmuch as they ought
to have had more knowledge of the nature of the Deity; yet we do not read that
Plato in his travels into Egypt and Sicile, separated from the Communion which
the Inhabitants of the places had in the Ceremonies of the Country, how
different soever they were from those of Greece. And in all those great
Peregrinations which Philestratus relates Apollonius Thyanaus to have made,
both into India, Ethiopia, Italy, Spain, Egypt, and Africa, we do not find
that he refuses the honor to the gods of every Nation which they performed to
them, but generally conforms thereunto, reforming and amending after his own
fancy the defects which he found in some slight circumstances only, changing
none throughtout either in Doctrine, or the body of their Mysteries. And if he
abstains from communicating in the Sacrifices of beasts and living things, it
was only by reason of the whimsey of the Metempsychosis, which he had closely
embraced from the Sect of Pythagoras, to whom it was peculiar. For the rest, he
lest to Jupiter, Venus, Bacchus, and the other gods, their Temples, Statues,
and Altars, and all their Mysteries, and would have us account him a more
Religious Observer of them then any other person in the world. But however,
none of them all would ever believe it lawful for them to communicate in the
Jewish Religion, or have any participation in the Ceremonies of the Christians,
since they all accuse them of Idolatry, and their gods of vanity, and this with
strange reproaches, calling them people without God, and those whom they
adored, gods of dung and filth. For either the Jews and Christian say true in
this point, or not: If they do not say true, but the Pagan Religion is of
Divine Institution, then the Christians themselves are Idolaters. Now there is
no likelihood, that a Religion of Divine Institution, should permit communion
in the service of false gods; for, as I said above, Religion is as the marriage
of God with the soul, If therefore God himself permits commerce with false
gods, it is as if a man should permit his wise to prostitute her felf to
others; whereby he would show himself both too gross and stupid a contemner of
his own right, a too sordid prizer of the honesty of marriage, and too unworthy
of the faith of a true and loyal Spouse. If they say true, the testimony of the
Pagan Religion ought not to be valued, whatever it be. But besides, it would
not be reason for the Pagans, who do not believe it, to condescend the least in
the world to the Christian Religion, since it does so much mischief and outrage
to the gods they adore. For what man is there that has never so little natural
affection, or if natural affections be possibly dried up in him, so little
shame lest in his face, as to dare pronounce it lawful for him to entertain a
friendship either true or feigned, with such persons as have a sworn
irreconcilable enmity against his father: yea, who would not resent it in
point of honor, to hear his friend defamed in his presence? Imagine then what
good devotion a Gentile could have, at the prayers which we make to God for the
destruction and confusion of all those false Deities whom the Gentiles worship:
For if he believes neither in our God, nor his own, he is no longer a Gentile,
but an Atheist; if he believe in his own, can he have the heart to bow his knee
and pronounce Amen to such Prayers of ours?

Indeed we find it in some place or other, where Socrates counsels every man
to serve God according to the mode of his own Country. But this counsel
proceeded partly from ignorance of the true God, and despair of ever being able
to comprehend his nature; because it being naturally imprinted in the mind of
man, that he ought to honor him, and the manner of doing it agreeably being
unknown to Socrates, he had no further to advise, then to serve him at a
venture of happening right or not: Like as a man that had cast his net a hundred
and a hundred times in places noted for fishing without catching any thing,
should at length in choler and despair, cast it into the next place he came to,
though it were upon the sand or rocks. So the Painter in rage threw his spung
against his Picture, because he could not please himself in representing to the
life the foam of a horses mouth that he was painting. Partly also, because all
the Devotions of the Greeks had such a resemblance between them, that as the
Dialects of their Language, and the fashions of their attire, how various
soever, always retained the Greek air and mode; so likewise, though in the
manner of serving God they varied in some things of less importance, yet in the
judgment of this Person it was at the bottom indifferent to which of them to
conform. And whereas he had never traveled, he conceived the opinion
concerning the Deity and his service was alike almost in all Nations. But had
he heard the Jews speak, without question he would have either despised the
gods of the Pagans, or abhorred the Jews, who utterr'd such heinous reproaches
against them. Truly, the constancy which this Person showed at his death, and
that admirable protestation he made, (That he would not cease to teach
Philosophy among the Athenians, not even for the hope of life, inasmuch as he
conceived himself raised up by God to reform the manners of his fellow-citizens
by Philosophy) clearly evinces, that if he had had any certainty in Religion,
and particular revelation of the will of God concerning his service, he would
not have deviated from it in the least, much less would he have mingled himself
indifferently in all sorts of ceremonies. Wherefore in that he advised every
man to comply with the Religion of his Country, it appears that he did not
believe the form of Religion received amongst the Greeks to have been of Divine
Institution; but being otherwise a man of peace, and politic, he would not
have received customs infringed, for fears of commotions in the Commonwealth.
Certainly, if the Pagans had believed the profession of all Religions
indifferent, the Romans would never have persecuted the Christians and Jews
with such extremity, nor endeavored to constrain them by such rigorous
torments, to sacrifice to their gods, and communicate in their mysteries; they
would not have shown themselves so violent for the extinguishment of
Christianity in their Empire, nor made such diligent inquisition after the
Books which we hold for sacred, to abolish the memory thereof. And if Julian
surnamed the Apostate, famous amongst the Pagans for his knowledge in
Philosophy, had been of this opinion, he would not have renounced the name of
Christian, for the service of Jupiter and other Pagan Deities; nor after he had
revolted, would he have shown himself so irreconcilable an enemy thereunto:
And the same may be likewise said of the other Philosophers, who in his time
and before, oppugned the Religion of the Christians with so great asperity and
violence. They would without question have been more gentle and tractable, had
they had any intelligence of this complacential Indifference.

Now whether the Pagan Religion favored this Indifference, or not (which yet
experience and reason decides in the negative) it was so vain and false, that
no account ought to be made of its suffrage. And I cannot imagine that there is
any at this day, that bears the name of Christian, who esteems it to have been
of Divine revelation. Wherefore the little I shall say to prove it, is not so
much for necessity of the thing in it self, as because the design of this work
does not permit me to pass it over absolutely in silence. To judge therefore
what it was, we must not conceive it such as it is amongst barbarous and savage
Nations, such as the Toupinamboults are at present, and the people of Suevia
and Sarmatia were of old. For who will believe that any extraordinary Celestial
light in matter of Religion ever illuminated those Nations, amongst whom there
is scarce seen any traces of so much as humanity? It is true, there have been
some people in our times, that have written so highly in commendation of the
contentment there is in their opinion, in living under the simple Laws of
nature, as they speak, that they seem inclinable to favor the manners and
condions of Savages, and prefer it before ours; so as to have no shame at all
of their nakedness, and to boast that they do not cover it, but only in
respect to custom. But as for these persons, it is not my present purpose to
dispute against them. If they would speak the genuine sentiments of their
hearts, they would not only not acknowledge any particular revelation of the
will of God in Religion, but would moreover make profession of not believing
the immortality of their souls, nor any Religion in the world; and after having
rendered themselves like to those miserable Savages in all brutalities, they
would surpass them in this point, that they would cast under their feet all
remembrance of God, of whom in their Deserts and forlorn Barbarism, the
Margajats and Patagons have yet some fear and reverence. I speak now to such as
make some esteem of the improving elegancy of Learning, and who have some
portion of honesty lest in their conversation amongst men. The Greeks and
Romans therefore have without question carried the pre-eminence in all kinds
of politeness and excellence amongst the Pagan Nations. So that it is amongst
them that we must seek for this particular revelation, whether it may be found
in the Religion of either of those people. It is true, the Egyptians were much
celebrated for their mysteries and rare wisdom, and diverse have thought that
all the wisdom of Greece was transported from the treasuries of Egypt, by those
that traveled thither for it. But if there were any thing of good among them,
they had it from communication with the Jews, who besides that they sojourned a
long time in Egypt before the Greek name arose in the world, they were their
near neighbors in Palestine, and had frequent and free commerce with them: yet
have they so viciated, corrupted and obscured in their superstitions and
idolatries, what they had learned from them, that there is none of it to be
known and distinguished, and almost all the books in which they had expounded
their mysteries are lost. But he that is desirous to know what excellent
opinions they had, what divine wisdom it was that made them so cried up, he may
please only to read the Treatise written by Plutark of Isis and Osiris, and he
will see in the first place that the veiles and allegories under which he says
they hid their knowledge, are shameful and putid fables, such idle and dull
extravagancies and impertinences in themselves, that it is impossible they
could serve for a coverture to any conceptions, I do not say heavenly and
divine, but worthy of men and ordinary sober sense. In the next place he will
find, that all that Plutark with singular acuteness of wit could uncypher of
them, is so dubious, and the text on which he comments so pliable to all sorts
of fancies, that he that would set himself about it, might invent several other
interpretations as probable as his. They are as the diverse impressions of
clouds, to which the fancy of every man ascribes what image or lineaments seems
best to him. And lastly, he will discover, that though the expositions which
that Philosopher presents us there, were as certain as if they had been
delivered by an Oracle, yet they all terminate in two caitive and dismal
Demons, unknown even to them that adored them; in uncouch speculations
concerning the motions of the Moon and the Inundations of Nilus; in Platonic
Idea's, and the Riddles of Pythagoras, and in that ancient foppery of Oromasdes
and Arimanius, two opposite principles of all things, with some cold mystical
interpretations of reasons why the Egyptians religiously worshipped the Ox, the
Sheep, the Ichneumon, Larks, Storks, Serpents, Dogs, Beetles and Weesels. Is
not here great cause to boast of having drawn from the fountain of Divine
Wisdom it self? So little ground is there to think so, that on the contrary,
there is no person of indifferent understanding, but in the reading of that
Treatise would pity Plutark, that bestowed so much knowledge and labor in
commenting upon such absurdities, and could not discover them to be such. What
shall we then say of the Greeks, who held from the Egyptians whatever they had
not altogether bad? and what shall we think of the Romans, who had nothing but
from imitation of the Greeks, both in humane Sciences and Religious Polity?

But put the case they had borrowed nothing from the Egyptians, but that this
Divine Revelation had been peculiarly imparted to them, I would be told from
what books that were in reputation amongst them, we ought now to take it. For
we have heard say indeed, that they had Sibyls, by whose means they were made
acquainted with divine secrets, and who also writ books of the same, but the
wind and time have carried them away. If there be any thing lest of their
Oracles (as there are diverse excellent Greek verses that bear their name at
this day, yet are with very just reason suspected by the learned) the Christian
Religion is clearly described in them, and the Pagan so strongly and directly
confuted, that the Christians could scarce find more express proofs for
themselves, then in those books of theirs. And there is no likelihood that
these were the same whom the Roman Priests went to consult, as often as there was
occasion to avert some raging mortality. For they taught not to render to
Apollo, Latona, Diana, Hercules, Mercury or Neptune, those honors which they
used to perform to them, to make them propitious in such occurrences. If
therefore this revelation was contained in the Books of the Sibyls, it is
perished long since, and we have no more knowledge of them, then of those of
Numa Pompilius, which were burned at Rome by authority of the Senate, because
they tended to the subversion and annulling of all their Religious Ceremonies.
They had moreover memorials of the rights of the Pontifices, Augurs, and
Aruspices. Of all which there is nothing left but the name. Miserable are we,
if the truth was there; of which we are in despair ever to have any
intelligence. Shall we then have recourse to find it in the books of the Poets?
Truly it would be an excellent design to go about to build a Religion upon the
model afforded us in the Theology of Hesiod, the Hymmes of Orpheus, the Poems
of Homer, the Odes of Pindar, the Metamorphoses of Ovid, and the divine
Theology of the great Virgil, who is so hard put to it to save the gods of the
poor Aeneas from the sack of Troy, and who trusses them up in the same fardel
with the little Ascanius as companions of the same fortune. It were more
rationally credible that the beasts and trees held that rare converse together
which Aesop reports of them in his Fables, then to give belief to the
adventures and exploits which those Poets ascribe to their Deities. For in the
first there would be nothing but childishness or at most but brutishness, in
the latter impiety and blasphemy. And if, as some would have it believed of
them (though perhaps themselves never thought of any such matter) their intent
was to cover under the veil of those fables several true mysteries pertaining
to the knowledge of the Deity and understanding of the secrets of nature, so
far was the teaching the same after such a manner from being a divine
intention, that on the contrary the honor of the Deity has thereby been
unworthily impaired and the truth smothered under most horrible lies. It
follows therefore that we go to the writings of Philosophers, to which we
cannot without great injury to truth ascribe the commendation of being
proceeded from celestial inspiration, since the authors themselves, though
sufficiently presumtuous, do not pretend they were so. And indeed we have shown
above that they were either wholly ignorant of the requisites to a true piety
toward God, or if they had knowledge of some few it was wonderfully obscure
and dubious. But how could the revelation of God have suffered them to groap
and wander in that ignorance! To conclude, is it then to those Oracles of
Delphos, Dodona, Jupiter Ammon, and others the like, that we owe the glory of
this divine knowledge? Truly, it moves both shame and pity, to hear themselves
speak both of the original, and faculty of divination, and cessation of
Oracles. It was a heard of Goats that first brought that of Delphos, which was
the most famous and venerable of all, into reputation. But the virgins that
were placed there to give answers to inquirers, which they received by their
obscene parts, were not long there, but there arise most notorious scandals of
them. All their predictions were ambiguous and doubtful, like our
Almanack-makers, who prophecy by hap-hazard; and themselves gave this account
of it; that the Demons which spoke there not knowing things to come but by
inspection of the Stars, and so being able to gather from thence but uncertain
conjectures, they shrouded their ignorance under the ambiguity of words capable
of different interpretations, to the end they might make good their credit
whatsoever the event of things might be. In a word, after Plutark had bestirred
himself on all sides to find out the causes of these Oracles and their
ceasing, and sometimes conceived them perishable and mortal Demons, sometimes
immortal, but that they changed place, he seems to resolve upon this worthy
Philosophy. That the earth was in some places endued with certain prophetic
Virtues, which come by exhalations to be mingled and insinuated into souls
fitting to receive those inspirations, and so cause in them those Enthusiasmes
and predictions of future things: Afterward, when all the virtue is spent, and
the whole mass that was made thereof in the subterranean caverns, evaporated,
then the prediction that was made by the Oracles of things to come, ceases and
is extinguished. Without question those divinations could not but be very
clear, which proceeded only from the fumes of the earth, and the religious
devotions very good that were paid to these divining exhalations and the
persons who received the impressions of them in their souls.

But perhaps though the evidences of this divine revelation be lost, I mean the
books in which it was recorded, yet it has remained in the memory of man, and
is preserved by practice as by a living transcript. Be it so. Let us therefore
now examine the Pagan Religion in it self. Which certainly if it was divine,
ought to have afforded a great knowledge of those supreme truths, in the
understanding of which consists the perfection of our souls. And yet it has
been pitifully defective herein. For setting a part at present those principles
of Christian Religion, which seem most incredible, and by reason of which
profane men reject or suspect it, there is no person that has a dram of common
sense but will freely confess that we have beyond comparison more knowledge of
the nature of the Deity and true virtue, then the ancient Greeks or Romans
ever had, which notwithstanding we have drawn from books more ancient then them
by many ages, and which condemn the Gods of all other Nations. Whence therefore
came it to pass, that if they had that particular revelation we enquire after,
they were so ignorant of those indubitable truths, of which we are so knowing,
who have learnt the same from those that are professed enemies to the Pagan
Deities? If what they believed in matter of Religion was truth, whence do those
truths which we perceive now so clearly and comprehend so certainly, convince
them of falsehood? And if the Gods which the Pagans adored were true Gods, why
do the books which have taught us so many excellent things whereunto humane
reason cannot repugne, call them Gods of clay?

And indeed they were marveillous Gods; for even those that adored them knew
their parents, and could show their tombs, and tell a thousand debaucheries of
them; which confirm that they were so far from being worthy to reign in the
heavens, that on the contrary they deserved public punishment upon earth.
Their thefts, their rapes and adulteries, their attempts against parents, their
whoredoms, whereby, if we believe their authors, they filled the heavens with
bastards, their Sodomies and incests would not have been suffered unpunished by
those that built Temples and Altars to them, if they had apprehended them in
the jurisdiction of their respective Republics. And the supreme Jupiter
himself must not be excepted, of whom Menelaus exclaimed with more reason then
he imagined, (...).
Jupiter pater, nemo Deorum est te perniciosior.
What a kind of Religion is that whose Gods have had a beginning, and that a
long time after men, of whose history we have certain knowledge? For Jupiter
and Saturn and Vranus are none of them so ancient as Abraham. On the other
side what Gods had the Nations before these came into the world? Whosoever
(says Plutark) would search into the histories of the times that preceeded
Theseus and Hercules, shall find therein nothing but vast and unknown
solitudes, deserts, labyrinths and abysses; where nothing occurs to fix and
arrest his wandering thoughts. And the reason is because the most ancient people
having for a good time retained some memory of their original and of the true
God, it diminish't and vanished by little and little till there remained no
more of it in the World but the bare name; and so those that came after not
knowing to whom they ought to ascribe it, they imputed it to them who had most
endeared themselves to their love by their benefits or rendered themselves most
redoubtable by arms. Whence it was that Scipio Africanus in Ennius utters this
brave language, Si fas caedendo coelestia scandere cuiquam est,
Mi soli coeli maxima porta patet.
If killing can give title to the Sky,
No man bids fairer for that place then I.
But had not the lateness of their original and the debauchedness of their
manners been so well known, yet their multitude renders them contemptible. For
they had some high, some low, and some of middle rank; some kept their
quarters in the Heavens, others in the Earth, and in the Sea, and Rivers; and
some under the barks of Trees and in Chimney-corners. They had of one sort for
their corn, and another for their cattle, others for tuition of their houses,
for arts, swords, and diseases. Honor, Virtue, the Fever, Fear and Victory,
were consecrated and deified by them promiscuously; and even the infernal
regions had their Deities, to the end there might be no corner in the world
either above or below destitute of them.

Peradventure some will here take occasion to interpose two things: First that
the wiser sort amongst them did not believe this multiplicity of Gods; and
Secondly, that they that did believe it, acknowledged one supreme over the
rest, and to whom they were as subalternate Deities. But this makes nothing
against us. For, as to the first objection, we speak here of the form of
Religion established amongst the Greeks and Romans and not of the opinions of
such or such Philosophers. If some have had peculiar conceptions different from
those of the people, this was not by reason of any special revelation, but
through the natural strength of their minds which could not approve all that
rabble of Divinityes which were in reverence with the vulgar. Besides, we have
shown that all those particular conceits were of extreme little worth, and
that what they contained of truth was intricated and confused in a Chaos of
lies. In the next place, no Religions authorized by the consent of those
Nations were founded upon those truths. If one person produced any thing of
that kind into the public, the people became immediately his enemies, as if he
purposed the overthrow and destruction of Religion. Their opinion is probable
who think the sole cause of Luhemerus's being branded with the name of Atheist,
was his writing the history of those false Gods and discovering their shame to
all the world; not that he peremptorily and flatly denied the Deity. Even the
persons to whom those better sentiments were peculiar, never had, to speak
strictly, any design of reforming the world, or reclaiming it from Idolatry and
Superstitions. Themselves conformed thereunto, and commended the same as others
did; because the little they perceived of truth was so dubicus, that it could
not give them courage to oppose boldly the common received apprehensions; which
appears by Plato's books De Republica, and the Apology for Socrates contained
therein. For does not he well prove that he believed there were more Gods,
since he believed the Gods had children; the name of son presupposing the
existence of a father? Is not this a rare ratiocination for so great a
Philosopher? And how does he defend himself against the accusation of
attempting to alter the Religion of his Country? No otherwise then by a flat
denial; though he was a person whom the fear of death could not have induced to
dissemble a truth which he certainly knew, as appears sufficiently by the issue
of his case. For the second; In truth I doubt not but those amongst the Pagans
which had the least measure of understanding, asserted some supreme Deity above
all those diminutive ones, of which some reckon five and twenty or thirty
thousand. Thus Homer makes his Jupiter utter this rodomontado, that should all
the Gods together draw at one end of a chain, and he himself at the other, he
could hoise them all up in spite of their reluctance. Whereby it appears he
had a higher opinion of him then of the rest; though he says in another place,
that had it not been for Briareus who came to his succor upon the request of
Thetis, Jupiter had been bound by the other Gods, who had complotted to that
purpose together against him. But what is the guess or hariolation of two or
three to the constant opinions of a whole multitude? Or what is it
considerable, if several persons have had these particular opinions, seeing
they generally followed a contrary practice in Religion? And this is attested
by experience. What defect do they charge upon the other Gods, which they do
not likewise attribute to Jupiter? What honor do they afford him, which they
do not also allow to the rest? Do they erect more Statues or burn oftener and
larger portions of incense to him? Do they consecrate more Altars to him or
build him a greater number of Temples? Do they give less credit to the Oracles
of Apollo then to his, or make less account of his ceremonies? Are the rest
addressed to by them with less reverence, or are they more sparing in giving
them the title of Gods? Have they rather recourse to him in their afflictions?
Do they render less praise to the others for victories which they obtain in
battle? Whosoever reads their histories, will find the other Gods as much praised,
magnified, sacrificed to, adored, thanked and venerated as Jupiter; and if they
allow him some priority in speaking, as we do to the President of a Council,
yet in effect they equal all the others to him. But let them, if they please,
place him in the highest throne in the heavens: what celestial revelation is
that which multiplies Deities to millions? Certainly, if there be a Deity, it
is infinite both in effence and power; if it be infinite, it is one, and
suffers no companion or equal: If God be sufficient alone for the government of
the whole Universe, for what end were all these little pygmy-Gods, but only to
distract the minds of men from the true and supreme Deity to them? And if he be
not sufficient, how is he himself God who is so defective in his power? If the
others be not Gods, but only Demons, either good or evil, creatures of the
soverain God and ministers of his commands, then are those mortals idolaters
that ascribe to them that title and glory; and by consequence their Religion is
either humane or rather diabolical, certainly far from being divine, as they
pretend.

But, alas, this is an Augean Stable. Though there should be some small Deities
inferior to the supreme (which yet right reason abhors) yet He ought to be of a
majesty so glorious, and of an essence and power so immense, as we have shown
above, that no corporeal image either by the hand in brass, or marble, or even
by the mind in the fancy, can be framed of him. In as much as all corporeal
figure not only determines and limits the subject which it represents, but
always refers it to the proportion of the thing it self under the figure
whereof it is represented. Now how abominable was the idolatry of the Pagans in
this respect? The Egyptians represented the Deity under the figure of beasts,
and Apollonius in Philostratus blames their Gymnosophists for it. The Greeks
and Romans thought they did more sutably to represent him under a humane
figure. How came this to pass, but only because they imagined that God
resembled themselves, and that there was a proportion as it were of greater and
less between them and him? And was it not upon this apprehension that they were
so forward to attribute the name of God to men, as to Kings, Emperors, and
Philosophers, and that they dedicated Temples and Altars to them, and burnt
incense to their Statues? Wretched worms of the earth, that conceived they
could comprehend what God is, and measure him by their fadom! To make Gods at
their pleasure, and to become Gods themselves! But that which was most of all
pernicious to them was the consecration of their Idols, into which by means of
certain invocations they conceived they could attract some portion of the
essence of the Deity, or cause some extraordinary virtue to descend from him
into their images; after which they looked not upon them as mere Images, but as
things partaking of the divine nature it self. For under this pretext Demons
entered into them, making them sometimes speak intelligibly sometimes weep,
sweat, bleed, remove from their places, clatter their weapons, and practiced
diverse other kinds of illusions in them, whereby the poor people were
encharmed, and conceived the same opinion of them, as if they had had the Deity
it self lodged in their Temples. Thus the evil Spirit exercised an absolute
dominion amongst them. In short, it is an abuse of time to spend many words in
showing that all their opinions in this matter were false, their mysteries
wicked, their observations frivolous, and the service which they rendered to
their Gods full of Idolatry. Their sacrifices were oftentimes barbarous and
inhumane, for not only the Massagetes, the Phoenicians, Carthaginians,
Persians, and some other less civilis'd nations, but the Greeks, and Latins,
and Gauls, whose Druydes were in great esteem, offered victimes of living men,
yea some their own children, to their false Gods, as if they had conceived God
delighted to feed on their entrails. And who sees not that it was the devil,
who is a murderer from the beginning, that incited them to those so lamentable
bloody devotions. Their mysteries rendered men furious and frantic: for with
what a spirit were those enraged women agitated after their devotions in the
Bacchanal festivals? Their auguries by the flight of birds, their presages by
the smoke of incense and the fat of their sacrifices, and by inspection of the
intrals of immolated beasts were so absurd, that they seem to have been
invented in derision of those that applied themselves to them, and argue that
the learned Greeks and prudent Romans, how great personages soever they
thought themselves, had not much wisdom in the heart, as One of themselves
sometimes said, since they sought it in the liver of beasts. Then for their
ceremonies, there is nothing more inept and ridiculous. Was it not excellent to
hear the Curetes and Corybantes when they were in procession, some of them
drumming upon Kettles, some upon Bucklers, and Helmets, and others gingling
chains and Cymbals? Their manners of celebration were dishonest and unbecoming.
For how could they but be ashamed both of those dances of naked men about
tombs and of the races of naked men in the public places of the Cities, yea
at the meeting of women in the Lupercalia? Their propitiations, purifications
and oblations were unprofitable and inefficacious. For what could the death of
poor beasts do in order to appeasing the anger of God? It was not they which
had offended, nor did it belong to them to bear the punishment. If their blood
had had the virtue of making propitiation for sins, the rich however otherwise
wicked, were happy, that were able to offer hecatombs. And what efficacy was
there in the aspersion of cold water to cleanse the conscience of man from his
crimes? Certainly with good reason did One amongst them write, Ah! nimium
faciles, qui tristia funera caedis
Tolli fluminea posse putatis aqua?
Fond men! that think by waters crystal flood
To cleanse away the horrid guilt of blood.
Their miracles were for the most part illusions of Demons; as the Serpent
adored for AEsculapius in the City of Epidaurus, and afterward carried to Rome
to assuage the pestilence; and the apparitions of Castor and Pollux relating
the tidings of the defeat of Perseus King of Macedonia, and all the speakings
and sweatings of Images in their Temples. Or else they were tricks of Magic:
as that of Appius Navius, who to gain credit to his Auguries, cut a Whetstone
in two with a Razor in the presence of Romulus; and also that manner of
appeasing a raging plague in the City of Ephesus practiced by Apollonius of
knocking down a Demon with stones, and his vanishing before Domitian, and all
those juggling sleights that were done before him when he was at a feast with
the Brachmans of India. Or they were simple gulleries; as that of the
inundation of the Lake of Alba. The inventors of their devotions were crafty
men, who abused the credulity of the people to render them pliable to their
laws, and more respectful to their persons, as themselves confess of Numa
Pompilius at Rome, and Minos at Crete, and some others. The most seemingly
devout sectators of their Religions were very frequently contemners of them in
the bottom of their hearts, though outwardly they put on a grave countenance to
retain the affection of the vulgar; as Cotta, who in the books written by
Cicero de Natura Deorum, says that Religions must be preserved in the state
they were at first instituted for the conservation of Commonwealths, but that
otherwise wise people laugh privately at all those mysteries; which was very
religiously spoken by a Pontifex Maximus. Or they were shamefully
superstitious. For was it not gravely done of Fab. Maximus and C. Flaminius,
one to depose himself from the Dictatorship and the other from the Mastership
of the Horse, because a Mouse made a noise in the time of their installation;
and of the Senate of Rome to call home Figulus out of Gallia and Scipio Nasica
out of the Island of Corsica to abdicate the Consulship, because Tiberus
Gracchus had observed in the books of Augurs that they were created contrary to
the custom, and that the pavillions were not rightly placed in the public
Assemblies. Lastly, the means used to promote and propagate this Religion were
merely humane, as wars, conspiracies, encroachments, invasions, sieges of
places and battles. For how did the Romans impose other Gods upon other
Nations but by force of Arms? And how did they possess the Gods of their people
but as spoils of their enemies and trophies of their victories? Whereas, as we
shall see hereafter, it was overthrown and ruined without a blow stricken,
after a most wonderful manner.

CHAP. III. Whether the Profession of all Religions be Indifferent according to
the Religion of Mahomet. And that this Religion is not of Divine Institution.
IT is of some difficulty to know certainly what was the opinion of Mahomet,
the Author of the Turkish Religion, concerning this Question, Whether the
Profession of all Religions be Indifferent? For he seems sometimes to affirm
it: as when he says in the Chapter of the Fable, That Jews, Samaritans,
Christians, all that shall have trusted in God and believed the Resurrection of
the Dead, and done good Works, shall be exempt from affliction, and they shall
have nothing to fear at the day of Judgment. Sometimes again he denies it: as
when in the same Chapter and Page he says, Certainly they which say that Jesus
the son of Mary, is God, are impious; and the entrance into Paradise is
forbidden to him that says God has a companion equal to himself, but hell
shall be his habitation. Which Assertions are manifestly contradictory. And he
is otherwise alike unconstant and fluctuating. For sometimes he promises the
grace of God to all those that do good works, provided they believe the unity
of the Deity; a thing which he is very instant in recommending. And sometimes
he says that his Law is the only way of truth and salvation, and almost every
where he teaches to promote it by force of Arms; which does not well consist
with his former maxim. For if all Religions equally endear to God and his
favor, what necessity is there of so many bloody wars for the propagation of
Mahometisme? In truth it would be a strange thing if a good Musulman should
think his salvation secured in the profession of the Christian Religion, which
censures Mahomet for the greatest and most abominable Deceiver, that ever lived
upon the Earth, and his Alcoran for a piece of unparalleled imposture and
execrable impiety; or if he should partake in a communion where they pray
continually for the destruction of the Empire of the Turk, and the extirpation
of the Mohammedan Religion. It is possible he might dexterously explicate his
meaning by this distinction, whereof there are some shadows frequently in his
book; That if a person who once embraced the faith, afterward happen to
relapse from or renounce the same by constraint, yet he shall not be condemned,
provided he retain the same in his heart: but if he do it voluntarily and
without any violence, he shall never be redressed or restored into the right
way by God, but shall be adjudged unto eternal pains. And it is well known,
that whatever the Alcoran says to the contrary, The Turks hold the Persians
for eternally damned, as heretics of their Law, though they consent in the
principal points of the same, and both unanimously hold that impostor for a
supreme Prophet. But as to matter of life and ordinary practice, there is no
people under the Sun more scrupulous in observation of things which they
account as making part of their Religion, or come near it within a hundred
leagues; as not to employ any paper to unclean uses, because the Alcoran is
written in it, and other such niceties, which speak them indeed sufficiently
foolish, but otherwise exact observers of their most minute ceremonies. Their
public prayers are constantly frequented, and their private never neglected.
Their Fasts are strict and inviolable; and seeing they condemn the use of Wine
as abominable, how can they be indifferent in other things more essential and
important to Religion? Certainly though Christians have without comparison
better grounds for this pretension, that the truth is on their side, yet they
are nothing near so passionate for the promoting of Christianity, as the Turks
are for the propagation of the Law of Mahomet. For they invite Christians to
them by great rewards; they favor and advance renegadoes: and when a war is
undertaken, they are wonderfully zealous and ardent therein, if there be hope
of extending their Belief, further thereby, and planting it amongst the Nations
which they invade. Which also themselves are so obstinate in retaining, that it
is very ordinary to find amongst them great numbers of persons that have
abandoned the name of Christ; but to see converted Turks in Christendom, is a
thing then which nothing is more rare: Yea there have been some who have rather
chosen to suffer an ignominious death, then to accept of a pardon for notorious
crimes committed by them, on condition of being baptized.

But admit that Mahomet and the doctrine of his Law made for our, adversaries;
yet I can scarce imagine that in this great light both of holy and profane
learning any man in these parts of the world would put any stress upon the
testimony of those people, who have not only a professed enmity to all liberal
Sciences and such as are suitable to the excellence of humane understanding, but
whose sottish and abominable superstition equals and in some things surpasses
that of the Pagans themselves. It Is true, he teaches not only one supreme, but
one single and solitary Deity, infinite in essence and power; and condemns all
those trifling Deities, which rendered the Pagan Religion so contemptible. He
acknowledges that this Deity governs the World by his Providence, and that all
is subject to his Empire, even things natural, fortuitous and contingent, and
the motions of the mind of man. He preaches in general that God is a rewarder
of virtue, and that he will repay wickedness with suitable punishments. He
extolls the mercy of God, and declares that he invites men to repentance. He
exhorts to good works, and asserts the resurrection with a final judgment of
all men at the consummation of the World. But all these things which are so
specious and plausible in themselves, are but as Sugar blended with his
poisonous doctrines to make them be swallowed more pleasingly and unadvertedly;
nor needs there any long discourse to discover his imposture.

I shall not at present insist on the qualifications of his person, how he was
a wretched and vile Arabian, and raised himself to a reputation only by
robberies. Nor shall I mention his adulteries, and impure concubinage, nor his
frauds and violences. I shall pass over with silence, that it was only the
ambition of establishing an Empire amongst thieves that induced him to invent
and hatch that Religion; which he suited to the genius of those he was to rule
over, who had been accustomed to lead dissolute lives with women, to enrich
themselves by depredations and robberies, and to live by violence and rapine.
Perhaps such as favor him, may be offended at these reproaches, though they
contain nothing but what is true. Let the doctrine be considered alone in it
self. The first thing which be propounds is that he is a great Prophet of God,
and a messenger by whose ministry he makes known his will to men. In the mean
while, he acknowledges the Old and New Testament as divine Books; for he
affirms that God imparted the Law to Moses, and the Psalms to David, and the
Gospel to Jesus Christ, and in the general speaks very advantageously of them
all, pretending that as the Gospel succeeded the law, so likewise the Alcoran
succeeds the Gospel. But how is it possible that so great a change should
arrive in the Church of God, that the Gospel should be as it were devoured by
the Alcoran, without any prediction of so remarkable a matter either in the Old
or New Testament? Certainly God has followed a quite other method in all times
as to what regards the various dispensation of his knowledge. In contracting
alliance with Abraham, he in a manner laid the foundations of the Law and the
Gospel, and declares things that did foreshew both the one and the other. The
Law which came into the world four hundred years after, made express and direct
mention of Jesus, and Mahomet himself does not deny but that Jesus was promised
by the Prophets. How comes it to pass therefore that the Gospel has intimated
nothing of Mahomet to advertise the Christians of so marveillous a mutation, to
the end they might prepare themselves thereunto? It is true, that his advocates
do here allege two things: One, that Moses designed him by those words, God
shall raise up unto you a Prophet like to me among your brethren; Hear ye him:
The other, that his name was expressly written in the Old Testament, but that
the Jews and Christians have expunged it out of all places where it was in
their books. But both these exceptions are vain. For, as for the first, The
Gospel applies those words of Moses to Jesus Christ. Which if they do with just
reason, how are they competent to Mahomet? If they be perverted to a contrary
sense, whence is it that Mahomet confesses that the Gospel is of divine
institution and revelation? Either Mahomet is an Impostor, that arrogates that
to himself, which agrees to Jesus Christ; or the Gospel is false, to which
notwithstanding Mahomet allows the dignity of being proceeded from the hand of
God himself. For the second; it is without all color of reason. For who first
rased the name of Mahomet out of our Books? Was it done, before he was born,
and his doctrine had gained any repute in the world? No, surely: for neither
the Jews nor the Christians had at that time any interest to move them to
commit such a sacrilege. If he were named therein, yet they pretend it was
with a promise to the Church of God, to raise up a great and soverain Prophet
to it at a certain time; and who would have gone about to efface such promises
out of the holy books? Certainly, as the Jews did not imbezle out of their
Scriptures those which promised Christ before he was revealed, so neither would
the Christians have blotted out of theirs those of this supreme Prophet, before
he came into the world, And if they have so carefully preserved the predictions
of Antichrist, who was to commit such horrible outrages, how much more dearly
would they have kept the promises of this great and incomparable personage? Was
it then, after the times of Mahomet? Certainly, no: for there are copies of the
Old and New Testament in their primitive language, and Greek and Latin
Translations made many ages before the birth of Mahomet, which are inserted in
the Writings of those that preceded him by a long time, and which are found
wholly congruous with ours. The Chaldaick, Syriack, and Ethiopick Versions and
Paraphrases which were performed long before these was any mention of Mahomet
in the world, have continued in their integrity to the present, without any
trace of this prophecy. In a word, of all the ancient Christian and Jewish
Commentators and Authors that have labored with an incredible diligence in the
Old and New Testament for a thousand years past, none has lest the least
conjecture or shadow in his writings of ever having any knowledge of it. Could
it possibly be, that this prophecy should be so totally rooted out of all the
Writings in the World, in which it ought to have been implanted, as not one
slip or sprig to be left of it, neither in Europe, nor Asia, nor Africa? And
why were not the Turks careful to preserve some Authentic Copy wherein it
might be found, thereby to convince the fraud of the Christians, and support
the honor of their Prophet by the Scriptures? Certainly, we cannot have a
greater animosity against Mahomet, then the Jews have against Christ: and we
are not less jealous of the conservation of our Gospel, then they were of their
Law. Wherefore since they have not erased out of their Law the testimonies
which authorize the person of Christ and his doctrine, there is no reason to
suspect that we should have expunged out of the Gospel those that had favored
Mahomet and Mahometisme.

But further, put case the Holy Spirit forgot to make mention of Mahomet as a
great Prophet, in the Old and New Testament; yet if so be the Law, the
Prophets, and the Gospel are proceeded from God, and the Alcoran also be, as
its authors pretends, descended from Heaven, it is requisite that their
doctrines agree together. For God cannot be repugnant to himself. Now the Jews
observe an excellent correspondence between the Prophets and the Law; and the
Christians between the Gospel, the Law, and the Prophets: but there is such a
disagreement between these Books and the Alcoran, as neither the Mahometans,
nor the Jews, nor the Christians, nor God himself can reconcile them together.
I shall not now mention that the Old and New Testaments teach that the Messiah
is both God and Man, and that there are three Persons subsisting in the Blessed
Trinity, and that Christ dyed for the redemption of mankind: because they are
points, which perhaps may be disputed: although, to receive the New Testament
for the Word of God, and to reject the Doctrine of the Trinity, and that of
Redemption by the Merit of Christ, is as if a man should take back with one
hand that which he casts away with the other. I shall only speak of those
things which are clearer then the light it self. In the Alcoran, the History of
the Creation of the World, of the Terestrial Paradise, of the Fall of man, of
the Death of Abel, of the Deluge and the Arc of Noah, of the Angels which
appeared to Abraham, of the Selling and Imprisonment of Joseph, of the Plagues
of Egypt and Pharaoh, of the Calling of Moses and his Miracles, are so
villanously corrupted and contaminated with Fables, both contrary to the truth,
and ridiculous in themselves, that whatsoever is excellent, elegant, genuine,
pathetical and divine in the books of the Jews, becomes cold and impertinent,
absurd and divested of all verisimilitude, when this busy sciolist has the
management of it. If Moses and Mahomet were guided by the same spirit, whence
comes it to pass that they do not agree together? How do the Writings of the
Former ravish attentive and sober minds with admiration, while the confused
trash of the latter deters ingenuous spirits from the belief of those
histories? In like manner, there is in the Evangelists a clear and coherent
narration of the Annuntiation of the Angel to the Virgin, of the miraculous
Conception of Christ, of the Birth of John the Baptist, and the history of
Zacharias his father, of the Crucifying of our Savior and his Ascension into
Heaven, and other like matters with their circumstances and dependances. All
which is so perversely related in the Alcoran, debased with so many falsities
and fables, mangled and disguised with so many additions, contradictions and
intolerable mutilations, that were it not for the proper names that he uses
therein, and some slight marks by which the reader may judge that he intended
the rehearsing of those histories, it would be difficult to imagine that he had
ever heard of or understood any thing of them. Wherefore, if the Alcoran be
proceeded from the Spirit of God, and yet it bears testimony to the divinity of
the Gospel, how is it that the same spirit blows both cold and hot? Why does it
report at one time after one manner, and differently at another? Had it lost
the memory of that which passed in Judaea five or six hundred years before, and
therefore recounted the same afterward after such a disagreeing manner? Or why
did it not make use of the Memorials which the Evangelists and Apostles, who
were ocular witnesses of those transactions, had recorded concerning the same?
But its possible, our Books have been altered. Which is a most frivolous
exception. For if they were changed before the Sarazin name was heard in the
World, by what prophetic spirit could it have been divined that Mahomet was to
come, and so to new mold all the Old and the New Testament, out of despite to
him? And if it was afterward, how come our Books to accord from word to word
and point to point, both in this and all other matters, with the Commentaries
of all them that writ in the first Ages of Christianity? How would the Jews
have permitted the Christians so to alter the Old Testament from the beginning
to the end, and the Christians the Jews likewise the New, seeing they are so
irreconcilable enemies amongst themselves? Is it not rather to be believed,
that the ignorance of Mahomet, who had never professed Christianity, and the bad
memory of those that helped him to compile his Alcoran, who suggested to him by
roat, that little of it they had learnt by hearsay, caused him to committ all
those hideous absurdities? And certainly he extremely mistrusted that people
would believe so. For there is nothing he has so strictly forbidden, as to
dispute concerning his Law with the Jews, because his cheats and foists are so
open to discovery and conviction. Two things alone keep up in credit amongst
his fellows the falsities which he vented with so outrageous an impudence;
Force of Arms, the terror of which he diffused wheresoever he came, and the
Profound Ignorance of the people that follow him, to whom it is forbidden to
enter into any examination of the verity of things.

But if he be foully inconsistent and discordant in the relation of histories,
he is no less in the doctrines which he teaches. For the Gospel exhorts
universally to patience, and would not have any maintain or advance it
otherwise then by sufferings; and though in other things it condemns not wars
justly engaged in by Princes for conservation of their rights and the peace of
their dominions, yet in matter of Religion it recommends only constancy in
suffering of the Cross, and would have us be contented with that promise, that
all shall be so well ordered by the Providence of God, that none shall have
cause to complain that he leaves his own in oblivion. But what does Mahomet in
this cast? There is not a chapter in all his book, wherein he does not preach
fire and sword, wars and massacres for the advancement of his Law. He promises
rewards in Paradise to those that shall acquit themselves valiantly therein,
and denounces eternal pains to cowards. And although (as He contradicts himself
very frequently) he says sometimes that no person ought to be constrained by
force to receive his Law, yet himself was the first that began so to make it be
believed, and gave special commandments for it, which also has hitherto been
practiced by his successors upon all occasions. In the Gospel Christ reduces
Marriage to its ancient and natural purity, prohibiting Polygamy and Divorce,
saving in case of adultery only. By the Alcoran it is lawful to have four or
five wives, if a man be able to keep them, and to add to them moreover if he
pleases a number of concubines. How then is it, that Christ having taught that
the permission of Divorce was an induligence to the people of Israel because of
the hardness of their hearts, that at the beginning it was not so, and so
having by degrees abolished polygamies which had been in custom amongst them;
How is it, I say, that this Prophet, whose revelations are, if you will believe
himself, the accomplishment of the Gospel and the Law, establishes the same
again with so boundless licentiousness? Certainly Christ did in this correct
the defects of the polity of Moses, and put things into an estate convenient to
the excellence of times under the Gospel. To urge the same further; Had there
been any thing in the causes of the Gospel to be amended, Mahomet ought to have
caused as much purity of holy marriage to have shined in his Law above that of
Christ, as Christ had made to appear in his above that of Moses. And
notwithstanding, clean contrary, he dishonors and pollutes it more then it ever
was in the time of the Law of the Jews, or even amongst idolatrous nations that
have had any knowledge of natural honesty. Add hereunto, that the Gospel being
a Doctrine of holy liberty, and which has favored us with the grant of
well-using such things as are neither good nor evil in themselves, has
abrogated the constitution which obliged to abstain from them, and likewise
recommended the use of them in time of necessity: which appears expressly in
wine, which the Apostle advises Timothy to use for the weakness of his stomach.
And so far was Christ from intending that his disciples and believers should
abhor that sort of liquor, that he has made it a part of the celebration of
his most sacred mysteries. What new inspiration therefore had this pretended
Prophet to forbid wine as an abominable thing, and the game of Chess as a
diabolical and cursed invention? As for the prohibition of Games of Chance,
such as Cards and Dice, he is most readily commended for it: but I know not
what evil sports of industry had done him, that he should attribute the
invention of them to wicked spirits, and excommunicate unpardonably out of his
Paradise all those that divert themselves therewith. Above all things the
contrariety of manners and fashions of behavior is remarkable between the
authors of these two Religions, the Christian and the Mohammedan. For Christ
showed himself an unimitable example of all sorts of virtues, and Mahomet
acknowledges him such, and his most bitter enemies could never find any thing
in him that was to be blamed. Whereas Mahomet, like a monster of uncleanness,
places amongst the privileges allowed him above others of his sect, that it
was not lawful for them to have more then four or five wives beside some
concubines, but he had liberty from God to espouse as many as he pleased. And
that which is horrible to hear, he makes God speak as if he had endowed him
with extraordinary vigor at his birth for that purpose. Yet I am the most
mistaken man in the world if he were not jealous; so strictly does he enjoin
his wives not to go forth of the house, to make no flaunting of their beauty,
and never to appear but with a veil over their faces: and so severely does he
forbid the Mahometanes to approach and caress them, yea to enter into his
house, saving at certain hours prefixed and determined by him. And for the
height of continence in a Prophet of God, his sectators do not deny, that
becoming enamored of the wife of Zeid his slave, he caused him to divorce her,
that he might espouse her himself because of her excellent beauty; and
afterward this beast introduces God speaking, and owning that it was he that
married them together. Who can doubt, as to the rest, of the genius of this
person?

But indeed the Paradise which he promises to his True-believers is an
indubitable argument that the mind of this man was absolutely ingulfed in the
dissoluteness of the flesh, and subverted with the love of women, and that his
intention was to inveagle the minds of others by the same baits of
lasciviousness. For with what beatitude in the heavens above does he feed their
hopes? They shall be, says he, in a Paradise watered with fair and delightful
fountains, which shall flow as gently as if they were of liquid crystal. They
shall lie and repose in the shadow, under the cool of thick-leav'd and stately
trees, which by their own motion shall intwine into pleasing bowers. There
shall they eat all sorts of delicious fruits in all seasons, and shall be
recreated with the melody of ten thousand little birds warbling amongst their
branches; wherewith shall be mingled the consort of most harmonious instruments
and melodious voices. Their attire shall be magnificent and triumphant, as of
silk purfled with gold, and bedecked with jewels and pearls. They shall sleep
in beds imbroider'd with gold; their pillows shall have great pearls hanging
at the corners, and their curtains shall be beset with jewels beyond value and
number. And that which tickles his fancy most, they shall each have their wives
transcendently beautiful, with breasts delicately protuberant, and eyes like
Jet enchased in Sylver, whiter then snow, and as great as large Eggs; which is
a bigness something exorbitant, unles he will give them an enormous stature at
the Resurrection. And because sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus, they shall
banquet with them every day, and shall be diverted with all sorts of sports and
recreations that can be imagined; and they shall be served at their feasts in
fair large goblets of gold and crystal, beset with most precious jewels, and
that by beautiful young Lads more smooth then pearls themselves, and perfumed
with odors beyond that of Amber-gris and the most fragrant of Arabia. What can
be concluded from this description of his rare Paradise, but that Mahomet was
wholly of flesh, and there was nothing spiritual lest in his soul? Then, as for
Hell, he describes it almost after the same rate. For he says that the Wicked
shall be cruelly tormented there in flames, and shall beg for a little water to
refresh them; upon which shall be given a little drop of I know not what
liquor, but so poisonous and corroding that it shall eat out their bowels, and
yet they shall not dye; then they shall be fed against their wills with a fruit
resembling the Devils testicles, which shall boil like fire in their stomachs;
and they shall be clothed with shirts of flaming pitch, and wear great collors
of burning fire about their necks. Is not this an excellent prospect of the
infernal pains? I know there are some of so perverted fancies as to seek out
mysterious doctrines hidden under them. Yea they go so far as to make
comparison thereof with that which is contained under the veil of some typical
and figurative words in the books of the Old and New Testament. But were not
these wildbrain'd persons sufficiently punished in this life by their own folly,
they should be answered with stripes and scourges instead of the reasons of
Divines and Philosophers. For what is mysterious in the Bible is such, that
were it, not understood, yet it offers nothing either absurd or ridiculous. And
that which is understood of it (as there is scarce any thing which is not,
saving some prophecies not yet accomplished, in regard they are veiled under
enigmatical expressions) has been manifested by events, which are the best
Commentaries on prophecies, or illustrated by doctrines explicitly and clearly
delivered in other places of it; So that the whole book does give light unto it
self by its own beams. But in those prophecies of Mahomet, the obscure matters
are irrational and ridiculous in their obscurity; and he that goes about to
seek some doctrine worthy of esteem under the bark of his words, there is in
the first place such a perpetual dissonance in the text of the Alcoran, that he
will soon perceive those words were not made for those things; and liken a
noble and excellent doctrine clothed with the seemingly mysterious style of
that person to the story of Hercules's putting on the attire of a young maid;
for what could be easier then to discern that those feminine habiliments were
unsuitable to the robust and nervous members of him that overcame so many
monsters? In the next place he will be forced to borrow that doctrine some
where else, either from the Holy Scripture, or from Philosophy, and transplant
the same into the Alcoran as into a strange soil. For of it self it neither
furnishes matter wherewith to supply its deficiency and emptiness, nor light to
clear up its obscurities. And indeed, what a furious love of the Alcoran is it,
that causes a man to observe such things in it, of which its author would not
have us believe he ever thought, and such as his interpreters reject, and his
followers detest and abominate? For why are they so affected to the Law of
Mahomet, unless because it promises them all sorts of corporeal contentments?
And should any expound those things to them in a mystical way, who doubts but
that they would think his endeavor was to cause all the hope of their beatitude
to vanish into smoke?

Moreover, though for the Words and the Rhyme, that book was written in an
Arabic style good enough, yet it is composed of parts so loose and incoherent
amongst themselves, that it is a wonder how they that read it with so much
admiration, do not advert its impertinence. For it is a hotchpot of several
confused matters huddled together without any other connection then they have
by chance; and it is sufficiently apparent that it was built at several times
and by diverse hands, and not followed according to one uniform and continued
design. For he mingles therein the Histories before the Law with those after
it, those of the New Testament with the Wars of his own time, and sometimes
divides one into two or three pieces, and contrarily sometimes ineptly molds
two or three into one. Prayers, promises, exhortations, admonitions,
commandments and laws, privileges and histories, descriptions of Paradise and
Hell, Philosophy and Divinity after his manner, fables of times past and
future, the number of the Celestial Orbs, and the death of a Cow are to be
found jumbled together in one and the same Chapter. And you would say sometimes
that they are verily the ravings of a man in a fever, or the enthusiasmes of a
drunkard. -- Vt nec pes, nec caput uni
Reddatur formae --
And if the order thereof be so perverted, the matter is little better. He
says that the Mind of man is a portion of the soul of God, which he breathed
into him at his first creation, and that under the shadow which the trees make
they adore the Deity. He swears by the Alcoran in one place, and in another by
his pen, that that book was sent to him from Heaven. That the Heavens would
fall, were it not for the Angels that pray for us. That Jesus Christ had the
soul of God. That many deserted Christ, because he was too eloquent. And
disputing against the Christians he proves that Jesus is not the Son of God,
and that God can have no Son, in as much as he has no need of any thing
whatsoever. He says, Men were created of shadow, and Devils of flames of fire.
And as for the creation of the rest of the Universe, he relates it in this
manner: God created the Earth in two days, and fastened it, to the mountains as
it were by anchors and cables. In the two next days he caused all sorts of
herbs to spring up for the nutriment of animals. After which the earth being
thus framed began to emit exhalations and steams, of which he formed the
Heavens in two other days, in which he placed the Stars, and gave them
principally in charge to chase away the Devils by the splendour of their light
when they go to spy what is doing in Heaven. Did he reason or rage, when he
writ all these excellent pieces of Divinity? But then he interweaves the same
here and there with I know not what putid fables. He repeates a hundred and a
hundred times, so distrustful is he it will not be believed, that God is the
author of that rare book, and professes that all mankind together could not
have made the least syllable of it. He sprinkles the doctrine of the
resurrection with shameful and unprofitable fables. Sometimes he goes about to
discourse of matters treated on by the Writers of the New Testament, and
presently discovers that he understands nothing at all of them; as where he
makes a comparison of Christ with Adam. Then in another place he trifles
incongruously about the Table of the Lord and the Sacraments of the Gospel. He
boasts of having cemented the Moon together again which himself had cut in
sunder. He speaks of Predestination and the Providence of God, as a Fatal
Destiny; and some say, it is by this means that he rendered his followers so
adventurous in war, because being persuaded that the decrees of that Destiny
are inevitable, they cast themselves without heed into the mouth of danger,
presuming they shall not dye, in case it be not predestined, though their
hearts were pierced with a hundred Javelins. Lastly, he contradicts himself at
every turn. But the thing for which he most frequently defends himself, is his
not doing of miracles, and he will not allow anyone to require them from him;
though indeed he did all things which no man ought to undertake unless he can
prove his vocation by authentic miracles. For he abolisht the constitutions
which himself acknowledged were authorized by God, as those of the Law and the
Gospel. He introduced a new form of Religion, and invaded the dignity of
sovereign Magistrates, levying arms against Princes, though he was but a
private person, giving liberty to slaves in spite of their masters with an
absolute authority, and maikng invasions and wars the most violent and bloody
that ever were seen in the world, But ought not he to have authorized himself
by miracles, to show the right he had to do all this? Who ever attempted any of
those things, as Moses, or Elias, or Christ, or his Apostles, but at sometime
or other gave testimony of their celestial calling by miracles? Certainly when
I consider on the one side the absurdity and grosseness of almost every thing
he says, I cannot but think he had great need of miracles to persuade the same
to people of understanding, and I should reckon it a miracle if any honest man
could believe him. And on the other side when I consider the nature of his
doctrine, and those to whom he persuaded it, I conceive it no great miracle to
have allured and drawn carnal minds by the gaudy baits of a carnal Paradise. In
a word, it needs not to be much versed in that work to observe that it is a
medly of all impertinent and bad things, amongst which there is sometimes found
some little good, as there is in the Drugs of Egypt.

(...). But what good there is there, is overwhelmed in an abyss of falsities,
impieties, fables and impertinences; and it is not difficult to show from what
fountains he derived it all. The good doctrines and sentences which are
sometimes met with by the way, are taken from the Old and New Testament; The
hatred which be perpetually testifies against the doctrine of the Trinity and
the Deity of Christ, he received by contagion from the Arians and other
heretics that were in high repute in his time; That vile pollution of Marriage
by the licentious multiplicity of wives and concubines, came from the Schole of
the Nicolaitans; The rare carnal Paradise was the invention of Cerin^hus and
the ancient Chiliasts; and that other foist, That Christ did not suffer really,
but only some Fantasme in his place, was forged by the Cerdonians, and others
of that stamp. The greatest part of his Fables are borrowed from the Jews and
some Apocryphal Authors that were current, like false money, in those times:
and his gross follies wherewith he has larded and strewed it throughout, came
from his own ignorance, and for that having himself no knowledge at all neither
of the Old nor New Testament nor of the writings of the Jews nor profane
histories nor the Poets, he trusted to the memory of a lewd Monk, and some
false Christians or false Jews, who never understood very much of them; whence
all that he relates out of them is delivered rashly and at random. But on the
other side, though there were nothing but truth in the whole Alcoran, nothing
but what were rational in it self and consentaneous to the Holy Scriptures,
both for histories and doctrines, yet the author of it ought nevertheless to be
held for no other then an Impostor, for that he dares to vaunt himself for a
great Prophet. For such a Prophet as he pretends to be, ought not only to
declare things agreeing with those that were before him, but either to reveal
doctrines unknown till then, or to expound those which were delivered
enigmatically, and to unveil them out of their obscurities, and withal to make
faith of his calling either by miracles or prophesies of things to come
ratified by the events, the prediction of which does not import the vivacity of
humane wit by penetrating by conjectures into some things undiscerned by vulgar
eyes, but the wisdom of God to whom the bottom of the most impenetrable secrets
is conspicuous. Otherwise all Divines that ever writ concerning Religion either
Jewish or Christian congruously to the books of the Old and New Testament,
should be either Prophets or Apostles. Besides, were there no errors in the
Alcoran, yet how many books have we that treat the best things contained
therein in a manner incomparably more excellent. Wherefore he ought to be
accounted a Deceiver, and the father of Deceivers, who being so ignorant, so
impertinent, so absurd, so discordant from truth, so fabulous and pollute, he
yet glories that he is the greatest of all the Prophets, by whose ministry God
revealed himself to men.

Now if Mahomet himself was so gross and mad a fool, his principal Doctors and
interpreters had yet more need of manacles and chains then he; which I shall
show only by the sample of two books which they have in esteem. In one of
which is described the journey of Mahomet into Paradise by the conduct of the
Angel Gabriel. He entered (say they) into the first heaven, being mounted upon
Alborach, an animal something bigger then an Ass, and having a humane face;
where he observed that that first sphere was of fine silver, and so thick as
would require the space of five hundred years to be traveled over by a
footman. There they found an Angel so high as it would be a thousand years
journey from his head to his foot, with seventy thousand other Angels, each of
which had seventy thousand heads, every head seventy thousand horns, every
horn seventy thousand knots, and the distance of forty years journey between
one knot and another. Also, every head had seventy thousand faces, in every of
which there were seventy thousand mouths, in every mouth seventy thousand
tongues, and every tongue spoke a thousand languages, in which they praised God
seventy thousand times a day: you may imagine what a rare melodious noise they
made. In the second heaven, which is made all of burnished gold, they found a
great multitude of Angels greater then the former, amongst whom there was one
whose seet touched the earth and his head the eighth Heaven. It Is strange no
body ever saw him at least in one of the hemispheres. But all these were but
pygmies in comparison of another, whom they met in the third Heaven, who was so
prodigiously great that if he should hold all the world in the palm of his
hand, he could nevertheless shut it. Yet betwixt him and those which were in
the fourth heaven, it is hard to say whether there were any proportion, unless
some new Geometry be f und out to express it. For every one of them had seventy
pair of wings, in each of which were seventy thousand pinions, and every pinion
was seventy thousand cubits long. But as for him that they saw in the fifth
sphere, the Poets with their Briareus never understood any thing of him; for
what was he with his hundred arms to the Angel that opened the gate to them,
who had seven thousand arms, at the end of each of which he moved seventy
thousand hands? In the other spheres they scarce found Angels of so enormous a
stature: but in the eighth sphere they beheld I cannot tell what huge Giant, so
dreadful, that he could have swollowed the Globe of the Earth and Sea as easily
as a little Pill. Is the true History of Lucian and the Chronicles of
Garagantua to be compared to this? In the other Book is recited the discourse
between a Musulman and a Jew who puts questions to him about the principal
points of his doctrine; and here it is that the spirit of error and lying
displayes its full sails. He says God created a large Carton or Paper-volume
and a pen of so rare a shape, that it was five hundred days journey in length
and four and twenty in breadth; and that with this pen, which has four and
twenty points, he writes continually in that Paper all that ever was, is, or
shall be in the world. That the light of the Sun and the Moon were equal in the
beginning, so that the day could not be well distinguished from the night, but
the Angel Gabriel as he flew by, struck the Moon with the end of his wing and
made it loose half its light. Mention is made there of an Ox, of so immense a
greatness, that between each of his horns (whereof he has forty) there is the
distance of a thousand years journey. And yet he says this Ox is under the
Earth, which the Hollanders sail round about in less then a year. And least the
Sea should complain of being destitute of Mahometical Monsters, he assigns a
fish to it, whose head is in the East, and tail in the West, which carries on
his back the whole earth, seas, and mountains; a heavy load indeed; but the air
and darkness which he casts into his burden do not much increase his weight. He
makes Rats to have been produced in the Ark of the sneesing of a Hog, and Cats
of the sneesing of a Lion, perhaps by reason of the resemblance of their snout
and muzzle. And he says that Seraphiel (whosoever he be, is not worth much
enquiry) on the day of resurrection, shall by sounding a trumpet of five
hundred years journey long, puff out all the souls of the deceased, which
being so dispersed about the world shall fly about, every one seeking its own
body. They that find allegorical senses in these rare texts, I think no
reasonable man will judge but a portion of Hellebore were more fit for them
then argumentative discourses. Wherefore let him be perpetually concluded and
accounted a most stupid and senseless person, who will not subscribe to this
Result, that the doctrine of Mahomet is so far from being of divine revelation,
that it is not so much as of humane institution. Or if man had any share in it,
the evil spirit, when he contrived it, was lodged in his hypochondres.

CHAP. IV. Of the Religion of the Jews; Whether it allows Indifference: And how
it ought to be held of Divine Revelation.
I Intimated above that the Jewish Religion is not to be distinguished
according to the Sects of those that profess it, but according to the times in
which they lived. Nevertheless in this contest against those that maintain
Indifference in the external profession of all Religions, it is not material,
if they betake themselves to the Jewish, in what time they consider it, before
or after the birth of Christ. For if they plead it as it was established by
Moses and continued down to the birth of Christ, there never was any that so
severely forbad its professors to participate in strange ceremonies. The first
Commandment of their Law is, Thou shall have no other Gods before me. And next,
Thou shall not make to thy self the likeness of any that is in Heaven above, or
in the Earth beneath, or in the Waters under the earth; Thou shall not bow down
before it. Comprehending in one and the same prohibition both devotion toward
other Gods, and the expression of it toward their Images. And all the books of
Moses are in a manner but a commentary in confirmation of these two
Commandments, repeated and inculcated from page to page. As likewise all the
ceremonies enjoined by the same Law, differing from those of all the Gentiles,
were as a separation between those Nations, which withheld the Gentiles from
approaching to the Jews, whose God they did not know, and the Jews ftom
communicating with the Gentiles, whom they looked upon as profane and
idolatrous. Marriages with the Daughters of strangers were forbidden them,
least they should become snares to them and cause them to turn aside to other
Gods: and the total extirpation of the inhabitants of Canaan was commanded, to
the end there might remain no memory of them or their idols, which might be an
occasion of perversion and scandal to them. And it appears by many experiences
that God and men construed this Law after this manner. For there is no where
else to be found examples of greater resolution and constancy in maintaing of
Religion. They have chosen rather to be cast into burning furnaces, and amongst
the paws of Lions, then to conform to the idolatries of Babylon. They have
endured cruel deaths rather then they would taste of swins flesh, which was
forbidden to them, and in short, have cheerfully suffered all kinds of
oppressions and violences for the desense of their Law. On the other side we do
not find more dreadful judgments inflicted on any nation for associating with
other people in their religious Ceremonies. For they have been inslaved by
their adversaries, their Country turned into desolation, and their whole Nation
carried away by their victorious enemies into a strange Land. And indeed the
case is too notorious of it self to be doubted. If the Jewish Religion be
considered as it is professed by them at this day, being themselves pretend it
to be of a permanent durance, and not subject to any variation, it follows that
they must accord in this point with the doctrine of their ancestors. For
wherefore should it be changed in this particular, being in all others
invariable? And truly their practice is not different from that of old. They
bear still about them a token imprinted in their flesh, which seperates them
from the rest of mankind. They abhor and despise other nations as ignorant of
the true God: and abominate Images and Statues more in these days then ever, as
reminding them of the idolatry heretofore so expressly forbidden to their
fathers. So that they choose rather to be the scorn and hatred of all Nations,
and deprived of all hopes of honors, pre-eminences, great possessions, and
offices, which are so powerful attractives to the rest of mankind, then to
conform only in outward profession to our devotions, and set foot in our
Churches. But if they were of the Opinion of our Indifferents, were it not an
easy thing for them to be baptized, and thereby redeem themselves from so many
mischiefs, and partake in the honors of the Countries in which they dwell? It
is true, some Marchands amongst them dissemble in such places where they are
not permitted to sojourn; but they do it with great regret and against their
consciences. Yet they cannot be brought to do any thing on the Saturday for
fear of violating the Sabbath, or to eat the flesh of swine, the prohibition
whereof they account perpetually valid.

But should the present Jews have degenerated in this particular, as they have
done in many others, from the faith and practice of their ancestors, yet there
ought not any account to be made of their testimony as to the matter in
question. For whatever advantages they have above the Pagans and Mahometans,
they are nevertheless deviated from the way of salvation as well as they, and
cannot pretend hereafter to have that Divine Revelation which ought to be the
sole Rule to men of piety and devotion. Indeed their race is the noblest of all
others; and there is no King or people that can boast to be descended from so
ancient a stock, nor prove their pedigree by so authentic evidences. For they
are not guilty of the ridiculous vanity of the Egyptians, who by their own
account are many thousand years elder then the World; nor of that of the
Athenians, who thought themselves sprung out of their own soil. They do not
pretend to have been formed of the Stones of Pyrrha, nor go about to rake the
badges of their nobility out of the rubbidge of Troy. They show by a great
series of time, and an exact and clear display of diverse periods the world of,
that their first father was the common father of all, and that no nation can
have any manifestation of its original but from their Records. As for the
Antiquity of their Religion, it preceded all others by many Ages. It has been
ratified by an infinite number of great and excellent miracles, which made that
Nation sometimes formidable to their neighbors, and which being frequently
exploited, did without question advance it above the parallel of all other
people of the Earth. It has preserved amongst them the knowledge of the true
God, and delivered the same to us, disintricated from the confusion of so many
false Deities, to whom our Ancestors were devoted. It gave them to know after
what manner the World was at first formed, and has preserved fresh amongst
them the memory of the most remarkable matters that arrived in that primitive
Age of Men, of which other nations have had only some kind of obscure and
faint glimpses in fabulous stories, which afford only enough evidence to
convince the books of the Pagans of vanity, and to confirm the truth of what is
found in the Jewish histories. And that which advantages them yet more, is,
that their Law contains such an excellent model of all piety and virtue, that
more wisdom has been revealed to them in ten words only, then can be
collected out of the Books of all the Philosophers, were the quintessence
extracted out of them. In a Word, the Books of their Law and the Revelations of
their Prophets are proceeded from Heaven; and as it shall more amply appear,
they bear with them most undeniable testimonies of it. But the polity of their
Religion, how divine soever, was to be changed; and its time being expired, we
must otherwhere seek the rules of that which we ought to follow.

Wherefore to show that their Law was to be changed, and that it was established
but for a time, it must be considered in each of its principal parts; As in the
Political Laws, upon which their Republic was founded; In their Ceremonial
Ordinances, in observation whereof consisted all their external divine service;
And in the Ten Commandments of the Two Tables, which contain the General
Precepts of piety toward God, and virtue which ought to be practiced amongst
men. As for their Political Laws, they were excellent indeed for the government
of that Nation, and established with singular Wisdom. But I conceive there is
no Jew so opinative, as to account them proper for the government of all sorts
of Nations in all Ages. For every country, every people, and time must have its
respective laws, and there is necessity of altering the same according to the
variety of circumstances. And as Divorce was permitted in the Commonwealth of
Israel in its political government, for some necessity particular to that
Nation, so there may be some other Nations, in which likewise for some
political necessity it must be absolutely forbidden. It would seem unreasonable
in a country where the houses are built with plain ridges, for the public
authority to demolish all sort of edifices of that fashion, and enjoin to build
only with battlements and ballisters. Now it is as little comprehensible, how
in such a Country as France is, the Laws given by Moses concerning the
determination of Lawsuits could be practiced. It would be requisite not only
to change the order of Magistrates and practice of Courts, but to new mold the
manners of the entire Nation. And how could the diverse forms of Governments of
Kingdoms and Empires be conformed to the political Law of Israel, as Monarchy
in France, Aristocracy in Venice, and Democracy in Athens? Must they that
should become Jews in these parts of Europe, renounce all soverain powers that
are so well established therein according to the genius of every Nation, to
reform them all according to the model of the Jewish policy? And if the great
Cham of the Tartars with all his subjects, should cause themselves to be
circumcised, to what purpose would the Laws of Tenths for the Levites, and the
like, be in his Country? Indeed all the policy of Israel was regulated either
according to the nature of that people, different from most others, or
according to the division of their Tribes, wherewith other Nations had no
resemblance, or else according to the quality of the Country, which was unlike
to others in many respects. But on the other side, their great Legislator, the
most pious amongst their Kings, and the divinest amongst their Prophets have
expressly promised the Calling of the Nations to the communion of one and the
same Law with the Jews, so that they shall make up but one people. Rejoice O ye
Nations, his people, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.43. And David in the 117. Psalm, O
praise the Lord, all ye Nations; praise him all ye people. Why? but for being
called to his knowledge. And in Psalm 69.1. O sing unto the Lord a new song: All
the Earth sing unto the Lord, verse. 3. Declare his glory among the heathen, and
his Wonders among all people. But Isaiah more expressly when he promises in the
55. chap. of his Revelations, that the Messiah shall be equally a Legislator of
the Jews and others, verse. 4. Behold, I have given him for a witness to the
Nations, to be a leader and commander of the people. Behold, thou shall call a
Nation that thou knew not; and the Nations which knew not thee shall run
unto thee, because of the Lord thy God. And it is for the same reason that he
speaks thus to the Church of God in the foregoing Chapter, Sing, O barren, thou
that did not bear; break forth into singing and cry aloud, thou that know
not what it is to travel with child, etc. Enlarge the place of thy tent, and
let them stretch forth the curtains of thy Pavillions; spare not, lengthen thy
cord and strengthen thy stakes. For thou shall spread forth on the right hand
and on the left; and thy posterity shall inherit the Nations, and make the
desolate Cities to be inhabited. And the Jews themselves await the
accomplishment of these promises. Wherefore it follows necessarily that their
Law, as to the policy of the Commonwealth, was to alter; and that whereas
before, it obliged all those who had any interest and title in the Alliance
which God had contracted with them, the use thereof in this respect is now
become free, and not necessarily obligatory. The truth is, though political
Laws of Republics be nothing but the natural laws of justice and honesty,
which being general are applied to particular matters according to the
diversity of circumstances, which are infinite and infinitely variable;
provided that in the government of every Nation the image of that natural
justice be always resplendent in their Laws, it is not important whether there
be difference in things of lesser concernment. And it would be too rigorous a
yoke, to subject all Nations to the same form of Laws, without regard whether
the humors of men and conditions of times permit it. Now whereas the Law of
Moses is composed of three parts equally, the change of one necessarily infers
with it the alteration of the rest. And it must needs fall out here as it does
in the building of Palaces. For he that should go about to change one part of a
great uniform edifice it would be needful for him to change it all, and ruin
it all from top to bottom; otherwise the disparity of its parts would render it
unproportional and deformed.

But this is more manifest in the Ceremonial Law, in which consisted all
external service performed to God. For it would be more difficult for all
Nations to obey that, then the Political. What likelihood is there, I beseech
you, that God would tie all Nations, so remote and dispersed upon the face of
the Earth, to repair and sacrifice at Jerusalem, and assemble there at solemn
Feasts? That from the North, South, East and West, they should all be there at
a time appointed to perform that service, notwithstanding the interval so many
Seas and mountains: And if when Jerusalem was besieged by Titus, the multitude
of men grievously pestred the place, although there was only the Nation of the
Jews assembled there at that time, what Jerusalem would be capable of
containing all other Nations besides, which ought to come to the knowledge of
the true God? Could the Tribe of Levi have furnished Sacrificers enough, or
Judea beasts for victimes? Could the Temple, had it been twenty times as big as
that which Herod built, have received the twentieth part of those that were to
perform their devotions in it? And what a horrible slaughter would there be, or
how could they escape the deluge of blood which would fill the streets if every
one were to offer his beast? But indeed he that shall duly consider the whole
structure of the Religious Policy which was sometimes amongst them, shall find
that it has not the appearance of a thing that was to endure to perpetuity,
but was only the platform and delineation of some other to come in its place.
For to what end served the massacre of so many beasts? Was it, because God took
pleasure in the flesh of bulls, or in the blood of Goats? Himself denies it in
their Prophets. In the 50. Psalm verse. 8. I will not reprove thee for thy
Sacrifices, or for the burnt-offerings which should be continually before me. I
will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he-goats out of thy folds, etc.
Verse. 13. Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats? Offer
unto God thanksgiving, etc. Also, Thou take no pleasure in sacrifices, else
would I give them; the burnt-offering is not acceptable to thee. The sacrifices
of God are a contrite spirit, etc. And Isaiah in a severer strain, chap. 66. He
that kills an Ox is as if he slew a man; he that sacrifices a sheep, as if
he cut off a dogs neck; he that offers an oblation, as if he offered the
blood of a swine; he that burns incense, as if he blessed an Idol. And
certainly he should have too low an opinion of God, that should imagine he
delighted in beholding the spilling of the blood, or the smoking of the fat of
sacrifices. He takes pleasure in the piety of the heart and in virtue, and not
in the odor of incense or the death of beasts. Was it to make propitiation for
their sins, and secure them from the curse denounced by their Law? Much less.
For it is possible some man might fancy God so good toward his creatures, as to
be pleased with such offerings proceeding from a good heart, as testimonies of
its devotion; But he is too just for any to imagine, that when he is incensed
he maybe satisfied with trifles. Lastly, was it to exercise the people of
Israel, and keep them in discipline, as curbes and pasternes are used to unruly
horses, and diverse rules of discipline are prescribed to youth inclinable to
deboshery? This indeed was one of the uses of the Law, but the Jews will not
acknowledge it, and which they cannot have learnt but from the Doctors and
Founders of the Christian Church. Moreover, these exercises are not to be
continued for ever: We take away the shackels from horses when they are become
tractable, and leave children to their own conduct when they come to age. Can
it be thought then, that the Church of God should be always in infancy, and
never come to perfect age to have no more need of so exact and so rigorous a
discipline? Let them consult their Books well, and they will find that in
process of time God gave them to understand that all those things were but
shadows, which were to vanish when the truth should be manifested, and that
proportionably as that time approacht, the contempt that he had of those things
in themselves was discovered. For in the books of Moses they are most severely
enjoined as if the service of God really consisted therein. In the Psalms of
David God begins to decry the use of them. And Isaiah in the first and the
sixty sixth Chapter of his Prophecies, speaks so disadvantageously of them, that
he almost as good as says that they were even already abolisht. I know well,
that he speaks of them after a comparative manner with internal virtues, which
the Jews wholly forgot, confining themselves strictly and trusting in the
observation of these externals. But I conceive that Moses in reproving the
contempt of internal piety, would never have spoken with such disdain of those
corporeal sacrifices, and there is nothing in all his books but gives assurance
of the contrary. Whence then should this difference between them arise, since
they were all guided by the same spirit, but that Moses was yet too remote from
the body in which those shadows were to terminate? To what end were their Arks,
Propitiatories, or Mercy-seats, Tables of Shewbread, candlesticks, dishes,
basins, courtains, covertures, veiles, altars, sives, gridirons, censers, and
lamps, in a word all the accoutrements and deckings of the Tabernacle, which if
they represented nothing but what they barely seem, would be frivolous and
tedious? Especially, why should God so particularly give the whole scheme of
it, and enjoin Moses so strictly not to transgress in any thing from the
pattern shown to him in the mountain? Certainly if all this had no further
reference then to the Tabernacle, no body can give a pertinent reason why God
should make so scrupulous a description of it, or why he should impart
extraordinary graces of his spirit to the chief managers of the whole work,
unless we will say that God takes pleasure, like us, in imbrodery and painting.
But when he says expressly that it was only a representation of what he had
shown to Moses, he apparently intimates that he aimed further, and that the
Tabernacle was but the image of that which God reserved to himself till another
time, and the Israelites were to expect. For seeing our minds are never
contented with the images of things, when-they consider that they are merely
images, be; cause they cannot perfectly represent the life and the more
exquisitely the images seem to be made, the more desirous are we to see the
reality; God admonishing them that the Ark and the Tabernacle were but
representations of that which he kept hid with him, would by degrees excite
them in the desire to behold the thing it self. But he would never have excited
the appetites of men for nothing: if he inflame our hearts with any desires, he
always supplies wherewith to satiate them, and never deludes men with vain
expectations. Wherefore it must needs be that he has exhibited the same in
it is due time, and the figure has given place to the substance. For at the
appearance of the body it would be a folly afterward to stick to the
consideration of shadows. God therefore has done like an excellent Architect
who intending to build a great and magnificent Palace, before he cuts out the
porphyry, prepares the pillars, forms the arches, carves and squares the pieces
of Cedar for the feeling or the Wainscot, designs out his whole work with a
Crayon on paper, and takes pleasure in beholding the proportions of it in such
an Idea. For before building up his Church of all Nations, and revealing his
spiritual secrets to it, he was pleased first to behold the design of it in the
structure of the Tabernacle, and in the whole Legal Polity of the Jewish
Church. Not to make an assay, or take his proportions, for fear of failing when
he should come to the effect; for all his works are present before him from
eternity, but because the time did not yet require that he should put his hand
to the true building, he would as it were please himself in the Idea which he
had pourtraied of it in the Nation of the Jews, and give those that should one
day see the real extribition of the thing it self, singular incitements to
admire his wisdom in the wonderful correspondence of the building with the
shadow.

Now in my judgment the present Jews ought to reflect more seriously upon the
state of their affairs, and the change which is really and evidently befallen
them; which if they did, they must be very obstinate not to be convinced by
such experience. God caused the tabernacle to be built in the desert, and
placed his Ark in it, giving them to know thereby that he dwelt with them under
tents, during their attending the accomplishment of his promises. Afterward he
permitted a Temple to be built to him in Jerusalem, wherein the Ark was at
length settled, which till then had been ambulatory. As if he would signify
that his abode was fixed among them, and their Nation absolutely confirmed in
the promised land. And who would not have said at that time, that the Temple
would continue as firm as the mountain it self on which it stood, David having
utterly defeated his enemies and filled all the neighboring countries about
him with the terror of his arms, and Solomon enjoying so profound a peace?
Nevertheless, about four hundred and fifty years after, Jerusalem is ruined,
the Temple rased to the ground, and all the sacred vessels carried away to
Babylon; and as for the Ark, it was never seen after in the World. Behold a
notable change befallen both to their Civil and Religious Polity. For they had
no longer a King, which was the head of the Republic, nor the Ark, which was
incomparably the most venerable part of all their Religious Mysteries. Yet this
was but the forerunner of a more universal change. The distinction of their
Tribes remained still, and the Royal race was owned in that of Judah, and that
of Levi was preserved for the restoring of their sacrifices. It Is likewise
true, that at the end of seventy years they returned from their captivity, and
rebuilt the Temple, but much less then that before, inferior to it in all
prerogatives, and especially in being destitute of that particular testimony of
the presence of God which was before in the Mercy-seat. Why was it thus, but
only because the time was drawing nigh, in which they should seek their God no
more upon the Earth, and that consequently their Religious polity should be
ended, seeing it had this express promise, I will dwell in the midst of them,
and abide there; which is not to be understood but of the Tabernacle and the
Ark, At length, after many profanations, the second Temple is destroyed from
the foundations, the City of Jerusalem burnt to ashes, the Nation dispersed,
without Levites, without sacrificers, without sacrifices, without offerings,
without solemn Feasts Sabbaths, Altars, Incense and Lamps, and this for the
space of fifteen or sixteen hundred years, without any hopes of ever being
recollected from so dreadful a dissipation. And which is more, all their Tribes
so confounded by their long wanderings and by the search that has been made for
all the evidences of their Genealogies to abolish them, that they know no
longer to distinguish which is Judah, or which is Levi, or Benjamine, or any
other Line. Certainly if that dispensation was to have been perpetual, God
would never have permitted so long an interruption of it, much less such as it
should be impossible to be redressed. For should they rebuild Jerusalem, yet
the Function of Sacrificing having been restrained to the Family of Levi with
exclusion of the rest, they could not have any lawful Sacrificers, by reason of
the confusion of their Tribes.

Let us now proceed to the Law of ten Words (or Decalogue) contained in the two
Tables. In which two things are considerable. First, that it is, as was said
above, a perfect model of piety and virtue, and in a manner the image of God
himself. Secondly, that God propounded the hopes of life to the Jews upon
observation of this Law together with the Judicial and Ceremonial; and forbad
the transgression of it with threatenings of an unevitable curse. For these are
the terms, Do this and thou shall live; and, Cursed is he that continues not
in all the words of this Law to do them. Now, as for the first of these things,
no person can deny to the Jews, but it is of perpetual duration, and ought to
be uniformely observed amongst all Nations. For since God is immutable in his
own nature, his image also must of necessity be alike invariable; and I have
already asserted that his image consists in the holiness and justice of this
Law. But as for the other, there must necessarily betide a change in that as
well as in the other Laws. For though God has instituted Religion to save men
and not to be as a snare to make them obnoxious to eternal damnation, how could
this law be the means of attaining salvation, which no man (except one onley)
ever perfectly observed in all ages, yea which no man can observe in any age?
Not that his Commandments are impossible to be performed in themselves, if we
were not fallen from our ancient and primitive Integrity. For what is there
more proportionate to our natural faculties, if they were in their integrity,
then to love God with all our heart, and our neighbor as our selves? But for
that sin has caused such a disorder in us, and imbued us with so profound
habits of vices, it is always impossible for our affections to be duly
conformed to that obedience. Since therefore, according to the Religion of the
Jews the hope of salvation is solely in the absolute observation of this Law,
and on the other side the violation of it is accompanied with an evitable
curse, conscience, which checks all men for sin, suggests to them, that either
there must be some change in Religion as to this regard to become capable of
salvation, or that Religion was instituted not out of a design to save but to
curse and destroy. They will say perhaps, that there are promises of mercy
mingled here and there in this Law, for those that shall repent of their sins,
whereof their conscience convinces them. And I grant it. Miserable had they
been, if it had not been so. For how could they have appeased the disquiets of
their conscience? But I say the promises of mercy to penitents do not belong to
the Contract established between God and them, according to which he promised
life to those that kept it, and denounced a curse to those that should
transgress it in the least clause. For how can one and the same Covenant be
capable of two such contrary clauses, Cursed is whosoever shall not observe
this Law in all points; and, Mercy it promised to those that repent of the
transgressions which they commit. What is repenting but returning to be a good
man? And what is to be a good man, but to observe this Law? Therefore
Repentance is an observing the Law after a transgression, I say an observing
it, inasmuch as the Repentance be good and durable. Whence these two
propositions will be found contradictory in one and the same Contract, Cursed
is whosoever abides not in all the things of this Law to do them; and,
Whosoever does not abide in all things of this Law, is not therefore accursed,
provided he does not always persevere in his transgression, but at length
repent of it. Now it is not consentaneous to the Wisdom of God to contract an
alliance of so repugnant parts. But further, There will not be only a
contradiction in the denouncing of the Curse but also in the promise of reward.
For observe how the Law speaks; Do these things and thou shall live, that is,
Observe this Law in all points, and thou shall have life for thy salary of
observing it. So that he that obtains Life by the Law, obtains it by virtue of
his observation thereof, as a recompense. Now Life and the Curse are so opposed
that he that has not life falls into the curse, and on the contrary he that is
delivered from the curse is instated in the enjoyment of life. As he that is in
health or in the light, is thereby exempt from diseases and darkness, and
contrarily he that is sick or in darkness is necessarily deprived of health and
light; The enjoyment or sense of the one consisting in the privation of the
other. If therefore the same Law says, Repent and thou shall obtain mercy,
seeing mercy implies deliverance from the Curse deserved, and deliverance from
the curse is nothing but the enjoyment of life, it will follow that by the same
contract life will be obtained as a recompense of the observation of the Law,
and nevertheless be a favor too in regard of mercy. Which are things directly
repugnant, and cannot be reconciled together. These promises therefore belong
to another Covenant different from that which says, Do these things, and
Cursed is he, etc. and they were the seeds of that other Law which was to
succeed in the place of the ancient one, and sufficient to bring penitents to
salvation in that time and entitle them to Life (not by virtue of observation
of the Law, but through pure mercy) yet such as were to be more clearly and
abundantly revealed. And let them but remark a little what their own Prophet
David says in the 32 Psalm; Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven,
and whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guilt. When I kept silence, my bones
waxed old, through my roaring all the day long. Because day and night thy hand
was heavy upon me, my moisture is turned into the drought of Summer. I have
acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I said, I will
confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the punishment of
my sin. I appeal to themselves whether this be the language of a man that seeks
the quiet of his conscience in those words of the Law, Do these things and thou
shall live? For the peace of conscience arises from the hope of life. But when
he looks toward the Law, he is desperate, and has no peace in his soul. His
satisfaction is in the forgiveness of his sins, and therefore in the assurance
of mercy. And yet this was David, a man according to God's own heart, that
spoke thus. If therefore such a man as he did not obtain life by virtue of this
contract, Do these things, what other dares claim a right upon such terms? If
no man obtaines the same upon that account, is it not necessary that some other
Covenant succeed, namely that of mercy and grace, in the room of that which was
ineffectual? But we prosecute this too far; Let them hear God himself in the
31. Chapter of Jeremy, verse. 31. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I
will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah,
Not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the day that I
took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, which my Covenant
they brake, although I was an husband to them, says the Lord. But this shall
be the Covenant which I will make with the house of Israel; After those days,
says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And they shall
teach no more every man his neighbor and every man his brother, saying, Know
the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the least of them, unto the greatest
of them, says the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember
their sin no more. Who sees not that he distinguishes the Covenants by these
two things? First, that he will give them the grace to violate the New no more;
which he did not under the Old. And secondly, that he will pardon under the New
the transgressions of the Old, which under it he did not nor could, the
denunciation of the curse annexed thereunto being irrevocable. And what can be
said more? Does not God in promising a New Law foretell the abrogation of the
first? And why should he term this Old, if it ought to be perpetual, since
perpetual things never wax old, age being a tendency to an end, till the thing
growing old comes to be to tally extinguished. But whereunto then served this
Law, if none could obtain salvation by it? Truly, as Ceremony was a
preparation to that which was to succeed and to give the Israelites some taste
and knowledge of it, as in a shadow, so the old Law was a preparing of the
minds of men to receive that which was to be enlarged and communicated under
the other. For the more they have attempted to fulfill the Law of the ten
Commandments the more have they found by experience of their vain indevours,
that they had need of that grace which ingraves the Laws of the Lord upon our
minds. The greater knowledge they have had of their transgressions and the
curse which they had incurred, the greater necessity have they discerned of
that Pardon and propitiation which was to be exhibited to them under the New
Covenant, and breathed more ardently after it. Which shall be shown more
clearly in the ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. V. That the time of the duration of Moses's Law is expired; and
consequently that some other must be come in its place.
I Will not examine at present the solidity of that distinction of the Ages of
the World made by some Jews, That two thousand years passed before the Law, two
thousand under the Law, and two thousand more shall run out under the reign of
the Messiah, according to which computation the world is to last six thousand
years. In the first period there will be found a mis-reckoning, unless the two
thousand years of the Law be extended to the first Covenant entr'd into with
Abraham, which indeed contained the principles of it. Concerning the last I
will not determine; For not only the disposing of times and seasons is in the
hand of God, but to him alone belongs the knowledge of things to come. But as
for that in the middle, it is a long time since those two thousand years were
expired, not only counting from the days of Abraham, but likewise from the
publication of the Law upon the mountain. And nevertheless, as they think, they
do not yet behold the Messiah come; which might be another error in their
account. I shall only say it was very consentaneously done to make the Messiah
succeed after the Law, as he that was to bring the abrogation of it. For since
it was to be changed, to whom could it belong to make that alteration, but to
him of whom Moses said, The Lord thy God shall raise up unto thee a Prophet
from the midst of thee, of thy brethren like unto me; unto him shall ye
hearken; And David, The Lord has sworn, and it shall not repent him, Thou art
a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck; And all the Prophets, That
he was to be a King sitting upon the throne of David and commanding over the
Kings and Rulers of the Earth. For since he ought to be a Prophet like Moses,
he must also be a Legislator and continual Mediator of a Covenant, because it
was this which rendered the office of Moses eminent above that of all other
Prophets. Now he would be neither Legislator nor Mediator of a Covenant, if
that of Moses were in force during his reign. Next, In as much as he ought to
be a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, the Levitical Priesthood must be
changed. Lastly, if he ought to be the King of Kings, he must establish other
ordinances then those enacted by Moses which were only to rule the people of
Israel, and not to command over Kings themselves. But further; All the Law, by
acknowledgement of the Jews themselves, tends to the Messiah as to its end, and
all the parts of it concentre and terminate in him. Wherefore if the time
prefixed for the coming of the Messiah be passed, of necessity also the term of
that Law must be expired. But that it is passed, diverse reasons constrain us to
believe; which I shall deduce briefly, because others have done it with very
exact diligence. And first, the Patriark Jacob, as we read in the 49 chap. of
Genesis, spoke thus by a prophetic spirit, The Scepter shall not depart from
Judah nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until that Shiloh be come, or till
Shiloh come. That the Scepter and Lawgiver denote the power of political
government, both the words show evidently, and the consent of the Jews
themselves attests. And that the Messiah is denoted by Shiloh, both the titles
of the Prince of Peace and Savior given him in other places, and the ancient
Jewish Interpreters and Paraphrasts do confirm, though there be difficulties
made by some concerning the signification of the word, and the modern Jews
quarrel about it. For (...) comes from (...), which bears both these
significations, To love peace, and To save; and the circumstances of the place
disparage all interpretation that refers it to any other then the Messiah.
Wherefore the meaning of this Prophecy is, That the power of the Political
Government should not be taken away from that Nation, in which the Tribe of
Judah had unquestionably the pre-eminence, till he that was to bring eternal
Peace came into the World. Now concerning the precise time when the Political
Sovereignty was taken away from Israel, I shall not at present dispute; it is
all one to me whether at such time, when Herod having extinguished the race of
the Asmoneans, invaded the Soverainty, or whether the entire ruin of their
Government must be referred to the desolation of their City and Temple, and to
the dispersion of their Nation by the Romans. The reasons wherewith both these
opinions are maintained being diligently discussed by Learned men, are of no
necessity to the matter in hand. It Is sufficiently apparent that there has
been no form of Regiment amongst the Jews for fifteen or sixteen hundred years.
And they of the Tribe of Judah, if this promise have a particular regard to
them, are so far from holding the Scepter of that Nation, that all the Jews are
universally subjected to strangers Laws, and their Tribes so mingled, as I said
above, that there remains no longer any mark of distinction of their families.
Moreover, there were two Temples at Jerusalem; the First built by King Solomon,
with such magnificence that no structure in the World was comparable to it; the
Second, erected by the Jews upon their return from the Babylonish Captivity, so
mean and despicable in respect of the other, that the Old men who had seen the
former, poured forth tears when they beheld it; so that the Prophet Haggai, who
was present at the re-edification, speaks of it in these terms, in the 2 chap.
of his Prophecy, verse. 3. Who is left among you that saw this house in her
first glory? And how do you see it now? Is it not in your eyes in comparison of
it as nothing? But besides the smallness and contemptible form of the building
in comparison of the former, the ancient Jews observe that there wanted five
things in it; The presence of God in the Mercy-Seat; The spirit of Prophecy;
The celestial fire which consumed the burnt-offerings; The Vrim and Thumim; and
the Ark: which added such luster and glory one to another. Yet behold, how the
same Haggai prophesies of it immediately after, verse. 6. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the Heavens and the
Earth and the Sea and the dry land. Verse. 7. And I will shake all Nations; and
the desire of all Nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory,
says the Lord of Hosts. Verse. 9. The glory of this latter house shall be
greater then of the former, says the Lord of Hosts, and in this place will I
give peace. Now of whom can this be understood but of the Messiah, who was to
enter into it, and effectively fill this house with glory? What else could
advance it so, as not only to equal but transcend the magnificence of the
other? And indeed Malachy who lived and prophesied at the same time, speaks it
plainly in the 3. chap. verse. 1. Behold I will send my Messenger, and he shall
prepare the way before me; and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to
his Temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in; Behold, he
comes, says the Lord of Hosts. They will say, perhaps, that Haggai foresaw
that Herod would enlarge and enrich it so magnificently, that it should equal
or surpass even that of Solomon. And it is true as Histories inform us, that he
advanced the same to a far greater splendour then rhat which the poor returned
exiles had given it. But seeing all the pompous state that he bestowed on it
was but the effect of his vast and boundless ambition, which he expressed
almost every where by proud structures, as amongst others in the City and Haven
of Caesarea, to the end his power and greatness might be admired, and not the
divine glory promoted, how could it be agreeable to God to attribute to him the
vanity of a man? and even of such a man? who was a stranger, if not absolutely
in profession, at least in heart and affection, from his Covenants, and a cruel
bloody usurper of the government of his people? And if it was not well-pleasing
to God that David should build him a Temple, because his hands had been
bloodied in so many wars, which he had managed, though very just and undertaken
out of necessity, for the deliverance of Israel, and for the Glory of God
himself, how could he take pleasure in the vanity of this Monster, who was
formed and elemented of wind and blood and dirt? Besides, though it had been
built all of Saphires and Diamonds, could that glory have rendered it comparable
to the least of the five mentioned particulars? or would it have been worth the
pains that God should promise to shake the Sea and the dry land, the Heavens
and the Earth for it? to cause, I say, by his infinite power a universal change
in the face of the World? and to what purpose were it to mention the shaking of
all Nations, to bring the choice of them into that Temple, if there were no
more signified by it then the proud magnificence of the Pile, and vast
greatness of the Stones? And what Nation ever changed their seat to go to see
it, or to send offerings thither by their Ambassadors? We see therefore the
Temple demolished, and all the attempts made to re-edifie it defeated by a
special demonstration of the anger of God against them that endevour'd it, so
that there remains only the dust of its ruins after near sixteen hundred
years, without ever having been filled with the glory promised to it, if the
Messiah be not yet come, as the Jews pretend. In the third place, Daniel in the
9. chap. determinately foretold the time; since the expiration of which are
past a dozen Ages. Seventy weeks (says the Angel) are determined upon thy
people, and upon thy holy City, to finish the transgression and to make an end
of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most
Holy. Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the
commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the Prince,
shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks. That this place ought to be
understood of the Messiah, nothing but obstinate blindness can dissent; and
it is very strange that Passion should so feel up the eyes of some of them, that
in hatred of our Lord they should interpret it of some other. For to whom
belongs it but to the Messiah, either to be styled the Anointed by way of
excellence, or to put an end to Prophecies, or to bring in and manifest eternal
righteousness, or to make propitiation for offenses? Now what is meant by those
seventy weeks? Septenaries of days, or weeks, or months, or years, or ages? Of
weeks of days, and weeks of years there is frequent mention in the Old
Testament; of the rest there occur no examples. And surely they cannot
understand it of Ages, for so they would refer the coming of the Messiah to too
remote a distance of time; and of fifty thousand years which Daniel should have
foretold, there would he passed little more then two thousand. And when would
they see the accomplishment of their hopes? Therefore they must be septenaries
of years, or months, or weeks, or days; and indeed they ought to be
understood of years.

But observe what their subterfuge is, and to what they constantly retreat, to
defend their opiniastry; That indeed the time prefixed by the Prophets for the
sending of the Messiah is expired, but it is their sins which hinder them from
seeing the accomplishment of those promises. By reason of them God has delayed
the time of their visitation and deferred the exhibition of the Messiah, and
consequently prolonged the term appointed for the duration of the Law: That
when they shall have performed a suitable repentance, they shall see the effect
of that which God has promised; at which time, they do not gainsay, but the
Law of Moses shall cease. But this Evasion is vain. For supposing that God
deferred the sending of his Anointed, yet at least the Temple ought to have been
kept undestroy'd, and the Jewish Religion maintained in its integrity, and not
so dreadful a dispersion of that Nation to have been suffered, and so total an
abolition of all his service. For where are his sacrifices and his Altars? Why
did not He leave some use of them at least, during the expectance of the
accomplishment of that promise, Mal. 1.11. From the rising of the Sun even unto
the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in
every place incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure offering? Let
them consult their own Books. God denounced that he would cause the Deluge to
come upon the Earth; and he executed it at the set time. He promised Posterity
to Abraham, and gave it him contrary to all probability. He foretold the
Captivity of his Posterity in Egypt, and it came to pass, and continued
neither more nor less then the four hundred years which he had limited. He
promised the Deliverance of them from it, and performed the same faithfully
with a thousand miracles. He foretold the Babylonish Captivity, and it did not
fail; and he gave in charge to his Prophets to promise deliverance from it by
means of Cyrus, naming him a hundred years before he was born: and with exact
fidelity at the end of seventy years after their transportation into Babylon,
he brought them back into their own Country by the Edict of that Prince. In a
word, all their History from the beginning to the End is interwoven with
predictions and prophesies, which have had their accomplishment, without the
least defect or miscarriage. Whence therefore should it be, that in this
prediction, which is the foundation of their comfort, and on which all others
depend, God should have changed his purpose, and by so long delays deluded the
expectation of the people of the Jews, which himself excited in them by his
promises? Why did not their sins hinder their deliverance from the hand of
Pharaoh, and the accomplishment of that Word, that he would give the Land of
Canaan in heritage to the seed of Abraham? For they were sinners at that time
as well as now, and besides inclined to Idolatry, a sin hated by God most of
all, and which themselves have at this day in so great abhorrence. And ought
not the same obstacle to have impeded their return from the Captivity of
Babylon? They were sinners then too, and have always been of the same genius,
both they and their Ancestors. And if by reason of some more obstinate
perverseness in them then in their predecessors, God pleased to await their
repentance for a time, why is that time lengthned out to fifteen or sixteen
hundred years? that is, to three or four times as much time beyond the day
prefixed as between the promise and the prefixed day it self? Who ever heard
tell of such a tedious over-delay, where the Promises of God were engaged? And
how long does he attend their repentance? Has he resolved to give it them, or
to expect till they be converted of themselves, and of their proper motion? For
if he expects the same from their voluntary and proper motion, all hope of ever
seeing the Messiah is lost. Since the horrid desolation of the City of
Jerusalem, the burning of the Temple, the slaughter of their Nation, the
dispersion of the remainder to the four winds of Heaven, the long servitude in
which they are, the reproach and ignominy which they endure, the hatred of
great and small; and in sum, all the curses they could imprecate upon their
enemies, being befallen them, have not been sufficient to mollify their hearts
and convert them, what hope is there that hereafter any thing should move them
to repentance? Fifteen or sixteen Ages suffice to give us a proof by them and
their predecessors, what their posterity will do in this case after them. If
God himself will give it them, and touch their hearts, what is the reason that
he expects that so long time from another, which he has resolved to execute
himself, and thus to expose his fidelity and constancy to the tacit suspicions
of some, and to the close murmurings or even open blasphemies of others? Now I
wish they would consider this attentively; Namely, that in their Books God
makes two sorts of Promises to them; Some are founded upon a Condition, and
others are (as they speak) Simple and Absolute. As for those which are sounded
upon a condition, should God have prefixed a certain time for performance, yet
ought not he be accused of inconstance, though he should defer it beyond the
term, when the condition has not as yet been accomplished. For where the
obligation is reciprocal, and some thing is to be done first on the part of
men, why should any think God obliged to perform that which he promised not but
under some previous condition? Are we wont to act thus one toward another? And
of this Nature are the Legal promises, that is, the Promises of Life and
Blessing upon a firm continuance in his Covenant. For by saying, If thou
continue in the observation of my Commandments, I will give thee all sorts of
blessings, he does perpetually imply, that in case of deviating from them the
expectation of all those Benedictions is frustrated. For the other, which are
absolute, and not dependant on any condition, to fail to effect them is to be
wanting to his own constancy. And why should God have been so forward as to
promise absolutely, and yet retract it afterward upon so groundless a
pretense? This is the practice of vain men, who promise rashly; and afterward
repenting of the matter, seek out excuses and pretexts to put off the effect,
and veil their levity. Now let any man read the Old Testament from end to end,
and he will find that the Promises concerning the Messiah are so far from being
founded on any precedaneous condition on the part of men, that they are not so
much Promises as settled and determined Predictions. Or if they ought to be
called Promises (as indeed they are, since they are predictions of a Good to
come, which must afford incomparable benefit and contentment) they are promises
in which the Goodness and Mercy of the infinite God seems to wrestle against
the obstinacy of men. As soon as Adam was fallen, God, without being invited
thereunto by his repentance, even without speaking to him, says to the
Serpent, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and
her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Can it be
suspected here, that without the foregoing penitence of men, these words shall
never be accomplished? On the contrary, it is to excite our repentance, which
otherwise would have remained dead; for they are the promises of Grace, which
alone (as we have said elsewhere) can awaken the minds of men to true
repentance. In like manner, when the Patriarch Jacob says, The Scepter shall
not depart from Judah, etc. Does he understand that Shiloh shall come, only
provided Judah and Israel repent? Certainly he had no regard to that; but puts
this among the absolute pure predictions, which the Spirit ennabled him to make
concerning his Posterity, and the things which were to happen to every Tribe,
were it repentant, or not. And thus it is also in all the rest, Deuteronomy. 18.18. I
will raise them up a Prophet among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put
my words in his mouth and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command
him. Verse. 19. And it shall come to pass that whosoever will not hearken unto
my words, which he shall speak in my Name, I will require it of him. Psalm. 2. I
have set my King upon Sion the mountain of my holiness. And 7. The Lord has
said to me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. 8. Ask of me, and I
shall give thee the Nations for thy inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
Earth for thy possession. 9. Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, thou
shall dash them in pieces like a potters vessel, etc. And Isaiah, 7.14. Behold,
A virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel. Also
chap. 11.1. And there shall come forth a rod out of the stemne of Iesse, and a
Branch shall grow out of his Roots. 2. And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest
upon him, etc. Also chap. 32.1. Behold, a King shall reign in righteousness,
etc. And likewise in that celebrated 53. chapter. And Malachi having ended the
second chapter with a complaint of the murmurings of the Jews against the
Providence of God, and likewise of their blasphemies, he continues his
discourse thus, chap. 3.1. Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall
prepare the way before me; and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to
his Temple, etc. As if he would either break the heart of those Rebels by this
admirable effect of an incredible goodness, or warrant his Providence from
blame by the execution of his immutable decrees. But above all things, the
Prophecy of Daniel above alleged is remarkable. For after having so clearly
set down the time of the birth of Christ, he adds ( verse. 26.) And after score
and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself: and the people of
the ^rince that shall come, shall destroy the City and the Sanctuary, and the
end thereof shall be with a stood, and unto the end of the wa^ desolations are
determined. Now I beseech you, had not this its event in Titus and the Romans,
who utterly destroyed the City of Jerusalem, and burnt the Temple to ashes? How
then could the prediction of the Desolation have been accomplished which was
not to happen till after the accomplishment of the Promise, if the Promise were
not executed before, seeing they are both contained in the same Prophecy?

It remains therefore, that since as it is not allowed for men to exempt
themselves from subjectino to Divine Institutions so long as they are in force,
so neither is it lawful to extend them longer then the term appointed to them
by God himself admits; the Law of Moses having passed its time, either there is
now no longer any form of Religion of divine institution in the World, or that
some other has been established by God in its place. For as to what they
allege, that in several places of their Books, it is said that their Law ought
to endure to perpetuity, (...), it has been answered a thousand times that the
word (...) taken simply, does not necessarily signify the perpetuity of a
thing, or eternity of time, but oftentimes a long duration only, which began
or is terminated at some certain and remarkable period, as of the Deluge, of
the descent into Egypt, of a Jubilee, and the like; Examples of which are very
ordinary. Now it would be a thing too unsuitable to that great goodness which
God has always testified to men, and to that special care he has had to bring
them to the knowledge of himself and by that to salvation, to have abolished
and suppressed the true Religion without substituting another in its stead. He
has always shown that he loves the Political or Civil Societies of men, which
only have relation to the conservation of their rights and civil comportments
among themselves: how much dearer then is the maintaining of a Religious
Society to him, in which the importance is concerning the preservation of his
rights over us, actions of piety and virtue, and the eternal salvation of our
souls? Certainly, it would be a too strange inequality in the proceedings of a
Nature so wise and uniform as the Divine, to have employed so great exact
diligence in prescribing and delineating the Religion of the Jews and in all
the order of it, and afterward to destroy the same totally without raising
another upon its ruins. And it would be too great a lightness in so constant a
nature to have promised his Church in so many places of the Old Testament to
cause her to subsist eternally (and what is the Church, but a Society regulated
according to the Laws of the true Religion) and yet to subvert it utterly
beyond all apparent possibility of restoration. Wherefore there has succeeded
some other Religion in place of the Jewish. But it can be neither the Pagan,
nor the Mahometane; and therefore it must necessarily be the Christian. And
this is the business to be deduced more at large in the following Chapter.

CHAP. VI. That the Christian Religion, being more excellent, has succeeded
the Jewish.
SO numerous is the store of things that offer themselves for the proof of what
the title of this Chapter promises, that I beseech the Readers indulgence if I
omit some. Should I do otherwise, it would be impossible to proportion this
piece to the rest of the work. I shall not allege that the author of the
Christian Religion and his principal Ministers were Jews, and so interessed and
engaged, according to the natural instinct of all Nations, to the maintenance
of their own Religion, if it ought to have been perpetually durable; Nor that
it was first of all to their own Nation that they adressed to persuade the same
to them, and did not turn to the Gentiles, but only after they had been
rejected and persecuted by the Jews. Nor that the Pagans converted by their
preaching professed to be only gathered to the Jewish Nation, and inserted like
a wild grass into a natural stock. I shall only compare the two Religions
together, so to manifest the excellence of the Christian above the Jewish, and
that not only in things wherein they differ, but also in such as they agree
together in: for ours will be found to have in either respect inestimable
advantages above it. And this will be sufficient for the proof of my
proposition. For since the Jewish was of divine institution, if the Christian
be more excellent, it must have been drawn from the same treasures of his
celestial Wisdom, who enlarges and augmenteth his favors as he pleases.

First, as for the things they agree in, seeing the Christian Religion
acknowledges that the Books of the Jews are not only true but divine, and
consequently accords with them as to all the ancient histories recorded
therein, of the Creation of the World, the formation of man, the propagation of
mankind, the destruction of the same by the Flood, the restoring of it by the
family of Noah, the conflagration of Sodom, the selection of Abraham, the
calling of Moses, the miracles in Egypt and the Wilderness, the deliverances by
the Judges, the establishment of Kings, the Captivity of Babylon, and the like;
And that the Christian Religion has retained the doctrines revealed therein as
inviolable, being of eternal and immutable truth; As, that there is but one God
infinite in essence and perfections, and that all the petty Deities of the
Pagans are trifles; that he is the punisher of Vice and the rewarder of Piety
and Virtue, by suitable penalties and recompenses both for the body and the
soul; that all creatures ow him honor and obedience, both because they hold
their being from him, and in regard of his infinite majesty; that their
beatitude consists in their communion with him, and their ruin and extreme
misery in their elongation from him; that he is the author of all the good that
is in them, and therefore to him only is praise and thanksgiving to be
rendered; And also that it professes to embrace the promises of the Messiah, in
the exhibition of whom the Jews place all the hope of their felicity and glory:
It might seem that in these particulars and the like, the Christians ought not
so much to be held to have succeeded the Jews as to be Jews themselves; or
indeed rather the ancient Jews to have been Christians, in as much as these are
the foundation of Christianity laid by the Prophets, and upon which, to speak
strictly, all the faith and piety of their ancestors was built. Nevertheless,
the Christian Law is not without greater advantages herein, as having diffused
these doctrines without comparison more universally then the Jewish ever did.
For God being not only the God of Jews, but of all people in the world
equally, in as much as he framed all of the same blood, it is more suitable to
the goodness of his nature to communicate the knowledge of his Name to all
Nations, to East, West, North, and South, then to hold himself as it were
included within the bounds of Iudaea: and it cannot be denied but that he
presents us with a more glorious example of his love to mankind, by uniting
them together in a Society more strait then that of humanity it self, then he
did sometimes by the Law of the Jews, who having their God, their Laws, their
Ceremonies, and their hopes apart, looked upon all other Nations as profane,
and entertained no communion with them. And certainly were not the Jews blinded
by their passions, they would acknowledge in this not only the excellence of
the Christian Religion above their own, but also that the Author of it was the
true Messiah promised by the Prophets. For there is nothing so clear in all
their Scriptures as the prediction of the calling of the Gentiles at the
appearing of the Messiah, as was shown above; and the day is not so clear, as
it is evident that this Promise has been accomplished by the preaching of the
Gospel. For did not the preaching of the Apostles aim at the reducing of the
Gentiles from the service of Idols to the knowledge of the God of Abraham? Did
not they wage a mortal and irreconcilable War against false Deities? Did they
not overthrow their Temples, and demolish their Altars, with the sound of their
voices? Are not the very names of the Idols of the Pagans obliterated out of
the memory of men in the greatest part of the world? Certainly the Romans and
the Greeks, whom the Jews held for aliens from the true God, and the Nations
which both of them accounted Barbarians in Asia, Europe, Africa; even the
Savages of the Indies, which were unknown to them, have done homage to the God
of Israel, acknowledge the Jews for those that heretofore alone served him,
venerate their Scriptures, ascribe to their Law the prerogative of being the
only rule of piety and virtue, reverence their Prophets as heralds of the
Divine Will, have cast off and abandoned all their images. What do they require
further? Such a universal mutation in the whole face of the Universe, such a
mavelous conversion of the hearts of so many Nations, in all parts of the
World, can they judge possible to have been made without a special divine
assistance? Certainly either this Prophecy, The Earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the Lord, as the bottom of the Sea with waters that cover it, has
been accomplished in the preaching of the Gospel, or it will never be
accomplished at all. Wherefore the Christian Religion has this advantage in
this respect above the Jewish, that God shows himself in it more affectionate
and good toward men, and it is his property to be good; that men have more
powerful inducements by this consideration to be good one toward another, in
which consists their perfection; and lastly that it has this indubitable
evidence of the manifestation of the Messiah.

Then in reference to things in which they differ; they are of many sorts. And
as we above distinguished the Law of Moses into three parts; the Political, the
Ceremonial, and the Moral, we will now consider each of them distinctly by it
self in brief. And first for the Political, it needs not much to insist upon
that, because it does not so directly regard Religion; and yet it must not be
wholly pas^over in silence. How exact therefore so ever it was, and congruous
to the Nature of that people, yet it cannot be denied but the Christian
Religion which has left to all Nations the free use of their own Laws,
provided that honesty and equity be resplendent in their policy, wherewith all
the actions of men ought to be tempered, is in this point preferable before it
many degrees. For seeing the substance and groundwork of Political Laws is
proportionate to and does not exceed humane reason, and therefore the
constitution and administration of those Laws depends on Prudence, it is a very
evident testimony that God greatly distrusted the prudence of the people of the
Jews, when he took care to prescribe to them even in the least matter, and to
give them, as their Prophet speaks, Precept after precept, Precept after
precept, line after line, line after line. But having diffused over all Nations
a spirit of prudence and wisdom, by the publication of the Gospel, to
administer their affairs with sage and good conduct, it was consentaneous that
the establishing of their respective Laws should be permitted to themselves.
And this turns both to the great adorning of the Universe and to the singular
praise of the divine Wisdom. For as the Wisdom of God is more illustrous in the
several motions of the Heavens, of which some are slow, others more rapid, some
tend toward the East, and others to the West, and yet from all of them at last
results that excellent harmony on which the conservation of the World and the
production of all things in the Universe depends, then if were no variety at
all in their courses; And as in the Earth the different streams of Rivers, of
which some glide so gently that their motion is scarce preceptible, others rush
with violence like torrents, each according to the manner of the places through
which they pass, some flowing toward the North, others toward the South, and
all in the mean while come from the Sea and return thither again; do much more
grace and adorn the face of the World, then if they all kept the same equal and
uniform tract; So without doubt there appears a greater Providence in the
conduct of so many Nations so diversified by various sorts of Laws and
Governments, Monarchical, Aristocratical, Democratical, and mixed, each
according to its peculiar genius, all which nevertheless conspire to the glory
of one and the same God, and aspire to the atchievment of one and the same
hope, then if they were all modeled and policyed according to the same
constitutions. Besides, that God being willing that Christians should be people
of free courage, and erected to that honest liberty which is worthy of generous
and noble souls, it has pleased him that men should exercise the actions of
Justice and virtue no otherwise then by following the suggestions of a nature,
almost restored by so excellent a Religion to its primitive integrity; so that
every one should be a Law unto himself. It is true, that a good part of the
Nations which in these days make profession of the Christian Name, do not show
that a doctrine so heavenly has been efficacious to cleanse the vitiosity of
nature, and repress the disorder of their passions; so that there may seem need
of more Laws to prevent frauds and injuries. But this is the corruption of
these dregs of Ages. And he that would know what Christian charity and the
uprightness of those that have embraced this Law, is, must not consider it such
as it is at the present time, but in the first Ages of the Church.

As for the Ceremonial Law, it is the Christian Religion alone that teaches us
to understand the use of it, by manifesting the en^ to which it aimed. For by
that we are instructed that the whole structure of the Tabernacle, and all the
Economy of the service which was performed therein by external and sensible
things did refer to spiritual verities and virtues. So that as much as the
knowledge of divine mysteries and admirable doctrines, transcends things
obvious to sense, by so much is the Christian Doctrine and the fruits produced
by it more excellent then the Mosaical Worship. It would be too long to
allegorise all that pertains to it; the matter will be evident by two or three
examples. There were two eminent Sacraments; Circumcision, and the Paschal
Lamb. To take them according to the construction of the Jews what other
signification had they but only to separate the people of the Jews, and to
discriminate them from other Nations, and be a commemoration of their
deliverance out of Egypt, and the death of the Firstborn? The one was a token
imprinted in the flesh of a Covenant that seemed to regard only the body, and
the other a memorial of a deliverance merely temporal. Now we have learnt from
the Christian Religion that the First was instituted to represent the need we
stood in that this corrupt nature of ours which we derive from our fathers by
ordinary generation, should be retrenched, if we would have part in the
spiritual Covenant with God; and the Second to be a type of him, of whom it was
said, He was lead like a Lamb to the slaughter, and whose blood and death
secured our souls from the dreadful and universal destruction, to which
otherwise they were obnoxious. And in this we do no more but follow the traces
which themselves have hereof in the Prophets, but could not discern. To this
purpose is their speaking of and exhorting to the circumcision of the heart, as
in contempt of that which was made in the flesh; and also that of Moses's
diligent injunction to sprinkle the blood of the Paschal Lamb upon the posts
and tressell of the house, and that it should be a perpetual institution in
their generations. For what virtue had the blood of a Lamb to divert the sword
of an Angel, and to warrant the houses of the Israelites from the calamity of
others?

There was moreover prescribed by it several washings and purifications for the
vessels and utensils of the Tabernacle, houses and garments infected with any
pollution, for men and women seized on by some natural infirmity; things which
were accounted unclean, if all these mysteries were not solicitously observed.
The Gospel has taught us that all this represents true sanctification, which
cleanses the corrupt appetites of man, and purifies his conscience. And truly,
otherwise to what end or benefit served all these washings, if they did not
design something else? Or why should corporeal and naturally inevitable
infirmities, such as the Lunar flux of women, debar them from communion with
God and his Tabernacle, but only as figuring those voluntary ones of the
conscience? In this also we have the authority of their Prophets; It is said in
Ezekiel, chap. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be
clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you.
But how? A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you;
and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an
heart of flesh. And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in
my statutes, etc. Now by how much piety and the internal virtue of the soul is
better then the cleanness of the body, so much is the recommendation and
doctrine of the one more excellent then the observation of the other. But this
appears remarkably in the principal part of the Ceremonial Law, namely in the
Sacrifices. For the death of beasts being, as we intimated formerly, incapable
to make propitiation for sins, and yet it being a thousand times expressed in
the Law, that those victimes were appointed for propitiation, what remains but
that they were destinated as types for the representation of a Sacrifice, which
in truth made real and sufficient propitiation for offenses? And indeed what
else could the Prophet Isaiah have referred to, when he said, chap. 53.6. All
we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and
the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. He was brought as a Lamb to
the slaughter; and as a sheep before the Shearers is dumb, so he opened not
his mouth. Especially, since the blood of Bulls and Goats had no virtue for the
purification of souls, and yet the High Priest entered every year into the Holy
of Holies with blood in the presence of the Ark of the Lord, as if he had gone
to offer satisfaction for the sins committed by the People, what had this been
but a vain and empty ceremony, in case it did not typifie One, who in the
quality of great and Soverain Priest entered into the presence of God in the
Heavens, with real satisfaction for the sins of men? Truly the resemblance is
admirable, Only once a year (a period of time in which the world seems to
exist a new, grow up, wax old, and terminate its duration, by the revolution
and succession of the four seasons) the High Priest slew in the Tabernacle, but
in a place separated with a veil from the Ark, a sacrifice for the offenses of
the whole people: and once in the whole duration of the World, a Man devoted
thereunto offers himself in sacrifice, and suffers death upon the Earth, a
place remote from the presence of God, and severed from his especial mansion by
the extent of the Heavens as with a veil, to the end to o^tain remission to all
them that seek it. This being done, the High Priest took the blood of the
Victime, and presumed to enter into the Most-holy place within the veil, and to
appear before the Mercy-Seat: And the same Man, Holy and without spot, after
having suffered in the World, taking confidence from his sufferings, as having
satisfied the justice of God, dares attempt to ascend into the Heavens, and
pass beyond the veil to present himself before the Lord in the habitation of
his glory. For he no longer dreaded his presence, having undergone all his
wrath. Lastly, the High Priest, dipping his finger in the blood sprinkled it
seven times before the Mercy-seat; Now the Septenary is a number of perfection,
as the Jews themselves acknowledge: And the same Man, who suffered death for
the remission of sins, being entered into the Holy of Holies in the Heavens,
abides there until the consummation of Ages, to represent his sacrifice
continually before God, and by this his intercession to render him eternally
propitious unto us. Let them therefore consider a little without passion or
prejudice the correspondence, and resemblance distinctly. For whereas in all
that external service, God had regard to something to come, what better
interpretation can be made of this mystery, then that the sacrifice of a beast
prefigures that of a man; the expiation of a corporeal defilement, a spiritual
purification; the place where the victime was slain, the World; the veil, the
Heavens; the Most holy place, where the Ark was, the habitation of Gods's
glorious residence; and the sprinkling made by the High Priest, the perpetual
intercession of him that offered up himself by the Eternal Spirit? Wherefore
let them either admit this explication thereof made by the Christian Religion,
or study to give more congruous and suitable. Which I assure my self, their
attempts to effect will be so vain, and all their inventions so extravagant,
that in respect of ours they will be but as darkness in comparison of light.
But that all these typical representations have been really acted and
accomplished, shall by the help of God, appear hereafter with abundant evidence.

Now if our Christian Religion be thus excellent above that of the Jews in the
understanding and application of their own Ceremonies, it is also far superior
to it in those which Christianity it self practices; of which indeed it ought
not to be destitute. And first, it is highly advantageous to us, that they are
few in number, and consequently less painful and laborious. Next, that they are
less carnal and material, as not being appendances of a Religion which seemed
to consist wholly in outside, in the mean while till the spiritual things
which it promised were really exhibited. And lastly, that they are
eucharistical and commemorative of that truly propitiatory sacrifice, which
has been already offered, and by consequence more proper to beget piety in our
minds, because they represent and apply things past to us, of which we have a
perfect and clear knowledge; whereas the Jewish figured the same as future,
obscure, and in a riddle. Moreover, he that shall duly consider the external
face of the true Church, its exercises of devotion, its pompous simplicity and
modest magnificence, singing, public and solemn prayers; due celebration of
its mysteries without Idolatry or Superstition, and on the other side without
contempt of a Being so worthy of profound admiration and reverence, and that
excellent custom of instructing the people by Preaching, and dispensing the
Christian Doctrine to edification and comfort by exhortations and convenient
reprehensions; will find that there is a more pleasing and comely spectacle in
the order of its divine ministry, then in that butchery of sacrifices which was
made in the Tabernacle, where it was necessary to be always employed in washing
and cleansing away the blood and scouring all the utensiles of the service from
the soil and fat of sacrifices. And it may be also observed, that whereas the
Jewish Religion arrested the mind to sensible things, affording them but very
little taste of spiritual and intellectual; as it is the custom to retain
children and instruct them in gross and sensual things for that their reason is
yet but weak, and they live principally according to the guidance of their
senses; On the contrary, in the Christian Religion men are reclaimed from sense
to understanding, so that what is sensible in it is not capable to arrest our
minds on it, although it be profitable to lead us to the use of spiritual
things, where with our souls are abundantly fed and satisfied; and this because
that the Church under this Religion is come to perfect Age, being endued with
far greater strength of reason and understanding to comprehend them. This the
Prophets first taught us, who have spoken so disdainfully of all those external
ceremonies of the Mosaical Law, as we have seen above, in comparison of the
internal virtues of the Soul. And indeed nature it self would teach us the
same; though they had been wholly silent of it. For since man, being composed
of body and soul, is principally man by the faculties of reason and
understanding, the Religion which consists rather in corporeal exercises, then
in the instruction and perfectionating of the mind, must be judged infinitely
inferior to that which is concerned principally and almost solely about the
Soul.

As for the Decalogue, it has not been less illustrated by the preaching of
the Gospel then the other: Not that there has been any thing relating to piety
and good manners taught by the Gospel which was not comprised in the Moral Law;
Since this Rule of Justice and Perfection has been always like to it self in
all Ages. But the understanding of it having been corrupted partly by the
hypocrisy and partly by the profaneness of men, the Christian Religion has
reduced it to its primitive purity and restored it to the highest pitch of its
natural perfection. The Jewish Doctors upon this Commandment, Thou shall not
kill, thought that it was enough to abstain from the effusion of blood, and
otherwise either justified or excused wrath, desires of revenge, and words of
spite and scorn. The Christian Excellency teaches us, that it is not the
external act of murder only that is forbidden, but even the least motions of
the mind that carry to revenge, the most loose thoughts of mischief, and the
slightest words uttered in offense to our neighbor, either by derision or
outrage. Then which what is more agreeable both to the nature of God who is so
good, and who is not the judge only of actions, but likewise of cogitations;
and to the nature of man, whose outward actions are neither good nor evil, but
only so far as they proceed from the good or evil source of the internal
affections? Upon this Commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery, they
condemned the act indeed which defiles the bed of ones neighbor; wanton
thoughts and lascivious glances they made no great reckning of. The Christian
Religion teaches that he that looks upon the wife of his neighbor with desire
after her, has committed adultery in his heart. Then which what is more
suitable to the holiness of God and more reasonable in reference to that which
ought to be in men? For what great advantage were it to have kept the body
unpolluted with filthy actions, if yet the soul should be full of impure
cogitations? Moses in his Political Laws, the administering and superintendency
of which belonged to the Magistrate alone, constituted the retribution of Eye
for Eye and Tooth for Tooth, that so the violence of outrages might be
repressed by the fear of a penalty semblable and adequate to each sort of
crime. The Jewish Doctors extended this to private revenges, as if they had
been permitted by this sanction. But the Christian Purity reforms this error by
teaching, that a man ought to be so far from doing himself reason for an
injury, that it is more commendable to be so disposed as to receive and
dispense with reiterated wrongs and insolences. Then which what is more
befitting them that believe there is a God in Heaven, who preserves the rights
of every one, who watches over all by his Providence, and who has declared
that vengeance belongs to himself? And thus also it is in the Law of Divorce
and Polygamy, abrogated by the Gospel, which reduces marriage to the estate of
its primitive institution, an estate so worthy and becoming in regard of its
natural honesty, and so recommended even by their own Prophets. And truly,
what likelihood is there, the Jews should be lest to eternity in that ancient
hardness of heart for which it had been indulged to them, or that the example
of the Jewish incon inence should be made authentic in other Nations? So also
concerning light and unprofitable Swearing, which the Doctors of the Jews
tolerated, provided exact care were used to perform what was incumbent by
virtue of the oath; Christian Religion has abolisht the same as a profanation
of the holy and sacred Name of God, which must not be pronounced but with great
reverence. And is not this to reduce men from the shell to the marrow of the
Law, from the outside to the inside, from the body to the soul, and even to the
most spiritual part of the soul? And that these and such like have been the
corruptions which the Doctors of the Jews have introduced in their Law, the
testimonies are but too frequent in their Books.

But there is yet something further considerable. For there are two things in
every good Law; First the Righteousness of the command which it contains; and
Secondly, the Right of punishment due to the transgression of it: both which
arise from the natural difference which is between Vice and Virtue, and their
necessary appendances, Punishment and Reward. Now Christianity has not only
reduced the Law to its integrity in relation to the first, but has also
wonderfully illustrated it in the second; in which the Ignorance of men had
debased it two ways. For first, if there were some among the Jews that had a
little deeper knowledge in the Nature of the Law, and esteemed it the rule not
only of actions or intentions accomplished but also ^f thoughts, yet they
accounted sins committed in thought or word only so light, that they scarce
believed God ought to inflict any punishment for them, and judged them very
venial in themselves. Secondly, though in sins perpetrated by scandalous
actions they beheld a turpitude, which deserved severe chastisement, yet they
had all this opinion that God would readily forgive them without other
satisfaction then by pitiful sacrifices. Perhaps, not that they thought
sacrifices could impretate remission by their own value, as being equivalent to
the deserved penalty (for to believe so, they must have been too like the
victimes which they jugulated) But because God remitting the same freely, was
contented with the acknowledgement made of the demerit by killing the
sacrifice. For every man that slays a beast in his own stead, confesses that
he has deserved death. But the Gospel has restored it in this point to its
pristine Majesty, and reinstated it in the prerogative of a severe avenger of
the sins of men; for as we shall see hereafter, the belief of its inexorable
severity in this point conduces highly to conciliate honor and reverence to it.
First then, the Gospel has taught men that those which they looked upon as
piccadillo sins according to the custom of the world, are of a henious nature
when weighed in the balance of God's justice, so that men are to give account
even of their idle words; and that the most inward thoughts of their minds, the
least ticklings of their appetites, if they be dissonant from the rules of the
Law, which require a perfection in which nothing can be impeached, render men
obnoxious to the curse that is annexed to it. And truly should not the Gospel
affirm it, the Law it self holds forth as much. For I demand whether the
Decalogue does not contain the rule of the most exquisite and consummated
perfection that can and ought to be in humane nature? If it does not, then
seeing all things which can concern the Moral perfection of man that are
neither commanded nor prohibited in this Law, are reputed as mean, that is,
neither good nor evil, but indifferent in themselves, it will follow that there
may be some defect of moral perfection in man, which nevertheless shall not be
at all reprovable: for mean and indifferent things, whether they be done or
not, bring neither praise nor blame. So that a man that has all the moral
perfection which the Law requires, but yet sails of that which it does not,
shall notwithstanding merit as much praise as he which has that which it
commands not, and that which it does command together. Which is as absurd, as
if one should say that an Angle made with a right Line and another that cuts
the same decussatim, deserv's as well the title of a right Angle, as that which
is composed of two right Lines, one of which falls perpendicularly upon the
other. For it is not more necessary to an angle that it be composed of two
right lines, whereof one falls perpendicularly upon the other, to be approved
for a right angle; then it is necessary to a man to have all moral perfections
possible, in order to being perfect with humane perfection. Moreover, the
Decalogue being nothing but the renewing of the Natural Law, which was for a
rule of Life to the first man in the Garden of Eden, and of which he with his
posterity lost the knowledge by Sin, it would be requisite, suitable to that
opinion, to presuppose that Adam in his first creation was not endued with all
moral perfection required in humane nature. Which indeed would be an affront to
him that formed him. But I beseech you, do not the praises wherewith David
extolls the Law of God, constrain us to have a more advantageous esteem of it.
The Law of the Lord is perfect (says he in the 19. Psalm) converting the soul:
the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple. The Statutes of the
Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; the Commandment of the Lord is pure,
enlightening the eyes. And in the 119. Psalm, he prays for nothing else but
that God ^ould illuminate him in the knowledge of the Law, that he might walk
in his Commandments, as being the rule of all perfection desirable; which is
also extreme frequent throughout the whole book of his sacre^ Hymns. But if
the Law contains the measure of the most exquisite and accomplished perfection
that can be in humane nature; then since the denunciation is express, that
Cursed is he who abides not steadfast in all the things of this Law to do them,
he is undoubtedly subject to the malediction that deviates from this Law, and
omits or commits the least thing forbidden or commanded by it. But a curse
denounced by the mouth of God himself, cannot but be unconceivably dreadful and
hideous.

In the next place, the Gospel teaches that the Law is so inflexible in its
rights, that it is impossible, after having transgressed it, whether in a small
or great matter, to be acquitted from punishment, so as not to suffer the same
either in proper person, or in that of some other. Which to an intelligent
considerer even the Law it self sufficiently testifies. For it denounces on the
one side an inevitable curse to them that transgress it, God himself
pronouncing the same from the mountain of Sinai, with lightnings and thunders,
smoke and flashes of Fire, and earthquakes. On the other side gratuitous
remission of offenses is promised to them that have violated it. Now what
expedient is there to fill up the abyss which is between these extremes? Shall
that pardon be granted without preceding punishment? If so, what need was there
of such terror at the promulgation of this Law, and after to suff^^ all those
horrible menaces of malediction vanish away thus in smoke? Perhaps, God powers
all the Curse upon the victimes instituted upon himself to be sacrifices of
propitiation: and it is true they are termed expiatory a hundred and a hundred
times. But what a kind of Comedy would it be, if God after himself had
published his Law with such dreadful majesty, should be contented, for
satisfaction of the transgressing of it, with the death of a poor beast? Might
not that Adage be here applied, Parturiunt montes, etc. It remains therefore
that those terrible threatenings must either fall upon them that violate the
Law, or upon some other capable to bear the same, substitute in their room,
that so they may be secured from them. And the glory of the Law remains hereby
more full and entire. For Reward being a sequel not more natural to Virtue,
then Punishment is to Vice, the Law which denounces a Curse for transgression,
and yet does not really inflict the same, is as imperfect as that which should
promise a reward to its observers, and afterward when it came to the effect,
frustrate all their expectations. As he that should have fulfilled the Law in
every point, would have cause to complain of it, if in case he reaped not the
recompense of his piety and virtue, so would the Law have cause of complaint if
he that violated it, did not undergo the penalty of his offense: the natural
order of things alike requiring both the one and the other. And from hence
results a thing which turns marvellously to the advantage of the Christian
Religion above the Jewish; Namely, that it represents to us the principal
Attributes of God, in which his usual ways consist, as his Justice, Mercy, and
Wisdom, in a much more eminent degree of excellence. For as for his Justice,
it is nothing but a natural repugnanee that is between him and sin; by reason
his Nature is good and holy, and the essence of sin (as they speak) consists in
iniquity and pollution; a repugnance, I say, which necessarily inclines him to
the hatred and abhorrence of sin. For he were not God, unless he hated Evil.
Now all Hatred is a vehement desire of revenge; and hence it is that in their
books this Justice is termed Wrath and Fury, and even an ardent Fury. Whence we
infer, that accordingly as God is perfect in himself, so he abhors Evil; and as
he perfectly abhors it, so he is equally inclined to execute vengeance upon it.
Wherefore the Christian Religion which teaches that God has not saved the World
without being revenged, I say, not without taking satisfaction convenient to
his Justice, exhibits the same to be considered in a more eminent degree, then
that which holds forth remission without inflicting deserved vengeance. For
since the hatred of sin is a virtue in God, the more implacable this hatred is
the greater is the virtue. There are indeed three sorts of satisfactions:
First, such as is made to repair a damage received; as if one should give a
Statuary money for having broken an Image in his shop. Secondly, such as is in
order to contenting an incensed Passion; as when we strike one by whom we have
been offended. For though no good accrue to us by his harm, yet the passion is
contented by being revenged. Thirdly, a satisfaction of Justice, when without
regard either to damage or indignation, a crime is expiated by punishment for
the sole love of righteousness and the natural order which ought to be in
things. Now the first has no place in God; for what damage can arise to him
from our offenses? Nor the second: For he is not subject to our Passions;
choler, and animosity do not discompose his serenity, nor agitate him in any
manner. And if these Passions are oftimes attributed to him in the books of the
Prophets, it is by way of similitude with the humane mind, as well as
repentance; or rather according to the similitude which seems to be between the
actions us which men do out of choler, and those which God does out of justice;
inasmuch as both the one and the ^ther cause grief or pain to those on whom
they are exercised. It Is therefore the third sort of satisfaction or revenge,
which is competent to God after so peculiar a manner, that the more perfect his
nature is, it must of necessity be equally inexorable. And no man can imagine a
justice in God capable of leaving the sins of men unpunished, but he must with
all fancy him little abhorring sin, and too negligent of the natural order of
things. Which would be a very unbefitting reflection upon him. But of this more
at lage hereafter.

But in the next place there is discovered in the Gospel an incomparably
greater depth of Mercy. For it is evident, he obliges less by pardoning that
conceives himself less offended, and he conceives himself less offended that
apprehends he may pardon without doing himself any injury, or diminishing the
reputation of his virtue or his courage. On the contrary, he obliges more, that
forgives an offense so sensible and atrocious, that to make expiation of it
there needs a great preceding satisfaction. Since therefore the Christian
Religion represents the justice of God inexorable, and nevertheless tenders
absolute remission to men by his mercy; of necessity this mercy must be of a
more transcendent benignity, that swallows up an implacable fury. And lastly,
his Wisdom is admirably resplendent in the Christian Religion; whereas in the
Jewish, as the Jews understand it, there is scarce a glimpse of it in all that
mystery. For if he punish according to the curse d^nounced in the Law, it is an
act of pure Justice not of Wisdom. If he pardon without other satisfacti^^
(...) then the death of beasts, it is a work of pure Mercy, and not at all of
Wisdom. But to find an exped^ent to punish and pardon both together, to
display his Mercy without derogation from his Justice, this is it which the
(...) of man was unable to penetrate into, and wherein now it is revealed,
appears an admirable design of Wisdom.

And now what more natural conclusion can there be, then that the
Christian-Religion is incomparably more proper to induce men to Piety and
Virtue, then the Jewish. For, as we have intimated elsewhere, there are three
motives alone that incite us thereunto; Fear of Punishment, Hope of Reward, and
the Admiration of the excellence of the Nature of God in it self, and of the
beauty of piety and virtue in which his image is resplendent. Now as for the
Fear of punishment, it is always so much the greater as justice is vigorous and
inflexible. And therefore the more implacable Religion represents the Justice
of God, the more powerful is it to reclaim and keep men from vice by the terror
of punishment. In like manner, the Hope of reward ought to be greater, where
Mercy is greater too. For our Conscience bears us witness, that it is on this
score we are to expect it. And if Admiration of the Perfections which are in
God can be to us an efficacious attractive to goodness (as indeed there is no
true and sincere Piety which is not principally rooted and fixed on this
foundation) besides the great and incomprehensible Wisdom that is eminent in
him, the immense depths of his Mercy ought to ingulf all our thoughts and
inflame all the affections of our souls with a holy devotion. For ever since
the time of the first sin, all our piety is nothing but a gratitude toward his
mercy. And lastly, for that Contraries mutually illustrate one another, the
Beauty of Piety and Virtue will be more resplendant by the opposition of Sin,
the horror of which appears so much the greater, as the punishment that
attended it is more terrible. Now how much this consideration, that God has
discharged the vengeance due to the sins of men on the person of his own Son,
exalts the luster of all the precedent doctrine, we shall not now insist upon
(for we have not yet considered the qualifications of his Person, who has made
this satisfaction for our offenses) But truly every one may of himself readily
judge.

Lastly, The Christian Religion infinitely excels the Jewish, in the
understanding of the Promises which concern the Messiah. For what Messiah is
that which the Jews expect? A Triumphant King, who by force of arms may subdue
the Nations, and bring Emperors under his yoke, and break Empires in pieces,
may extend his conquests from East to West, and from North to South, and fill
the whole Earth with the terror of his Legions, and advance the Jewish Nation
as high as it is now miserably abased. For as for many more impertinences which
they are otherwise guilty of in this matter, I shall forbear to mention them;
as less intending their shame then their conviction; And I cannot but pity them
when I observe the race of Israel, the Posterity of Abraham, and the people
once beloved of the Lord, to equal and surpass in this all the extravagances of
the Mahometans, and the Pagan fopperies. In that which I have proposed which is
the most tolerable of all their imaginations they sufficiently manifest that
they are of the flesh and the world, since they apprehend nothing but carnal
and mundane things. For if their remained in them any spark of spiritual Light,
they would acknowledge that they are composed of two Parts, Body and Soul; and
that the body being earthly and material, and endued with organs and faculties
like to those of beasts, does not come near the dignity of the nature of the
soul, which is spiritual, inmaterial, intelligent, next the Nature of Angels,
and as it were a beam of the very Deity. If therefore they expect glory and
advantage from the appearance of their Messiah, it ought to be chiefly in
reference to the soul, and not for the body saving so far as it is the servant
and dependant of the mind. Now, as we have shown above, in what can the glory
of the soul consist, but in Wisdom and Virtue? And wherein does wisdom lie, but
in the knowledge of him, who is the Author and Fountain of all Virtue, Prudence
and Understanding? Should he have turned the rocks into Diamonds, and the
flints trampled on at each step into Gold and Jewels, the Snow of the Alps
into Butter, and the rivers into milk, the Wine of Judah into Nectar, and the
bread of Asher into Ambrosia, and driven all the Kings of the earth fettered
before his triumphant Chariot into Jerusalem, yet all this terrene pomp and
magnificence had not been comparable to his lively illumination of minds by the
knowledge of the Most-high, and to his victory over hearts, their passions and
appetites. For there is so little proportion between the mind and the body,
that the greatest and most triumphant Emperor of the Earth, if vicious and
ignorant of things worthy the excellence of man, is to be contemned in
comparison of the most miserable slave that in the servile condition of his
body, excells him as to the understanding in Virtue and Prudence. And I think
there is not any so unworthy the being of man, that would not choose rather to
loose all the Kingdoms of the Earth, if he possessed them, and after that even
the limbs of his body, then the use of Reason which advances him above the
equality of beasts. Moreover, let them speak in conscience, whether it be not
the sense of their present calamity and the miserable estate they are reduced
into by their dispersion throughout the whole world, that makes them breath
after a Deliverer powerful in arms. Now what is the cause of this misery but
their Sins, both such as are common to all men in general, and particular to
their own Nation? For certainly God who loved them so tenderly, and chose them
out from all others to communicate his Covenants to them, would not treat them
so rigorously, were there not some lawful cause in their extraordinary
offenses. And what a strange blindness and stupidity of mind is it, to have so
quick a resentment of evils, relating to the body, and not to acknowledge the
cause of them? What a depravity and perversity of understanding, to groan under
the strokes of the hand of God, and never to groan under the load of their own
iniquity? To pant incessantly after a Deliverer of the Body, and never to think
of the redemption of the soul? They are driven out of Judaea, and Heaven and
Earth resound with their lamentations: They are by their sins debarred the hope
of Heaven, and make no matter of it; They are inthralled to their corporeal
enemies, and murmr against God for it; They themselves are sold to Satan and
to Sin, and do not understand the horror of this servitude: They are impatient
in a waiting the coming of some Person, that may reassemble them from their
dispersion, and deliver them in reference to the body: The Redeemer and
Deliverer of their fouls is offered and preached to them, and they reject him.
They flatter themselves with hope of a profound and plenteous tranquillity in
all sorts of pleasures and delights of the Flesh, and cheer up themselves with
it: They are invited to taste how good the Lord is in his compassions, and they
refute it. Their thoughts are day and night upon gold, silver, silk, scarlet,
fine linen, and jewels; and their hearts leap with the fancy; The Gospel tells
them of riches and ornaments relating to the mind, and they blaspheme it. Is
this the Posterity of that only wife and intelligent people with whom God
established his Covenants? But above all the rest, they do injury to the glory
of that Messiah, who was promised to them, to fancy him an earthly Prince. For
since themselves call his Kingdom the Kingdom of Heaven, what other ought they
to hope for but one spiritual and heavenly; which beginning to be exercised
here below in the souls of men which are of a spiritual nature, is accomplished
above in glory unspeakable. And truly it is to this that all the Prophets lead
us from the first to the last. What does that promise refer to (The seed of the
woman shall break the Serpents head) but to the consolation of man by the hope
of being delivered from the Curse of eternal Death, into which he is fallen by
the deceit of the Evil One? For as he sinned principally with his soul, which is
the source and principle of the actions of the body, and alone capable of
understanding the laws of piety and obedience; so it was consentaneous that the
condemnation of death should be directed to the soul in case of rebellion. And
that other promise (In thy seed shall all the families of the Earth be blessed)
and (I will give this Land to thee and to thy Posterity after thee) wherein did
it profit Abraham, if it aimed no further then that Canaan, which himself never
possessed, and was not given to his Posterity till above 400. years after? Was
it either a sufficicent consolation to him in all the Crosses that he
underwent, or a Promise worthy of God who established his Covenant with him? For
which of us cares what will be done a hundred years after his death? As for
those words of Jacob (until Shiloh come) they promise a Prince of peace, about
whom neither fire nor sword shall glitter, but he shall be the author of peace
between God and men. It shall come to pass (says Isaiah) that the Mountain of
the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be
exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. But what to do?
Come, shall they say, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, and he will
teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. Therefore it is to be enriched
in the knowledge of the Name of the Lord, and not in Jewels or Pearls; to learn
to moderate and subdue their Passions, and not to conquer Kingdoms. Also in
the 25. chap. 6. verse. In this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all
people a feast of fat things, a feast of Wines on the lees, of fat things full
of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined. Can they take this according to
the Letter? It is certain, there are some so stupifi'd with the wine of
ignorance, that they take it so, and expect to be satiated with that horrible
Leviathan, which is powdered up I know not where against the manifestation of
the Messiah. Poor people! who think the Prince of the Kingdom of Heaven will
come to fill their bellies. But behold what follows, verse. 7. And he will
destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and the
veil that is spread over all Nations. What is the meaning of this, but that all
Nations being involved in ignorance as in the black veil of night, he will
dispell all that darkness to the end they may behold the light of his
knowledge; that they may rejoice (I say) in the light of that Sun of
Righteousness who carries healing in his wings? And thus through out all the
Prophets; which would be too long to recite: there needs no more but to read
them. For it will be found that he is a Prince of peace, upon whom the Spirit
of the Lord shall rest, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of
counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord. That
under his reign, The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie down
with the Kid; and the Calfe and the young Lion and the fatling together, and a
little child shall lead them, etc. That is, He will unite the most hostile
Nations together in the same society of Religion, and cicurate and mollify the
fiercest people by the knowledge of the true God, and render the most
untractable natures gentle and sweet. Which the Prophet himself expounds
immediately after; They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: For
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
Sea. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the
street. A bruised reed shall be not break, and the smoking flaw shall he not
quench. So far is it that he shall batter all to pieces with Canon-shot, or hew
all down with the sword. And as for his Glory, it must needs be other then
terrestrial and corporeal, Since he was to be despised and rejected of men, a
man of sorrows and acquainted with grief: Since (I say) he was to be lowly,
riding upon an Ass and a Colt the fool of an Ass. And indeed the frail dusty
ornaments of the Earth would have been too vile and wretched for him that is
the Sun of righteousness of souls. Wherefore forasmuch as the Christian
Religion refers all the promises of the Messiah to the good of the Mind,
making him to be the Redeemer of souls, and attributing to him a spiritual
Empire and glory; it directs them to their right end, from which the carnal
imaginations of the Jews had perverted them, and has consequently as great
pre-eminence above the Jewish in this point, as the soul has above the body,
and the Heavens above the Earth.

CHAP. VII. That according to Right Reason and the Old Testament, the means of
obtaining Salvation ought to be such as the Christian Religion holds forth.
I Affirmed in the precedent Chapter that the Law of God, and the nature of his
justice require that either all men perish universally, or that some person in
their stead endure the punishment which they have merited. But because this is
the Foundation of the Christian Religion, and the most usual stumbling-stone on
which the Jews and diverse other people fall foul, it is requisite for us to
discover it something more clearly in this Chapter. Certainly, if they will
confess the truth, the natural terrors of their Consciences, when they consider
the justice of God seriously, will make them acknowledge that nature it self
directs them in order to the obtaining of solid comfort, to seek out a
satisfaction of merit proportionate to the Majesty of him to whom it is due,
and to the demerit of their offenses. For not only the Jews, to whom God
revealed his vindictive justice more manifestly, but others who never heard
speak of the Law, have been invaded by them. Which how could it be, did not
punishment accompany sin as the shadow a body; and that for a man to be quit
from the penalty, it must either be suffered by another, or he must be exempt
from sin himself? And the Natural Instinct which lead them to offer sacrifices
in the beginning, and which was approved and authorized by the Law of God under
the Old Testament, is an evident argument of it. For whence was it that soon
after sin committed, Abel offers the first-lings of his stock in sacrifice, and
that this example became so powerful to all the posterity of Adam, that there
has been no Nation by whom the death of beasts immolated in sacrifice was not
practiced; but only that nature it self taught him to acknowledge what he had
deserved, and all others have in like manner followed his sentiments? So that
though they could easily judge that the satisfaction was not proportionate to
the dignity of him with whom they thus transacted; yet being unable otherwise
to satisfy, they offered that which they could, and withal referred it to the
Wisdom of God to supply the rest? Moreover it is apparent by several Nations
mentioned above, and whose names and customs are recorded both in Holy and
Profane Histories, as the Cananaeans, Tyrians, Carthaginians, Egyptians,
Cyprians, Arabians, Persians, Scythians, Cretans, the ancient Grecians, ancient
Romans, Gauls, and others, who sacrifis'd living men, that the opinion which
Caesar attributes to the Druydes, That it is not possible for the Wrath of the
Gods to be appeased but by offering the blood of men to them, was naturally
imprinted in their souls; Otherwise man, being sufficiently prone to elevate
the opinion of his faults and flatter himself, partly through an immoderate
self-love, and partly by reason of the little knowledge he has of the nature
of God, would never be so inhumanely animated against his own species, and even
against his own children; which some of those Nations were wont to make
victimes of. And for testimony to this, I appeal to men's peculiar thoughts in
the administration of humane justice. How do they detest murderers and robbers,
and those that give themselves up to perpetrate heinous crimes? And when they
observe a Magistrate suffering such persons to go on in impunity, do not they
judge that he is either like them, one of their accomplices and partakers in
their prey, or that he connives at their facinorous actions through want of
power? Certainly, when any enormous misdeed is committed, there ought no
damage to arrive to the Commonwealth either by the Fact or the example; But
there is a kind of detestableness in the deed that of it self cries out for
vengeance, the impunity of which blots the reputation of him who has the
authority and power of punishing in his hand, and brings him into an evil
suspicion and esteem. And he that shall more attentively consider the
emanations of his own mind, will find that Nature has not only endued us
with the Passion of Anger to be inservient toward defending us from particular
injuries which are offered to us, but also has imprinted in our Minds a Hatred
against Wickednesses which do not particularly reach us, which causes us not to
be satisfied till we have seen vengeance inflicted upon the same. But as soon as
we have beheld them expiated by suitable punishment, our minds acquiesce in the
justice done with a kind of satisfaction, and our indignation ceases. For
corrupt qualities and horrid vices in the soul, when they come to be discovered
by actions, they are like Ulcers and Cancers which hideously deform the visage;
we divert our thoughts from the former with indignation, and our eyes from the
latter with nauseousness. Now the Virtues which are but little in us, are in
God in a degree transcendently eminent; he possesses (as we may speak) the body
of them, whereas we have no more then the shadow. As therefore a good
Magistrate does not only detest Crimes, because they are detrimental to the
Commonwealth, but also by reason of the natural turpitude which renders Vice
odious, were it not pernicious; so that he thinks he does not satisfy the
natural equity of things nor his own Conscience unless he punish it; and the
more upright a person the Judge is, the more hatred does he bear against Vice
for its own sake: So God does not only punish Sin, being the Universal Judge
and Magistrate of the World, because it produces prejudice to Humane Society,
and is an enemy to its preservation; but also by reason of that internal and
essential deformity in it which is so repugnant to the Divine Nature and the
natural order of things; so that he cannot possibly prevail with himself not to
revenge it. And the more perfect his Nature is, the greater is this natural
detestation he has against sin.

But to proceed further; The Jews consent that men are naturally corrupted by
sin, and that they have in them from their conception an evil seminary of Vice,
(...) which (they say) is like a mountain to the Good, and a straw to the
Wicked; That is, they which are immerged in it are not sensible of it, no more
then a dead man would be of his burden, if he were buried under a mountain. But
they in whom God has put some sparkle of spiritual life, feel what a great
hinderance it is to their spiritual motions, and are discruciated and oppressed
with it in their Consciences. And we have evinced above that this Corruption is
manifest in all, against those which do not acknowledge the Holy Scriptures.
Now, could the Divine Justice (in their opinion) allow that men should arrive
to Eternal Felicity, without satisfaction beforehand and repentance of that
natural corruption? No, surely. And they which acknowledge no Satisfaction, do
yet confess it absolutely necessary to the obtaining forgiveness of sins, and
beatitude by that forgiveness, that the sinner repent of his Offenses. I ask
therefore, whence they have this repentance? Whether God begets it in them, or
whether they have it from themselves? Certainly, the books of the Jews teach
expressly, that it is God who circumcises the Heart. And the usual prayers of
David, That God would teach him to walk in the ways of his Commandments,
sufficiently show, that if He, that was already converted, and a man according
to God's heart, stood in need of the Working of God in him that he might follow
his ways aright, it follows that with greater reason it is necessary for God to
work the conversion of sinners, who are grown obdurate in their Wickedness.
This, though it were not so plainly held forth in the Holy Books, is so
evident, that even reason and experience make it good. For if Aristotle (who
acknowledged not the vitiosity of man's Nature, but attributed all his
depravedness to custom) teaches that when a man has once contracted a habit
of vice by custom, it is not in his power afterward to quit it, by reason
that vice has possessed his faculties, whose strength and performance is
necessary to rescue him from it, and hinders them from executing their natural
abilities; much more is it impossible for a man to disimplicate himself from
sin, the habit of which is in him, not by custom only, but also by nature.
Custom (it is said) is another Nature; yet Nature is always stronger then
custom. How will it be then, when inveterate custom and nature are found
together in the same vice? Certainly, in such case another force then humane is
requisite to reform it. Moreover, is not true repentance the Love of Holiness
and Righteousness? And is not that Love also the chief part of Beatitude, of
which other things are but as Dependances? Surely, he that denies this, must
pass into the School of the Epicureans, who placed the Supreme Good of Man in
Pleasure, and made no reckoning of Virtue, but only so far as it is requisite
to a cheerful and Pleasant Life. Which was condemned by most part of the
Pagans, and would be shameful for the Jews and those who acknowledge their
Books to be Divine, not to condemn. It will follow therefore that without a
foregoing satisfaction to his Justice, God may give the Wicked the principal
part of Beatitude without Repentance. For since it is he that gives them to be
penitent, and that the principal part of Felicity lies in Repentance, that is,
in the love of righteousness and holiness, God shall give them the principal
part of beatitude before he sees any preceding repentance in them. Now if there
be nothing in the Nature of God which hinders him from giving the most
excellent part of the Supreme Good to the Wicked without any regard to
repentance, why should there be ought in it to hinder him that he should not
even without that give them the other part of it, which consists only in
appendances, to wit, Immortality and Glory? Which yet themselves account a
thing absurd and impossible. Nor would it be material here to say, that it is
not possible that God should give this Second and less principal part of
Beatitude, unles man have the former before, because Happiness is a natural
consequent of Virtue; besides, that there is such a correspondence between
them, that virtue is incompatible with Misery, and Happiness with Vice; and
that they are things of so repugnant an essence, that there is no possibility
of coupling them, but there will appear a remarkable dissonance in the
conjunction. And lastly, that God may draw near to a sinful Creature to amend
it, inasmuch as he loves virtue in which the amendment of it consists for its
own sake; but cannot have any communion with a wicked creature to render it
happy, by reason the Happiness of a creature is not so precious with God, that
to confer it, he should do injury to his justice and his Wisdom, which abhors
vice and wickedness. For in the first place, if Happiness accompanies Virtue by
a natural and inseparable dependence, misery does not less necessarily attend
vice and wickedness. So that if it be not possible for Virtue not to be
remunerated with a suitable Happiness, it is not less impossible for Vice not to
be punished with due chastisement, there being an equal necessity and dependence
between these things. And truly, he that considers the matter attentively,
will find that the bond which conjoyns Beatitude and Virtue together, is less
indissoluble then that which connects Vice and Punishment. For the condition of
the Creature being such, that it ought to be holy and virtuous, though God had
not commanded it; and that God having so commanded, it is bound to obey his
command, though he had not proposed the hope of Reward, inasmuch as it owes all
to God, both in regard of the infinite eminence of his Majesty, and because it
holds its being from him; the promise which God makes of remuneration, and the
actual retribution which he performs of the same, ought to be imputed only to
his goodness and gratuitous liberality. We cannot pretend any other right
toward him, from whom we hold all, yea our very Being. Now that which proceeds
from Goodness, seems not to be of so strait an obligation, but that he which
does it is at his liberty not to do it, and especially when the transaction is
between two persons, the dignity and authority of one of which is infinitely
above the condition of the other. Hence it is evident how, regard being had to
the soverain Majesty of God, which advances him infinitely above all his
creatures, and exempts him from all obligation toward them, he might have
enjoined Holiness and Virtue to his creatures without promising Recompense for
it. But the relation which is between Punishment and Sin, as to the consequence
and dependence one of another, is a relation of Justice, from the exercise of
which it is so impossible for the Supreme and Infinite Dignity to be exempt,
that the greater it is, the more is it obliged thereunto; for that, as I said,
the Love of Justice, on which the exercise depends, and the Hatred of Evil is a
Perfection in God, inasmuch as he is supreme governor and magistrate of the
Universe; whence the greater his dignity is in this respect, the more is he
obliged to the exercise of Justice, in which if he should fail, it could not be
but he must suffer diminution of his glory. Again, if there be such a
correspondence between Virtue and Beatitude, that they cannot be dissever'd,
without appearance of deformity and irregularity, so that the Wisdom of God,
who does all according to weight, number and measure, cannot permit the
dis-junction of two things so closely united together; there is not less
between sin and punishment. Of which the motions of our minds, which are as
obscure shadows of the Properties which are in God, may be testimonies to our
selves. For if we have compassion of a miserable man, whom we esteem not
deserving his misery, we are also moved with indignation against one that is
highly fortunate, but unworthy the felicity he injoyes. And if we observe an
excellent harmony between these two things conjoined together, Virtue and
Felicity; so likewise we esteem these two extremely well adapted where we find
them together, Vice and Misery. So it is incongruous to the same Wisdom of God
who committs no dissonance in any of his administrations, to permit a
separation of these most Natural Relatives. To conclude, I readily concede that
God loves the virtue and holiness of his creatures by reason of its own
excellence; for how can he but love his own image? and also that it is more
precious to him then the Felicity, consequent to it; that is, to speak more
clearly, that it is more well-pleasing to him that his creature be holy and
virtuous, then that it be happy. But at the same rate that goodness and piety
are affected by him, he detests the creature that despises them. And if God be
naturally inclined to provide for the happiness of man, because he is his
Creator, he is likewise natural inclined to execute vengeance upon his Sin,
inasmuch as he is his Judge. And truly I wonder how any can so much cry up the
Mercy of God in the impunity of sins, to the prejudice of his Justice, whereas
Historians do so highly extol the memory of Zaleucus, for an act of justice
done, as it may seem very much to the injury of the virtues of clemency and
Mercy. This man (says Valerius Maximus) having constituted very wholesome Laws
in the City of the Locrians, one of which condemned adulterers to have their
eyes pulled out, it happened that his own son was found guilty of the prohibited
Crime, and consequently obnoxious to the severity of the punishment attending
it. But the whole City interceding in the favor of the young man that he might
be exempted from the rigor of the Law, were a long time denied, till at length
Zaleucus being overcome by the Petitions of his Citizens, that he might
preserve the sight of his Son and the authority of his Laws, caused one of his
own eyes to be pulled out and one of his Sons; thus by an admirable temperament
of equity showing himself both a just Legislator and a merciful Father. Why did
not he suffer his Law to ly dormant for one day, to save both the eyes of his
Son for the good of the Commonwealth? Or if he would not that his Law should be
wholly infringed, why did he punish himself, when he was no partaker in the
fault? But his reason was, that having established Laws, he accounted them
inviolable; and this Act is recorded amongst the most memorable examples of
Justice. How then can any esteem the eternal laws of God possible to be
violated with impunity? Therefore either it is impossible for men to attain to
the enjoyment of Felicity without satisfying the Justice of God; or else it is
possible for them to attain to it without Repentance. Which the common sense of
man abhors.

Object. But possibly some may object and ask us, Whether the same absurdity
will not follow from the Christian Doctrine which teaches necessity of a
satisfaction precedaneous to Beatitude? For it informs us that men have not
made satisfaction in their own persons but in the person of another, who was
constituted a Pledge in their room; and it is God himself that gave them this
Pledge. Now the bestowing one to make satisfaction for sins, is an effect of
infinite mercy and inestimable bounty; and yet it was not prevented by the
repentance of men, but on the contrary prevented their repentance; For the gift
of sanctification, to which repentance pertains, is an effect of the
satisfaction and a fruit of the merit of Christ. How then could God be moved to
communicate so great a good to men without preceding repentance, or without
something else equivalent to a satisfaction? And if he could love his creatures
so much, notwithstanding his justice, as to give them one to make satisfaction
for them, to the end they might be capable of repentance and beatitude, why
could he not give them both repentance and beatitude too without that
satisfaction?

Answ. This deserves to be further displayed, that so the harmony which is
between the parts of Christian Religion may become more conspicuous.
Satisfaction is to be considered in two respects; First, as it is a punishment
of sin, and so it is an act of justice; Secondly, as it is a means to obtain
remission and impunity to those for whom satisfaction is made; and in this
respect, it is an act of Mercy. As for the first, seeing it was an exercising of
the justice of God upon the sins of men, there needed no other previous
condition. The case stands thus. The Creature sinned, and the justice of the
Creator takes Vengeance upon it. For the second, distinction must be made
between the Mercy by which God is inclined to render his creatures good and
happy, if nothing withhold him from it, and that whereby he really and de facto
renders them good and happy. Not that these are two Mercies; for they are but
one; but being considered in the first respect, the effect which it would
produce is intercepted by some obstacle; and considered in the second, it is
followed with the effect, because an expedient is found out to remove the
impediment which strained its efficacy. If therefore some image of the former
sort of Mercy can be found in men, it resembles the natural affections which
Zaleucus had for his son, whose sight without question (had he had no other
considerations) he ardently wished might remain safe and perfect. His paternal
compassions would lead him to this, but the sacred authority of his Law
obstructed his desires, and restrained his natural inclinations, that he should
not do injury to justice. Now in reference to the first sort of Mercy, we grant
that it may be in God toward his sinful creatures without any previous
satisfaction or condition of repentance. But yet withal it does no injury to
justice, because it brings nothing to effect. The consideration of the Law
transgressed by the Creature intercepts it, so that man remains in his
condemnation. For the other, which really and effectually confers repentance
and consequently beatitude, satisfaction ought of necessity to precede it,
because otherwise it would derogate from Justice, as the pity with Zaleucus
used in sparing one of his sons eyes would have prejudiced the authority of his
Law, if he had not at the same time decreed to pull out one of his own. But
Gods giving of his son to make satisfaction for us, arising from the former
sort of mercy, was not founded upon any preceding condition or satisfaction;
otherwise it would be requisite to proceed to infinity, or recur to repentance.
But the real conferring of sanctity and blessedness which attends it, was
grounded on foregoing satisfaction. Whence it appears that though God might
give us a Pledge without being otherwise prevented by us, yet he could not
remit our sins and bring us to salvation without the intervention of that
Pledge. And herein it is that on the one side his mercy is resplendant in
willing it, on the other his Justice in hindering him, and his Wisdom in
satisfying the latter by such an expedient, and giving free passage to the
former.

Now this without doubt ought to be sufficient to men of not contentious
spirits: And nevertheless here it is that the Boasters of Humane Reason lift up
themselves. What show of reason (say they) is there to punish sin in any other
then the person delinquent? What justice to execute vengeance upon the just
instead of the unjust? And what proportion between the punishing of one Man and
the Sins of all the world? To the two former of these exceptions we intend to
give satisfaction in the remainder of this Chapter; The third shall be remitted
to another. First then, that several persons may be involved in the penalty and
yet not in the guilt of a crime, appears in the practice of Life and ordinary
exercise of humane Justice. For Children are punished for the sins of their
Parents; and the tainte of the crimes of the Children redounds back upon the
Fathers. This is seen every day in Offenses of Treason, where the design is
more atrocious in it self and pernicious to the Common wealth. God himself, as
Magistrate has given us a Precedent of this acting. For the Thest of Akan, who
purloin'd forbidden goods, was fatal to his whole Family, and the Posterity of
Saul was hanged for their Father's fault. And the sin of David, who in a vanity
and presumption of his strength, caused the Tribes of Israel to be numbered, was
expiated with the death of seventy thousand men. Which also seemed not
irrational in the judgment of the Pagans, who very frequently attribute the
defeats of great battles and the loss of flourishing Armies either cut in
pieces or destroyed by mortality, to the fault of one single man. For, the
overthrow of Cannae, if we will receive their account, was occasioned by I know
not what sin of Ter. Varro against Juno; and Apollo sent the Pestilence into
the Army of the Greeks for Agamemnons despising his Priest. Thus also the
Goddess Dice in Hesiod requires of Jupiter, -- (...)
(...).
-- ut luat
Populus delicta Regum.
Now if it be not absurd for them which have no share in the saul^ to partake
of the punishment, it cannot seem more inconvenient that a translation of
punishment be made from one person to another. And indeed that communication of
punishment is in some sort a translating part of it. As if the Criminal not
being capable of all the punishment, others should be associated with him to
bear a part of it. Now if a part may be transferred, and he discharged from so
much, why may not the whole be devolved over to another and so he obtain
absolute exemption and impunity? Certainly, if it be not (as they speak) of the
essence of punishment for sin to be all undergone by him that committed it, it
will be no more essential to it, to be undergone by him in part; provided at
least there be some sufficient reason to oblige him that suffers the punishment
to substitute himself in the place of him that deserved it. And this reason
ought not to be fetched elsewhere then from the strait and indissoluble
conjunction that those two persons, the Criminal and the Sufferer have
together. Now there are diverse sorts of Ties, which conjoyn persons closely.
First, Natural Consanguinity; as of Fathers toward their Children and Children
toward their Fathers, of Brethren amongst themselves, and of all those who
have some near communion in the same blood. Secondly, Political Union; as of
Subjects with their Kings, and vicissim, and of fellow-Citizens one toward
another. And thirdly, Friendship voluntarily contracted, but ratified by
inviolable promises of running (as they speak) the same fortune, and laying
down the life courageously one for another. For it w^^ never looked upon as
unjust or strange, for those who are obstring'd one to another by these bonds
to partake in the punishment of their Relatives, or substituted themselves in
the room of one another to bear it all. There is nothing so celebrated in the
Poets and Historians as the death which Alcestis suffered in her husbands
stead, and the story of Damon and Pythias Pythagorean Philosophers of which one
generously offered himself to bear the sentence of death given against his
Friend by Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse. And many other like examples have
been diligently collected by learned Men. What can be said then, where there is
found One that has not only one or two of these relations with mankind, but
all together and much more? What injustice or absurdity will there be for him
to derive the punishment of men's sins upon his own Person? But such is He whom
the Christians venerate for their Redeemer. For he is man, and consequently of
the same blood with them, one with them in communion of the same nature. He
loves them ardently, has contracted an indissoluble society with them, and
has offered himself of his own free and immutable will to be surety for their
debts. He is King of all those whom he has redeemed, and their head, and their
brother. But he was innocent, and they unrighteous. What equity can there be in
this, that he who did nothing should be beaten, and he that committed the fault
have never a stripe? This is the Second Exception, to which there are three
Answers. The First of which is, that by demonstrating above that Punishment may
be communicated, and likewise all of it transferred to the person of him that
had no hand in the Crime, it was by the same means demonstrated that the Just
may be punished for the Unjust: for he that was unconcerned in the fault, of
which notwithstanding he suffers the penalty, is innocent in this respect,
whether he be culpable or no in some other matters; and therefore he suffers in
such case, not for other matters of which he may be guilty, but in
consideration of this in respect of which he is absolutely just. So that all
his other actions what ever they be are set aside, and of this, he is punished
for, he is as innocent as the most virtuous man in the world. The Second is,
that the Punishment of the Innocent and Impunity of the Guilty are so far from
giving us ground to judge the Doctrine of satisfaction to the Divine Justice
extravagant, that on the contrary it is that alone which renders it receivable
by right Reason. For had the substitute himself been culpable, he had been
unfit to be a substitute, for that the Divine Law obliges the Creature to all
it is able to perform, and therefore the Transgression of it obliges to all the
punishment of which the Creature is capable. If therefore the substitute should
be of himself obnoxious to punishment, how could he be able to satisfy for
another? Certainly, he could not pay for an other, if he were bound to pay all
he had of value in the world for himself. For he that h^th but a hundred Crowns
and can have no more, and owes them all, he can by no Arithmetic^ ^^tisfie for
himself and his friend that owes a hundred more. Moreover, if they in whose
stead the substitute suffered were still liable to punishment, there would be
no satisfaction; which was purposely made to exempt them from it; Unprofitable
were the payment made by the Surety, should the Creditor have yet a right to
redemand his debt. The Third Answer is, That if the Substitute had continued
for ever under the condemnation of those whose vicarius he became, such an
excessive charity might have been thought strange, to destroy himself eternally
for the salvation of others; But if he free himself from that condemnation, and
bearing in his hand the discharge for an other, so wrestle against the Curse as
to surmount it; if he indures the wrath of God even so far as to exhaust it, if
he fight so successfully against Death as to triumph over it; if his very
sufferings are to him but a passage to inestimable glories; if he obtain for
the prise of his Fightings, beside the salvation of mankind, an immortal Crown
of honor and a transcendent Soverainty in Heaven and Earth, who can afterward
be scandalis'd at his sufferings? And who will not acknowledge in his being
willing to undergo the punishment deserved by men, an immense charity; in his
remaining victorious, a wonderful power; in his being so highly recompensed, an
immaculate justice; and in all this dispensation, an incomparable Wisdom? But
such is the Redeemer whom the Christians have embraced, and whom they persuade
the Jews to acknowledge, even by inducements out of their own Scriptures. For
besides that, as was shown above, all their sacrifices were inept and
unprofitable, if they had no figurative relation to some other really
propitiatory sacrifice, where the punishment of men's sins were actually laid
upon the victime offered, as it was typically placed upon the Beast which was
immolated in the Tabernacle, so to rescue really from eternal condemnation, as
the other delivered typically from the legal malediction. The 53. chap. of the
Prophesies Isaiah is so express to this purpose, that there must be abundance
of perversity to call it into doubt. For in the beginning he describes the
external appearance of the Messiah (for it is of him he speaks, as the most
solid and learned among themselves consess) when he prepares himself for this
satisfaction so full of sorrows and griefs. He is (says he) grown up as a
tender plant before him, and as a root out of a dry ground; that is, withered,
and not like young plants which abound with sap: He has no form nor comeliness,
and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.
Because it was not meet for him who prepared himself for an ignominious death
to lead before a delightful and pompous Life. Being to descend so low, it was
expedient to go by degrees, and not to fall down suddenly, as from a precipice.
He is the despised and rejected amongst men, a man of sorrows and acquainted
with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was so despised, and
we esteemed him not. Such scandal indeed, it behooved him to suffer who was
exposed to all, that even his own should abandon him, and be ashamed of his
ignominy: otherwise how could he have saved us from the eternal reproach which
we had deserved, if himself had not been covered with reproach? But surely
(says he) he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows; his being so
contemptible before our eyes was not for any thing he was culpable of himself.
He was covered with our misery and our shame, though we for our parts esteemed
him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted; that is, They that beheld him did
not consider it was for their offenses that he was stricken. And yet he was
wounded for our transgressions and bruised for our iniquities: they were our
sins and not his own that brought him into this condition. The chastisement of
our peace was upon him; the satisfaction, by which we are reconciled and obtain
peace with God. And with his stripes we are healed: by his sorrows and pains
comes salvation both to our bodies and souls. All we like sheep have gone
astray; we have turned every one to his own way. Every particular person of us
have erred from the right way, and consequently by our perversity deserved to
be destroyed. But the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. Every one
questioned him, and he was afflicted by it. Both the Devil, and the World, and
they themselves for whose sakes he came, tormented him both by importunate
troublesome questions, and outrageous actions. He was oppressed, and he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he i^ brought as a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his
mouth. Such it behooved his obedience to be toward him who laid the same upon
him. Now is it possible to be more plainly declared, that the world was to be
redeemed by a satisfaction? Or have the Christians need of more clear and
emphatical terms to preach it? But as for the Victory he was to obtain over his
enemies, the rest he was to have after his labors, and the glory arising from
his sufferings, they are not less apparently held forth in the following
expressions. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief. But
when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he
shall prolong his days. Which, being he laid down his soul, can be only by a
victorious resurrection. And the good pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his
hand. Whence, God shall commit to him the execution of his decrees, and
strengthen him with power for the conduct of his purposes. He shall see the
travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied: for there is nothing of so
delectable a gust as the fruit of one's victories. By the knowledge of him
shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities.
Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the
spoil with the strong, because he has powered out his soul unto death; and he
was numbered with Transgressors, and bare the sins of many, and made
intercession for the transgressors. In conscience now, is this to be a Prophet,
or to preach our Gospel? Is this to foretell things to come, or to point with
the finger to things present, or to relate passed. Certainly, let any man
choose the clearest passage of the New Testament concerning this matter, and
compare it with these recited, and it will be hard to distinguish which is that
of the Apostle and which of the Prophet. We conclude therefore, that the Holy
Scriptures of the Jews agree with the Doctrine of satisfaction and have
foretold it; and that Right Reason induces yea inforces to believe it.

CHAP. VIII. That the Promised Messiah ought to be both God and Man; whence it
follows that there are several persons in one simple Divine Essence: Also, Of
the Divinity of the Old Testament.
THe third Objection against Satisfaction remains to be dissolved; Namely, that
the punishment of one alone is not sufficient to obtain impunity for all men.
Indeed, there is either no satisfaction, or it ought to be proportionate both
to the ossenses of men for whom it was made, and the Justice of God that was
incensed, and consequently must be of an infinite worth and value. For to fancy
to our selves a satisfaction admitted by God, infinitely below the demerit of
the offense by way of Acceptance (as they speak) that is, that he should be
contented as fully paid for all, though he receives but a small part, is a
thing not consistent either with the Wisdom or Goodness of God, or the nature
of his Justice, as we declared it above. Not with his Justice; For since it is
impossible for that to leave the sins of men unpunisht, by reason it is the
Hatred and Detestation of Evil, a Perfection which is not divine if it be not
infinite and extreme, nor extreme and infinite if it be not wholly inexorable;
how could it be contented with the punishment of one alone, for a satisfaction
belonging to all mankind? seeing it should thereby take vengance only for the
offense of one, and remit the sin of all others freely without punishment? For,
to speak properly, there is no real satisfaction in an Acceptance, but only
for so much as is received; all the remainder of the debt exceeding what is
received is freely forgiven, and there is none but a fictitious and imaginary
satisfaction for it. Now it is not competent to an implacable justice to be
paid with empty formalities and fictions. Secondly, not with his Goodness. For
it there be nothing in his Nature that hinders him from remitting gratuitously
and without satisfaction the offenses of all men, saving one, what can there be
in it to hinder him from forgiving that one also? If, I say, there be nothing
to hinder him from being contented with the death of one single man only
(which of it self is of value only to be satisfactory for one) for payment for
the infinite offenses of an almost infinite number of men, why did he not
likewise exercise this his infinite goodness toward this person, that so it
might be complete, and no vengeance eclipse its luster? Since also, be it by
Acceptance or no, it is perpetually necessary that the person who is to make
the satisfaction be perfectly innocent and exempt from sin. For God would not
accept a polluted victime; and he were incapable of appeasing the wrath of God
for another who had provoked him by his own offense. Whence it should seem, he
could scarce justify his Goodness, if freely pardoning sinners, he should
without any need at all revenge himself upon an innocent person. Lastly, it is
not consistent with his Wisdom. For to what end were it to, make such an
ambages and intricacy, where the way is so plain and short? What could be more
easy then to pardon plainly without digressing to a satisfaction wholly
defective in it self, and complete only because he that receives it will
absolutely have his justice contented with it? The reason alleged, is, that he
might show that his justice is terrible when he pleases, and ingenerate in the
minds of mortals so much greater horror of their offenses. Certainly, if the
design be to render Divine Justice sormidable, it appeared so incomparably more
in Noah's Flood, the conflagration of Sodom, and many other dreadful judgments
then in the Death of one single man. And if men must be made to know how worthy
their Sin is of detestation and Hatred, the Destruction of the City of
Jerusalem with the unparalled mortality and slaughter that was seen there is
a much more authentic Document to that purpose, and an Instance that speaks
louder and farther beyond comparison. But I believe men are not possessed with
much dread of the wrath of God, when they are preached to, that it is appeased
with so small a matter. It remains therefore necessarily that the Satisfaction
be of an infinite weight and value, to the end it may be proportionate to the
sin of men and to the infinite Majesty of God himself. But who can make it
such? No man surely, who is nothing more then man. For the condition of his
Nature is too low, and the b^unds of his dignity and excellence too narrow, to
correspond to so great an effect. It would be very much if One could pay for
one; besides that the surety must abide in eternal destruction and having saved
an other perish himself for ever. Then, all men in geneneral cannot make it.
For since Sin committed against an infinite Majesty deserves an infinite
punishment, the Offense increasing, as Philosophers and Jurists teach,
according to the proportion of his dignity against whom it is committed; and
since the punishment of men cannot be infinite unless it be eternal; should all
men in general present themselves to undergo the wrath of God, they would
become overwhelmed by it to all eternity, far from redeeming themselves by a
sufficient satisfaction. Thirdly, the Angels are equally unable. For besides
that there is not communion and affinity enough between men and them, to be
conveniently substituted as Pledges for them in suffering those pains,
whatsoever dignity the Angelical Nature possesses, whatsoever excellence it may
have above the humane, yet it could never arise to equal the Majesty of God, in
order to satisfying his Justice after a proportional manner. For at most they
are but Creatures, and there is an immense disproportion between the Creature
and the Creator. And he had good reason, who said, Behold, He puts no trust
in his servants, and his Angels he charge with folly. Because, though upon
comparison of Angels with men, they are of more transcendent purity and
excellence; yet if they be compared with God, all their excellence is
despicable; and were it not that God upholds them they would fall; did not he
infuse Light into them they would become darkness, as well as we. There remains
therefore but one Expedient; which is, for God who alone is infinite, to
satisfy himself. And here it is that humane Reason is confounded. Let us,
nevertheless, experience how far we are able to comprehend this abyss.

By the words above recited out of the Prophet Isaiah, it appears that he that
underwent the chastisement of our peace, was to be man. A man of sorrows (says
he) and acquainted with grief, who must lay down his soul an offering for sin:
and this cannot be meant of any other Creature. But had he had not expressed
the same so manifestly, the nature of the punishment which it behooved him to
suffer, necessarily requires it. For this is the wages of sin, In the day thou
eatest of the fruit of this Tree, thou shall dye the death, that is, thou shall
be under the subjection and condemnation of death both as to body and soul. For
as the Reward of Piety has respect to the whole complete man, composed of body
and soul, so also has the retribution of sin, which has corrupted both the
one and the other. And indeed, he that was to break the Serpents head,
according to the word of God, was to be the seed of the Woman. If therefore the
satisfaction which he was to render to God, ought to be of an infinite value,
what person is able to render it, though a man, unless himself be of an
infinite dignity? And if such man be of an infinite dignity, what remains but
that he is also God; since infiniteness of dignity cannot reside but in the
divine Essence and Nature? Certainly, infiniteness of Dignity is as much
incommunicable as infiniteness of Essence; for it has its root and foundation
in infiniteness of Essence, and the one is as the natural reflection or
irradiation of the other. So that, as it is impossible to separate the light
and strength of the Sun from the Sun it self, or to imagine that something
should possess that admirable splendour and vivificant virtue which is in the
Sun, and not fancy it to be the Sun it self; So, yea, much more, impossible is
it, to attribute a dignity beyond all limits to any whatsoever, and not withal
attribute to him an uncircumscrib'd and infinite essence. And to this, how
seemingly repugnant soever to their reason, do the Divine Scriptures manifestly
astipulate, out of which, I shall for brevity's sake, produce but some few
irrefragable passages. Thus speaks the Prophet Malachi in the 3. chap. of his
Prophecy. Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the may before
me: and the Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his Temple; even the
messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in. Words which we have shown above,
and the Jews grant, are intended of the Messiah alone; the Messiah, who alone
was promised to be a Redeemer to his Church. Now, I beseech you, to whom was
the Temple of Jerusalem dedicated but to the true God? and can it then be meant
of any simply a Creature that it was his Temple? Certainly, neither the
Jealousy of the Lord could endure it, nor the ancient piety of the Jews have
permitted it; the erection of Temples, and dedication of Altars being not due
but to the Deity alone, as testimonies of the soverain honor we owe to his
supreme nature and Majesty. But David apertly terms him God in the 45. Psalm,
and will not have us put to the necessity of gathering it by consequence. Thy
throne (O GOD) is for ever and ever; The scepter of thy kingdom is a right
scepter. Thou love righteousness and hate wickedness; therefore, O God, thy
God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. For I
challenge any man, to make out to whom else these words can suit, but to the
Messiah? Whose throne is this that must abide for ever and to eternity? For
that the words he uses, (...), signify a duration without end, they know who
understand any thing in this language. Now there is no appearance, that the
Holy Spirit would give the name of God to a simple creature on this manner,
together with a Kingdom of everlasting duration. So likewise in the 110. Psalm,
where David calls the Messiah his Lord, there is no question but he would have
him understood to be something more besides a mere man. For David was a King
and depended of no other but God; so that between the Divine Power and that
which is truly Regal, such as that of David was, there can be no other
intermediate. And yet he styles him with the same appellation subjects use to
their soverain Prince. In the 110. Psalm; The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou
at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. But least any
further cavil at this word (...), which sometimes in Scripture is given both
to men and to Angels, by reason of the greatness of their strength and eminence
of power (though it cannot be found attributed to one alone in particular
either of Angels, or men that are in power in the world) Isaiah makes the
commentary of it. For unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the
government shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called,
Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The Father of Eternity, (...), The
Prince of Peace. Are these titles competent to a creature? I know well that
they assay to turn this passage to Hezekiah, and refer all these titles to God,
except that of the Prince of Peace, which they say is given by him to Hezekiah;
but it behooves to have lost both shame and the use of common sense to believe
them. For in what other place of the Scripture, where the Prophets mean to
speak of God, and some action purposed by him to be done, do they accumulate so
many titles? Besides, that to them that understand it, the genius of the
language contradicts them very evidently: and their best Paraphrasts, being
overcome with the clearness of the truth, refer it to the Messiah. But the
Prophet Jeremy speaks with the greatest clearness possible, in the 23. chap. of
his Prophecy, Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto
David a righteous Branch, and he shall reign as King, and shall execute
judgment and justice in the Earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely; and this is his Name whereby he shall be called, THE
LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, (...). For here the Ineffable name of God is used,
which is as much incommunicable, according to the opinion of the Jews
themselves, as his very essence. And indeed the greatest part of his other
Names seem to hold forth his Properties; but this denotes his eternally
permanent essence. This is it by which he delights to call himself, and
glorifies himself in it. It Is true, they have two exceptions against this. One,
that it ought to be translated thus; And the Name of him that shall call him,
is the Lord our Righteousness. The other, that the City of Jerusalem is also
termed by this Name, and therefore that the Messiah cannot take so great
advantage by it. But these are cavils unworthy of people in whom there is left
the least measure of Understanding and Ingenuity. For as for the first; to what
end here serves the mentioning the name of him that must call the Messiah,
without expressing the name of the Messiah himself, seeing the drift is to set
him forth, and to encourage the Church with the hope of those benefits which
should accompany his coming into the World? And in the next place what a
defective manner of speaking is this, And the name of him that shall call him,
without adding how or wherefore? What example can be produced of the like? And
when the Prophet speaks thus; In those days I will raise unto David a righteous
branch, etc. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell
safely, and then shall she be called The Lord our Righteousness, where the name
of the City of Jerusalem is remarkably declared, and not of him that calls her,
is the phrase and placing of the words wholly alike? For the second, Indeed it
is more then evident, that this Name cannot have been attributed to a Person
and to a City after the same manner. To a Cit^ it cannot be suitable, but only
as a memorial of Favor done to it by him to whom the Name is properly
competent. And to a Person it cannot be appropriated, but to denote something
that resides in such person. There can be no danger in communicating so
glorious a Name to a City, none being so brutish or stupid as to take occasion
to suspect any Divinity either in the whole people of a City, or its stones. To
a man simply as man it cannot be given without an inevitable scandal of
Idolatry, especially to such a personage as he that is described there was to
be, not only a King, but the firstborn among Kings, and the King of the whole
world. And truly, if the Messiah be not God, it would be injustice to condemn
those that should adore him, as culpable of Idolatry, seeing him honored with
so magnificent Names. For what ought we not to render to him, to whom both
divine names and honors are communicated in the Scripture, the names of the
highest Majesty, as that of (...), the most sublime honors, as dedication of a
Temple, and that so holy and sacred a Temple? Besides, that in describing his
admirable achievements, there is excuse more then enough for error; if error
may be committed herein. He ought to break the serpents head with his heel. Is
it within the power of a mere man to foil so strong an enemy with so much
disdain and glory? In him all the families of the earth ought to be blessed. A
benediction so firm and vigorous, that it reaches through so many Ages, and is
diffused so abundantly over all Nations, whence could it flow but from an
infinite fountain? He ought to have the Heathen for his inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for possession. Can so great an Empire be
maintained and governed, yea even eternally, without an infinite power and
wisdom? He ought to sit at the right hand of God. But how should he be capable
of so great an honor except he be God himself? For seeing Kings did not readily
admit any to sit at their right hands, but only those which were of their own
blood, as Solomon did Bathshebah, or whom they established Lieutenants and
Governors of their Dominions, as being the second place of the Kingdom, most
honorable next the throne: Whether it be out of the first consideration that
the Messiah is seated at the right hand of God, he can have no consanguinity
with him but by communion of Nature; Or the Second, he cannot be capable of so
eminent a dignity, nor provided of wisdom and power enough to maintain the
same, it being necessary to possess both in an infinite manner, if the person
himself be not infinite. He ought to redeem the Church both by suffering an
infinite punishment, as we have shown, and by the victory which he was to
obtain over death and him that was chief in the Empire of death. Who could
undertake and accomplish so great a design, unless one that is very God? Now if
this Messiah our Surety, ought to be God, as must be acknowledged, or else all
the Holy Scriptures denied; forasmuch as his Person is of an infinite dignity,
his Satisfaction was not only sufficient for all mankind (which how numerous
soever, cannot be actually infinite) but also correspondent to the immensity of
the Nature of God, and proportionate to his Justice. For as the Professors of
the Civil Laws teach that crimes become more henious proportionably to the
dignity of the person against whom they are committed, and Reason also adds its
suffrage hereunto, so in like manner they attest that penalties and
Satisfactions are rated according to the dignity of those who undergo and
perform them. And it is not material, that the punishment deserved by men was
to be eternal in case they suffered it in their own persons, whereas the
Passion of their Substitute ought to have had a certain termination of time;
otherwise (that which is impossible to imagine) a person of such excellence
should have continued under perpetual condemnation. For according to the
natural right and order of things, sin deserved an infinite punishment,
inasmuch as it was committed against an infinite majesty. But because the
nature of man is bounded, and infinity cannot otherwise be competent to him but
only by perpetual duration; had men themselves been to suffer it, it could not
have been infinite otherwise but only by being eternal. But the satisfaction
performed by our Substitute, did not need to be immense in respect of perpetual
duration because his person was of an infinite dignity. For it was made
according to the absolute Right of Gods Justice, and the Natural order of
things, and not according to the compensation which should have been made in
the persons of men by the eternal duration of their pains, by reason of the
narrow limitation of their Nature.

From this discourse it very clearly results that there are distinctly in the
Divine Essence, which with the Jews we acknowledge to be one and simple, at
least two Persons, or Hypostases, or Subsistences; (for we stand not greatly
upon it, by which of these names they are termed) Namely, that which is most
usually represented to us in the Old Testament by the Name of God Creator of
all things; and that, which in order to being Mediator between God and Men was
to assume humane Nature; who is sometimes represented to us under the names of
SON and Branch. As in the 2 Psalm, verse. 7. I will declare the decree; The Lord
has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And verse.
12. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry. For whatever clouds they endeavor to
obscure this place with, it is as clear as the Noon-Sun, that it cannot be
applied to David or any other besides the Messiah; No other can inherit so
glorious a name as to be called, The Son of God, nor have the uttermost parts
of the Earth for his possession and the Heathen for his inheritance. So
likewise that that promise made unto David [When thy days be fulfilled, and
thou shall sleep with thy Fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which
shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his Kingdom. He shall
build an house for my Name, and I will establish the throne of his Kingdom for
ever. I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son] is applicable to Solomon
(though that which follows agrees to him [But if he commit iniquity, etc.)] the
too great magnificence of the words and the event of things cannot allow: the
Kingdom of Solomon having been first of all rent in two in the time of
Rehoboam, and afterward his Throne for so many Ages so shattered to pieces
that there are not the least relics of it to be found in the world. And in
another place, Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, etc. Of whom
without question Solomon is to be understood, where he introduces wisdom
speaking thus; By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice. By me Princes
rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth. The Lord possessed me in
the beginning of his way, before his works of old. I was set up from
everlasting, from the beginning or ever the earth was made. When there were no
depths, I was brought forth; when there was no fountains abounding with water.
Before the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought forth. When
he prepared the Heavens, I was there; when he set a compass upon the face of
the depth. Then was I by him, as one brought up with him: and I was daily his
delight, rejoicing always before him. For what a strange manner of speaking
would this be if the intent were only to express that God is wise? To what
purpose were it to give us notice so diligently, that he was wise from the
beginning, if there be no other mystery in it, seeing it is as impossible that
he should ever be without Wisdom as his own Divine Nature? What manner of
expression is it of Gods being wise from all time, for wisdom her self to cry
out the Lord begat her? Can any Poetical Fury excuse such extraordinary and
uncouth fetches, and especially in a Book whose style otherwise throughout,
though it seems writ in verse, is as remote from enthusiasmes as the Heavens
are from the Earth? Now the Son is without question a Person distinct from the
Father; The Wisdom begotten, from him which begets it; The Branch shouted forth
from him that emits it; He that causes to sit, from Him that sits at the right
hand. And reason consequently proves the same evidently. For since it was
requisite satisfaction should be made to that eternal and immutable Justice,
and it behoved him to be God that should make it, to whom could he satisfy
unless there be an other person likewise God in whom this Justice is
considered? For we have asserted and repeated many times, that this Justice is
a Perfection in God, which consists in the hatred of evil; and that God by
punishing exercises the office of universal Magistrate and Judge of the World.
Wherefore it was necessary for the person who exercised this inexorable Justice
to be distinct from him upon whom it was exercised, the punisher from the
sufferer. For in one and the same matter and the same respect none can be
Magistrate and Criminal both together.

Well (will some say) let Christian Religion stop there. The Scripture and
Reason hold forth these two distinct Persons. But Christianity conjoines also a
Third. What necessity is there of multiplying thus the Persons of the Deity?
Indeed, that which makes the Christian Doctrine seem strange in this point, is,
that Humane Reason is not easily able to comprehend how diverse persons really
and distinctly subsistent can reside in one single and simple essence: the
union of essence being according to the judgment of Reason, repugnant
thereunto. But if it be granted upon inducement of the Holy Scriptures and the
necessary dependence of these truths so excellently coherent together, that
there are two distinct Persons in one single essence of God, the Doctrine of a
Third ought not to be scrupul'd. For the Unity of the Divine Essence will be as
little repugnant to the distinct subsistence of Three Persons as of Two. It
behooves us therefore to inquire in brief whether the Jews may find this Third
Person in their Books. Now mention is so frequently made of the Spirit of God
in the Books of the Prophets, that it is some trouble to make choice in so
great a multitude. These are apparent amongst others; I have not spoken in
secret from the beginning (says Isaiah chap. 48.) and now the Lord God and his
Spirit has sent me. Are not the Lord and his Spirit distinct? And yet to whom
appertains it to send Prophets but to the Lord himself? If the Spirit had not
been God, would Isaiah have called himself his Prophet? And that it might not
seem to be the Second Person who is called The Spirit, he elsewhere puts all
three distinctly in one and the same passage; And the Spirit of the Lord shall
rest upon him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel
and Might, etc. For it is clearer then the day, That the Branch growing out of
the roots of Jesse is the Messiah; upon whom seeing the Spirit of the Lord
ought to rest, and that He also, as we have shown, is the Lord, behold here is
one only Lord distinguished into three Persons. And in another place in the
same terms; The Spirit of the Lord is upon me. What me? The Prophet? No. For it
follows, Because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the
meek; he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to
the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound: To proclaim
the acceptable year of the Lord. Effects which transcend both the capacity and
the condition of the Prophets times. And to the same effect in another place;
Behold my servant (to wit, the Messiah, so styled in respect of his humane
nature, and because as he is Mediator he is employed by his Father for
Redemption of the Church) whom I will uphold, mine Elect, in whom my Soul
delights; I have put my Spirit upon him. And that passage in the 1 chap. of
Genesis is very remarkable, though they except against it; And the Earth was
without form, and void; and the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the
waters. For what is that Spirit of the Lord? A great Wind (say they) which
agitated that confused Mass of the Elements; for great things are said to be
God's; as the Mountains of God. But in the first place, what verisimilitude is
there that Moses should in the beginning of his History make use of a rare
phrase and which is not found but in the Books of the other Prophets, and
perhaps no where else in his own; which is enough to evince that it was not yet
extant in his time? In the next place, whence came this great Wind, and to what
end served it? Was it to hinder that great confused mass from putrefying? God
was well able to hinder that; and there being as yet no order established in
Nature, it was not needful for God to create a wind supernaturally, to prevent
the putrefying of the Matter by its agitation. And Then, the Matter of the
Chaos being to continue so little a space in that estate, the putrefaction of
it was not to be feared: Besides, the word moved, (...), does not signify such
a motion as the blast of a great wind, but only a gentle tremulous
concussion, in which regard it is attributed to the Eagle's shaking the wings
in incubation over its brood; as if Moses would have said, The Spirit of God
gently incubated on the World to cause it to be excluded or brought forth out
of that confused matter. But many others have handled this Doctrine at large,
and therefore I shall produce no more testimonies. Certainly, if regard be had
to the Order which Christian Religion observes, not so much in reference to
these distinct persons considered in themselves (for they are abysses, which it
looks upon as inscrutable) as to the effects which are attributed to them in
the work of Redemption of Mankind, it will be found highly admirable. For to
the Father, as to the first Principal Author of all things, it attributes the
care and administration of the Justice which takes vengance on the Sins of men;
So that it is properly to his Person as Superintendant of the Common right of
the Three in what relates to the unity of their Essence, that satisfaction has
been rendered; And the first source of that Mercy whereby he was moved to
determine to raise man from the misery into which he was fallen; And the
Invention (if I may so speak) of that Expedient in order to it by his
incomprehensible Wisdom. To the Son, as to him who assumed humane Nature and
conjoined it with the Divine in the unity of his Person, and who suffered in
one of his Natures a Passion of infinite value by reason of the infinite
dignity of his other, it attributes the work of Redemption both in regard of
the satisfaction which he made and the exercise and accomplishing of the other
things belonging to his office. So all things having been created, as the Wise
man speaks, by that eternal Wisdom, it could not be competent but to the same
to raise them out of their ruins. To the Holy Spirit, as to him who, being
common to the Father and the Son, is the Virtue by which both one and the other
produces things, and bring their purposes into being, it attributes the Action
which renders both the mercies of the Father and the Performances of the Son
beneficial and efficacious to us. For what would the Dilection of the Father
advantage us if we do not experience it, and the satisfaction of the Son if we
do not embrace and receive it, to the peace and joy of our consciences? Which
how can we do, if the faculties of our Understandings and Wills which are so
blind and perverted, be not enlightened from above, and rectified by a
supernatural power? So the Father, who prevented the existence of all things by
his goodness, has also prevented them by his mercy in restoring them to a
happy being. The Son, by whom all things were at first created, as by the
Eternal Wisdom and Word, has reestablished and repaired them. And the Holy
Spirit, by virtue of whom both the Father and the Son accomplished the Decree
of the Creation of the World, has also been the Virtue of both to perfect
actually the restoration of the World.

Nor ought the Jews here to be exasperated, or humane reason demur. For as for
the Jews, since their own Scriptures teach this, what can they oppose in
contradiction? Are they wont to control the words of the Lord, or to measure
the Doctrine he reveals to them by their own judgments? Have they not learnt,
That his thoughts are not as their thoughts; nor his ways as their ways, but
as distant as the Heaven is high above the Earth? Have they not learned of
their Prophet, that not only none has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or
being his Counselor has taught him, but also that there is no possibility of
fadoming his understanding? Yet their Ancestors, who lived before the Hatred of
Christian Religion had so blinded their Nation, perceived some shadows of these
truths in the Scripture, and have left diverse footsteps of them in their
Commentaries and Paraphrases, speaking so frequently both of the Word and the
Wisdom of God and of his spirit, as of things distinct, that there is but too
much to convince the obstinacy of their descendants. As for humane Reason, it
ought not much to be scandalis'd if there be in the nature of God a depth
beyond comprehension, there being in all other things which seem commensurate
to its capacity, so many difficulties which check it. None has yet been found
that could give account of that Motion in the Heavens called The Motion of
Trepidation; yea it is not yet fully determined, if we follow the Phenomenon of
Astronomers, whether the earth circulates about the Sun, or the Sun about the
Earth. The formation of Meteors has not hitherto been clearly and certainly
explicated, nor is there any that pretends confidently to have discovered their
causes thoroughly. The Flux and Reflux of the sea is to Philosophers a secret
more deep then any of its abysses; and there is no mention of any that ever
rightly understood it. Then, in terrestrial things, who is he that can declare
to us the nature of the Loadstone, what that attractive virtue is which draws
Iron to it, and that other of it is verticity toward the Poles of the World?
How numerous mysteries are there in the most easy Sciences, which cannot be
discovered to the bottom; and how many things seem facil, against which the
acies of our minds is blunted? Who ever understood the reasons of the almost
infinite variations, which are observed in the mixture of the Elements in the
production of all things, as to color, figure, quality, quantity, medicinal
and venomous faculties? All the world knows what a Circle is, and Children are
not ignorant of the shape a Square, a Peasant is capable of comprehending that
there is according to all appearance some proportion between these two figures;
and yet after so many thousand years to the present time, it is not found out
nor determined what it may be. Where is the person amongst us, that is able to
make our handsomely what is meant by the Agent and Patient Intellect, as they
speak, and wherein their difference consists? And 1. evertheless they bicker in
the Schools to maintain that they are really distinct. Certainly, nothing ought
to be so well known to us as our selves, nothing so evident to our minds as
their own motions. Now we understand and will different things a thousand times
in one day; and yet it is disputed whether the Will necessarily follows the
dictates of the Understanding, or have some liberty of resistance for all
dominion it has over it. It Is scarce known whether they be two distinct
Faculties, and there are some which confound them. Books are compiled of the
Miracles of Nature; so termed, because the effects indeed are visible, but the
causes undiscerned. The Occult Sympathies and Antipathies of things fill
complete Volumes; and after the most exact and curious Enquiries, Obscurity and
Incomprehension is pleaded in Favor of Ignorance. Physicians examine our Pulses
every day, and the most learned amongst them, if ingenuous, confess they
understand not what that wonderful faculty is which sets the Heart in motion,
whether it began to move first by contracting or dilating it self, and whether
the Arteries are contracted at the same instant of the Hearts extension. What
ground of scandal therefore is in this assertion, that there is something in
the Nature of God which we are not able to comprehend? But which is more;
should it be granted that there is but one single person in the Divine Essence,
yet none can boast of being able to solve the difficulties which may arrive
from thence. For what humane mind is capable of distinctly understanding how
all the Perfections of God are his very Essence, and not Accidents or Qualities
like those faculties of ours, really distinct from the subject in which they
reside? Since there are some of them not only extremely different; as Wisdom
and Power, but directly opposite, as Justice and Mercy? And yet reason induces
yea compells to believe it; otherwise, Accidents must be imagined in God, and
consequently a composition, unworthy the simplicity of his being. Who is he of
us that is able to imagine an infinite essence, as the Divine is, diffused
infinitely in the mane space, beyond the world, expanded throughout the whole
Universe, so as to be totally present in all things, not divided or separated
by the occurse and interposition of bodies, not mingled and confounded with the
spiritual and immaterial substance of our Souls? Where is the man that is able
to conceive after what manner our souls are extended through all the members of
our bodies? For if it be all in every part of the Body, as is commonly taught,
what difference is there between it is manner of being in the whole body and in
each of its members? and if it be not totally present in each part, why is it
not composed of parts, after the manner of bodies, and by consequence divisible
and corruptible? I am not ignorant that many subtle distinctions are used in
this matter, more proper to cast a mist before the eyes, then to afford a clear
and certain knowledge of it: but I am confident, they are most times not
understood even by those which allege them. Now let us bestow our inquiries in
such things as yield solid satisfaction to the mind, and not in such in which
those that propose them have only designed to show the vivacity of their
Understandings and their abilities. Otherwise, if we betake our selves to
subtleties, forsaking manifest deductions, and conclude that for true which we
are not able to make out, the Speculations of our Scholasticks in this kind
will over-cloud our Religion, and supply matter enough for contradiction. But
there are certain verities resembling too radiant lights, which dazzle if beheld
in themselves, and in their fountain, by reason of the weakness of our eyes,
but content and delight if looked upon in the correspondence they have with
others more preceptible by our minds. And this in question is of this Nature.

Now there are two ways of being assured of the verity of this Doctrine. The
first is that which we have touched upon formerly; That every man have so high
an estimation of the justice of God, as to believe it absolutely implacable
toward us without a preceding satisfaction for our offenses; and know so well
to weigh the horror of Sin, that he never dare think of approaching God without
confessing ingenuously that he has deserved both the temporal death of the
body and the eternal of the Soul, and that it is impossible for him ever to
obtain pardon unless some other satisfy for him, and that with a price
equivalent to the greatness of his crimes and the Dignity of Divine Justice.
For he that is thus disposed in his soul (and we have shown above that the
right consideration of the nature of God requires man to be so) as soon as the
means of so idoneous a satisfaction is propounded to him, he will eagerly
embrace it, unless he ascribe too much to Reason, and presume too much on his
own capacity to comprehend things which are above his reach. But the good
opinion we have of our selves in being able to dive into abstruse matters
causes us oftentimes to commit most pernicious errors. The Second is, for a man
to consider attentively what the Book is, and the Doctrine in general, and in
the body of which this makes but a part. For there will appear in the First so
many evidences of its Divinity, and in the Second such an indissoluble
connection of this point with many other verities of an indubitable certitude
and evidence, that it will be impossible for the mind of man, if it be not
totally obstinate and hardened, not to acquiesce therein. And in truth, let him
begin with the books of Moses. Their Antiquity in the first place renders them
venerable above all other writings of the world. For there are lest no
monuments in all Antiquiquity that come near them by many Ages: The War of
Thebes, and the Sacking of Troy, to which Lucretius limits the knowledge men
have of ancient matters, in these verses; Praeterea, si nulla fuit genitalis
origo
Terrai and coeli, semperque aeterna fuere,
Cur supra bellum Thebanum and funera Trojae
Non alias alii quoque res cecinere Poetae?
And the times of Theseus and Hercules, beyond which Plutarch is able to
discover no certainty in Histories, followed a long while after the birth of
this great Prophet. The language in which it was written is the mother of all
others; of which the several words which they have retained from it, and which
are as slips of that ancient stock, and the names of their very letters bear
sufficient testimony. The style of it is plain indeed, but full of such native
decency and graces; its narrations so equal, and accompanied with so curious a
facility, that the truth of what it relates is resplendent throughout, and
seems to justify it self with a confidence that none would call it in
question; an undubitable evidence of its generosity. The discourses it assigns
those it introduces are wonderfully pathetical and agreeable to the condition
of the persons. The things which it relates both of the creation of the World
and the propagation of Mankind, upon examination of reason alone hold forth a
higher evidence then that of verisimilitude. And it is dubious whether the
histories of the deluge, of the conflagration of Sodom, of the building of the
Tower of Babel, and the like, more clearly convince the Fables we meet with in
the books of Poets, as a well-proportioned body discovers the deformity of the
prodigious shadows it casts, or whether those vain worn-out traces of these
ancient verities bear a more irrefragable testimony to the same. The
Prophetical eruptions, speak a spirit other then humane. The Predictions found
therein have been so ratified by events, that it is too great obstinacy to
disparage their credit by contradiction. And if some things be related to have
come to pass beyond the ordinary ways of nature, as mysterious shadows of what
was to appear afterward, and which really appeared in due time, there results
a light truly admirable from the comparison of the Verity with the Figure. And
the miracles which he performed for confirmation of his doctrine and for
accomplishing the enterprise which himself declared was committed to him, which
might have been refuted by a hundred and a hundred thousand persons, if they
had been counterfeit, and for defense of which so many millions of men would at
present lay down their lives, clear him from all suspicion of fraud and
imposture. Proceed then to the books of Josuah, the Judges, Samuel, and the
rest which writ the histories of the Kings of Juda, and Israel; and there will
appear in them such an excellent continuation both of matters and times, such
an exact description of Genealogies, a narration of various occurrences arrived
both in the Church and State, in the persons of Kings and Prophets, great and
small, Princes and Vulgar, war and peace, and all sorts of accidents, which
carry with them a thousand marks of verity by the correspondence they have with
humane passions and affections, and the resemblances we observe of them in the
various adventures of ordinary life, that a man must either belly his own
faculties or give belief to such illustrious truths. And remarkably here and
there occur such excellent instances of the Divine Providence both in justice
and mercy, such illustrious examples of eminent piety and virtue in rare
personages, such grave admonitions and efficacious exhortations by the mouths
of the Prophets, that he must exceed rocks in stupidity, that does not resent
some lively emotions in his soul by reading them. Then go forwards and read the
book of the Patience of Job, the Psalms of David, and the Proverbs of Solomon;
Good God, how fraught with wonders! Sometimes you will meet with sentences so
full of Wisdom both in reference to knowledge and moral virtue, that the most
excellent piece the Philosophers ever composed in that kind is dross and
darkness in comparison; sometimes with a complaint so lamentable that it may
melt the most rigid hearts with compassion; sometimes with the voice of God
speaking and revealing himself from Heaven in a most august Majesty surrounded
with lightnings, and with a terrible voice resembling thunder. In one place an
ardent prayer, in another testimonies of a fervent piety: here a zeal for the
glory of God, and so inflamed a virtue, or else so violent a hate against vice,
that when you come to pass from reading of these books to those of the
Philosophers, or of any other whatsoever that has assai'd to write of such
matters, you will seem to be transported from Vesurius to Carcasus. In the
whole series of them are interspersed predictions of future things so remote,
that no other but the Spirit of God durst have offered at them; apostrophes to
the Nations which were to be converted to the knowledge of the God of Israel,
exultations for the manifestation of the Messiah, so different from the
ordinary thoughts and sentiments of men, that we must forget who we are, if we
attribute the same to humane invention. And throughout the whole body composed
of members so well adjusted and disposed in so excellent a harmony together,
are universally diffused (like blood replete with spirits) vigor, life,
consolation so lively, efficacious and sensible to the soul into what
perplexing inquietudes soever it falls, that there is none so sweet a
refreshment in any ardor, nor soverain balm to whatsoever wound. And lastly, he
that shall proceed from thence to the reading of the other Prophets, unless he
do it with much supinity and negligence, will observe in each page sparklings
and beams of a light and inspiration truly Divine. Do they expound what the
aim and use of the Law is? they do it with most profound Wisdom. Do they
reprove and threaten in the name of God? the gravity of their admonitions is
inimitable, and the denunciations of his judgments, terrible; so that no
humane voice is able to stretch to so high a strain without breaking, no
affectation can be set out in a dress so stately, constant and uniform. Do they
promise? If temporal deliverances, it is with demonstration of so redoubtable a
power, that the very name of the Lord of Hosts, which is so often repeated in
them, sounds a kind of grandeur I know not how to express, and which cannot
arise from humane imagination: If spiritual redemption by the Messiah, it is in
terms which represent an inexhaustible sea of benedictions and riches. Do they
foretell things to come? if it be in obscure terms, the very obscurity of the
Prophecy is venerable; and there is always something of greatness discernable
cross the veil, though not very distinctly; if it be in plain words, the names
of persons designed entire Ages before their birth, times predetermin'd, and
circumstances of matters most exactly taken notice of, sufficiently argue that
they are neither divinations of Demons, nor humane conjectures; neither nature
being capable of so remote a foresight. Then, their transports are so sublime
and their flights so bold, that no man durst attempt to soar so high; the
doctrine held forth is so directly intended to the glory of God and the
salvation of man, that it is not possible any evil spirit should have been the
author of it; and the mixture of the Law with the Gospel is dispensed therein
so wisely according to the condition of times, and the economy of Prophecies
opening themselves by degrees maintained after such a rate, that should men and
Angels conspire together, they would fall infinitely short of such an admirable
wisdom. And I entreat such Readers as have any familiarity with the language in
which they writ, to observe the same attentively. For I am confident, whatever
some say, there is not to be found in any Author, Greek or Latin, so
magnificent and pompous an eloquence. And if they understand them not in their
natural language, let them read them considerately in some version performed
with care and diligence, especially in those which are commonly called Living
Tongues. For though the Greek and Latin languages are in their own authors
more rich and copious; yet those which live, if well managed, are more pliable
to these Translations and take off better the impression and graces of the
language of the Prophets; and this, because they are capable of new words and
phrases. It will without question appear that all the reproaches profane men
cast upon the Holy Books, and disparagements of its style and eloquence, are
frivolous. If therefore these Books teach the doctrine of the Trinity, as we
have shown they do, and are delivered to us by divine Inspiration, as is
clearer then the Noon-Sun, what a folly would it be to go about to examine by
reason the mysteries of the Divine Wisdom, which it self has revealed?

Now concerning the correspondence these verities have with others
unquestionable in the Doctrine which holds them forth, it may seem sufficiently
declared in the preceding discourse. Man is fallen into a depth of misery, and
so is become an object of pity. Now in whom can he excite it, unless in him
that is the Father of Mercy? But it was by his sin, and so he is an object of
justice. And from whom is he to expect punishment but from the supreme Judge of
the World? Will this Mercy display it self in pardon without punishing? No,
that would be to the prejudice of justice. Will this justice be executed upon
man himself; Nor so; this would be to exclude all Mercy, in which the Almighty
takes delight. What remains therefore but for God to substitute a pledge in the
room of men? Now it is requisite that this substitute suffer death, and by
consequence that he be man. And it is requisite that his passion be of an
infinite value; and for this, he must be God; for no other is capable of making
such a satisfaction. And if he who is God be stricken by the hand of God by way
of punishment, does it not necessarily follow that there are two distinct
persons in God? This redemption is unprofitable, if it be not efficaciously
applied to man. Who shall apply it to him? Not himself. A blind man might as
well open his own eyes, or a Carcass raise it self out of the grave. And since
this work of our salvation is common both to the Father and the Son, what is
more consentaneous then for them to consummate and apply it by a Virtue which
is common to them both? Now if it be common to both, it is distinct from both.
How therefore is there not a Third? This is that which men chiefly stumble at
in the Christian Religion. In all other things it is so consistent with reason,
that its greatest enemies dare not gainsay it. In this indeed it is in no wise
incongruous with reason, provided it be attended to in a due manner, and we let
not loose the bridle to its presumptuous curiosity. These principles are
likewise common to both the parties, into which we have distinguished all those
which profess the Christian Name in Europe at this day. If there be some things
embraced by either, which seem absurd to reason, or contrary to piety, yet it
behooves not forthwith to accuse Christian Religion for it. It is meet to try
the same by those Books which both equally own, and explore them by the common
Principles upon which their Religion is built. For if they be conformable
thereunto, they will be found in no wise repugnant to right reason; if not,
they must be held for humane inventions, and Religion discharged of the blame.

CHAP. IX. That Jesus is the Messiah promised by the Old Testament. Also, Of
the Divinity of the New.
WHereas we have evinced in the preceding Discourse that the Christian
Religion far surpasses in excellence of Doctrine that which the Jews of old
professed, how divine soever it was; and consequently that it was substituted
in its place; it is now sufficiently clear, since Jesus is the sole author of
it, and professed himself to be the Messiah promised by the Prophets, that he
is really the person. For how could an Impostor have been the interpreter and
revealer of so celestial a Doctrine? And this is chiefly the means by which he
verily ought to be judged; For it is a man's Doctrine which manifests what he
is. Nevertheless, our design would not be complete, unless we also observed
here briefly (because others have most diligently and amply acquitted
themselves in this matter) the principal circumstances of his birth, his Life,
and his Death. For there has not been the least defect therein, in relation to
all that was heretofore either required or presignified by the Prophets.
Malachi had writ in these express terms ( chap. 4.) Behold, I will send you
Eliah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the
Lord. And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart
of the children to their Fathers. From this place the Jews still expect the
coming of Elias. But what appearance is there that Elias himself should be
fetched back from Heaven to converse again here below on Earth? That after so
long an enjoyment of the felicities above he should return once more into the
miseries of life? Certainly, as it was necessary for him at his reception into
Heaven to be divested of the terrestrial qualities of his body, and clothed
with suitable ones to the place of his new abode; so, if he should redescende
amongst us, it would be requisite for him to resume qualities agreeable with a
terrene condition, and to despoil himself of his celestial glories. Now he
might well pass from worse to better, from an earthly to a heavenly life; but
to return from better to worse would be a mutation of too much disadvantage.
Elias therefore was to come, just as David was to come: for the Prophets
promised him also. Not that the Son of Jesse and father of Solomon ought to
arise from among the dead, to repossess the Kingdom of Israel; but the Messiah,
of whom David was a type, ought to be the conducter and Chieftain of spiritual
armies, and passing through many dangers and fights obtain peace to his people
by his glorious victories. Thus ought one to be born, who being clothed with
the spirit of Elias, and leading the same manner of life, might prepare the
hearts of men to receive the Messiah by preaching the doctrine of repentance
with an extraordinary authority and gravity. And such was John the Baptist, as
our Evangelists describe him to us. Isaiah had said in the seventh Chapter of
his Prophecies, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call
his name Immanuel. And though this might have had its accomplishment after the
time of the Prophets, by the extraordinary birth of some infant, for a sign of
the deliverance which is promised here, yet in the second place it has regard
to the Messiah; as many things in the Prophets agree to the type in one
respect, which are referred to the thing signified by the type in another. And
in truth, besides that all temporal deliverances have, as shadows, prefigur'd
the great and spiritual one, and this being very signal ought to prefigure the
same in a more signal manner; what kind of sign was here chosen to assure Achaz
and his people of Deliverance? For if the child of which he spoke, was to be
born after an ordinary manner, certainly the sign was not great, nor capable of
suggesting much assurance. If there ought to be something extraordinary in his
birth, the election of this sign among so many others is strange, if it had no
remoter aim. Add hereunto, that were all which the Jews allege concerning the
word Virgin true, and that it should sometimes signify a young woman, because
there is but little distance of time between these two conditions; yet being
its proper and most common signification denotes a Maid, it is a manner of
expression marvellously strange, to intimate that a young woman shall bear a
child, by saying, A Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son. So that according to
this meaning, should the Prophet have shown with his finger the young woman he
spoke of, he had left Achaz and his people at as great a loss by this uncouth
speech; and the condition of the times was suitable to such biassed Prophecies.
Now Jesus was born of a Virgin, in a miraculous manner. Which the Jews now
cannot handsomely deny; whose Ancesters that condemned him never did him this
outrage, though they had rigorous laws against adulterers, and means enough to
prove that he was not born in marriage, to which they might have had the
acknowledgement of Joseph and his Mother. Micai had expressly designed the place
of his birth ( chap. 5.) But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little
among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that
is to be ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old from
everlasting. And all the Prophets promised him of the seed of David, in their
Revelations, Histories, and Psalms. As for the place, the Evangelists declare
it expressly: and as for his blood, they rehearse the race of Christ from father
to son and from time to time up to David, Judah, and even Adam himself. And the
Jews never called in question his being of the royal line. Jacob prefixed the
time of his coming at the subversion of all government and political power in
Judah; and Malachi, before the ruin of the second Temple; Daniel, after
seventy weeks of years, to be reckoned from the time of his Prophecy. And the
revelation of it was so clear and the tradition founded on it so constant, that
all the Jews waited for this time; and several impostors rose up about this
time to abuse their expectation. Now Christ was born at the predetermin'd time,
when Herod possessed himself of the Kingdom, and extinguished all that was left
of the race of David in any political Power or probability of attempting to
gain it; a little before the destruction of the Temple, and the total
desolation of the Nation, and the ruin of the Soverainty of Herod himself, and
at the time when the seventy weeks of the Prophet were expired. It was foretold
that he should be both a contemptible man in his external appearance, and of a
Life unblamable in his conversation. For God calls him his just servant; and
Isaiah, The despised and rejected of men. And Jesus spent the space of about
thirty years unknown of all, not acknowledged even by his kindred, with parents
of abject condition, although of royal descent: The calamities of the house of
David having reduced some of his posterity to these terms: and his enemies
reproacht to him, as if he had been the Son of a Carpenter, and a Carpenter
himself. As for the integrity of his Life, his most capital Adversaries, and
calumny it self found nothing to reprehend in it. Isaiah uttered these
remarkable words in the 35. Chapter of his prophecy; Behold, your God shall
come with vengeance, even God with a recompense, he will come and save you.
Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be
unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap us an heart, and the tongue of the dumb
shall sing. A promise too magnificent to receive accomplishment under any other
then the Messiah, both in reference to healing the imperfections of the body,
and also in relation to the vices of the soul of which those are in a manner
resemblances. As for the first, the Miracles which Jesus performed, were so
great in themselves, so notorious in the sight of his enemies, so consonant to
this Prophecy, that none can with any shadow of verity question that this
Prophecy was accomplished in him. For he gave sight to the blind, he healed
such as were impotent from the womb, he raised the dead, opened the ears of
the deaf, loosned the tongue of the dumb, commanded the winds and the Sea and
they obeyed him, and surpassed as well in number as magnificence of his
miracles all the Prophets that came before him. It Is true, there are some Jews
who accuse him of having done the same by Magic. But then their Ancestors who
condemned him, would have bethought themselves to make this a part of his
Indictment, and insert it into the sentence of his condemnation. For what law
is more severe then theirs in constituting terrible penalties for Sorcerers,
and all such as addict themselves to Magic? And nevertheless he did these
wonders before their Eyes, under the view and cognizance of all the world; in
the City and the Country, in the house and the street, and for the most part in
the presence of the greatest multitudes. Yet they never accused him of Sorcery.
Some Pharisees indeed, whose eyes were perstring'd by the luster of his deeds,
accused him of effecting them by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. But their own
followers did not believe them, and the Answer he gave them was perfectly
convincing; That his Doctrine wholly tending to the subversion of the Empire of
Satan, the Devil would never have confederated with and assisted him that went
about thus to undermine the foundations of his Kingdom. And truly what
diabolical art or what sleight of Magic could be employed in restoring life to
the deceased, and sight to those which never had any, to heal persons
desperately sick at a great distance from him and by his Word alone, and to
stop a continued flux of blood of twelve years only by the touching of his
garments, to reinfuse decayed strength in a moment, and rectify cripled
members after long impotence? For what are the works of Magicians usually but
illusions, and feats of juggling, rather then actions surpassing the power of
Nature? Others of the Jews ascribe his admirable Works to the Cabala,
pretending that he stole the name of God out of the Temple, and that to that
ineffable Name (...) was annexed the power of doing miracles. But besides that
this is a shameless fable, and unworthy to be taken notice of, what color is
there that four Hebrew Letters should have the power of resuscitating the dead?
And if the Name of God ennabled him to work Wonders, was it with the permission
of God himself, or against his consent? If against his allowance, surely it
would be a pitiful case should a man by subtlety steal the name of God and do
miracles by it, in spite of him to whom it belongs: That God, I say, should
have divested himself of his infinite power to transfer it to four small Hebrew
Characters by a irrevocable donation. If with his permission and consent, then
hereby he confirmed the calling of Jesus and ratified the open and clear
declaration he made of being the Messiah. Which he would never have done in
patronage of an imposture. God also foreshew'd that the Messiah should suffer,
and David apparently specified the manner of his Death: otherwise, to what end
did he say, They pierced my hands and my Feet? since in those times of his
there was not among the Jews, any custom of a punishment in which they pierced
the hands and feet, from whence David might borrow this phrase? For as for what
they cavil upon the word, they pierced me, (...), as if it ought to be
translated, as a Lion, (...), the sense of the sentence, which would by that
means become imperfect and in suspense, refutes it. For what can this signify,
As a Lion my hands and my feet, there being no connection to that which
precedes? Now our Lord Jesus has suffered death, even the death of the Cross;
by which on the one side the words of David have been accomplished, and on the
other that has been really brought to pass which was figuratively represented
by the Lifting up of the Serpent: besides, that the Curse denounced against
those which hanged upon the tree, is become expiated thereby. David had said in
the 16. Psalm, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer
thine Holy One to see Corruption. To what purpose spoke he thus if he meant it
of himself, seeing he is dead and in his dust with his fathers? And yet he
spoke it not extravagantly; for the Holy Spirit which guided him did not suffer
these words to escape him at random. To whom then ought they rather to be
referred then to him, of whom David was so express a type that he is styled by
his Name? Therefore since he was to dye, and yet ought not undergo putrefaction
in the grave, it follows that he ought to rise again from the dead; and this
our Scriptures teach us of Christ, and is of most evident verity, though the
Jews pretend dissatisfaction of it. For why shall we not give credit to his
Disciples who were eye-witesses of it, since they gained nothing but
persecutions and capital hatreds by maintaining it? Who can imagine that men,
who naturally love Life, should spontaneously abandon themselves to death, to
defend the delusion of a Death from which they could expect nothing? Moreover,
David in the 68 Psalm, says, Thou have ascended on high, thou have lead
captivity captive, thou have received gifts for men. I beseech you, who does he
speak of? Is it of God as a person distinct from the Messiah? It cannot be.
Throughout all the whole space of Ages which passed before Penning of this
Psalm, never any deliverance was wrought for the people of Israel, nor
extraordinary favor shown them, whose greatness or manner may correspond to
this passage; and the strain of the whole Hymn testifies the contrary. To whom
can it suit but to him in whose time was to be seen the effect of the words
which follow in the same place? Princes shall come out of Egypt; Ethiopia shall
soon stretch out her hands unto God. By reason of which the Kingdoms of the
Earth shall sing praises unto God, and Psalms unto the Lord; that is, to the
Messiah. Now our Lord is ascended into Heaven after his glorious resurrection,
whence he has sent those admirable gifts of the spirit, which have imbued the
people of the Earth with the knowledge of the Lord; whereof there need no other
proofs, then that the Nations, heretofore the most ignorant and barbarous, have
now so much knowledge of the Nature of God, and the truths of Religion, that
they exceed the Jews therein as far at least as they were exceeded by the Jews
before the preaching of the Gospel. Daniel had foretold that after that Christ
should be cut off* that is, after he should have suffered death, but not for
himself, The People of the Prince that shall come shall destroy the City and
the Sanctuary: and Christ confirmed this Prophecy by foretelling that of
Jerusalem and the Temple there should not be left one stone upon another. Now
who can doubt but that the event has ratified the Prophecy? Lastly, it was
predicted, that he should destroy the Kingdom of Satan and the worship of false
Gods: and since his times, they have been no longer in repute, even the most
famous oracles have lost their very being. Of which there needs no other
testimonies then those of Pagan Authors, who inquire after the cause of their
cessation, and of experience after so many Ages that their memory is quite
abolisht.

Very good (will some say) but of all this we have no authors besides the
Evanglists and the Apostles, who are therefore justly suspected and liable to
exception, as speaking in their own cause. And moreover, who will warrant to us
(say they) that there were Apostles heretofore; or if there were, that those
Writings were of their composing? How frequent are cheats committed in such
matters.

Here it is difficult to dispute: for what argument and how clear soever be
brought the thing it self is of greater evidence. And the Jews are very unjust
and unreasonable, if having no other warranty to give us of their Religion but
the books of their Prophets, whereunto notwithstanding they require we should
yield an absolute belief, and plye under those magnificent names of Moses,
David, Jeremy, Isaiah and the like; they demand of us other evidence of ours,
then the writings of our Apostles. For what reason is there to ascribe more to
the former then the latter? Yet let us comply in this with the obstinacy of
men. It is demanded whether there were Apostles heretofore. But he that should
demand whether there was a Caesar at Rome and an Alexander in Greece, might
with good reason be judged troublesome and impertinent for indubitating a thing
of so constant credit. And nevertheless what remains of the Empire of
Alexander that may give us assurance of its quondam existence? are there any
traces of it either in Asia or Europe? Certainly, no statues which were erected
to him, no medals, no pillars erected for his monument, no memorial engraven in
a rock or mountain, no person of his lineage, nor shadow of his Empire can give
us any certainty of him. There Is nothing but the Books of the Ancients for it,
of which it may be in like manner demanded whether they be not supposititious,
and whether the Authors whose names they bear, were ever in the world. Only it
has continued constantly in the memory of men, that there was sometimes an
Alexander surnamed the Great by reason of his virtues and grandeur. And what
have we of Caesar? His Commentaries; which may with as much reason be called in
doubt as the Epistles of Saint Paul? For what more lively character do those
bear of that great Emperor then these do of this great Apostle? More then this,
what evidence can be produced but I know not what vain pretended inscriptions,
some mutilous monuments and the foundation of some old castle, without any
other title of its author then the ancient tradition that the Romans waged
great wars with our Gauls under his conduct? The most eminent token remaining
of him is a vain shadow of his Empire transferred from Rome to Germany, and his
name which is perpetuated from one to another by those Princes. Now is there
any thing in all this to be compared with the immarcessible evidences which the
Apostles have left of themselves in the whole earth? And if the name of Caesar
retained by the German Emperors, and that carcass of his Empire are sufficient
proof that there was a great Prince of that name, is not the name of Saint
Peter preserved by the Bishops of that place, and their authority to which
those Caesar's have subjected themselves, an authentic testimony that there was
a Saint Peter? The Roman Name is indeed perished and the Nations have shook off
the yoke of its obedience, and out of the shivers of that great body are risen
up diverse Kingdoms, who own it no longer, how ever renowned Emperors and
formidable armies it had heretofore. But the Christian Name is Living, and the
memory of those who founded it, though we be now far removed from their
Generation, so fresh and deep in the minds of men, that a self-oblivion will
sooner arrive to all mankind then they will forget them. They are continually
spoken of in life, they are sought to for consolation in death; the knowledge
of them is instil'd into the souls of little children with their milk, who do
not so soon understand that they are men, as they do that they are Christians
and disciples of the Apostles. If therefore a much less certain tradition be
not questioned, why shall that which is so constant be called into doubt? If
belief is given to some fragments of statues, and some old triumphant arches
defaced by time, shall we not give credit to so many Temples and infinite other
authentic monuments? Wherefore it remains that there are certain things which
though no otherwise known then by tradition and common report, nevertheless
cannot be contradicted but by contentious spirits and such as are insupportable
in their impudence. For when a thing contains nothing incredible in it self,
and is moreover universally received; when all memorials that can be required
of it are found both in books and monuments; when the multitude of those which
affirm it is innumerable in comparison of those which deny it; when it is
embraced by all sorts of spirits and of all conditions, high and low, learned
and ignorant, rich and poor; when it has got footing in several Nations,
passed over seas and mountains, and penetrated into the most remote regions;
when it has taken such root in the minds of men that millions might be found
all absolutely disposed to suffer death in defense of it; it behooves to have
lost common sense, or to be immensely brainsick, to be capable still to
distrust it. The Question, whether the Books attributed to them be theirs or
not, perhaps may seem of somewhat more difficulty to be resolved. And yet, if
we be minded to use the same argument, the Christians have had so constant an
opinion from all time that they are so, and all Nations and Languages so
unanimously acknowledged it, and rendered them so uniform a testimony, that if
we doubt not but the Books bearing the names of Aristotle and Cicero are truly
theirs, much more ought we to be assured of these, to which such a cloud of
witnesses of all qualities and in all times have given most peremptory and
convincing evidence. But let us close with them a little nearer.

The first thing which ought to be considered in a writing is the matter,
whether it be both excellent of it self, and consentaneous to the condition of
the person who propounds it. For I am persuaded the Marshal de Strossy who was
an assiduous reader of Caesar's Commentaries, was not so much assured by the
title of the Book that they had that incomparable Captain for Author, as by the
traces of an extraordinary military sufficiency he discerned in them, which
could not have been made or written but only by a man that was a perfect
master in the art of war. Now who did the Apostles pretend themselves to be?
Ministers sent to proclaim the name of Jesus Christ, and dispensers of his
heavenly mysteries. Let it examined what consonance there is between their
writings and this profession, and a most perfect correspondence will be found
between them. For in that which they have written of his history, they paint
him out to us so much to the life, and with so natural a pencil, that he that
reads them attentively cannot but seem to himself, to see, understand and
converse with him amongst his disciples in Judea. Moreover all their doctrines
and narrations have that aim, without ever intermixing any thing of humane
sciences or affairs, and extraneous matters little conducing to their purpose;
and yet even in that which they teach they discover such a profound wisdom, so
unknown to all those that ever professed learning, and nevertheless so
conformable to the humane Understanding when once it has comprehended the
same, that it is abundantly manifest, that they in truth derived from the
fountain of those mysteries what they dispensed to us, and that they portrayed
Jesus so lively by having a perfect Idea of him deeply imprinted in their
souls. Since therefore the matter of those writings is such that they could not
have been made but by those who were either Apostles or alike qualified, what
is more rational then to attribute the same to them, seeing they bear their
names inscribed in the front, and the air (as I may so speak) and genius of
them in their aspect?

In the next place the style is to be considered; which ought to be agreeable
both to the condition of the Writer, and the capacity of those for whose use
the writing is intended. Now the Apostles were indeed exalted to a most eminent
dignity, but withal teachers of humility, and writ not to refined wits
accomplished by the acquist of Sciences, but to the most simple vulgar. What
then behoved them to do but choose a plain manner of writing and phrases to
which their Disciples were accustomed, to the end not to obscure mysteries of
themselves above the ordinary reach of men by an elaborate and sublime style?
And this they have done by writing in Greek indeed, because that language was
most generally in use among all sorts of Nations which were to be brought to
the knowledge of Christ: but they have so accommodated it to the mode of the
Hebrew Tongue, that rendering themselves understood by the Greeks, they have not
relinquisht the idiomes to which those were accustomed who by reading the books
of the Prophets were already somewhat lightly imbued and prepossessed with
those mysteries. As likewise it would have been inconvenient for that Divine
Wisdom, unknown to all the Nations and which had conversed with the Jewish
alone, though veiled in a sort with ceremonies and legal doctrines, to have all
at once quitted its simple and modest attire, to put on the pomp of the Greek
or Roman eloquence. For besides that it would have been disguised thereby as in
a strange garb, the love it had excited in our minds might have been
attributed to that quaint attire, whereas we ought to be invited to it only by
the attractiveness of its simple and natural beauty. Nevertheless there shine
so many beams of celestial light, and such a venerable Majesty through this
humility and modest outside, I mean the plainness of its language, that whosoever
observes it attentively will judge it never to have been of humane extraction.
But in this it is in some measure different from the manner in which it was
revealed by the Prophets, because it was then something terrible, for that
designing to awe the minds of men rather by the respect of its Majesty then by
very much knowledge, and unveiling it self but seldom, it was requisite it
should use a high tone and full of authority. And thus we see why the Prophets
seem to use more lofty strains and a more magnificent procedure. But now that
it offers it self to perfect knowledge, taking away the band from before the
eyes of men and the veil from its own face, it shows it self more obliging and
gracious. Hence it is that the Apostles do not thunder and lighten, but
discourse and reason, and persuade the humane mind by the consequence of their
arguments; whereas the former amazed it.

Moreover, because it is proper to God to be constant, and on the contrary to
man to be variable; so that the Works of God, as proceeding from an infallible
wisdom, are correspondent to themselves in all their parts; whereas those of
man, both through his ignorance which he cannot avoid, and his natural
inconstancy, usually vary and interfere; since the Apostles being designed for
Teachers to the whole world, ought to have been taught by God, it behooves
necessarily that every one be both consistent with himself and concordant with
the rest. Let the New Testament therefore, the writings of which bear the names
of eight or ten authors, be diligently considered, for discovering what harmony
they make together: certainly the histories will be sound so consonant, the
opinions so uniform, the style so like, and the ratiocinations prosecuted so
equally, that though according to the diversity of each man's genius there be
some kind of air which distinguishes them, so that it may be well observed that
they are not the work of one alone, yet in this consort of several voices of
which each bears its measure and part, there cannot be found any real discord
or dissonance.

And because the Christian Religion ought to be built upon the foundations of
the Jewish, so that what was begun by the Prophets, ought like an edifice to be
continued by the Apostles, and finished according to the same design; let the
Old Testament be compared with the New, that it may be seen whether there be
any part of the structure not correspondent to the foundation, vitiating the
proportion, disordering the work, or making a breach. On the contrary it will
be found that there is no other difference between the Old Testament and the
New in reference to the doctrine of salvation propounded by both, but that it
was in the former as it were in its infancy, and in the latter as in its
perfect age; there the foundations were laid of it, which scarce ascend above
the ground, here it is advanced into a complete structure as high as the clouds.
It Is there like seed shouting out its verdure amidst the ceremonies of the Law,
as amongst strange plants; here it is like a flourishing and plentiful crop
which has overtop'd them all. And lastly God speaks there indeed to the
Israelites as a Savior and Redeemer, but it is from the middle of acloud,
whence sometimes issue forth lightnings and the noise of thunder; here he
dispells all obscurity and shows a calm and serene aspect with a mild and
charming strain.

[Hence also it comes to pass that they who betake themselves seriously to the
reading of these books, being enamored on the excellency of the things they
teach, persuaded by the evidence of truth, deeply affected with the knowledge
of the nature of Sin which they hold forth, comforted effectually with the
remedy which they exhibit against the same, and raised by the gracious
promises they meet with therein, to a lively hope of a glorious immortality,
are transported with such ardor to embrace them, that all other things
afterward, how commendable soever, seem to them in comparison, jejune,
languide and disgustful, impertinent to the right end of humane life, and
unprofitable toward what is alone of importance and necessity in it, to wit,
The knowledge of God, for whose glory we were created; and The knowledge of the
Chief good, whereunto we have a natural tendency; and the means to obtain the
same, without which we are destitute of all hope. For admit you were imbued
with all the Philosophy of the Greeks, understood all the excellent Learning of
the Roman Civil Laws, possessed all the skill in Physic which Hippocrates and
Galen have left the world; had turned over all the writings of the ancients,
and treasured up a magazine of all histories, observed all the motions of the
Heavens, acquired the knowledge of all Arts and perfection in all languages,
and discovered the most abstruse secrets in the Mathematics or in Nature,
indeed ye might find something of contentment to your mind by noble
speculations, and avoid many disturbances of life, and be ennabled to provide
for your security and the recovery of your health for a while, and perhaps gain
a high repute amongst men: But when a man is at the point of death, and
conscience summons him before the Tribunal of God, and he reflects seriously on
the immortal state of his soul, the memory of all this vanishes, and there is
nothing to animate and comfort us but only the knowledge of the things which
are revealed to us in these divine writings; which moreover, both the multitude
and the constancy of such as have maintained with their blood to be of Divine
original, do justly challenge admiration. For since it has not been through
ferocity of courage that they underwent death with such alacrity, being simple
men for the most part and humble and quiet-minded in their whole lives; nor
through ambition of vain glory, from affecting which they were very remote in
all their conversation; nor through a blind and obstinate headiness and
opiniastry, having always shown themselves submissive to all good reasons, and
respectful toward all persons and especially toward superior Powers; nor
through brutish stupidity, since in all other matters they appeared men of
sober judgments, capable of reason and prudence; nor through ignorance of the
nature of Death, seeing they preached to others that it is an effect of the
vengeance of God upon the Sin of men, and were fully persuaded of the
immortality of their souls; but the only hope of glory promised in those books
raised them beyond all fear; and they must needs have had a high persuasion of
their verity, since it was capable to ingenerate so powerful and impregnable a
confidence in their minds.

And whereas there were many things which might have reclaimed and deterred
them from embracing these Books; as the continual afflictions which they
promise in this life (for such is the gratification they hold forth here to
those which receive them) the love of their estates, honors, and children,
which naturally possesses the minds of men; the reproach of an ignomious
death, which is so intolerable to minds that own any thing of generosity; the
severity and reiteration of torments, sufficient to shake the most firm
resolution; it follows that there must have been some more then humane
inducements which fixed their minds so unmoveably on an object exposed to so
numerous incomfortable perplexities and violences. Then, consider especially
the almost infinite multitude of Martyrs, and their long perseverance through
so many Ages. For had there been but two or three, it might have been deemed
Nature had intended some extraordinary exploit in them, or that they were
transported by some foolish fancy; and every Religion might produce some like
example. But what charm could have been potent enough to induce so many
millions of men, women and children, of all ages, conditions, sexes, and in so
many most bloody persecutions renewed from time to time and age to age, to
despise death so magnanimously, in maintaining a doctrine, which had no other
trouble attended it, may seem ought to have been disgustfull to them both
because it opposed their passions, which we follow so willingly, and deprived
them of all the sweetnesses and delights of life? Nevertheless those Violences
have been the means to propagate it throughout the whole Earth; and resolution
and patience, the arms wherewith it has destroyed the empire of the false Gods,
and expelled the Demons from government of the World: Other kind of Armies it
never depended on to extend its conquests even to the ends of the World and
subdue the greatest and most flourishing Empires. All other Religions are
confounded; or if any are still upheld, it is only by the favor of Princes and
force of arms. This, though all the powers of the world were enemies to it at
it is birth, though it never attempted any thing but by the Voice only, never
used other rampart for defense but an invincible patience, has born up through
1600 years, and overcome the hearts of Princes themselves. But of this subject
there are express Treatises, to which we refer the Reader, and proceed to
examine in the next Chapter a certain Opinion excogitated of old by some giddy
spirits, and revived in our days, against the Divinity of Christ; which though
destitute of all appearance of reason, does not cease to take root and grow
amongst many persons, and therefore requires our consideration.]

Place these two leaves, which you find with Stars, between 510 and 511.
CHAP. X. That those who affirm Christ took upon him the appellation of God,
though he was not so, only that he might thereby render his Doctrine more
authentic, are apparently destitute of all reason.
THere are some people in these days who conceive they render the Christian
Religion very acceptable, when they give this account of matters pertaining to
it; That true Religion consists in the internal piety of the soul toward God
and in the sincere and constant exercise of true virtue toward men; That of
all Religions, the Christian is that which holds forth most knowledge of the
nature of God and true virtue, reducing the humane mind to the principles of
nature it self and rectifying it from all the perverse opinions which the
corruption of depraved Ages had induced into it: But because the naked and
plain proposing of these matters would have been very little effectual with
men, their own affections inclining them more powerfully to vice then virtue;
and for that the exhortations of a man merely man would not have been very
prevalent; Christ, who was the chief and most excellent promoter of it, that he
might render his preaching more authentic, assumed the glorious appellation of
the Son of God and pretended to be God too; to the end that, it being natural
to us to receive with reverence what proceeds from the Deity, his Doctrine
might be more readily and firmly embraced, his pretended divine dignity and
the danger of rejecting what God is author of, conciliating a sacred and
venerable authority unto him. Whence it was, that like as when some great
structure is to be built, scaffolds are erected round about it, which of
themselves make no part of the Work, but are serviceable for conveying
materials upwards and for the standing of workmen; so in the structure of
Christian Religion some positions were employed, which of themselves are but
mere fictions, but yet conduce to the establishing of profitable and excellent
truths: Such are the doctrine of the Trinity, that of the Incarnation of the
Eternal Word, of Justification by means of Christ's death, and others which
depend on these; which are in their judgment Pious Frauds (as they speak)
useful to very advantageous effects, and might be employed with a safe
conscience, because it is a good thing to deceive when the delusion renders men
better, more happy and more wise.

Now this Opinion is so strange and swarms with so many absurd impieties, that
not the scarcity but the abundance of Arguments which arise all at once in the
mind of whosoever considers it, renders me anxious where I should begin. For in
the first place, it is requisite that they take away all correspondence between
the Old Testament and the New, and deny that our Lord Jesus was the Messiah.
Because the preaching of Christ was grounded on this point, That God had
heretofore by his Prophets promised a Messiah to the people of Israel, who
should be the Redeemer of the Nation; and he was sent accordingly by God for
that end in the fullness of time t in which regard he invited all the world to
receive him as the Supreme Prophet. Let them speak it out therefore confidently
whether Christ be the Messiah promised by the Old Testament, or not. For if he
be not, it behooves to become Jews, and to account him as they do for the
greatest Deceiver that ever was upon the earth, and hence forward turn our
Churches into Synagogues, reducing all Christian order to the ancient manner of
the Tabernacle. If he be the Messiah promised by the Old Testament, he is God;
for that describes him to be such, as we have shown by irrefragable proofs. And
that those Books of Moses, David, and the Prophets, are divine, what we have
spoken above in the matter leaves it no longer doubtful. Nevertheless, admit
(for the present) they be writings purely humane; surely these excellent
Theologers will not deny (least the reading shame them) but that they agree all
in this particular, That from the Nation of the Jews ought one day to arise a
great and rare personage who should be King in Israel, and should be called the
Son and the Branch of the Lord himself. And this has been the expectation of
that people in all times, with which they comfort themselves still in their
deplorable desolation. But what moved them to speak in this manner, if they had
no other instinct but from their own mind? Who incited Moses to set this fraud
first on foot? Why did the others many Ages after so carefully cherish, ratify
and augment it in several circumstances with other false prophecies? What
profit did they reap by deluding the world with such a hope? They must have had
intelligence so many ages before with a man who was not yet in being, to
foretell that he should exist; and this man born by chance at the just time
which they presumed to determine, must have taken occasion from these
fortuitous predictions and the expectation raised by them in the minds of men,
to declare himself the person whom so many prophets in so many different times
had unanimously presaged was to exist. Now it would be a strange case, that
Moses should first of all, without any necessity of so doing or advantage by it
in reference to his design of governing the people of Israel and the
establishment of his power, take up a fancy of the future arising of some great
Prophet; and then another should come two or three hundred years after, and
revive this prediction made at random and enlarge and clear it up with other
new (for this opinion was successively more and more confirmed and rooted in
the minds of men) and that at length, at the time prefixed and the set period,
there should be found one both confident enough to draw all those presages to
his advantage, and so favored by fortune that all the circumstances of his
birth, his life, and his death should meet together in his person. Surely
there is as much likelihood in this as in the Imagination of Epicurus concerning
the framing of the world by the casual lighting together of Atoms. But there is
something yet more strange. If they were predictions purely humane and also
fortuitous, like the Ephemerides of Nostradamus; being they were clothed in
magnificent terms, and there was nothing promised less then a King sitting upon
the throne of David, who was to restore the Commonwealth of Israel, fallen into
so miserable an estate under the power of the Romans; If Jesus were merely man
and intended to advantage himself by the foolish hopes of that people, what a
preposterous madness was it to take the course he did? In stead of exciting the
people to sedition against the Romans, he commands to pay tribute, and pays it
himself to give example: In stead of insinuating into the affections of daring
adventurous men and such as he might use for Captains, he makes choice of a
dozen poor Fishermen, and people of such condition, to have them continually in
his train: Instead of erecting his Nation to magnanimity, he betakes himself to
preach humility and obedience: In stead of employing the virtue of doing
miracles he was so mighty in, to astonish Herod or Pilate in some surprise or
battle, he heals the lame and the blind and the dumb and the paralytick: And
that which is, if these Opinionists be credited, the height of folly, instead
of raising men into hope of his victories, he foretells to them which followed
him that he was to die upon the Cross, and sharply reproves one of them who
went about to dissuade him from that purpose of his. Was this the way, if it
was a humane Design, to be get in the world already possessed with hope of a
Messiah for a great Earthly King, a belief that he was the person which was
promised by their Prophets? Surely Mahomet used not this course, who takes arms
in hand, gives freedom to slaves, and because he knew his doctrine could not
support it self by the prop of truth, plants it in all places, where he can by
wars and battles. Wherefore to conceive a person should endevor to serve
himself, after this manner, of the presumptions and expectations of men, is not
to fancy a man but a lunatic. In the next place, I ask, whether Jesus Christ,
when he called some persons with him to serve him in the work he undertook (as
nothing is more apparent then that he had twelve peculiar Apostles) he
discovered this secret of his pretended Divinity to them, or whether he abused
them as well as other men? For if he discovered the same to them, 'twas a
wonderful complot, that he should style himself the Son of God, deport himself
for very God, and they profess themselves his messengers, sent immediately from
him to promulgate his doctrine, and at last for their reward, he should be
ignominiously crucified, and each of them respectively after diverse dangers
both by Sea and Land, after imprisonments, stonings, tortures and racks, should
conclude their miserable and painful lives by cruel and shameful deaths.
Truly, though he chose Fishers and men of low condition, yet I believe there
was none among them so stupid as to be capable of being persuaded to partake in
this enterprise upon these conditions. For as for his having induced them to it
by this only consideration, that great good should come thereby to the World,
and that the Nations should be converted by their word from Idols to the true
God, there was so little color in the thing, that he would never have been
believed; so little of that generosity in them which leads men to promote the
universal good of the world without appearance of other recompense then misery
and death, that none of them would have forsook his boat or his cottage. If he
abused them also and imposed upon them by his fair language, it is yet a thing
surpassing all admiration, that this deceit should have rendered them of idiots
and rusticks, the most excellent persons of the world, and incited them (who
knew nothing beyond mending nets) to undertake the reformation of Religion and
manners of all the people of the habitable world. For even a rejecter of the
Gospel cannot but judge it requisite for them to have been endowed with
extraordinary graces, not adequate to Fishers and tollgatherers, that they
might persuade men to embrace things of such a surprising nature, and bring it
so to pass, that whereas Mahomet with all his Armies, and they which have
succeeded him, have not been able to establish a firm Empire, but in the space
of some hundreds of years, twelve mean and despicable men, in half an Age drew
the greatest part of the World to them, and established an Empire over the
consciences of men which continues unshaken after so many generations; and
furthermore, which is observable above the rest, they effected this by teaching
men things repugnant to their natural inclinations, and exhorting them to dye
courageously for one that was crucified; whereas Mahomet published a Law which
flatters the body with carnal pleasures and likewise the mind by indulging it
in its most violent passions? But will they venture to give credit to what the
Apostle Saint Paul writes concerning himself? We have shown above that it would
be too great impudence to deny the Epistles which bear his name to be his, too
great perversity not to believe it. I demand therefore, whether, when he
relates the means by which he was converted to Christ, he does it according to
truth, or to promote the Illusion? For if it were only to play his part in the
Comedy, what advantage was it to him to abandon the honors and privileges he
enjoyed in his own Nation, and expose himself to hunger and thirst, the hatred
of his Countrymen and the sury of cruel beasts, only to deceive the world in
favor of another Deceiver, and he one that was crucified, for which he had no
other reward to hope, but at length to perish by the same sort of punishment?
If it was according to truth, what power had a dead man to cause him to see
such visions, to speak to him from heaven and captivate all his thoughts (as he
speaks) to his obedience?

Yet perhaps both the one and the others, Christ and his Ambassadors, intended
the glory of God, and did all this in favor of true virtue, by an honest zeal
which closed their eyes against all dangers, and was also seconded with some
especial strength from God ennabling them to contemn all things in comparison
of the advancing of their enterprise. Let us therefore inquire what their piety
and virtue may have been if the opinion of these people be admitted. And first,
did they use this proceeding by the command of God? No, surely; For God, who is
the God of truth, would not have commanded them to teach a Lie, or to make use
of one to persuade some other thing that were true. He is powerful to cause the
truth to be embraced by other means; and a greater injury cannot be done to him
then to go about to gratify him with what he hates. Much less would God have
commanded a mere man to call himself his eternal Son and God equal to him, so
to add blasphemy and sacrilege to a lie. Indeed what appearance is there, that
whereas men ought to honor and venerate him as God alone, he should not only
have favored by his connivance but enjoynd by his expres commandment that a
mortal man should take upon him to be eternal God, and draw the hearts and
veneration of men to himself? But if they had no such command, what prodigious
boldness would it have been for a man, whose conscience was convinced he was no
more, to dare to call himself God? And what a hideous impiety in those who
seconded him in this design to preach him for such throughout the whole world?
These people make show of commending Christ because he brought the minds of men
to the knowledge of the purity of virtue, and taught a more refined and
exquisite holiness then any that ever was besides; and yet they represent him
to us the most notorious liar and most impious blasphemer of men. The wise men
of old exclaimed against the folly of Alexander the great, who suffered himself
to be almost flattered into a belief that he was the Son of Jupiter, though he
lived in a dark Age and Country, in which the stories of the lewdness of the
Gods made it no incredible thing; Bacchus and some others worse being in the
number, whose achievements were short of his. But these subtle people we deal
with, represent him to us for a modest person and worthy of imitation for his
virtue, whom they judge to have abused the world by so notorious an imposture.
Moreover, what piety could Christ have had toward God? For what an insolence
was this to believe himself God if he was not so? And if he did not believe it,
why did he not, having no command to profess himself such, tremble with horror
as often as he reflected on God and his own blasphemy? Certainly, if he had been
such as these people describe him, he had deserved far worse then the cross
which he suffered. But behold something yet more strange. They say that among
the great and glorious things which Christ did, this excels the rest, That he
abolisht Idolatry and the rabble of Gods which were adored by the Pagans, and
restored the knowledge and true worship of the Deity: And yet, if what they say
be true, he has established the highest and most universal Idolatry that ever
was seen in the world. For almost all Nations have embraced the doctrine of
Christ: And amongst those Nations very few persons can be found but acknowledge
him for God blessed for ever. Nor is it material here to allege that his
intention was not to be acknowledged for such. For why did he call himself God,
unless that men might believe it? Wherefore does he complain of the incredulity
of the Jews when they will not acknowledge him for such, but accuse him of
blasphemy? And how would he have men believe him God without adoring him, since
it is as much sin not to adore him whom we believe to be God, as to adore him
whom we esteem not to be so? Besides, he never repelled any that adress'd to
him under that notion, and his Apostles universally own it. Was it not
therefore by his commandment? Or, if it were not by his express commandment,
ought not he to have redressed so dangerous a mistake?

One thing there is which I would understand certainly, whether they against
whom I dispute, give any credit to the Books which we call the Gospel. For what
ever good outside they wear, I doubt they believe them not at all, and withal
think no Jesus Christ was ever in the world; and consequently all this
Discourse is absolutely unprofitable: they must be referred to the preceding
dispute, in which I proved their Divinity against the Jews and others like
them. If they afford any belief to those Books, certainly they will never
accuse them of having forged the testimonies rendered of Christ from heaven,
the authors of which might not only have contradicted one another, but might
have been convinced of fall shood by fifty thousand persons. What then was the
meaning of God in these words, This is my Son in whom I am well pleased? As for
the miracles which he wrought, as raising the dead, giving sight to such as
were born blind, healing inveterate lamenesses of many years, and the like,
they could not proceed from any but a special assistance of a power truly
divine. And what appearance is there that God should have afforded his infinite
power to such an impostor to cause men to believe in him, and consequently to
found such a prodigious and universal Idolatry? We know, said one, God hears
not the wicked. But who ever was more wicked then Christ if he was so impious
and such a blasphemer as this Opinion represents him. Then, in reference to the
certain predictions which Christ made of things to come into which no humane
conjecture could dive, there needs no other proofs of them then by comparing
the correspondence which the Evangelists observe of them with the events
themselves. He foretold that he should die, and it came to pass accordingly. But
which is more, he foretold that he should rise again, and he was not deceived
in his assurance. He foretold the ruin of Jerusalem; and the Romans, as if
they had been hired by him for that purpose, fullfill'd his Prophecy. He
declared that when he was once lifted up on high, he would draw all men to him;
and experience attests the verity of this oracle. For his Cross is like a
standard lifted up before the Eyes of all Nations to summon and invite them to
his knowledge. Now many others indeed have foretold things to come; but I judge
it impossible for such a person, as Christ would have been had he been such as
these people describe him, to have obtained the spirit of Prophecy from God.
Balaam sometimes prophesied of things to come; but it was for the good of the
people. But this of Christ's would have been to gain credit to the word of an
impostor, to lead men into many snares, and especially, as was said, for God to
lend his hand to the seting up of Idolatry. As for what these good the people
say, that it was lawful to abuse men in some points in order to leading them to
embrace certain excellent virtues; although it be a strange and absurd method
of teaching truth by the favor of prodigious falsities, and a wiliness
uncommendable by prudent judgments, yet should it be admitted, it ought not to
be practiced unless in matters which draw no pernicious consequences after
them; as when the simplicity of childhood is beguiled by smearing honey or
sugar on the brim of the cup which contains a medicinal potion, -- Deceptaque
non capiatur,
Sed potius tali facto recreata valescat.
But the using impious and blasphemous falsities, and which are infallibly
effective of such idolatry, had Christ and his Apostles practiced it, they had
not followed that incomparable precept which they give us for a rule of our
actions, Not to do evil, that good may come of it. As for the other opinions,
being they are consequent of this, and by reason of their dependency implicitly
proved in the proof of their primitive principle, I shall not insist upon
demonstrating the truth of them. Only I shall intimate, that Saint Paul had
been a person of a stranglye distempered mind, to labor so much in disputing
against the Gentiles from the maxims of Nature, and against the Jews from the
constitutions of the Law, to draw arguments from the books of the Old
Testament, to expound allegories, to reason, raise and resolve objections, in
maintaining the doctrine of justification by faith, and of predestination or
eternal election, and other like doctrines, if they were nothing but fictions.
His writings discover a wisdom too profound to leave place for an accusation of
so inept and ridiculous deceit. But the cause these people speak after this
rate, is, that they never read or never understood the Holy Scriptures and the
economy of Christian Religion. For did they attentively consider them, they
would easily observe that the point of Christ's incarnation in this doctrine, is
like the image of Phidias in the Statue of Minerva; which if taken away, the
whole work is dissolved; if let alone, all the parts of the statue are
terminated in the same with such art and wisdom, that an observing mind is
ravished with admiration at the whole contrivance. But let us now return to our
Design and bring it to conclusion.

CHAP. XI. That Indifference in the professing all Religions is not justifiable
according to the Christian Religion, which Party soever be embraced. And for
Conclusion, The Refutation of the Pretext propounded in the Preface.
WE have by the Divine assistance shown by reasons in which all endu'd with any
sense of piety, and even in whom nature and reason are not absolutely
perverted, ought to acquiesce, That the Jewish Religion having been heretofore
alone of divine institution, the Christian has by the authority of the Messiah
so succeeded it, as that it has wholly abrogated its use; and That this latter
bears infinite evidences of its heavenly original, both in the excellence of
its doctrine, and the correspondence of it with the ancient Prophecies. We also
intimated at the beginning, that there are two principal Parties of Christians,
under which all are ranked that wear this name, differing in two principal
Points, on which all their other controversies depend. One of these Parties
holds that that particular Revelation by which God has ordained Religion and
matters pertaining to his service, has been left to men by two ways; namely by
the Scripture, and by verbal Tradition; the Scripture to serve for a foundation
to Tradition, and Tradition to be a supplement in the deficiency of the
Scripture, for that it contains not all things necessary to salvation; and even
in what it does contain, is of dubious understanding, and has need of the
interpretation of Tradition. Moreover, that the dispensing of Tradition has
been committed to the hands of the Bishop of Rome, to use it with a Soverain
and Apostolical authority, and a promise from God to be absolutely infallible
in it. The other Party acknowledge no other revelation of the Divine Wisdom,
then that which is contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament,
rejecting all verbal Tradition in reference to things necessary to salvation.
And as for the authority of the Pope concerning the infallible interpretation
of the Word of God, they not only do not acknowledge it, but dare to condemn
it as tyrannical and Antichristian. It remains therefore to inquire briefly,
whether this flexible and soft Indifference be approvable by either Party.

Now how sharply soever they contend in other points, they both accord in this,
That it is in no wise lawful for Christians either to partake in the Idolatries
of the Pagans, which their Religion condemns as abominable; or to desert the
Christian Religion, and embrace the Law of Mahomet, which they account a
damnable impiety, with which no communion ought to be had even so much as in
appearance; or to join themselves to the Jews, though anciently the people of
God, or partake in any manner whatever in their worship, for that it would be
an abjuration of the name of Christ the sole Savior and Redeemer of our Souls.
And this their judgment is grounded on texts of their Gospel so frequently
occurring almost in each page, that it is scarce needful to allege any example.
Certainly, those words of St. Paul writing to the Corinth. are singularly
emphatical, I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice
to Devils and not to God; and I would not that ye should have fellowship with
Devils. And they are so much the more to be considered in that he speaks not to
those which were of Pagan belief, for he would not have termed such, Brethren;
nor to those which had a desire to revolt from the Gospel of Christ to
Paganism; for otherwise those words, You cannot drink the Cup of the Lord and
the Cup of Devils, and you cannot partake of the Table of the Lord and of the
Table of Devils, had been wholly beside the purpose and impertinent; and if he
had had to do with such people, he would have written in another style. But he
speaks to such, as either through fear of persecution or complacency, were
willing to hold in with both sides, and to retain the Gospel of Christ in
secret, but otherwise to conform, as to outward profession only, to the
ceremonies of Idolaters. And the same Apostle was so jealous of the purity of
the doctrine which he held forth, and esteemed it so necessary to salvation for
the form of it to be retained sincere and complete without any mixture of
strange doctrines, that when certain Teachers went about, not openly to
withdraw his disciples of Christ, but only to introduce the doctrine of the
Old Law in the matter of justification into the Covenant of Grace, because
these are things absolutely incompatible, he says, Although we or an Angel from
Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto
you, let him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, If any man
preach any other Gospel unto you then that ye have received, let him be
accursed. And can it now be conceived he had any favor for this Indifference?
On the contrary, the Cross was ever the cognizance of him and others like him,
and in general of all true Christians in all Ages; Not only to denote that
they believe in him who was crucified for them by the Jews and the Romans, but
that they are resolved, if need requires, to undergo the like or more grievous
punishment for the confession of his Name, as not being worthy to have part in
his glory, unless they generously incur all sorts of dangers and sufferings
for his sake. Thus likewise he said, Whosoever will be his Disciple, must take
up his Cross and follow him. And the Martyrs of the Primitive Church, who in
the infancy of Christianity, sealed his truth with so much blood as they
courageously lost, so many horrible torments which they underwent, so many
shameful and exquisite deaths which they endured, have more then authentically
confirmed this belief, which was so universal and immutable in them, That he
who confesses not the Name of Christ in the very face of danger, who abstains
for love of him from all religious ceremonies different from his own, who does
not condemn th m publicly and even in the presence of Flames and Axes, is
fallen from the hope of their chief Good and for his unworthiness adjudged to
eternal punishment and ignominy; according to that saying of their Master,
Whosoever shall deny me before men, I will deny him before my Father which is
in Heaven.

Then, for communicating in the Religion of one another, both Parties alike
condemn it, and look upon this Indifference as a Profane and irreligious
humor. For they which hold Religion to be constituted as well by Tradition as by
Scripture, and that the Church of Rome alone is entrusted with the custody of
it, and the Pope the supreme mannager and dispenser of it, thunder out
Anathema's against those which are not of their opinion, have persecuted them
with flames and torments, and at this day in Italy and Spain exercise a cruel
Inquisition against them of different judgments, though they declare not the
same; and moreover when occasion is offered they make bloody wars upon those
whom they account heretics. And they believe themselves bound hereunto by zeal
to the Christian Religion and the salvation of the souls of men, which when
they cannot be reduced by reason, ought to be reclaimed from error by the
terror of persecutions and arms. And as they hold this for a necessary course
toward those who are turned aside from the faith, so they wonderfully extol
the courage not only of the ancient Martyrs, but also of those who resolutely
undergo any thing for defense of the Roman Religion. And if there be any
Country in Europe, wherein the contrary Party prevails, they enjoin their
adherents to submit rather to all sorts of evil usages, then to comply with
anheretical profession; proclaiming openly that there is no salvation out of
the communion of their own Church, the head and mother of all others, by
communication, participation and dependence on which alone, all other Christian
Assemblies have right to the titles of Christian and Catholic; so that whosoever
is not gathered unto it, is out of the way and lost. On the contrary, should
the other Party, who restrain all Divine wisdom revealed for the instruction
and bringing of men to salvation within the bounds of the Holy Scripture,
approve this pretended lawful Indifference, they would be the most stupid and
inconsiderate branglers in the World: For they allege this cause of their
separation from the Roman Church, for that they could not with safe conscience
partake in its ceremonies; which has occasioned many great wars, which within
this last hundred years, have filled all Europe with deplorable slaughters and
calamities. Themselves also undergo all sorts of inconveniences and mischiefs
for their professions sake, rather then condescend in this point to the command
of Kings and the bent of whole Nations; they extol the patience of their
Martyrs (for with this title they honor the memory of such as have been put to
death for defense of the Religion they profess) they exhort one another to the
like magnanimity, and denounce eternal perdition in ^ase they be deficient of
courage herein.

I will not at present determine on which side the right is. May the Father of
Mercy please to reconcile their minds, and close up this great wound of his
Church! But in the mean time, it is beyond all doubt that according to their
contrary doctrines they ought to condemn one the other, and hold that whosoever
embraces the faith of the One cannot secure his salvation in the external
profession of the Other. For example (for I will will not engage far in this
matter) The Reformed charge the Roman Church with three accusations; Of heresy
in its doctrine, in many particulars; of Idolatry in its religious service; and
of Tyranny in relation to government, in sundry instances; So as to call the
head of it, Antichrist, and apply to him, as the person intended by
Prophecies, whatsoever is found concerning Antichrist in the Epistles of Saint
Paul and the Revelation. If these accusations be grounded on truth, how can
they comply with that Church, unless they will violate this Commandment, A man
that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject; Knowing
that he that is such, is subverted and sins, being condemned of himself,
etc. And how can they but hold the teachers of it for accursed, according to
this other commandment, Little Children, Keep your selves from Idolatry? And I
cannot imagine that Saint Paul would permit external communion in the same
Religion which those whom in regard of their Religion he excludes from hope of
the Kingdom of Heaven. Be not deceived (says he) Idolaters shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God. And if he forbids to eat with them, that is, to converse
familiarly with them in the way of civil and ordinary life, much more would he
prohibit to entertain society with them in the same Religion. But those words
are most highly remarkable; If any man worship the beast and his image, and
receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand, The same shall drink of the
wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of
his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the
presence of the holy Angels and in the presence of the Lamb. For if the Beast
mentioned there be Antichrist, as it is manifest; and the Bishop of Rome be
this Antichrist as the Reformed pretend; and that to receive the mark of the
Beast in ones forehead or hand, be, as is evident, to adhere to it in external
profession, what does he but pronounce sentence of condemnation against
himself, who believes the Pope to be Antichrist, and nevertheless esteems the
outward profession of adhering to him indifferent? For it is all one, as if he
should affirm it lawful for a good and loyal Subject to follow the standard of
the enemy of his King, some unjust and violent usurper of his Kingdom. And
indeed it cannot be thought but that the Pope himself and his Cardinals, if
they believed themselves such as the adversary party publishes them, would
condemn themselves and all those which follow them.

On the other side, the Catholics accuse their Adversaries of a temerarious
separation from the true Church, and of having added Heresy to Schism,
amassing their Religion up of all those heresies which have been condemned by
the ancient Councils; and moreover of having to heresy added Rebellion against
the Pastors, whose vocation is only true and legitimate. Also, of having
abolisht the most sacred Mysteries which our Savior instituted, subverted all
order of Discipline from top to bottom; in a word, of having revolted from the
faith and obedience of the Supreme Monarch of the Church, the Vicarius of our
Lord Jesus, the sole and infallible dispenser of his mysteries. Now if this
accusation contain as much truth, as upon seeing it explicated and maintained
in the writings of those great and even incomparable personages which have
undertaken the quarrel in favor of the Roman Church in our times, it seems to
have verisimilitude, what man so persuaded can with a good conscience associate
himself to people culpable of so many heinous crimes; as of Schism, heresy,
rebellion, temerity and sacrilege against God, impudence toward men, and
above all of disobedience to him that represents Jesus Christ and God his
Father upon earth? Surely he that should in the least connive at or bear with
the reproaches cast upon him might be thought even capable of attempting on the
person of the Redeemer of the World.

From all this it is easily colligible, That this opinion of Indifference of
all Religions in outward profession, is false and pernicious; renders all the
exhortations of God himself in his Gospel to suffer for the truth,
insignificant; disparages the sober judgment of the Apostles, who were the
first that proposed themselves examples of inflexible resolution; and
consequently leads to the contempt of God and of all Religion in the World. For
like as one that should profess it indifferent to him what man he ownes for his
Father, or what Prince's badge he wears instead of his King's, would tacitly
intimate himself to be of some spurious or degenerate offspring, and that he
has a venal and unnatural soul; So he that cares not of what God he bears the
cognizance here below, declares sufficiently that he acknowledges none for his
own part, and that his following of any Religion is only out of interest and
complacency; and those Pretexts we mentioned in the beginning, how specious
soever, are only a coverture to this profane humor. Truth, say they, is hard
to be disentangled from the confusion of the many Religions which have the
vogue in the world: And God is of his own Nature so merciful, that he is not
strictly inquisitive concerning it, but is better pleased with the love of
peace and society, then with the adherence to certain particular opinions which
occasions such disturbances and miseries. Strange people! who complain of the
difficulty of a thing they never inquired after, who limit the prerogatives of
God and his affections, without understanding them, and who under color of
tenderness for peace with men make no conscience to wage war against God, who
for the preservation of Civil Society which only regulates and contains the
duties of men among themselves, subvert and confound the Laws of Religion, in
which are contained our duties toward him who created the World and Men.
Certainly, had these Opinionists employed in the search of God's truth, half
the time they bestow on unprofitable occupations of this life, they would not
judge Religion a thing full of spinous questions and irresolvable difficulties.
The sole reading of the Old and New Testaments, which would not take up so much
of their time as a quarter of Amadis or the Romance of Astrea, would clear up
all those perplexities, and cause them to pronounce resolutely, provided they
come to it with attentive minds and free from evil prejudices, for the
preeminence of the Faith of Christ against all the superstitions of the world.
And though some knot may be met with here or there by the way, yet what man is
there who addicting himself to the study of a science, is deterred from it by
one or two difficulties he finds in it? How often has such a one vexed his
brains for the understanding of Aristotle, and how many days and nights has he
spent in the reading of his writings, dispairing of being ever able perfectly
to understand them, who having scarce once in his life cast his Eyes upon the
Epistles of Saint Paul complains of the contexture of his ratiocination and the
obscurity of his doctrines? And yet the affair with the Philosopher, was
perhaps no more then to know whether Demonstration from the Effect deserves the
title of Demonstration as well as that which is made from the Cause; or whether
according to the Peripatetick doctrine Universals have a subsistence out of our
Intellect; or what reasons justify the opinion of ranking Privation among
Principles of things; empty questions and of no importance in reference to
Life: whereas in the writings of the Apostle, the argument is concerning the
glory of God and the salvation of our souls. But the truth is, where the
business is to render to God the service which we owe him, the most even ways
seem rugged to us; but where it is to follow our fancies, all precipices become
easily superable, and we level mountains. Had these people once understood
Religion and well conceived the idea of it, they would exalt the mercy of God
without comparison more then they do, and withal have a greater dread of his
justice; and where he has revealed his celestial truths, they would not dare
to bring a Lie into competition; where he has manifested his will, they would
not presume to prefer their own before it; where he has described the form of
Religion he would have us to follow with his own hand, they would not offer to
equal with it either humane imaginations or inventions of Devils; where he has
sworn, that As he lives, he will not give his glory to another, and that he
will bring vengeance upon his enemies, by drenching his arrows in their blood,
they would not abuse his mercy to impiety, nor sleep in so profound a supinity,
but would learn from those who have most of all extolled his compassions, that
it is a terrible thing to fall into his hands. The great judgments wherewith he
has chastis'd all Nations by reason of their Idolatries, the dreadful
calamities which he brought on his beloved People for having imitated the same,
the unparalled desolation of the City of Jerusalem, and the visible Curse
which pursues that miserable Nation every where for having rejected the Gospel,
the breaking to pieces of the Roman Empire for having persecuted it, and the
judgments which lie pours down from time to time upon all those who provoke
him, would be sufficient documents to them that though his patience be
mavelous, yet he is terrible in revenging contempt toward himself and the
truth revealed by him. As for what is alleged concerning the peace and union
of minds inflamed with so great passion through the occasion of Religion some
against others, and of the tranquillity of States put in combustion by
differences in sacred matters; did we see no other means to obtain the same but
those of impiety, it were more eligible to be at perpetual jars and enmities.
Did Christ, who knew well that he came to bring fire and sword into the world
by the preaching the Gospel, desist therefore from preaching it, or command his
Apostles to conform themselves to all professions according to occasion, for
fear of exciting seditions and tumults? No, surely. Should the world perish by
combustions, his truth must be maintained. But by the grace of God we are not
reduced to those terms. To turbulent and inconsiderate minds Religion is often
a pretext of commotions: to violent and bloody souls the same Religion is
sometimes an incitement to murders and massacres. But wise and politic
Princes, who give not themselves up to their own passion or to the furious zeal
of others, have well understood, how, notwithstanding the diversity of
professions, to contain their people within the compass of duty toward them
and concord together; and experience has attested that when they will employ
their prudence and authority therein as they ought they are equally well served
by opposite Parties. So that the zeal of Religion being moderated by the laws
of reason and humanity does not so transport men's minds but that they may live
peaceable together under one Government although in contrary profession of
Religion. Besides, the two Societies (Civil and Religious) have their rights
and their laws distinct, and the knowledge of the true God does not lead to the
troubling or subverting of humane Commonwealths, no more then ardency we ought
to have for his glory ought to render men murderers and barbarians. But what
tends all this discourse to? For certainly, these people who speak so much of
the public peace, have no great care for it; it is their own peace they are
solicitous of. And because their God is the grandeur, pleasure and contentment
of the world, they hate the profession which crosses their designs, and lays
obstacles before them, and which hinders them from mounting whether they
aspire. And being it is an infamous thing to be accounted a despiser of the
Deity, and they which declare freely that Religion is not worthy to be preferred
before the things of the world, are ordinarily looked upon as monsters by
others, they shelter themselves under the fair appearence of the desire of
peace, and seek masks to disguise so uncomely an aspect. But he that should
behold the bottom of their hearts (and they cannot so well hide themselves but
they may be discerned cross their veil) would find there the contempt of God
and of his service, which shame hinders them from laying open to the world. In
Christendom whoever is neither a Catholic nor Reformed, he must of necessity
be an Atheist (since he cannot be either Pagan or Jew or Mohammedan, unless he
have lost common sense together with all gust of piety) And indeed for the most
part either their lives or discourses convince them to be such. For if there be
any such person that lives in a measure honestly in the sight of the world, yet
he speaks disdainfully of Religion, and looks upon all those as besotted who
are lovers of the same. Others swim in all sorts of pleasure, and are so
abandoned to dissoluteness, that they cause shame to mankind and horror to any
that considers them. These, Truth accounts it a glory to have her enemies. The
former she cares for so much the less as they are much more rare. I pray God
restore them to a better mind. And to him who has afforded us the grace to
bring this small work to its conclusion, be honor and glory to all eternity.
Amen.

FINIS.

