An Answer BY AN ANABAPTIST TO THE Three Considerations Proposed to Mr William
Penn, By a pretended BAPTIST, CONCERNING A MAGNA CHARTA FOR Liberty of
Conscience.

Allowed to be Published this 10th Day of September, 1688.

London, Printed in the Year 1688.

An Answer BY AN ANABAPTIST TO THE Three Considerations etc.
YOU desire, All your Dissenting Brethren to Consider, and then Answer.

I have Considered, but I cannot tell whether you suppose all Dissenters are
your Brethren, or that all are your Brethren who dissent from you. If the
first, It seems probable to me, that you have been either Educated in a strange
Soil, or have forgotten your Brothers Dialect; so that I cannot discern, that
you are any otherwise a Baptist then only in Masquerade, and therefore am shy
of owning the Relation: But if all that dissent from you, must therefore be
reckoned your Brethren, then I am in that Number, and because I think Mr Penn
may not have so much leisure as my self at present to attend upon your Trifles,
I intend to be in the first Rank of your Respondents.

I consider also that though you have proposed but Three Considerations, yet
you have bolted out a Mulitude of Questions, which administer an occasion for
as many more to be retorted.

To your first Question, Then; What Validity or Security can any pretended or
designed future New Law or Charter have, when we see so many of the present
Laws we already have, may be, and are by the Dispensing Power Dispensed with?

So many of the present Laws -- The Grievance then with you may lie rather in
the Number, than in the Dispensing Power. His Majesty might with your leave
perhaps have dispensed with some Persons, and some Penalties too, but not with
so many altogether.

One would think by that you would not have Quarreled at the Dispensing Four,
tho the Act for levying Twelve Pence a Week had never been Prosecuted, so as
the Twenty Pound a Month had been Levied, nor if the Conventicle Act had been
Dispensed with, so as the Thirty fifth of Queen Elizabeth had been rigorously
Executed.

I cannot tell how many, but all the Laws that are Dispensed with, are Penal
Laws of a like nature for matters Ecclesiastical: Uniformity, Sacraments, Oaths
and Tests are the Subject of them all. If this be your Grief, you must be
either a Conforming Baptist, or such a strange sort of a Baptist, as in my
Forty Years Conversation among them I have never met with.

But to come more close to your Question, What Validity can a New Law have,
seeing so many of these we have already are Dispensed with?

I Answer with a like Interrogation, I grant that the King may do what his
Royal Pleasure is with his own, Does it thereupon follow, that He may do so
likewise with what is mine? If I acckowledge and thankfully accept His
Dispensing with a Penalty, to which I am Obnoxious, because I take a Liberty in
matters of mere Religion, which I am not allowed by Statute Laws, Is it of
necessary consequence that I therein acknowledge He may also impose a Fine upon
me for lawfully using a Liberty when granted to me by Law?

Its hoped the designed New Charter for Repeal of such Penal Laws as are
inconsistant with the Doctrines of Christianity, will according to His
Majesty's Declaration, both maintain the National Religion, as it is now
Established by Law, and provide for such a Christian Liberty as may set at Ease
and Secure the Consciences, Persons and Properties of all that will Live
Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present Age, whether they be Conformists
or Non-conformists to the National Religion. And a Grant remains valid, tho a
Penalty may be dispensed with.

But what if the New Law should have no more Validity or Security then these
Old Ones that are Dispensed with? The Dissenters will yet be in so much a
better Case by a New Law, as that they will then be Secured by Law, whereas
till that be done, they are always subject to be Ruined under color of Law.
But why are you so Querulous at the Dispensing Power in this particular case
wherein it is Exercised? The King declares his Opinion, That Conscience ought
not to be constrained, nor People forced in matters of mere Religion. This
Principle is the ground of his Dispensation. Have you not lately observed, That
diverse Gentlemen, who being in Commission would not Execute these Penal Laws,
and were therefore for a season laid aside, are now returned again into their
former Stations, with Reputation, and the Love of their Neighbors? Have you
not Read the Apology for the Church of England with relation to the Spirit of
Persecution, for which she is accused? How their former Errors are extenuated
by Instances, page 4. That tho the Party (in Parliament) of the Church of
England did not perform what had been promised by some Leading Men to the
Dissenters (in procuring them a Bill of Ease) yet there was little or nothing
done against them for about Nine Years; but they had their Meetings almost as
publicly and as regularly as the Church of England had their Churches. Do you
not remember a Vote of the House of Commons in 1680. whereby it was Resolved,
That the Proseeution of Protestant Dissenters upon the Penal Laws was at that
time Grievous to the Subject.

Shall the Justices that did not Execute these Laws gain Esteem by it? Shall
the Church of England excuse her self from the charge of Severity by her not
Executing these Laws for Nine Years together? Shall the Commons in Parliament
Vote the Execution of them a Grievance? And may not the King extend his
Compassion toward his Dissenting Subjects, and say They shall not be Executed?
To make such a signal Act of Grace the ground of a groundless Jealousy, and
cause of Contention, to say no worse of it) is highly Disingenuous, and
discovers a very froward and perverse Disposition: But let us consider your
next knot of Questions.

Have we, or can we have any higher Power here in England then King, Lords and
Commons in Parliament Assembled? The Laws that are now Dispensed with, and
rendered useless, were they not made by that Power? Can your New Charter be made
by any higher or other Power? Do you think there is any Temponal or Spiritual
Power here in England above the Dispensing Power? And can you make it appear to
us? To these Questions you desire Mr Penn would let his Brethren and you know
his Mind honestly.

In his stead I answer, We have no Law Makers, but King, Lords and Commons in
Parliament Assembled, but yet we are in England, as well as in other parts of
the World, under a Law to God, and thereby each Man is obliged to preserve
within his own Breast the Answer of a good Conscience, from which no Law of
King, Lords and Commons can absolve him; and hence it is that we have many
Fundamental Maxims of Law grounded upon the Law of God, and common Reason of
Mankind, as well respecting the Sovereigns Prerogative, as the Right of the
Subject, not written in Acts of Parliament, but in their Nature so invariable,
That (as our Lawyers tell us) Acts of Parliament made against them are void in
themselves. And if this Opinion be true, these Fundamental Maxims of Law,
whether in Spirituals or Temporals, tho they may be for a season by a
particular. Act of Parliament interrupted, they are not thereby vacated, but
still retained, and will at one time or other again discover their Vigor. Acts
not contradictory to these Fundamental Laws may be useful for a season, but not
having that innate Stability as Fundamental Maxims have, may afterward become
useless, improper and grievous to be put in Execution; hence those common
distinctions between Malum in se, and malum prohibitum. And subseqent thereto,
in many cases a power or no power of Dispensing, That which is unlawful in it
self to be done, as Murder, Theft, Trespass, and the like, cannot be made
lawful by any Law or Dispensation whatsoever. That which is lawful in it self,
but becomes unlawful, because prohibited by a particular Statute, may be
Dispensed with, so as no particular Person be Damnified by that Dispensation,
and not otherwise. Among the many Vicissitudes of Succession to the Crown,
between the two Houses of York and Laneaster, Do you think there were no Laws
in being, made in the Reign of a King of one of these Branches (in Fact)
dispensed with by his Successor of the other Branch, till they came to be
Repealed in Parliament? Were the Oaths of Fidelity and Obedience made to the
Line Interrupted, required to be taken by all Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, and
other Officers Commissionated by the other Line which succeeded, until they
were Repealed in Parliament? In the various changes of the National Religion,
between the Reigns of King Henry the the Eighth and Queen Elizabeth, were all
Penalties imposed by Laws respecting Religion, exacted without any Relax or
Suspension, till those Laws were Abrogated in Parliament. In the first Year of
King Henry the Fourth a whole Parliament held in the Twenty first of Richard
the Second was Repealed: In one of which Laws then made, diverse Pains of
Treason were ordained, whereby, as the Act of Repeal says, No Man did know how
he ought to behave himself to Do, Speak or Say for doubt of such Pain; and if
that Law had been Religiously observed till the moment of its Repeal It could
never have been repealed. In the Second Year of Richard the Third, a Statute
made in the First of the said King was Dispensed with by Proclamation. Vaughans
Rep. page 353.
Now I would gladly hear what cause my pretended Brother Baptist has to Quarrel
at his present Majesty's gracious Dispensing with Laws inflicting Temporal
Penalties for Ecclesiastical Matters, and rendering them useless for the
present, in that respect only, till they can be Repealed in Parliament. And
wherein the exercise of this Dispensing Power has exceeded what has been in
Fact done by his Royal Predecessors, and admitted may be lawfully done by our
greatest Lawyers. But to proceed,

Shall your New Charter have a Penalty inserted to be inflicted on the
Infringers or Breakers of it or no? If not, What will your New Charter
signify? Not three skips of a Lowse: And if it has a Penalty, Cannot any King
by his Prerogative and Authority Royal Dispense with the Penalty? And what will
it signify then?

This pretended Baptist's Resolution of the first of these Questions is as Weak
as it is Idle, and both that and the others, may receive a satisfactory Answer.

Such a New Charta as is desired, if no Penalty be annexed, may be very
significant in many respects, (1) It may be materially good and obliging to
Obedience by its innate Virtue, on pain of Condemnation by the Divine Law; and
in that respect of greater signification, and much more desirable then such
Laws as are materially Bad, and cannot be obeyed without Breach of the Law of
God. (2) This New Charter may, without annexing any Penalties, Repeal all those
Penalties, by which Persons are compelled to perform Acts of Divine Worship,
contrary to their Understanding, Faith, and a Good Conscience, and put it out
of the Power of any Dispensation to revive those Laws, or to impose Penalties
of the like kind. (3) Such a New Law may without any Penalties by its simple
Declarations put an issue to that, which is now unreasonably made the ground of
all our Contests, and confirm to us all those Laws by which our Liberties and
Properties are preserved.

But presuming it may also have Penalties inserted to be inflicted on the
Infringers or Breakers of it, These may be so qualified as not to be Dispensed
with; (if under the color thereof evil minded Men do not practice upon the
Sovereign Power: For in such a case, if the Sovereign Power cannot Dispense
with the Penalty of a Statute Law, it may be divested of such means as are
necessary for its own Preservation, (but in any ordinary case, if any Person or
Body Corporate receive particular Damage by the breach of such a New Law, He or
They may if the Legislators please, be Entitled to a particular Action by the
same Law, and recover Damages against the Breakers of it, Vaughans Rep. page
334, 342.
at the Kings Suit, by Indictment, or Presentment, or by a Special Action, with
which the King cannot Dispense.

The Instance you give, to put us out of Doubt, in Mr Langhornes Words,
touching the Kings Right in Dispensing with Penal Laws, I shall not Repeat, but
only observe, That the Opinion you cite (however you may do it in scorn)
carries such an Evidence in it for a Dispensing Power (not in ordinary Cases,
as that Author has well observed) but upon extraordinary Occasions, when the
King in his Wisdom shall find it necessary, as calls for more Cunning then I
yet perceive in you, to raise any material Objection against it.

Qu. Now where is the assurance then of Mr Penn's New Charter?

Ans. Our Assurance will lie not only in the Authority of the Legislators,
equal to any other Law, but also in the Authority of the Matter, which will
command an Assent in every Man's Conscience as soon as he reads it, Not to do
that to another, which he would not have done to himself. Our Assurance will be
in our Love and Affection One toward Another, as Neighbors concerned to
promote the common Interest of the Realm. In the Watchfulness of all Parties
against any one particular Faction, if any such should rise up, and attempt to
inthrall the Consciences of all the rest, in our thankful and dutiful Behavior
toward our Sovereign for breaking off those intolerable Yoaks we could not
bear, and setting us upon such a lasting Foundation, both for our Civil and
Religious Liberties, as with a discreet Care and Management of them may remain
firm to Perpetuity.

Qu. But who can tell what King we may have after our present Sovereign whether
so merciful, or so just? Or what Skeriffs the next King may chose, and what
Returns of Parliament Men they may make? For you know the Forfeiture on the
Sheriffs making a false Return is no great matter, and cannot a King pardon it
by his Dispensing Power or Authority Royal? What will, nay what can your new
Charter then signify, when it either is or may be, (according to your own
Doctrine) Invalidated, Disanulled, or Annihilated in an instant.

Ans. If there should be raised by my Querest, or any other like him, such a
perverse Spirit and behavior in any Party of Men, as to prevent the Nations
selted enjoyment of these Privileges we now have as Men and Christians, by his
Majesty's Prudence, Justice and Clemency, who can tell (indeed) what the sad
Consequences of it may be? But if Duty, Reason and common Interest prevail,
here is nothing offered that should cause any Man to slack his utmost diligence
and endeavors to arrive at the Settlement proposed by a New Charter. For what
do these Queries tend to, or what of any weight do they contain? For,

First, Does William Penn, or any party of Dissenters propose any such Methods
to be persued, as may advance Prerogative to that degree, as to Invalidate, or
Annihilate all our Laws?

Secondly, Is not the National Religion, as it is Styled in the first place to
be maintained, and as well secured, as any old or new Law can make it, with
such a Liberty for consiencious Dissenters from it in the worship of God
(Exploding of all Lisenciousness) as may free them front future inconveniency
upon account of Religion.

Thirdly, Is any thing suggessed that by a new Charter, greater power should be
given to the King for choosing of Sheriffs, then now he has, or that the
penalties upon a Sheriffs making false Returns, shall be less then now then
are? or any thing else to render our Case worse then it is.

You take it for granted, I know, that which I do not know, nor your self
neither, as I suppose, that the Sheriffs Forfeiture, who shall make a false
Return is no great matter, or that which the King can pardon, or dispense with.
The Case of Sr Samuel Barnardiston wherein he had a Verdict and Eight Hundred
Pounds damage given against a Sheriff for a false Return, may inform you
otherwise; and certainly a new Charter will not make it less Penal then now it
is, but if it should ever happen, notwithstanding a new Charter, as it has
heretofore happened notwithstanding our old Charter, that Knights and Burgesses
should not be duly chosen; the same Fate may attend such a Parliament, as did
that of 38 H. 6.

I now come to your second Consideration, wherein you pray Mr Penn to consider,
What his New Charter can signify, so long as there is a High Commission Court,
or a high Commission for Ecclesiastical Affairs set up? Cannot those
Commissioners take any of your and our Preachers, Teachers, or Ministers to
Task when they please? Cannot they, when they have a mind to it, suspend Mr
Pen, or George Whitehead, Mr Alsop, Mr Lobb, Mr Mead, or Mr Bowyer, as well as
the Bishop of London, etc. Cannot the Court when they will, or shall think fit,
or be commanded, suspend, silence or forbid any or all the Dissenting Ministers
to Preach any longer in their Meetings, if they will not Read any Declaration
or Order whatever, that the King shall set forth and require them to Read?
Remember the Magdalen College Men; Remember also that Sawse for a Goose is or
may be Sawse for a Gander.

Ans. The case of Magdalen College is published at large, you may Read it if
you please, and Answer it if you can, especially the parallel case in Edwards
the Sixth time. But pray what is that to a New Charter? If wrong Judgment was
given by the Court (as you perhaps suppose) in that case, do you make no
disserence between Dispensing with a Law, and wrong Judgment given against a
Law (if any such should be) in Westminster Hall or the Ecclesiastical Court

If the Dissenters you name, or you who pretend to be a Baptist, be of the
Clergy of England in the Eye of the Law, and hold Ecclesiastical Affairs and
Benefits, they or you may for Mis-behaviour be suspended from them by the
Ecclesiastical Commissioners. But why do you fancy that a New Charter (by which
it is expected that Penalties for matters of mere Religion will be repealed)
should be made to signify nothing, by the Ecclesiastical Commissioners which
now are; I can easily foresee that a New Charter may make that Commission in
the cases you mention to signify nothing; but I cannot imagine how that
Commission should make a New Charter insignificant. As to the silencing of
Dissenting Ministers, its evident as the Law now is, their reading or not
reading the Kings Declaration in their Meetings will not prevent it, if the
King withdraw his Favor, nor is there any cause to give the Ecclesiastical
Commissioners any trouble about them; for as the Laws now are there are other
Ecclesiastical Courts, which with the aid of the Justices at their Sessions are
sufficiently empowered to Censure, Fine, Imprison, Banish or Hang them for their
Nonconformity to the Religion Established by Law.

You exhort us to see before we Leap, whether the Words in the Orders set forth
in the Gazett, for contempt of his Majesty's Authority will run no further then
just Mr Penn will have it. And ask, Can he stop the Current of it when he
pleases? and say, If he could, we are not sure he would; for formerly he had no
great kindness (we know) for us Baptists and other Dissenters, and if he could
and would we are not sure of his Life, how long; therefore it will be the
greatest piece of Weakness and Folly in the World for us to Danee after his and
the Jesuits Pipe alone, contrary both to all common Sense and Reason, and our
own general Interest.

Ans. How do you make out your Inference, That to do as you say is the greatest
piece of Weakness and Folly? I take it to be altogether as great folly to Dance
after your Pipe in Company, contrary to common Sense, Reason and Interest, as
after Mr Penn and the Jesuits alone; surely in this you take the Dissenters to
be very forgetful of what their Senses so lately testified, when under the
feeling Prosecution of Penal Laws, and to be unreasonably ignorant of their
Interest in desiring those Penal Laws may be Repealed in Parliament, and a due
Liberty of Conscience Established in their room. But for what cause do you
reflect upon Mr Penn? I take it as a certain Evidence, that all Pamphlets on
this Subject, that are interlaced with personal Reflections asserted on
Surmises, without proof, are designed to promote Factious Dissentions, rather
then to Unite in one common Interest, and heal our uncharitable Divisions. I
have known Mr Penn for many Years, and have been credibly informed by others,
that from his Age of Seventeen Years he has been an intimate Associate with the
most eminent of Dissenters, that when he was of Christ Church College in
Oxford, he was fined for his dissent from the Religious Ceremonies of the
College: He suffered many Hardships in his Fathers Family on that account, has
been a constant Advocate these Twenty Years for the Liberty we enjoy and hope
to to have confirmed: I have heard of many good Offices he has done at Court,
both for Dissenters and Conformists; and that he has improved that Favor which
has been shown him by his Prince, both before and since his Ascending to the
Throne, for the Benefit and not to the Prejudice of others: I have not known of
any rich Presents or Rewards that have been given or required for any of his
Services, or any Employments he seeks or accepts of. How his pleadings for
Liberty of Conscience has or can tend to the improvement of his Revenues, I
cannot apprehend neither; therefore if you will free your self from the
suspicion of an ill Design, and a groundless Aspersion, tho Mr Penn may be no
Friend to such pretended Baptists and nominal Dissenters as you are; its
incumbent on you to show wherein he has manifested that he had formerly no
great Kindness for those that are really such upon this account.

I pass by your trifling about the enlarging or limiting Authority by the power
or will, length or shortness of Mr Penn's Life, and proceed.

Thirdly, To consider above all what Security or Validity this New Charter can
be of, when there is a standing Army kept on Foot? Whether Guns will hear
Reason, or Dragoons mind Charters or Arguments? your reference to their
practice in France, if we are not strangely Infatuated and given up to Ruin and
Destruction; your Query whether their Carriage and Quartering will agree with a
New Charter for Liberty, and if Mr Penn be a Friend to Liberty for Liberties
sake, you desire an honest, clear nnd satisfactory Answer to these Three Points.

In Mr Penn's stead give me leave at present to return you an answer, by asking
you some Questions; Is the Western Rebellion, slipped out of your mind? Was there
no occasion given for multiplying Dragoons? Is Sovereign Power so limited by
our Laws, as that it cannot make use of such means as are of apparent and
absolute necessity for its own preservation? Did you ever know of any Army
wherein no dissorders were committed in their Marches, or Quarterings? Are our
Dragoons without any discipline, for reforming or punishing abuses when they
are complained of?

Do you, and such as follow your Examples, take a right course to avoid such
mischiefs, being done in England by Dragoons, as are committed in France? I am
as far from defending any of their disorders, or desiring their continuance
longer then needs must, as I am from beleiving you to be a Baptist.

But sure I am, whatever you are, your Reasonings are very unsavory, and
unsafe, tending to fasten us under that Bondage, you seemingly advise us to
avoid; for to deal plainly and honestly with you, (as you desire Mr Penn to do)
I see no way to escape the dissorders that are either felt or feared, but by
giving His Majesty full satisfaction, not only of our Fidelity, but of our
Affection also to his Person and Government, in complying with what he shall
propose, for maintenance of the National Religion, and all the possessions of
the Clergy, as Established by Law, and abolishing all such Penalties for
Nonconformity to the National Religion, as may be found inconsistent with the
common Right and Reason of Mankind, Doctrines of Christianity and Interest of
England.

I shall now consider your closing points (1) In the mean time it appears to be
highly the Duty of all Men as well Dissenters as others, who have Votes in
choosing Parliament Men, above all to choose such Faithful Patriots as will
take care of these things already hinted, and others that may be brought before
them; that our Liberties, our Laws, and our Lives may be preserved from ill
designing Men, and from future Quo Warranto's, and all the high Violaters and
Infringers thereof called to account, and justly punished; this will well
become them, and secure us, more then any titular Charter what soever.

If you had only advised the choosing Faithful Patriots for Parliament Men,
without cutting out their Work, your advice might have been sound; or if you
had only looked forwards that our Liberties, and our Lives might be preserved
from ill designing Men; and our Laws so settled, that all good Subjects may
equally share in the benefit of them; your Advice might have been seasonable;
for it is evident that our Circumstances require as wise and moderate Men,
experienced in civil and Religious affairs, as every Parliament in England did;
and if the Nation be blessed with such a Choice in the next Parliament, all
sober persons, may by their wise Councels be out of fear of suffering Prejudice
by future accidents of State: But at this juncture to talk of calling to an
Account, and punishing all such as you may reckon high Violaters and Infringers
of our Laws and Liberties is very unseasonable: Pray tell us since you
undertake to Chalk out the way for a Parliament, and propose the Work you would
have done by them, how far they are to look back, and where and with what sort
of Men you would have them begin; with such of the Clergy, or of the Lawyers,
as were the first Advancers of Prerogative above your measures; or with the
Dissenters for thankfully accepting the Kings Indulgence, and making use of the
Liberty he has been pleaed to grant in their peaceable and Religious
Assemblies? after so many Convulsions in the State, Plots and Counter-plots as
we have known in our Age. The same things to be liable to Penalties at one
season, which at another time have been marks of the greatest Loyalty; sober
Men cannot but think it is high time to adhere to, and pursue those Royal
Methods, that have been with good success begun, and are proposed to be settled
on terms of lasting security and Peace.

If the Case should be proposed to any Assembly (your self being in the
company) in reference to any Man that you can mark out as it was by the Jews,
in reference to the Adulteress before our Savior, That he who is without Fault
should cast the first Stone, your supposed Criminal might escape by the
Assemblys going out one by one, from the Eldest to the last convict in their
own Consciences; and if you should have the confidence to stay behind the rest,
it might be no good evidence of an awakened Conscience; but if Peacemakers
have singular marks of favor always attending them, certainly such worthy
Patriots as at this season shall be found in that Work, repairing our Breaches,
healing our Divisions, settling our Civil and Religious concerns, that whoever
will conscientiously discharge his duty to God, his King and his Neighbor, may
not only enjoy Peace and Truth in his Days, but leave it on like terms as a
Blessing to his Posterity, will deserve the highest marks of favor from all
good Men, and may therein also expect a Blessing from Heaven.

Liberty, say you, is indeed a Fine Word, but Remember Brethren what the
Apostle Peter has told us, That some there were, that while they promise them
Liberty they themselves are the Servants of Corruption? And Observe what
Follows; ^or of whom a Man is overcome, of the same he is brought in Bondage,
And then you ask (I suppose Mr. Penn or my self) How Do You. How will you like
that Word?

Answer, I like it as part of Holy writ, Teaching me (1) Not to abuse that
Liberty whereunto I am called by the Gospel, (2) To prize that Liberty in the
Gospel which is indulged me by my Sovereign and to promote what in me lies, the
Establishing of it by a New Charter (3) Not to hearken to you, or any, which
perhaps did never feel the want of this Liberty, and would misguide me, and
take an Occasion to deceive me of it, by talking of Liberties of another Sort
which signify nothing to me or any other Conscientious Dissenters, if we be
deprived of this (4) as inducing me (for the better understanding of the Text
you cite) to consider the Context by which I am cautioned not to hearken to any
such, as promise me Liberty, who are themselves overcome by, and in Bondage to
their own Fleshly poluting Lusts, (5) as instructing me by certain Characters
to discern what sort of Persons they are who (by enticing Words) would beguile
me of my Liberty; chiefly such as despise Government, are Presumptious, and not
afraid to speak Evil of Dignities: And with this short Paraphrase, I may after
your Example, ask, How do You; Or how will you like that word?

In this I agree with what you say, The Name of Liberty signifies nothing
without the Substance. And that which the Dissenters desire and endeavor
after, is that such a Liberty may be obtained, and secured by a New Charter to
Perpetuity as is substantial: But in this we may differ, if you think a present
Liberty signifies nothing, for it is now, and will be at all times, so long as
we can enjoy it, the present comfort of our Lives, and of so great value, that
I think he that has felt the want of it, will not easily be enticed to make a
Forfeiture of his present Liberty, by taking any such course as you steer to
Secure Penal Laws for Coertion of Conscience under the Name of Substantial and
English Liberties, If these Penal Laws be the Goose you advise us not to part
with for sticking down a Feather; and the Bird in the Hand, I cannot Guess how
you came to be a Baptist; sure I am you do not show your self in the Colors
of an English Anabaptist, for your course tends to the b^^ding of Heavy
Burdens on their and other Dissenters Shoulders, which its most likely you
never did, nor will touch with one of your Fingers.

You exhort us, To be of one mind as Brethren, to let Brotherly Love and
Charity continue, and tell us, nothing will save us but Union. Pray take your
part in the Exhortation let Brotherly Love have a beginning (for I fear that is
not yet settled between us) and then I doubt not but the profitable Experience
of the Exercise of it will give it a continuance; If you are for uniting, be
content to part with those Offensive Weapons that have caused our divisions,
let our Civil Liberties as Men, and our Religious Liberties as Christians be
settled upon sure Foundations, let temporal penalties, for dissent in
spirituals be set aside, and the hard Names of Sedition, Felony Treason be
severed from such things as are in no manner offensive to the Civil Government,
but mere Opinions, and peaceable Exercises subsequent in matters of Religion.
Let us learn to be kindly affectionate and Compassionate as Men and Neighbors
ought to be one to another, whether True Believers, Misbelievers, or
Unbelievers, and then there will be no ground to fear that the Corruptions or
projects of Rome, Geneva, France, Holland, or any thing else should ever
dis-unite us, or be able to gain any advantage by attempting to sow amongst us
the Seeds of Dissension.

FINIS.

