The Anabaptists late Protestation. Or, their RESOLVTION To depart the City of
LONDON. Wherein is set forth, The full proceedings of a great number of
Anabaptists, at a late Conventicle near Old-street. Together, with their
several Debates, and Consultations at the said Meeting, concerning the City of
London, and the Kingdom of ENGLAND.

Printed in the happy Year,
When Sectaries durst not appear.
The Anabaptists last Goodnight. BEING A RELATION OF The proceedings of diverse
Anabaptists at their late Meeting near Old-street, March 18. 1647.
UPon the 28. day of the last Month, there were assembled together near
Old-street (at a zealous Conventicle) diverse persons, of several degrees and
functions, for the laying open their sad grievance, and heavy ^ppressions (as
they term them) occasioned by the late good Votes of the honorable Houses of
Parliament, for the putting down, and abolishing of all Sects and Sectaries,
within the Realm of England, etc.

And after some hours spent in disputation, they generally resolved to persist
on, and adhere to the Rules of the^ own reformed Churches, protesting and
(ingeniously professing) not to revo^^ in the least from their Opinions which
they were now grounded in; saying, that if Liberty of Conscience would not be
allowed of with in this Kingdom, they would become Strangers to Foreign
Princes; and take their leave of this their native Soil, But notwithstanding
the late Ordinance of Parliament, they still proceed on in their Meetings and
Conventicles, using their own Form of Worship, contrary to the Discipline of
the Church of England.

But (indeed) they are up-held by many strong Agents, and animated and
encouraged on by those who have broached most ^ntollerable thins of late years
against the high and honorable Court of Parliament; the grand and chief
Ringleaders being now in custody, for endeavoring to sow the Seed of Discord
within the Bowels of this Kingdom, both by their several Writings, and
printed Papers, which has enflamed the hearts of many thousands within this
Kingdom: therefore, I may say, A lame Hand, is better then a lewd Pen:
Therefore to show much courage in a bad matter, is rather a token of a
desperate folly, then any badg of a magnanimous mind. For, is it not apparent,
to all true Christians, that this kind of people has for these two or three
years practiced and endeavored to raise a division, and to stir up strife
and envy in the hearts of the people, against the most high and supreme
Council of this Kingdom.

Therefore, what a woeful course has this people ran into, not only through
their own lewd practice, but also their infecting of others; so that even the
sins of thousands they must give a^ acco^t for.

But it is apparent, that since the creeping in of so many Sects within the
Church of England, many sad disasters have arose thereby; for where there is
tolleration of too many sorts of Opinions, there arises nothing but strife and
contention for superiority, and every one that has gained a little experience
in the Scriptures, takes upon him the great Office of a Minister, and
admististers the Word; by which means, too many poor souls are ensnared and
deluded: therefore, believe not every one that takes upon him to be a
Preacher, but try the Preachers, whether they are of God, search the Scriptures
daily, and see whether those things are so, that such preachers say, prove all
things, and receive that which is good, ^ John. 4.1.

Christ himself says, that if the blind does lead the blind, both shall fall
into the ditch, Matthew. 15.14.

Nay further, the Lord himself says, the Leaders of this people, that teaches
them Errors and false Doctrines shall cause them to err, and they that are led
of them are destroyed, Esa 9.14, 15.

And verse. 16, Therefore shall the Lord have no pleasure in their young men,
^^ther have pity of their fatherless and widows; for they are altogether
Hypo^^i^^s, and wicked, and all their mouths speak folly: After all this, is
not the Lords wrath ceased, but yet his band is stretched out still.

Thus may we see, and plainly discern the wonderful and horrible things which
has been done in this Land, by the wicked Seducers of our times, by their
false and erroneous Doctrines, and their changing and altering of the sacred
Scriptures.

Oh the sad things which are now broched: How is the Church of England defiled,
She is become black and bespotted; nay her beauty which formerly shined
throughout all Europe, is now eclipsed, because of the too many diversity of
Opinions, which are crept within her very bowels.

But now the beauty of our Church begins (once again) to shine in its full
luster, the Curtain is drawn, the Clouds are dissolving, and all Sects and
Schisms now vanquishing.

So that now it is hoped, the Church will enjoy her former purity, and that by
the vanquishing of these Sects and Heresies, she will become undefiled, and
without spo^ or blemish, and appear in the full beauty of al her Members.

God grant that all such wicked Seducers of the people may become new
Christians, and reformed; and if not, God give the people grace to know them,
to shun them, and to fly from them.

FINIS.

