Another DECLARATION: Wherein is Rendered, A further Account of the just Grounds
and Reasons of the Dissolving the PARLIAMENT; BY THE LORD GENERAL AND HIS
COUNCIL of OFFICERS.

LONDON, Printed for T. Brewer, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhil. 1653.

Another DECLARATION WHEREIN Is rendered a further Account of the dissolution of
the late Parliament, by the Lord General and his Council of OFFICERS.
AFter the Lord had wonderfully owned the Army at the Fight at Worcester, by
delivering into their hands and utterly dissipating the public Enemies of this
Commonwealth; God set a strong resolution upon the hearts of the Officers of
the Army, to seek after the effecting of good things in all lawful ways; but
always being tender of doing any thing against Authority: And many of them
made it their work, to be laying hold on all opportunities, to persuade and
convince the Parliament men of their duty.

And finding them slow in their proceedings, they thought it their duty not to
lie still in persuasions, but to try in some more effectual way; whereupon in
August last, there was a Petition from them presented to the Parliament; for
which they had thanks and some word of encouragement, That they would
vigorously go on to effect those good things they desired; and the Parliament
then committed over the consideration of them to several Committees, some of
themselves, and some others: At which, they seeing the Officers a little
satisfied, they began so to clash in their Counsel, that there was little
agreement; they then reigned in their old dull spirit, and thought, a may b^
supposed, (and no^ without grounds) to endeavor the breaking o^ the army,
knowing them to be the only Bugbear in their way.

These things might be instanced in many particulars but especially in the
last, in offering to reduce the army to so many less in number as came to one
and thirty thousand p^unds per mensem. The Officers being willing to condescend
what might be, did after Worcester fight, reduce the army to seven hundred in a
foot Regiment; and the horse to sixty in a Troop, to save the Nation what might
safely be from charge, which was all they conceived they could do with safety.

But the Officers seeing them rather active in exposing the nations peace to
danger by this; they thought they were bound vigorously to prosecute those good
things that was by them, in the behalf of the good people of the nation
desired; and the Officers set several days apart to seek the Lord, at which
time it was set upon their hearts, that there was a duty incumbent upon them;
and they appointed a Comittee to confider of some particular things (as does
appear by the Letter sent out by them) yet still held up their Counsels and
consultations, what was fit for them to do, making it their daily work, to
quicken and incite the best in the House to do themselves what was desired; or
might conduce to the good of the Nation, rather then the Army should have any
hand in the business.

And the Officers of the army made it their sole desires to have a new
Parliament, and lay aside all other considerations, clearly perceiving an
impossibility for the honest men of the house, to carry on the good things that
were so much longed for: then the House seeing that the Officers would not be
satisfied without some answer of their desires, set about the Bill for a new
Parliament, and went on with that; but (as clearly appeared) not so much to
answer their desires, as to effect their own ends in the thing, by passing
several things in that Act of dangerous consequence

The Officers beholding, That the Bill would not answer the thing desired, and
being altogether unwilling (if possible, to prevent it) to use any other way
then entreaties: They used means to procure several meetings with diverse of the
House, which they effected acc^rdingly; and when they met, the Officers freely
laid open their hearts and thoughts to them, desiring the like from the
Members, which was promised: But after a full and naked discovering of their
thoughts and hearts to the Parliament men, their Reply to the Officers was,
That they were not free to discourse there; but when they were in the House,
they had their Negatives and Affirmatives.

The Officers seeing themselves thus dealt withal, held on their consultations,
and came to some considerations what was fit for them to do; and as often as
opportunity offered, pressed the best of the House to do those good things
desired, and prevent further mischief, telling them what they feared else would
follow; yet all would not avail, but they went on in their old way.

This being clearly perceived, and that they went on vigorously with the Act,
and some that had been averse to it, now pressing it, the Officers they thought
it either time now to stir, or never; whereupon they made another Application
to the best of the Parliament men, who (with much entreaty) gave some of them a
meeting the night before; but for all that, diverse of the chief of them were
strong the next morning in prosecution to pass the Act, for a new Parliament to
be called in November next: And if themselves having passed it, had that day
then adjourned, as probably they would have done (had they not been dissolved)
and by that means their Design frustrated, the whole Nation would have been in
a sad condition, and involved in a Labyrinth of new troubles; which through
Gods goodness, by this way of dissolving them, before it passed, is prevented.

FINIS.

