An Account of the Manner of Taking the Late Duke of Monmouth, etc.
By His Majesty's Command.

Immediately after the Defeat of the Rebels at Bridge-water; on Monday the sixth
of July instant, the late Duke of Monmouth, late Lord Gray, and the
Brandenburgh fled; and coming between Gillingham and Shaftsbury, got a Guide to
lead them the way to the New Forest, most free from Towns and Watches; he led
them by White-Sheet four Miles East of Shaftsbury, and thence by Cranborne
Chase; where their Horses being tired, they let them loose, and hid their
Bridles and Sadles.

In the mean time, the News of the said Defeat coming to the Lord Lumley, then
posted at Ringwood in Hampshire, with three Troops of Horse of Colonel
Staplyes Regiment, commanded by Major Bridger, Captain Monk and Captain
Peckham, and four Companies of Foot of Colonel Alfords Regiment, Commanded by
Lieutenant Colonel Cooper, Captain Bickely, Captain Best, and Captain Car^e,
all of the Sussex Militia: His Lordship was pleased to send his Scouts every
way to take up suspected Persons; and Sir William Portman, for the same end,
had taken care for strong Watches to be set, made up of his yellow Coats and
others, on the Roads from Pool to the most Northern parts of Dorset.

Upon the seventh Instant, about five in the Morning, some of the Lord Lumley's
said Scouts (riding in the Road near Holt Lodge in Dorset, four Miles West of
Ringwood) just at the turn of a Cross way, surpised and seized two suspected
Persons; which (when the Lord Lumley came up) proved to be the late Lord Gray,
and the said Guide: This put the Lord Lumley upon a strict examining of the
Cottages (with which that Heathy Country abounds) and called in the
Neighborhood that were acquainted with the Country, etc. Notice of this being
brought to Sir William Portman, by some of his Watches, etc. He hastened to the
Place with as many Horse and Foot as he could of a sudden get together.

It happened upon the Lord Lumley's inquiry amongst the Cottages, that a poor
Woman, one Amy Farrant directed his Lordship to a Hedge, where she had seen two
men go over; which Hedge proved to be part of the Out-bounds of very many
enclosed Grounds; some overgrown by Fearn and Brakes, and others sown with Rye,
Pease, or Oats, etc.

Whereupon a strict Guard was put very near one another, round those Outbounds;
whilst other Foot and Horse did beat within: These Guards kept their several
Posts so well, that tho the late Duke, and the Brandenburgh attempted at least
thirty times, to make their Escape out, yet they always found each Guard ready;
and upon their last attempt to escape, two of the Troopers fireing on them,
made them immediately to Retire and hide themselves apart from each other, in
some of the adjacent Ditches, where they were afterward found.

Upon the eight day by five of the Clock in the morning, the Brandenburgh was
found; who upon Examination, confessed, that he parted with the said late Duke
within the same Out-bounds, about one of the Clock that morning: Whereupon
every individual Person being encouraged thereby, and by the hopes of having a
share in the 5000. l. (as was before agreed of in the Field) did renew the
pursuit of him with the strictest search and diligence imaginable; and about
seven of the clock of the same morning, one Henry Parkin (servant to Samuel
Rolls Esquire) happened to discover the said late Duke hid in a Ditch, covered
with Fearn and Brakes, and calling to two of the Sussex Troopers that were by
him, all three seized him together: Sir William Portman happening to be near
that place, rid presently in and quieted those that cried Shoot him, Shoot him!
he laid hands on him as his Prisoner, and so preserved him from all violence
and rudeness: And immediately in the same instant, the Lord Lumley came in, and
agreed that Sir William Portman should search him; which was done, and as soon
as they had found his George, they dispatched that, with the News to his
Majesty by Captain Bickely, and Mr. Chaldecot, a Sussex and Dorset Gentleman.

The Prisoners after this were keept two nights at Ringwood. On Friday the Lord
Lumley discharged the Foot there; and with the said three Troops of the Sussex
Horse, and one Troop of the Dorset Militia, commanded by Captain Fownes, they
were conveyed to Winchester, Where joined them two Troops of his Majesty's in
pay, and two of the Northampton Militia Troops, all which conducted them to
Farnham Castle upon Saturday the 11th. and the next day to Guilford, and upon
Monday the 13th. to Fox-hall, where a Regiment of the Lord Dartmouths received
them, with other Troops of His Majesty's in pay, and thence by Barge they were
carried to Whitehall.

The Papers and Books that were found on him are since delivered to His Majesty.

One of the Books was a Manuscript of Spells, Charms, and Conjurations, Songs,
Receipts, and Prayers, all written with the said late Duke's own hand.

Two others were Manuscripts of Fortification and the Military Art.

And a fourth Book fairly written, wherein are Computes of the yearly Expense
of His Majesty's Navy and Land Forces.

And as for his Gold; only twenty Guinies were given to the said Parkin; and
ten Guinies a piece to the two Troopers, that first seized him; and the rest
was returned to the said late Duke.

As the Prisoners passed through Rumsey, Winchester, Farnham, and Guilford, one
would admire to see the very great numbers of the Militia, with the Deputy
Lieutenants, and Gentlemen of those parts, that were ready to guard them, and
take off the Fatigue of such as were on the March.

Within doors none but Commission Officers were trusted to watch by them; and
besides those, the Lord Lumley and Sir William Portman took their turns to
watch in Person, night and day, from the time of the taking of the said late
Duke, until they had delivered him safe at Whitehal, from whence he was
conveyed to the Tower.

FINIS.
Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.


