AN ACCOUNT Of the Late Dreadful Earthquake In the ISLAND of MEVIS, St.
CHRISTOPHERS, etc. Which happened in the Beginning of April, of this present
Year 1690. In a LETTER to a Friend in London.
SIR,
THE Interest which you have in the Trade of this Island, obliges me to give
you some Account of the Earthquake that happened in this Place. It was very
astonishing and terrible while it lasted; but as for what Mischief it has done,
we cannot for the present give a just Account of it, and therefore must leave
it imperfect till the next. However, you may be sure it was very great, by the
wastful Destruction of Buildings, which it has made: And it was one of our
chiefest Happinesses that the Fort and Magazine escaped.

It began upon the sixth of April, about five of the Clock in the Afternoon. At
what time we heard a rumbling Noise, like that of distant Thunder, which seemed
to come from the Bowels of the great Mountain, seated in the very Navil of the
Island. We heard it for a short while with great Amazement; for it lasted not
long before we felt the dire Effects of those violent Vapors struggling and
contending in the Womb of the Earth for passage forth. So strong was the
Motion, that within some few Moments after the Noise began, ensued a most
amazing Earthquake, which shook the whole Island to that degree, that all the
Houses in Charles Town that were built of Brick or Stone, dropped of a sudden
down from the Top to the Bottom in perfect Ruins. Those that were built of
Wood were no less violently shaken, but stood however; which showed that the
Rivetings of wooden Structures are far stronger, and not so easily disjoynted
as the Co-agmentations of Cement and Mortar. Nevertheless, it was a dreadful
thing to see Men, Women and Children flying up and down from Place to Place in
Fear and Consternation, yet not knowing where to fly for Safety, while the
Surface of the tottering Earth hardly gave them Liberty, no less in an Agony
than the Earth it self, to set their Feet upon the Ground: which in many places
also opened, and from the yawning Clefts, vomited up a sort of hot, bituminous
Water, whole Tuns full at a time, no less offensive to the Smell, than dreadful
to the Sight: and such was the Force which thrust up that heavy Element, as to
mount it a great height in the Air. The Sea it self for a time forsook the
Shore for about three quarters of a Mile together, and left a great Number of
Fish of a large Size to lie gaping upon the Sand, till it returned again: which
violent Motion of the Water happened diverse times, though not with the same
Rapidness and Fury, nor at so great a Distance as at first.

Another thing was observable, that whereas it is an usual thing in this
Island, for every House to have a large Cistern, nine or ten Foot deep, and
fifteen or twenty Foot in Diameter, for the Convenience of receiving the
Rainwater, the Violence of the Earthquake all over the Island was such, that
those Cisterns threw up the Water eight or ten foot high in the Air, as if it
had been spouted out of so many monstrous Springs. The Earth also in many
places was thrown up in vast Heaps; and great Numbers of large Trees were torn
up by the Roots, and buried in the Rents and Gapings of the Island, and never
expected to be seen more. I wish we may have a true Sense of this terrible
Judgment of God upon us.

Nor has this Island only felt the severe Strokes of Celestial Indignation. For
as we are told by several Persons, since come from thence to this Island, St.
Christophers has had a large Share of the same Calamity; where a late
Earthquake, no less dreadful, has made the same Ravages, by throwing down and
burying whole Houses in the wide Fissures of the gaping Mold, overturning their
Sugar-Mills, and demolishing the Jesuits College, together with several other
Piles of Brick and Stone, to the great Amazement of all that beheld it, and no
less Damage of them that suffered. We are also informed that Antego and
Monserrat have likewise been very greatly shaken, though not in so severe a
manner; and that the Barbados also has had some trembling Fits, but not so
considerable. As for our parts, we are not quite rid of all our Fears, for this
Island has had several short Agonies since, that have not long endured, which
is all we have to make us hope that the Fury of the Cause is over, and that the
Effects will consequently cease.

After we had somewhat recovered our selves, I began to consider what might be
the Cause of this dreadful Accident: and by my little Reading, I find the great
Philosophers cannot agree concerning the true Cause of Earthquakes. For some
will have Wind, some Water to be the Cause of them, when put up within the
Bowels of the Earth, like strong Liquor fermenting in a Bottle, and not able to
get forth, otherwise, than breaking the Glass. For my Part, I believe both Wind
and Water concurred in this which we have suffered. But I shall not trouble you
with my Philosophy, you being in a Place where you may have recourse to the
more Learned, for better Satisfaction than I can pretend to give you. This is
certain, we have severely felt the fatal Consequences of these Contentions
within the Bowels of the Earth; and this being over, I hope I shall have no
more occasion to trouble you with these sad Relations.

London Printed for A. Smith, 1690.


