Another great and admirable VJCTORY Obtained By his Excellency the Lord Genesis
MONK, Against the Scottish forces: With the total routing and dispiersing of
General Glencairns Brigade; the number killed and taken; and the pursuing of
them above three miles by Major Bridges, and Captain Babington.

With several other Remarkable Occurrences, touching the Transactions of
Military and STATE Affairs.

London, Printed by K. Wood, 1654.

Another great and glorious Victory obtained by his Excellency the Lord Genesis
Monk against the Scottish forces.
THe Lord Genesis Monk having refreshed his wearied Army, near sterling, he again
drew forth against the enemy, and upon his advance toward Loughaber, where
Middleton lies with his scattered forces, another party of the enemy were
discovered: Whereupon a party of five hundred Horse and Dragoons were
commanded forth under the conduct of valiant Major Bridges, and resolute
Captain Babington, who charged the enemy with such abundance of magnaninity
and dexterity of spirit, that they immediately routed them, and embraced the
pursuit for three or 4 miles, doing admirable execution and taking about 150
prisoners, with the loss of 7 men.

The enemy consisted of about 1500 men, being part of Gencairns Brigade, and
going to unite and join with Middleton; against whom, valiant little Morgan is
again designed; but the enemy decline engagement.

By an Express from Hainant the 27 of July it is certified, That the King of
Scots being gone from Peron toward the Spaw, was met within a League of Peron
by the marshal Thurenne, and de la Ferte, who conducted him as far as the
Enemies Country; whence they returned with the D. of York, who is now made
Lieutenant Generalissimo. Soon after the Governor of Cambray of the Spaniards,
met the King of Scots, and conducted him to his Lodgings, and there feasted him
like a Prince: Since which time he is gone to the Spaw.

The King of Sweden having sent new Letters of Credence to Monsieur Bonnel his
Resident; his Lordship had Audience by his Highness in White Hall, being
attended by Sir Oliver Fleming, master of the Ceremonies, and diverse other
Gentlement. And after a very grave and learned Oration, he presented his
Highness with the Royal Condescensions of his Lord and Master, To confirm and
maintain all things particularly contained and specified in the Articles of
Union, etc. After which, the two Deputies from the Duke of Holdenburgh had both
Audience by his Highness; and then the Secretary from the States of Venice Unto
whose assistance, a gallant Fleet is preparing for relief of the Christians
against the Turk: Between whom there has been two great Naval Fights: but in
the first the V. netians lost the Galley of Padua, Monsieur Moriciui was
killed, and his Galley blown up with powder; but after three days vigorous and
lamentable engagment the Venetians became Victors In which memorable and
Christian Dispute, the Turks lost 20 Galleys, five Mahoncs, and six men of
war; and the rest were forced into the Isle of Scio, where the Venetians have
had a second Victory, and again sunk 6 of their Galleys, and taken six ships,
and three Mahones, with the loss of three of the Venetian Galleys.

The French go on victoriously with the siege at Stenay; and with as much
vigor before the Camp at Arras: Indeed, true it is, great has been their
success since the making of the Duke of York Lieutenant General; and that upon
his approach within a League of the Spanish forces before Arras with the whole
Army upon the way of Doway, where he entrenched upon a design to cut off all
provisions from the enemy; the Prince of Conde at first represented his Opinion
at a Council of Officers, that the enemy being but 14000 the best way would be
to engage them with hopes of success, but his advice was waved. Then the Duke
gave them an alarm, and faced them with his horse, which the French
perceiving, made a sally with some horse and foot with such vigor and
resolution, that they routed the Spaniards at first; but the Prince of Conde
coming in seasonably rallied them, and forced the French into the Town again
with some loss; in which conflict his Highness fought half an hour sometimes on
horseback and sometimes on foot, at the head of the Trench, where the valiant
Knight de Crequy, who commanded the French, had his Arm broken to pieces, and
was hardly gotten off, and several other Officers and soldiers were killed and
taken.

Since which time, Marshal Thurene has presented himself before the Spanish
Lines, in hopes of breaking through to relieve the City; but the business
proved not feasible, so that they were forced to retreat with some loss.

Since that 5 or 6000 of the spanish horse with some foot in the Rear, went to
take and fortify the passage of saint Paul, five miles from Arras, and as many
from Air, to secure the Convoys sent toward the Spanish Camp, which Genesis
Thurene having notice of, pursued them with a body of 7 or 8000 horse, to spoil
the design of the Spanish forces. But since that another party of 4000 horse of
the spanish Army have been to meet a Convoy, which they have conducted safe
into the Camp; which being done, they were presently sent to join with the
first party commanded toward the said St. Paul; so that we do expect very
suddenly to hear of some engagement between these two parties.

FINIS.

