APOLOGETICALL Animadversions of certain abuses that may be reformed in
Ecclesiastical persons and Ecclesiastical Courts without the utter
extirpation of either.

Presented to the consideration of the high and Honorable Court of Parliament.



London Printed. 1641.

Apologeticall Animadversions of certain Abuses that may be reformed in
Ecclesiastical persons, and Ecclesiastical Courts, without the utter
extirpation of either. Presented to the consideration of the high and
Honorable Court of Parliament.
1. THat every Archbishop, Bishop, Chancellor, Vicar General, Surrogate,
Archdeacon, or any having authority in that behalf (when he Instituteth,
Collateth, or Investeth any Clerk in any Benefice with cure of Souls, or any
dignity in a Cathedral or Collegiate Church, or any other spirtuall promotion)
shall in the presence of the Register, and one or two public Notaries,
minister the Oath of Simonie to Patron and Clerk, and cause an Act to be made
thereof, upon a certain pain.

2. No Bishop to admit any youth under 23 years of age, nor any that is not of
sufficient learning, unto Holy Orders, upon a pain to be inflicted upon the
deliquent Bishop.

3. No Archbishop or Bishop shall employ any to be Vicar General, but such as
have potest tem clavium, neither shall any Simoniacall person use and exercise
such authority in any visitation Provincial or Episcopal, upon a pain.

4. No Bishop or other inferior Clergyman shall be a notorious Blasphemer,
Drunkard, Sweater, Adulterer, Incestuous, Fornicatour, etc. or keep or
maintain any such in his house, being by presentment under censure
Ecclesiastical, upon a pain.

5. No Bishop upon a Bond to save harmless, or such like pretense, shall
discharge any party that is followed by due course of Law to an Exco. capiendo
in a cause of instance between party and party, upon a pain.

6. No man presented by Churchwardens or Minister for drunkenness, adultery,
incest, fornication, or other criminal cause, and followed to Excom. capiend.
shall be freed without public Confession of his offense, and an act of his
Confession for satisfaction to the Church, upon a pain.

7. No man shall be allowed above two months to profecute an appeal upon
presentment, and the higher Court shall not hold it above a twelve month, upon
a pain.

8. Every Citation upon a Judge a Quo, shall be served in open Court, And an
Act thereof, upon a pain.

9. No Archbishop, Bishop, Deane, etc. or other having authority, shall grant,
seal, or deliver any Patent to a Register before he has taken the Oath of
Simonie, and the Oath to do justly and uprightly, as is required by the Canon,
upon a pain.

10. All Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Chancellors, and all having authority,
shall without fraud employ Commutation money to pious uses, and thereupon shall
cause an Act to be made, where the name of the offender, his crime, the time,
place, and sum of his Commutation, and he manner how it was bestowed, shall
be expressed, upon a pain.

11. Every Archbishop, Bishop, Dean, Archdeacon, Cannon, Prebend, or any person
Lay or Ecclesiastical holding any Impropriation, shall lease it unto the
Incumbent for the time being with Cure of Souls Sans fine upon the usual
rent, upon a pain.

12. The Registers negligence in transmitting a Record shall not be a cause
sufficient for the Iudex ad quem to excommunicate the Iudex a quo, unless it
appears, that being admonished, the Judge a Quo did refuse to exhibit his
Patent. And the Judge ad Quem upon appeal, to avoid delay shall not intend the
terms of the Courts as the Merit of the Cause.

FINIS.

