AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST ROMES INFECTION: RECEIVED By the Reformed Churches beyond
the Seas, approved by them, and commended to the Church of England: consisting
of Uniformity and Conformity in Church Government, and the necessity of
abolishing some Ceremonies lately commanded by the Episcopal power, which are
rather prejudicial then material to Gods true worship.

Also a view of the pious and Religious care of the Citizens of this City; who
have by all means labored the extirpation of the causes which have so long
troubled the Church and Commonwealth.

Brought over by Philadelphus, and delivered by him to Philalethes, in a
Discourse; and by him published for the public benefit.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wood. 1641.

An ANTIDOTE AGAINST Romes Jnfection,
Philalethes. BRother, you are most happily men, and no less welcome to this
our Land, I pray what news have you now stirring in your foreign parts.


Philadelphus. Truly very little news, but the most frequent there stirring is
the distracted Estate of this Kingdom.


Philalet. Truly, this Kingdom has of late days bin very much off of the
hooks, and the peace thereof very much disquieted; and it is not to be wondered
at, when the or^g^nall cause is justly to be considered. The universal
disagreement of this Kingdom took original the first from the unlimited power
granted, and committed to the Clergy, who executed that authority given unto
them with such insolency and tyranny over the subject, that they began to usurp
a dominion both over the consciences and fortunes of all who were in the least
manner re^^gious. Their unjust censures in their Ecclesiastical ^ourts have
vexed and abused the greatest part of the Kings most loyal Subjects, and by
their innovations and new form of Church Government, they have miserably
enthralled the conscience of many, and constrained men to the obedience and
observance of that war-ship, which is contrary to all pious practice. They
began to cast a superstitious mist throughout this who^e K^ngdome, so that it
was in great danger to be subjected unto the Heresies and power of Rome.


Philadel. It was not the Disease of this Kingdom only, but the same malady
had overspread the greatest part of Europe, there was scarce any part free from
the Popish Supremacy. For whilst we disagreed among our selves, being
distracted or drawn asunder in matters of Faith, and disagree^ng about the
manner of worship; the Pope by his Agents, took opportunity to foist in his
Doctrine among them, and having gotten but some possession could not be again
removed: so that for a very long season, a great part of Europe groaned under
the blindness of Romes Tyranny. Occasioned first by their private discensions
among themselves.


Philalel. Most certain it is, that civil discensions are most dangerous, both
to Church* or Commonwealth, and none of so great consequence, as those which
arise from points of Faith, and matters of Religion. For how can that Kingdom
expect Peace within it self, who is at difference with its God. What quiet or
prosperity can therebe, where the first rent made, is in Christ's seamlesse
coat; or how can there be Peace and Tranquillity in a Kingdom, where the unity
of spirit is neglected, which is the ground and foundation of all civil peace
whatsoever. But I long to be resolved concerning your Reformation, and to be
informed of the happy means that gave so great a blessing, both to the Church
and Commonwealth.


Philadel. I will begin. When an universal Cloud of Ignorance and Superstition
had blinded the greatest part of all Europe: when the power of Rome did
possess both the liberty of their conscience and persons; then, in the midst
of that obscurity, did Almighty God cause a light to shine upon them: yea, and
such a light, that the Pope with all his Adherents could never since
extinguish. God raised to those distressed souls that most worthy Champion of
Christ, who undertook the cause, and opposed the Pope: and by degrees, did
deliver them from that darkness, and miserable captivity.


Philalel By what means did he effect his Reformation.


Philadelp. The first onset and blow he gave him, was not by circumstance, but
downright; he denied his Supremacy and his power to be universal, and did
limit his power only to an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and that also to extend
no further then the Sea of Rome; and withal, he acknowledged to Kings as Gods
Anointed, and his immediate Vice-geren^, all power and supremacy: as well in
matters Ecclesiastical as Civil, within their own Dominions. Having thus
begun with his personal power, he then proceeded to his Doctrine: and now with
the protection of that most Christian, and most renowned, the then Duke of
Saxony, at a general Counsel, he disputed most of their points, and confuted
them: and for his pains, he returned home rewarded with his Holiness
Excommunication. After he had satisfied his Countrymen by disputation, he
proceeds to matter of circumstance, and begins to cleanse the church from their
Relics and Superstitions. The Surplice is hung by, as of no use, the use of
the Cross is quite crossed out of the necessity of their Belief, the Altar is
taken away, and in fine, whatsoever might give the least occasion of offense be
removed, and took away, being rather stumbling blocks, then help unto the true
worship of God.


Philalel. But how did the common people relish this new introduced form of
practice, and how did they take the Alteration of their ancient Customs.


Philadel. Truly, as the common people do all changes, although for their
be^efit, it seemed at the first very strange and displeasing unto them; but
within a small space, he having made known unto them how their liberties and
consciences had bin abused; and also the great commodity that must of necessity
ensue this Reformation, they were contented and well pleased, and were more
ready to execute, then he to desire, or will any thing that should promote or
further this happy and newly begun Reformation.


Philalet. But Mr. Luther lived not to absolve and finish this work, he left
them, and many superstitious in the Church, being immuturely taken away from
them.


Philadel. It Is true but M. John Calvin succeeded him; and what the one had but
begun, the other brought to pe^fection.


Philalet. Luther and Calvin dissented among themselves, and had a variety in
their opinions.


Philadel. Right, then was Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses against
Ephraim: yet were they both against Judah. So though Calvin and Luther in some
small circumstances disagreed among themselves; yet they both labored the
extirpation of Heresy, and the subversion of the Popish tyranny: and what
Luther by reason of his untimely death left unfinished, Calvin did bring to
perfection, those superstitious Ceremonies which Luther but denied, Calvin
quite took away: the Surplice was rent in pieces, the use of the Cross not any
thought of, and the exalted State of the Altar was brought so low, that he left
no sign at all thereof: nay, he went so far in the matter of Reformation, that
he denied the pride and Hierarchy of Bishops, and did not desist until he had
cleansed the Church from all Superstitious whatsoever; for he well understood,
that the Catholics are like Foxes, and that where they can put in the head,
they will soon put in the rest of the body.


Philalel. This was a most happy Reformation, and I hope that before your
departure, you will see the same in our Kingdom: that so we as well as you may
enjoy the tranquillity and peace, both of Conscience and Estate.


Philalel. I hope J shall, and then I shall think my Journey happily
undertaken, and it will be a most happy hearing to our Brethren in our parts,
to understand of the prosperity of this Kingdom, when it shall begin with the
Glory of God, and the Reformation of the Church.


Philalel. Things have bin a very long time, and yet nothing concluded of, by
reason of the manifold distractions in this Kingdom: but now I hope very
shortly we shall behold a Reformation; for the Citizens have very much and
zealously endeavored the extirpation of the abuses of the times, which have
disturbed the peace of the Church and Commonwealth: they have bin no way
defective to have the ambitious and proud Episcopal Hierarchy (from whom all
these evils did spring) called to question, and to be censured according to
their deserts, for molesting both the peace of the Church and Realm. And the
Honorable House now assembled, I doubt not, but will be speedy in their
endeavors to root out all Heresies from the Church, that so the God of peace
being honored* the Kings Majesty obeyed, and the Commonwealth established, we
may have a most happy and flourishing Kingdom.


FINIS.

