ANSWERS For Sir John Hall Lord Provost of Edinburgh, the Magistrates, Town
Council, and others. To The Complaint exhibited by James Mcklurg, George Clerk,
Robert Blackwood, William Paton, and others, against them.
THe Sum of the long Libel is this, that the Defenders are factious persons,
designing to perpetuat the Office of Provostrie of Edinburgh in the Persons of
Sir John Hall, and Sir Archibald Muir by turns, and to inhance and squander the
Common-good of the Town, and that the said Sir John and George Stirling, by
their imprudent Carriage in Parliament, toward the Royal Interest, occasioned
a great Branch of the Towns Revenue to be cut off by an Act of Parliament; And
that for these Designs of perpetuating that Magistracy, and inhancing the
Common-good to themselves, they have made many Invasions on the Set and
Constitutions of the Town, by the three last Elections, which the Complainers
crave may be reduced, upon several pretended Violations of the Set; and the
Defenders otherways punished therefore; and in order thereto, the Complainers
crave, that the Books and Registers of the Town Council may be produced, and
which Libel consisting of two Sheets, back and before, was execute against the
Defenders upon Saturday in the afternoon, to compear before your Lordships this
day.

For although the Complainers were sufficiently picqued at the disappointment
they met with, in not being advanced to places within the Town according to
their expectation, a great while ago, which they themselves thought they did
deserve (though the plurality of the Town Council was of another opinion) and
consequently the Complainers have had a considerable time to advise and consult
this their long Complaint, yet they never attempted to raise the same, till
after the death of Sir James Rochead, one of the conjunct Clerks of the Town,
that Mr. David Dalrymple his Son in Law, having agreed with Aeneas Mcleod, Sir
James his Conjunct, to get his Good Will of the half of that Office, the
Complainers knew, that the receiving or not receiving of a Clerk, was in the
power of the Defenders, and that they had grounds to believe that the Defenders
would not receive Mr. David in that Office; so they would have the settled
Magistracy of the Metrapolitan overturned, to make way for their own
Advancement, and the Instalment of Mr. David in the foresaid Office: For within
an hour after the Execution of the Libel against the Provost, Mr. David
proposed to him, and thereafter to Baillie Chiesly, that the Town Council would
enter him to his Father in Law's place, which Favor Mr. David would not have
demanded from a Magistrate, which he thought was presently to fall, even though
they had granted his desire, but would rather have been obliged for that
Complement to James Mclurg his Cousin, who (as the Complainers give out) is to
suceed the Provost if they prevail.

As the Factiousness of the Defenders, they humbly represent to your Lordships,
in all sincerity, that they are of no Faction, neither Jacobite nor Episcopal,
but are persons well affected to the present Government, both of Church and
State, and that they have no intriguing with such disaffected persons, whatever
Friendship the Complainers may have from such, and whatever Inclinations the
Disaffected within this Town may have shown, to have the Complainers brought
into the Magistracy; For as Sir John Hall and George Stirling, their Zeal and
Affection for Their Majesty's Interest, did appear in their hearty and
cheerful Concurrance in the late happy Revolution, as Members of the
Convention of Estates, representing this good Town, so Sir Archibald Muir made
his Loyalty and Zeal for this present Government, eminently appear by his
inducing of the Neighbors of the Town to offer to contribute for the
Maintenance of a Regiment, for Defense of the present Government, when a
dreadful and present Invasion was threatened from France, and of which Offer
your Lordships need not to be remembered.

As to Sir John Hall and Sir Archibald Muir's design, to perpetuat themselves
Provosts of Edinburgh by turns, though it be the great Drift and Scope of the
long Libel, and many far fetched Consequences, and Repetitions used to evince
and make out that Design against the Defenders; yet the Sum of all is, that Sir
John was first Provost, and that Sir Archibald succeeded upon his Dimission,
and that Sir John was elected at Michaelmass last, when Sir Archibald went off;
Yet that Sir John was first legally Elected, the Complainers cannot contravert,
and that Sir Archibald succeeded him, cannot infer the Design of perpetuating
the Office betwixt them, since it is imppossible, but that one Man must succeed
another; beside, Sir John had no hand in the Election of Sir Archibald, having
voted both for Leeting and Electing Archibald Hamilton: So that the Design is
only inferred from this single Act, that Sir John is now Elected after Sir
Archibald; when James Mclurg's Friends offered to lay Wagers, that he would
carry the Vote. But it is a strange Confidence to infer from one single Act, a
Design of perpetuating the Office by turns; when the Complainers themselves
cannot deny, but that Sir John was absent all the time that the last Election
was in Agitation, and that he was very unwilling to accept of the Office, after
he was voted Provost, and which Office he only accepted for the Common good,
and not for his private Interest; since the Complainers dare not say, that he
made, or makes any Advantage by the place; nor could Sir John gratify his
Ambition thereby, having had the Honor before, of being chosen Provost by the
popular Election in a critical time: and continued a second year by the ordinar
way of Election.

As to the Design of inhancing, and squandering the Towns Money, it is no ways
evinced by any Fact or Deed done by the Defenders, in inhancing, or squandering
already any part of the Towns Goods, nor in any such thing alleged to be done
by the Libel, but only the Hundredth Pounds Sterling given to William Menzies
(which shall get a good Answer in its proper place) And as for the inhancing of
the Towns Money, the Complainers have not the Confidence to allege the
Defenders have already done it, or to give any Instance thereof, but they would
have them removed, because they may Inhance the same hereafter, which if it be
a good Argument, all Magistrates may be removed because they may Inhance; But
to redargue the Complainers Jealousies of Inhancing, they know that at the
Michaelmass 1683. the Town was but in six hundredth thousand Merks of Debt,
which by the Mismanagment of the Magistrates in five or six years extended it
to seven hundred and sixty (...) thousand pounds when Sir John Hall entered to
be Provost; for the former Magistrates were in use to Borrow Money for payment
yearly of their Annualrents, and expend yearly of incident Charges, (...)
thousand pounds or thereby; whereas since the Revolution there has no Money
been Borrowed for payment of Annualrents; but on the contrary some Principal
Sums have been paid, and the Yearly incident Charges of the Town has not
extended to so many hundreds, as it did to thousands before.

A^ to that point of Sir John Hall, and George Stirling, their losing a great
Branch of the Towns Revenves, by their imprudent Carriage in Parliament toward
the Royal Interest. It is answered, That it is a strange Insolence in the
Complainers, to quarrel Members of Parliament, for their Carriage in
Parliament: for which they were not Challenged by the Parliament it self, since
it is undeniable, that it is the Freedom of the Members of Parliament to be
Censured by none but the Parliament for what they act therein; and the
Parliament did never Censure either of them for what they did, as Members
thereof, and the Town was so far from being Displeased with their Carriage
therein, that even after that pretended Miscarriage in Parliament, they were
continued in the Offices of Provost and Deacon-Conveener: And since the
Complainers do not condescend upon the Miscarriage, the Defenders can make no
distinct Answer thereto, but as they were, and are Members of this current
Parliament, so they Acted and Voted in Parliament according to their Oath de
fideli, and no Man would offer to Censure and Accuse Members of Parliament for
their Carriage therein, but these that perhaps hereafter may take the liberty
to reflect upon the Acts of Parliament, and the claim of Right, when they touch
them, or their Relations: And as the Complainers cannot condescend upon any
particular Miscarriage of the said Sir John and George in Parliament, though
the same were to be Cognosced by the Parliament (who are the only Judge
Competent thereto) yet the Complainers mistake the consequence of the pretended
Miscarriage, when they say that a Branch of the Revenue was cut off by an Act
of Parliament, for that Branch was the two pennies on the Pint, whereof the
Town had an Arbitrary Grant from the late King, without Consent of Parliament,
which was Condemned as Illegal, by the Convention of Estates, and so was not
cut off by the Parliament, whose Act did not cut off the same, but did
Indemnifie the Town for uplifting Bygones: and granted them a Year thereof in
time to come, with a New Imposition, etc. which was all that the said Sir John
and George could get done for the Town, notwithstanding that they used their
utmost Endeavors, to get the two pennies upon the Pint continued by Act of
Parliament for a longer time: So that the said Sir John and George their
Carriage in Parliament, could not occasion the cutting off the two pennies on
the Pint by Act of Parliament, which was contrary to the fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom, condemned as Illegal by the claim of Right, and had been Treason
in the Town to have Exacted it, without a New Act of Parliament, unless the
Complainers be of Opinion, that the Late Kings absolute dispensing power
asserted by his Proclamations be yet in Vigor, and that that Branch of the
Revenue would have stooden in despite of the claim of Right, if the Parliament
had not out of Displeasure at Sir John Hall and George Stirling, taken it away.
And if the Complainers mean that Sir John and George in stead of cutting off
the Gift, did hinder the Renewing thereof by the Parliament; It is Answered,
that they Voted, according to their Consciences, and albeit they had had all
the Freedom the Complainers would have advised them to, yet as things then
stood, the plurality of the Parliament would not have concurred in Renewing of
the Gift.

The Complaint being a Reduction of three successive Elections. It is alleged
by way of Defense. 1. The Conclusion for Reducing the two first Elections,
cannot be sustained for Annulling the Elections, or inferring any Censure on
the Persons Elected, they having served out their time, and gone off in course
before the Elections were quarrelled: And the Complainers having acquiesced
thereto, and concurred with them in the Council: and Sir Archibald having had
the Honor to sit amongst Your Lordships, as Provost of Edinburgh, while the
Provost was in the Nomination: And Your Lordships being Judges to possession,
when it is unjust or Violent, if the possession be ended and past, the unjust
possessor, cannot quite the possession. And therefore these Magistrates not
being now in possession of the Magistracy, cannot be put out thereof, and
although there had been Streaches made at their Election, and Invasions upon
the Set, yet these consisting in point of Right, depending upon the
Interpretation of obscure Clauses: if the Complainers Design to prevent the
like, for the time to come: they ought to insist in the Declarator, which they
raised a Year and an half ago, upon the same pretenses, which they have
Ommitted to do ever since that time, being conscious of the Weakness of their
own Cause. 2. As to the last Election, the pretended Informalities of the first
and second Elections, can be no ground to Annull the same: otherways, if such
Errors of Election should influence, and infect succeeding Elections, then any
Elections of Magistracy might be quarrelled upon Errors done at any time within
forty years. and all the Deeds done by the succeeding Magistrates, might be
quarrelled upon that Ground. For albeit the Convention of Estates by their
Authority, before Their Majesty's acceptance of the Crown, did appoint a
popular Election through all the Burghs, because of the manifold Encroachments
had been done by the Government upon their Privileges, yet it were hard that
Errors and Informalities in Elections occasioned by the Competition of
Neighbors within Burgh, should so far affect succeeding Elections, as to be
grounds to annull the same when the Election quarrelled it self has been most
regular. And therefore the Election of their Defenders to the Magistracy, cannot
be quarrelled upon any Informalities in the two preceding Elections. 3,
Adhering to the former general defenses for taking off the particular pretended
Informalities of the Elections, it is answered as to the Points quarrelled in
Sir Archibald Muir's first Election. 1. That where the Libellers pretend that
after two and twenty of the Town-Council had Voted to fill up most part of the
eight Proxies requisite to make up the number of thirty, and the Votes spliting
Eleven to Eleven as to some of these Proxies, the Defenders refused Baillie
Graham the odd Vote which was due to him as first Magistrate for the time, and
withdrew Tumultuary, though the Complainers Party stayed, whereupon the
Libellers made a representation to the Council, and both Parties being heard,
the Defenders did Boldly and Falsely assert that there could be no Proxies
chosen for two old Counselors who had right to Vote jure proprio, unless they
had absented after they were required to come, whereupon the Council ordained
both Parties to begin a new Formal Election, at which time the Defenders did
choose eight Proxies over again, which if it was right, then the first Procedure
was right, and there was no place for the new Election of Proxies, and if it
was wrong as being contrary to the Privy Councils Order, then the Election must
fall.

To which it is shortly Answered, That the Procedure of the Town Council, prior
to your Lordships Order, was fully debate before your Lordships, where it was
evinced, that only the Provost had the double Vote by the Set, and that
Privileges in Law are strictissimi jur is, and that no Baillie did ever claim
the same, and that there was nothing disorderly in the Defenders carriage in
withdrawing when the Votes splited, since one half of the Council is not
subject to the other, and the Libellers party that sat still being only Eleven
(which was not a Quorum, and so could not fill up Proxies) that, and not their
Modesty or Discretion was the only stop of their Procedure at that time, and
that by the Set page 15. it is clear that the thirty Leeters are eighteen of
the new Council, and twelve of the old, which twelve are the old Magistrates,
three Merchant Counselors, and two Trades Counselors, so that Patrick
Johnstoun and James Baillie being old Merchant Connsellors, had right to Vote
proprio jure, which the Defenders do yet assert, notwithstanding of the
Libellers calling it a bold and false Assertion, which the Complainers may take
in better part, since the Libel bears that your Lordships took notice thereof,
though it was not thought worthy to be noticed by the Libellers in their
Debate; and upon which Debate, your Lordships ordained both Parties to proceed
to a new formal Election, and the two old Counselors to be called to Vote
proprio jure, which appointment was obeyed in precise terms, and these two old
Counselors called, and six other Proxies chosen only to prevent a Clamor,
these two Counselors were not only called proprio jure to Leet, but further
got a Vote, which was not to make them Proxies, but approving them to Vote as
old Counselors, which is the Complainers mistake, for a voting them Proxies,
whereby it is clear, that the first Procedour in voting of eight Proxies was
wrong, because the two old Counselors had right to vote proprio jure, and that
the choosing of six Proxies after your Lordships Order, and allowing the two old
Counselors to vote, was legal and according to your Lordships appointment. And
for Baillie Graham's pretended odd Vote, it was thought such an odd Claim by
your Lordships at that time, that Baillie Grahame had not the confidence to
claim it, when your Lordships ordered them to proceed to a new Election. And
therefore to the first Nullity, that after your Lordships had ordered a new
Election, they chused eight Proxies; It is Answered, they chused but six, and
allowed the two old Counselors to vote conform to your Lordships Interlocutor.

2. As to that Point, that the Libellers had raised a Declarator before the
Lords of Session, and given in a Petition, craving the same might be discust
summarly, which the Lords appointed to be seen and answered, which Deliverance
was intimat, notwithstanding whereof the Defenders did proceed.

To this it is answered, that the raising and executing of a Declarator, and
Deliverances on Bills to see and answer, does not stop Execution, otherways it
were in Parties power to stop Execution, by raising Declarators of course, and
the Lords Ordinance to see and answer on a Bill without stoping Execution, does
not hinder Parties to proceed in the Execution of their Right, especially when
they are warranted thereto by the Allowance of Their Majesty's Privy Council,
so that the Defenders having according to your Lordships appointment, prefixed a
day for the Election, before the Intimation of the Lords Deliverance, there was
not the least ground of pretense, for delaying the Election upon that
Deliverance.

3. As to that pretense, that your Lordships Ordinance was upon Thursday, and
that upon Friday the youngest Baillie called a Council to meet upon Monday,
upon which day, they both Leeted and Elected, which was done to prevent the
sitting of the Privy Council and Session: It is answered, that the youngest.
Baillie may call a Council, when the elder Baillie will not do it, and that a
Council met together upon the Call of any Magistrate, is a legal Council,
especially when they are called together by Warrant of the Privy Council, and
the youngest Baillie his calling a Council upon the morrow after your Lordships
Ordinance, cannot be counted a Fault, being a ready Obedience, and the Council
there appointing on Friday, Monday to be the day for Leeting, is no breach of
the Set, since there is no time determined thereby for Intervals betwixt the
Leeting day, and the preceding Council day: Neither is the Leeting and
Electing upon one day contrair to the Set, unless the Dyets were confounded at
the ordinary time of the Election, for when Magistrates dimit or die, the method
of Election of their Successors is not determined by the Set, neither is there
the same reason for the distinguishing the days of Leeting and Electing of one
Magistrate, as when the whole seven are to be chosen, and Custom has cleared the
Point, for both Sir Thomas Kennedy and Sir Magnus Prince had but one day each
of them, both for their being Leeted and Elected.

4. As to that Pretense, that Threats and Promises were used, to get the thirty
persons Leeters made up to Sir Archibald Muir's Election, and that the Town
Pensioners were allowed to Vote therein, who were excluded to Vote in the
popular Election, by the Act of Convention of Estates. It is answered, that the
Complainers deny the using of Threats or Promises upon the Account lybelled,
albeit the Lybellers cannot deny, that they and their Accomplices, did actually
apprehend with Caption George Drummond late Theasurer, upon suspicion he would
Vote for Sir Archibald (and that after they had called him out of the
Council-house to the Door) whereby they actually hindered him to Vote in the
Election, neither are Threats and Promises for Voting relevant to annul
Elections, unless they be made or ordered by the Parties Elected; and as to the
Town Pensioners voting in the Election. It is answered, the Convention of
Estates debars only Beed-men and Servants to Vote in the popular Election, but
Sir George Drummond and James Currie, who are two of the persons the Lybellers
aim at, are no such persons, and were admitted to Vote in the popular Election,
and were themselves Provosts of Edinburgh, and may be chosen yet Provosts of
Edinburgh, there being no Limitation in the Set, not to choose Magistrates who
have Pensions off the Town, and certainly he that may be chosen Provost of
Edinburgh, may Vote in the Election of a Provost of Edinburgh; As to James
Baillie who is the third person, against whom the Lybellers aim, as a Servant
of the Town, because he is Captain of the Towns Guards: It is answered, that
James Baillie is a Gentleman, and a Merchant of a competent Fortune and Trade,
tho he be Captain of the Towns Guard, and was an ordinar Merchant-counsellor
the year preceding, when he had the same Employment, and it is absurd that he
who could be an ordiner Counselor the year preceding, while he had the same
Employment, should because of that Employment, the next year be incapable of
Voting as an old Counselor in the Leeting and Electing of Magistrates. Likeas
the Act of Convention expressly appoints all Elections, after the popular
Election, to be according to the Set, and there is nothing therein to hinder
persons that are old Counselors the year preceding, or that are chosen
Proxies, from Voting in the Leeting and Election of Magistrates, tho they have
Pensions from, or be Servants to the Town.

2. As to the pretended Informalities in the second Election, viz. 1. That
Patrick Johnstoun was then advanced to be Baillie, though he was but twenty
days a Counselor before, which is contrair to the 10 page of the Set, which
appoints that no person be chosen Magistrates, without they have been a Year or
two on the Council before. It is answered, That these words of the Set (An Year
or two upon the Council) are not to be understood that a Man must be a full
Year upon the Council before he be a Baillie, but that he must be a part of the
Year upon the Council before he be Baillie, and which has been the constant
custom, as particularly in the case of Thomas Hamilton, who was made a Baillie
within eight days after he was made a Counselor, and Joseph Majoribanks, after
he was but a Month a Counselor; and which two were chosen Baillies for that
same Year wherein they were made new Counselors, whereas Patrick Johnstoun was
a Month a Counselor for the year preceding, and the rest of that year was
Baillie of Leith before he was chosen Baillie of Edinburgh; Likeas James Mclurg
and William Paton, two of the Libellers themselves, were Elected Baillies, when
they were no longer Counselors than Patrick Johnstoun was: And that the
Paragraph Quoted by the Libellers must be understood that Annus ceptus pro
completo habetur, is evident by the 15. page, where it says, If any person of
the Merchants chosen upon the new Council, happen to be promoted to another
Office, another shall be chosen in his room: Which clearly imports that a
person of the new Merchant Council may be promoted to be a Magistrate, since
there is no other Office in the Council he can be promoted to but a Magistrate.
And if a person of the new Council can be promoted to be a Baillie for that
year he is chosen Counselor in, it necessarly imports, that a Man needs not be
a whole year a Counselor before he be Elected Baillie, since generally those
of the new Council were never Counselors before, and therefore this Article,
as it is groundless, so is it shamelesly stated by the Libellers against the
Defenders, since some of themselves were promoted that same way.

3. As to that pretense, that George Stirling was continued more than two years
on the Council, though the Set expressly provide, that no Man shall be upon the
Council more than two Years, except he be an Office-man, which George Stirling
being a Tradesman, was not capable of. It is answered, that George Stirling
was Elected a Trades-Counsellor by the Popular Election, and at the Michaelmass
1689. he was chosen Deacon of the Chirurgions, and Deacon-Conveener of the
Trades, and was chosen as a Deacon to be Counselor, wherein he continued till
Michaelmass 1691. And at Michaelmass 1691. was chosen again to be a
Trades-Counsellor, wherein he has continued since; so that George has not
been yet two years a Trades-Counsellor; for the Libellers mistake is this, that
they do not think a Deacon an Office, and that they confound a
Deacon-Counsellor and a Trades-Counsellor; whereas a Trades-Counsellor and a
Deacon-Counsellor are contradistinct: And the Paragraph of the Set alleged on,
is immediately subjoyned to the method and manner of choosing the two
Crafts-Counsellors; And it cannot be denied but a Deacon is an Office, and that
the six ordinary Deacons are on the Council as Deacons, and having that Office,
whereas the other two Counselors are on as Tradesmen, and are called
Trade-Counsellors; so that George Stirling having been continued on the Council
in two distinct Characters, he has not contraveened that passage of the Set,
nor did he ever acknowledge any such thing, and if he had, it was a mistake,
and cannot hinder him to continue on the Council, when he is Elected according
to the Set; which is further cleared from the constant practice, so William
Hamilton Tailor continued eight years by changing his Character of Deacon,
Counselor, and Trades-Counsellor; and so Alexander Reid Goldsmiths was
continued six or seven years on the Council.

3. As to the pretense anent William Carse, that he being one of the
extraordinary Deacons, was chosen to be one of the ordinary Council of Twenty
five, whereby the Council of Thirty eight was reduced to Thirty seven, and the
Defenders forced to choose Thomas Campbel Proxy for William Carse, when he was
personally present, to make up the number of Thirty eight persons at the
Election. It is Answered, That there is nothing in the Set to hinder any of the
eight extraordinary Deacons to be Elected one of the two Trades-Counsellors,
that makes up the ordinar Council of Twenty five. And it were strange, that
when any Tradesman might be Elected one of the two Trades-Counsellors, yet an
extraordinary Deacon should be incapable to be on the Council of Twenty five,
because he is a Member of the Council of Thirty eight, when the whole Twenty
five Members of the oridinary Council, are all Members of the Council of Thirty
eight, as well as the eight extraordinary Deacons; and it is a mistake to
assert that Thomas Campbel was Proxy for William Carse when he was present,
for he was Proxy for the Deacon of the Fleshers, whose place was vacant, as
one of the fourteen Trades, because of the advancement of William Carse to be
an ordinary Counselor, who in that Character could not represent the
Incorporation of the Fleshers. And this same was practiced when Sir Thomas
Kennedy was Provost, in the case of John Robison Litster, who being Deacon of
that Trade, and so a Member of the Council of Thirty eight, was advanced to be
upon the Council of Twenty five; And at the ensuing Election, another of that
Corporation was brought in to Vote for that Trade, and to make up the number of
Thirty eight by Persons at the Election.

3. As to pretended Informalities in the Election of the present Magistracy at
Michaelmass last, as 1. That of William Carse his Voting, both Personally and
by Proxy, is answered already.

2. That Proxies being chosen and admitted to Vote several days before, were
thrown out by a Vote the day of the Election, contrair to the Set, page 16. and
17. Which appoints the thirty persons, who made the Leets, to make up with the
eight extraordinary Deacons, the thirty eight Electors, and yet at this
Election, these proxies were thrown out that Voted the Leeting. It is answered,
that the Words of the Set, page 16. and 17. are oppon'd, which does not bear,
that the thirty persons that Leeted, and the eight extraordinary Deacons,
should make up the number of thirty eight Counselors; but that the thirty
persons of the old and new Council, etc. And the Libellers cannot subsume that
any of the old or new Counselors were excluded, and for the changing of
Proxies at the Councils pleasure, there is nothing that hinders it by the Set,
otherways a Proxy would be in the same Case with an ordinary Member of the old
or new Council, which makes up the number of the thirty, if they could not be
removed at pleasure; Likeas the Proxies that were thrown out the day of
Election, were only called in, and allowed to Vote the preceding day of the
Leeting, and were not called in the day of Election, and so the Council had
reason to throw them out by a Vote, who officiously intruded themselves that
day without an invitation.

3. As to that pretense, that the Proxies who had Voted to the Leeting, were
thrown out the day of Election, without the allowing Eight extraordinary
Deacons to Vote, whether these Proxies should be continued or not: It is
answered, that the Eight extraordinary Deacons are to Vote in the Election of
Magistrates, and other Matters of Import mentioned in the Page 18. of the Set;
But the Magistrates are to be Leeted by the Old and New Council consisting of
Thirty (whereof the Extraordinary Deacons are no part) and if there by any of
the Thirty absent, those of that Number of Thirty are to choose Proxies for the
Absents: As is clear by the Set, Page 19. which provides no Proxies to be
chosen for Deacons, but only the preceding Deacon to be called; and therefore
since Proxies can only be chosen for the absents of the Thirty; these Proxies
can only be chosen by these present of the Thirty.

4. As to the pretense of the not reading the Set, and taking the solemn
protestation accordingly. It is answered, that this pretense is False and
Calumnious: For at that time the Lord Provost Replied, that they by their Oath
de fideli, were bound to give the Voice of their Conscience: and the said
Robert continuing to urge an Oath to be imposed: the Lord Provost told them,
they were to give the Votes of their Consciences, as in the presence of GOD,
whereunto they all gave their Assent, and in particular the said Robert
Blackwood, in face of Council acknowledged he was fully satisfied therewith:
whereupon Instruments were taken, and which can be proven by Witness thereupon.

5. As to that pretense anent George Stirlings Declaration that he would
continue no longer on the Council, and his retreating thereof. The same is
answered already, for if George might be continued by the Set longer then two
Years, changing his Character from Deacon Counselor, to Trades-Counsellour,
as he might for the Reasons above-written, then his own Declaration, though he
had given it (which is denied) yet since he gave it by mistake, he may retreat
the same.

6. As to Baillie Bowdouns being Elected, when he was not a Counselor, a full
year before; it is the same case with Patrick Johnstoun, which is answered
already.

7. As to the pretense against William Menzies, that though he could only
continue two years Thesaurer, and one year Old-Thesaurer on the Counsel; yet he
has continued more without being in any other Office, than Thesaurer, which is
contrair to the Set; Especially not having made his Accounts; And by the two
years Act it is provided, That no Thesaurer can be made a Baillie, till he make
his Accounts; and that the said William has got a Gratification of an hundred
pounds Sterling from the Town, for his being Ringleader of that Faction (as
they call it.) It is Answered. That William Menzies being chosen Thesaurer, at
the popular Election he dimitted his Office at Martimass 1690. and so might
have continued a year upon the Counsel as Old-Thesaurer; But in June 1691, when
Sir Archibald Muir was chosen Provost, he was Elected youngest of the four Old
Baillies; in which station he continued till* Michaelmass last, at which time
he was Elected Old Dean of Guild; whereby it is clear, that he was never a
single Merchant Counselor since the Revolution; and so is not concerned in the
continuance longer than two years, since all the time he was either present
Thesaurer, Old-Thesaurer, Old-Baillie, or Old-Dean of Gild; which four
Capacities are all Offices; and any person may continue upon the Council longer
than two years, when they are chosen successive to different Offices. And for
his not making his Accounts, that delay is occasioned by James M^lurg, and the
other Auditors, who would not clear his accounts of purpose to hinder him from
being Elected a Baillie, so that it is incompetent to and malicious in them to
obtrude his not clearing of his accounts, he having Several times required them
to audite the same, and take instruments upon their Delay, and it is most false
that he is indebted any Considerable Rest to the Town, for he could make it
appear that there is not four hundred pounds scots in his band; and as to the
Gratification of an hundred pounds sterling allowed him, it was allowed him for
his necessar Charges and Expenses the ninteen Months he was Thesaurer, and is
less than ever was allowed to any former Thesaurer for their incident Charges.

8. As to the pretense, that George Stirling had a Proxy Voting for him, as an
old Counselor, when he himself was present, and Voted as a present
Counselor. It is Answered, That there is nothing more rational and consistent
with the Set, than to Elect an old Trades-Counsellour, who has not been two
years upon the Counsel as a Trades-Counsellour: and to Vo^ him a present
Trades-Counsellour before his two years run out; and his place of the O^
Trades-Counsellour not being filled, to fill up the same by a Proxy, to make up
the number (...) thirty; which Proxy was not a Proxy for George Stirling, who
was present, but a Pro^^ for the Old Trades-Counsellour, which was vacant by
George's being made present Trades-Cou^sellour.

9. As to that pretense, that the said George Stirling, and other Deacons
mentioned the Libel, did enter into a Conspiracy, and subscribe a Paper to
Elect Sir John Ha^ Provost.

It is answered; That the alledgance is altogether false, and the Defenders
denies the sam^

In respect of all whch, and that the Complaint is only at the Instance of Nine
Persons, where of five Merchants, viz. James Mclurg, George Clerk, William
Paton, Rober Blac^wood and Duncan Mcintosh; and four Tradesmen. viz. James
Penman, William Sco^ Wright. Robert Ioglis and Andrew Paterson, of which number
seven of them are priv^ persons, and the other two only Deacons out of Doors,
the Defenders ought to be Assoilzi^ from the malicious and scandalons Complaint
exhibit against them by the Complainers and the Defenders Libel of
Re-convention ought to be admitted to Probation.


