The Answer on behalf of the City of London, to the Reasons of the County of
Middlesex.
1. THe Houses in London are chiefly inhabited by Retailers and Handicrafts
men, who are much impoverished in their Personal Estates both by the Fire, and
the withdrawing of the Trade into the Out-Parishes in Middlesex. 2. The Houses
in London, built according to Act of Parliament, are many of them Empty, and
many filled with mean Persons, of mean and inconsiderable Callings: And that
part of the City, that was not consumed by the Fire, is likewise filled with
very many necessitous People. And such other poor that are withdrawn out of the
City, that received Pensions before the Fire, do still receive those Pensions
from the respective Parishes unto which they did then belong. 3. The Houses
Eastward of the City are since the Fire greatly increased, and better inhabited
by Merchants, and very many other considerable Traders, who have now left the
City. 4. The Houses Westward of the City are not only inhabited by Lords and
Gentlemen of Quality, who (besides their Houses) are assessed, and do pay some
part of the Tax, as by the Books may appear, but also by Eminent Tradesmen in
Covent Garden, the Strand, High Holborn, etc. And the number of the Poor
maintained by the City being very great, the Annual Charge of them to the City
amounts unto Fifteen Thousand Three Hundred Forty One pounds Six shillings at
the least. 5. The City desires not Ease from the Land-part of Middlesex, but
only from those Parishes that are within the Bills of Mortality within the said
County. 6. Those Citizens that have left the City are an Advantage to the
Parishes within the County in respect of their Trades, Families, and paying of
Taxes. And those that live within the City, and have any Stock in the
East India Company, or other Companies, are rated within the City for their
Personal Estates, but the greatest part of the Stocks of those Companies
belonging to several, inhabiting within the County of Middlesex, and other
parts without the City, cannot be rated within the City. 7. The County of
Middlesex was not charged upon the Account of any Office in London: But several
Officers, who keep their Offices in London, were taxed in Middlesex, and paid
there, to the great Advantage of that County.

