AN ANSWER TO THE DECLARATION Of the Imaginary Parliament of the unknown
Commonwealth of England, concerning the Affairs past betwixt Them of England,
and the High and Mighty Lords the States General of the United Provinces:
Wherein their Frivolous Reasons are clearly refuted; and their injust
proceedings in the Treaty of the aforesaid Affairs, as in all their Actions,
Manifestly discovered.

printer's device of John Pieterson

At Rotterdam, by John Pieterson. 1652.

THe Authors of this Declaration are the same men; who having acted that
execrable parricide upon the King assumed the name of Parliament, which they
had abolished. Their beginning and growth has been formerly published, how a
few lurking Sectaries being at first Members of Parliament, and consorting in
prodigious opinions in Religion and policy with the illiterate rabble, became
useful to the prime projectors, that under the mask of securing Religion and
Laws, sought to gain the power of the State into their hands, being assisted
in their votes in the Lower House, and applauded abroad for their proceedings
by this busy crew, who got into places in the Army, and at last gave law to
their old Masters, and having renounced faith and obedience to their King, with
more ease scorned the bonds of association to their guides and consorts in the
same impieties; And it cannot seem strange to any that look on their Actions,
to read their shameless Declarations, nor that they should proceed with like
injury to strangers, as they have used to their King, Companions and
Countrymen.

They say, the returns which the people of the United Provinces, made toward
this Commonwealth will hardly be believed, if their sufferings and deliverance,
and the principles and spirit that acted in them then be remembered, and the
help they had from this Nation with the expense of English blood and treasure.
The people of these Provinces have with gratitude acknowledged the assistance
they received from the Crown of England, and the affection and readiness of the
English Nation; And it were a just reproach if they should make returns for
those benefits to the Usurpers of the regal power, destroyers of the Monarchy,
and Oppressors of this Nation. Can National obligations be transferred to the
Enemies of the Nation? And because a Traitorous Army has gotten power over the
Nation, shall the Friends and Allies of the Nation assist the Usurpers? This
will hardly be believed, but easily that these Declarers have the impudence to
pretend a right to all that which was due to the Crown that they have abjured.

Though their boasting of successes be a principle part in all their papers and
so in this, Yet it is not intended (they say) to be very particular in
mentioning the State of the affairs of this Commonwealth, as it stood when,
oppressed by a Tyrant, they were necessitated to fly to Arms, for defense of
their Lives and Estates, because in Parliament they did but assert, and desire
the settling of their just and Native liberties. When over particulars are
mentioned of the State of affairs in England in the time of the late King,
their Faithless and bloody proceedings must more clearly be manifest. And its
proof to all reasonable men of a resolved continuance in wicked undertakings,
that they call the King a Tyrant, when not only the mildness of his nature,
and Moderation of his private and public Actions, but the Peace and Prosperity
of the People was so universally known to strangers, and when in all that
peevish discontent, or Traitorous malice could offer against him, there was no
one Act in its nature and substance Oppression, but such only, as were
pretended might not be done by the King out of Parliament, and no one of these
was done by the King, Regia manu, (with the Kingly power) but left to the
ordinary Ministers of Law, and Justice to decide in point of right, and execute
accordingly; but these men knowing how odious their Actions are, seek a cover
from reproachful appellations upon the King, as if any could entertain a
prejudice by misnaming persons, or Actions, and if it were Tyranny for the King
to do an Action out of Parliament, which he was advised by the Judges of law he
justly might: how impudent are these men to reduce it? For where is the
Parliament Authority for their vast levies of money, Murder of the King, and the
imposing Laws upon the people? Can a few persons of the Lower House, scarce
the tenth part of the whole, by violence totally abolish both Houses, and do
all Acts that belonged to the whole? And yet they persuade the world they are
believed in such extravagant untruths. There need nothing be more said how
causelessly the Rebels of England took Arms against the King. And if Rebels
may pretend defense of their persons against Sovereign power, Malefactors will
never want a justification, when force is used to bring them to Justice. And is
it one of the just and native liberties of the English nation, that the members
of Parliament in the Lower House being five hundred, forty of these may drive
out the rest, and do what they please? this is the present case. But if we
look back, is it the liberty of England to be without a King, or to be subject
to the power of one another, and have no recourse to their Prince for redress!
Is it the liberty of England, that a rabble of the City of London or an Army
shall oppress the Parliament and propound laws to oblige the whole Kingdom? Is
it the liberty of England to exclude the King from making of laws, or governing
the Militia? But they that are not ashamed to act, yet seem loath to speak the
things they do. The seizing the Kings forts and navy, raising force against
him and both Houses of Parliament, punishing Judges for doing their duty, and
delivering their opinions in open Courts, against sedition, licencing all lewd
sectaries and disturbers of Government are only asserting and desire of settling
just and native liberties. Thus they call their murders Justice, their
robberies Reparation of Wrongs; And their persecution of the King from one end
of the Kingdom to the other, the defense of their lives and Estates. Its well
seen, that those men are the God of Gods anger upon the three Kingdoms, but
they vainly flatter themselves to think that any believe it a blessing of God as
they assume it, or that these wonders in so many signal battles, or that
series of providence was either in favor to them or their cause, and such
presumptuous pretenses declare of what spirit men are, that they take up the
language of Senacharib, who came not without God against Jerusalem, and of the
Turk, that attributes all his successes against the Christians to the power of
his false Prophet. And those men that in their writings against the King, used
the name of the whole Kingdom on their part, and the small strength of the
King, now tells us of an handful of men that were faithful to the cause, even
so faithful, that they first brake allegiance to their King, and then all
fidelity to men. What they said in this clause they say, was not intended to be
mentioned, and indeed it no way concerned their present controversy with the
United Provinces, unless they thought to scare all men by recounting their own
Actions. But they proceed to say, neither is that endeavor to divide them in
the memorable year of forty eight to be omitted. Surely the one might have
been omitted as well as the other was not intended, for it has nothing proper
to their Declaration, unless they meant to make their own story; And they
very unseasonably mention the endeavor to divide them, when they were formerly
divided, and the division still continued, and themselves not only
endeavored, but effected it, rej^cting both Scots and Presbyterian; Was not
the new model and change of the General their Act? And was not their division
further acted by purging the House, and change of the Government?

Nor can they admit the great preparation against this Nation in the year,
1650. And what is all this to the United Provinces? And can they think any man
believes, that preparations to assi^t the King, dispossess them of their
usurpation, and restore the Nation to its just Rights, are preparations against
the Nation? but this is the common style of them Declarations.

This (they say) necessitated their proceedings in Scotland, being refused
satisfaction for forepast wrongs, and denied assurance of peace from them, who
had received the declared Enemy of the Commonwealth from the United provinces.
Their guilt, and malice necessitated their proceedings; for the Scots were
obliged to receive their lawful King, and will any accuse Subject, for
fidelity and obedience to their King, but such as hate all piety and truth? but
what were those forepast wrongs? They had agreed with the Scots after the
engagement of forty eight, which was the wrong pretended, and nothing can be
assurance of peace to them, but a total abdication of Loyalty, and submission
to the new Republican power of England. And it is their pretense of invasion to
have satisfaction upon men's estates, and security by enslaving their persons.
The Scots were unhappily m^sled in in their connection with the English in
their Rebellion against the King, and found the reward of it from those they
assi^ted; And yet after they discerned the mischievous consequents of their
undertaking upon their own Nation, continued yet jealousies of one another,
and while they feared that, which might never happen, they suffered that, which
they saw was unavoidably falling on them, the power of the English Rebels; And
while some would act alone, and had fear of the event of a victory if they got
it, betrayed all to the common Enemy. And what if they received the King from
those Provinces? Did he not come through the Dominions of the Kings of France
and Spain? And what was the mischievous contrivement, that was hatched there
against England? Doubtless if the contrivement were to bring in the King, it
had been happy for England if it had taken effect But what is this to the
United Provinces, if Strangers and Allies pass through their Country? But
they say, their Enemies had much open and secret assistance by the Interest of
the Prince of Orange; and others. And what law, or convention was there against
it? had the United Provinces any League with England besides what was made with
the late King? and when their Ally dies, must they quit all friendship to his
heir?

They say, it was a time, when the Prince, and his adherents were contriving as
is most probable, to erect a Tyranny upon these Countries, of which he missed
but narrowly, especially in his attempt upon Amsterdam, which things they say
are better known there then here, and are not the purpose of this
Declaration. But it was purposely set in to scatter jealousi^s in their
Provinces, and divide their affections, and endeavors against the malicious
attempts of this common Enemy. The differences arising touching the attempt
upon Amsterdam were prudently composed and buried by the States Provinces, and
no man will measure intentions by the malicious invectives of an Enemy, that
contrives to effect that, which he says another inrended. Tyrany is judged by
the sense, not by the fancy. But wisemen will not by the apprehonsion of past
or remote dangers make way for present. They say it is not pleasant to remember
the cruel and bloody business of Amboina, for which no satisfaction has bin
given though often demanded. But never by them, when they sent their Agents
Ambassadors to treat, whereof they speak afterward; And if it were not
pleasant to them, they would rather have endeavored satisfaction when they
treated, then repetition when they were in hostility.

Now they come to unkindnesses received, that the Parliament sent a Resident to
the States General, who refused to receive him. The reason is very apparent.
The Parliament never had sent any Resident, neither was any such Authority
acknowledged by foreign States; And its a known Treason for the persons in
Parliament to do such an Act. Besides the United Provinces were in league and
amity with the King. The Parliament, or such, as called themselves so, had not
then renounced the Kingly Title, and still allowed the Oaths of Allegiance, and
Supremacy to the King, and therefore their Resident was ill sent, and justly
refused. But they think this amounts to an unkindness, since it proceeded from
their affection to the United Provinces, the establishment of liberty and
advantage of traffic, and strength to both. Their affections are doubtless
such, as are usual between near and potent Republiques, especially where the
advantages of traffic are the common aim of both, which not only creates
emulations, but necessarily makes continued differences till one be destroyed;
and thence proceeded the Judgment of Qu. Elizabeth, who concluded that the
United Provinces must in wisdom desire the stability of the English Monarchy,
where by these ruptures might be prevented, and the Crown of England had
greater assurance of these Provinces in the Government they were under, then if
they had bin under a Prince, when new Alliances and engagements would
continually change the affections and Councels of the Prince, but when these
men sent their Resident, their affections were to their own interest, and they
sought to gain reputation by having a Resident received, and to diminish the
Kingly power abroad

But the reason above al (they say) was the advancement of the true Protestant
Religion, which both profess, and which in humane probability would receive the
greatest growth by their friendship. The State of the United Provinces did not
think, that England professed not the true Protestant Religion in the time of
Queen Elizabeth, and the Kings since, but the Religion those new Governors
profess, no true Protestant will own for his, no one Church established in any
estate concurring with them; And as one chief Article in their Religion is upon
their own private Authority to rob their neighbors and kill their Kings: so
their doctrine and practice has been a great scandal to the Protestant
Religion, whereof they pretend to be. Their professed opinions are destructive
to humane society, disclaiming all subjection to Civil Governors, or
Ecclesiastical Synods, further then their private opinions concur with them,
and maintain not only the reproaches of Rulers, but violence against them, if
in their judgment they deserve punishment to death, and this those men would
have to be the true Protestant Religion, and their affection to the Protestant
Religion is seen in their cruelty to the Protestants of England.

Next they observed in some of the Governors, and people of those Countries an
affection to this cause, and expressed by them in their free contribution for
the poor Protestants in Ireland. It is far from a probability, that any
affected their cause, because they contributed to the poor Protestants of
Ireland. Themselves well know, that very many contributed to the poor
Protestants of Ireland, that hated the Rebellion, that occasioned it; and if
any man hated the Irish Rebellion, he must from the same grounds have
detestation of a greater and more guilty, which followed in England; And the
suffering Protestants in England are more in number, and for quality more
eminent then those in Ireland, and that of England has had more barbarous
effects, and is more incapable of excuse, that of Ireland pretending difference
of Nation and Religion, this of England pretending the same Religion, as they
were of the same Nation; And its too well known both at home, and abroad how
many those in England have robbed of their Estates, that not only contributed
to the relief of the poor Protestants of Ireland, but hazarded their lives in
that cause. And such, as in the beginning of the troubles in England extended
compassion to the poor Protestants of Ireland, discerned not the merciless
disposition of those men, that then governed affairs in England, who never did
one Act in order to their relief, but made use of their sufferings to reproach
the King; And by hypocritical motions of other men to Charity sought an
opinion of Zeal to themselves, and means to carry on the war in England against
the King; And those great sums, that were given to the relief of Ireland
they converted to the maintenance of their own Rebellion in England; and as
many in these Provinces find the error they were in touching the integrity of
the Reformers in England: So their Actions for the relief of the poor
Protestents in Ireland will not prove, that they hated Rebellion less in
those, that profess the Protestant Religion then the Popish.

They joined (they say) with their Resident a worthy person Dr. Dorislaus, who
was barbarously, and openly murdered at the Hague the place of residence of
the States General, of whose assassination the world will judge as of an Action
most abhorred against all Rules of national intercourse, and humanity, and how
little was done to attach the murderers must here be remembered. The quality of
Dr. Dorislaus is chiefly known by their employment of him in forming their
proceedings against their King to a style of law and this negotiation they
mention, which latter they might out of foresight, knowing how odious the man
was to the world abroad, have forborne, and have sent one not so deeply died in
that blood, for what care soever-states take to restrain, and punish outward
Actions, they cannot take away the universal indignation of a people against
unnatural and barbarous villainies. But Dorislaus was killed in an house
suddenly, which, though in the place of residence of the States General, those
complainers cannot pretend it in the power of the States General to have
prevented, and they cannot intend the breach of all Rules of intercourse, or
humanity in that Act by the States, though they display the fact with such
colors. They need not be told, that the Rules of intercourse, and humanity
allow no protection to common robbers, and enemies of humane society; And those
men, that think the world so ready to make the Judgment they like, of this
fact upon Dorislaus, see not the Judgment themselves given of their own
assassination, and therein the Crime of Dorislaus in the murder of the King:
was not every man as much a Magistrate to execute Dorislaus as they their King?
And the Messengers of common destroyers cannot be accounted public Ministers,
but by whom they are acknowledged for such. But if such, as did the fact were
unknown to the States General, how could they attach them, or if they were gone
out of their Territories though they were often called on? And why this must be
here remembered as a national Injury is not visible to any, but to show the
resolution of these Governors to quarrel with the United Provinces, there
having never bin a denial of Justice, and legal proceedings?

The States (they say) sent the Lords Borele, Renzwo, and Joachimi Ambassadors
in the time of the late troubles, pretending all good offices, which proved a
correspondence with the Enemy, and a means of assisting them against those, to
whom they were sent, this with reproaches by them cast upon the Parliament was
the work of these Ambassadors. It was a friendly and worthy Action of the
States of these Provinces to seek the composing of the troubles in England, and
to interpose their Council, and mediation in a work so becoming their
Alliance; And it was no more then Justice to the King to correspond with him,
and these men of Westminster must be remembered, that at this time they had not
declared the King an Enemy, but they fought against evil Councillors, and they
took up Arms for King, and Parliament, their party was not impudent enough then
to avow the Titles they have since taken up. They well know these Ambassadors
were sent to the King and though thye interceded with them, that called
themselves Parliament, it was in that manner as Ambassadors address
themselves to treat with the Ministers of Princes, to whom they are sent; And
these Ambassadors then found what was doubtful to many before, that the men
then in hostility under the name of Parliament had abused the world with a
pretense of necessity to take Arms for defense of Religion and laws, seeking
only power to themselves, and an alteration of Religion and law, and that they
had obstinately refused all the gracious offers of the King, and his desires of
peace, and these Ambassadors were bound in honor and fidelity to deal
uprightly in their negotiation, and to declare where the binderances of peace
lay; And if the actions of the then pretended Parliament were reproachful to
themselves, they cannot blame the Embassad ours for a faithful report of them,
and this was very far from making them liable by the practice of nations to
punishment, or reproof; and it stood not with the affairs of the then Rebels in
England to offer incivility to those Ambassadors, though they wanted not an
inclination to it; and those Ambassadors need not be careful to answer for
such an Action, wherein they had clear reason, and the warrant of their
superiors, to whom the complainers discovered the iniquity of their cause by
so unjust an exception.

They come now to the solemn Embassy they sent the States, which (they say) was
in a time when there was much less cause to apply to the States for any need
the Parliament had of their assistance, for that England was wholly in their
power, most of the Towns and Cities in Ireland, the affairs of Scotland not
unprosperous. But whoever took notice of the affairs then, knew very well they
had need of the forbearance of the United Provinces from engaging against them
which had they then acted, its probably they had prevented the progress of
their victories, and rendered them liable to their demerits; And what the men of
Westminster did in that Embassy was in order to their own affairs, not out of
any priciples of affection to the Protystant Interest or common good. They
endeavored to draw the United Provinces into their own guilt by the league
they propounded, so as these Provinces must have supported their usurpation,
and have drawn on them the infamy of Murdering the King and all the former
Actions, whereby that usurpation was effected. Though Princes and States for
the peace of their people sometimes enter into leagues for comerce, with such,
who by wicked attempts have obtained the power of States, yet neither Religion
nor civil Justice permit defense of unjust power; And when those Ambassadors
discerned that the United Provinces could not be drawn into a scandalous
league, then they deserted the prosecution; And these tenders, which their
Ambassadors were empowered to make, that would have demonstrated the affection
of these in England to the good People of the United Provinces the same as to
themselves, sufficiently demonstrate their affection to the people of these
Provinces to be only for themselves; And the Privileges they tendered to them
were to divide them from their own State to a dependence on a foreign
kindness, and was of the same stamp with this hypocritical profession to the
good people of these Provinces, these good people being in their sense such, as
would be seduced against their Country by their attempts, such being their
dealing with Scots pretending rather private enmity against some persons, then
Dominion over all, which was so apparently their Design, as it will be the
shame of any, that shall hereafter pretend ignorance of it. They say the
Embassy was rendered of no effect because the Ambassadors were unheartily, and
dilatorily dealt with. But the true reason was, that these Masters had
instructed their Ambassadors to make no agreement without the absolute
submission of these Provinces to them. If their Ambassadors were unsafe in
their persons, it was not by any neglect of the States of the United Provinces,
who placed a sufficient guard about them, and punished such as offered
indignities to them, and if their Ambassadors concealed it, they dealt
unfaithfully with their superiors, and unjustly with them they were sent to:
And when it appeared the States of the United Provinces would not partake in
the guilt of that blood, and usurpation with these Masters in England, the
Ambassadors were recalled home.

That the States General sent not an Embassy till after the defeat at
Worcester is true, and the willingness and affectection with which it was
received, does testify for the English part, they stood fixed to their former
Principles, which were to serve themselves of the power, and Interest of the
vinced Provinces; for to prepare for the Ambassadors entertainment, they had
made an Act as they call it, that no commodities should be brought into England
by any foreign vessels, but such as were of the growth of that Country, to
which such vessel belonged, which took away that traffic, and intercourse,
which was in all ages continued between the nations, and had no other scope
but to interrupt the trade of these Provinces: And as this Act test^fies what
principles they went in to destroy the trade, and navall strength of the United
Provinces, so they being the same they had in their former proceedings, and
sending their Embassy, they vainly pretend affection to Religion, Liberty, or
amity with this Country, while they express a malicious Design to enslave, or
destroy it from their first Treaty with them.

They find fault that in the Treaty the States Ambassadors evaded possitive
demands in things not of hardest resolution with allegations of want of power,
though their Commission showed no such restraint. The age of these men's rule in
England may be read in these frivolous objections. Though Ambassadors have an
absolut commission, are they not tied to instructions? And are there not
particular laws, and customs in States, that limit Ambassadors, and yet not
expressed in their Commission? But whence comes the Allegation of want of power
to be an evasion? And because the Provincial States must be assembled before
answers could be had, it gave small grounds of any real intendment of a firm
peace, and amity. It was a firm ground of aversion to peace in those of
England, that they were positive in such demands, as must enforce the meeting
of the Provincial States to give a resolution. Upon the coming of the
Ambassadors of the States General into England, its well known what license
was taken by mean people to abuse them: And to let them know what they must
trust to, a Treatise is composed, and published of the business of Amboina,
which had rested for so many years, and till then unmentioned by those
affectionate seekers of amity with the United Provinces. Herein they provoke
the people to assume an hatred of these Provinces, and to seek revenge for an
Act so long passed. If they had intended amity, or thought a strict Alliance
with these Provinces necessary, why would they renew the memory of old
differences, or fix an aversion in the people to those, with whom they treated
for peace? This might have bin a proper work after a treaty broken, but to make
such a narration the Prologue to a Treaty, is a sure ground, that no peace was
intended, but such, as force and terror could extort; And that such
propsitions must be granted to obtein it as a conquered people only must submit
to, and they must needs give way to the exercise of the peoples license, and
hatred that used the means to work it in them. And this design of the Rulers
being known it was soon prosecuted, their ordinary Agents, the Preachers and
composers of Gazetts, and Almanacks published it to the world, and from thence
came these predictions of their South sayers of the destruction of Holland; And
these discuourses of their Politiques of subjecting such powers, as might be
prejudicial to the new Babell they had raised in England, and therefore the
United Provinces being able to do them harm, they must have these Countries in
such a Chain, as may draw them that way only where those new Rulers shall
move, and like forms of Govenment are no more to them then the brotherhood of
Scotland. It cannot be presumed, that the servants speak other than their
Masters sense; And if it had bin contrary, it would have appeared in their
restraint, or punishment; And these Rulers vainly offer an exception of
dilatoriness on the part of the United Provinces when there were so many of
their ships continually taken, and made prize during the Teraty, and the danger
of those Provinces must be increased by delay, the seasons of their Trade, and
return of their ships being known, and unsafe while the Treaty was unconluded.

And its will known the preparation of Shipe in England proceeded those of
Holland; And though they speak of preparations upon the notice the Ambassadors
of the States General gave them of setting out a hundred, and fifty sail of
ships besides the men of war abroad* all men know the preparations in England,
and affronts received necessarily occasioned that care in the States General.
But those of England were offended that the States General should defend their
Merchants, which they meant to make prize of; And besides the exercise of
reprisals on the ships of the United Provinces, the grounds, on which their
Commissions of Reprisall were granted, showed it no other then an open
hostility, as that, which was to repair one, that was intercepted by the States
ships carrying supplies out of England into Flanders before the peace between
those Countries, and the King of Spain, and others of less color. It is
easily believed, they altered not their resolutions upon notice of the States
prepations; But that they made Justice, honor, and mutual good the Rule to
steer their Actions by, is incredible to any that knew their former, or
present Actions: For is it Justice to grant, letters of Reprisall upon a
particular case, unless Justice be first demanded for the fact and denied? And
can it stand with honor, Justice, and mutual good to require unequal
conditions, and an absolute submission for peace? And the happy close of the
Treaty, which these: Rulers were willing to come to, appears no other but to
have the United Provinces under their command: For the Accidents touching
Captain Young, and Admiral Tromp by the narrative, which the Usurpers of
England, have published, the world will judge, that they sought an occasion
against the United Provinces, and to renounce all amity with them; And their
aggravation adds not weight of Argument for what they offer, for if the midst
of a Treaty be considerable, why did those men of peace continue Reprisalls in
the midst of the same Treaty? But it is ridiculous to affirm, that the Dutch
Admiral sought out their Ships in their own seas, when the trade way of those
seas is such, as a meeting of ships is not easily avoided; Besides the
peaceable demeanor of the Admiral Tromp, till he received the shots from
Blake. But this is their accustomed language, their Declarations against the
King being fraught with such stuff of making a bloody war upon the Parliament
rejecting their humble desires, and of dangerous plots against the City of
London, and Kingdom. But the truth of this fact is fully known, and the vanity
of these declarers aggravation. And it bears full proof in it self, that the
Fleet under the command of Tromp came not purposely into the Road of England
unto their Fleet, and by all the attestations produced, he showed no
inclination to hostillity; And those men that make al clear on their part, like
not a way of equal examination because long and intricate, but would kave a
submission to their own allegations, and a satisfaction for the wroags they
pretended; And they believe, that men understand not, that they could make
their demands for satisfaction such, as would take up longer debate, then that
examination, and in the mean time proceed with all hostillity, which they would
not forbear till that demand were satisfied; And when could the States
Ambassadors assure themselves that they would determine their demands?

The reason they give for their Counsel is that time being gained an addition
of strength might therewith be provided by the Dutch and from hence the resolved
hostility of the Rulers is evident, and that they had provided to take the
Dutch unprepared, and were offended that they had a fl^et. It cannot be
conceived that these Engl. Masters having propounded to have satisfaction for
wrongs upon their own Allegations only without respect to what was offered to
the contrary, that they would treat with such moderation, as such, as treated
with them should Judge reasonable, but would be sole Judges of the
satisfaction, as they made themselves of the cause, for which they demanded it;
and if they would not hear all proofs in the one case, they were not likely
to admit any reason in the other; And they might very well offer a cessation of
hostility upon their own terms. They projected their satisfaction for their
preparations because the Dutch had prepared a fleet, and yet never excepted to
it when notice was given them, and they enlarge this satisfaction to losses of
all kind, in the damage of the ships, loss of men, and the poverty of
persons thereby, and under those heads who could conjecture the quantity of the
satisfaction, they would think a fit proportion, and in the mean time no
cessation, and all Accidents succeeding must be cast into the account, which
might be prolonged at the pleasure of those, that got by the delay; And yet
those confident men think it strange, that the Lord Ambassador Paw did not
pursue his desire of cessation, when by their answer they showed their
resolution to keep it in their own power to set the time to it, and was no more
then if they had answered, it should be at their pleasure, and yet they are not
ashamed to say, it was in his own power to accomplish it. Can any man think it
was in his power to accomplish what they would demand? And is it not a
desperate compliance for any State to continue treating, while hostillity is
avowe^, and terms only propounded of absolute submission to avoid it? Thus the
Ambassadors were forced to depart to preserve the honor, and safety of
themselves, and their Country. It seems those Declarers think they merited by
giving respect and accommodation to the Ambassadors: And considering their
other actions, and disposition, worse might have been expected, but they found
it not for their present advantage, nor does the mention of their yiedling to
respect and accommodation tend to their honor, as if it were questionable
whither they should have performed it, and during their abode they neither
expected, nor found better usage then the Ministers of these Rulers found from
the States of the United Provinces; and they had not merited that aversion of
the people, which was univesally expressed to the Ministers of those Rulers.

The Narrative by them published, they hold a sufficient justification of Acts
of hostillity, and deteining ships brought into their Ports without any
precedent Declaration, or notice to the Ambassadors then in Treaty. The
Narrative is of one side only giving no answer to contrary attestations; and
though it be evident to all reasonable men, that the fact was accident all and
undesignet by Tromp, yet this Narrative is all the reason they will give for a
present hostility, neither could any prosecution be looked for before the case
were fully examined, where friendship was so confidenly professed. Neither had
their forbearance been laying down of themselves at the feet of any. But the
speedy feirce pursuit shows not a sudden passion, but a long premeditated
Counsel for the oppression of the United Provinces, and destroying their
trade, and strength by sea, and yet so shameless are they to call this
proceeding their own defense, and if they had done contrary, it had been
against the trust reposed in them, few men think the Actions of these
Declarers agreeable to any rules, whereby nations or single persons are
governed, and breach of trust is of no regard with them, for there was not any
trust reposed in them by King, or people, but what they have most perfidiously
broken; that trust, which was reposed in them as subjects, whereto they were
bound by Religion, Law, and nature, they have falsified to their King and
Country. They were called by the Kings writ, and by law incapable of any place
in Parliament, till they had taken the oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy. They
were trusted to petition the King, and offer their Council, they destroy the
King insteede of petitioning, make laws, and change the Government in despite
of the trust they pretend to regard. If we examine their Doctrines, they
maintai^^^ themselves not bound to oaths longer then they think fit. If we look
upon their proceedings, they have acted accordingly, breaking all oaths, and
promises, the trust, whereon depends humane society, asserting falsehood and
abjuring truths. There are numerous Testimonies of all these in the
Declarations and Treaties with the King, that they would make him a glorious
King; that it never entered into their thought to depose him; that if they
should charge the King with any evil Action, it were contrary to the law, and
the Testimony of their own Conscience; That providing for the prosperity of
his Majesty who protest in the presence of all seeing Deity to be the end of
all our Counsels; That they have nothing in their thoughts more precious next
to the honor and immediate service of God, then their just and faithful
performance of their duty to his Majesty. This being compared with their
actions who can repose trust in them; Besides, they are not trusted by the
Kingdom, and those few of them that were depuzed by particular places were not
trusted to rule, but they now tiranize, and trample on such, as at first
trusted them; and comparing their Actions toward the united Provinces, and
their words we may Judge they are not changed in their principles, for they say
by those proceedings it will be more then evident with what affection, and
constancy the Parliament have labored for the friend sh of he United
Provinces, how carefully they avoided all differences, and occasions of a war
between the nations, though all such overtures of amity, and nearest alliance
having been rejected. In the beginning of the wicked Rebellion in England, not
only the common people at home, but strangers were much mistaken of the
condition and intention of those, that made themselves a party against the
King, ma^y persuading themselves, that the prevalent party in Parliament had
the same sincerity in their purposes, which they professed in their speeches,
and papers. But such, as were then deceived, see the discovery of their e^rour,
and that those pretenses of Religion, Law, and Loyalty were only snares,
whereby they were seduced to their own ruin: And though the first loss
lighted on the King, and his Loyal subjects, the whole Kingdom has selt the
scourge of that credulity: And while some were misled, and others rested
secure, as unconcerned, not foreseeing the consequents of popular contests with
Sovereignty, the whole are brought under the Tyrannical power of a few
contemptible persons: And such, as with dry eyes beheld the sufferings of the
King and his party, find the same fince at their own doors: And such, as
acted under the name of Parliament against the King are now oppressed under the
same pretense, which themselves used, they persuading men they were the
Parliament, though the King and the greatest part of the Lords, and a great
number of the Commons were forced away, and the remaining party overawed by the
City Tumults and Army, now groan under this new power, that call themselves a
Parliament, though the King be murdered, the Lords house shut up, the greatest
part of the Commons imprisoned, and expelled. And only a few persons sit, as a
Lower House without any color of Law. The neglect of opposition to growing
evils is often too late repented, and such, as doubted not what has happened in
England, may now see, that wickedness puts no bounds to it self. It must be
resistance, from without, not the inward inclination that must restrain it;
And where men have success, and an opinion of strength, they rest not at a
stay especially new gained powers, and the Example of th^se persons is no less
dangerous, then their power. Princes and States are cheifely concerned in
suppressing such pernicious Monsters, whose opinions and Designs are the
subversion of Rulers, and draw with them the misery of the people, who must
fall into confusion and slavery. If their design take upon the United
Provinces, it may be easily conjectured what their attempts will be next. And
affection to an oppressed King, and Ally, amity to the English nation, security
to Religion and commerce, call for a conjunction of the hearts and hands of all
Christian Kings and States against those common Enemies of mankind.

FINIS.

