AN ANSWER TO Two Danish Papers: The One called Jus Feciale armatae Daniae; To
other, A Manifest.

Faithfully Translated out of the Latin Original, which was published By the
King of Swedens Command.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Pakeman, and are to be sold at the Rain-how in
Fleet Street, 1658.

AN ANSWER TO TWO Danish Papers: The One called, Ius Feciale armatae Daniae;
The Other, A Manifest.
THe Danes have not thought it sufficient to provoke the most Serene and
Puissant Prince, Charles Gustaf, King of the Swedes, Goths, and Vandals,
assaulting him and his Kingdom of Sweden by the Sword; but they have proceeded
more fiercely with the Pen and the Tongue, the usual weapons of unmanly
spirits. Two venomous Papers of theirs are come abroad, which, if the sacred
persons of Kings were not concerned in them, might justly pass for defamatory
invectives and notorious Libells. One whereof appears under the name of Ius
Feciale armatae Daniae, (or, the legal proceeding of Denmark in taking arms,
and proclaming war, etc.) the other of A Manifest. But before those men that
will judge impartially without the biass of affection or hatred, they can no
otherwise justify the titles they bear, than that the first should be so
called by way of contrariety, as the Ancients were thought to term war Bellum,
quasi minime bellum; the later, from the effect, because indeed it both
evidently manifest the Danish injustice. The very form of that writing bewrayes
a palpable injury in setting forth the grounds of this war, while it turns
those things into captious sophistry, and malicious accusation, which were done
heretofore in the reign of another Prince, which for the greatest part of them,
are cancelled by Acts of Oblivion; which belong to other nations, and have no
relation to the Kingdom of Denmark; which are too inconsiderable to be
prosecuted by a war; lastly, which might easily be reconciled by a composition,
both offered, and actually treated upon.

There is therefore little reason to fear, that those Pamphlets should gain any
credit and favorable opinion amongst judicious and equitable persons; and as
little need of a studied and tedious confutation. Only lest the Danes should
flatter themselves, and take our silence for a confession of guilt, or lest any
doubt should remain in the hearts of those that are not conversant in the
affairs of the world: for clearing up the truth of such things as are
injuriously questioned, it will be sufficient to make a bare Narrative out of
public Acts and Records.

It is fresh in the memory of all the world, in what posture the Danish affairs
stood 1644. and the year following. When by justice, and the prosperous success
of Arms, the most Serene Queen and Kingdom of Sweden had possession of the
principal places in Denmark, and were propitiously invited by the conduct of
War and good fortune to conquer more; yet they hearkened rather to Peace, than
to the allurements of Victory. For out of a desire to settle tranquillity in
the Northern Kingdoms, a few places only being retained, but the most part of
their Territories and strong Towns restored, the Swedes not improving the
opportunity of bringing the Danes into a more strait bond of conformity, while
the chance of War turned always to their loss, did notwithstanding their own
victorious progresses, the very next year conclude a Pacification at Bremsbro
upon equal terms, and made the Articles of the Agreement much easier for them
than the state of affairs deserved, or the occasion required: That thereby the
World might be satisfied, how much they desired a firm alliance, and the Danes
bound to observe the same more inviolably for the time to come, upon the
account of an extraordinary obligation. But this confidence deceived us;
forasmuch as after the Covenants were mutually signed, within few weeks space
the Counsel of Denmark, seeing their strong Holds surrendered into their hands
upon the Treaty, began to consider and east about how they might repair their
forces, and raise a new War against Sweden. It is known from very good hands,
that the late King was hatching upon those thoughts unto his last breath; and
that he that reigns at present endeavored to revive the same resolutions,
setting up a Title from his pretended claim upon the Archbishopric of Bremen
and Bishopric of Verden, keeping together some forces a good while (though
against the will of the States) to effect his intent by violence, So that
nothing stood then in the way to stop such a proceeding, but the more prevalent
love of peace, the fidelity and prudence of the States of Denmark, and of some
of the Counselors at Court. The most important settlement of controversies
between the two Kingdoms concerning the freedom and immunity of Swedish Ships
and Merchandise in the Sound, being more expressly concluded in the
forementioned peace, while they were yet ashamed to break out into open
violation, was notwithstanding so baffled and circumvented, that under borrowed
colors and pretenses the Swedish Navigation, Merchants, and Seamen were
brought under sundry troubles and injurious sufferings. Which that they might
carry the fairer show, and they provide themselves with aid and support to
carry on their designs, it was conceived to be for the Danish Interest, to sow
all seeds, and take all occasions to blow the coal of differences betwixt the
Crown of Sweden and its Allies, the most Mighty Lords the States of the United
Netherlands: Nor was any thing omitted, that might contribute thereunto.
Therefore the first year after the Peace concluded, King Christian the fourth
began, and Frederick the third continued to negotiate a Contract with the said
Lords States about farming the Customs in the Sound; as also for making a
League offensive and defensive, particularly against the Swedes. But though by
reason of the ancient Confederacy, and the great advantages they lately
received thereby, he fell short of his intention as to the point of offense; yet
he prevailed so far, as the customs being once agreed for, several insolences
contrary to Covenants and ordinary proceedings, and those very burdens, from
which these modern treaties had recovered the ancient imunity, being again
practiced on the Swedes upon the account of a defensive league made, gave the
Danes encouragement to pursue their designs. We shall hereafter set down both
the ill consequences of this Negotiation, and the Acts relating thereunto. But
at last things came to that pass, that when the King of Denmark had drawn upon
himself a great share of the dangers growing out of the late war between the
most Serene Commonwealth of England and the States of Holland, by Ambassadors
sent to the most Serene Queen in the year 1653. actions were excused, a
levelling of accounts was offered, and satisfaction promised for all wrongs
that should be made to appear. For their consciences made them fear, that the
Swedes might as well have he will and resentment, as they had given the cause
and occasion, to revenge the infringing of Covenants. And when it was made
evident, how much injury had been done, and how fair and just an opportunity
there was to assert and vindicate the observation of agreements by other ways,
yet the love of peace and amity prevailed in Sweden, even to the laying aside
both the prosecution of their right, and the use of their power. In this
condition things remained till the time that the Queen resigned the Crown of
the Kingdom of Sweden; nor did the Danes pretend any thing to the contrary.

Ever since his sacred Majesty took the government upon him, he has been
desirous not only to preserve and maintain all compacts and peaceable
intelligence between he Northern Kingdoms, free from any manner of injustice
and innovation; but particularly to cement and assure all mutual offices of
consanguinity, friendship, and neighborhood with the King of Denmark. When in
the beginning of his reign in evitable necessity forced him to take arms for
the defense of his kingdoms right, liberty, and security, against the close and
treacherous designs of the Polanders, discovering amongst the rest the dangers
like to ensue upon the Baltic sea by their intention to introduce a foreign
Fleet; he opened these things to the King of Denmark out of the singular
confidence and integrity of a kinsman and neighbor, both signifying his
intention and the causes of war against the Polanders, as also offering by word
and writing of his Resident in that Court such things as he conceived might
conduce to prevent the prejudice of both Kingdoms, especially a hearty
conjunction of minds and counsels. No. 1.
Moreover when his Majesty was preparing to depart out of his Kingdom in order
to the war in Poland, the King of Denmark making remonstrance of some things by
his public Minister, about showing Certificates in the Sound, as disagreeable
to Covenants, and therefore desiring redress; all kind of satisfaction was
granted to him freely and without delay. Then besides a Proclamation published,
whereby his Majesty's Subjects sailing through the said Sound were forbidden
under great penalties to do any thing contrary to agreements, he likewise
commanded his Resident in the Danish Court, that upon conference with the
Ministers of State there he should examine whether any offense were committed;
and what appeared, should be rectified by re-inforcing a strict observance upon
the inhabitants of his Swedish Dominions; but what required further search and
disquisition, should be referred to his Majesty's cognizance, to remedy
whatsoever should be found amiss: With the later part of this determination
the King of Denmark was content; and for the former, he took it kindly, as a
testimony of faithful and friendly neighborhood, disapproving nothing of his
Majesty's intentions, wishing happy success to the war he undertook, and
largely profering all good offices worthy of a friend and neighbor, as appears
in his answer dated at Copenhagen, June the 21. 1655. No. 2.


Hereupon there followed a confident and free communication between the
Ministers of both Kings touching those things that were for the interest and
advantage of both Kingdoms. And when that which the Swedish Agent demonstrated
to be more conducible, was readily embraced by the Danes, judging it necessary
to enter into a mutual league for the defense of the Baltic sea, that
Declaration was no sooner made, but the Swedes on their part immediately
contributed their best endeavors thereunto; the Resident Magnus Durer or one
side, and the Commissioners on the other, treating a confederation of minds and
assistances to the end aforesaid. Which things, as it was agreed, were to be
wrought and prepared by these men, but afterward to be accomplished (according
to the method and tenor of Covenants) upon the borders of both Kingdoms by
other persons deputed and chosen out of the principal Senators of the
Kingdom. Amongst these mutual exchanges of good will and affection (as it
seemed to be) nothing was further urged or spoken of grievances, or of those
things, which how-ever they are too old to be remembered, are now taken up for a
fresh pretense. The matter in question, after the express forms thereof had
been drawn up, and several times debated by the Commissioners on both sides,
was brought to that period, that in the beginning of the year 1656. the League
was looked upon as a thing resolved and concluded, because nothing remained
that could check or hinder it. But then the Danes began first of all to desire,
that the States of the United Netherlands might be comprehended in the Treaty;
nor did the other side refuse it: only the manner of including them was
disputed, whether it should be done in general terms, as was usual in such
agreements, or under some special condition to be entered into by them. Hence
the Danes laid hold of an occasion to demurre, making asemblance indeed of a
desire to dispatch speedily, but purposing to retard the Swedish Residents
earnest solicitation; to which end it was intimated by the Rix-hofemaster (or
Lord high Steward) and the Chancellor of Denmark, that their King was resolved
to prosecute and finish that negotiation by his own Resident whom he intended
to send to the Swedish Court. hereof as there appeared no certain or pressing
reason, so the delay rendered it suspicious; and the more, because the Danish
Resident coming to the King in Prussia, mentioned nothing at all of it; and
afterward being demanded by Commissioners in the Kings name, whether he had
any thing to say upon that subject, he pretended a want of power may almost an
ignorance of what had past, and that he would make report of those things to
his King. In the mean time it was understood by proofs of unquestionable credit
that all this was carried on by dissimulation only, but that other things were
secretly under contrivance to the hatred, prejudice, and surprise of the King
and Kingdom of Sweden. Sinister reflections upon the Treaty were scattered
abroad both to his Highness the Lord Protector of England, and to the Lords
States of the United Netherlands, as if it tended to the destruction of trade:
and suggestions were instilled into them, as if something was intended by these
agreements that would be prejudicial to their respective States and Dominions.
In Muscovia they went yet further, and spurred on that hostile invasion of
Liefland which they had procured, and framed a pernicious association against
the Kingdom of Sweden. In Poland they held forth the hopes of favor and
assistance against his sacred Majesty; and more violently inflamed the
refractory dispositions of the Dantzackers. In Austria there was juggling to
plot those things which are now brought to light by open and declared effect.
By all which it appears, that all the designs and thoughts of the Danes were
at a great distance from the true intent of the Treaties. Yet was it impossible
so to conceal them, but that some glimpses thereof appeared through the
crannies of their hearts. The first stroke (as I may say) was against our
proceedings before Dantzick, which were justifiable by the Law of War; at which
time the Danish Counsel, under a pretense to procure freedom of Trade with
that City (which yet was never interrupted, but had been fully restored by the
agreements concluded with the Holland Ambassadors) sent letters of the 15. of
July, 1656. to the Counsel of the Kingdom of Sweden, full of unkindnesse and
threats, and smelling rank of a war suddenly intended; as that kind of style is
usually the forerunner of blows. Nor had they held their hands at that time,
if it had not been for the bad success in Liefland, after the Muscovites were
disappointed of their hopes in the siege of Riga, and for the misfortunes of
the Polanders after the victory obtained against them at Warsovia; as also for
the agreements concluded with the States of Holland, and the commerce of
Dantzick included therein. These cross accidents made them think this
conjuncture unseasonable, and took away the pretense whereupon they were
necessitated to expect a more favorable opportunity, and go on by Treaties
lying in wait for fitter times and occasions; and yet not absolutely forbearing
those machinations, which they imagined would be to the prejudice of the King
and Kingdoms of Sweden, but did not perceive that they were as much to their
own. Amongst other things, he not only suffered and assisted the Holland Fleet
to pass through his Sound, and to usurp some Royalties belonging to the
Dominion of the Sea, contrary to the liberty of the Baltic, hitherto preserved
entire by the valor and endeavors of our Ancestors, nay contrary to Covenants
confirmed by oaths; but he also brought his own Ships to Dantzick, with aid and
succor to that obstinate City, contrary to friendship and to the Law of
Nations. The most Serene Elector of Brandenburg, fearing the issue of such
proceedings, and out of the love he bore to the common tranquillity, took a
wise course by way of prevention, and making the King of Denmark sensible of
the dangers and disadvantages that would accrue to the present state of Europe,
and specially of the Protestant Religion by such strange counsels, adding also
an exhortation to a straiter Union and Concord, he prevailed so far with him
(as appears by the answer given to his Highness Ambassador at Copenhaguen Sept.
6, 1656.) that he consented to the finishing of the Treaty, which he had both
intermitted and prolonged. No. 3.
After his Electorall Highness had acquainted his Majesty herewithall, he
suffered nothing to be wanting on his part that might conduce thereunto, but
expressed his consent for a continuation by his Royal resolution given at
Frawenburg the 26. of October, and offered such things as might suit best with
a quick and easy dispatch. No. 4.
But that which followed on the Danish part gave clear evidence, that they had
nothing less then a serious intent to bring matters to a happy composition.

Presently after the Treaty was renewed, the Commission which his Majesty had
sent to his Commissioner from Frawenburge the 7, of October in the same year
No. 5.
was called in question, nay dishonored by a reproof, though it were
sufficient both to reassume and finish the negotiation; neither could any
thing be pretended to the contrary, beside the change of the times and the
state of affairs, and because nothing was expressed touching grievances. But
although that needed not to have been granted, by reason of the mention thereof
in general, and that there was no such clause as might cause an alteration in
re-assuming the business; nay whatsoever might make to the clearing of
grievances, was couched therein, if a right understanding had been applied, so
that there was no need of any more formality: Moreover though it might be
justly answered, that nothing was ever spoken upon those points either in the
time of the preceding Treaty, or in the answer to the Electors Ambassador,
neither had it any relation to the making of the League, but was exactly
conformable to that very declaration of his which the foresaid Ambassador had
received: yet such was the sincerity and constancy of his Majesty's purpose,
that he gave way to their desires, and sent a Commission in such a manner as
the Danes themselves would have it. No. 6.
His Majesty was further pleased to remove all obstructions, and besides his
general command particularly enjoined his Resident to offer the King of
Denmark (if he desired it to make their friendship more firm and solid) an
Oblivion of such things as had any way swerved from the rules of amity and
their agreements ever since the time of the late peace until that present: as
also for the redress of grievances that might be objected on either side, he
proposed a free discussion agreeable to the Articles in such cases by
Commissioners of both Kingdoms upon the borders, or in a third place, with
power to decree such reparation as might not entrench either upon former
agreements or his Majesty's honor.

He was also willing to admit, that if any jealous disposition was not content
with this declaration, he would be bound to an absolute performance in clear
and express terms of the Covenants: Than which nothing could be studied more
sweet, more obliging, or more suitable to peace and the intended confederation.
Hereupon the Articles of Union were again brought to the anvile by Both
parties. The Swedish Resident trod in his former steps, and advanced his old
proposals, as conducing to the main intent, and hitherto allowed on all hands.
But all this labor on the Swedish part, full of sincerity, and friendship,
became fruitless: for when the point of confederation heretofore begun ought
to have been reassumed, the Danes changed the whole order, matter, and form of
Treating, and laying aside the endeavor of concluding a League, clogged all
passages with the objection of grievances, aiming rather at exasperating than
uniting of hearts. Neither were the grievances produced all at once, but to
foreslow and cripple the Treaty, they were drawn out piecemeal, one by one.
No. 7.
And it was premised in general, as it were to observe the due form of
Treaties, That an alteration should be made in the peace concluded at Bremsbro,
That reparation should be given for damages in the Customs of the Sound that
the Swedish Subjects had occasioned, That Security should be expressed upon the
Treaty. Which things as they were brought into dispute without faith and
reason, against law, against order, against the intent, against the rules of
friendship, and against covenants: so ought they not to be admitted into
Treaties designed for another purpose. But although this was visible enough to
the Swedish Resident, yet could he obtain no mitigation: and so that he might
not seem to distrust the justice of his cause, he complied with their will, and
answered to the grievances with the hope of fairer proceeding afterward. But
besides several remonstrances as well against their demands impertinent and
improper to the scope of the business, as also against the injustice of their
accusations, he showed at large, how there was nothing either of right or truth
in the things upon which they bestowed those attributes, and how on the
contrary much more and greater wrongs had been done to the Kingdom and
inhabitants of Sweden, whereof they might more justly and truly complain, and
require satisfaction. No. 8.
And when at last with much difficulty (even at the request of the Mediator) he
had obtained a discovery of all the remaining grievances, No. 9.
and replied such things to them as were convenient, No. 10.
he forbore not still to press, that they should be referred to an examination
appointed and prescribed by agreement of both Kingdoms, where they would
receive a certain and final determination, and be observed in the mean time by
clear indisputable Covenants; the negotiation of the League being not to be
interrupted for doubtful pretenses, that would require a longer and deeper
inquisition. But the Danes having no patience to bearken to those proposals,
even before a just proof of any grievance was made, totally laid aside the
treaty of the League, obstinately desiring that the peace made at Bremsbro
(which ought to be the foundation and rule of this) should be changed, and so
prosecuted nothing else but their demands of satisfaction and security. Under
these shadows they endeavored to cover (but so as it appeared sufficiently)
their desire to have those Lands restored, which when they could not be taken
from us, were in the last peace left irrevocably by their Kings own word and
authority, by way of recompense for our laying down arms, and for a far
larger tract of ground delivered to them. And although it were demonstratively
proved, that such things were desired without right and reason, to wit,
satisfaction without either debt or damage; Security otherwise then by
Covenant, and as it uses to be betwixt Princes in amity; nay, without any
color of danger, presupposing that all this was built upon suggestions not yet
proved, nor contributing any thing to peace and friendship; that what had been
yielded up for the peace sake, could not be brought in question without the
breach thereof; that such things were incongruous both to custom and the
reputation of Kings; that to have their Covenants (the very bond and strength
of concord) altered, could not be for the interest of both Kingdoms, nay was
utterly against the obligation of friendship and neighborhood, and in that
regard opposite to the very intent of Treaties: yet for all this he prevailed
nothing. Considering therefore the designs and practices of the Danes in the
mean time out of the obdurateness of their hearts, what counsels, decrees and
preparations for war were made in their public assemblies at home, what
conspiracies and malicious Leagues were entered into abroad with the declared
enemies and the uncertain friends of Sweden, the raising and embodying of great
forces being hastened every where, exactions and burdens being increased upon
the Lord Frederick Duke of Holstein and his Territories, out of hatred to his
Majesty of Sweden whose Father-in-law he is; considering all this it was
evident enough which way they were bent, and what they were resolved upon. Yet
the Resident thought fit to try them once more, offering a memorial the 8. of
April, to show the impossibility of their desires, and to obtain a Categoricall
answer to better purpose: but No. 11.
he was frustrated again, and they were still in the same tune. No. 12.
When therefore their stubborn resolution for war against all that was
equitable and fair had rendered fruitless both the Swedish Residents moderate
instances and remonstrances, and the diligent good offices and mediation used
by the Elector of Brandenburgs Ambassador to preserve peace, and that their
spirits were rather blown up higher by this modesty, as if it had proceeded
from fear, seeing there was no hope of better things, nor that they could by
this way be induced to the thoughts of peace, much less of a League; the
Resident, not to spend more labor in vain, found it necessary to intimate his
departure, and to reserve the business in hand for some other fitter time and
place, Which purpose of his, with a re-iterated demonstration of his readiness
to continue the Treaties, and the Danes tergiversation and drawing the contrary
way, he declared to them in a writing presented the 2. of May that instant
year. No. 13.
Neither did he break off the Treaty, as they lay to his charge, the
continuation whereof he urged with all earnestness, and at that time offered
it; which motion of his was so far from being embraced by them, that they
quickly dismissed him, as a person whose room they rather desired then his
company. Neither would he have left off, notwithstanding all the neglects he
had already received from the Danes, because he was employed to conclude a
League; but another was offered, as the method of the Commission for grievances
seemed to require; who was rejected as soon as offered.

For although they would not suffer him to effect his intentions, yet was he
not unmindfull that such differences might be composed by another way, set down
in the Covenants between the Kingdoms, to wit, that matters in controversy
should be discussed and determined in a Treaty renewed by Commissioners on both
sides appointed to that end upon the confines of the Kingdoms after the
ancient manner. The King and Counsel of Denmark would not willingly seem to
refuse that offer; but the Resident was hardly gone out of their Territories,
when three very considerable Swedish Ships richly laden, passing the Sound upon
confidence of Agreements, and guilty of no offense, were yet arrested there,
seized upon as prize, and the Swedish Subjects used like Enemies. In other
places they began to stir-up and encourage his Majesty's subjects to rebellion.
And by these steps there followed a proclaimed War.

Now by what has been said let the World judge freely, which side has been
more studious and more sincerely desirous of peace between the Kings and
Kingdoms of the North; and with what brow of confidence the Danish Papers can
boast of their observance of peace, amidst so many things in relation to it
done by them coldly, unconstantly, and clean otherwise then was intended, as
also many things fairly and kindly offered, and as scornfully rejected by them.
But this will be better discovered by him, that shall weigh those causes of
breaking the same, which they set forth.

The Danish pretenses took both beginning and end from their fear of the
Swedish Arms: though besides the consciousness of their desert, there appears
no cause at that time that could move an innocent heart, and a constant mind;
and if there had been any, yet it might have been removed by that observation
of good neighborhood and friendship which was offered during the Treaty of the
League, and should have been confirmed by the intended Covenants. Those
arguments whereby they would justify this fear, are very weak, and destitute
of truth. How little thereof is there in that which is first laid down, That it
is the Custom of Sweden to begin Wars without warning. In the Record of times
there are not a few examples extant of War proclaimed, even against the Danes.
If ever it was omitted, there was reason for it, since neither the Law of
Nations requires it always as necessary, nor is there any need of it, either
when wrongs are done which nothing but taking of arms can right, or that blow
is ready to be given which must be prevented by a quick providence. The
Aggressor denounces the War; and he is beforehand in sending the Defiance, who
makes the necessity of repelling the Adversary, and defending our selves. As it
happened in the last War with Denmark, although even then proclaming was not
altogether forborne. It is for want of experience, that they call this a
Barbarous and Turkish Proceeding: It might with more reason be called Danish,
when lately the King of Denmark before any solemn found of Trumpet used
violence and hostility upon the Swedish Ships and Subjects. Then they say, That
they ought to fear now what has been done heretofore. But how can they fear,
unless they have done those things now, which deserved the justice of revenge
heretofore? whereof truly they make themselves both conscious and guilty by
this very objection. That panick fear of their Subjects which is mentioned,
showed not its effect before the King of Denmark had openly taken arms: so that
it proceeded from his actions, nor from any of the Swedes. After his injuries
and affronts put upon a warlike Nation, no man could expect so long a
forbearance and impunity; but ever one might wonder, with what patience,
gentleness and courtesy that Nation labored (though in vain) for peace and
friendship. They allege something of a debate and persuasion to take arms
against the Danes but without proof. If any such thing were, it became
harmless, and ended without effect: The event makes it clear, that the Counsel
inclined not to that opinion; who if they had had as good a will, as they
wanted neither cause nor power, certainly it had been both nearer and easier
for them to fall upon he Danes, then upon the Polanders. Whoever shall observe
in what manner they have prejudiced and abused the Kingdom and its
inhabitants, will believe we had cause enough to prosecute our defense by the
Sword. And it may be the Chancellors words reflected upon that, if ever they
were spoken: But since nothing bath been hitherto attempted by force and arms,
they claim another interpretation, and furnish a stronger argument of a purpose
to maintain Peace and Covenants, then to strike fear into any one. Which
neither may be sufficiently grounded upon the words of I know not whom,
implying an intent to make up the losses of the Polish War upon Denmark. Such
language might happily fall either from freedom of private discourse, or from
the observation of what the Danes were contriving, or from the conjecture of
that necessary defense which would follow thereupon. But how does it advantage
this case, to charge the Covenants of Bremsbro with injustice? An absurd
accusation, and void of all appearance of right, when the Danes at that time
deserved far worse for the injuries they had done, and the damages they had
caused; when it was just to impose such terms by the Law of Victory; when of
those places that were gotten by the right of the Sword, a few only retained,
more were restored; when the agreements were solemnly ratified; when ten years
silence had confirmed, and consecrated then amongst the Monuments of
Friendship; when the Danes owe their safety and quietness to nothing else ever
since. Nay, it is well known, and will be made good out of the Danish Record,
that the Commissioners whom the King of Denmark on his part appointed for that
Treaty, had power to yield up many more Territories, namely Schoneland, and
other places; so that it is manifest he was willing to part from more then he
did to buy a Peace. And it would become the Danes better to render thanks and
praise for Swedens moderation in so great good fortune, then to complain of
quitting less then they would have been content to do. Hence they had no ground
of fear, if they had persisted in that faith, with which they were willing to
be bound. While they themselves are guilty of the breach, they endeavor to
arreign Sweden for it, not only without any proof at all, but without
probability to pitch upon any particular action. But they are convict thereof by
the confession they make of those wounds of past hostility not yet cured and
confirmed, the memory and smartness whereof they promised to bury and
extinguish in a firm peace (but with what integrity, the world now sees) when
their present actions declare, they only laid it up in a sullen mind, and
always intended a revenge. The example of the Popish War is vainly alleged to
strike a terror upon the Danes, unless they will acknowledge themselves like
them, partners of their enmity and guilty. The just and necessary causes of
that Engagement are elsewhere set forth and proved already. It is a weak and
senseless objection, that the King of Denmark labors now to disapprove that,
which he openly approved before by wishing good success, and hinting some other
particulars: certainly when he was acquainted wih the motives thereunto in a
friendly way, he showed not so much as a gesture that imported a dislike. As
long as the arms of Sweden were employed there Denmark had reason to think it
self the more secure nor ought there to be any fear when that should be brought
to an end, because their security (as a mutual benefit of friends) would stand
more steadfast then, upon the League and Covenants of amity. But besides what is
discovered by the compunction of their own ulcerated consciences, all other
things that are forcibly drawn into arguments of fear, are vain and groundless.
He that looks more narrowly, will find that it is mere envy against the
acquisitions and enlargements gotten by the prosperous Arms of the Kingdom, and
against the glory of the Naiton, that makes up the Alpha and Omega of their
quarrel, while they reflect but little upon that piety which should teach them
to judge aright, and attribute the successful issues of War to the hand of
God, as one that gives sentence from above, the Lord of hosts.

But although indeed there were some cause of fearing, upon what account can
War be derived from thence? Fear gives us no right, but to prepare by way of
caution; or if violence be offered, by way of defense. The License which the
new Danish Law of arms maintains, of breaking in upon another man's possession,
of tying their horses (as they say) to their neighbors hedges, is as
improperly applied, where there was no enemy to resist, and where all was
peaceably and friendly, as it is contrary to the general rights of the world.
They that being truly possessed with fear, are allowed no more than to provide
harmless remedies for their security; are condemned, if they oppose present
force against a future danger, and undertake certain enmities upon doubtful
suspcions. Cicero, who was otherwise learned in the Law of Arms than the Danes,
was also of another opinion: Who ever decreed this, (says he) or how can it be
granted to any man without the danger of all, to have right and law to kill
him, by whom he says he is afraid that he may be killed himself? There cannot
be alleged or shown the least syllable of threatening, much less any appearance
of hostility from the Swedes, before the Danes drew their swords. Whatsoever is
objected, consists in bare jealousies only, far from any offense, or from
such a danger as could deserve a repulse by a violent hand.

But that is not all, that the Danes were fearful; they go on to reproach the
Swedes as injurious against them. They begin with their claim laid to the
Archbishopric of Bremen, and Bishopric of Verden. The relation to whereof we
shall fetch from its very first grounds. These Provinces being freed from the
Enemies garrisons by the glorious valor of Gustaf the Great, while he waged
the German War, were reduced under the Swedish power; only the jurisdiction and
revenues thereof were restored to the Archbishop John Frederick for his life,
as being the Kings friend and kinsman. But after his death no man could make
any title, or pretend any right to them, but they who had rescued them from the
Enemy: nor was there any cause to restore them, besides the account of
preserving friendship with the king and Kingdom of Denmark, and exercising the
same uon his Son by way of bounty and obligation. From whence proceeded this
singular gratification, that they should be delivered to the present King of
Denmark, at that time styled Archbishop (whose claim had been disallowed by the
Imperialists before, nor did the Kingdom of Sweden rely at all thereupon) yet
upon condition of neutrality and faithful friendship, an express reservation
being added to the Instrument set forth upon that subject, No. 14.
That if the Archbishop or Archbishopric by themselves or their dependants
should any way give favor and asistance against the Kings Majesty of Sweden,
and his Allies, the Safeguard should forthwith become void and abrogated. He
held them for some years in a quiet posture, as long as he continued in peace.
But when in the War which began with his father King Christian the fourth, he
inclined more to the sway of his private affections, than to the condition of
the surrender, and the Covenant of Neutrality, not only affording aid and
supplies out of those Territories, but at last becoming a party in the War, and
acting hostility against the Swedes, he provoked their arms against himself,
and from thenceforth forfeiting the right of Covenant fell obnoxious to the Law
of War. Ever since that, those Lands were seized upon according to the Law of
Arms, and not only detained by a just possession, but to be considered under
the Nature of things lost and obtained by the right of War. Now he can hve no
pretense to require them again, but by virtue of Peace confirming those things
to the possessors which were not agreed to be restored, and naturally allowing
the present possession, if it were not otherwise covenanted. But there was
never any covenant for a restitution. Indeed his demand thereof was made in the
Treaty at Bremsbro, but arrived neither to agreement nor promise, being
expressly laid aside by the 38. Article No. 15.
till some other Treaties, the Commissioners only giving him hopes of their
recommendation, as the words import. From thence the King of Denmark had no
right to redemand what was gotten in the War, nor the Queen of Sweden any
necessity to restore it; it was left in her absolute power to determine what
she pleased: therefore if matters were not carried according to his desire,
there is no reason to complain of injustice, seeing there was no pretenese of
right. It is a partial and groundless complaint, if they say therer is any
Article not fulfilled on the Swedish part. Hitherto there has appeared none
amongst them, to whom any restitution ought to be made according to that
Article, that have complained: nor do we know any body that had reason to This
only appears, and perchance it is the thing meant, That the Danish Resident in
Sweden did earnestly solicit the restoring of certain Ecclesiastical
Benefices; but very incongruously, since by the public consent and authority
of the Empire those Church Livings being extinguished together with the
Chapters, did no longer remain such, but put o a new quality of a secular
nature, and past all together in Fee to the Kingdom of Sweden. There is no
scruple made to allow those points which were resolved about referring the
cause of the Archbishopric to peculiar Treaties. That by reason of very
difficult and tedious Negotiations for War and Peace at that time, there
happened a delay of two Months; That Letters also of Safe Conduct fo rthe
Ambassadors of a Prince in amity were not, as is untruly affirmed, denied, but
seemed needless and superfluous; it will not appear so strange to those that
are conversant in affairs, as it is impertinent and indiscreet to upbraid us
with such passages at this time. But that Negotiation came to nothing, partly
by the neglect of those things which ought not to be omitted, or by doing what
should have been forborne, and partly by incident occasions which altered the
state of the business. When persons should have been sent in behalf of the
Prince, to treat upon the restitution, they came to the Court at Stockholm, and
shutting their eyes at the justice of possession and military acquisition,
complained as it were of wrongs and required things as their own: to which
proceeding the Lord Chancellor of the Kingdom could do no less then oppose the
title and condition with which the Archbishop received those lands, the cause
and ground of their forfeiture, the incongruity of the manner used in the
demand, and the just reason he had not to consent thereunto: All which he did,
not in derision, or vanity of words, but with Weighty Reasons, as the
necessity of the Business, and the importunity of the Demandants required.
Besides the Ambassadors brought a Commission with them, only to require
restitution, not to treat; which was altogether unsuitable to the business, and
also disagreeable to the Covenants: for it is not Restitution, but a Treaty,
that is mentioned there. When thus there was no way to begin with these men,
much less to conclude, it was necessary to suspend the negotiation. But the
Danes acknowledge, with what testimonies of affection all things were carried,
and how friendly and fair offers were made. All which is vainly objected to
have proceeded from dissimulation. Indeed the effect followed not, from their
own deficiencie and false persuasion, as if restitution ought to be made
against the very words of the Covenant without contract, without any condition,
and without satisfaction. It had been in vain to have laid it apart for a
Treaty, and deferred it till other negotiations, if it should have been done so
abruptly, peremptorily, and inconsiderately. The King of Denmark, Christian the
4, confessed the error, and afterward offered another manner and place of
Treating, No. 16.
but too late, and when the state and circumstance of matters was no more the
same, as it is declared No. 17.
in the Queens answer. In the mean while they began to take those Territories
into debate at Osnabrug and Munster while the peace of Germany was in Treaty,
both because they were a part of the Empire, and because the subject in
question had some relation to that peace. Then another consideration happened,
and that no small one, to alter the Treaty; upon a cessation of arms concluded
with the Field-marshall Koningsmark as to the province of Bremen, before the
peace of Bremsbro was published, a garrison of the Prince was to remain in
Bremerverd upon certain conditions. By which agreement the quiet possession of
the whole province free from all hostity and danger was left tot he Queen of
Sweden, and that place only to the Prince until a further composition, upon
condition of keeping all things in the same state, and besides provisions and
money agreed to be furnished, of living innocently, and without design or
Stratagems. But when contrary to these Covenants an irruption was made from
that upon other places of the Province, the inhabitants were oppressed with
exactions and insolences of Soldiers, the ways were rendered unsafe by
robberies committed upon Merchants, passage and other like favors were granted
to the Imperial forces at that time our enemies, but denied to the Swedes, the
Fore was more and more strengthened with an addition of men and warlike
provisions to the prejudice of the agreements and the danger of the
neighborhood; a necessity of repressing these attempts enforced the Lord Count
Koningsmark (not staying for a Royal command) to seize upon the Fort, and so
both to chastise the breach of faith, and to prevent a greater danger ensuing.
It happened in the mean time, that amongst other points concluded for the
pacification of Germany, the Emperor and the States of the Empire offered the
Territories of Bremen and Verden as a satisfaction to the Kingdom of Sweden,
disanulling the Ecclesiastical character which they had born, and reducing the
Lands to a secular right with the title of Dukedomes. Neither were they only
granted, but there was added a security of maintaining and defending the same
after the form of Warrantie. From that time it is the cause of the German
Empire which the King of Denmark opposes. We leave him to the Justice of the
Emperor and States, so far as he impugnes their public Acts, vilifies their
faith, power, and honor, and tempts their patience.

In the mean while Sweden thought it might safely rely upon the public
authority of the Empire, upon the inviolable reverence of their assurance given
against the dangers of any claim, and lastly upon the notorious inconvenience
of such a desire, which no sober man could approve. We are blamed, that those
Lands were required by us, that they were accepted of, that they were not
exchanged for some others in recompense. But there was no need to require them,
when they werre already in possession by right of war; and they might be justly
retained, when they were freely offered. In the Articles about means of
satisfaction the Swedish Plenipotentiaries named those Lands they had seized
upon, that they might be brought into Treaty to that end; but so, as they
presently declared their equity and fair meaning, that they required not all of
them for the Crown of Sweden, but that others might be ordained to such persons
as perchance had particular pretense to some of them, endeavoring that way to
avoid contentions that might obstruct the peace; and so those pretendants
carried away the most, and far more considerable, than the Kingdom of Sweden
did. Out of all the rest the consent and will of the Emperor and Empire
offered the Territories of Bremen and Verden erected into Dukedomes; which
offer is confessed in the letter of the Father, Christian the 4. wherein he
complains of the decree of the Emperor and the States, but imputes nothing to
the Swedes upon that account. They had good right to receive what so Soverain a
public judgment had decreed might and ought to be delivered unto them:
neither was it handsome for Sweden to withstand those determinations, nor could
we do it without a malicious hindrance of the peace. The Chancellor who was
then sent by the Archbishop to the forenamed Treaty, did not so much oppose the
parting from those Lands, as desire a recompense, because he well understood,
(as appeared by those learned writings which he published) that the power of
the Empire, and the manifest advantage of that surrender in relation to peace,
could not be questioned without sacrilegious Treason: but that it would be
better for his Lord, being within so near hopes of succession to a Kingdom, to
obtain something of perpetuity and equal value in lieu of an Ecclesiastical
benefice that was only for life. He can also say, if he will confess then
truth, how the Swedish Plenipotentiaries, not bound to such a good office, did
yet by way of supererogation instead of hindering his desires, use all their
diligence, counsels, assistance, and persuasion to further the satisfaction he
aimed at. And he had received it, if either the Archbishop coming to the Crown
of Denmark about that time had not let fall the prosecution of the cause, as he
ought to do in submission to the request of the States, or if he had desired
nothing but what was reasonable. But when his Ambassador required both great
and many things, and the assembly of the Empire thought that either nothing was
due, or not so much, he put an end to the Treaty, either by his Masters command
scorning (as some have said) a pecuniary satisfaction, or through his own
impatience and overhasty departure. But if there were any obligation of
recompense, it was chargeable upon the Empire, not the Kingdom of Sweden, and
consequently that only, not this, should answer the process. But what need is
there of this tedious relation, since it is visible, that the acquisition is
not only just and fair, but frequently allowed for such by the King of
Denmark? After the publication of the peace he did in a most friendly manner
congratulate with the Queen both by letters and by his Envoy for the glory and
happiness of regaining tranquillity, and of the enlargement of her
Territories, not making the least complaint, demand, or protestation. No. 18.
Soon after by his said Minister he proposed something concerning debts, which
he pretended the States of the Dukedom ought to him and Josias Ranzow,
requiring justice against them of the Queen, as Duchess of Bremen-When the
Chapter of Hambourgh, as a part of the Dukedom, sent Deputies to her Majesty
to desire the settlement and confirmation of their rights, he writ letters in
their behalf, as in a cause wherein he had no interest, and which appertained
to her Majesty's will and disposition. Ever since that time he has given the
titles of Duke of Bremen and Verden to the Kings of Sweden, and received all
writings and addresses bearing the same, without any show of a mind bent to
contradiction, much less of such caution was Princes in the like cases use; And
which deserves special observation, when the war against Sweden was under
debate, nay almost concluded, in the Commissions which the King of Denmark
received from his Majesty to renew the Treaties, and which he likewise
delivered to his Commissioners, he not only suffered those titles, but gave
them: which makes it clear, thta either there was no ground of hostility from
thence, or what has been taken up, is of a later date than the war. When at
the Diet of Ratisbon the peace, and with that the forsaid surrender, was
inserted into the public Constitution of the Empire as a fundamer tall Law,
his Ambassadors were present, and subscribed the same, as well he that
represented the Kings person, and subscribed in the number of the Counts of the
Empire, as he that came from him as Duke of Holstein, consenting, approving,
and not so much as whispering to the contrary. Nor was there any thing in that
Diet, that carried the appearance of a displeasure, objected against the
sitting or voting obtained there in the name of the Dukedom of Bremen and
Verden; no more than there was before in their Circular consultation at
Luneburg. Nay, when in the year 1654. an assembly of the Circle of lower Saxony
at Brunswick was ordered, directed, and concluded in the name of his Majesty as
Duke of Bremen, the King of Denmark as Duke of Holstein being invited by his
Majesty, appeared by his Ambassador, speaking nothing in derogation of the
acts or rights of the King, but exhibiting a directory of what was fit to be
considered, and performing all duties as well in his coming by Ceremonies, and
showing Crednetialls and Commission, as in the deliberations when he was come.
When the controversy touching the immediate dependence of the City of Bremen,
which had formerly been moved against him as Archbishop, was again set on foot
in the Imperial Court, a testimony of what had past in that particular being
desired of him, the original of the Imperial decree in opposition thereunto
he communicated to the King as Duke of Bremen. For indeed he was withheld from
thwarting peace and the Laws, by the obedience he ought as a Member-state of
the Empire; neither could he have any color to do it as King of Denmark, since
that Crown had no right to those Lands. Moreover it is said, and that not
without good credit, that amongst the conditions which the States of Denark
made when they conferred the Kingdom upon him, they required that he should lay
aside the memory and pretensions of those things which concerned the
Archbishopric of Bremen and Verden, and should not seek any further
satisfaction upon that account; nor was he Crowned, till he hd accepted of that
condition. Which is made more probable, as by may other passages, so by the
letters which the Counsel of the Kingdom of Denmark writ to the Queen of
Sweden the 13. of April, 1648. long after the surrender of those Lands had been
offered, approved, made, registered, and published, wherein they desired to be
comprehended under the peace, making no mention then of any demand (which is
now produced amongst the causes of the war) much less framing any contradiction
thereupon. No. 19.
Which that it should be made after their request was granted, shows the
greater injustice in the King of Denmark, who being included in the peace, does
yet disallow the act thereof.

As these old grudges about the Archbishopric, of Bremen and Verden disparage
the peace concluded in Germany; so that which follows concerning the two
Parishes Irne and Zerne does no less to the prejudice of that, published at
Bremsbro. The clear words whereof in the 25. article, wheter No. 20.
Iemptland with the adjacent places called Herrendale, are to be surrendered for
satisfaction, do so define the matter, that whatsoever is situate toward
Sweden on this side the Mountain Fiolles, which divides Sweden and Norway,
should be contained therein. When therefore the forenamed two Parishes are
placed within the limited bound on Swedens side, there is good right and reason
they should be retained and possessed, There remains a third ground of a more
just complaint, still in the hands of the Danes, which ought to be restored
according to the tenor of the foresaid definition. After two years quiet
possession the Danish Resident at Stockholm made a dispute upon a pretense that
they were not expressly named, as if that evident delineation equal to words
did not supply, and virtually imply the naming of them: whereupon he desired a
meeting upon the present case, which was easily obtained of the Queen, out of
her great inclination to peace, and accordingly by her Majesty's answer given
the 26. of October, 1648. a day was appointed him, to wit, the 3. of July. No.
22.
The same day was also expressly signified to the King himself by her Majesty's
letters dated at Stockholm the 26. of May in the year following. No. 22.
The Swedish Commissioners coming to the place timely enough, upon the 27. of
June gave notice to the Danes from a place not far off, of their arrival and
purpose to confer. Long it was before any answer came, at last they received
this from Christiania the ^0. of July, 1649, That they, the Danish
Commissioners were ready for a confer^^ (...) but now could not come thither
again without special order. No. 23.
It appears not whether this happened by the inconsiderateness of the Resident,
or of those who penned the Commission, or through the negligence of the
Commissioners, or perchance whether they did not repent themselves of an ill
grounded demand, fearing a more just one of another Parish which still remained
to be restored. Without doubt it was done by the error and fault of the Danes,
who do ill to excuse themselves by objecting that they were deluded therein.
Knowing their own guilt in that particular they patiently bore the reproach of
so foul a negligence cast upon them by the Swedish Resident in the Court of
Denmark, whereunto he added (out of the confidence of the Swedish right) the
offer of another meeting to that purpose. Which the Chancellor of Denmark
Christian Thomson refused, not judging that worthy of a meeting, which is now
made the pretense of a bloody war. The next accusation the Danes lay to our
charge is an alleging of grievances from stealing of Custom, which yet
according to the rigor of the narration does only concern Officers and
Subjects. How then his Majesty and the Kingdom of Sweden can become obnoxious
to occasion a war, is neither inferred, nor does it appear. By the common
consent and reason of Nations particular offenses, if they be discovered, are
to be punished in the offenders, not reaching unto Kings: much less can they
justify a war against them, unless the sufering party have applied themselves
to them by accusation, proof, demand of justice, and after all this have been
denied it: the least part whereof is not expressed. Indeed there was once a
complaint made to his Majesty of Sweden, about the beginning of his reign, when
he was ready to set forward to the Polish war: but such content was immediately
given them, that they desired no more at that time: for the Subjects were
forbidden to commit any such thing, as we have already declared, the
observation of Covenants was straightly enjoined upon them, the care and
inspection thereof laid upon the Resident, with power to make amends where
matters were clear, and offering all just and usual redress of debate and
composition in such things as required further search and considerations. Now
what could be desired more than this? After these fair proceedings the
complaint ceased, as long as they could counterfeit a show of keeping peace and
making a League: but since they have discovered their inclination to arms and
disension, for want of other causes to declare the same, they began to urge
grievances afresh. But as to that point, every thing was ready to be granted
that could be desired with any appearance of equity. And whereas the agreement
between the two Kingdoms solemnly concluded at Stetin the year 1570. and
renewed in the pacification of Bremsbro, had appointed a certain order and
method of debating and determining such things, his Majesty's Resident did
several times offer whatsoever was consonant to those rules, only he required
that there might be no delay in the acts of the League upon any such account.
But when he could not obtain this desire, for all the equity and advantage
thereof, he was ready to answer to what they could object, not only waitin for,
but earnestly pressing a speedy declaration of particulars. But then it plainly
appeared that no such thing lay before them in the Treaty, and that they were
to seek for those pretended grievances For when the Resident both by his own
industry, and the assistance of the Elector of Brandenburgs Ambassador, urged
for a declaration of the grievances; he received this answer, That they would
first make a collection of those that concerned the Customs, but that they
could not be so soon engrossed: so unready and so uncertain were those
injuries, which were insisted upon with so much clamor and violence. Which put
it out of question, that the Danes had made their former complaints without any
certain ground; and for their present loud accusations, they were rather
ashamed of them, than studious of righteousness and the light of truth. At last
he confuted such things as were produced, with answers fortified by truth and
equity, that whosoever would balance the case impartially and without passion,
could not find any just reason of accusation, much less a sufficient cause to
begin a war.

It is enough to refer the Reader to these things, as they are laid down in
order. First of all, the things heaped together in the Danish Papers, besides
the bare Narration, contain nothing at all of demonstrative verity; nor any
thing probable, if you consider that which all the world knows, their rigorous
taking notice and extorting of Customs. Who will believe, that if any abuse had
been discovered in that particular, the offenders had not presently been
admonisht, corrected and punished; when such proceedings were used against them
without reason, if any interpretation of the Covenants would bear it; and the
slightest pretense that could be strained, served to justify the extremity of
Law against the Swedes? Besides, the delinquency objected relates to Seamen and
Merchants, whose practice it is to seek their gain by any trick whatsoever; but
at their own peril. It belongs not to Kings to pay those scores, but the action
is laid against the Defrauder only, and that (by common usage) in the place
where Customs are taken, from whence those that are escaped, are looked upon
as clear and unpunishable in other parts. As the King of Denmark would be
unwilling to stand obnoxious for the deceits of his people in foreign Customs:
so he has no reason to accuse Sweden, if perchance their Subjects have
committed any such fault in other places.

But they say, They have oftentimes complained of those things to the Swedish
Resident, though in vain: Whereof he acknowledges nothing at all, besides some
importunate and unreasonable exprobrations. Which is not strange, since their
complaints used to want nothing, but faith, right, and reason. And now who can
say, that such desires could take place, being disagreeable to covenants, and
void of truth?

Two things are chiefly reproached; first as to Certificates, that they never
came complete and entire from the Cities where the Magistrates had signed them,
to the Danish Customs, but with blanks firmed with the Seals of those Cities;
and were written or filled up by the Swedish Ministers, nay some of them made
in foreign places. But it is clear and palpable to the Danes themselves, by
reason of sundry and changeable occasions and circumstances of Traffic,
especially where Merchants and Merchandise come from, or are sent to remote
Countries, that the Ships wherein they are fraighted, nay the Commodities that
are laden being bought by Factors upon a general order, cannot be known in
their Native Country; and therefore that it is impossible they should be
inserted in Certificates, which use to be desired and brought from thence for
specified particular Commodities, which yet do often fall out otherwise: nor
can any other course be taken, but that arriving from another Country, they
should declare the condition of their Cargo, profess the same in presence ofthe
Swedish Resident, and so be registered according as their reports were found
true. It is a calumny and slander of the Customres, without any argument of
truth, when they say that this was ever done by boys, women, or other
strangers, or even by the Residents Officers, without his own knowledge and
special command. Forasmuch as the same was observed of old, nothing heretofore
required upon that account, no fraud ever said to be detected nothing otherwise
defined upon that case in the Covenants, nothing contrary to them in this
proceeding, nay rather suitable to the ninth Article of the Agreements at
Bremsbro; there can be no just cause of complaint thereupon. It was long ago
provided by Queen Christina, that no fraudulent dealing should creep in as to
that particular. For she ordained, that all Certificates should be sent to the
Resident remaining in Denmark, that he should take care to see all things done
righteously, and after his examination to deliver them into the Custom House
Office: The integrity of which proceeding she strictly enjoined as well upon
her Resident as upon Cities under her Dominion. No. 24.
Ever since that time not any one man has been convicted or found guilty of
miscarriage in that kind. He that besides this providence on the Swedish part,
shall consider the rigorous examinations and searches used by the Danish
Officers of the Customs, will think it impossible that any room should be left
for fraud or abuse.

The second charge is framed out of those things which ought to be observed by
the Agreements made at Christianople with the United Netherlands 1645. about
exhibiting Bills of lading. But nothing of that relates to the Subjects of
Sweden, for whose Navigation and Traffic provision has been more fully made
by other Covenants; but that which was provided about Holland Ships and
Merchants, is not agreeable, but contrary thereunto, nothing being thereby
liable to discovery but Certificates. It was therefore injurious to exact other
things, and those unusual heretofore, no part whereof obliged the Northern
Kingdoms: nay the agreement between them was clearly otherwise in express
terms. That his Majesty's Resident would not consent to such things,
accompanied with so great prejudice, nay contradicted and opposed them, is very
unhandsomly laid to his charge. For he did but according to right, while they
required him without any, to introduce such things, contrary to agreements, and
without any power. He protested while the Treaty was in hand, that to his
knowledge, or by his permission, nothing was ever done in favor of Strangers,
or to the detriment of the Danish Customs; nor was there any substantial proof
then produced to the contrary, and as little now in the Danish Papers. They
only express how it troubles them, that the patience of their Officers should
withhold them from falling upon the Swedish ships and Merchandise and that the
liberty which the Swedish Traffic has gotten, makes such progress and
increase as moves their envy.

The damages by lessning their Customs, are falsely objected to the Swedes, from
whom they have no right, nor ever had, to require any So there can be no
defrauding, where there is a confessed immunity. If any wrong in that kind has
been done, it was by other people who were liable to Customs; wherein it is so
much the less probable that the Swedes should use any deceit, by how much their
gain would be the less, and their hazard the greater. It is an unseasonable and
impertinent argument which they draw from the comparison of traffic in the
Cities of Liefland for a time; when it was charged with unreasonable exactions,
and is so even now after the recovery of Liberty. That does but manifest, what
an obstruction to trade grew from the Danish Customs and vexations; which being
taken away, it is no wonder that Traffic and Navigation should flourish again,
from which men were forced to forbear heretofore by reason of those
afflictions. But Cities being freed from them, could furnish out their own
shipping, turn into commodities the money heretofore extorted by the Danes,
hope for and get more certain gains, which used to be cut off by vexations,
delays, and law-sutes.

But all this complaint about Grievances proceed, first from hence, that it
vexes them at the heart, to see the revenues of the Sound not so great at this
time as formerly, and that they have not such a licentious power to increase
the same, and burden trade therewith, since Sweden has recovered her antien
liberty and the Hollanders by arms and contracts have diminisht the extremity
of those exactions to about a sixth part wherein Sweden has taken or impaired
nothing from the Danes, since it had anciently the possession thereof, nor had
they any right or legal custom to exact it. So that all which they call damage
from this ground, is really not so, but properly to be esteemed the surceasing
of an unlawful gain.

The other spring from which the Danish complaint flosw, is placed in the
error of an unjust supposition, as if that passage of the Sound had any right
over the Swedish Ships and Merchants; which is just none at all. It has been
long since notorious to the world, and made good by late victories (since which
it has been more fully reduced into Covenants) that the King of Denmark as to
any thing of the Swedish Nation has no Dominion, jurisdiction, power of
visiting, imposing, and exacting any thing in that Strait, more than in the
open Sea. A general ordinance and confirmation of that liberty is contained in
the articles of the last peace, limited with no exceptions, but established in
full and ample forms: only when other nations were content to forgo part of
their liberty in that particular, that a distinction might be made who they
were, and what belonged to them, what to the Swedes, this one clause was
granted, that Certificates (according to the manner there expressed) should be
shown in the Office of the Danish Custom-house concerning those things which
the Swedes, would affirm to be theirs. In all other respects the immunity and
freedom was entire, impeacht in no particular, but left without any charge; so
that the Danes have not a syllable of right to set up against it. Whatsoever
therefore is exacted or imposed more than this, is unjust, and improperly
called a grievance where no such title is allowed of. But Sweden has better
grounds of a just complaintin many things slyly and treacherously offered to
infringe and diminish those rights of liberty contrary to convenants.

These close designs began to take effect the very next years after the peace
of Bremsbro, when the Swedish ships were brought under the slavery of being
visited, from which by the tenor of the pacification they ought to be free; by
this subtlety, that the Certificate being readily accepted of, as it were out
of singular respect to the Swedes, their request of letters of conduct was
prevented by the visitors making have with them to the Swedish ship, or that
which was laden with Swedish goods, and there while he offered them, under the
pretense of observing the building of the ship, or some other thing, especially
if there was any foreign commodity there, he would search and pry into every
part of the ship. Hence they took occasion to question some of those things
they found, to render them suspected upon slight cavills, to bring them under
inquisition and other suits from which they were expressly exempted by the law
of the peace, and the mean while to detain and vex the ship with great
prejudice and incommodity. Then they assumed to themselves the examination of
certificates, and if they failed in the least tittle, Custom was required, not
regarding that the said Certificates were by the agreement left to the trust
and care of the Magistrates in every place, free from searching, and not
presently to be charged with Custom upon a small defect, or mistake, when the
truth and reality sufficiently appeared otherwise. Moreover when ships returned
from Portugal or other far remote countries, if Certificates were not instantly
ready in the Sound (which they would have to be sent thither, and wait there)
but were prevented by the prosperousness of the voyage, they would not allow
time to expect them, nor a harmless stay in a common road till they were
brought, but the space of twenty four hours was set, within which if they were
not exhibited, neglecting and refusing their entreaty for a suspense till the
arrival of the ordinary post, Custom was demanded with threats to be carried
away into the port at Copenhaguen; when, notwithstanding the showing of them
was not limited to a certain time in any of the covenants, yet was usurped here
in the open Sea and upon the coast, which ought to be free from every man. If
any thing was found in the ships besides what belonged to the Swedes, under
that pretense even that also which was theirs, contrary to the Law of the
covenants was made obnoxious to visitation (which the said covenants did
generally forbid) with a twofold great inconvenience following thereupon; for
first that examination was differred till all the other ships were visited, the
ship being in the mean while hindered a long time from her intended voyage;
secondly the making up of the accounts was committed to some citizens under a
charge and expense which they call writing and counting money, sometimes
greater then the Customs themselves. When these things were not sufficient for
their designs, in the year 1649. by a treaty of Redemption (as they call it)
concluded with the States of the United Netherlands, whereby they did as it
were rent or farm the Customs, the Danes committed far more intolerable
breaches against the covenants. To say nothing of the many and great prejudices
which were hereupon exercised upon the liberty of the Baltic Sea, and the
ancient Royalties of the Northern Kingdoms, by this covenant of Redemption
there was obliquely intended against Sweden an imposition of that custom and
molestation, the right or duty whereof that Crown had nevr consented to bring
upon its subjects; nay, thereby they aimed almost at a totla abrogation and
voiding of the agreement of Bremsbro. Ships and goods were charged upon another
account in Holland, and several ways in the Sound: In Holland under pretense
of haven-right, the freedom agreed and established was not allowed to those that
arrived there: in the Sound, vessels that were passing to other places were not
dismissed upon showing their Certificates at the custom house Office (as the
express words of the covenants run) but they were remitted to show them before
the Holland customers; and if they refused so to do, made customable, detained,
and punished; subject also to their vifitations; examination, troubles and
Lawsuits, if any Swedish commodities were fraighted in Holland ships, as if
their liberty from thenceforth ceast: Whatsoever these men imposed, ours were
forced to suffer. Thence came burdens and charges to be doubled, which ought
not to be single. The inconveniences whereof the Queen explained in two
letters the tenth and seventeenth of May 1651 ( N. 25.
, and N. 26.
) which she writ with a desire to remove them. We will not detain the reader
with a recital of the arrests, processes, impositions, nay seisures after they
were out of the Sound, detentions, and confiscations, wherewith the Swedish
ships and goods have been molested ever since; The Danes themselves are not
ignorant hereof, when more then once a just and better observation of covenants
has been required at their hand for these very causes; sometimes the injury
has been confessed, and restitution followed; sometimes also but a reparation of
damages, and an amendment of exorbitancies promised. Some mention thereof you
will find in the grevances presented to the Danish ambassadors at Stockholm
1653. N 27.
you will find their acknowledgement of the injustice by their answer the 14.
of March N. 28.
and by the Swedish commissioners reply the 28. of March N. 29.
which things are further witnessed as well by their ill observation of
covenants, alleging grievances to no purpose and without proof, as by their
endeavors to hinder and destroy the Swedish commerce.

That after the last peace with the States of the united Netherlands something
was concluded or offered to free the Swedes absolutely from exactions in the
Sound, is untruly urged. There was no need of that long before, when the Swedes
many years past had published, and both by their public writings, and at last
by arms defended this judgment against the Danes, that they had neither right
nor reason to exact a chargeable custom for a passage only (without any
benefit of landing) in the open Sea, whereof that stait is a part. Nor is it
unknown to the world, that when the Hollanders would endure that slavery no
longer, they rather invited Swedland, then we them, to a league for asserting
the common liberty so much oppressed by the Danes.

From this point the Danish papers go on to that cause which past between the
king and the Lord high Steward of Denmark, or Rixhofemaster Corfitz Vlefeld,
objecting that it was contrary to there peace, that he was entertained in the
Kingdom of Swedland, that he obtained a safe, and not the Royal favor, that he
was neither delivered nor expelled at the request of the Danes. All that upon
this occasion relates to these times, wherein the most Serene Lady Queen
governed the Kingdom of Swedland. Both her Majesty N. 30.
and the Counsel of the kingdom of Swedland N. 31.
answered to the letters of the King, and counsel of Denmark written upon that
subject. From whence it appears, that as they would not be engaged in the cause
so they could not deprive an unconvicted person of the right of protection. And
when after that declaration of right and equity they insisted no further at
that time, they have no pretense to take up that now as a cause of making war
against his Majesty which was done in the reign of another. To receive a man
into security who is fled from his own country, not by reason of a legal
condemnation, but for fear of his adversaries, is not against the law of
nations, but suitable to humanity, full of examples amongst princes and
nations, and agreeable to the covenants between the Kingdoms. For in those
concluded at Stetin 1570. For the peace of the kingdoms, it was mutually
resolved in the fourteenth Article N. 32.
as the words bear it, thus; That such of the Nobility or commonalty as should
fall into the Kings displeasure for a fault laid to their charge, if to avoid
his indignation they should retire themselves out of one Kingdom into the
other, and desire to partake of the rights there, then they should enjoy safe
passeport, that other Kings security, peace, and protection: but that the King,
whose subjects they were, might administer legal execution of justice against
them according to allegations and proofs. The Danes accusing of us for the
reception of this man has so much the less justice in it, because they cannot
be ignorant, how often exiles of Sweden have not only been received and kindly
used in Denmark, but also preferred to Offices and dignities. But as the first
part of the fore recited Article could not be denied to a man that was next in
degree to the King in Denmark, and heretofore the first in his favor and
secrets, honored there for services to his country, and not of obscure fame
abroad, not yet condemned or convicted of any crimes that could deserve so
severe a prosecution; as (I say) this could not be denied him out of
commiseration of his fortune, without a breach of the Laws of humanity: so the
latter part was offered by her Majesty to the King and Counsel of Denmark. When
thereupon he made himself ready for his defense, the Qu. intimated the same to
Peter Juel, at that time Danish Resident in the Court of Sweden, who solicited
the cause against him, that he might hear it, make his answer, and take notice
of her Majesty's inclination to just proceedings. But he, as it were
discordered, flung out of the presence in wrath, without the modesty fit for a
Resident, or the respect due to the Queen It happened while these things past,
that the Lord high Steward made use of certain proofs from letters, presently
to refute such matters as had been objected against him at another time:
specially whereas he was charged to have entered a great sum of money upon the
accounts, and made deduction thereof, which yet the man to whom it should have
been paid, said he had not received it; he made the contrary appear by the
acquittance and letters of those that were to have the said money, and showed
the falsehood of the accusation. By refusing the offered trial, what else could
be collected, but that the Danes would have him accused, so as he might not be
convicted; condemned, so as he might not be heard, nor make his defense;
ejected and punished, so as the truth of the fact might never come to light.
Which things since they are not permitted by divine and humane Law, her Majesty
could not consent to such a desire; nor the Danish zeal justly argue, that it
was misbecoming the dignity of a King to plead against his Subjects in another
place, seeing it was so ordained by the Agreements; nor is it lawful for any
King to use his absolute authority in another Kingdom, and to oppress a man
unheard and undefended, though the suit be against his own Subject. It is not
unusual, nor taken to be against the dignity of Superiors, that Kings should
make process against their exiled Subjects in the Territories of other Kings,
as it is shown by infinite examples in History. That no other proceeding may be
allowed in Sweden, it appears out of the foresaid pacification of Stetin, which
prescribes the manner thereof. When beside, nay against Covenants, a man that
was present, accused as guilty, and offering himself to trial, not without a
fair show of confidence, was yet refused the hearing of his defense, nor any
thing proved that was alleged against him, nay the legal administration of
justice declined; all this could not but move the Queen and Counsel of the
Kingdom to the equity of protection against passionate and blind persecution,
all equal and impartial judges to the presumption of his innocence, and all
other persons to favor and good will toward a man otherwise eminent for wit,
qualities, and experience. Indeed the Danes declared their opinion N. 33.
out of the 21. Article of the said Covenants, that all extremity was forthwith
to be used against him, by reason of a Writing he set forth, but impertinently;
That provisional clause speaks of contumelious and reproachful Pamphlets; not
to be inflicted but upon those that write and publish scandalous papers,
fraught with affronts, disgraces, and infamy; and indeed, if the Subjects of
one Kingdom do so against the King and Inhabitants of another. Now whereas in
this case there was a controversy betwixt the King and his principal Minister
and Subject, and betwixt the Noblemen and one of their fellow Peers, therefore
it was to be prosecuted not by the Covenants, but by Law, according to the 24.
Article. The writing came forth not in the nature of a scandalons Libel, but
under the title of an Apology; and so, that the Writer seems to have published
it, not to rail upon the King and Kingdom, but to defend himself and his cause,
and to maintain his reputation. Especially seeing it was opposed to another
writing, which the King had set forth in print before, purporting the charge
against him. Whereby since the King had committed that cause to the judgment
of the world by a public accusation, and as it were challenged him; it
appeared not how he was guilty of a scandalous detraction, while after the
pattern set before him, he was willing in like manner to expose the necessity
and subject of his defense unto the world; and if he desired to be thought an
honest man, he could not decline that way of public judgment begun by the
King. They do him wrong to object, that any thing was done or omitted
otherwise, then the common cause of Kings, the rights of Commonalty, and the
merits of the fact required; while that was offered in Swedland, which is
agreeable to the order of judgments, and tenor of Covenants, both which was
neglected and scorned by the Danes, withdrawing the matter in question from a
legal inquiry of truth, and intending all things not for administration of
justice, but the satisfying of passion, which ought not to be admitted by a
just Prince, studious to observe agreements.

Forasmuch as relates to Memmius Burin her Majesty's Secretary in the Dukedom
of Bremen, the King of Denmark does indeed tax him with an undue departure, but
has not yet made it appear to be so. When Peter Juel the Danish Resident in
the Court at Stockholm gave notice thereof, her Majesty commanded him to repair
into Swedland to answer for himself. Upon which summons he appeared, as relying
upon the integrity of his conscience; upon his appearance he produced causes
why there was no reason to believe such an imputation against him. And when the
grounds and arguments of his defense were communicated to the Resident, he
offered nothing to the contrary, but rested content, honoring him with his
table and conversation, as a person guiltless, and giving him hopes of
re-reconciliation. When the same man was presented by her Majesty in right of
the Directory of to the Secretarieship of the circle of Lower Saxony, he entered
upon and persormed that Office, the King of Denmarks Ambassador being present,
and moving nothing thereupon. Neither did the Queen supersede the inquisition,
which she committed to certain Counselors and other Officers of the Kingdom,
to see if there were any ground why he should be accused, discharged of his
Office, and punished; but no salshood or crime could be discovered: Thus much
only appeared, that he was indeed called to undertake some employment under
the principal Secretary: but that he was never actually placed therein by the
present King, only put to be Governor of a certain Nobleman in his travels;
in the mean time while he was absent, being traduced by malicious enemies, he
often desired to be dismissed, and when he could get no answer to his desires,
being as it were forsaken, he at last submitted to the necessity of undertaking
another condition after the forementioned, which he could not but attribute to
providence amongst such occurrences. Besides which, when the accused persons
probable allegations were justified by these arguments of his Innocence, the
silence of the accuser, the inconstancy and alteration of matters objected,
and the presumption of letting the accusation fall: to condemn a man in other
things of spotless life and clear reputation, not confessing nor convicted, or
to deprive him of his Office and Dignities as one condemned, and deliver him
into the hands of an enraged King, would have been repugnant to the laws of
justice.

The rest of their accusations, which are related, proceeded upon no better
terms nor arguments: whereunto a refusal of Justice cannot be alleged, when
nothing was either justly demanded or proved. He has little reason to desire
favor from a Judge, that does not himself perform the duty of a fair accuser.

Furthermore, many things are enviously alleged, of a desire to enlarge the
Kingdom, and increase the traffic of Cities under its dominion; which savours
of a suspicious and jealous disposition, but makes nothing to justify a War.
For they tend only to raise hatred, and foment malignity; but when they meet
with just and right judgments, they fail even of that end. But most of them
are feigned and contrived, never to be made good by creditable proofs;
especially such things as are cast out about secret plottings and designs in
emulation, and to the disadvantage of neighbors: They will never be able to
produce resolved counsels, or instructions containing such results, as they
have largely, but vainly heaped together, about the prejudice of Trade. They to
whom they say such things were communicated, are ignorant of them; and wise men
will never believe otherwise, but that either the Danes desire to abuse others
in those particulars, or are abused themselves by too much credulity. It is
evident what it is that wounds the Danes; that Sweden is so zealous and
successful in their prudent Counsels, to preserve hitherto the common freedom
of Trade, and a better constitution within the bounds of their own Dominions:
the first whereof has turned to the benefit of the European World, besides the
withstanding of the Danes immoderate increase of Customs and burdens upon
Navigation; the other is as profitable for the enlargement of the Kingdom, and
the interests of the Subjects: Yet all this without injury to any one. What
Nation has not an inherent justice and right to attend and watch for their own
and their Subjects advantages? Traffic is laid in common, subject to nothing
but industry, lest free by the Law of Nations, that every man may as freely and
lawfully derive his profit from thence, as take water from the Sea. That care
and industry is not bound to old rules, but admits of alterations with the
change of times and occasions. How many innovations has Denmark it self,
Norway, both seen and introduced? If we may enter into comparisons, to whom the
common care and advancement of Trade owes most, to the Swedes or the Danes; the
greatest obstructions and detriments will be found to have been east in by
them, and removed by us. What the condition of the Baltic Sea, and of the
Hanse Towns situate thereupon, and what the dangers of those that sailed
therein were 30. years ago, occasioned by the war and peace betwixt the Danes
and the Emperor, they can tell, who remember the ports blockt up, the Sea
swarming with Pirates, prodigious titles of dominion taken up by others upon
the same Sea, and both designs and endeavors to bring it for the time to come
under the Spanish yoke. All which when the King of Denmark, forsaking both the
public cause, and that of his Friends and Allies, upon the peace made at
Lubeck had left without reparation, or restoration to the former state; by the
blood and valor of the Swedes things were repaired, and again brought to that
pass, that while the Germane War continued, nothing was unsafe or attempted
upon the Trade of the Baltic Sea, but what proceeded from the Danes; and when
the peace was concluded, the former power and vigor was restored to Sea,
Rivers, and Lands by the composition of Osnabrug. What stops and hindrances
were thrown in the way of that Treaty, by the Customs introduced in the Sound
against the Law and usage of Nations, and the same so often innovated,
increased, and by strange ways exacted, appears by the long complaint of other
Countries, specially of Poland and the United Netherlands; but it was Sweden by
whose means that immoderate excess was brought to reason and remedy, as the
Acts of the year 1645. and the promises which the King of Denmark thereupon
made to the Swedes and Hollanders while the pacification was making at Bremsbro
and Christianople, do sufficiently testify. And there indeed the shoe wrings
them, that a bar should be set up against their boundless licentiousness.

We pass over other things, as not judging it worthy the pains to answer them;
and being so destitute of truth, they are denied with as great ease, as they
are objected. It has not, nor cannot be made good, that there was ever any
intention to sue in the Emperors Court for an Investiture of the Baltic Sea.
It is as great a stupidity to believe it, as an absurdity to say it; when
without any such thing not only all the right of dominion that could be
thereby desired, was of old due to the Kingdom of Sweden, and more fully then
any Investiture could make it, and that the Northern Kingdoms never granted the
Emperor any power upon that Sea but when he would have usurped the same about
thirty years ago, the most glorious King of Sweden opposed him, and by Arms
defended both his own right and the Baltic liberty. The manner of the
Investiture is expressed in the Instrument of peace, which there was never any
intention to exceed.

They write with no other style of truth and credit concerning the Swedes
interposing in businesses between the King of Denmark and his kinsmen,
concealing names and circumstances. There is as little knowledge to be had of
the things, as they relate them, as of the parties they forbear to name; all
which will doubtless be suspected by avoiding the light, and being so wrapped up
in obscurity. If perchance they mean hereby that which past heretofore about
the jurisdiction of Swabstet, and the rights of the most Serene Duke of
Holstein upon the Bishopric of Sleswick, their discourse is very much out of
the way from that business: For the Swedes neither took upon them any judgment
thereof, nor was War threatened upon that account, nor was any endeavor used to
dissuade an amicable composition, or a lawful decision. But rather her Majesty
out of the respect of friendship and neighborhood earnestly recommended that
controversy to the Danish Ambassadors, that differences might be composed upon
equal terms sweetly, as between kinsmen, and without further difficulty or
bitterness of contention.

Of like nature is that which is said concerning a design of invading the
County of Delmenhorst, and of orders given to that purpose; as also about
disputing the title of Dithmarse: all without the least justification of truth.
Without question a scruple of conscience was the cause of that suspicion, and
that suspicion thrust forth an expression of what was justly feared; since the
King of Denmark is not ignorant of the rights which the Dominion of Bremen has
upon both those lands: As how the County of Delmenhorst was of old a Fee of the
Archbishopric, N. 34.
and there yet remains an action against the Counts of Oldenburg for a
fraudulent usurpation upon that right; and when Christian the last of the
Counts of Delmenhorst departed this life, the Chapter opposed the Counselors
of the Count that succeeded, by making a Protestation and a reservation of
their right: Then how Dithmarse N. 35.
was violently rent from the Archbishopric within these hundred years, the
inhabitants thereof invaded by arms, and forced to obedience, how the
Archbishops complaining to the Emperor of the injury, desired his aid against
their powerful adversary, and reserved their rights purloined and abused by
the craft and hypocrifie of the Danes N. 36.
Lastly, although when the Archbishopric came to the Princes of Holstein, and
thenceforward for the interest of their House the controversy lay a good while
covered under the ashes of silence, yet was it never to this day totally
extinguished, nor did the Arch. Bishops or all the States renounce their rights.

They reckon amongst their imputations those letters, which his Majesty's
Ambassador in Germany, Count John Oxenstiern (out of that care of preserving
peace which is incumbent upon the Office of an Ambassador) writ from Wismar the
26. of February, 1657. to the Lords Directors of the Circle of Lower Saxony, at
that time when the war was already resolved in Denmark, and matters were very
near breaking out into hostility. N. 37.
They contain nothing but what agrees with the Instrument of peace, and
whereunto the States of the Circle were bound without any other excitation, as
well by the Constitutions of the Empire published for the execution of the
general peace, and so many times confirmed, as from the Warrantie promised to
the King and Kingdom of Sweden in the last pacification. For those
Constitutions do principally oblige the Circle and ordain, that by their
providence disturbances may be prevented, and the lands situate under them
defended against violence. How necessary these rules were, appears by the
sequel; how beneficial not only to the Territories of his Majesty and
neighbors, but even to those that the King of Denmark holds in Germany, if
they had their force and authority, is evidently perceived by the damages and
inconveniences caused by the Danes rashness, and by those we have just reason
still to expect. There is that considence to be reposed upon the consent of the
States of the Empire (if they would not suffer the passion of the Danes to
prevail over their reason in this particular) that as there is no man but will
disapprove and take to heart the invasion of the Imperial Provinces, and the
bringing of a War upon Germany; so he will think it well done, to give
provident and timely admonitions for averting the violation of the public
peace. Nor was there any other thing declared, as well in the answer of the
Lords Directors, N. 38.
as in that which they and the Supreme Officers of the Circular Militia out of
their care of the common tranquillity writ to the King of Denmark. N. 39.
and afterward took upon them to do it. The King of Denmark has no reason to
think that Letter was framed to render him odious; which could never have been
done so effectually and deeply by a writing intended to a good end, as he has
drawn it upon himself from the poverty, destruction, wasting and ruin of so
many innocent men and Countries by his inconsiderate Arms, seeing all those
evils must be charged upon his score, that follow the precipitation of his
attempts, and the necessity of a defense.

The objection of not observing the laws of the Empire concerns other people;
neither does it appear by what right that charge is made without authority from
them; the rashness of the action only is evident, while the parties concerned
are silent, because in truth there is no such matter, nor any ground for a
complaint. It is not yet out of the memory of man, what the Empire and the
States thereof, nay what the common Liberty and security lost by that war and
peace made by the King of Denmark in Germany, nor what they regained by the
blood and labor of the Swedes. The last peace visibly declares, that the
Kingdom of Sweden desired not to diminish any thing of the ancient Rights
belonging to Germany and its States; whatsoever remained of that kind, was
carefully restored, guarded, and confirmed. We are content the public acts
should bear testimony, how the Swedish Counsels and votes in the Assemblies of
the States of the Empire, and of Deputies, yea and of the Circles too, have
always been carefully directed and given for peace and public safety. That
which of late years the Circle of Lower Saxony decreed at Luneburg and
Brunswick, was concluded, the King as Duke of Bremen not gainsaying, nor
dissenting from the major part of votes, nay happily directing and encouraging
them in the last Assembly, when the Ambassador of Danish-Holstein raised no
small strife and disturbance, and stubbornly opposed the Circular defense well
agreed on before; which being referred thither by the last Diet, was diligently
treated, and as much as in him lay, brought to effect. Hitherto no man has
been heard but the Dane, nor he neither till he would be an enemy, that could
say he had received any offense.

That the raising of Soldiers in Germany for the Polish War should entrench
upon the Constitutions of the Empire, is an unjust objection; while he himself
does that against a Member-State of the Empire and its Provinces, which he
blames for being done against a foreign enemy to no prejudice of the Empire at
all: Thus he has not observed what he requires of another. But further, the
objection is ignorant; by the public right of the Empire it is permitted
within the limits thereof even to foreign Princes and people, held to be a
point of the Germane liberty, never denied to any but declared enemies of the
Empire, and practiced by many even to this very day. Their hasty censure runs
in a very quick stream, gathering together those things which are of obligation
to strangers that make Levies in Germany. The application whereof, as they make
it, is incongruous; seeing his Majesty as a State and Member of the Empire,
brought his soldiers into his own Provinces, and maintained them there without
inconvenience to any one, till they were drawn from thence; and then obtained
no more then a harmless peaceable passage not to be denied to any man by the
law of nations, and permitted even to foreign forces by the Constitutions of
the Empire, yet so as he both requested it of his neighbors, and they as
readily granted it. All this while nothing was done but what was agreeable to
the ordinance of public peace and the execution thereof, as also to the
Instrument of peace. But if the insolence of soldiers went a little beyond
their bounds, that was besides his Majesty's intentions, and contrary to his
command. It was always thought fit to appoint some to oversee their march, and
to provide by orders and Commanders a means to withstand and punish their
extravagancies. It does not appear, nor will be believed, that ever the
soldiers past by the Kings command through the King of Denmarks Countries, or
that they were landed upon his coast. It was also against the Kings will, if
notice thereof were not given. Neither was there ever any complaint made or
mentioned of such things heretofore. Yet how innocent our march has been
through the Danish Countries, their own Papers show, alleging nothing of
damages, when otherwise they use to omit nothing even of the lightest moment.
But it imports not much that they past so quietly, where there was neither
danger, nor subject of offense. But it looks maliciously, to complain of an
innocent taking of that which is to be denied to no man.

We cannot see by what authority the Danes take upon them to scoff and abuse
the Imperial Investiture, as not taking effect. Neither is it to any purpose to
answer their curiosity in a thing wherein they are not concerned.

Much alike is that clause, that touches the laying aside that controversy
about the City of Bremen; ridiculous, for the clawing flattery misbeseeming a
King; and no less unhan from, for the prevarication. That State which he had
formerly impugned with the hostility of his pen, and his father by Arms, which
afterward he would have had convicted, furnishing the Queen with evidences
against it; he now takes patronage of the same, that by soothing allurements he
may stir it up to rebellion and breach of covenants. Nor is it unknown, what
more has been acted in his name to weaken the fidelity and constancy of the
City. But it is to no purpose to plead that cause with a person, that has no
interest at all therein. His Majesty showed by the composition he made, how
much he respected the peace of Germany and the safety of the City, when at that
time he wanted not strength to decide the controversy another way. But the
King of Denmark declares, how glad he would be to have the difference revived,
their loyalty corrupted, and the City in confusion, that what he could not do
by right and the power of his arms, he may bring about by his subtle arts and
treacherous practices.

Concerning the Manors of Ralswick and Strew in Rugen, the case stands thus:
Those lands were anciently the Bishop of Roschilds, to whose Diocese that
Island belonged in the time of Popery, but lay within the Territory of the
Princes of Rugen, and so were situate under, and subject to their Territorial
Soverainty. But afterward in the Reformation when the Ecclesiastical
constitution of Germany had suspended the Churches jurisdiction, and translated
the care of religion, with what appertained thereunto, into a right of the
States of the Empire, from that time the goods of the Church, as part of the
Territory, following the rights thereof, the most Illustrious Princes of
Pomerania thereupon thought the foresaid Manors fell to their lot. But because
the King of Denmark assuming to himself the ancient rights of the Bishop or
Roschild, opposed their title, a controversy arose between them, which was at
last determined at Kiel in Holstein, in the year 1570. N. 40.
after this manner, That the propriety and profit of the Manors, and right of
conferring them upon others, should belong to the Kings of Denmark; but the
Superiority and Dominion should remain to the Dukes, so that being as it were
situate in their Territory, hey should be subject to their jurisdiction, and to
Provincial charges. Nor had they any particular privilege of immunity either
before or after this agreement, but excepting what was left to the Kings of
Denmark, they were in the same condition with the rest of the inhabitants and
lands. As long as that Island in the time of the Germane war was held by the
Crown of Sweden upon occasion of covenants and right, those Manors continued
free from military taxes, and that was granted in regard of friendship with the
King of Denmark: But ever since Rugen became a Fee of the Kingdom of Sweden by
the Peace of Osnabrug, and all matters were ordered no longer by right of War
but of Territory, it was reasonable that such provincial duties as are laid
upon other Manors should be performed by those, in the same manner as by the
rest that are subject to Territorial right and power; besides that the
inhabitants petitioned more then once, that the indulgence of past years might
be no longer continued to their oppression. Now seeing there appeared neither
covenant for, nor foundation of any privilege, and seeing a request or
protestation ought not to be any longer admitted (by way of justice, contrary
to the tenor of the foresaid agreement) to the prejudice of Territorial rights,
and the burdening of other inhabitants of the Province; how can justice be said
to be denied, where there was none at all, or an imposition be noised for a
grievance, where there neither was nor appears any exemption?

Those things which are afterward intermingled concerning the breach of
liberties and rights of the Swedish subjects, and the burdens laid upon them,
are brought to no other end, but that their incitements and provocations of
that people to disobedience and rebellion might find the readlier success. We
neither know nor believe, that they have appointed the King of Denmark to be
their advocate. And it is held a trespass of a high nature amongst Soverain
Princes, for a man of his own head to negotiate the affairs of another Kings
subjects. For after the bounds of Dominions and Kingdoms are once set, and
from thenceforward the care of every Prince confined to his own, and restrained
from another man's subjects, Divine and humane Laws, the consent of Nations, the
common interest of Kings, reason, custom, and the tacit agreements of
societies, besides the Constitutions of the Empire, have condemned such kind of
busy solicitations and sought patronages. The treacherous designs and false
colors whereof without question they understand by this time, since they find
the incommodities of a War so rashly brought upon them, the cruelty of the
Danes, dangers and charges ^encreased pon them for defense against irruptions
and running invasions; and that the Danes are the only cause of all these
mischiefs. And seeing a deliverance from these miseries cannot be hoped but by
an end of the Danish vexations, they will think it concerns them to oppose
their attempts the more vigorously. We do not add, with what fallacious and
vain ostentation these things are written by the King of Denmark, while every
one sees the miserable condition of his own Subjects groaning under far greater
burdens and inconveniences, that they live almost without justice, liberty, or
a competency of livelihood, subject to the ambition and avarice of a few,
sighing and panting after better things, but while the War lasts expecting
little support and no relief from him, and when it is ended, nothing but that
tyranny and slavery which he has long aimed at.

At last a pretense is raked out of those things that past with the
Dantzickers, when yet nothing can be picked from thence, that is not justifiable
by the Law of Nations, and deservedly inflicted upon them, nothing that the
King of Denmark can pretend with equity to vindicate by Arms without prejudice
to the public. The Counsel of Sweden declared as much by their Letters written
by way of Answer to the Counsel of Denmark in the year, 1656. N. 41.
To which he replied nothing in his answer returned the 26. of April, in the
year following, but that he excused their bold and stubborn resistance from the
allegiance that City ought to the King of Poland, adding nothing how it
concerns the King of Denmark, nor of the right that involves the Subjects and
adherents of enemies, and what means ought to be used against them. By an old
Law of Nations practiced time out of mind, whereby Subjects become obnoxious to
those actions of War in which Kings are engaged, and are dealt withal by the
Law of Arms, after his Majesty had accepted of a decision by the Sword betwixt
him and Poland, he might lawfully invade a City subject to their power, and
favoring their injustices: and so much the rather, because it had formerly
been in part an occasion of that War; and whereas before the truce it was
obliged to the Kingdom of Sweden to run the hazard of their fortune, after the
same was broken by the treachery and plots of their adversaries, it ought to
return to its former condition, and so might most justly be reduced. But though
his Majesty might well enough have made it the first step of his military
Engagement, and had right to invade it as an enemies place, yet he dealt so
graciously, that in regard of Religion, neighborhood, and traffic, he
suffered his Resident and others, if they would timely provide for their own
quiet and safety, to make them fair offers, and such as were accompanied with
no prejudice, upon condition they would forbear hostility, neither abetting his
enemies with favor and assistance, nor disobliging him. But when they refused
that, and not only entertained an union of affections and counsels with the
enemies, but turned all their abusive and treacherous helps upon the Swedish
part, all their real courtesies upon the Polanders, it was impossible to avoid
the exercising of justice upon a declared enemy. And yet that was done with
great moderation, rather to sweeten their minds, and induce them to a care of
their safety, then to bring ruin upon their City. Neither was there any stop
or prejudice upon their Trade, which his Majesty left free, and no man
excluded, though he might justly have forbidden it. Only he was necessitated to
impose Custom, but that very easy and moderate, for preventing their malicious
attempts, and maintaining a Navy to watch against the same. Which surely is not
to be blamed, when it has been a practice in all ages with Kings and Nations,
absolutely to block up their enemies Ports, to hinder the importation of
Commodities and all Trading with them, to punish their Navigations with the
confiscation of Ships and goods. Neither have any people ever suffered it to be
brought in question, whether such proceedings are just against the Subjects,
Cities, and Ports of enemies. When his Majesty declining the use of that right,
left Trading free and secure in an enemies Country under so small Custom, he
could not persuade himself any man would be so unreasonable, as not to think
they were bound readily to acknowledge they had a very good bargain, enjoying
the liberty of traffic upon such easy terms, contrary to the custom of War.
Besides, they needed not to have paid it, if they would have been content to
forbear Trading, as is usual in the time of hostility. It is not unknown, how
far greater Taxes have heretofore been imposed by others without any just
ground. Whatever was done in this case, the Law of War will justify; but that
less was done then might have been, appears by what others use to do, which
hitherto we have not practiced. Much of this civility in these matters was upon
the score of friendship with neighbor States, and particularly of that which
was thought to continue still with the King of Denmark. For as soon as it was
understood that he took offense thereat, although none was given him, that
small imposition was forborne, and the Fleet drawn off. Moreover, during the
Treaty with the Ambassadors of the Lords States of the United Netherlands held
and accomplished at Elbing, room was left open for the foresaid City to be
comprehended, that in the very heat of War it might have enjoyed Peace and all
its advantages, and that no man might complain of any want or obstruction of
Trade. N. 42.
Nor was it refused, if the Dane had been so pleased, that the same should be
inserted into those agreements which were in hand with him at that time. But as
the King of Denmark employed his uttermost industry to hinder the ratification
of the league renewed with the Hollanders, so by his crafty insinuations he
moved and encouraged that City rather to put it self upon the hazard of War,
then to enjoy peace with a continued and flourishing Trade by the agreements of
Elbing. Which intention of his that he might the better compass, when the
Swedish Fleet was totally withdrawn from before that Port, he both permitted
the Holland men of War to pass the Sound as it were to beset the same Port, and
caused his own likewise to come up, just as the Treaty was brought to a
conclusion. The event clearly showed, what he did contrary to the desire of
Peace and the obligation of good neighborhood, and what effect it had in a
City brought into confusion by his artifices. Which Peace being first
scornfully rejected, and afterward violently opposed by them, made them
unworthy of the benefit that had been offered. When therefore under pretense of
loyalty (as it were due to the King of Poland, but not so punctually observed
heretofore, if we may believe History) they thought fit to use hostility, and
run upon furious affaults, all that was lawful against enemies, might justly
and deservedly fall upon their heads. And seeing it were but justice to destroy
them, being so obstinately implacable; why should it be reputed a crime to
straiten them, only to bring them to repentance? That which was done in order
to the stopping one of the streams of the Weyssel near this City, might indeed
be interpreted as an inconvenience to a hostile place, that would not be
reduced to reason, and the care of its own safety, but not as the destruction
of Trade, since there might be a more commodious passage at another branch of
the same River. Yet was there nothing committed in that particular which did in
the least swerve from the Laws and usages of War. The reproof of this liberty,
granted to every man by the Law of Nations, seems strange, since the Kings of
Denmark have always used it when they are engaged in Wars, and he that raigns
at present does use it against Cities and Territories situate in Germany under
the protection of the Empire, which he does not only exclude from freedom of
Trade, but oppresses them with depredations and great sufferings both at home
and abroad, and terrifies them with the fear of greater. When before the last
truce Sweden waged War with the Polanders, the Seas lying before the City were
possessed passages by Sea and Land blockt up, greater Customs imposed, and yet
neither he, nor any other Kings and States of Europe did then make that quarrel
theirs, nor look upon it as the common cause; only one or two desired some
particular things for the liberty of their own Nation. And when things returned
to their former posture by the Law of Nations, nothing was offered further in
opposition thereunto, much less was that judged to be a cause of disturbance,
or an unjust hindrance of traffic. It is certainly fresh in the memory of many
yet alive, how the most glorious King Gustavus the Great interdicted Commerce
not only with Dantzick, but with other Cities also under the Kingdom of
Poland, by Edicts published and set up in every place; those that were
concerned, not gainsaying this proceeding, because they had always done the
same, as well they might by the Law and custom of Nations. How this man's father
Christian the fourth judged otherwise both of the justice of such actions, and
their suitableness with friendship we have drawn up several evidences. When he
had Wars in Germany, and distrusted his own power to withstand the Imperialists
then aiming at the mastery of the Sea, he invited the most invincible King by
Letters written the 12. of September 1627. N. 43.
that with his Fleet he would watch over the Ports of the Cities of Germany
lying upon the Baltic Sea, and in exchange for that courtesy freely offered
both his help, and a prohibition against the Navigation and Trade of the
Dantzickers. He set forth a Proclamation the 25. of March 1628. forbidding all
Commerce and Navigation to and with that City, under pain of confiscation of
Ships and goods. N. 44.
Then by other Letters of the 14. of May in the same year N. 45.
he promised, that he would not permit any Ship going to, or coming from
Dantzick, whether it belonged to that or any other place, to sail, come, or
pass in or upon the streams of his Dominions, if the Customers of Sweden did
not by their Passes signify that Custom was paid. In consequence whereof be
gave Commission to seize upon such Ships and goods, as far as his power and
command reached. That which the Father approved by the Law of War, and as a
good friend and neighbor assisted, the Son has made a cause of War, which
cannot be just if the Law of War have any force. But what right can he have to
forbid that such actions should be done (even by the common Law of Nations)
against a City in Arms? He complains that his Customs are decreast by that
means. But as yet there appears no such right in those very Customs, that their
diminution should warrant the making a War upon others. Besides, care was taken
that they should not be diminisht: For there was left a freedom of Trade,
inserted the second time into the agreement of Elbing. If that proved without
effect, the fault is to be laid upon the stubbornness of the Citizens, and the
corruption of the Danes, not upon the King of Swedens intention. If the Danes
received any disadvantage thereby, it is submitted to judgment (for giving
reparation, if any damage accrewed) whether it was fitter to make War upon his
Majesty acting according to the Law of Arms, and yet in the mean time leaving
and offering the freedom and security of traffic; or to reduce a disorderly
City to reason. The first could not rightly be done against him, who only made
use of his own right; the latter by his fathers example ought to have been
prosecuted against them, who disdainfully rejected a liberty which was
determined by agreement. But if the Danes will take this for a sufficient cause
of war, that their Customs are grown less by reason of others wars, as no war
either by sea or land can be managed without such intervenient prejudice, so no
nation can ever be secure against them, because they will never want such a
pretense. The granting of this principle will be an occasion and pretense of
hostility against all men, and as it were a tacit submission to their
arbitrament of peace and war, to the infinite wrong and prejudice of the
European world. From whence they will proceed to a lusting desire of
prescribing and limiting Navigation and Commerce, whilst others are at war, of
giving Law to Kings and States, of taking away and hindering their liberty and
all right of war.

That which is contained in the 42. Article of the peace of Bremsbro N. 46.
concerning this City, affords nothing to move the King of Denmark to a just
indignation, for this very reason, because the right of War is exercised upon a
City subject and aiding to the Polanders. That place has no obligation to
assist or defend them, nor any power to prohibit Sweden from vindicating its
own Rights by the Sword. Such accidental and accessory inclusions were never
of that value and authority amongst Nations, that either the principal Leagues
should be judged broken by actions against parties so included, or the rights
of War abolisht by any other causes. The clauses there inserted are
impertinently urged here, as if his Majesty had thereby lost his power of
Military right against enemies and their Cities, especially when those Cities
do not forbear hostility. By common interpretation covenants are always so to
be understood, if things continue in the same state; the alteration whereof
dissolves the force and bond of the covenant. When war was composed by that
peace, provision was made that no revenge should be exercised upon the
Dantzickers for what was past; not to excluded actions of peace or war upon
other accounts for the time to come: which indeed holds as little
correspondence with the intention of covenants, as it does with reason. Neither
does that agreement allow them any other security, then they had before in the
time of the truce; the end whereof reduced the City to its former condition,
under which it lay before it was assaulted by arms, that is, subject to pay
Customs, and to undergo the sufferings of War, if the like occasions happened
again. For as much as they had not a perpetual peace, but a truce only with
the Kingdom of Sweden; the conditions thereof failing, it must needs expire. In
that Article of Bremsbro there was nothing changed therein, nor enlarged to
further time, nor was it so much as debated. But supposing they ought to have
had a more ample security, yet had they forfeited the same by their
miscarriges, their conspiring with the enemy, and declaring themselves so
against the Swedes. Neither will any discreet man show himself so unreasonable
against Sweden, as to impose upon it so great a sufferance of injuries against
the law of Arms and the practice of the world. That others were prohibited
Navigation, and their ships or goods taken from them in the open Sea, is a
charge that wants example as well as credit: Just as such things are faid to
have been committed against the Danes, without the particular mention of any
fact. The forbearing to name circumstances both here and elsewhere is an
infallible Argument that there was no such matter, when upon other occasions
the least puntillio's are not omitted.

It is hereby made manifest how distant from truth and justice those things
are, which are vented in the Danish Papers. Nor is it less obvious to those
that consider impartially, that by the true law of Arms the King of Denmark
has no just cause at all to make War upon a King, his neighbor, his friend,
his kinsman, and of the same Religion. While for the making a colorable
pretense of arms he rubs over those things which happened before the last
Peace, and were composed by this, he discovers the past thoughts of his heart
hitherto dissembled, that he intended not a faithful and perpetual League,
nor such as should last any longer then till he had strength and opportunity to
break it. When he alleges such things, as either appertain to others, and are
without the sphere of his vindication; or being done in the time of the most
Serene Queen, were not allowed by his Majesty now reigning (as almost all those
points are which make up the gross of his objections) he shows to what straits
he was put, to rake together incongruities against his Majesty, while he wanted
wherewithal truly and justly to upbraid him. And seeing those things had been
partly buried in long silence before, nor for many years together accused so
much as in word before the Peace was broken, and partly debated in friendly
Treaties, without any signification of distaste or offense; seeing also there
continued all the while frequent and repeated testimonies of good neighborhood
and affection by letters and Envoyes, it is manifest that he had no faithful
and sincere intention to maintain peace and friendship, but reserved a
perpetual discontent and close hatred in his heart, having been quiet hitherto
for no other reason but for want of power to offend, and under that cloak
waiting for an occasion, seeking revenge, and plotting mischief against Sweden,
when he thought that he had gotten what he looked for while his Majesty was
encumbered with a War against the Polanders and Muscovites, two potent enemies,
when either he found or made his Majesty's friends faithless to him, was
provoked or did provoke others to confederacies against him, being persuaded
that Sweden had not strength enough remaining to oppose him, or at least that
all their force would necessarily be employed in other Wars; then he broke the
peace, and flew out into hostile invasions and the proclaiming of a War. But
hitherto his hope and opinion has failed; nor will his success prove better
then the reason of his engagement.

As the defigne of this War began without just cause, so it was carried on
without just means, rashly and inconsiderately. But the Common Law of Nations
it is held unjust to take up Arms before the trial of an amicable composure.
But that was so far from being sought after by the Danes, that it was
absolutely rejected, even when offers were made to knit faster the bonds of
friendship and neighborhood, and if there were any controversy, to bring
differences to a fair and equal account. Besides, by the agreements made
heretofore at Stetin betwixt the Northern Kingdoms, and confirmed by the late
Peace, in case any controversy should arise, there is extraordinary caution
used to hinder the taking of Arms, and a way of proceeding set down. N. 47.
which the King of Denmark should have observed, nor indeed could he neglect
the same without the forfeiture of his faith, when the Swedes had made it
appear, that if there were any grievances, they ought to be redressed by that
method; yet he neither did nor admitted any thing agreeable thereunto. The
pacification also of Germany in the Instrument of peace at Osnabrug contains
the manner of proposing and determining incident controversies, with a severe
and solemn prohibition (under the penalty of breaking the peace) against
beginning a war upon such accounts. Yet the King of Denmark not caring for all
this, has done nothing of that which was desired, but presently thrust his
sword into the very bowels of Germany. Seeing therefore no war is just, but
when it is necessary, what can be more unjust then that, which had not begun,
if he could have bridled his revenge, and his blind ambitious defire of making
not Sweden only, but all the world tributary to him in the Sound? But he might
have forborne it, if he had not perversely rejected those things that were
treated and brought to conclusion concerning the preservation of peace and
making a League, without any probable reason, only out of the presumptuous
persuasion of his strength and the opportunity. When you look upon the Danish
demands, you will find such things proposed as by their impossibility sought
for nothing but an occasion to break off the Treaty: They were such as were
never heard of before, unworthy of Kings, nay grossly absurd. The scope of the
Treaty was, the strengthening of friendship and confederation; and yet they
desired to have those covenants dissolved, by which peace, friendship and
safety was restored to, and did continue amongst Kings, Kingdoms, and Nations.
It was under deliberation, how the Sea should be kept secure and free; and
those things which Sweden put in execution to preserve the same according to
the tenor of the Covenants, the Danes called Grievances. When it was suitable
to friendship and mutual confidence, that every one should keep what was their
own, they endeavored to wrest out of the Swedes hands what they had lawfully
gotten in war, and held confirmed in peace. When they could not say they were
offended, much less wronged, in any thing, but that way was not given to their
intemperate lust joined with the loss and prejudice not only of Sweden, but
of the whole Sea and of those that trade therein; yet they would have imposed
such a satisfaction as was to be required from conquered people. When all
friendly and faithful things were offered, they labored to take away
Provinces after an unusual way under pretense of Security. These exactions,
which use not to be made but upon subdued enemies, nor ever granted by any but
a conquered Nation, are a demonstrative argument of no inclination to peace,
and of a war long designed for those pretenses.

But the War was managed with no better skill, then it was begun. The first
step whereof was an invasion of the Lands of the Germane Empire, and so a
violation of that Peace, which had been recovered with so much blood, such
tedious labors and difficulties, after mortal destructions, amidst many
millions of prayers and sighs for the same. Whether the premises do not render
him guilty of breaking the Peace, and liable to the punishments due thereupon,
we leave it to be judged by the tenor of the Imperial Constitutions, and of
the late pacification. After that, one of his principal endeavors was, to
stir up his Majesty's subjects (otherwise loyal enough) to Treason and
Rebellion, to call in most cruel and barbarous enemies to the oppression of
Christians, to bewitch his friends with false suggestions, to disturb the peace
of so much of the Christian Church, as is made up of Protestants, and to cut
off all the hope, comfort, assistance and relief, which they can only expect
from union and concord amongst the Northern Kings and Kingdoms. What mischiefs
and dangers by that war has already happened to, and do still threaten, not
only him and his territories (for which he may thank himself, as the author
of his own misfortune, deserving no pity for such a voluntary offense) but his
neighbors, and the common security and quiet of almost all the Northern World,
yea and the safety of those that profess the Protestant Religion, every one
sees, and many smart for it, yet without hope of aid and redress from him.

Amongst so many unjust and horrible proceedings of the Danish war, there can
remain no doubt of the justice of his Majesty's defense: Only it will hardly
appear with what conscience and piety the Name of God, as witness and judge,
is so often called upon in the Danish Papers. We leave the Danes to try the
severity of Divine judgment, not to be deceived like men with corrupt
Narrations; undoubtedly hoping, that God, the World, and the Sword, to which
this controversy between Kings is committed, will be propitious and favorable
to the juster side.

Their reproaches and bitter invectives so prodigally cast upon us, we do not
return, being better instructed by the example of their confessed
unhandsomnesse, but we pass by and slight them, thinking it fitter to answer
them with the Sword, then with a railing tongue and the pedantry of a pen and
inkhorn.

Just JEHOVAH, Judge and Revenger, be so present with our righteous Arms in a
bountiful dispensation of prosperous successes, as Conscience, Confidence,
Justice, and Glory clap their hands in favor of our Defense.

Note. The public Acts and Records beforementioned and often cited according
to the numbers in the Margin, being not yet ready for the Press, shall follow
with the first opportunity.


