ANSWERS TO THE OBJECTIONS MADE Against the Re-establishing OF THE EDICT OF
NANTS.

This will be Published once every Fortnight, for the Benefit of all
Protestants.

LONDON, Printed for E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, MDCXCVII.

TO THE READER.
Hague, the 1st of July, 1697.
SIR,
THERE being no mention made of Ecclesiastical Matters in the Proposals made by
the Emperor's Ambassadors at Ryswick, those of other Roman Catholic Secular
Princes, they that are there deputed from Ecclesiastical Electors and Princes
of that Communion, have thought sit to put in their Memorials and Remonstrances
concerning their Grievances on that Subject; especially seeing that the King of
England, and other Protestant Princes do demand, That the Edict of Nants might
be again made good, and that the French Protestant Refugees be restored to
their entire Privileges and Estates in France. To this the former answered,
That those Differences would be debated at the End of the Treaty for a General
Peace; but the Baron de Lelienroot, the Mediator, replied, That it was fit that
Ecclesiastical Points should be adjusted, as well as those of Temporal and
Politic Concerns. Upon which, some of the Party that are against the Restoring
of the said Edict, etc. have spread some Objections, and Answers were made to
them, which are herein inserted; and it being not doubted, but that Replys will
be made on both sides, we will take care to send you whatever comes out on that
Subject, which will be Published once every Fortnight.

Farewell.
ANSWERS TO THE OBJECTIONS MADE Against the Re-establishing OF THE Edict of
NANTS.
Objection I.
IT IS the Policy of every King, to see that there be but one Religion in his
Kingdom.

Answer I. Princes who formerly afflicted the Church, which served God
uprightly according to his Gospel, proposed likewise to themselves to Abolish
the Diversity of Religions in their States, but Happiness never attended that
Conduct

II. In the States, where all the People has embraced the Reformation, good
provision is made against the Establishing of the Roman Catholic Religion: but
where there is some Roman Catholics already Established, as in England,
Scotland, Ireland, and in the United Provinces, they are not molested; and
'twas never known that Protestant States used any Violence to force the Roman
Catholics to embrace the Reformation, that Conduct being contrary to the
Spirit of Christianity: God alone is the Ruler of Consciences.

III. The Wisest, even among the Heathen Emperors, were sensible that it was
the Interest of the State not to trouble Consciences, and to let all People
live in the free exercise of their Religion.

IV. The Protestants of France have Edicts and Treaties granted or confirmed by
Prancie II, Charles IX, Henry III; Henry IV, Lewis XIII, and Lewis XIV; the
Observation of which has often been solemnly Sworn throughout the whole
Kingdom; and the said Treaties are Sacred and Inviolable Obligations.

Object. II. Every King being persuaded his Religion to be the best, he is not
to be blamed for enaeavouring as much as possible to Induce his Subjects to
embrace it.
Answ. I. He may for that purpose use Instructions, but not Violence.

II He ought to allow his Subjects to justify their Doctrine by the Scripture,
but that is not suffered in France; even when those are put to Death, who
assemble to serve God according to the Gospel, Drums are ordered to beat, to
the end the Martyrs-may not declare their Innocence and Piety when they are a
Dying. This Conduct will always be very much suspected by Persons who are not
prepossessed with Passion.

III. It Is not enough to say, that they had a good Intention: The Egyptians,
the Famous Antioches, the Jews and the Heathens pretended they had a good
Intention when they oppressed the People of God, but that did not excuse them.
Jesus Christ himself has foretold, That they who would put to Death the
Faithful, should think to do God a ^ervice, John 16.2. nevertheless that does
neither excuse them before God nor Men.

Object. III. The Diversity of Religions, occasions Divisions in a State.
Answ. I. Man's was accused of causing Trouble in the Kingdom of Israel: Such
like Crimes were imputed to Jesus Christ himself, to his Apostles, and to the
Primitive Christians.

II. When the Diversity of Religions is already established in a Kingdom, the
putting of all in Trouble and Confusion by forcing Millions of Souls to embrace
a Religion which they believe to be plainly against the Word of God, is not the
way to secure the Public Tranquillity.

III. It Is not in the power of Men to hinder the Diversity of Religions: It Is
God alone that can hinder it by his Grace; but especially, when he is pleased
to Establish his Kingdom of Light and Grace in the World; Men cannot destroy
his Work, and they that undertakes it, must have a care they be not found
making War against him.

Object. IV. When Princes in France are dissatisfied, they always find a Party
ready formed against the French Protestants.
Answer. When the Duke of Orleans, sustained by the Duke of Montmorenci, was
willing to Dethrone Lewis XIII, the Franch Protestants by their Inviolable
Fidelity rendered his Design abortive. When the Prince of Conde attempted
afterward to take away the Crown from Lewis XIV, the Protestants of France
rendered all his Endeavors ineffectual, notwithstanding all the advantageous
Promises he made them. When the whole Province of Languedock was in a very
dangerous Uproar, by reason of some new Taxes, the Protestants have likewise
put a stop to it by their Fidelity: So that it may be said, That of all the
Subjects the King of France has, the Protestants are the most Faithful, and
most Zealous for his Service.

Object. V. All the Protestants of France, have embraced the Roman Catholic
Religion.
Answer. Violence forced from their Mouth, some Word contrary to the meaning of
their own Heart: ^ut all the World knows already, That all that People has
long ago renounced the Roman Communion, which they were forced to embrace; and
that they groan continually in the Captivity they are now in, not having the
liberty to meet to serve God according to his Word. When the Ministers go to
preach in France, of an hundred Persons overcome by the Violence of the
Persecution, there is hardly one to be found that does not repair to the Holy
Assemblies; of which, the great number of People that have been, and are still
from time to time Massacred, condemned to be Whipped, to the Galleys, or to Die,
is a convincing Testimony.

Object. VI. The Edicts have occasioned abundance of Law Suits.
Answer. If the Chambers of the Edict had been preserved, and any Inclination
shown to see the Edict of Nants religiously observed, there would have been no
Law Suits on account of Religion; and if there had been any, they might have
been repressed by Justice: But when the Clergy saw there was a design formed to
subvert and annul the Edicts, by making a show of observing them, and taking
the way of an apparent Justice, the Law Suits, Litigious Pleading, Calumnies,
Perjuries and Injustices filled the whole Kingdom with trouble.

Object VII. The Edicts were obtained during the Troubles of the Wars.
Answ. I. The Protestants were not the cause of these Troubles, but they who
remeved Heaven and Earth to exterminate them with Fire and Sword.

II. When there is some trouble in a State, if it could not be pacified by
Edicts and Treaties, and one could not rely on the observation of them, even
when they have been solemnly sworn to throughout the whole Kingdom, the evil
would be without remedy, and things forced to be carried on to the last
Extremities.

III. When the like Misfortunes happens, the Aggressors ought to be severely
punished; but as soon as the Troubles are pacified by respective Words, Edicts
and Treaties, they ought to be faithfully observed. A Maxim contrary to this
Principle, cannot be but very pernicious to a State.

IV. The Gabaonites obtained by Fraud the Treaty granted them by Josiah; and
though Sedacias King of Juda was forced to treat with Nebuchadnezzar, who was an
Oppressor, yet God punished in a most dreadful manner the Infraction of each
of these two Treaties. The Edict of Nants was given in time of Peace, as
appears by History, and by the Edict it self. And, 1. This Edict was just in it
self, and necessary for the public Tranquillity, and for the good of the State,
as the event has demonstrated. 2. Since it supplied the stead of the precedent
Edicts, which were grounded on Treaties signed on both sides, and solemnly
Sworn to through the whole Kingdom, it was not to be revoked. 3. It appears by
the Preface of the said Edict, That it was made when the Roman Catholics and
the Protestants had conferred and agreed together of the Just, Reasonable and
Necessary Things for the Public Good: So that it was a Transaction between
them, as well as a Solemn Obligation of the Royal Promise. 4. In effect in the
same Preface, Henry IV. promises to see it Inviolably observed. These are not
Terms of Edicts revocable by their Nature. 5. In the 91st Article, that Edict
is expressly declared Perpetual and Irrevocable. 6. The Observation of the said
Edict was solemnly Sworn to by all the Bodies Civil and Politic of the
Kingdom. 7. Lewis XIII. confirmed it afterward in time of Peace by his
Declaration of 1610, and 1614. 8. The said Edict was also confirmed by the
first Article of the Treaty of Peace 1626, of which the King of Great Britain
was Guarantee with the consent of France. 9. It was likewise confirmed in full
Peace by Lewis XIV. in his Declarations of 1643 and 1652, as a very Recompense
of the great Services he received from his Protestant Subjects when the Crown
was in danger, as appears by the last of the said two Declarations, which gives
an Authentic Testimony of their Fidelity. 10. Finally His Most Christian
Majesty promised the late Elector of Brandenbourg, That he would cause it to be
Inviolably observed, as appears by the Letters he wrote on that Subject to His
Electoral Highness in the Year 1666. If after all these solemn Engagements, the
Repose of a great Nation was not secured, nothing would for the future ^e Sure,
Sacred and Inviolable.


Object. VIII. The Roman Catholics are excluded from Offices in the Protestant
States.
Answ. I. If they had Edicts and Treaties, and the same were violated, they
would have reason to complain; but there is no such thing.

II. It Is very well known how often the Jesuits have Plotted in England, in
order to Subvert the State, and to Reign themselves in it, which they have
likewise done some times in the chief places of Holland; and that is the reason
it is not thought fit to put in Offices of State Roman Catholics, who have such
Directors of Conscience; but the Protestants of France are always satisfied
when they are permitted to pray to God; and when the State wants their
Assistance and Fidelity, they never fail of performing their Duty. In a word,
their Edicts are Irrevocable, and even necessary for the good of the State, as
Experience has always justified it.

Object IX. The Kings of England, who endeavored to Establish the Roman
Catholic Religion in that Kingdom, have drawn themselves into great
Misfortunes.
Answer. If any has attempted the Subversion of the Laws of the Kingdom, which
(...) promised to observe, and has not had a happy Success in his Enterprise,
he ought to blame none but himself.

But finally, That Is no reason why Sacred and Inviolable Edicts should be
trampled down, the Observation of them being necessary in France for the
Tranquillity of a Great People, and even for the good of the State.

Object X. The Roman Catholics in France, would be dissati^fied if the
Protestants were (...).
Answ. I. It Is known on the contrary, That all the Roman Catholic People in
the Kingdom own, that the Evil inflicted to the Protestants, has drawn upon
France great Calamities, and that that Persecution is the Ruin of the Kingdom.
It Is likewise known, That it is the Opinion of all Judicious Persons in France.

II. Let the King, who has the Authority in hand, order those who shall act
contrary to the Edicts, to be severely punished as Disturbers of the Public I
ranquility, and all will be quiet in a very little time.

III. But to deliver absolutely His Most Christian Majesty from the
Importunities of the Jesuits, it is important, That the Protestant Powers do
Intervene in the Re-establishment of the French Protestants, to the end their
Intervention may hereafter serve as a (...) to curb the Malice of that
Turbulent sort of People.

Object. XI. If France should Re^stablish the French Protestants, it would be
just the Roman Catholics should enjoy the same Advantages in the Protestant
Staees.
Answ. I. The Protestants are not so much to be feared in the Roman Catholic
Dominions, as the Roman Catholics are in the States of the Protestants. The
Faithfulness of the Protestants is sure; whereas the Poisoning, Assassinations,
Plots and Conspiracies of those that directs the Consciences of the Roman
Catholics, are known all the World over, and puts the Protestant Powers into a
just mistrust of them.

II. The Roman Catholics in England, Scotland, Ireland, and in the United
Provinces, suffer neither Injustice, Persecution, nor Hinderance in the
Exercise of their Religion.

III. If the Protestants were reduced to meet privately in France, the Jesuits
doubtless would induce the Rabble to Massacre them; it is necessary to make it
appear, That they are authorized so to do, and that there be Chambers of Edict
to punish the Contraventions of the Edicts.

IV. In a word, The Edicts and Treaties granted to the French Protestants, are
Irrevocable Laws.

Object. XII. The French King, has no occasion for the French Protestants
Fidelity.
Answ. I. Though he should have no occasion for it, however a Prince ought in
justice to protect his Subjects, and to procure them a peaceable Enjoyment of
their Rights, their Liberties and their Privileges, especially when the said
Liberties and Privileges tend, as in this case, to no other end but to render
those, to whom they are granted, equal to their Fellow Citizens, who are not
more Faithful than they, and who contribute no more than they do toward the
Charges of the State, and the Encouragement of Trade.

II. It has sufficiently appeared in time of need, that the French Protestants
Fidelity has not been useless to Henry IV, Lewis XIII, and Lewis XIV.

Object. XIII. The Court of Rome would take it ill, to see the French
Protestants Re-established.
Answ. I. That Is no business of the Court of Rome. The Court of Rome did not
hinder the Protestants, Lutherans and Reformed from being Re-established
throughout all the Empire, by virtue of the Peace of Munster and Osnaburg, on
Foot of the Ancient Treaties. France it self did procure this Re-establishment,
and approved very much the Secularisation of several Archbishopricks and
Bishoprics, in favor of the Protestants: Why then, now the Peace of all
Europe is in hand, should several Millions of Innocent People be left in
Trouble and Calamity, who has a long time groaned in France, or where ever
they are dispersed, to the prejudice of the most solemn and most sacred Edicts
and Treaties that can be made between Men? Does not the very Interest of France
require that so great a number of People be comprehended in the General Peace.

Object. XIV. The Mixture of several Religions is very apt to breed Scruples in
Men's Souls, and to draw them into an Irreligious Life.
Answ. I. It is by forcing people to profess against their Will, a Religion
which they condemn in their Hearts, that they are thrown into an Irreligious
Life, and it is from thence also that arises many doubtful Thoughts in the Minds
of the Roman Catholics themselves, who have any understanding, since People
does by force profane those Mysteries, which they know to be contrary to the
Spirit of Christianity.

II. There was ever wicked and ungodly People in the World, but we dare say,
That the number of those that Leads an Irreligious Life, has always been very
small amongst the French Protestants.

III. The only means to put a stop to Profaneness, is to preach the pure
Doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

IV. Finally, If there were no Protestants in France, such measures might be
taken as would hinder their coming in from abroad; but when the King was raised
to the Throne, he found in France, a great number of people established there
long before, who had inviolable Edicts and Treaties, which His Majesty himself
promised to protect and maintain, who wrongs no Body who lives in the Fear of
God, who serves him purely according to his Word, and who has not made himself
unworthy of the Love and protection of his Monarch, seeing he has given him on
the most important occasions, signal proofs of his Fidelity.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A New and Exact Survey of the City of Barcelona, as it is now Invested by the
French, curiously Engraven on a Copper Plate. Printed by J. Moxon at the Atlas
in Warwick Lane, and Sold by E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall, Price 6 d.


