AN ANSWER OF THE PURCHASERS Of the Lands, late of Sir JOHN STAWEL, By Act of
Parliament, Exposed to Sale for his TREASON: To a Pamphlet, Entitled, The
humble Remonstrance of Sir John Stawel: TOGETHER With the Answer of John Ash
Esquire, to diverse Scandals mentioned in that Remonstrance. AS ALSO A Petition
and several Reasons for establishment OF PUBLIC SALES; Tendered by Will.
Lawrence Esquire One of the Judges in SCOTLAND.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Newcomb, dwelling in Thamestreet, over against
Baynards Castle, Anno Domini 1654.

AN ANSWER OF The Purchasers of the Lands LATE OF Sir JOHN STAWEL; By ACT of
PARLIAMENT, Exposed to Sale for his Treason, etc.
IT is true, that Affliction and Calamities have attended Sir John Stawels late
condition, not by any practice, misinformation, or ill-grounded Apprehensions
(as himself would have it,) but through his own obstinacy, wilfulness;
doubtless, as a punishment for his slighting that Mercy, which Divine
Providence tendered unto him by the Army; and which, others of his own judgment,
and within his own Articles, timely embracing, did safely harbor, whilst
himself remains splitted on those Rocks which they wisely avoided. Yet does he
now by his Remonstrance, proffer his Peaceable-Obedience to this Commonwealth,
(and it is better late then never.) But of what integrity, can such his
Autumn-submission be, since it is tendered not till after the Fall of all hopes
of a Contrariant, and is mixed with an endeavor to palliat, if not justify his
former exorbitances.

The particulars of which Remonstrance he does avow upon the Faith of a
Christian, and Honor of a Gentleman, though many of them be notorious untruths;
and which Remonstrance he has published to Vindicate (as he pretends) the
Honor and Justice of the Parliament and Army, and undeceive the People; when
diverse of them yet feel the smart, and others will ever bear the marks of his
cruelties.

It cannot be denied, but that the County of Somerset, in the year 1640. chose
Sir John Stawel to serve in Parliament as a Knight thereof, and thereby
entrusted him with the protection of their Estates, and Liberties. Which high
trust he undertook, and accordingly sat in that Parliament; but afterward,
contrary to that trust, he not only deserted that Parliament, but levied war
against it, and the Public Interest of that County, by color of a most
Illegal Commission of Array; and by the command of one, who as little deserved
the recommendation of the then House of Commons, as Sir John Stawel did the
choice of that County; neither answering the expectation then had of them, and
both infringing their Countries trust.

Sir John being thus in Arms, opposed at Marshals-Elm the Forces then raised in
that County, by Authority of Parliament, where his catriage will appear by this
ensuing Examination, being the Deposition of a Minister of Gods Word, faithful
to the Parliament; and one that did, therefore, afterward suffer under Sir
John's Tyranny.

October 22. 1650. Examinations taken upon Oath the day and year above written,
by virtue of Directions from the Right Honorable The High Court of Justice,
concerning certain High Crimes and Misdemeanors committed by Sir John Stawel,
Knight of the Bath, for levying War against the Parliament of England.
JOhn Daniel of Buckland-Mary, in the County of Somerset, Clerk, Aged Sixty
years or thereabouts, being sworn and examined, says, That Sir John Stawel,
late of Higham in the County aforesaid, Knight of the Bath, did take up Arms
against the Parliament of England; and, to his knowledge, listed many Soldiers,
both Horse and Foot. And Anno Dom. 1642. the said Sir John Stawel was himself
in person at a place in the said County, called Marshals-Elm; and then and
there had many Soldiers under his command, both Horse and Foot, and did abet
and encourage the said Soldiers to fight against those that were then near unto
them; under the command (as I conceive) of Col. Pyne for the Parliament, and
preservation of the Peace of the then Kingdom.

And this Examinant further says, That he being with the company that were for
the Parliament, did adventure to ride up to the said place of Marshals-Elm by
himself alone, of purpose to discern what Forces the said Sir John Stawel had.
Before he came full to the top of the Hill, the said Sir John Stawel staid him,
and asked this Examinant, What he did there, and whether or no he was a
Chaplain to the Army? To whom this Examinant replied, That he was not, but had
some occasion of his own, at a place called Shapwick; which was about two Miles
from that place of Marshals-Elm. And being demanded by the said Sir John
Stawel, whether the Roundheads would come up the Hill, and fight them? This
Examinant replied, That he believed that they intended not to fight; and
thereupon this Examinant desired him to preserve the peace of the Kingdom. But
the said Sir John being much enraged, swore, That if they would not come up to
fight with them, the said Sir John, and his Company, would go down the Hill and
fight with them; and thereupon drew his sword, and had also a Pistol, and
brandishing his sword, said, Come up Blades, if you have a mind to it, and we
are for you.

And this Examinant further says, That there were placed in Quar-Pits, thirty
Musketeers or thereabouts, which had their light Matches, and their Muskets
laden, ready to fight; which were at that time encouraged by the said Sir John
to be valiant.

And this Examinant further says, That at that time Mr. Robert Osborn (being
for the Parliament) was there slain, and many others grievously hurt and
wounded, and this Deponent with others taken prisoners by the said Sir John
Stawel, and his Forces there with him.

And this Examinant further says, That one Captain Rosecareck (a Cornish man)
six Months after, or thereabouts, came to Machelny, where this Examinant then
lived, being sent by the said Sir John Stawel, and there searched this
Examinants house for Arms, and then carried away a Welsh-hook into the Castle
of Taunton; and also diverse other Arms from other his Neighbors. And the said
Sir John Stawel (then calling in the Country upon Posse Comitatus) by Warrant,
sent for this Examinant to appear before him, and there told him, That he was
worthy to be drawn, hanged, and quartered for his siding with the Parliament
against the late King.

By which Deposition, the intention of Sir John and that Company, does clearly
appear to be otherwise then what by his Remonstrance is pretended. Sir John
called the Parliament Forces Roundheads (a Nickname he lately learnt at
Court) swore those Roundheads should fight, and then drew and brandished his
sword, inviting them to come up and fight, and encouraged his Musketeers in
the Quar-pit.

But (says Sir John) the Parliament Forces made many shots first at us, and
wounded a Gentleman, and killed his Horse, which made him, and his, put
themselves into a posture of Defense.

Be this granted to be true, (although the Depositions on both Parts seem to
affirm the contrary) yet this Plea (De son Assault demesne) although it is a
good Bar in an Action of Assault and Battery. He first Assaulted me, and
therefore I did cut, and gave him those wounds in my own defense. Yet here it
is no Plea, sithence, for a Theif to say, The Honest-man first assaulted me,
and therefore I robbed him; or for a Traitor to affirm, The Parliaments Forces
first shot at me, and therefore I killed, wounded, and imprisoned them; were
never known to be any good Pleas, or so much as colorable excuses; And Sir
John's being there in Arms against the Parliament, was a Treason of an high
nature. Vain therefore are this and the rest of Sir John's pretenses in that his
Remonstrance, and of as little weight are his Protestations therein, one
whereof we now light upon: For he protests before the Almighty God, That he did
not cut or draw blood on any man that day; but made it his care to preserve any
of that party, and to rescue as many as he saw any violence offered unto. The
truth of which his Protestation, will appear by this Deposition transcribed.

October 24. 1650. Examinations taken upon Oath, by virtue of Directions from
the Right Honorable The High Court of Justice, concerning Treasons, Murders,
and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors committed by Sir John Stawel, Knight of
the Bath.
NIcholas Ward of Chard, Cordwinder, Aged Thirty five years, or thereabouts,
sworn and examined, says, That about eight years since (he was then a Drummer
under Lieutenant Colonel John Preston, of the County of Somerset; who raised
Forces by Authority derived from the Parliament, for suppressing of
Insurrections and Rebellions) This Examinant marched with diverse other persons
unto Marshals-Elm in the County of Somerset, where appeared Sir John Stawel,
Knight of the Bath, with diverse other Gentlemen in Arms against the Parliament,
for the late King, when and where the Parliaments Forces were routed by an
Ambuscado laid. And the said Sir John Stawel having his sword drawn, fell on
this Examinant, and with his own hand gave him with his said sword twenty six
wounds, leaving this Examinant for dead. This Examinant did then see the said
Sir John Stawel ride after the Parliament Soldiers, and hacked and hewed them
This Examinant further says, That the said Sir John Stawel did often say in
this Deponents hearing, That all those that did take up Arms for the Parliament
were Rebels, Rogues, and Traitors, and should be all hanged one after another.

By which Examination, the pretended civility of Sir John does manifestly
appear, by his hacking and hewing upon the pursuit, and his carbonading of
Nicholas Ward, a fit expression of that outrage, and would be adjudged so, if
Wards mangled face were in present view, his nose being cut off, and his eye
cut out, as Nicholas Ward by his Petition to the Court of Articles, and in that
Remonstrance recited, does set forth. But this blood Sir John endeavors to wipe
off by affirming, That Ward having once sworn and obtained a Judgment against
him for 100 l. damages, finds himself now bound to make good that shameless
untruth (so he is pleased to term it) doubtless it is the part of an honest
man, at all times, and in all places to affirm a truth, especially having sworn
it before a lawful Authority; and therefore Ward inserting in his Petition to
that Court of Articles, such Sir John's dealing with him, cannot be any scandal,
except truth it self be one. For an untruth it cannot now be presumed: For
Nicholas Ward in Hillary Term, the two and twentieth of Caroli, brought his
Action of Assault and Battery against Sir John Stawel, whereunto he pleaded
neither this pretended Plea of Self-defence, nor his being comprised within the
Articles of Exon, but the general Issue of Not guilty: Which Issue coming to be
tried at an Assizes for that County of Somerset, the Jury (persons not
interessed nor concerned) found him guilty (of this shameless untruth.) And
this very Main being then given in evidence, and proved by one Checkford, since
deceased, and other witnesses (whereof Ward himself could not be one,) the same
Jury assessed so great damages as 100 l. Without which Testimony the Jury would
not have found Sir John guilty, unless they themselves knew the truth thereof,
as perhaps some of them did, being Inhabitants of the same County. And
therefore Sir John's bare negation, especially seeing it tends to the attainting
of both Jury and Witnesses, must and will with all unbyast persons beat no
weight. Which Sir John it seems well knew, and therefore produces several
Certificates and Depositions, in order, as himself says, to remove the
Grievance which then lay on him by that Petition of Ward, (and doubtless will
lie on him to Succession.)

And to this Testimony Sir John gives the title of Very Honorable, whereas
Neighbor-hood will know how little credit may be given to all those Witnesses
and Certificates, except one of them. Mr. Emmanuel Sandys his Certificate is
first produced, which (if admitted) does make against Sir John himself: For Mr.
Sandys certifies, that after some intercourse between the Forces, Captain
Preston and the Company offering to march up the Hill in two Bodies, the
Company on the Hill (meaning Sir John's Company) shot at us several times
(meaning the Parliaments Forces) and we at them. Of which words, what other
construction can be made then, that Sir John's Company made the first shot; and
if so, where is the truth of Sir John's Plea of Self-defence. Thus far Mr.
Sandys (and we must believe him, Sir John else will be angry) has fixed the
shameless untruth on Sir John himself, and then proceeds to certify, That the
Parliament Forces flying, Captain Preston and himself were taken prisoners, and
their Moneys, Horses, and Weapons taken from them by some of Sir John's Company,
who had killed them, if not rescued by the now Lord Pawlet and Sir John Stawel.
And these prisoners had that night fair Quarters; and for that the Soldiers had
taken from them their money, Sir John Stawel, Gentleman-like, delivered to Mr.
Sandys Forty shillings, which Mr. Sandys took for a civil respect, and
afterward repaid him with thanks, for his favor and kind usage.

This is the further effect of Mr. Sandys Certificate; by which it is
observable, how soon Sir John Stawels Party had learnt their Trade, first to
rob, and afterward to kill; which must speak aloud Sir John Stawels honor, in
that he rescued the prisoners, and gave Mr. Sandys Forty shillings. Which (for
ought appears) might be part of the moneys taken from him, or Captain Preston;
and if so, Mr. Sandys is favored with a Pig of his own Sow. But where is the
Certificate of Captain Preston on this behalf? A person of valor, and one that
has faithfully passed through the greatest offices of trust in his County: his
Certificate is not to be found, perhaps not demanded, his usage was so bad. It
is certified, his Moneys, Horse, and Arms, were taken from him. And what was
the reason, that Sir John gave Master Sandys Forty shillings, and nothing to
Captain Preston, seeing both were alike prisoners, alike robbed? Was there no
design in this partiality? did not Sir John foresee, or had hopes of a facile,
or possible corrupting Mr. Sandys and his man Vax, (to whom he gave so
liberally as Fourteen pound) or at least abating their zeal and fidelity to the
Parliament? It is certified, That Mr. Sandys took it as a civil respect and
favor; and it was observed, That Mr. Sandys and his man Vax, did thereafter
very coldly, if at all engage for the Parliament. And Mr. Sandys has in
requital of this respect, certified his belief to that Court of Articles, but
grounded upon a known untruth; He does verily believe, That many lives and much
blood was that day saved by the only means of the said Sir John Stawel, who
then, and at other times, ever behaved himself as a lover of his Country.

These are the words of this bold Certificant, whereas it is too well known in
that his Country, That the series of Sir John his actions, doubtless not
unknown to Mr. Sandys himself, does speak him the contrary; witness his
Depopulations at Cothelstone, and his Planting afterward under color of some
satisfaction, and through fear of the then Star. chamber, (who began to
question such offenses) the disterr'd Inhabitants on the top of Quantock-Hill;
witness those Articles of Complaint by the Town of Taunton (the Inhabitants of
a whole Corporation, and his Neighbors) exhibited against him in Parliament,
which seem to be the Articles mentioned in his Remonstrance, P. 14. to be by
that Town preferred. 3 Car. against him unto the Parliament, upon scandalous
and false suggestions, as he pretends; and yet they were made good against him,
and himself reproved; and which he has since fully revenged, as will appear.
Witness his Breach of the Public Trust of his Country, by leaving the
Parliament (at a time when all the Liberties, and Common-Interest of the
Subject lay at stake) and his taking up of Arms to destroy and tyrannize (when
thus armed) over the Lives, Liberties, Estates, and Consciences of his
Fellow Subjects; the very Magistrates and High Sheriff himself of the County
not excepted: And yet Mr. Sandys is pleased to term him a lover of his Country
then, at Marshals-Elm, at that time, when Mr. Sandys himself fighted him (if he
fought at all) as a disturber thereof. O Regina Pecunia! What a strange
alteration of judgment has these Forty shillings wrought in Mr. Sandys in a
few years!

Sir John's next Proofs are the Examinations of the Lord Pawlet, and one Robert
Knight, Gentleman, (which Knight, although not by the title of Gentleman, yet
is otherwise notoriously known in his Country,) both their Depositions being to
this effect, That Sir John did not hurt any man, nor discharged his Pistol, as
the Lord Pawlet remembers, being near unto him, during all that action, and as
Mr. Knight verily believes: Sir John not stirring out of the highway; and that
the Drummer (whom the Lord Paulet knows not) was (as he believes) not hurt by
Sir John, but (as he has since heard) by one Crocker; which Depositions (if
true) will no ways invalid Wards testimony, and much less the affirmative and
positive testimony of the witnesses at the Trial and Verdict of the Jury
thereon, in regard these Depositions are in the negative, Did not stir out of
the highway, nor discharge his Pistol, nor did hurt any man: Whereas it is
proved that Sir John had his sword drawn, and Wards wounds were given by a
sword, and might be given as well in the highway as in any other place. Neither
is it usual for one Commander to take particular notice of another actions,
especially in a fight and pursuit of an enemy, and when there was no
preintention or cause of any such particular observation; neither is it
improbable but that Ward might have that day some wounds given him by Crocker,
and yet afterward receive 26 more from Sir John Stawell (all his wounds
exceeding that number) and those by Crocker might be given in the Corn, and
those by Sir John in the highway? The same answer might be given to the ensuing
Depositions of William Stuckly and Robert Vax, being both to the effect of the
former; but that the Deposition of Vax is voluntary and extra-judicial: and
both the Deponents of no such credit in their Country, as in any sort to call
in question the verdict aforesaid, however by comparing the Depositions of
Knight, Stuckly, and Vax, it is evident, that Sir John's company were by
direction and order to, and did give the onset and charge, which argues Sir
John's actions rather offensive then defensive, as Sir John pretends, and the
first shot to be given by his party. The next endeavor of Sir John is, by his
Remonstrance to extenuate his sending of William Cady and John England to
Ivelchester Gaol to ease (forsooth) the Castle of Taunton, whom he there found
prisoners, and where they were improperly kept. It Is very true they were
improperly imprisoned for their faithfulness to the Parliament; and as
improperly by Sir John by a Mittimus to the Keeper of Ivelchechester, removed
from Taunton thither.

But Sir John says that he soon after released England, but could not Cady,
because he was a prisoner for debt upon his first coming thither; but Cady
swears that Sir John committed him to the common Goal, and kept him there in
chains for a year and more, and threatened to hang him, and said he was a
Traitor against the King, and demanded 20 l. of him, and John England does
depose, that he tasted very deeply of Sir John's cruelty.

The Transcriptions ensuing are full.

October 22. 1650. Examinations taken upon Oath the day and year above written,
by virtue of directions from the High Court of Justice, concerning certain high
crimes and misdemeanors committed by Sir John Stawell Knight of the Bath, for
levying war against the Parliament of England.
John England of Taunton, Clothier, aged thirty years or thereabouts, sworn and
examined, says, That Sir John Stawell, when he was Governor of the Town of
Taunton for the late King against the Parliament, did exercise much cruelty on
some of the inhabitants that were real in their affections to the Parliament,
by close imprisoning of them, putting by his command, Irons on them, and
requiring great Fines from them, to advance the Kings Interest to the great
destruction of the Commonwealth; of which cruelty this Deponent tasted very
deeply.

November 5. 1650. An Examination taken at Dunster concerning certain high
crimes and misdemeanors committed against the Parliament and Commonwealth of
England, by Sir John Stawell Knight of the Bath.
William Cady of Dunster Mercer, aged 49. years or thereabouts sworn and
examined, says, That the said Sir John Stawell did in the year 1644. raise
Arms against the Parliament and Commonwealth of England, and in particular was
in a hostile posture of war at a place called Marshals Elm in this County, and
there did fight, and there did draw blood; and so continued in arms in the said
County against the Parliament, and raised great sums of money to assist the
King against the Parliament; Committed this Examinant to the common Goal, and
there kept him in prison, and in chains, by the space of one whole year and
more, and threatened to hang this Examinant diverse times, and said he was a
Traitor against the King, and did demand sums of money of him, as he remembers
20 l. or more, and further says, that he was carried from the Goal to the
Assizes for this County, and there was indicted for High Treason, and the Bill
then found against him. And this Examinant verily believes, and to his best
remembrance says, That Sir John Stawell was then present at the same Assizes.

Will. Cady.

By which Depositions of William Cady, it is manifest that Sir John Stawell
fought and drew blood at Marshals Elm; yet Sir John Stawels honorable
testimony would persuade, that they believe, he did hurt or wound no man there.

A very neat belief to mince a truth; as if the wounding of Ward to desperation
of life (found so by verdict) his hacking and hewing upon the pursuit (proved
by Nicholas Ward) and his fighting and drawing of blood (attested by William
Cady) were no hurting of any man. These Depositions likewise prove the cruelty
of Sir John, and yet Sir John thinks it impossible for him to be guilty of so
much blood and cruelty as is mentioned in the Petition of Cady and Ward; as if
26 wounds draw little or no blood, and as if chains, irons, close imprisonment,
exaction of great fines of well-affected persons, to advance the late Kings
interest, to the destruction of the Commonwealth (as the ensuing Depositions
will plainly manifest) be less cruelty then is mentioned in their moderate
Petition. We do pray that Sir John may no longer stand on public extenuation
of these and the ensuing outrages of his; but in secret repent them, humbly
imploring the divine mercy, to avoid divine Justice, being the readiest way to
pacify the restless proceedings of them, who (as he scandalously pretends)
hate him without a cause; but probably are the instruments of that Justice.

Sir John's Remonstrance has brought us to the year 1643. and to Marquess
Hartfords approach to the Town of Taunton, the place which afterward God
preserved amidst the fires, and notwithstanding the adusted wrath and rage of
the besiegers; and which Sir John, during his Command thereof, made the
Rendezvous of Tyranny and arbitrary power, not to advance the Royal Interest
(as was divulged) but (as is very likely) to satisfy the displeasure he had
taken up against the Inhabitants thereof, upon the occasion abovesaid; upon
which approach, these faithful Inhabitants (finding that they were not of
strength sufficient to protect themselves from this rebellion) sent their
Justice of Peace, Mr. George Powel, and one Mr. Nicholas to the Besiegers, to
Treat of a Rendition upon Articles, during which Treaty, and after Articles
agreed on (amongst which, some of them were, That the Inhabitants should be
free from Plunder and Imprisonment) the Enemy upon pretense (without the least
ground of truth or probability) that the Inhabitants were flying with their
Movables (whereas they were in truth some strangers only then in the Town that
went out) did enter the same, and (notwithstanding those Articles) plundered it
to the value of 10000 l. and imprisoned the then Mayor, and chief Inhabitants
thereof. With what face then can Sir John now call so loud upon the faith of
the Parliament and their Armies to perform their Articles; when himself and his
associates then brake theirs. Now after this Plunder was made, then Sir John
(as he says) entreated that the Town might be admitted to a reasonable Fine,
which was assessed at 8000 l. a sum which that poor exhausted Town was not able
to pay (the richest of them being, before that time plundered to what could be
found:) And this moderate Fine was thus imposed (likely) to the knowledge of
Sir John (if not by his Vote) for he was then of the Council of War, that
imposed it, and Governor of the Town: And yet now he says it was 8000 l. as he
has heard. To gain which Government, Walter Cliffe the Jailer, Aldred Seaman,
and others, Sir John's Agents were sent to gain subscriptions to the Petition in
that Remonstrance recited page 13. which Petition was drawn beforehand, and
without the knowledge of the Inhabitants; some of whom in hopes to get out of
prison, and others for fear of being imprisoned, subscribed the same, and such
as denied their subscriptions thereunto, were by Sir John Stawels special
command inhumanly dealt with. Sir John having thus gained unto himself the
Government of this Garrison, begins his intended revenge on the Inhabitants,
laboring with all rigor to extort that fine from them, which he knew to be
unreasonable, and contrary to Articles, to maintain (as he confesses page 16.)
the soldiers left there in Garrison, indeed his fellow-Traitors. And such
Inhabitants as refused to pay the same, either through a good affection to the
Parliament, or disability, he imprisoned, laid them in irons, threatened to hang
them, and denied them humane necessaries, causing a spout to be taken away,
which served them with rain water for their drink. In which hardships Sir John
kept them until he had gained from them such sums of money as he thought
fitting; and then scoffingly boasted, that he now knew a way to get money;
meaning, by hard imprisonment, and the torment of irons, to enforce men by any
means to raise sufficient to satisfy him. Neither will his allegation that the
Town agreed with the Marquess to pay that fine, any way excuse him, in regard
such Composition was contrary to their Articles, and made when a plundring
sword was amongst them. Mr. George Powel was then a Justice of the Peace in
that Town; and how Sir John used him, his depositions and his wifes attestation
will declare, being as follows, viz.

October 22 1650. Examinations taken upon Oath the day and year above written,
by virtue of Directions from the right Honorable the High Court of Justice,
concerning certain high Crimes and misdemeanors committed by Sir John Stawell
Knight of the Bath, for Levying War against the Parliament of England.
GEorge Powel of Taunton in the County of Somerset, Gentleman, aged 30 years,
or thereabouts, sworn and examined says, That in or about the fifth day of
June, in the year 1643. Sir John Stawell Knight of the Bath, then in company
with the Lord Marquess of Hartford, and others, entered the said Town of Taunton
in an hostile way (having the day before summoned the said Town and Castle, for
the use of the late King) which Town and Castle had then declared to be kept
for the use of the King and Parliament; who after their entering (and so by
force and power) seized on this Deponent with many others, and by one Davis
their Marshal, kept him prisoner some days. This Deponent then being of
Commission and Justice of the Peace for and within the Town of Taunton. And
also says, That about the eight day of the same Month of June, the said Sir
John Stawell, in company with John Syms Esquire, sent for, and commanded the
said Davis, to bring this Deponent before them at the house of one Edward
Cooper in the said Town; who told this Deponent that he was fined eight hundred
pounds to the King, for his rebellion against the said King: and after many
opprobrious speeches used, saying the Parliament and the said Town were a
company of Rebels and Traitors against the late King, and deserved to be
hanged, required the said Fine of 800 l. -- of this deponent, and upon his
refusal to pay the said Fine, committed this Deponent close prisoner to the
Castle of Taunton, then in the hands and power of the said Sir John Stawell, as
Governor of the said Garrison for the late King, who after diverse weeks
imprisonment there, and several demands of the said Fine, by the said Sir John
Stawell, and refusal of payment thereof by this Deponent; he this Deponent was
afterward by the said command transmitted to the Bridewell of Taunton, and
there kept in Irons close Prisoner (with many others) not suffered humane
necessaries, to the great weakening and impairing of the health of this
Deponent; until at last, being often threatened by the said Sir John Stawell to
be hanged; or to be sent to Oxford, then in the late Kings power, to be tried
for his life: through fear of which and terror, and for preservation of his
life, he was constrained to Morgage and Pawn that land and credit they had left
him, for three hundred pounds or thereabouts; which he paid (then languishing
in prison) unto the said Sir John Stawell; to redeem himself out of that cruel
bondage, and inhumane usuage and imprisonment.

This Deponent further says, that during S. John Stawell's bearing power and
government in the said Town; he exacted great sums of money from several persons
for the late King and his armies use: Mustered Soulderies for the late Kings
service against the Parliament; and billited and enforced on this Deponent, and
diverse of the said Town many Soulderies to free quarter. And during his
Government there, a Soldier of his Regiment (the name of whom at present this
Deponent remembers not) was then hanged on the Gibbet or Gallows, set upon
the Market place in the said Town; and by one Reeves his Major, declared that
it was the command and pleasure of the Governor that he should be hanged;
which being done, the said Reeves, did then further declare openly in the
Market place, that it was a beginning, and president for the rest of the Rebels
and Roundheads of the Town to look upon, and must look some of them to follow
after shortly, or words to that effect, which was to the great terror and fear
of the freeborn of this Nation.

I Honor Powell of Taunton, the relict of my late Husband, George Powell Gent.
am ready to make attestation, of what is under written

In the time of the late miseries of this Land, it pleased God to make us of
this Town, partakers in a great measure, of the calamities of the times, of the
which my late husband (as is well known) had not the least share; being exposed
to the most inhumane cruelties and outrages of the Enemy, when this Town was
subdued by them, and afterward made the mark of Sir John Stawels envy and
hatred (as will more largly appear by what is under written) when he usurped
that most Tyrannous government over this Town. First of all he imposed a Fine
of eight hundred pounds on him (his house being before rifled and plundered by
the Souldery) for the refusal to pay the said Fine, he was committed by the
said Sir John Stawell prisoner to the Castle of Taunton; after he had lain
there a long time, he was removed by his order to the Bridewel; where he was
kept close prisoner, and lay night and day in Irons without the least favor;
nay denying him that favor, which we give to horses; namely to have a bundle
of clean straw to lie on; saying, that he would make him an ensample to all
Rogues; and should look through a grate all days of his life: and saying at
his committing to the Bridewell, that he would lay him neck and heels, until he
paid his Fine, which words Mr. Maj. of Taunton which now is, can attest, being
in the presence when they were spoken, and threatened at several other times
that he would hang him: Afterward, having paid a Fine of 300. l. of money
besides what other goods were fetched from us by his order; he was then released
of his imprisonment, being so weak, with lying on the ground, and in Irons;
that he was scarce able to go along the street; afterward being sick, for not
hearing one of their malignant Priests, on their Monthly Fast, Sir John caused
him to be brought before him, and fined him 10 l. and told him if he did not
pay it forthwith, he would levy a greater fine on him, which was forthwith paid
unto him; with many more of such like cruelties and threats, which now would be
too tedious to recite.

One act more of his cruelty, I cannot here in silence pass by; which is this,
when he had clapped up my husband close prisoner in the Bridewel, putting him in
the common prison, where Felons and other Rogues were kept; he would not suffer
me; nor yet admit my children, to go unto my husband.

And although Sir John Stawell, by his Remonstrance page 15. seems to excuse
Mr. Powells imprisonment and detainer, because he found him committed, and his
offense of such a nature, as that he could not be delivered without due course
of Law. Mr. Powell upon his Oath discovers the cause of his detainer to be
for his affection to the Parliament, and not payment of the 800 l. imposed on
him for his proportion of that Fine.

Mr. Jasper Chapline, who was then Maj. of that Town, and a person of about 70
years of age will next relate, Sir John's usuage of him, and the cause thereof.
His certificate follows, viz.

Some particulats of Sir John Stawell's Remonstrance answered, by me Jasper
Chaplin the 28 of Nov. 1653.
When my Lord of Stanford first entered into the Town of Taunton, I being then
Major, was commanded with others to seize the Castle into our hands, for the
good and safety of the County, which was done acordingly: And some of the
honorable Deputy Leiutenants of this County, authorized me to receive of
diverse Delinquents great sums of money, which I ceived, and paid according to
order: but when the Kings army entered this Town, I was wounded in the Knee, and
sent to prison into the Castle; being an old man, and paid a hundred pound
Fine; for which I have a receipt under Sir John Stawells hand. Whilst I was
there in prison, diverse of those of whom I received great sums of money, became
suitors to Sir John Stawell to this effect as I remember; that they might be
repaid out of my personal Estate, by whose importunity as I conceive, I was
still kept in prison; but how long, I was so kept in prison, I remember not, it
being about ten years sithence, and my self about 80 years of age: as also for
that I had received of (...) Hellier of Exon 200 l. which was thus as I have
since been informed; he came into this County, supposing to have remained here
in some safety; but this being known unto the deputy Lieutenants, he was
brought unto the Inn, called the Three Cups in Taunton; and as it seems gave
bond for payment of 200. l. to be paid unto my self (I not knowing thereof until
I saw the bond) but I received the 200 l. and it was thus employed, the Dep.
Leiut. (before that time wanted 200 l. (which was procured by my self, Mr
Searl, and others on our bonds, and repaid accordingly, as by our bonds
appears. During my imprisonment, my house was plundered, and I not left worth
ten shillings to my knowledge, more then the timber stuff, so that I lost 400
l. or thereabouts.

And Sir John Stawell came himself to the Prison at my enlargement; but I never
found such contentment in prison, as to desire the said Sir Ioh. Stawell, to
send me back to prison again, as is alleged; so that for my suffering and
losses, the said Sir John confessed me a judgment 313. l. as I was informed by
my Attorney.

By me Jasper Chaplin.

And although Sir John in his Remonstrance, p. 20. seems to justify it, the
imprisonment being by his consent, and for his good, for the Reasons therein
set forth; yet does Mr. Chaplin deny any such consent, or any contentment in
his imprisonment, to induce either his desire thereof, or consent thereunto.
Indeed his great Age could take no delight in, nor endure any imprisonment; but
the truth was, he was detained by Sir John, until he had paid a considerable
proportion of that moderate Fine. And although it should be granted, That he
was imprisoned in such manner, and for those courteous ends mentioned in that
place of his Remonstrance, yet Sir John had no Authority, nor Reason so to do;
no Authority we know, nor Reason, himself confesses: For as he says, he wrote
unto Prince Maurice, That it was contrary to Reason, to enforce that from him
(meaning Mr. Chaplin, who was admitted to his Composition) which he was liable
to repay unto his Creditors. But Sir John did first imprison Mr. Chaplin, and
then return an Answer to the Prince; whereas, it had perhaps been more just,
first to have endeavored the Princes satisfaction.

Mr. Matthew Quash, Mr. William Milles, Mr. Christopher Tailor, Mr. John Adams,
Mr. Evans, Mr. Andrew Pit, Mr. George Treagle, Mr. William Cady, Mr. John
England, Mr. Alexand Kingsland, Mr. George Lyssant, and others of the chiefest
Inhabitants suffered likewise under him; some of whom were so much weakened by
their imprisonment, and ill-usage therein, that they were not well able to go
out again: All which, these Oaths and Certificates will manifest.

The Information of John Adams of Taunton, in the County of Somerset,
Gentleman, taken upon Oath before Sir William Row, Knight, George Manby and
William Weston, Esquires. A Committee of Examinations appointed by The High
Court of Justice, the 12 day of December, 1650.
Who says,
HE has known Sir John Stawel, Knight of the Bath, by the space of sixteen
years and upwards, last past; and that in June in or about the 19 year of the
Reign of the late King: He knows, That the said Stawel was in Taunton with
Prince Maurice, and Marquess Hertford; and about a week after, he was in
Taunton, and acted there as the Governor; and sent Summons to this Informant
under his hand, to appear before him; where being come, the said Sir John
Stawel commanded him to provide One hundred pounds for the late Kings service;
whereof one Fifty pounds he demanded in hand, and the other shortly after.
Which said One hundred pounds was imposed on this Informant, as his part of
Eight thousand pounds imposed as a Fine upon the said Town of Taunton, for
their Rebellion (as the said Sir John Stawel termed it) against the said late
King, by their adhering to the Parliament. Which Money, this Informant refused
to pay, and was therefore committed prisoner, by Warrant under the Hand of the
said Sir John Stawel, to the Castle of Taunton, where he remained about ten
days, until his wife had borrowed Fifty pounds, and paid it to the said Stawel,
and so procured his liberty. And shortly after, the said Sir John Stawel sent
to this Informant for Twenty pounds as his part of Two thousand pounds; which
the Messenger that came to him from the said Sir John Stawel, told him, was to
be sent to the Garrison of Bristol, then held for the late King; which Messenger
also told this Informant (as from the said Sir John Stawel) That in case the
Money was not forthwith paid, he the said Sir John Stawel, would send this
Informant to the Bridewel in Taunton; and would there keep him a prisoner,
until he had paid full Two hundred pounds, to which his Fine was increased.

And he further says, That the said Sir John continued Governor of Taunton
about one year; during which time, diverse well affected persons to the
Parliament, were by his command made prisoners, and put to fine, and ransom for
their affection to the Parliament: As namely, Mr. Evans the School Master, Mr.
Jasper Chaplin, then Major of Taunton, Mr. George Powel, one of the Justices of
the Peace for the Town, with diverse others: And that during Sir John Stawels
Government there, diverse of the Parliament Officers and Soldiers were brought
in there, and made prisoners, and there kept by his Command, until such time as
they were discharged by Exchange, or let go upon their Parol.

John Adams.

October 22. 1650. Examinations taken upon Oath the day and year above written,
by virtue of Directions from the Right Honorable The High Court of Justice,
concerning certain High Crimes and Misdemeanors committed by Sir John Stawel,
Knight of the Bath, for levying War against the Parliament of England.
GEorge Treagel of Taunton, in the County of Somerset, Clothier, Aged Fifty
years, or thereabouts, sworn and examined, says, That he has known Sir John
Stawel, Knight of the Bath, for the space of Twenty years, or thereabouts; and
that he knew that about seven years since, the said Sir John Stawel was
Governor of the Town of Taunton, for the late King against the Parliament: And
that the said Sir John, together with other of the Kings Party, committed this
Deponent as a prisoner into the Castle of Taunton, for the space of five weeks,
or thereabouts, for his affection to the state: Part of which time he was kept
in Irons. And further says, That the said Sir John Stawel did raise Forces
both of Horse and Foot for the late King, and levied War against the
Parliament. And also says, That he was fined by the said Sir John Stawel in
the sum of Forty pounds, whereof upon the payment of Fifteen pounds he fled
away.

George Treagel.

Alexander Kingsland did then likewise depose to this effect, That Anno 1643.
Sir John Stawel was Governor of Taunton for the King, and did imprison this
Deponent, and diverse other well-affected; and kept them in Irons, until they
had paid great sums for their enlargement.

Henry Dunscomb did then likewise swear to this effect, That Sir John Stawel
committed him to Ilchester Goal, to lie there till he did rot, if he would not
take up Arms against the Parliament.

Robert Audrey also upon his Oath, did affirm to this effect, That Sir John
Stawel being Governor of Taunton, this Deponent for his affection to the
Parliament was indicted for High Treason at Wells; and Sir John Stawel said,
That he would see this Deponent hanged, drawn and quartered, for being against
the King; and would hang his quarters upon the Gates of Taunton.

Some Particulars of the Remonstrance of Sir John Stawel, Knight; Answered by
Christopher Tailor, the now Major of Taunton, November 28. 1653.
NOtwithstanding the fair gloss that Sir John Stawel endeavored by his
Remonstrance to put upon the cruel dealings with many of the Inhabitants of
this Town, which were well affected to the Parliament, I do certify as
follows, That whereas Sir John sets forth that there were Eight thousand
pounds imposed on this Town, in the pain of a Fine to prevent plundering, and
his fair dealing with the Inhabitants thereof, as he was their Governor, I do
certify, That there were great plunders committed by his Party here. And for
my own part, I was put unto Three hundred pound Fine, whereof I paid One
hundred and fifty pound; and for Fifty pound of it, was enforced to engage my
Taunton-Dean Land Before the payment of which One hundred and fifty pounds, I
was often threatened with imprisonment, if I did not pay it according to his
Order. And that on the payment of my last Fifty pound, I being much unprovided
at that time, I desired him, that he would accept of Twenty pounds parcel
thereof, for that time, and that the payment of Thirty pound residue, might be
respited until the Thursday following, which he would not admit of; but by his
command, I stood committed, for some time, and longer had continued in custody,
had not Mr. John Syms engaged to see it paid. And afterward, besides the
extorting of the said One hundred and fifty pound from me, he commanded a house
of mine to be pulled down near the Castle-gate, which I had not long before
built, and erected; and at this time (if it stood) would have yielded Ten pound
by the year. And as if the pulling it down had not been enough, he would not
suffer me (though my Wife importuned him thereunto) to save the Tyle-stones,
which by computation were worth about Ten pound; but telling her he had nothing
else to employ his Soldiers about. So they beat them down, and spoiled them,
and carried away the whole stones, being about One hundred loads.

And Sir John having, during his Government, commanded the Fast (appointed to
be kept Wednesdays) to be kept Fridays, the Congregation on Sabbath Days and
Fasting-days being very thin, by reason of the inability and disaffection of
the Minister which Sir John assigned here to Preach; required two of the
Company to go into every Street of the said Town, and learn who resorted to
other places to hear the Word Preached. Whereupon Sir John once having had
intelligence of many Women that went to other Congregations, he said in my
hearing, That he would appoint a Party of Soldiers to meet them, who should
strip them to their Smocks, and that, that act should not be taken as done by
the Soldiers, but by himself.

To set forth in part the cruel dealings of Sir John Stawel toward us the
Inhabitants of the Town of Taunton, in the time of the late Wars, I Matthew
Quash of Taunton, do certify as follows.
AT the coming in of the Kings Army into our Town of Taunton aforesaid, I had
no sooner put off my Arms, but was extremely plundered, and my two Sons taken
prisoners; and for one of them I must pay Twenty pound for his ransom, or else
he must be hanged (Sir John Stawel being then Governor of this Town.) In a few
days after, there was a Fine of Eight thousand pounds imposed on us the said
Inhabitants; and thereupon, my self and others were called up together in the
Marketplace, by the said Sir John Stawels command, where they demanded of us
our Fines, which were very hard for us in our plundered condition; and on our
refusal of payment thereof, I and the rest were presently committed by Sir John
Stawel unto the Castle, where I was kept for the six first days without any bit
of Victuals, unless I would come to their Ordinary of Fourteen shillings a
week, which was too hard for me. And indeed, I was loath to strengthen then
against my Friends, by any supply of money, as they desired; but my necessity
compelled me to Petition to have such provision, as I could, of my own, or to
have a Joyner to make me a Coffin: For in such a condition I could not long
subsist; And thereupon liberty was granted me to have Victuals of my own. In a
few weeks after this, we were removed from the Castle, and committed prisoners
to the Bridewel, by Sir John Stawel; he saying (though our imprisonment was so
grievous) That whilst these Townsmen have so much ease in the Castle, they will
not go from their money. And in the said Bridewel, we were kept in Irons night
and day, for a long while. Mr. William Mills now in London, was the man, whose
Leg was fettered with Irons to my Leg, and he can witness it: No Petition could
prevail with Sir John Stawel for my enlargement; for he said, That I was the
basest Rogue in all the Town, and termed me a Tub-Preacher. But if need
require, I could have One thousand hands for my own, and Childrens faithfulness
to the Parliament; and that cause for which I have suffered much loss in my
Estate.

Which Testimonies fully declare Sir John's disposing of the Estates and Persons
of the chiefest of those Inhabitants at his will, and contrary to all Law: And
therefore some of them upon their Actions brought against him for these
Injuries, obtained respective Verdicts and Judgments upon full Evidence on both
sides, and by Testimony satisfactory to a Foreign Jury, a Jury at the
Guildhal, London. Neither were persons and Estates the bounds of Sir John
Stawels rage: He breathed out threats, and persecution against their
Consciences, styling them Puritans, Tub-Preachers: He fined Mr. Powel Ten pound
for being absent from Sir John's Fasts, when sick: He forbad Mr. Mills, and his
Fellow Prisoners, either to pray or sing Psalms in prison, telling them, If
they did, he would be so near unto them, as to hinder their long Prayers, or to
that effect.

And because many Women resorted unto other Congregations, and were not willing
to hear his Malignant-Preacher, he threatened by his Soldiers to strip them to
their Smocks; and would own it as an act of his own. And further his malice
extended not to the well-affected Inhabitants of Taunton alone, but likewise to
those of the Neighbor-hood, he seized on the Estate of Colonel Ceely, whilst he
was in the Parliaments service; the incivility of his Soldiers in the mean time
hastening the death of the Colonels Wife, and her child. And although Sir John
is pleased in his Remonstrance ( Page 19.) to say, That there were taken from
the Colonel by his Command, no more then seven or eight loads of Hay, in a time
of necessity. These ensuing Certificates together with a Verdict given for Col.
Ceely at the Guildhal, London, will show the contrary.

WHereas Sir John Stawel in his late Remonstrance, amongst many other
aggrievances there enumerated, is pleased to recompt this one as not the least,
viz. That Col. Ceely has obtained a Judgment at Law against him of One hundred
and fifty pound damages, for the carrying away only of eight loads of Hay,
bearing himself much agrieved at the injustice of that Trial and injury done
him by the said Colonel.

Let the Impartial read, and then judge of the Cause.

It will be sufficiently proved by Testimony of diverse (besides the Warrants
under his own hand) that a Party of Sir John Stawels Horse plundered the House
of all his Goods and Household Stuff, carried away diverse of his Writings, and
Living goods: That the Hay of Sixty Acres, and Two hundred pounds worth of
Corn, growing on the Farm at Charlton, was carried away and seized on: So as
his Wife was denied two Pecks a week for her self and children. That one Walton
his Captain, by his command, with Troopers, entered the House and Chamber with
Pistols and Swords drawn, where Col. Ceely his Wife was with her Midwife, and
put her in such fear, that soon after she died of a Convulsion, then
contracted, and her child likewise.

Now if the Colonel received no more damage then the loss of eight loads of
Hay, let all men judge.

It is therefore wondered, That Sir John Stawel should pass by so slightly the
sufferings of those who felt his unjust plunder and cruelty, and yet bear the
damage thereof legally obtained so heavily (though little in consideration to
the wrong done, and yet unpaid.) And in a Remonstrance (set out to gain pity
(as it is supposed) by a Mis-narative of his own sufferings) should use so
little truth and sincerity in the Relation of the loss of another man.

This is inserted, to undeceive the people, and take off the slander of a legal
Trial had and prosecuted.

WHereas Sir John Stawel, Knight of the Bathe, in a late Pamphlet of his,
entitled, His Remonstrance, and in the 19 Page there, has averred, That only
seven or eight load of Hay on Col. Ceelyes Estate were taken away by his
command. I William Ceely of the Middle Temple, London, Esquire, do hereby
certify to all whom it shall concern, That I did in or about the year of our
Lord God, 1643. or 1644. cause to be carried from the Lands of the said
Colonel, to my House at Huntham, in the County of Somerset, of the Hay of the
said Colonel, to the number of fifty six loads, or near thereabouts. All which
Hay (about ten loads only excepted) was by some Constables of those parts, and
by color of several Warrants under the proper handwriting of the said Sir
John Stawel (which I then saw, and well knew) taken away; and that the said Sir
John Stawel did justify the taking away thereof, uttering these or the like
words unto me, Your Brother (meaning the said Colonel) is a Traitor, and
therefore I will have his Hay. And that afterward my self being Subpena'd to
give my Testimony in a Cause, then to be tried at the Guildhal, London, between
the said Colonel and Sir John Stawel, for taking away the said Hay, I did
appear and gave my Testimony to the effect aforesaid; and that there were
produced at that trial by the said Colonel, three other Witnesses besides my
self, viZ. Henry Hammond, Tho. Bridge, and William Chaple, whose testimony was
as touching the taking away of that Hay, agreeing with mine in effect.

Given under my hand this first day of November 1654.
Mr. Henry Ceely of Northcurry, was likewise plundered and imprisoned, and Mr.
Henry Myntern imprisoned by Sir John Stawell, but wherefore, and in what
manner, their own Depositions hereunder transcribed will best declare.

November 23, 1650. The Information of Captain Henry Mintern of Chesselborough
in the County of Somerset, taken before Sir John Thorowgood Knight, John Hurst,
and William Weston, Esquires, a Committee of the High Court of Justice for
Examination.
THis Informant says, That being an Officer in Arms for the Parliament, he was
taken Prisoner at Glastonbury about St. James's day, in the year 1643. and
brought before Sir John Stawell, then Governor of Taunton and after some
examination of him concerning the estate of our Army; the said Stawell by order
committed this Informant to the Castle of Taunton, where he remained about six
months, and from thence by the order of the said Stawell, was carried by twelve
Dragoons to the common Gaol at Ivelchester, being carried in disgrace through
three Market Towns in his passage to the said Gaol. And this Informant says,
that being a prisoner in Taunton Castle aforesaid, after four days
imprisonment, this Informant, and diverse others were brought before a Council
of War at the place where the Assizes are usually kept in Taunton, where
Stawell sat as Governor of the Town, and President of the said Council, where
after examination this Informant was sent back to the Castle where he remained
until the Assizes held at Wels about three weeks or a month before Christmas
An. 1643. and was there Indicted for high Treason, and examined by Mr. Richard
Newcourt, then Clerk to Sir John Stawell; and the day after he was brought
before Sir John Stawell at Mr. Waldrons house in Wels where his said
Examination was read to him, and Sir John Stawell forced this Informant to
subscribe the same, and refused to take Bail for this Informant, although 1000
l. bail was offered. And Sir John Stawell further told this Informant, he was a
Rebel and a Traitor, and should be tried for his life; after which he was
remaunded back to prison until he was relieved by the Parliaments Forces.

This Informant further says, that being of the Grand Jury in the year 1647.
one Richard Cluff of Taunton (since deceased) came before this Informant and
diverse others of the Grand Jury, and informed them that there was means made to
Sir John Stawell for the reprieval of one Viccary a soldier of Captain Clarks,
in the year 1643. or thereabouts, at which time the said Viccary was condemned
by a Council of War in Taunton, and executed before the window where Sir John
Stawell was to sup; and the said Cluff said further to the said Grand Jury,
that Sir John Stawell refused to reprieve him, and bid the Executioner do his
Office: and accordingly he the said Viccary was executed.

Henry Mintern.

October 22. 1650. Examinations taken upon Oath the day and year above written,
by virtue of Directions from the right Honorable the High Court of Justice,
concerning certain high crimes and misdemeanors committed by Sir John Stawell
Knight of the Bath, for Leavying War against the Parliament of England.
HEnry Ceely of North- Curry in the County of Somerset Gentleman, aged 53 years
or thereabouts, sworn and examined, says, That Sir John Stawell Knight of the
Bath, and Governor of Taunton in the year 1643, or 1644. about the first of
February, sent a Troop of horse to the house of the said Ceely by night, by one
Captain Walton, and plundered the house of the said Ceely, and carried him away
prisoner to Taunton, and there kept him in cruel endurance so long as the said
Sir John Stawell staid there Governor, threatening him with hanging and death
for adhering to the Parliament, and at his, the said Sir John Stawels departure
from Taunton, sent the said Ceely to the prison of Bridgewater, then in the
power of the late King, to the undoing of him the said Ceely and his Family.
Also in the time of this Deponents imprisonment in Taunton, the said Sir John
did cause to be hanged and put to death, one Viccarie, for refusing to go in
Arms against a Town in the County of Dorset, named Lyme-Regit. And further
says, That the said Sir John Stawell did appear with many more in Arms in the
County aforesaid at Marshals Elm, to the intent and purpose to wound, kill,
and slay those that adhered to the Parliament, as he the said Sir John
confessed to this Deponent when he was in prison in Taunton aforesaid, and
said, that all those that were at Marshals Elm, deserved to be hanged as
Traitors, for adhering to the Parliament. And this Deponent does verily believe
that the blood shed at Marshals Elm, was the first blood shed in the West of
England.

I John Baker of Higham in the County of Somerset, Esquire, do humbly certify
the unchristian dealings of Sir John Stawell toward me, who having received a
wound and maim at Launsdown fight (whereof I lay dangerously sick a long time)
as soon as Sir John understood that there were hopes of life, granted his
Warrant for the apprehending of me and my brother, threatening that if he took
us, he would hang us. And indeed, his Tyranny was such, that we could expect no
other, had not God preserved us out of his hands and fury, by letting of us
have private notice of his design; upon which this Certificants friends
conveyed me away by night, and hid me in several places to avoid his rage.

John Barker.

Sir John Stawell did also commit Mr. Martyn Sandford, the then High Sheriff of
the County of Somerset to the Prison of the Bridewell for some actings of the
Sheriff for the advantage of the Parliament; which, as it is thought, shortened
his aged days. And to complete his cruelty, he caused to be hanged one
Christopher Viccary, for refusing to fight against the Parliament and the
dictates of his conscience, as appears by the precedent and following
Depositions.

October 22. 1650. Examinations taken upon Oath, the day and year above
written, by virtue of Directions from the right Honorable the High Court of
Justice, concerning certain high Crimes and misdemeanors committed by Sir John
Stawel Knight of the Bath, for Leavying War against the Parliament of England.
GEorge Lyssant of Taunton in the County of Somerset, Woollendraper, aged forty
years or thereabouts, sworn and examined, says, That he knew Sir John Stawell
to be late Governor of Taunton, and that he in that time did raise Forces for
the late King, both of horse and foot against the Parliament, and that the said
Sir John did raise, and went with Forces from Taunton against the Town of Lyme,
and that the said Sir John Stawell, together with others of the Kings party,
did fine the said Town of Taunton for their Rebellion against the late King, in
the sum of 8000 l. for that they did adhere unto the Parliament. And further
says, that he saw one Reeves Major unto the said Sir John Stawell (upon the
clamors and outcries of the people of the said Town) to go into the Quarters
of the said Sir John, to seek to save the life of a Soldier, whose name was
reported to be Christopher Viccary, who formerly lived at Norton, which said
Reeves returning back again, said he could not prevail, but that the said
Viccary must suffer; whereupon immediately after the said Viccary was hanged.
And also says, that he, this Deponent, was by the said Sir John, fined in the
sum of 100 l. for his affection to the Parliament, the said Sir John saying,
that this Deponent was a Rebel against the King.

William Savage of Taunton in the County of Somerset, Locksmith, aged fifty
years, or thereabouts, sworn and examined, says, That Sir John Stawell Knight
of the Bath, was about seven years since Governor of the Town of Taunton for
the late King, against the Parliament. And also says, that one Christopher
Viccary, who sometimes quartered in this Deponents house, being then a Soldier
under the command of Captain Robert Clark in the late Kings service, was by one
Mayor Reeves, after he was condemned to suffer death, carried into the Castle
of Taunton, and immediately after brought forth again, and hanged by the order
and appointment of the said Sir John Stawell, the said Viccary being drunk at
the time of his suffering. And further says, That the said Sir John Stawell
committed this Deponent unto Prison for his affection to the Parliament, and
there detained him for the space of three or four days.

George Deacon of the Parish of Norton-fitZ-Warren in the Coutty of Somerset,
Husbandman, aged 28 years, or thereabouts, sworn and examined, says, That he
knew Sir John Stawell to be Governor of the Town of Taunton in the County of
Somerset for the late King against the Parliament, in the years 1643, or 1644.
And that the said Sir John did raise Forces both of foot and horse for the late
King against the Parliament. And further says, that he does well remember one
Christopher Viccary of Norton aforesaid, who was then a Soldier under the
command of Captain Robert Clark for the Kings service; which said Viccary being
by the said Sir John Stawell and others, commanded to march from Taunton unto
and against Lyme, which he the said Viccary refusing, was by one Major Reeve
carried into the Castle of Taunton, and condemned to suffer death; which said
Reeves upon the outcries of the people of the said Town, went unto the then
Quarters of the said Sir John, to seek to save the life of the said Soldier;
which said Reeves returning back again, said, he could not prevail, but that
he, the said Viccary, must suffer; who imediately after was hanged on a Gibbet
in the Market place of Taunton, by the order and appointment of the said Sir
John Stawell, as this Deponent verily believes, he, this Deponent being then a
servant unto the said Captain Robert Clark.

Henry West of Taunton in the County of Somerset, aged 42 years, or
thereabouts, sworn and examined, says, That Sir John Stawell, Knight of the
Bath, in the years 1643, or 1644. was Governor of the Town of Taunton aforesaid
for the late King, against the Parliament, and that he raised Forces both of
horse and foot for the said late King against the Parliament. And this
Examinant further says, that he being a Captain for the Parliament, at and
before the time of the enemies entry into the said Town. The said Sir John
imposed on this Deponent a fine of 500 l. whereof he paid the sum of 250 l. in
money and goods. And further says, that he knew there was a Soldier whose
name he does not now well remember, who was commanded with others to march from
Taunton unto and against Lyme, who marching a little beyond this Deponents
house in Silverstreet, did there first lay down his Arms, for which he was
carried away, and afterward hanged.

He further says, that one Mr. Anthony Pardee, late Minister of the said Town,
told this Deponent, that the Lady Stawell did pitch down on her knees unto the
said Sir John her husband, craving of him to save the said soldiers life, who
in wrath denied her, and took her by the arm and thrust her forth of doors;
which said Lady after employed the said Pardee to sue for the said soldiers
pardon, who upon his motion was commanded to hold his peace. And after this
Examinant saw the said soldier hanged.

Philip Atherton of Hillforrence in the County of Somerset Gentleman, sworn and
examined, says, That he was Ensign unto Captain Robert Clark, in the time
when Sir John Stawell Knight of the Bath, was Governor of the Town and Castle
of Taunton for the late King against the Parliament, and was in the said Town
when one Vicarry, a soldier to the said Captain Robert Clark was condemned to
suffer death by a Council of War (as this Deponent conceives) who was then
personally present, and heard the Debate of the said Council of War, and the
sentence of death given by the said Sir John Stawell in these words, That the
said Viccary should go from thence to the Castle of Taunton, and from thence to
the Cornhill, and there to be hanged until he was dead, or words to the like
effect.

And further says, that about four or five hours after of the same day, he,
this Deponent, saw the said Viccary brought forth and hanged according to the
order and appointment of the said Sir John, notwithstanding there were several
means used by solicitation to the said sir John, by one Major Reeves, to save
the said Viccary's life: And further says, That when the said Viccary was
commanded to march by the said sir John from Taunton unto and against Lyme (he,
this Deponent verily believes) the said Viccary was distempered with drink.

By which Depositions it is evident, that Christopher Viccary (when he was
drunk) was hanged by Sir John Stawels command, for refusing to march (as
formerly he had refused) against the Parliament Garrison at Lyme,
notwithstanding the importunate entreaties of the Lady Stawell (his own wife)
Mr. Pardee a Minister, and Major Reeves (his own Major) to the contrary; which
refusal, although Sir John endeavors to excuse by the aspersion of Mutiny,
sometimes for pay, or advance money, and afterward for want of Arms; yet in
truth it was to satisfy the dictates of his conscience; for if want of pay and
arms had been the cause of his pretended mutiny, the pay being satisfied, and
the arms delivered to satisfaction (as Sir John confesses they were) he would
readily have marched; but he refused notwithstanding, and swore he would not
go; so as the pay and the arms were but pretenses; the conscience was the cause
of the refusal: neither could this refusal be a mutiny within the Kings
Military Articles, for Sir John (as himself confesses) receiving Orders from
the late King to send a hundred men to the siege of Lyme, sends for an ancient
Trained Band, under the command of Captain Robert Clark (whereof Viccary was
one) in order to send them to Lyme; but because he was not formerly listed in
that service, he now refused to march, and therefore was hanged; but by what
Law or Justice he was either thus hanged, or a mutinier; let each man judge.
Where are now those glorious expressions of Sir John in his Remonstrance; that
he acted not beyond the moderate and sober limitations of a contrariant; that
he was a lover of his Country, and a protector of every man in his property;
that he was governed in all the course of his life, by that divine rule and
principal in humanity; do, as you would be done unto: Has not every one of
these his acts exceeded the sober limitations of a Contrariant? can this man be
said to be a lover of his Country, when he sought the destruction of the
faithful thereof? or a protector of property, when each action of his
entrenched on it? were not undeserved Imprisonment, Irons, Chains, swollen
Legs, pinching hunger, weakened bodies, and exaction of moneys thereby,
scandalous language, persecuted consciences, threats of death, and death it
self the emblems of his love and moderation, and so proved? and by many more
ready to be proved and certified. And yet this man dares to Remonstrance, would
Sir John have been done unto, as he has done unto others? certainly no, his
frequent complaints of his late condition (though deserved) do witness the
contrary.

Sir John at length concludes his Government at Taunton with an act of
humanity, shown to Mistress Treagle, touching Sir Samuel Roll his Estate; which
(as he supposes) did put an end to that his command. But whatsoever his
civilities were to the Wife, he was very uncivil to the Husband, as his own
Depositions does evidence. And as one or two bad acts do not make a good man
bad, so one or two good actions make not a bad man good; nor in any sort excuse
or diminish his wickedness.

And it has been observed, That wicked men have sometimes ruined themselves in
not being wicked enough, through a desire to be honest themselves. If Sir John
had taken away this Plate, as he did the Goods of many others, and which he
might have as justly, perhaps he had continued longer in his Command; but doing
not the one, he lost the other, by the injustice of his friends, not the sword
of an enemy.

But now the Scene is altered, and Sir John, that formerly sat at Taunton
triumphing over the lives and liberties of the well effected there, is now
besiedged in Exon, by the Parliaments forces, and enforced in order to his
safety to Article with them for his life and liberty; and had been by reason of
his high crimes aforesaid denied, if he had been known in that City; but lying
there privately, and being comprised within the general words of those
Articles; the then General, Sir Thomas Fairfax, gave him the pass mentioned in
his Remonstrance page 22. In which pass, (grounded on the 22 Article) it is
observable, that Sir John had the freedom of his person and personal estate,
during the space of four Months next after the ninth of April 1646. to make
his composition with the Parliament, and if he could not make any such
composition, then within the said four Months, he was to depart the Kingdom,
if he though sit, or otherwise to stay in the Kingdom, but not in the quarters
of the Parliament, but in some of the Kings Garrisons, (there being then diverse
of them not reduced;) for certainly, it was never the intention of those
Articles, that Sir John having made no Composition, should notwithstanding
after the four Months continue in those quarters with freedom of person. The
words of the twelfth Article (which composition being made, they shall have
indemnity of their persons and enjoy their estates) do import so much. This
being the scope of those Articles and Pass, the question will solely be,
whether Sir John by any neglect or act of his since that rendition, has so
forfeited either by breach or not performance of those Articles (for both are
alike penal unto him) as that the benefit of those Articles being by him
thereby lost, the Parliament might justly for his offenses, deprive him both of
life, liberty, and estate, his pardon being conditional, so as he perform, what
on his part, by these Articles ought to be performed.

Now that Sir John has of set purpose, and wilfully neglected the performace
of his part of these Articles, and thereby forfeited the same, will evidently
appear if it be premised; neither can it be denied, but that Sir John has not
as yet actually made his Composition with the Parlialiament, neither did he
submit unto, or endeavor it from the 14 of April 1646. (when he obtained the
Generals pass) unto the 18 of July following (being the day he subscribed
before the Commit of the Militia of the City of London, according to the
order of the House of Commons of the 2 of July 1646) there being in that
interval of time above thirteen weeks, and so much of the four Months limited
for his Composition spent by his sole neglect: and yet such his subscription
was no submission to Composition, without the 12 of those Articles, but a
preparative thereunto only.

Sir John informs us in his Remonstrance, Page 22. that Mr. Ash having the
next day after Sir John's coming to London (which he says, was on the 15 of
July given him a friendly visit (as he then understood) Sir John did a day or
two before he presented his Petition to the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall, wait
upon Mr. Ash at his brothers house in Fanchurch-street, and did acquaint him
of his purpose to Petition, and prayed his furtherance therein. It was indeed a
friendly visit of Mr. Ash, and for Sir John's good, if he would so have
understood it; for Sir John confesses, that Mr. Ash did thereupon acquaint
him with the day that the Committee sat, at which time Mr. Ash did promise
not to fail to be there himself, and would in all friendly manner further his
business. But Sir John does not tell us, That Mr. Ash did at the time of his
visit, acquaint him, that he marvelled why Sir John staid so long in the
Country, seeing his time for compounding was almost expired, and wished him
forthwith to come unto Goldsmiths Hall. And that at the time when Sir John came
to Mr. Ash, Sir John desired him to acquaint him with the manner of their
proceedings there; which Mr. Ash did, together with the form of Petitions
usually presented, and wherein either a delinquency, or some act equivalent
must be expressed, and that Sir John must bring in a particular of his Estate.
Which friendly advice of Mr. Ash, if Sir John had followed, he had long since
rested under the peace of those Articles: But Sir John wilfully neglected both
the time and manner of his Petitioning.

For the time, it appears, both by the Two and twentieth of those Articles,
which is the Article of Explanation, and the Generals Pass, That such persons
as were comprised within those Articles, were to make their Composition within
four months from the ninth of April, 1646. Which months being understood to
consist of Eight and twenty days to each month, expired on the thirtieth day
of July following, inclusive.

Now although Sir John pretends, that his Petition was delivered on the Four
and twentieth day of July, five days before the expiration of the four months,
yet that could not be; for by an Order of that Committee, of the fourth of
August following, Sir John was summoned to appear on the sixth, as one that had
not then appeared; the words of which Order are,

Goldsmiths Hall, London. At the Committee for Compounding, Die Martis, 4 Aug.
1646.
Whereas by Ordinance of Parliament of the Thirteenth of November, there was a
Committee appointed to enter the names of all such persons as should come out
of the Enemies Quarters, and to take an account of their condition and abode.
And by the same Ordinance, all such persons were required to make their
appearance before the said Committee accordingly. Now forasmuch as you have
neglected to make your appearance to the said Committee, or to any other
Committee of Parliament, notwithstanding the time allowed by the Articles of
Exon, upon which you pretend you come in, are expired. These are to require you
to attend this Committee, on Thursday next at four of the clock, there to
answer your contempt, and give an account, what you have done in Obedience to
the said Ordinance, or in pursuance of those Articles; and hereof you are not
to fail at your peril.

To Sir John Stawel, Knight.
Again, Mr. Leech, the Clerk of that Committee did depose before the High Court
of Justice, that he saw not Sir John there until after the fourth of August;
and yet he frequently attended that Committee. Indeed Mr. John Ash in his
Deposition recited in the Remonstrance, Page 26. says, That he does not well
remember the precise day of the month, when Sir John first appeared before the
Committee at Goldsmiths Hall; but this he does well remember, That it was about
four days before the four months limited by the Articles of Exon expired,
which was true, and yet he did not come in until after the fourth of August, if
Mr. John Ash be rightly understood; for Mr. Ash meant Calendar months, which
ended on the tenth of August exclusive; and by this construction, the sixth of
August, (the day prescribed for his appearance in the Warrant) was four days
before the expiration of these months: And that this was his meaning, does
plainly appear, by the subsequent words of his Oath, That when Sir John next
appeared (and he did but twice appear) before that Committee, it was about
three days after the four months limited by the Exeter Articles; For it is
granted by all, that his second appearance was on the thirteenth of August, for
of that date is his Mittimus, and the Order likewse of Goldsmiths Hall; for Mr.
Stephens report as appears by the Remonstrance, Page 25. Now the thirteenth
day was three days after the tenth of August, (the day of the expiration of the
Calendar months) but could not be so after the thirtieth day of July, the day
of the expiration of the four months after the rate of eight and twenty days
to the month; which construction makes the Oath true in every particular,
otherwise it will prove repugnant to it self. And this does also agree with the
Depositions of Mr. Michael Herring, one other of that Committee, who did swear
before the High Court of Justice, and has since affirmed before the Committee
of Parliament, in the Star Chamber, That that Committee of Goldsmiths Hall did
not refuse his pretended Petition; for that he came not in time, but because he
observed not the Rules of that Committee; by which Oath, if sir John appeared
on the four and twentieth of July, he could not be said not to come in time;
but if on the sixth of August, then he came not in time, according to the rate
of eight and twenty days to the month. And although that Committee out of
favor to Sir John, in hopes of his future submission, took no advantage of
time; yet sir John's coming to Goldsmiths Hall on the sixth day of August, when
his Articles were expired, and that not voluntarily, but by constraint, upon
the summons of that Committee, argues him not very willing to endeavor his
Composition, and makes him really guilty of a neglect of performance of his
Articles in point of time, he having delayed the time of making his
Composition, or the least submitting unto it, until the four months expired.

Again, when Sir John did tender his pretended Petition, be it either on the 24
of July, and so within the four months, as Sir John will have it, or after the
fourth of August, and expiration of them, as that Order of Summons does
evidence, yet could not that Committee receive his Petition, in regard he had
not by that Petition confessed his Delinquency, nor expressed some act of his,
amounting unto Delinquency. And although sir John seems to complain of Mr.
Ash, for that he refused his pretended Petition upon that ground; yet sir John
cannot but know that Mr. Ash (being then Chairman (as himself confesses) did
not refuse it, as contrary to the rules prescribed that Committee, in his
opinion alone, but in the judgment of the whole Committee. And the reason why
they could not compound with any without such an acknowledgment or expression,
was because the Ordinances that did enable this Committee to make Compositions,
expressly will, That such persons with whom this Committee should compound,
should be Delinquents; for they are therein denominated by the word
Delinquents; as does appear by the several Orders and Resolutions of the sixth
of March 1644. of the 18 of October 1645. of the fourth of November 1645. and
the 13 of December 1645. and diverse others. And such were Delinquents only
within the intention of those resolutions, as had committed any act for which
their Estates were liable to Sequestration, and no others, though perhaps they
had otherwise offended the Parliament: For this Committee at Goldsmiths Hall
had not the absolute power of compounding, that remained still in the
Parliament, but were limited and tied up to the present and future Rules and
Orders of the Parliament, in such their compounding with Delinquents.

By the Resolution of the 24 of July 1644. of the House of Commons, The
Committee at Goldsmiths Hall had power to contract with persons for the sale of
Lands and Houses of Delinquents, according to the former Order of the tenth of
that month of July, at eight years purchase for Lands at least, and six years
purchase for houses at least, at the rates they were let at before the wars
began.

By the Resolution of the fourth of October 1645. The Rule by which the
Committees shall proceed with such as shall compound for their Delinquency, was
to be according to the respective proportions set down in the Propositions of
both Kingdoms, formerly sent to His Majesty for a safe and well-grounded Peace.

By the Resolution of the Eight of December, 1645. such Delinquents as came to
the Cities of London and Westminster, before the first of that month, were to
compound with the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall before the first of January then
next.

The third of March, 1644. the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall, made their
Proposition to the House of Commons, in these words following, That whereas now
this Committee does only take into consideration, such Delinquents as come
recommended unto them by particular Orders; if this Honorable House shall think
fit to give this Committee a general power to receive, treat, and compound with
whatsoever Delinquents shall immediately tender themselves to this Committee to
be compounded with all. They first representing unto this Honorable Assembly
such Compositions made, or Fines set upon them before any thing be concluded.
It will much promote the present Affairs, and have power to send for such
persons as they shall think to attend that Committee, about their Composition
and Fine. Whereupon on the sixth day of March following, The House did resolve,
That they assented unto this Proposition and ordered it accordingly.

By the Order of the 23 of March, 1645. the Rules for Goldsmiths Hall to go by,
upon Compositions with Delinquents, was to be those Rules that are set by the
House upon the Propositions for such as came in sithence the first of December.

By which several Orders and Resolutions, the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall,
were to compound with Delinquents alone (that word being only used for an
expression) and according to certain Rules and Orders, and to conclude with no
Delinquent, without certifying the composition it self to the house.

This Committee then having power to compound with Delinquents only, and
Delinquents particularly described, it was requisite for that Committee, and it
was their constant rule, That the Compounder should acknowledge either his
delinquency, or some act done by him, which amounted unto the same, to enable
them to treat with him; for if a person had committed no offense worthy of
Sequestration, and was notwithstanding sequestered; the Parliament had appointed
him elsewhere to attend his remedy, and not here: And it was fit, in point of
prudence, That such acknowledgement or expression should be in writing, and not
by words, or any verbal expression only, to the end, That such writing should
remain of Record for the future Indemnity of that Committee, and other the
Reasons of Mr. Justice Lawrence hereunto annexed: And for these Reasons all
such persons as did here compound, none excepted, were they comprised within
the Articles of Exon, or of any other Garrison, or not within Articles; yet did
they Petition in that manner, although they were as zealous for their King, as
Sir John Stawel, deeming it wisdom in them rather so to do, then to run the
hazard of not performing their Articles, and thereby of the loss of their
Liberty and Estate; and especially since such acknowledgment or expression, and
formality of Address, was within the intention of those Articles: For if a man
agrees to submit to a Composition with these Exceptions, certainly he does
agree to submit to all other Rules for such Composition, not formerly excepted;
and this was a constant rule, and observed at and before the time of the making
of those Articles. And therefore in regard Sir John Stawel did refuse to insert
such an Acknowledgment, or Expression in his Petition, he has in a second
particular neglected the performance of his Articles; and that premediately
since he was preadvised: Neither is it satisfactory, when Sir John alleges,
That he did tell Mr. Ash he had borne Arms for the late King, and by his
command; unless for the Reasons aforesaid, he had in writing affirmed as much.
And yet this very Paper, or pretended Petition (which was thus delivered) was
not presented by himself, but put in by a Solicitor: And Sir John did refuse to
subscribe the same, as Mr. Michael Herring has lately affirmed, before a
Committee of this present Parliament, sitting in the Star Chamber. And if it
shall be objected, That although the several Orders aforesaid, did enable that
Committee to compound only with Delinquents, it follows not, They should
compound with none but such as (in terminis) acknowledged Delinquency. It is
easily answered, when it is considered, That Sir John was not advised to
acknowledge in express terms, That he was a Delinquent; but if he had in his
Petition set forth some act done by him, amounting to Delinquency, it had been
sufficient; but one of them he was by the constant rules of the Committee to
insert in his Petition, which Sir John refused.

Sir Henry Berkley (with others) came in upon the Articles of Exon, as well as
Sir John, yet Sir Henry's Petition was in these words.

To the Honorable Commit for Compounding with Delinquents; The humble
Petition of Sir Henry Berkley, Knight.
Shows,
THat your Petitioner as formerly a Commissioner of the Army for His Majesty,
and since did voluntarily contribute to the Forces raised against the
Parliament, by means whereof, he is become under the notion of a Delinquent.
That being in the City of Exeter upon the delivery thereof, humbly craves the
benefit of the Articles of the same. And that he may be admitted to a favorable
Composition for his offense, according to the value of his Estate, to the end,
he may free the same from Sequestration. And he shall pray, etc.

Subscribed Hen. Berkley.

But Sir John having taken on a Resolution not to compound, took up all
pretenses to avoid the same.

But Mr. Ash asked him, as Sir John objecteth, whether he had taken the
negative Oath and Covenant, to whom Sir John answering, no; and that his
Articles did free him from taking any Oaths: Mr. Ash replied, that before he
could be admitted to Composition with them, he must take them both. It is
answered, that there then lay on that Committee a command (several Ordinances)
of both Houses (the transcripts whereof are inserted) that injoined them to
tender that Covenant and negative Oath to all persons that came to compound,
and to secure their persons upon refusal.

Sab. 1 Nov. 1645.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the Committee
at Goldsmiths Hall shall have power to tender the Solemn League and Covenant to
all persons that come out of the Kings quarters to that Committee to compound,
either upon Mr. Speakers Pass or otherwise, and to secure such as shall refuse
to take the Covenant, until they shall conform thereunto.

Sab. 5. April. 1645.
BE it ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That all and
every person of what degree or quality soever, that has lived or shall live
within the Kings quarters, or been aiding, assisting, or adhearing unto the
forces raised against the Parliament; and has or shall come to inhabit or
reside under the power and protection of the Parliament, shall swear upon the
holy Evangelists in manner following. I A. B. do swear from my heart, that I
will not directly, nor indirectly adhere unto, or willingly assist the King in
the war; or in this cause against the Parliament, nor any forces raised without
the consent of the two Houses in this cause or war. And I do likewise swear,
that my coming and submitting my self under the power and Protection of the
Parliament, is without any manner of design whatsoever to the prejudice of the
proceedings of the two Houses of Parliament; and without the direction, privity
or advice of the King, or any of his Council or Officers, other then in what I
have now made known, so help me God, and the contents of this book.

And be it ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that the Commissioners for the
keeping of the great Seal of England for the time being, shall have power, and
are hereby authorized to tender and administer the said Oath, unto any Peer, or
Wife, or Widow of any Peer, so coming to inhabit as aforesaid. And it shall be
lawful to, and for the Committee of the House of Commons for Examinations, the
Committee for the Militia in London, and all Committies of Parliament, in the
several Counties and Cities of the Kingdom, to tender and administer the said
Oath unto every other person so coming to inhabit a abovesaid: and if any
person not being a member of or assistant unto, either of the Houses of the
Parliament shall refuse or neglect to take the said Oath, so duly tendered
unto him or her, as abovesaid; the said Commissioners and Committees
respectively shall and may commit the same person to some prison, there to
remain without bail or mainprize, until he shall conform thereunto.

It is true that the Articles of Exon, do free all persons comprised therein,
from all Oaths, Covenants, and Protestations: but it is likewise as true, that
those Articles were not at the time of Sir John's being at Goldsmiths Hall,
confirmed by both Houses, as in right they then ought; indeed the House of
Commons had before that time confirmed them, viZ. sixth of May 1646. but they
were confirmed by both Houses not before the fourth of Nov. 1647, above an year
after Sir John's being there; so as the command of tendering this Oath and
Covenant lay still upon that Committee, and they were not to compound with any
person, be he within Articles or without, before he had taken them; and
therefore it was no injustice in that Committee to deny Sir John, to treat with
him before he was sworn, for they were prohibited otherwise to admit him to
Composition; which Sir Anthony Irbie in his Letter (mentioned in the
Remonstrance page 60) is pleased to confess, viZ. that the truth was, that by
the order of the House, that Committee was bound up from admitting him to
compound, unless he took the Covenant, except the House would dispense with it;
which (he says) they did, when they approved of those Articles: Certainly when
Sir Anthony wrote this Letter, he had forgotten that the Negative Oath and
Covenant were enjoined to be taken by Compounders, by Ordinances of both Houses
of Parliament. And therefore although the approbation of the Articles of Exon,
by the House of Commons, should be granted to be a dispensation of those
Ordinances in respect of them; yet the Ordinance of the House of Lords lay
still on that Committee, as a prohibition, not to make any Composition without
the tendering of those Oaths; otherwise why did that Committee (and Sir Anthony
amongst the rest) send some of those Gent. that were comprised within those
very Articles of Exon, to the House of Lords, after that the House of Commons
had approved of them to procure such their dispensation likewise? which had
been needless, if the approbation of the House of Commons alone had wholly
disengaged that Committee from the tender of those Oaths; and although they
were thus limited, yet was not Sir John without his means of Composition, for
he might have Petitioned the then Parliament, to admit him to Composition; who
did, before the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall were enabled constantly to
compound with Delinquents; which Sir John neglecting, or rather refusing to do,
the nonperformance of his Articles lies still on his account; for suppose Sir
John had come to the Court of the Upper Bench, or any other Court, and had
presented by Petition his offer to compound with them, and that Court had told
him, they could not compound with him; and that thereupon he had sat down, had
not Sir John neglected the performance of his Articles, or was it any fault in
that Court, that Sir John could not be admitted by that Court to compound?
certainly no, and there is no difference but that the Court of Upper Bench had
no power at all to compound; and the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall had such a
power, but limited to such rules: which Sir John refused, the primitive and
original power of Composition remaining still in the Parliament, which Sir John
neglected, nay refused to submit unto.

It is observable, that notwithstanding sir John had denied to take those
Oaths, or to acknowledge his Delinquencies; yet that Committee (our of a
design to preserve him) gave him some time to consider thereof (as himself
confesses, Remonstrance page 24.) which he seemed to accept (as Mr. Ash
affirms) although sir John now denies it. Let it be either; yet it does
aggravate his neglect, or obstinacy, that having longer time (notwithstanding
the expiration of the four months) and finding that Committee was disabled
(otherwise) to compound with him, he had not resorted to the Parliament it
self, for his peace. Again, the House of Commons themselves had after their
confirmation of those Articles, and before sir John came to compound, viZ.

Die Martis, 2 Junii 1646. RESOLVED,
THat all persons that have, or shall come and reside in the
Parliament-Quarters, shall take the National League and Covenant, and the
Negative Oath, notwithstanding any Articles that have been, or shall be made by
the Soldiery.

So as after this time, the Negative Oath and Covenant were to be taken by all
Compounders, at Goldsmiths Hall, (though they were within Articles) and this by
the command of both Houses. Neither can sir John object the Order following,
viZ.

Die Sabb. October 18 1645.
ORdered, That all Compositions for the discharge of the Delinquencies of any
persons, and for the taking off their Sequestrations, shall be made with the
Committee of Goldsmiths Hall; and that no other Committee do compound with any
Delinquent without the special directions of this House.

JOHN BROWN Cler. Parl.

Nor can sir John upon this Order say, that since this Order does enable that
Committee to compound with Delinquents in general, that therefore it was the
only place for sir John's address.

For although they were to compound with all Delinquents yet not until after
the taking of the Oaths; but sir John was to compound without Oaths, which
composition the Parliament alone could make.

Again, this Order takes away this power of compounding, from all other
Committees, and centers it in the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall alone; but still
reserving to themselves, either the power it self in cases extraordinary, or
direction thereof. Sir John therefore finding the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall
to be limited to Rules and Oaths, from which himself pretended an exemption by
Articles, should have made his address to the Parliament to make his
Composition with them, or from them to receive directions where else to make
it, especially when the Articles do mention Compositions with the Parliament;
and sithence his Composition made at Goldsmiths Hall, (if he had made any)
must, before it could be effectual, have the approbation of the Parliament.

If it should be objected, that these Articles being confirmed, were become the
Articles of the Parliament, and not of the Soldiery; and so by consequence not
within the word (Soldiery) in that Order of the second of June. It is
answered, that those Articles ought to have the confirmation of both Houses;
which they having not, until above 12 Months after, they still continued the
Articles of the Soldiery; especially when the words are, Articles that have
been made by the Soldiery. Sir John therefore not making any application to
the Parliament, touching the gaining his Composition, is guilty of this
neglect, those objections notwithstanding.

If Naaman had washed twice seven times in Abanah, or Pharpar, he had not been
cured; the command, and (together with it) the healing virtue being fixed in
Jordan, which Naaman upon advise wisely performing was cleansed of his
Leprosy. But Sir John not applying himself to the Parliament on whom the
agreement rested, and in whom the compounding power remained, though importuned
thereunto, continues yet a Delinquent.

Every Compounder at Goldsmiths Hall, was to deliver in a particular of his
Estate, by these resolves following, viZ.

Die Sab. 13 Dec. 1645.
REsolved, That if any shall come in to compound, he shall present the
particular of his Estate to the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall, and the true
yearly value of it, as it was before these troubles began; and for that that is
concealed or omitted, he shall have no advantage by his Composition, but shall
pay four times the yearly value of what real estate is concealed; and for his
personal estate concealed, he shall forfeit all.

Such a particular Sir John likewise did neglect, both at the first and second
time of his appearance, although advised thereunto before he came, by Mr. Ash;
and at his first coming by the whole Committee; and it had been wisdom in Sir
John to have hastened his Composition, having vainly spent already so much time
thereof: Neither is the objection of weight, that a particular was to be
brought in, when the Compounder was admitted to his Composition: for Sir John
was really admitted, observing the Rules of that Committee; whereof a
particular was one, and to perform which he had time given him; but at that
time neglecting it, his resolution not to compound appears; and without such
a particular, that Committee being strangers to his estate, could not without a
survey thereof (which would be chargable to the Commonwealth) compound
according to the rates prescribed them; to avoid which charge, the Parliament
ordered a particular.

Sir John's having no notice of these Rules, has been vainly objected; for when
Mr. John Ash gave him the visit, he was informed by him of the form of his
Petition and of the particular; and when he first came to Goldsmiths Hall, the
Committee gave him longer time (as himself confesses) to consider of the Oath
and Covenant; or (as Mr. John Ash deposes) upon hopes that at his next
appearance, he would be better advised, and yield submission to the authority
of Parliament, and conform to the Rules of the Committee, or (as Mr. James Ash
informs) to amend his Petition, and bring in his particular to compound, of
which also he was told by the Committee; neither could it be in any sort
prejudicial to him to subscribe a Delinquency, or some act amounting unto it;
for this over act of subscription, could not have been treason or breach of his
Articles, in regard it was known, and taken as an inabling rule of that
Committee only, if it had been, yet the very subscription carried with it a
pardon of that subscription.

So as in these four particulars, Sir John Stawell did neglect the performance
of his Articles; and therefore the blame of his after troubles must light on
himself, not on the Parliament, especially since the Committee of Goldsmiths
Hall, did admit him to composition, accoring to the Rules of Compositions, but
he would not submit unto it; and sithence the Parliament has performed, what
their Armies promised in suffering Sir John quietly to enjoy his liberty,
during the four Months, and expressing their readiness to compound with him at
two years value, had he Petitioned them to that purpose, but he wilfully
refused it; for (as Mr. Ash affirms) although Sir John Stawell did appear at
the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall, yet he never intended to make any Composition
there, according to the Order of Parliament, and the rules prescribed for
Composition upon the said Articles, but did oftentimes declare his resolution
to the contrary; which his resolution he seconded by his carriage and words at
his first coming thither.

And although, Sir Henry Berkly has said that it was fitting, and Sir David
Watkins, that he came to that Committee, with a fair and civil respect: And Sir
Anthony Irbie took no offense with his carriage, neither (as he thinks)
justly there could be any taken, neither saw he any incivility at the time he
was before them, either in carriage or language: yet has Mr. Richard Wareing
deposed that it was insolent, Mr. Michael Herring that it was very high, Mr.
Samuel Moyer that his comportment was very insolent, and Mr. John Ash that the
sense and substance of his words were, That the Parliament had seized and
sequestered his Estate, or had taken it away by force, for doing his duty to the
King, as by the Law and several Oaths (which he had taken) he was bound to do;
and that he could not have his Estate again, unless he gave that Committee money
to redeem it: that he was a person in debt, and his debt and his debts were
much increased since his Estate was taken from him by the Parliament, by which
means he was disabled to pay the Committee much money, notwithstanding if they
could accept of what he could procure he would then compound with them, for the
redemption of his Estate.

And Mr. James Ash does attest that his words were, and Mr. Samuel Moyer
certifieth, that he scornfully said that he was no Delinquent; but the
Parliament and they was, who contrary to their Oaths, had fought against the
King; and although Sir Henry Berkly being of the same judgment and affect, so
although Sir David Watkins by forgetfullness or age, and Sir Anthony Irbie for
some other respect seem now to excuse him, yet certainly his deportment then,
both in the opinion of Sir David and Sir Anthony themselves, was very
disrespective to the Government, and such, as the whole Committee, and
especially Sir Anthony Irby being the most earnest, had thereupon resolved
forthwith to have it reported to the House of Commons, had not Mr. John Ash
desired them to give him some four or five days respite upon the hopes
aforesaid, which the Committee did accordingly.

Sir John having thus voluntarily refused the Armies mercy, in not making his
Composition within the four months limited; he was after the expiration of
them reduced to a Delinquent that had forfeited his Articles; and therefore
cannot complain of injustice, when upon his coming to Goldsmiths-Hall the 13 of
August 1646. they then committed him for refusing to take the Negative oath and
Covenant; and upon his reiterated misdemeanors (being higher in his expressions
then at his first being there, although his former expressions contemptuously
disowned the authority of the Parliament) Ordered Mr. Stevens their then
Chairman to report such his carriage to the House of Commons. And being thus
committed, he did not in the least degree petition or desire that Committee to
be admitted to Composition; he only craved maintenance, which that Committee
promised him to take care of, as himself relates in his Remonstrance.

During his imprisonment there, he and the rest of the Prisoners (whereof Mr.
Michael Tidcombe, a Wiltshire Gentleman, was one) having received an intimation
of the late Kings pleasure, that the Prisoners might make their peace with the
Parliament, debated what to do therein, at which debate Sir John was present:
And although the rest of the Prisoners did agree to make their. Composition
with the Parliament, yet Sir John utterly opposed it in his particular, and
laughed at such as already had, or would make such Composition: which jeering
at such Compounders he used at another time, by the testimony of Mr. Ash.

Afterward Mr. Stephens accordingly does make his Report to the House of
Commons, and (as Mr. John Ash has sworn before the High Court of Justice) to
this effect, viZ. That the opinion of that Committee was, That Sir John Stawell
had slighted and contemned the Authority of the present Parliament, and
forfeited their mercy contained in the Articles of Exon: with this conclusion,
That if the Parliament did not make Sir John Stawell a Traitor, Sir John had
made them Traitors. And this conclusion is likewise attested by Mr. James Ash.
Upon which Report Sir John is sent for to the House of Commons: but being staid
some time in the Lobby, till the Debate of the House was ended, Mr. John Ash
came unto him and advised him to acknowledge his miscarriage at Goldsmiths
Hall, crave the pardon of the House, and desire admission to Compound. Which
Sir John disliked, saying, That if he were willing, yet he was not able to pay
the money for a Composition.

Sir John being brought to the Bar of that House, and refusing to kneel, is
committed to Newgate for High Treason for levying war against the Parliament;
the Transcripts of which Order and Mittimus are inserted in the Remonstrance,
fol. 29. Where he continued for some years; Neglecting, refusing, passionately
disdaining to Petition to be admitted to a Composition, or any way to comply
with the Parliament in that behalf, although entreated and importuned thereunto
by his wife and friends, that desired to preserve him and his Estate, and by
others that stood deeply engaged as Sureties for his Debts.

His wife has upon her bared knees, and with many tears, desired him, if not
for her sake, yet for the sake of the children of his body (to use her words)
that he would submit and Petition the Parliament for a Composition; which
notwithstanding he slighted, as the poor Lady her self, with grief, affirmed to
diverse Gentlemen of worth; and has complained of his wilfulness, amongst the
rest, unto Mr. James Ash, whose testimony lately given to the Committee of
Parliament, to whom sir John's Petition is referred, follows, viZ.

December. 15. 1654. The Information of James Ash Esquire (a Member of Parliament)
given to the Committee of Parliament to whom the Petition of Sir John Stawel is
referred, in the Case of the said Sir John Stawel.
WHo says, That he was present at Goldsmiths-Hall, when Sir John Stawell came
thither, who delivered a paper which he called a Petition. The Committee, upon
receipt and reading that paper, were all of opinion, It was not a Petition to
compound. The said Committee thereupon called in Sir John Stawell, and asked
him some questions (some of them the Informant has forgot, but these he
remembers.) Being demanded why he came thither, if not to compound? and they
telling him they were a Committee to compound with Delinquents: He said, that
he came to have his Estate that was taken from him; and did endeavor in his
speech to take off the Delinquencie from himself, and to cast it upon the
Parliament and Committee. The particular expressions he cannot now remember,
nor does he remember the title of the said Petition; but says, the substance
of it was, to have his Estate. Sir John Stawell being withdrawn, the Committee
fell into a debate whether his ill carriage there should be reported to the
House. But afterward a Gentleman (Mr. John Ash) moving that he might have
three or four days to amend his Petition, and bring in a Particular to
Compound, (which also he was told of by the Committee) He this Informant heard
no more of him, till the Report made to the Parliament by Mr. John Stephens of
his miscarriage and ill behavior: which the Parliament highly resented, and
did order him to be sent for as a Delinquent. Whereupon being brought to the
bar of the Parliament, and commanded by the Speaker to kneel; He this Informant
sitting very near Sir John Stawel, heard him mutter these words, I desire to
know my offense or crime. Upon which being ordered to withdraw, the Parliament
made an Order for his commitment to Newgate (as this Informant remembers.)
Afterward being by Order of Parliament referred to be tried for Treason, and
Report being made to the Parliament of his high carriage, and disowning their
Authority and the Judges that sat thereby, they were yet more incensed against
him. And afterward, upon the news given to the Parliament of one Mr. Anthony
Ascams death, (the Parliament having before declared to bring some Delinquents
to punishment who were excepted from pardon) did refer Sir John Stawell
(amongst others) to be tried at the High Court of Justice. That during all the
Debates when the Parliament gave any Judgment against him, consideration was
still had of his Articles; and yet in those Judgments there were hardly any
Negatives, but the Question passed clear. That afterward the Report being made
from the High Court of Justice, who did not proceed to give sentence of death
against him, in regard of the Articles of Exceter; many Gentlemen (Members of
Parliament in the House) did much wonder thereat; but in regard of the opinion
of the said High Court, they did not again refer him to be tried for his life;
but did (as he remembers) eo instanti pass a Vote, That his Estate should be
confiscate to the Commonwealth: and afterward past the Act for Sale of his
Lands. That to this Informants knowledge for many years together, after the
first appearance of sir John Stawell at Goldsmiths Hall, there were many
endeavors used for to have drawn him to compound, and to have had the benefit
of his Articles; but he would never be persuaded thereunto. Now the reason of
this his knowledge is, because he was privy to the actings on his behalf; and
having discourse several times with the Lady Stawell concerning those
endeavors which had been used to persuade him to compound: And this Informant
saying to her, Can there be no way found out whereby he may be preserved and
have the benefit of his Articles? She answered this Informant in these words,
Sir, you know what endeavors have been used, and how we would have persuaded
him to have suffered his son, Ned Stawell (meaning him called sir Edward
Stawell) to have compounded for his Estate; but he would not give his consent
thereunto, but did threaten him, if he endeavored any such thing. For (says
she) he does still flatter himself with vain hopes of seeing the King restored:
and although there be every day more unlikelihood then other, yet his faith
continues strong.

That having some discourse with one Michael Tidcomb (a Gentleman in Wiltshire,
as he remembers) upon reading of the Act passed by the late little Convention,
or Parliament, for the confirmation of the sale of sir John Stawels Lands, The
said Gentleman spoke these words; I wonder (said he) that sir John Stawell
should now pretend to the Articles of Exceter, since to my knowledge, he did
refuse to have the benefit of them: For (said he) when I was a prisoner in Ely
House with the said sir John Stawell, some intimation we had from the then
King, that we should submit to the Parliament, and compound for our Estates.
Upon which we had a Debate amongst our selves, and sir John Stawell was
present; and it was the opinion of most of them, they should submit to
compound; but sir John Stawell did declare against it, and laughed at them that
had compounded, or did intend it.

And this Informant further says, That sir John Stawell came to Goldsmiths
Hall in the afternoon (as he now remembers) and that this Informant was then a
Member of Parliament, but not of that Committee: And this Informant says that
sir John Stawell said these words, I am no Delinquent (which words he, this
Informant remembers positively) but the Parliament and you, who contrary to
your Oaths of Allegiance, have fought against the King: Or words to that
effect. Being cross interrogated by sir John Stawels Council, He says,

That it is the custom of the Parliament, when a Delinquent is brought to the
Bar, that the Delinquent do first kneel before he receive any Charge: And
says that upon the Debates in Parliament it was alleged, That sir John
Stawell had forfeited his Articles; and it was clearly the opinion of the
House, that he had forfeited his Articles. And that was one ground of their
judgment; there was no Vote passed to that purpose, that he knows of; but it
was taken as a thing clear and indisputable. And further says, That M. John
Ash was to have the benefit of sir John Stawels Composition by Order of the
House of the 20 of July 1646. (as he takes it) which was to be toward the
satisfaction of debts and disbursments to the value of ten thousand pounds,
which had been entered into by the said Mr. Ash, Col. Popham, Col. Fines, etc.
in Somersetshire, for the service of the Parliament; which being satisfied, the
overplus was to go to Mr. Ash, toward his losses and sufferings; but for
certainty, this Informant refers to the said Order it self.

This Informant further says, That Mr. Stephens did report to the House, the
high and insolent behavior of sir John Stawell, who came to Goldsmiths Hall
under the pretense of a Compounder, and had spoken diverse words tending to the
dishonor and disowning of the Parliament; for which the Committee had
committed sir John Stawell, and commanded him to report the same to the House:
And he concluded his Report in these words;

Although the Parliament shall not make sir John Stawell a Traitor, yet he has
made them Traitors.

And further, the Informant says, he does not know that ever Mr. John Ash did
make application to sir John Stawell to buy Aubery, nor did ever hear of any
such thing, until sir John Stawell told the story at the High-Court of
Justice, six years after the business of his Composition.

The Information of Michael Herring Esquire, taken the same time in the same
Cause,
Who says,
THat he was one of the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall, and present when sir John
Stawell came and presented himself to compound, as he understood it; who was
very high in his language and in carriage; but this Informant remembers not the
words: He refused to take the Negative Oath and Covenant, and to subscribe his
Petition, to acknowledge himself a Delinquent, as all men did: For my Estate
(said he) do what you will; but I would keep my conscience to my self. And
this Informant refers to his old Examination at the High Court. And further
says, That he conceives sir John Stawell came to compound, because he came
there and presented himself; but does not remember that he desired to compound.
There was a Paper presented, but sir John Stawell would not put his hand to it;
This Informant did not read it, nor can he remember that the Committee read it,
nor that they called it a Remonstrance; this Informant understood it as a
Petition, and does not remember the particular reason why sir John Stawell did
not subscribe the Paper, nor did he subscribe any Paper to the Committee, that
this Informant knows: And this Informant conceives the said Paper was brought
in by sir John Stawels Solicitor, who acted for him.

This is a true Copy, Examined by T. PAUNCEFOOT.

Hitherto sir John Stawell, notwithstanding his Imprisonment, continued his
resolution not to compound. It is true, that about five nights after his
imprisonment in Newgate, he sent late in the night the Lady Stawell to Mr. John
Ash, under pretense of a business of importance; but when Mr. Ash was come
accordingly, he entreated Mr. Ash to move the House for his removal to the
Tower for his better accommodation; but being desired by Mr. Ash to Petition
for a remission to Goldsmiths Hall to make his Composition, and receive the
benefit of Exon Articles, He answered, That Mr. Ash knew his resolution as to
compound; and that if he had a mind to compound, that he had no money to pay
his Composition. Which is not only attested by Mr. John Ash in his Answer
annexed to page 11. but by the Ladies affirmation to a Justice of Peace in the
County of Somerset, whose Certificate follows, viZ.

I have several times (being in discourse with the Lady Stawell) heard her to
say that Mr. Ash has been a very good friend to her husband, notwithstanding
all those calumnies he has cast on the said Mr. Ash, for his endeavoring to
save the said sir John's Estate. And about a quarter of a year since, being in
the company of the said Lady at Ham, I acquainted her that Mr. John Ash had not
long before that, acquainted me with the passage of his visiting the said sir
John at Newgate late at night upon the earnest importunity of the said Lady,
and on assurance from her that her husband had then a real mind and will to
submit to a composition: But when he came there, he found the said sir John to
take him up with needless and impertinent discourses, wholly waving his
business of compounding; so that the said Lady was enforced to say, Sir John,
is it not sufficient for you to abuse me, but must you also abuse your good
friend Mr. Ash, who has at such an unseasonable time, and at such a place,
come unto you, and by your direction, for the good of you and yours, or words
to that effect. All which the said Lady at the time aforesaid consented unto,
alleging that it was the truth which I had made relation of. In witness
whereof I have set my hand this 14 day of December 1654,

John Barker.

In which stubborness he continued for the space of four years, and could not
be persuaded to a composition, notwithstanding the many endeavors of his
friends, as Mr. James Ash has attested upon his knowledge. Mr. John Ash does
(Answer page the 2) affirm that when the Lady Stawell (his wife) and Sir Edward
Stawell his son (then in France) did earnestly solicit him, that they might
Petition the Parliament to be admitted to compound for the Estate, since he
refused it, Sir John denied to give his consent thereunto, threatening his Son
to disherit him if he attempted any such thing, and was much incensed against
his son Edward for writing Letters to Mr. Ash for his admission, since his
Father refused it. Mr. George Long was deeply engaged for him (as surety)
whose ensuing Certificate will acquaint you how he stood affected unto a
Composition, during his imprisonment in Newgate.

George Long Gent. does certify that he being engaged, for Sir John Stawell
for several great sums of moneys (as by the Counterbonds and other obligations
will appear) borrowed by Sir John Stawell in 1637. and 1638. to purchase lands
in Aubury, in the County of Wilts, before the beginning of the late Wars; which
being not paid, caused the said George Long to go at several times to the Gaol
at Newgate, to entreat him to Petition the Parliament, that he might be
admitted to a Composition; but the said Sir John Stawell was much discontended
with him for his endeavor therein.

Also the said George Long being prosecuted on his said engagements for Sir
John Stawell, made again his request unto the said Sir John, that he would
think upon some way to make his Composition and peace with the Parliament;
telling him that the Parliament (as it should seem) had taken such notice of
his not prosecuting his Articles, or forfeiting them, that an Act was drawing
up for the sale of his and other Delinquents lands (a Copy or draught whereof
the said George Long, at his own cost procured, and delivered to him, and he
read the same, being left with him to consider:) and did further acquaint him,
that until the Act was perfected there was hope yet left, so as he would betake
himself to the work, but if he neglected it, that he would not only undo his
own family, but also this Certificant and his. Which courtesy of the said
George Long, the said Sir John Stawell repaid with disdainful scorn and pride;
telling him that he had better Counselors then the said George Long: Which
Act passed not until about an year after, during which time many of the persons
which were first mentioned, got themselves struck out of the said Act (their
causes being referred to a Committee) and as it is thought so might Sir John's
have been, if he had but laid hold of the advice of his meanest friends.

Afterward his Highness the Lord Protector was to make his voyage into
Ireland, to reduce it: before whose going, the said George Long went again to
Sir John Stawell, in regard of his the said Georges sad condition, to entreat
and persuade him; and having made some relation of his thoughts, did acquaint
Sir John, that he was come the third time to draw a Petition unto his Highness
(then Lord General) that he would intercede to the House in his behalf, that he
might be admitted to a Composition; wherein the said George Long (being so
nearly concerned) did promise unto him, if he would cause his Petition to be
drawn, and therein humbly state his case, he the said George would find some
means of procuring his Petition to be answered: In which the said George Long
could not prevail with the said Sir John Stawell; at which this Certificant
stood amazed to see Sir John Stawell and himself so near undone; and the said
George Long so sensible, and Sir John no way regardful of his condition, and
so took a sorrowful farewell. George Long.

Was not this an apparent wilfulnes in Sr. John, that rather then he would
Petition the Parliament for his admittance to Composition, he would hazard the
ruin not of himself and Family alone, but of this Gentleman and his house, who
had so friendly and deeply engaged for him? and is not Sir John justly declared
by the Parliament to be not admitted to Compound, when he had for four years
space (for the Articles were granted the ninth of April 1646, and the Act that
declared his non admission was passed the ninth of July 1650) against the
advice and notwithstanding the importunities of his friends and sureties,
disdainfully neglected to Petition to that purpose; which by his Articles he
ought to have done; for it was not enough for Sir John (passively) to submit to
a Composition, but by all means to compass it (actively) and to that end the
word (submit) in the twelfth Article is explained, by the word (make) in the 22
of the same Articles. Sir John is pleased in his Remonstrance to produce a
Petition, which (he says) he delivered to Mr. John Ash; but indeed has been
lately drawn by Sir John of purpose to secret his resolution not to compound;
for Mr. John Ash (Ans. page 13.) says, that the Petition which (after many
amendments and obliterations of the high language therein) Mr. John Ash was to
deliver (as then it was) Mr. John Ash upon his going into the Country, did by
Sir John's appointment deliver to Mr. DenZil Hollis, who refused to deliver it,
because it desired his removal to a Prison more commodious, but not his
admissito his Composition; neither does that Petition in his Remonstrance
mention any such desire, nor indeed his removal; therefore could not be the
Petition delivered to Mr. John Ash, but one of a later birth. Thus his
resolution not to compound continues still upon him, notwithstanding his now
endeavors to persuade a continual readiness in him thereunto, if suffered.

In the interim he is (by Order from the House of Commons of the 18. of August,
1646.) at the next Assizes held for the County of Somerset, at Taunton, found
by the then Grand-Iury guilty of High Treason. But that Indictment being (in a
legal formality only) insufficient to bring him to his Trial, was laid aside;
and afterward (by another Order of the same House of the 18 of February 1647.)
there were three Indictments found against him, one for High Treason, and two
for Murder; one for killing of Robert Osborn, at Marshals-Elm (being the first
blood shed in the West of England in that quarrel) and the other for the murder
(not execution) of Christopher Viccary. Which Indictments were found by a Grand
Jury consisting of nineteen Esquires and Gentlemen (some whereof have been
since, and now are in the Commission of the Peace) four whereof only were of
Taunton, (viZ. Mr. Richard Bovet, Mr. Samuel Whetcomb, Mr. Philip Lyssant, and
Mr. George Powel) the rest living in several places in that County; and but two
of these four ( viZ. Mr. Richard Bovet and Mr. Powel) had then obtained
Judgments against Sir John, and yet those legally and upon evidence, and
defense made: The one for Sir John's taking away unjustly 1200 l. worth of Mr.
Bovets estate; the other for his cruelty toward Mr. Powel as aforesaid; and
Mr. Bovet (only) has since chased a parcel of Sir John's Estate.

But do all or any of these allegations invalid those Verdicts found by
fifteen more, besides those four of Taunton? Because Sir John Stawels most
frequent and greatest acts of Treason, and the Murder of Viccary were committed
in Taunton, was it not fit that some of the Jury should be of Taunton, that
could best judge of these his acts? And because some of them had obtained
Verdicts against him upon sufficient proofs, for injuries done unto them, can
it be any exception against their Verdict; especially since they had long
before the time of the Verdict recovered the same?

And as weak is the last allegation: Because one of them has purchased some
Estate exposed to sale in 1651. Therefore he was no competent Iuror 1647. (four
years before) when such exposal to sale could not without a spirit of
divination be before seen, and might have been prevented if he had pleased; but
being now sold, he catches at every twig to recover it.

However the truth of those Verdicts and Indictments is since confirmed by the
Judgment of the High Court of Justice, upon Sir John Stawels Plea of Not
guilty, and the Depositions of several Witnesses to that purpose; as is
certified under the subscriptions of three and twenty of that Court, and
manifested by the recital of the proceedings of that Court in the Remonstrance.

Sir John being thus found guilty by three several Indictments of Treason and
two Murders, and still refusing the mercy of his Articles, the Parliament in
honor of Justice, and upon consideration of his forfeiture of Articles, did on
the 14 of March 1648. and two years and a half and more after his first
Commitment, Order his Trial upon these Indictments at the Upper-Bench bar,
where his Expressions were more insolent, and his disownings of the present
Authority greater then at any time before: And so far was Sir John Stawel
(after so long imprisonment) from accepting the benefit of his Articles, that
he did not then mention them in order to his exemption from that Trial; but on
the contrary, distinguishing Mr. Justice Bacon from Mr. Justice Roll, owned the
first, as one sitting by the Kings Commission; but disowned the latter, being
appointed by the Parliament under the Great Seal by them approved; which Seal
he termed a Counterfeit, and accused the then Sollicitor-Generall of high
treason for prosecuting against him in the name of the Parliament, as was by
several Witnesses proved before the High Court of Justice.

And as Mr. John Ash affirms, uttered words to this effect, viZ. My offense
is not Treason for which I am here arraigned, but because I would not permit
the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall to pick my purse, and give my consent to pay a
sum of money for the redemption of my Estate which is unjustly taken from me.
Which speeches, if they had fallen from one formerly innocent, had been an
offense of an high nature; but being spoken by sir John, a person guilty (and
so found by several Grand Iuries, and at several times) of Treason, Murder, and
other high offenses; And by one that came into the Parliament-Quarters under
the pretense of a Composition; and in that conjuncture of time, when diverse
Garrisons held yet out for the late King, and some Ships had renegaded the
Parliament-service: and in one of the highest Iudicatures whither multitudes
resorted to observe his deportment, became not a Compounder, much aggravated
his former offenses, must prove prejudicial to the Parliaments affairs, and
contrary to the 21 of Exceter Articles, and to sir John's Engagement and
subscription at the Guild Hall, and was doubtless a breach of his Articles.

And although perhaps these insolences were not Treason within the Cognizance
of an inferior or ordinary Judicature, yet might the Parliament adjudge them
so, which they have done: For in their Act of sale, they have mentioned Treason
committed by him; which must be his miscarriages since his Articles, for his
former were pardoned: And although it be granted they do not amount unto
Treason, yet they may be a breach of Articles; for it is not Treason only that
does break them, inferior offenses may prove a breach, the breach of good
behavior (and certainly his miscarriages are of no less nature) is a
forfeiture of a pardon; and why not of Articles? Truly much more: for pardon
(though of grace) is grounded upon the compact and agreement of the whole
Nation; but these Articles are but the agreement of certain persons thereof; of
the Army with Traitors. And although by the third Article of Exon, certain
enumerated Acts are made a breach of those Articles; yet questionless other
matters not enumerated, may be a breach; whereof these of sir John are some:
and (it seems) have been so adjudged by the Parliament: For in the Debate of
all Acts and Resolutions of theirs against sir John, they still had a
consideration of his Articles, and adjudged these his miscarriages a breach of
them; and therefore declared him not to be admitted to Composition, having
forfeited the benefit thereof. And although the Articles bind not sir John in
point of his judgment, yet they restrain him from all open and overt
expressions thereof, to the prejudice of the Commonwealth. A man in private
thoughts, deemeth another man to be a thief (perhaps knows him to be one:)
This judgment, this knowledge, the Law takes no notice of:

But let him declare such his thoughts, judgment, or knowledge, by saying he
is a Thief; these open words being prejudicial to the party whereof the words
were spoken, make him liable to an Action; and if he proves it not, to repair
him in damage: Sir John might without damage have kept his judgment to
himself; but expressing it in such insolent and prejudicial language to the
affairs of Parliament, he forfeited his Articles.

Which his deportment being reported to the House of Commons, they proceeded at
that time no further against him in that Court; but having then consideration
of the Articles of Exon, and to preserve the faith of their Armies from all
color of violation; they still reserved their mercy for him, if he had but
then implored it.

But sir John continued in his averse resolution, out of a confidence of the
late Kings restitution to his Power and Authority; and a design thereby to
receive his whole Estate gratis, with a great reward for his many sufferings in
owning and justifying the late Kings Cause beyond any of his party, being the
only Subject of his, that refused to comply with the Parliament, when he might,
and was earnestly invited thereunto; which aim of his is apparent: For Mr. John
Ash does tell us that he sent unto the late King at Hampton Court, desiring him
to take notice of the great sufferings he had undergone for his Majesty's
Cause, and did let him know the hopes he had of his Majesty's great favor and
reward for him, when he should be restored. And Mr. James Ash testifies, that
the Lady Stawell told him that sir John did still flatter his hopes to have the
King restored; and although there were daily less hopes, yet his faith
continued strong; nay besides the testimony of these two persons of honor (and
by the testimony of two witnesses, each truth ought to be tried) if half an eye
did but look into his carriage from his first coming before the Committee at
Goldsmiths Hall, until his trial by the High-Court of Justice, it could be
nothing but disownings, contempts, and opprobrious language of the present
Government and Authority, deriding of Compounders, and not the least claim of
the benefit of his Articles, as long as his hopes of favor and singularity
remained: For sir John never pleaded, nor so much as ever pretended to those
Articles, until some time after the late Kings death, although in the mean
time there were brought and obtained against him diverse Actions and Judgments
for acts by him done before those Articles, and relating to the wars; which
actions amounted to the total of 7000 l. (as himself affirms) and to which
actions he never pleaded those Articles (although he might) but either the
general issue of not guilty, or suffered Judgment to pass against him by
confession or default. When he was arraigned at the Upper-Bench-Bar for his
life, he did not so much as mention those Articles: He now says in his
Remonstrance page 30. that upon his moving to plead specially, the Court did
order that he should bring in his special Plea the first day of the next Term,
and did assign him Council for that purpose; but what that special Plea was,
or intended to be, whether touching his Articles, or any other matter, sir John
is not pleased to acquaint us; hour, during this time sir John's deportment was
full of disdain toward the Authority of Parliament: High it was at his first
coming to Goldsmiths Hall, higher at the second being there; and highest at his
arraignment at the Upper-Bench-Bar: all which do manifest his intention not to
compound, through his ambitious hopes aforesaid. But when by the Kings death
his hopes began to sink, and were absolutely lost by the King of Scots (the
late Kings pretended successor) his taking the Covenant, and thereby engaging
against sir John, his Cause and Interest; then, and not before, he abated the
height of his insolences; how mild then he grew! witness his carriage (sunk
even to a dejection) before the High-Court of Justice; and how fearful! his
endeavor to escape out of Newgate (being thither committed for High Treason)
does testify. And then, and not before, he took up his pretenses and flew back
to the mercy of those Articles, which he formerly slighted; and to regain the
lost benefit of them, he insinuates with the Army, suggesteth unto them, the
great dishonor if their faith should be questioned; and that the highest
security that the world affords, is engaged for his Indemnity; and his
confidence of restitution is such, that his Agents give out, that Commissary
General Whaley will leave no stone unturned to preserve it; to the great
scandal and abuse of that person of valor and integrity.

Whereas it is true, that the Faith of an Army is a high security, and the
honor of it ought to be as precious as the apple of the eye; which Faith,
which Honor, sir John had once engaged for his Indemnity; but such an
Indemnity only, that he might the freelier make his Composition with the
Parliament. But when Sir John did not endeavor, but slight, nay contemn his
Composition; and during his stay in the Parliament-Quarters, did (by color of
that faith) in a presumptuous manner disown their Authority, in their
Committees, in their Courts of Justice, and in their very House, he has abused
the end for which this faith was given, the Armies faith is disingaged, and it
will be a dishonor unto them now to support him, whose offenses cry aloud for
punishment, and who has in so high a nature, abused the end and trust of their
engagement, and scorned their mercy, otherwise then to make use of it, to
advance his own ambition, and that very design against which the Army did
fight: when a mutual faith is passed between man and wife, the security is
greater, and as great as the faith of Articles; and the wife may with greater
reason, challenge performance from her husband, then a Traitor can upon his
Articles; yet if the woman shall become an Adulteress, she has abused that
faith, and the end for which it was given, and the husband is disingaged
without the least breach of his honor, or faith unviolated: Therefore does the
faith of the Army remain, notwithstanding sir John his imprisonment, Trials,
and sale of his Estate, and the rather for that he that now lays such hold on
the Articles of Exon, brake his own with the Town of Taunton, and committed
Dunscomb to rot in the Gaol, although his person was indemnified by the
Articles of Bristoll.

Sir John after a recital in his Remonstrance of these transactions against
him, mentions the erection of the Court of Articles (in time, 18 June 1649.)
and his Petition thereunto, to be relieved upon these Articles; upon which
Petition (he says, Remonst. page 35.) no proceedings were made by that Court;
but tells you not the reason; which in truth was for that (as they answered his
Petition) that they could not relieve him, standing committed by the Parliament
for High Treason; well knowing that by Law, that Court could not by general
words of their Act of Erection, intermeddle with sir John's relief, seeing he
was particularly committed by the House of Commons for High Treason, and
thereby implicitly adjudged to have either broken, or neglected the
performance of his Articles.

Painted Chamber, Westminster, Die Veneris, 13 July 1644. By the Committee
appointed for Relief upon ARTICLES of WAR.

THe Petition of Sir John Stawell Knight, was this day read, and the Council on
the Petitioners behalf heard: And it was moved that Bail might be taken for the
said Sir John, or that a Keeper might attend him to his Council, for the
clearing and dispatch of his business. Hereupon it was urged by the Council for
the Commonwealth, That the Parliament, who were the Supreme Authority, and from
whom all other Courts were derivative, had (as was confessed in sir John's
Petition) committed him for High Treason, and levying War against the
Parliament, and commanded that he should be detained Prisoner until they gave
further Order: So that no consideration was to be had by any other Power under
them, as to his Bail, or enlargement without their leave: But his Council was
informed, that if they had any thing further to move on the Petitioners behalf,
they should be heard; whereupon they desired time to advise: Which was
accordingly granted until Wednesday.

A true Copy. JOHN WILSON, Dep. Regist.

Now from the time that sir John was arraigned at the Upper-Bench-Bar (which)
as himself says, was in May 1649. there did efflux 13 months, until the time
that the Parliament passed their Act for sir John's Trial by the High-Court of
Justice, which passed 9 July 1650. during which time they patiently expected
his reformation; but finding him of the same thoughts, did by that Act order
his Trial by that Court and did in two places thereof, mention that sir John
was not admitted to compound.

And therefore, when in the trial of Sir John Stawell, for Treason and other
offenses (amongst which the killing of Robert Osborne at Marshals Elm, and the
hanging of Christopher Viccary in Taunton, were two) upon hearing all the
Evidences and Witnesses produced on the Commonwealth, and of the Prisoner, it
was agreed by that whole Court, (for so they certified to the Parliament) as by
the same transcribed in the Remonstrance, page 37. 38. appears) that he was
guilty of the Treason, and other high offenses charged on him; that Court ought
to have proceeded to sentence, his special plea of Articles notwithstanding;
neither indeed should that plea have been admitted, after that the Parliament
had by their Act declared, that he was not admitted to compound; and that, that
Court should try him, as one not admitted thereunto; which Declaration no
inferior or subordinate Court or authority whatsoever has power to examine or
question.

And all Examinations, Resolutions, and other proceedings of that Court,
touching those Articles and Plea thereof, are void and extrajudicial; and Sir
John stands guilty by the Judgment of that Court of high Treason, and other
the offenses abovesaid: and by Act of Parliament declared not admitted to
compound.

This his Guilt being certified to the Parliament, by the high Court of
Justice, with a cesser of sentence; in respect of his Articles the Parliament
upon reading of that Certificate (10 June 1651.) resented the same, yet by
reason thereof spared his life, but passed an Act of the 16 of June 1651. (a
month thereafter) whereby they adjudge sir John to have forfeited his Estate
for Treason, and thereupon vested the actual possession of that Estate in
certain Trustees and their heirs, in order to the sale thereof; which Lands are
since sold accordingly, and the moneys disposed of for the use of the
Commonwealth; sir John Stawell being in that Act first named, and before others
of higher degree: Which Act and Judgment, being the Act and Judgment of all
the People of England inclusively; and the same judgment being since fully
executed, and the Estate of sir John in fact sold and disposed of by and
according to that Act; and the Purchasers thereof by force of their respective
bargains in the actual and peaceable possession thereof, these consequences
will follow, and be necessarily deduced.

1. That the Reasons and causes of that Judgment cannot be examined or
questioned out of the House it self: Whether they passed that their Judgment
for Treasonable acts by him done before his Articles, in regard they adjudge
his Articles to be either neglected in performance, or broken by all or any his
refusals or misdemeanors abovesaid? or whether they adjudged those misdemeanors
either jointly or severally, to be a new Treason, and by consequence a
forfeiture of his Estate since his Articles? Or whether for any, and for any
other act of his, or cause, they passed their Judgment against him? It will
therefore seem very unreasonable, and be of dangerous consequence, if the
Purchasers (mediat or immediate) should be now enforced (for defense of such
their Possessions) to search into, and produce the reasons and causes thereof,
especially since the Purchasers are mere strangers thereunto. 2. That all the
Examinations and other proceedings, and very Judgment of the Court of Articles
(on the said Judgment of Parliament) (although an Act of Parliament erected it
after that Judgment given) were extrajudicial, against the fundamental Laws of
this Commonwealth, and of bad example.

Coram non Iudice; When that Court (under pretense of a general Act of Relief
upon Articles) did intermeddle with the Case of sir John Stawel, touching his
person and Estate, his Estate being already adjudged by Act of Parliament to be
forfeited; and the imprisonment of his person remaining indiscussed in that
very House, especially after the Parliament had

Thursday, Febr. 24. 1652. Resolved,
THat the Cause of Sir John Stawel upon his pretense of Title to Articles, be
resumed to the consideration and determination of the Parliament; and that the
Commissioners for giving relief to persons upon Articles, do forbear to proceed
any further therein, until the Parliament take further order.

Hen. Scobell, Cler. Parl.

Which Resolves (amounting unto an explanation of that Act of Reviver)
determined not with the dissolution of the Parliament, but does remain annexed
to it (as a Codicil) taking away the Jurisdiction of that Court in the Case of
Sir John.

2. These proceedings were coram non Iudice, in regard of a Proviso in that Act
of Reviver, in these words, viZ.

Provided, That such person or persons claiming benefit of Articles as
aforesaid, have not forfeited the same by breach or nonperformance of what is
or was on their part to be performed, since their Articles were granted.

Now the Parliament having declared, if not adjudged Sir John Stawell not to be
admitted to Compound, have adjudged or declared that Sir John has forfeited
his Articles either by breach or nonperformance; either of which Judgment or
Declaration the Court of Articles could not draw into question. And therefore
is Sir John within that Proviso, and without the jurisdiction of that Court.

It is a fundamental, That a Judgment of Parliament should not be reversed or
annulled by any subordinate or delegated Court, Judicature or Authority
whatsoever, or otherwise then by the immediate power of Parliament, which power
cannot be transmitted to any other Judicature.

The Court of Articles have adjudged, That Sir John Stawell (from and after
Composition made as aforesaid) shall have the possession of his Estate freed
and discharged from all sequestrations and seisures whatsoever, and shall enjoy
the same without any claim, demand, impediment or molestation of the said
Trustees, or of the Survivors or Survivor of them, they or any of their heirs.

These are the words of that Judgment, as it is recited in the Remonstrance,
page 71. Which Judgment in respect of this Estate, is no otherwise then an
annihilation of that Act of Parliament by this subordinate Court, under
pretense of a power transmitted unto them by the general words of the Act of
Reviver, when as a special Act could not give any such power of annihilation.

The Legislative power by the fundamental laws remains solely and undoubtedly
in the Parliament, and cannot be transferred to any inferior Judicature
whatsoever. Of which power, the Abrogation or Repeal of former Laws, is a
branch or part.

But this Judgment of the Court of Articles (in respect of the Estate of Sir
John) does amount unto a Repeal of that Act of disposing this Estate, by a
power pretended to be delegated to that Court by the general words of that Act
of Reviver.

It is of bad example for that Court of Articles to take cognizance of the
Cause of Sir John Stawel, the same being depending before the Supreme Authority
of the Nation: when as their Predecessors (who had the same, if not greater
power) for that very reason forbear to give Sir John any relief in that behalf;
And when the High Court of Justice for the same cause forbore their sentence,
and did submit it to the judgment of the House, although their Act was
particular, and the Act of Reviving the Court of Articles in general words.
And the example is heighthened, after that the Parliament-Votes had prohibited
them any further intermedling, to resume the cognizance of the Cause, and to
proceed to judgment, and by that judgment (in respect of the Estate) to
entrench upon the privilege of Parliament, in reversing the Judgments of
Parliament, and repealing the Acts thereof; and when the Judges, Members of
that Committee, and the best and fundamental Expositors of Acts of Parliament,
(the Parliament that made them being dissolved) did deliver their opinions
against such jurisdiction.

The Examinations, Judgment, and Proceedings of that Court being coram non
Judice, and against Fundamentals, are merely void in Law, especially when that
Judgment is grounded upon no proofs, the proofs taken by the High Court of
Justice being taken extrajudicially as abovesaid, and are therefore (in a Legal
construction) Nullities. Which gives a full and short Answer to that large
recital thereof in the Remonstrance.

And although the Certificates, Orders and Awards of that Court of Articles are
binding and conclusive to all Courts of Justice, Committees, etc. any Law,
Order or Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding; yet has not that Court
such sole and supreme power or jurisdiction, as to control the Acts or
Resolutions of the Parliament (the source of their power) and especially when
their Act begins with Courts of Justice, which are of an inferior
jurisdiction. Nor can it now, neither ought it to be supposed that the
aforesaid Acts, Orders, Resolutions, Judgments and Proceedings of that
Parliament, were, or were given in breach or violation of any of the Articles
of Exon, especially they still having a consideration thereof; in the violation
of which Articles, the faith of the Army and honor and justice of the Nation
is so highly concerned. But it shall and ought to be presumed, that Sir John by
some or all of the misdemeanors and neglects aforesaid, or by other acts of his
best known to that Parliament, had in the judgment thereof forfeited and lost
the benefit of his Articles.

Sir John, by way of objection, ( Remonstrance, p. 74.) recites a Clause in
that Act of Sale, in these words, viZ.

Nevertheless upon trust and confidence that the said William Skinner and
others the persons abovenamed, or any five or more of them, shall have, hold
and enjoy all and every the premises, and every of them subject unto such
trusts and uses, as by this Act, or in and by authority of Parliament shall be
hereafter further directed and appointed, and shall dispose of the same
accordingly. And from thence would infer,

1. That this power of limiting the trusts of those Lands, was reserved by the
Parliament in relation to the Articles of War, by them confirmed; that in
regard they had ratified diverse of them, and eminently bound themselves in
Faith, Honor, and Justice to make good, and could not take notice of such as
had right or claim to the same; they thereof provided, according to this
reserved power, that the Trustees should dispose of Lands accordingly.

In answer whereof it must be premised,

1. That the Articles of Exon were confirmed by both Houses the fourth of
November. 1647. And this Act passed the sixth of July 1651. almost four years
after.

2. That the words of that clause refer to trusts and uses only, which should
for the future be directed and appointed by that Act, or authority of
Parliament.

It will then follow, that the trusts if any of the Articles of Exon cannot be
the trusts, mentioned in that Act being precedent to it, not subsequent.

That the Act for sale passed for no causes mentioned in those Articles, but
for others, and for ought appeaes, for offenses of a later perpetration.

That it was well known to that Parliament, that Sir John did claim the benefit
of those Article; for the Parliament had at several times before, and at the
time of the passing of this Act, his very Articles in consideration, and deemed
them forfeited by him.

The second thing that Sir John does infer is, that the reviving after that of
the Court of Articles, was a Declaration of the uses and trusts of that Act of
Sale; seeing to that persons grieved contrary to those Articles, this Court was
constituted to do them right, any Law, Order or Ordinance to the contrary
notwithstanding.

But Sir John has mistaken the Act; the words are not, that the Court of
Articles should relieve the party within Articles, any Law to the contrary; but
that the Certificate of that Court should be binding to all inferior Courts of
Justice, any Law to the contrary notwithstanding.

Again, by the Act of Sale, the trusts of that Act are declared, and the land
sold, and settled according to that Declaration; and therefore the Patliament
cannot by virtue of that reservation, declare any contrary or other trusts, nor
did by their Act of reviver make use of their former power; (having already
executed the same) in overthrow of those sales executed by virtue of that Act
of sale; especially when, as has been shown, Sir John is a party -- excepted
out of that Act.

After which Act of Sale, and not before, Sir John does pretend to Petition the
Parliament, for admission to composition; which Petition (as he alleges by
his Remonstrance page 39) he delivered unto Mr. Garland; but whether Mr.
Garland did, or thought fit to present it to the Parliament, in regard of Sir
John's former actions is not declared, and perhaps the Parliament refused it and
justly: for Gods vicegerents do often Act like God himself; who when after a
long forbearance on his part, and an obstinate continuance in evil on man's
part, he resolves to punish; he does execute the same accordingly,
notwithstanding the Prayers and supplications of the sinner, to whom he then
turns a deaf year.

This might the Parliament do, Sir John's slightning of their mercy, and the
necessity of their Justice urging them to it. Sir John says (Remonstrance page
40.) that at the time of the passing of the Act of the 29. of September. 1652.
for reviveing the Court of Articles, provisors were tendered (he conceives by
the Purchasers) the one of the 28 of September. 1652. in these words, viZ.

Provided that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend, nor
cinstrained to ixtend to prejudice, alter, or make void any Resolutions, Votes
or Judgments given in the Parliament, touching any of the Articles aforesaid
(or any persons) claiming thereby.

The other of the day following in these words, viZ.

Provided always, and be it further enacted and declared, That no real or
personal Estate, which has been settled, conveyed, or assured to any person or
persons, by virtue of any Act, Ordinance, or Order of this present Parliament,
shall be made null, vacated, or otherwise determined, or disposed of by the
Commissioners, named in this Act or by their Authority; but if they shall see
cause of restitution, by virtue of Articles subject unto their CogniZance, they
make a word not in specie against the particular person or persons, upon whom
such Estate or Estates shall be settled, conveyed, or assured, but invalue to be
satisfied by such other Lands or Revenew, as the Parliament shall direct any
thing in this Act, or the former; which is hereby revived to the contrary
notwithstanding.

The first of these he says (after the second reading, the last after the
first reading) did pass in the Negative, which proviso tending to the
limitation of that benefit; which the House was most honorably pleased to
grant, and allow to such persons as should claim releife by Articles were both
received; and it was resolved upon the question in the Negative, which he
prays may be specially observed.

It may be thought presumption in Sir John, to intimate any reason or grounds
of the refusal of those Provisoes, and it would be modesty in us not to imitate
him; yet in answer to that his intimation, we say that the Parliament (as
appears by their proceedings intended so much in the case of Sir John
Stawell; though perhaps they would not have such a general proviso incerted,
either because their was no Judgment, Vote, or Resolution of that Parliament
touching Articles; but in the Case of Sir John Stawell, or because they
presumed, as well they might; that their inferior (deivrative) Court of
Articles would not call inquestion any of their proceedings; but as soon as
they did find that, that Court had proceeded in the Case of Sir John Stawell,
they forthwith by their Resolution of the 24 of Febr. abovesaid, prohibited
them any further proceedings, especially when that Court began to proceed to
sentence contrary to their judgment, until that time wisely forbearing their
prohibition, in expectation of that subordinate Courts submission to their
Declaration of Sir John's not admittance to compound, and their disposition of
his Estate.

There is likewise a Proviso in that Act of reviver, which in effect is the
same with the recited Proviso, and is in these words, viZ.

Provided, That such person or persons, claiming benefit of Articles as
aforesaid, have not forfeited the same by breach or nonperformance of what is,
or was on their part, to be performed since those Articles were so granted. And
there cannot be a more supreme Declaration or Judgment, then that of the
Parliament it self; that Sir John had forfeited the benefit of his Artitles:
and therefore the Case of Sir John Stawell, the only Case depending in
Parliament, touching Articles was already provided for, and by consequence that
Proviso needless.

The second Proviso seems as needless to be inserted in this Act of Reviver;
for since it does revive the former Act, and does enable that newly erected
Court, to put in execution all and every the powers expressed in that former
Act; one of which powers is, to relieve and redress the parties complaining, so
far as in justice they ought to have by the said Articles, by restitution in
specie or in value, etc.

That Proviso speaks no more then what was enacted in the very body of that
Act; and for that reason, doubtless was laid aside.

The next material thing for our Answer, is the Letter of Sir Anthony Irbie,
mentioned in the Remonstrance, page 59. to be directed to Mr. Tracy Pauncefoot
Reg. of the Court of Articles, and at large inserted, and because he did Sir
John such good service, by his said Letter; Sir John has produced him as a
Witness, before the present Committee of Parliament, where his examination was
in these words, viZ.

The Examination of Anthony Irby, Knight, taken the 16 of November 1654. before
the Committee of Parliament to whom the Lord Cravens Petition is referred;
being produced as a Witness on the behalf of Sir John Stawel, whose Petition is
referred by the Parliament to this Committee.
Who says, That he was one of the Committee for Compounding sitting at
Goldsmiths Hall, and was present there when Sir John Stawel did prefer his
Petition to compound: And says that the same was so preferred within the time
limited by the Articles of Exeter, as appeared by the Pass of Sir Thomas
Fairfax. And says that the said Petition was read at the board, but something
therein was disliked; for Sir John Stawel did not acknowledge his Delinquencie,
nor would he take the Covenant and Negative Oath. And further says, that Sir
John Stawel did not behave himself misbecomingly, as this Deponent conceives,
only did insist upon the Articles of Exeter, and said that by them he was to be
admitted to Composition; and he this Examinant took no exceptions at his
carriage. And says, that in those times there was want of money, and it was his
opinion that Sir John Stawel ought to compound.

And further says, That at that time this Examinant did not know of any body
that was about to buy any part of Sir John Stawels Estate: but says, That
about two or three years ago (as he remembers) he was at Sir Abraham Williams
his house, being about the time of Sir John Stawels Trial for his life, or
presently after, as he remembers; and there he met Sir Edward Baynton, and
enquired of him the reason of the prosecution of Sir John Stawell. And Sir
Edward Baynton then told this Examinant, That there was a Gentleman who would
have bought a Manor of Sir John Stawell, in Somersetshire or Wiltshire, (he
cannot tell whether) and that he the said Sir Edward Baynton had some interest
in part of it, and had offered, if Sir John Stawell would sell his part, he
also would sell his other part; but said, that afterward he was sorry for that
offer, because he conceived that was the original of Sir John Stawels troubles.

And this Examinant further says, That Sir John Stawell came punctually within
the time limited by his Articles; for that the Committee for compounding gave
him a time to appear after the date of the time given by the said Articles, on
purpose that the Committee might show him no favor when the time given by the
Articles was out. And says, That Sir Edward Baynton told him this Examinant,
that the person who would buy the said Manor, was Mr. John Ash.

And this Examinant further says, That one of the Members of that Committee,
being the Chairman, told the Committee that Sir John Stawell was without with a
Petition, but said the same was failing in many circumstances. And says, That
after the Case then in debate was ended, (which was one Berkleys, as this
Deponent now remembers) Sir John Stawell was called in. And this Examinant
being now demanded whether Sir John Stawell had subscribed not to bear arms
against the Parliament, as was required by his Articles: This Examinate says,
that there was a Committee who sat in Goldsmiths Hall to take Subscriptions,
without which, as he remembers, Delinquents were not to stay within the Lines
of Communication; but says, that he does not remember that ever he saw any
Certificate that Sir John Stawel had subscribed not to bear arms, nor did he
ever see the Certificate of any other person to that purpose that came to
compound. And this Examinant further says, That the Committee had an Order of
Parliament not to compound with any that did not take the Covenant and Negative
oath, which latter the Committee had power to administer, and the same was
tendered to Sir John Stawel, but he refused to take it, and said he was excused
by his Articles. And this Examinant further faith, That it was not then
objected against Sir John Stawel, that he had not subscribed the Engagement not
to bear arms against the Parliament.

Being Cross-examined on the behalf of the Commonwealth, He says,

That he does not remember that Sir John Stawel said, the Committee were
Traitors or Delinquents. That to his remembrance, they had no Order of
Parliament that persons should acknowledge their Delinquencie before they were
admitted to compound; but the Committee made such an agreement amongst
themselves: And says, that some of the Committee did say, that Sir John
Stawels Petition was rather a Remonstrance then a Petition. And says, that
there was no Particular of his Estate annexed to his Petition, nor was it
ordinary so to do, but the Particular was usually delivered after admission to
a Composition. And says, that Sir John Stawel did refuse the Covenant and
Negative oath upon account of his Articles; and that the subscription not to
bear Arms, was not to be made before them, but in another place before they
came to them. And says, That he was near Sir John Stawel when he was with the
Committee, but did not hear any particular ill language given by him to the
Committee, as he remembers; but says that his carriage was then as it was
usually, not very pleasant or Courtly.

Sir David Watkins examined at the same time on Sir John Stawels part,
Says,
THat he was of the Committee for Compounding, and was there when Sir John
Stawel came and presented his Petition to the Committee, which was within four
months from the 8. of April. And says, that he came in a civil manner, but
did not acknowledge his Delinquencie, nor would take the Negative oath, and was
refused to be admitted upon that account. And says, that he does not remember
any Order of Parliament that did forbid them to Compound with persons that did
not acknowledge themselves Delinquents, but such as had not taken the Oath and
Covenant. And says that he saw the Lord Fairfax his Pass dated in April, and
that he does account four months after the rate of 28 days to a month. And
says, that he does not know that any Certificate was brought to them touching
Subscription not to bear Arms, either in this or any case of persons
compounding upon those Articles; and says, that Sir John Stawels not
subscribing, was not objected against him at that time.

Being Cross-examined on the behalf of the Commonwealth, He says,

That some did say, That Sir John Stawels Petition was rather a Remonstrance
then a Petition; but the title was A Petition. But he had not acknowledged his
Delinquencie, nor taken the Negative Oath and Covenant; and for that reason he
conceives it was called a Remonstrance. That the Committee were informed he had
subscribed not to bear Arms against the Parliament.

Sir Anthony Irby being called in after the Company were withdrawn, and asked
whether there were any private discourse at the Committee to Sir John Stawels
prejudice,

HE says, that Sir John Stawell being without the door, the Chairman went out,
and on his return told this Examinant, That Sir John Stawel was a great Enemy,
had raised Arms against the Parliament, drew the first blood in the West of
England; that his Petition was not valid, he acknowledged no Delinquencie, had
not taken the Negative Oath; and says that the Committee pressed him to it,
and upon refusal gave him time till his Articles were out, because then they
knew how to deal with him; and says that the Committee did not meddle with
subscription, for that was to be done by particular Committees separated from
them, because that concerned Delinquents stay in Town: but only to see that
they did take the Negative Oath and Covenant. And further says, that the
second day that Sir John Stawell appeared, Mr. Stephens was in the Chair, as he
remembers.

Of both which, to make some observations: Sir Anthony says in his Letter,
That he knows sir John delivered his Petition within the time, according to
Articles. And in his Examination, that the same was so preferred within the
time limited by the Articles of Exon, as appears by the Pass of Sir Thomas
Fairfax: But in neither has he explained himself what he means by (the time
limited) for if he intends thereby Calendar time, it is then true; for sir
John appearing first on the sixth of August, came within the time limited: But
then it cannot be true, what Mr. Michael Herring has both sworn, and affirmed
upon his examination, that the Committee refused him not for not coming in
time. And so Gens contra Gentem. But if sir Anthony reckons but 28 days to
the Month, sir John must first appear before the 30 of July, when the time
according to that Act expired; but then the suggestions of sir Anthony's own
Warrant of the Committee (whereof sir Anthony was one, and present) of the
fourth of August, cannot be true; for that surmiseth, that sir John had not
then appeared before any Committee. And by this construction, there is sir
Anthony Irby the Commissioner, against sir Anthony Irby the Witness.

He says upon his Examination, The Petition was read, but something therein
was disliked, because sir John did not acknwledge his Delinquency, neither
would he take the Covenant and Negative Oath. As touching the refusal of the
Oaths, that could be no cause of disliking his Petition; it might be of
refusing his Composition, the Oaths being collateral to the Petition. As
touching his acknowledgement of Delinquency, it is strange that it is now grown
with sir Anthony, a finding of fault (or an occasion to pick a quarrel) with
one that deserved no favor, by reason of a Character given him of the
violentest and earliest enemy (which was indeed true, let whomsoever give that
Character) when as it was the constant rule by which that Committee, and sir
Anthony himself did walk; neither was there any person whatsoever that did
compound without it, let him deserve favor or not.

But if sir Anthony intended to show him no favor, why did sir Anthony (for he
swears that We did) give him time for eight or ten days, or fortnight. He
further deposes that he did not certainly remember; but it was to his cetain
remembrance, that by that time, his time given him by his Articles would be
out, that (We) might deal with him the better; which if it should be believed
to be true (because he swears it) certainly sir Anthony was then too severe
in his Justice, rather injust; as he is now too merciful; neither can he be
excused of casting snares in sir John's way, to satisfy his passion (for sir
Anthony himself was then the violentest man against him) though to the breach
of the faith of the Army and Nation: But we will not take advantage, with an
Habemus confitentem reum, we will not for his own credit at this time believe
him, but do believe Mr. James Ash, that time was given unto sir John Stawell
upon the entreaty of Mr. John Ash, and in hope to draw sir John in the interval
unto a submission. Sir Anthony's testimony touching sir John's carriage at that
Committee, has been before sufficiently confuted; his opinion that sir John
ought to compound (as his expression was upon his Examination) and his desire
to have had sir John admitted to composition, as he ought by his Articles, is
granted; for sir John ought by his Articles to have been admitted to a
Composition; but sir John would not compound in such manner as that Committee
could compound with him; and therefore he was justly denied such an admission
thereunto; but according to their Rules he was admitted, and might have
compounded. As concerning sir Anthonies relation touching the sale of a Manor
of sir John Stawels, it was but a relation of another unsworn, and therefore no
evidence; but Mr. Ash himself has fully answered it, and therefore needs no
other at this time, only sir Anthony has confessed that the whole Committee,
without a Negative did resolve to report that carriage of sir John to the
House, wherein sir Anthony now swears he then saw no incivility; if he did
not, where was sir Anthonies Justice, when himself voted that Report.

The same answer respectively may be given to sir David Watkins's Certificate
mentioned in the Remonstrance page 61. and his Examinations before this
Committee of Parliament, both agreeing; but in this only, that sir David does
now affirm, that he does account 28 days to the month, when he says that sir
John Stawell came and presented his Petition to the Committee within four
months from the eight of April; which likewise cannot agree with his Warrant
of the fourth of August often mentioned, he being one of the Committee that
granted it; and at that time, it seems he accounted the Calendar months.

The Remonstrance page 62. does surmise, that the 15. of August 1653. the cause
of Sir John, whereof the Court of Articles took the Cognizance upon them, came
regularly to be heard, but how reagular, or rather how extrajudicial has been
already declared, when the Parliament had resumed it to themselves: but that
Parliament being disolved, Sir John Stawel took advantage thereof, and by his
importunity obtained from that Court of Articles, a further, though most
extrajudicial proceeding therein, even to judgment.

The Trustees of Drury house and Purchasers cannot be blamed, if to preserve
the honor and credit of Acts of Parliament, they did Petition the then
Commit; for Petitions in such manner as the Remonstrance sets forth, to
prevent such irregularities, especially when that Court was deliberating and
advising upon their judgment; the Order of which Committee thereon, was as is
Remonstrated; that Colonel Rous should report it to the Parliament, with this
sense of the Committee: that the Purchasers ought to enjoy their Purchases, and
Sir John have satisfaction if found within, and ought to have the benefit of
Articles; which report made accordingly, and the then Parliament, reading the
said several Votes of Parliament, of the 24 of February 1652. touching the said
confirmation of the sales, and resuming the cause, did resolve to take the
consideration thereof on Friday following. After the resumption whereof, and
during its debate by the Parliament, that Court of Articles took the boldness
to give that Judgment; for Sir John Stawell at large set forth in the
Remonstrance, page 65. thereby breaking through Resolves, Judgments, and Acts
of Parliament to the contrary; and therefore Sir John could not probably
conceive that any other besides himself would rest on, or that the then
Parliament would suffer their proceedings, or the Judgments or Resolutions of
their Predecessors to be questioned and annulled by an inferior jurisdiction;
and therefore it was justly done by the Trustees and Purchasers, to endeavor
to render those illegal proceedings succesless; and for the Parliament, in
vindication of their supreme power to resume the debate, touching the Trustees
representation and Purchasers Petition, the sooner to declare their resentment
of those proceedings; which they did on the 29 of August 1653. and upon that
debate referred back to the same Committee, to consider of an expedient for the
Petitioners relief; upon which reference, that Committee of Petitions upon
consideration had of that Judgment of the Court of Articles, and the several
Acts constituting that Court, and of all the pleadings and proceedings passed
in that case, thought fit to report that the Purchasors ought to enjoy the same
Estate, which report the then Parliament was pleased to confirm, and

Teusd. the 15 of September. 1653. Resolved,
That this House do agree with this Report of the Committee, that the
Purchasers of Sir John Stawel's Estate shall quietly possess and enjoy the
same, according to their several contracts made with the Trustees.

Henry Scobel Clerk of the Parliament.

And passed an Act accordingly in these words.

Thursd. the 13. of October. 1653 An Act for confirmation of the sale, of the
Lands and Estate of Sir John Stawell, Knight of the Bath.
Be it enacted and deccared by Authority of Parliament, that all sales made of
any Estate, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods or Chattels of Sir John
Stawell Knight of the Bath, by virtue or appointment of any Act or Acts of
Parliament, are hereby confirmed and established; and accordingly all
Purchasers and Buyers of the same, shall and may have, hold, and quietly enjoy
the same to them, their Heirs and Assigns, according to the Rules, Conditions
and Limitations prescribed in the said Acts, any Law or Judgment to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Hen. Scobell Clerk of the Parliament.

Notwithstanding which reference, resolution, and Act of this second
Parliament, in confirmation of the Act and proceedings of the former
Parliament, and sale of the Estate accordingly, Sir John rests not, but now
pretends that the Committee for Petitions pursu^d not the intent of that
Order of Reference; and draws that pretense from these two Premises: The one,
because Sir John had the (extrajudicial) Judgment of the Court of Articles for
part of his Estate, therefore this Committee did not pursue the intent of that
Order.

Whereas (not to insist upon the consequence) the judgment and proceedings of
the Court of Articles against the Purchasers; being the very cause of their
Complaint, and against which they desired relief from a superior Court, the
Parliament thought fit upon a due consideration to establish the enjoyment of
the Lands, and by consequence did lay aside that Judgment that would have
disturbed it.

Sir John again says, that in regard the Committee did think fit to confirm
the Purchasers estates, therefore they did not pursue the intent of that Order
touching the Purchasers relief. As if it were not the best and most sit relief
to confirm their Estates, notwithstanding this Judgment, that would otherwise
have taken them away.

Neither in the judgment of the Parliament it self had that Committee not
pursued their intent of Reference; for both by a Resolve and an Act they settled
the Estate accordingly.

He says, the Purchasers bargains and contracts could not be absolute and
direct, in regard the said Clause of Limitation had debarred the Trustees
themselves (from whom the Purchasers claim) in case of Articles from any such
absolute Estate.

Suppose the Estate of the Trustees had been subject to such a trust in case of
other men claiming Articles, yet in Sir John's case (for the reasons aforesaid)
there could be no such trust. State but his case, it will so appear.

Sir John committed Treason, and then agreed to surrender Exon, and to enjoy
his Estate after Composition made within a month: But Sir John did not make
his Composition within four months, but refused to make it according to the
Rules of Goldsmiths Hall, and refused to petition the Parliament to be admitted
to compound at large. The Parliament afterward (the four months expired, and
five years past, no Composition made) upon consideration of the Articles, and
Sir John's forfeiture of them, enacted the Lands to be sold.

Now the trust upon the rendition being determined with the four months, and
Sir John's neglect of making his Composition within that time (nay, until sale)
cannot be annexed to the Act of Sale; neither is there any other trust of
Articles in the case of Sir John, other, then that (lost) trust at the
rendition. And that the trust was determined by his not making of his
Composition within the four months, it does appear by a Judgment of a
Court Martial given about two years after, and by that Army, that best knew how
to interpret their own Articles. The Judgment is in these words.

At a Court Martial of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight,
Captain General, etc. Held for the Headquarters at White Hall the 24 of
February 1648.
Upon the Question, Whether Robert Barcroft not compounding, sc. within four
months after the Rendition of Exon, has lost the benefit of the Articles of
Exon, as to his Indemnity against Richards?

It was Resolved in the affirmative.

HEN. WHALLEY Iudge-Advocate.

Sir John's Case being thus, may we ask him a question or two.

Since there was no Composition made within the four months, as by the
Articles he ought, we would demand of him, For what cause it was not made? Who
hindered it?

If he says the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall; that cannot be; they would
willingly have compounded with him, knowing the present want of money (as sir
Anthony Irby swears) and offered him a Composition according to their Rules,
and gave him longer time to that end.

If he says the Parliament; They did not, they were ready, and expected him
five years; nay some Members undertook it, if he would have Petitioned to that
purpose.

Neither could his imprisonment be his hindrance, for he was at liberty till
the four months were expired; and when he was in prison, his friends would
have procured it, if he would but have Petitioned or assented thereunto.

But certainly it was his own resolution to the contrary; that only hindered it,
it was that staid him in the Country three months and a half of the four, that
kept him from Petitioning the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall, until after the
four Months expired, or but six days (as himself confesses) before the
expiration, and not to come there again till warranted. And this his resolution
rendered the endeavors of his friends fruitless, and heightened his comportment
to an insolency.

Again, since his actions in Taunton are by a cloud of witnesses proved
destructive, illegal, and irreligious: we could in a second place demand of
him, by what Authority he thus acted? If he says by the late Kings
approbation, then certainly would not that Kings real intentions or constancy
(even in sir John's judgment) be for the establishment either of Religion,
Laws, or Peoples welfare (as sir John pretends, Remonstrance page 75.) if he
will say, by his own Authority, then did he abuse his King as grossly as his
Country; for the people conceived those his exorbitances to be warranted by the
King himself: And then sir John has been faithless to King, Parliament, and
his own Country.

To conclude, since sir John has been a depopulator at Cothelston, at Marshals
Elm bloody, a Traitor, a Murderer, what not in Taunton? a breaker of Public
trust to his Country, of Articles to Dunscomb; ungrateful scandalously to Mr.
John Ash, ruinously to Mr. Long (Et si ingratum omnia) since he entrenched on
the Privilege of Parliament, when he went thence without their leave, and upon
the Kings private Letter only, and has contemned the Authority thereof at their
Bar, in their Committee, Judges, Great Seal, and Solicitor General; sithence
he has scorned the mercy of the Army, otherwise then to use it in advance of
his Malignant design.

Can sir John think that the Army would have Articled with him at Exon, if they
had either known his former, or foreseen his future miscarriages; or that the
Army in 1652. had in their Petition (mentioned Remonstrance page 72.) any
respect for him, when they Petitioned to have Articles of War made good,
according to the intent of them, sithence sir John has in not compounding,
lost their benefit, both by their words and intent? or that the late Parliament
did upon designed, passionate, or self-interested reports, pass their Acts or
Resolutions abovesaid against him, when his former offenses, his Articles, and
after-neglects and misdemeanors were then in their consideration?

Or can sir John justly expect, that this present Parliament shall (when this
his comportment shall appear before them) take the Lands from the Purchasers
(persons innocent, of integrity, and friends to the Public) and contrary to
the Judgments and Acts of former Parliaments (who best knew his demerits) and
against the Law of Public Sales (which ought to be as firm as the Laws of the
Medes and Persians, and which nature it self taught the very Heathen to deem
inviolable) shall settle them on sir John, who in Justice deserves not the
mercy of his life?

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 5. l. 1. for Ward read Wards. p. 6. l. 11. Baker, r. Barker. p. 24. l.
15. to be honest, r to honest. p, 25, l. 11. without, r. within. p. 27. l. 33.
any Act, r. some Act. p. 29. l. 36. as, r. was. p. 31. l. 38. r. constantly
compound; p. 32. l. 3. for design, r. desire; p. 34. l: 9. for over, r. overt;
l. 17. r. to their rules; l. 48 or; Judgment and Sir David; p. 39. l. 23. r.
annexed, page 11. p. 41. l. 28. r. admission; p 42. l. 6. for chased, r.
purchased; l. 19. r. be foreseen; p. 45. l. 18. for greater, r. great; p. 47.
l. 30. for be, r. by; l. 40. for or, r. against; p. 49 l. 13. r. heightened, for
them, after that, etc. p. 57. l. 25. r. award; l. 34. for received, r.
rejected; p. 54. l. 4. for Goldsmiths-hall, r. Guildhall; p. 56. l. 13. for Act
r. Account; l. 14. r. Sir Anthonies own warrant, the warrant of the Committee.


