An ANSWER to the Objections, against Making the River Darwent Navigable.
This Navigation wi^^ spoil the Fords of the said River, remove Mr. Thomas
Stanhope's Two Private Horse-Bridges over it, and ruin his Mills upon it; And
the said Mr. Stanhope, cannot be Recompensed, nor the County Accomodated.

Trent, into which the Darwent runs, is Famous for its many Fords, and yet is
Navigable: And in this Part of the River Darwent, are but Two Fo^ds of any
Note; and Those but seldom used: But there is never a Ford in it, but what is
deeper than any of the Fords in the Navigable Part of the River Trent: And
therefore, the Fords in Darwent will not be Altered; for they are Deep enough
already; and will carry as Great a Burden, as can be carried down, or brought
up the River Trent: Mr. Stanhope's Bridges may be still enjoyed, without
Prejudice to the Navigation, by the Help of Draw Bridges, to be Drawn-up while
the Boats pass; and, according to the Bill, cannot be touched, till he have
Satisfaction: And the Mills will not be prejudiced by the Navigation; for the
Boats will Pass and Repass the Back-Water; and a Lock made in the Wear, will
(when the Boats, etc. come to it) open, to give them Passage; and then close
again, and keep the Water for the Use of the Mills; which will not be hindered
half an Hour, at any Time: And it is Provided by the Bill, That Satisfaction be
made, before the Wears be touched. My Lord Chesterfield has likewise Mills
upon the said River; and is Consenting to the Navigation: And there are no
Other upon this Part of the River, but His, and Mr. Stanhope's.

That the River is so Rapid, as to Wear away the Ground on each Side, unless
defended by Waterworks and Fleightering; which the Navigators will be
empowered to destroy, in whose Land they please; and so give away his Land:
Besides, this will glut Derby Market with Corn from Remote Parts; and so Abate
the Price, to the Damage of One Hundred Towns in Nottingham-Shire,
Leice^ter-Shire, and D^rby Shire, who Resort thither to Sell their Corn.

Objection, Represent the Navigation, as Prejudicial in those very Instances,
wherein it is highly Advantageous: For, by the Bill, the Undertakers are, from
Time to Time, after the River is made Navigable, to Stop and Repair the
Breaches and Hurts, in the Banks thereof, at their own Proper-Costs; which will
ease the Owners, of the Adjoining Lands, of the Expenceful Waterworks and
Fleighterings; which, they complain, the Rapid Course of the River, now obliges
them to make: And, as to the Corn, the Navigation will rather Advantage those
Towns, who use Derby-Market: For, as This will bring more Carriage of Cheese,
Butter, etc. to Derby, That will occasion greater Quantities of Malt to be
carried back; and then the Market will carry off more of their Barley. (2.)
Who-ever will take the Pains to make the Comparison, will find, that all Sorts
of Corn, for these Twelve Months last, (to go no further back) have been as
Cheap, and some Sorts Cheaper in Derby-Market, than at Nottingham and Newarke,
which lie lower upon Trent; And if Corn cannot be brought from the Remote
Parts, (the Objectors are so Jealous of) to those Towns, so as to sell it
Cheaper than at Derby; there is no Danger of glutting the Cheaper, and more
distant Market of Derby with it. (3.) There is a Fair Prospect of sending Corn
down oftener, than it will be brought up, from the Remote Parts: For, what we
can carry down the Stream for Three Pence, (suppose) will cost Twelve Pence to
bring up against it: And therefore, if Corn be so much Dearer below, as to pay
that Three Pence with Advantage, it will be sent down: Whereas, before we can
fetch it up, it must be so much Dearer at Derby, than at those Places below, as
to pay the Twelve Pence, with Advantage: And as, in Truth, considerable
Quantities of Corn have, of late, been sent down the River; so, in all Times,
it has been sent down more frequently, than brought up: For this has never
happened, but in Time of great Scarcity, when the Country could not Subsist,
without Supply. (4.) This River will Ease the Carriage, and bring Corn from
Leichestershire, and those Parts of Nottingham-Shire and Derby-Shire, that have
most Benefit of Derby-Market: And of this, several Towns in Leichestershire are
sensible, and have Petitioned for it.


Corn will be Sold at Derby, which else would be Sold and Tolled at Nottingham;
where, out of the Tolls, they Pay the King a Fee-Farm Rent of Sixty Pounds per
Annum, and Maintain a Bridge at the Yearly Expense of Two Hundred Pounds.

Crown, and not out of the Toll: And they have Lands settled, for Repair of the
Bridge, sufficient to keep it in Repair: Nor ought the Profit of the Town of
Nottingham, overbalance the Public Good, and the Advantage of all those many
Pla^es, which would have Benefit by this Navigation. Nor will Nottingham, in
Truth, lose much of its Toll; for, if the Trade of Derby exceed that of
Nottingham, so that Barley Fall with Them, and Rise with Us, and that We have
Occasion for Their Barley, We shall Buy in their Market; as, is well known, was
formerly done, till Nottingham (by the Benefit of their Navigation, and the
Carriage of Goods Thither, by Those who would not willingly Return Empty; and
therefore, took back Malt from Thence, to Places which Derby used to Supply)
gained a great Part of that Mault-Trade, which Derby was before in Possession
of: And Derby pays a Fee-Farm-Rent of One Hundred Pounds per Annum, to the
King's Majesty, and Repairs a very Large Bridge over the River Darwent, besides
several other smaller Bridges; and has only the Toll to Enable them to Pay the
same.

That the Abating of the Price of Corn, will discourage Tillage, and destroy
the Breed of Horses employed therein; which are some fit for Coach, and some
for War.

Tillage Here, by fetching Corn Cheaper from Other Places, is an Encourag^ment
to it in those Other Places; and will There employ as many Able Horses, and
more, if the Cheapness of Corn causes more to be spent: But, take it either in
Relation to the Public, or to those Counties, and the Answer to the Second
Objection Answers it: And We may urge, in Favor of the Navigation, That it
will (as has been showed) Encourage Tillage; and consequently, more of these
useful Horses, and cause more of them to be Bred: And however the Carriage from
Wilne-Ferry (wither Trent is now Navigable) to Derby, being now but Eight Pence
for a Quarter of Corn, the Navigation will Save but that Eight Pence; which can
never destroy Tillage, though it should so much lessen the Farmer's Profit.

That, as to the High Ways to be saved by the Navigation, they extend but Five
Miles; and none that Repairs Them, desires it.

Petition; which is Presented by the Inhabitants in and near Derby.

It was never known, That ever any Trent, or Darwent Water-Man, ever made a
Seaman.

Seamen, though very few have yielded none: And, it is certain, that they are, by
This, better prepared to become Seamen, as much as Watermen, in any River,
are; and more than the Watermen, that Row the Thames-Wherries; which yet have
afforded Seamen: But, however the Fact have heretofore been, the Nature of the
Thing speaks Unanswerably on Our Behalf.

There are more, by Thousands, set on Work by this Present Land-Carriage of
Lead, Corn, etc. than will be employed in the Water, upon any Occasion
whatsoever.

Objection, allowing for the Hyperbole; but it is Frivolous; for, during the
Navigation, there will be many more set on Work for the Land-Carriage, than
will be employed upon the Water; and there are not more set on Work now, than
will be then, by Land and Water; for all the said Land-Carriers will be
Employed then, that are now, except those who carry from Derby and Allestry to
Wilne-Ferry; and they are not so many, as will be Employed upon the Water; and
are all Derby-Men, and Consenting: For those that bring Lead out of the Peake,
will carry as they do, or further; for they now lay it down at Derby, or at
Allestry, two Miles before they come to Derby; but then they will carry it all to
Derby; and the same Carriers that carry from other Parts to Wilne-Ferry, will
carry to Derby: And if some Miles are cut off, which will lessen that Price,
it is but lessened as the Labor is, and their Returns will be quicker; and
they will have the Advantage of being Laden Home again.

Lead, Cheese, Butter, and other Commodities, which are now sent to
Wilne-Ferry; so it Delivers them from the Impositions, and Hard Usage they
find, by reason of the Monoply There: For, there is but One Person, that is the
Owner of the Wharfe There; and, by a particular Privilege, carries Goods up
and down the River; and so may and does Exact what Price he pleases; and is a
Trader and Merchant, as well as a Water-man; and so himself may, and does take
the Advantage of a Good Market, to the Prejudice of other Traders, whose Goods
he then neglects to Carry; and they must let their Goods lie there, until it be
his Pleasure to Carry them down the River; or give him his own Rates; or send
them to Nottingham, which is Twelve Miles further, by Land Carriage; and the
same Case up the River, from Gainsburrow to Wilne Ferry: All which would be
Saved, in Making the said River Darwent Navigable.

Undertakers do it at their own Charge; and no Mills will be Pulled down, nor
Destroyed; only Locks made in the Wears, to Carry up the Barges; nor no Fords
Spoiled, they being Deep enough already, to Carry-up Flat-Boats; and the Fords
upon the River Darwent, are Deeper than Those upon the River Trent; which River
is already Navigable.

Some Places, that have Petitioned for the Navigation.
The High Sheriff, Deputy Lieutenants, Grand Jury, and Gentry of the County of
Chester, at their last General Quarter Sessions, held for the said County: The
Salt-makers, Salt-Carriers, and other Inhabitants of the Town of Namptwich and
Middlewich, have Petitioned, That the River Darwent may be made Navigable. The
Mayor, Aldermen, Gentlemen, Cheese-Factors, Pot-makers, and the Inhabitants of
the Town of New Castle, in the County of Stafford, have Petitioned for the
same. The Gentlemen, Tradesmen, Cheese-Factors, and Inhabitants of the
Market Town of Uttoxiter, in the said County of Stafford, have likewise
Petitioned for the same. The Bailiffs, Sheriffs, Aldermen, Justices of the
Peace, Gentlemen, Tradesmen, and Inhabitants of the City and County of
Litchfield, have likewise Petitioned for the same. The Bailiffs, Gentlemen,
Cloath-workers, and Inhabitants of the Ancient Borough of Burton, in the
County of Stafford, have likewise Petitioned for the same. The Gentlemen,
Gun-smiths, White-smiths, Lock-smiths, Cutlers, Sword-slippers, Nailors, and
other Tradesmen of the Market Town of Birmingham, in the County of Warwick,
have Petitioned for the same. The Gentlemen, Tradesmen, Freeholders, and
Inhabitants of the Market Town of Atherson, in the said County of Warwick,
have likewise Petitioned for the same. The Gentlemen, Tradesmen, and
Inhabitants of the Market Town of Ashby de la Zouch, in the County of
Leicester, have likewise Petitioned for the same. The Gentlemen, Tradesmen,
Freeholders, Farmers, and Inhabitants of the Market Towns of Loughbrorough and
Kegworth, in the said County of Leicester, have Petitioned for the same. The
High Sheriff, Justi^^s of the Peace, several Deputy Lieutenants, at the last
General Quarter Sessions, held for the County of Derby, have likewise
Petitioned for the same. The Knights, Gentlem^^ Tradesmen, Lead-Merchants,
Miners, Grovers, Freeholders, Farmers, and others of the several Market and
Fair Towns of Derby, VVorks-worth, Ashborne, Crich, and Duffe^^d, and other
Townships and Villages, viz. Carson, Middleton, Cromford, Hopton, Cawlow,
Bradborn, Kniveton; And the Gentry and others of the Hundred of High-Peake, in
t^^ County of Derby, have like^ise Petitioned for the same. (...) of London and
Westminst^r, have likewise Petitioned for the same.

