AN ANSWER To the Solemn League and Covenant; PRESENTED To the public view of
all Loyal Subjects in ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND; In the twelfth year of
the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord CHARLES BY THE Grace of God, of
ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND, KING, Defender of the FAITH, etc.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, PRINTED for GEORGE HORTON, 1660.

AN ANSWER TO THE Solemn League And Covenant.
WHether is this Covenant so grounded upon holy Scripture, and so conformable
to the Laws of the Land yet in force, and so consonant to former Oaths and
Protestations that a religious Christian and Loyal Subject may without scruple
of Conscience, and danger of ensnaring his soul enter into it?

I answer negatively. And although I had more then once, made a Covenant with
my self, Rebus sic stantibus, or rather jacentibus, never to question this
Covenant; which the Authority of bath Houses, and Piety and Learning of the
Assembly of Divines, hoth commended as the Sovereign Remedy of all the Maladies
of the times: yet because my Conscience tells me that it has not approbation
from the Three that bear Record in Herven, I dare not conceal those Reasons
which at the first made me doubt of the lawfulness of it, and in the end put it
out of doubt. The Reasons propounding the naked truth, without any clothing of
Art, or ornament of Rhetoric, are these. Andi non phalerata, sed fortia.

Not to take advantage of the preposterous order in setting down the parts of
this Covenant, wherein he that runs may read a double Solecism. (For in it
the Church of Scotland, precedeth the Church of England; and the Liberties of
the Subject are set before the Royal Prerogative, and Imperial Dignity of the
Prince. Surely such a sacred and venerable Evidence of fidelity, is a public
Covenant made by two Nations, and signed by the Name of the great Jehovah; that
in it both matter and method, phrase and order ought to be maturely advised on:
and not only every period and line, but every word and syllable therein to be
exactly scanned, before the Conscience of millions of men be charged with it. If
we cannot brook or keep out hands from tearing a List, Catalogue, or Register,
wherein they who are many degrees below us, are yet ranked above us, and named
before us: can his Majesty take it well at our hands, that we should accept of
a Covenant hand over head, wherein the members are set above the head, and his
Sovereign Majesty slighted; and that not only by misplacing his person, but
limiting and restraining the preservation of his Person, and Authority to the
defense of the true Religion, and maintenance of the Liberties of the Kingdoms?
What is this but to indent with our Sovereign, and capitulate with our head; as
Ochan sometimes did with the Emperor Frederick, Defend gladio, and ego
defendam te argumentis; Defend me with thy Sword, and I will defend thee with
my Pen? If his Majesty will defend our Faith, we will bear faith to him; if he
will keep safe our Pendants, we will safeguard his Crown. Which limitation I
except at, not that I doubt but that there is and ought to be a mutualitie
between King and Subject; and that if he either desert the true Faith, or
infringe the Laws and just Liberties of his Subjects, for which he pawned his
Faith at his Coronation; God will call him to an account for it: but this does
not discharge us of our Allegiance to him. Though he keep not touch with us,
yet we may not break with him; for he is, (as Tertullian gives him his true
dimensions, according to the golden reed of the Sanctuary,) Solo Deo minor,
caeteris omnibus major: and consequently questionable for his breach of faith
before none but God. Alas, what a fickle estate and lamentable condition were
Princes in, if upon pretense that they defend not that Religion which the
people believe to be true; or maintain not those Liberties which they challenge
as their birthright; their royal Crowns may be exposed to rapine, and their
sac^ed persons to violence!

Not to dive into the depths of State, not anxiously to enquire into the reason
which moved the first contrivers and projectors of this League to set it on
foot at this present, and press it with all earnestness; I am persuaded that
none will deny that their main scope and aim therein was, to engage our
brethren of Scotland in the present quarrel, for pulling down Episcopacie, and
setting up the Presbytery; and by this National and solemn League to
strengthen their party, and foment the late unnatural War which drained the
Wealth of the Kingdom.: and was like to draw out the lifeblood also. Nemo
tenetur divinare, say the Canonists; neither will I take upon me the office of
a Prophet to foretell the Catastrophe of these Tragedies. Yet sure I am, this
Queen of all Islands never received such prejudiced and wrong, nor ever was so
near the brink of destruction as when she drew in foreign Forces to defend her
self against homebred Enemies: and I pray God we experimentally interpret not
the mystery of Pharoahs dream concerning the lean kine which eat up the fat,
and yet were never a whit the fatter. If there be a decree of Heaven, that
these two Nations shall be drowned one in another blood, for the crimsons sins
of both not yet repented of: yet let not us draw this most fearful judgment
upon both Kingdoms by the cord of an oath. But to argue syllogistically.

No Subjects living under a Christian Prince who is a professor of the true
Religion, and a Defender of the Orthodox Faith may enter into a public and
solemn Covenant for the reformation of Religion, without the consent, (much
less against the express command) of their Sovereign. For such disobedience and
sleighting of their King cannot stand with the duty they owe him of fear and
Loyalty, enjoined Prove. 24.21. My Son, Fear the Lord and the King, Eccles. 8.1.
I advise thee to take heed to the mouth of the King and to the word of the oath
of God. Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: whosoever
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist,
shall receive to themselves damnation. V. 4. If thou do evil, fea; for he
bears not the sword in Vain. Prove. 16.14. The wrath of the King is the
Messenger of death. Prove. 19.12. The Kings wrath is like the roaring of a Lion.
1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake;
whether it be to the King as Supreme. v. 17. Fear God, honor the King; Nor
with the Prayers of the Church made for him, that we may serve, honor, and
humbly obey him in God, and for God: Not with the principles of right Reason;
for the King is the supreme head of the Church, and Commonwealth, under Christ;
and all his Subjects conjuncti^^ in Parliament, or divisim; are but Members of
the same Body politic; and how should the Members enter into a covenant, or
frame and devise it without the head?

But the King is so far from yielding his royal assent to this Covenant, that
he striotly forbids it, and that under the pain of Treason in his Proclamation
printed at Oxford.

Ergo, We may not enter into this Covenant, nor entangle our consciences with
this new Oath.

This Covenant we make with God: and in all things, especially the things
appertaining to God, we must obey God rather then man.

We have the Kings vertua consent thereunto: for though he be not present in
person at the Parliament, nor has given his Royal assent under his hand; yet
this Parliament is called and continued by his Authority, and his consent is
vertually contained in the Votes of both Houses.

It is a ruled case in Divinity, That we must obey God rather then man, when
God commands one thing, and man another: but when the commands of God and of
his Vicegerent upon earth: clash not one against another, St. Bernards doctrine
is most true, we must obey him as God, who is in the place of God, in those
things which are not against God. When St. Peter and St. John returned this
answer to the Council, the Council forbad that which God commanded. God
commanded the Apostles to preach Christ's Resurrection; and the Assembly of
Priests and Elders forbad them. This is not the Covenante's case: for where
does God command the English to swear to preserve the Scotch Discipline and
Liturgy, which they themselves have often varied? Or to abjure Episcopacie,
which was the only government of the Church for more then 1500 years, and under
whose shade Christian Religion most flourished, and the Church stretched forth
her branches to the Rivers, and her boughs to the ends of the earth? Where does
the Scripture warrant, (much less command) the association of two Kingdoms and
jointly taking up arms in the quarrel of the Gospel, and defending and
propagating Religion by the sword?

The calling of the Parliament by the Kings Authority does not conclude his
assent to all the Ordinances of both the Houses: for is it were so, why did
this Parliament, after they had voted the Militia, and the extirpation of
Prelacie and Pluralities, send to his Majesty, and humbly entreat his royal
assent? nay, why in all Parliaments since the first even till this day, after
both Houses had past bills, did still the Lords and Commons lay them at his
Majesty's feet, beseeching him in humblest manner to take them up, and sign
them with his royal hand? and if he liked them, his answer has been, Le Roy
vieut; if he ditated them, Le Roy s'avisera. Did the calling of a Parliament in
the Kings name and by his Authority, vertually include or conclude his Royal
assent to all the Acts; King Richard the 2d. had given his consent to his own
deposing: for that Parliament wherein he was deposed, was called in his name
and by his Authority.

4. No Covenant, especially public and solemn between two Nations for
reformation of Religion, may be taken without warrant from Gods word; for in
every such Covenant God is a party, and his consent must be both had and
known, which cannot be but from his word. Beside, this Covenant is bound with
an Oath, which is an Act of Religion, and cultus latriae, that is a part of
divine worship; and if it be not commanded by God, it is forbidden in Scripture
under the name of will worship.

Moreover, that golden rule of the Apostle applied by him to the use of things
indifferent, stretches also to this case of Conscience, Whatsoever Oath we
take, or Covenant we enter into, not persuaded in Conscience that we have good
ground for what we do in Scripture, is sin to us.

But this Covenant has no warrant for it in holy Scripture: for from the Alpha
of Genesis to the Omega of the Apocalypse there is no v^la nor vestigium of
such a Covenant as this.

Ergo, This Covenant must not be taken by any, who desire to walk exactly
before God according to the precise rule of his word.

There is warrant in Gods word both for the matter of this Covenant, and the
form and manner of taking the oath. For the matter we have a pattern of a
Covenant taken for the reformation of the false, and preservation of the true
Worship of God, and the uniting of Kingdoms in the truth thus reformed, 1 Samuel
18.3, 4. 2 Kings 23.5. 2 Chronicles. 25.8. 9. 2 Chronicles. 30. Ezra. 10.2. And for the
form and manner of taking it by lifting up the hand, we have a Precedent, Apoc.
10.50.

None of these instances are ad Rhombum: all those Covenants were made against
idolatry and other sins expressly forbidden by the law of God; but this
Covenant is against Prelacie and such a form of worship practiced in the Church
of England, as has been justified by the word of God, and unanswerable a
guments drawn from Scripture by Whitgift and Hooker in their answer to
Cartwright, Covell to Barrow, and Brown, Burges to Ames, and Ball to Can, and
many others.

In all those Covenants the King had the main stroke, but in this none at all.

1. For the Covenant mentioned, 1 Samuel 18.3, 4. it comes not home to our case,
for that was a private Covenant between two intimate friends, for the safety of
both their lives, sought after by a bloody Tyrant: this is a National Covenant
between two Kingdoms, for the Reforming Religion, and settling Peace; that was
made by the true King appointed by God, and anointed before this by Samuel,
against him who indeed held the Crown, but was rejected by God himself; this a
Covenant made by Subjects against the Commands of a most gracious Prince.

2. For the Covenant mentioned, 2 King. 23.5. the text says, King Josiah made
this Covenant, that they should walk after the Lord, and keep his
Commandments, and his Testimonies, and his Statutes with all their heart, etc.
And that he put down the Chemarims, etc. There the King makes a Covenant, and
reforms a Church, and not the People; here the people enter into a Covenant
without the King, and they take upon them, against his command, to Reform, or
rather Deform the Church, by overthrowing the Hierarchy, and abolishing
Episcopacy. Chius ad Choum, these things agree as well as Harp and Harrow.

3. For the Covenant mentioned, 2 Chr. 15.8, 9. King Asa gathered all Judah and
Benjamin together to Jerusalem, where they offered to the Lord of the spoils,
and made this Covenant, and in performance of this Oath or Covenant, v. 16. he
deposed Maacah his Mother from her Regency, because she had made an Idol in a
grove, and Asa brake down her Idol, and stamped it, and burned it at the brook
Kidron.

4. Eor the example of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 30. who in the days of Hezekiah,
though they were under another King, yet joined with the men of Judah in
keeping the Passover, it yields no support at all to their tottering cause. For,

1. They entered not into any solemn League with the men of Judah, though for
the present they joined with them in a Religious duty commanded by the Law.

2. What they did, they were invited to do by King Hezekiah; whereas the Scotch
are not invited to this League with the English by the King.

3. The King of Ashur forbad not the Israelites to join with their Brethren of
Judah in keeping the Passover; but the King forbids any of his Subjects to
enter into this Covenant.

4. The King who Reigned over the Israelites, was an Idolater; but our King is
a worshipper of the true God. And albeit, in some case and quarrel, the
worshippers of the true God may join with their Brethren of the same Religion
in another Kingdom, in a Defensive League (though the King being an Idolater,
should forbid it) yet it follows not, that they may do so without the consent,
and against the command of a Christian Prince, who is a professor of the true
Religion.

Lastly, The Israelites, besides the invitation of King Hezekiah to keep a
solemn Passover with the Jews, had the express command of God himself; whereas
neither English nor Scotch have any command from God expressly or implicitly, to
enter into this League for the Defense of the Protestant Religion against
Papists without the King, the King himself undertaking, and that by most solemn
Oaths and Protestations to defend the same.

5. For the Covenant mentioned Ezra 10.3. that was merely to remove a Scandal
from the Jews, and to fulfill the express command of God, for putting away
strange wives, set down in the Law of Moses: in which case no man doubts but
a Covenant may be made not only without, but against the commandment of a
Prince. Yet here the Jews (besides the command of Nehemiah the Viceroy) had the
approbation of the Prince for making this Covenant: for the King of Persia at
this time favored the Jews; and cont^ibuted largely to the reedifying of the
Temple; and gave order to Ezra the Priest to adorn the house of God, and
perform all things in his service according to the Law, Ezra 7.10.

The last example, Rev. 10.5. is least to our present purpose: for the Angel
there made no Covenant, but only swear by the living God, that time should be
no more. It is true he lifted up his hand; yet that no way helps the
Covenanters cause: for that might be a fit gesture in an Angel menacing a fatal
doom to the world, and the outdating of all time; which yet may not be thought
so fit a gesture for men entering into a holy League for the preservation of two
Kingdoms. If they can* as the Angel did, stand upon the Earth and the Sea at
the same time; let them also further imitate the Angel in lifting up their
hands to Heaven; when they make their Covenant. Howsoever for the gesture we
will not contend with them: I think it fitter in taking this Oath, then after
the usual manner, to lay the hand upon the Bible; for this Oath and Covenant
has no ground or foundation at all in that book: and the lifting up of the
hand very well expresses the purport of this Covenant, which is a lifting up
of their hands against the Lords anointed, and his Church: yet under pretense
of defense of the Kings person, never so much endangered as by their Armies;
and of Religion, never so profaned as by their Reformadoes; and of the
liberties of Subjects, never so much infringed as by Arbitrary Votes.

Before we take this Oath of Reformation, we must desire a Reformation of the
Oath: for it is full of Ambiguities and Contradictions: whence I thus frame a
fifth argument.

5. No Ambiguous Oath ought to be taken, or Covenant signed: for here one of
Pythagoras golden Preceps takes place, Loquere cum lumine: all Ambiguities,
Equivocations, or mental reservations (especially in Leagues and Oaths) are
abominated by all Protestants. He that swearath ambiguously swears not in
simplicity of heart, nor can keep his Oath sincerely and entirely.

But in this Covenant and Oath there are many Ambiguities.

For what is meant in the first clause by common Enemies? Either the world, the
flesh and the Devil; which indeed are (as it were) sworn Enemies to all true
Religion: or Papists, or Independants; who are both enemies to the Discipline
and Government of the Scotch Church.

In the second clause what is meant by Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, etc? either all government by Bishops; or the present Government only,
with the late Innovations and abuses thereof. If all Government by Bishops,
then in taking this Oath, we condemn not only the perpetual Government of the
Church from the Apostles time till the Reformation of Religion in the days of
Hen. 8. but also the Reformed Churches in England, Ireland, Denmark, Swethland,
Poland, Saxony, and other parts of Germany; where either they have Archbishops
and Bishops, or tantmount Intendents, and Superintendents; If the present
Government only, with innovations and abuses; let them explain what are the
innovations and abuses we swear against: else we cannot swear in judgment. What
is meant by Hierarchy? the word signifies holy Government, being derived from
Iera holy, and Arkirule or government. And is it fit crudely, without any
gloss, to forswear all holy Government?

In the third clause, what is meant by defending the Kings person in the
defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms? Is it a
limitation, or not? If it be no limitation, what does it there? There ought to
be no idle, and (if I may so speak) hang-by words in an Oath: for the Wiseman
teaches us, when he speak to God, our words must be few. If it be a
limitation, how does this Covenant agree with the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance; by which we are absolutely bound to defend the Kings person, Royal
D^^nities and Prerogatives of the Crown, with any if or of, restriction or
qualification?

In the fourth clause, What is meant by Malignants or evil Instruments? A word
never used till of late in any Statute, Law or Ordinance; and never so much
abused as at this day.

In the sixth clause, how far extend these words, I will assist and defend all
those that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and
persuance thereof. Does it reach to giving battle to the KING, Sequestring
Estates, plundering houses, and trampling all Laws under foot, and to the
justifying all the outrages committed in the maintaining and pursuing this
League? If not, why is it not ci cumscribed with that limitation in the first
Protestation, By all good and lawful means? or so far as lawfully I may? There
being so many Amphibologies. Ambiguities, and Kiddles in this Oath, we must
have some Oedipus of the Synod to read and clearly expound them, before we can
safely engage our conscience by Oath to perform them.

No Covenant may be made, or Oath taken, which implies in it contradictions;
for in such an Oath or Covenant we play fast and loose; say and unsay; and
overthrow the nature of an Oath; and take Gods name in vain. The Schools and
ancient Doctors constantly maintain, that it exceeds even Divine Omnipotency
to reconcile Contradictions; which are amongst those many things St. Augustine
speaks of, which God therefore cannot do, because he is Omnipotent.

But there are apparent Contradictions in this Covenant, and Gordion knots
which cannot be untied. For,

First, It is said in the Preface, that the Noblemen, Bar^^s, etc. enter into
this Covenant according to the commend^^le practice of these King oms in former
times; and yet Mr. N^^e in his Speech, published by special order of the House,
upon ^he very day the Covenant was read and sworn unto, and subcribed by the
honorable House of Commons, and Reverend As^^mbly of Divines, Sept. 25. says
p. 12. That such an Oa^^ for matter, persons, and other circumstances, has not
been in any age, or Oath we read of in sacred or humane stories. And Mr.
Coleman in his Sermon commanded to be Printed by the Commons of the House of
Parliament, Sept. ult. 1643. page 18. Ask your Fathers; consult with the aged
of our times, whether ever such a thing were done in their days, or in the
days of their Fathers before them! And in his Epistle Dedicatory, An Oath if
vain, makes the Land to mourn: an Oath, if weighty, makes it rejoice. This is a
new thing, and not done in ou^ Land before; and I hope will have a new effect,
not seen by our people before.

We are to swear in the first branch, That we will really and constantly
endeavor the preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland,
in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government: and yet in the same branch we
swe^r to endeavor to bring the Churches of God in these three Kingdoms (of
which Scotland is one) to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in form of
Church Government, according to the Word of God, and the example of the best
Reformed Churches: But this cannot be done if Scotland be preserved in her
present Directory for Worship, Discipline and Government: for the Government in
the Church of England, Ireland, Denmark, Swethland, Poland, Saxony, and in all
the Churches of the East (not subject to the Pope) is Episcopal: and that is
proved to be most conformable to the Word of God, by the writings of Bilson,
Downham, Armagh, never yet answered by any.

We swear in the same branch. That we will endeavor to reform the Doctrine of
the Church of England, according (...) Gods Word; and yet preserve the Reformed
Religion in Sco^land in Doctrine: whereas the Doctrine of the Church of E^^land
and Scotland is all one; as appears by the Confession of the one and Articles
of the other. All the difference ^etween the Church of England and Scotland, is
concerng Discipline and Liturgy; not Doctrine, as it is distinguised from them.

We swear in the second branch, That We will endeavor the extirpation of of
Prelacy and Schism: whereas Prelacy has been ever, and is, the special if not
only mean to extirpate Schism. If Prelacy be taken away, says St. Jerome ad
Luc. and the preeminencie of one Presbyter above another; Tot Schismata erunt
quot Sacerdotes. That is, to extirpate Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. and yet in the third b^anch we swear to preserve the Rights and
Privileges of the Parliament, and Liberties of the Kingdoms: among which
liberties of the Kingdom of England, and privileges of the Parliament, are the
contents of Magna Charta, and Petition of Right, in which the Government of
Archbishops and Bishops, and the Rights and Privileges of the Church are
comprised.

In the third branch we swear to preserve and defend his Majesty's Person, and
Authority, without any diminution of his just Power and greatness: and yet in
the sixth Article we swear to assist and defend all those that enter into this
League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuance thereof: Whereas it is
known by their daily practice, that they levy Arms against the KING; Seize
upon his Forts, Ships, Magazines, and Revenues. How can a man take away the
Kings Munition; and Castles; and yet not weaken his power? How can a man
forcibly encounter and discomfit an Army raised by the KING'S Power, and yet
not diminish his power? How can a man take away his Revenues, Houses, Parks.
etc. and not diminish his greatness? How can he give him Battle, and yet Defend
his Person? Therefore before we enter into this Covenant to make up all the
breaches in the Church, and Commonwealth, we must make up the breaches in the
Covenant it self; before we reconcile and unite the three Kingdoms, we must
endeavor to reconcile the contradictions in this our Oath and Solemn League.

Either this League and Covenant confirmed by Oath is free and voluntary; or
forced and Compulsory. If it be free and voluntary, Why is there annexed a most
severe penalty to be inflicted upon all those who refuse to enter into it
before the first of March? If it be forced and compulsory, how is it a
Covenant? especially with God, who respects not our words, but our hearts? If
it be a const^ained Oath imposed upon us whether we will or no; then it is a
heavy yoke laid upon the Conscience, inconsistent with our Christian Liberty:
and the requiring it of us is not like to procure a blessing from Heaven to the
Land, but to pull down the vials of Gods vengeance upon it, If Tertullian could
say, Non est Religionis Religionem cogere, it is no rel^gious act to force
Religion: we may swear that such a constrained Oath is no way acceptable to
God. Well it may be tea^med in ou^ language a League or Covenant: but in the
Language of Canaan it is not so. For Berith, a Covenant; comes from Bara, which
signifies eligere, says Buxtorfius; that is, to choose. Neither is it any act
of virtue in Aristotle's School: for virtus est habitus electivus; a habit
whereby we exercise our free choice.

None ought to swear to that he knows not; for an Oath must be taken in
judgment, truth, and righteousness, Jer. 4.2. A man cannot swear in Judgment;
or judiciously, who knows not that to be true in an assertory Oath; and
honest and righteous in a promissary; which he swears unto. For if that be
false to which he swears, he is perjured: and if be a dishonest thing thing
which he promises to do, he is unrighteous. Besides it it great precipitancy
and rashness, to enter into a Covenant blindfolded, and to swear to maintain
that we understand not.

But the subjects of England (at least for the major part) know not what the
Scotch Discipline, Government, or Worship is: which notwithanding by this
Covenant they are bound to preserve, even with the hazard of their Fortunes and
Lives.

FINIS.

