AN ANSWER TO A SCANDALOUS PAPER, Wherein were some QUERIES Given to be
answered. And likewise, Therein is found many Lies and Slanders, and false
Accusations against those people whom he (and the World) calls Quakers. Dated
from Dorchester in New England, August 17. 1655. subscribed, Edward Breck,
which was directed to a People at Rainforth in Lancashire, which he calls, A
Church of Christ. The Truth is cleared of his Scandalls, Lies, and Slanders,
and he found to be a Reproacher of the Church of Christ. His Paper and
Quaeries answered by those people called, QUAKERS.

Romans 15.3. The reproaches of them that reproached thee fell on me.

Isa. 52.14, 15. His visage was so marred more than any man, and his form more
than the sons of men. So shall he sprinckle many Nations; Kings shall shut
their mouths at him, for that which had not been told them shall they see, and
that which they had not heard shall they consider.

Matthew. 5.11, 12. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you,
and say all manner of evil against you falsely for my names sake. Rejoice, and
be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they
the Prophets which went before you.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle near the West end
of Paul's. 1656.

Edward Breek to the Church of CHRIST at RAINFORTH.
DEerly beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ, I have sundrytimes had a mind to
salute you in the Lord, but partly my own rudeness, and partly other obstacles
in the way, I have not yet communicated any thing to you, as to the Church of
Christ since my departing; but because God has removed me so far distant, by
reason whereof I am never like to see your faces, and age and weakness coming
upon me, putting me in mind of my end; that I might do something at last
whereby to testify my love and dear respects to you, and that in all this
length of time of absence, you might perceive that I have not wholly forgotten
you, but with many secret desires breathed after your eternal welfares; I have
therefore for your sakes, pressed my self to break through many difficulties,
presuming upon your kind acceptance, notwithstanding you find in me much
weakness in expression, matter, argument, etc. But not to trouble you with a
long Preface, where my work is small, little I have to say, and slenderly I
shall deliver it, unless God make known his power through weakness; that which I
have to say is a friendly exhortation to continue in the grace and faith of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and not to be carried away with every wind of
Doctrine, whereby you should be spoiled of your faith and hope which you have
in the Lord Jesus Christ: Oh Beloved! Remember the days of old, and the years
of ancient times, when after the Marian-times that Religion began to spring God
honored Rainforth with many godly pillars, men famous in their days, for faith
and holiness, and the profession of true Religion, when the Country was
overwhelmed, or greatly clouded with Religion, or Superstition, yet these men
(whose names are not yet worn out of memory) cleave fast to the truth; the face
of opposing, jeering, scorning and reproaching enemies, their reproaches did
not dant the spirits of these men, but they patiently bare it with joy, and
pressed on forward in the ways of Truth of the Gospel, for the price and high
calling of God in Jesus Christ: The next Generation I was a little better
acquainted with, whose names are fresher in your memories, diverse godly people
God raised up to do him some Service, and to profess and defend his Truth, and
maintain his Ministry, which was a great thing they labored after; these men
gave not their minds with Balaam, to look out for visions, to curse Gods
People, nor to rail on Magistracy, nor Ministry, but humbly and in the fear of
the Lord, submitted themselves to Jesus Christ in the use of his own
Institutions, so far as he gave them liberty and ability thereunto.

And now, what the present Generation is since I left the Country, I do not so
well know, many of the old stock being dead and removed; yet (I hope) there is
some breathing of Spiritual life amongst you, and men bolding forth the faith,
and profession of faith and true Religion in sincerity, notwithstanding what
may be otherwise found among you: My Exhortation therefore is, To hold forth
this Faith, and continue faithful therein until Death, never leave it,
forsake it not lest God forsake you, and cast you off for ever; but Truth is
Beloved, and that which is my grief, that I have been informed, and dare not
but believe it, that there are men among you who are departed from the faith
and purity of the Gospel to depend upon Jesuiticall and Satannical delusions, I
mean such as go under the name of QUAKERS, who depend not upon the Scriptures,
for Light, but on what they receive from a Spirit which casts them into a
Trance, what these Trances are, let men of understanding judge, for I am weak,
only tell you what I think, they are either from the good Spirit of GOD, as
he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets in Visions, etc. or from the
DEVIL; if they be from the good Spirit of GOD, then they are like to that
Spirit which spoke by the PROPHETS, they accord with all the writings of the
Prophets, and most of all with all the doctrins and sayings of Jesus Christ,
his Ordinances and Institutions. Secondly, they bring a man that receive them,
into a humble, low, and mean esteem of HIMSELF, so that he will be ready to
fall down with the Prophet, Esaias 6.5. and to cry, Woe is me, I am undone,
because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell among men of unclean lips, for
my eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts; his near approach to God laid him
low, but for brevities sake, I give you no more Arguments, but let the spirits
of these Quakers be tried a little by these briefly, Does that spirit which
casts you into your trances make you like the old Prophets? Does it accord with
the Law, and Testimony? with Moses and the Prophets? with the Writings of the
holy Apostles, and the Doctrines of Christ, his Orders and Institution? then
something might be favorably spoken in defense and excuse thereof; but if on
the contrary, the spirit which brings you into your Trances, when your bones
quake, and you think you hear the voice of God, if the revelations and visions
of this spirit speak contrary to the Prophets and Apostles, yea sometimes
contradict and blaspheme, yea and sometimes amongst your selves be contrary to
your own visions; yea, if this spirit when you speak, teach you to speak
nonsense, idle, rediculous and foolish things, be said false doctrine, and
contradictions, if it provoke you to speak blasphemously against the Lord Jesus
Christ, crying down his Institutions, as Magistracy, Ministry, Sacraments,
Sabboths, etc. let me ask you, Did that spirit ever proceed from the Father and
the Son, that breathed out Blasphemies in his face? Judge in your selves. You
think it is no blasphemy, but I pray consider it, Christ held forth in his
Ordinances he breaths in them, and walks in the midst of the Golden
Candlesticks, conveying his heavenly Grace through them as through so many
golden pipes: Now to have Magistracy, and Ministry, Sacraments, etc. spoken
against, trodden underfoot, and held in contempt, and esteemed as very slight
and slender things, and those that cleave to the Scriptures and Ordinances to
be accounted as Antichristian, Carnal, etc. I pray you whom does this strike?
on whom does it light, if not on Christ the Author? and is it not then
Blasphemy? what do you call it? You may try a little what spirit it is that
sets you into your trances by the effects, if your spirit make you more
sensible of Original sin, more sensible of your own vileness, more humble you,
and cast you down in the sight of God, and say you low, so that you can cry out
with Job, Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee? and with Isaiah cry out,
Woe is me, I am undone, Isa. 6.5. then it were considerable; but if on the
contrary, it make the heart swell, and to cry, Stand apart, I am more holy then
thou; and all that come not up to your seize are of small value, little
worth, just as the Pharisees, who trusted in themselves that they were
righteous, and despised others: If I say it be thus, then judge you what spirit
it is, I dare be bold to affirm, it is the Spirit of Satan, and not of God; you
may think this hastily, and suddenly conclude; and I confess, I have not waded
very deep into this matter, yet what is not from God I can easily conclude it
is from the Devil, or man corruption, which is no better, I know no medium,
unless it be the Jesuits, who no doubt have had a large hand this way by their
sorceries to deceive the people, and have been known in London to quake and
speak in the Congregations; these men (it is little doubt) might make a
covenant with the Devil, and in the finest way of witchcraft and sorceries
convene it over unto others; by an implicit covenant seduce men, thinking no
such thing, but rather as though God had more abundantly declared his love to
them more then to any people in the world, whenas indeed the matter is nothing
else but Satan transformed into an Angel of light; for this purpose let me make
bold to report unto you this story which is credibly reported to have been in
or about Bristol, There was a man's wife desired to go to one of the Quakers
meetings, her husband was unwilling, but after importunity he gave her leave,
but she was so wrought upon in that meeting, that when she came home again
she was filled with REVELATIONS, and spoke as though she had spoke with the
Tongue of ANGELS, to admiration far above her self, her HUSBAND told her,
she was bewitched, she was far enough from believing that, but he could not
satisfy himself, but would search her body, to see what tokens he could find,
and about her arm he found a silk thread; he inquired, how that came there; she
seriously confessed, she knew nothing of it; well, says he, this shall not
remain here; then they took it away, and then she returned to be the same woman
that she was before she went to the Quakers Meeting: If this be a true Story,
as I credibly believe, tell me, if there were witchcraft used in this Quakers
meeting, yea, or nay?

Oh Beloved! you may well think the Devil has a finer way of witchcraft now,
then ever he had since the world began; no doubt ye can very well paint men to
come to the Lords Table, and to preach Christ, for he has sometime been a
Preacher of Christ himself, you know, for no good will to Christ, you may be
sure; but who are they that are most apart to be taken? Are they men who of old
has been most near to God, and walked before God, as our father Abraham did,
and lived the life of faith and holiness, and enjoyed many sweet, and pleasant
Soliloquies, peace and joy in believing, and many unspeakable consolations? I
am apt to think few of these men are taken, if any at all; but rather, fickle
minded men, unconstant, and unstable in their ways, such as perhaps, do change
their God and Religion diverse times, or proud persons, such as affect
singularity to be alone, and think it a brave thing to be taken up with Rapters
above other men, who but they in the world and in the mean time, who more
proud, more fickle, and unconstant, more wrathful and passionate, more railing
and blaspheming? can you think the Spirit of God does close better with those
men then anyother? Truly no: And what can you imagine will be the issue, after a
curse driven this way? a certain time truly it is probable their works will be
made manifest, and the tree will be known by its fruit, if it be not already a
little; I have learned what befell Grinton, a people come up to Trances and
Revelations, fell at last to Popery and profaneness, as I have been informed,
and Popery I think is the main thing the Devil drives at now, rather I think,
because the Jesuits has been the chief fomenters of this Quaking Religion, and
how do you find it for the present in these people? do you often see them upon
their knees? bewailing their sin? filled with godly sorrow and
repenting-hearts? a thing God much delights in; with hearts weary and heavy
laden, such as Christ calls to come unto him? do you find them frequent in
Familie-Duties, Catechizing, praying, etc. if you do, I shall be glad to hear
it, and how it is I will not censure; but if you find it otherwise, then
confider what fruit it is. Oh beloved! what shall I say? my hearts desire is,
that you may be established in the faith of Gods elect, and that those that are
already deluded may be reclaimed, and that all men may prevent the danger; if
what I have said be but slender, as well it may be, that which I shall say can
be but of like nature: Yet if I may not weary you too much, I would propose
some Quaeries to these men, and present the matter to consideration in another
view. 1 Qu. By whom do you hope to be saved? My charity bids me make your
answer, By Jesus Christ the Son of God, who also in time became man, and made
satisfaction to divine justice for the sin of his people, etc. I hope you will
accept my Answer. 2 Qu. How came you to know there was ever such a man in the
world? Here also I will presume to answer for you, By the Prophets which went
before him, and by the witness of his holy Apostles, and Evangelists, who have
left the Story in their holy record of the new Testament. I trust you will not
deny this neither. 3 Qu. If Christ be the Savior, and that the light and
knowledge of him do spring from holy Scriptures, I ask, whether the Scriptures
be any rule of Faith and Life in these days? Or are they abrogated, and put an
end to by Christ, and has he appointed another way for bringing his Elect to
eternal life and salvation? This Question I must leave you to answer your
selves, only for my part, I know no other way whereby to come to Christ my
Savior, then the holy Scriptures, which he has commanded me to search, and
which he promised eternal life, John 5. and whereof he curses all men that
adds to them, or detracteth from them, Revelations 21. What you have to say
to these things I know not, but these things I know; and this I know, that no
man speaking by the Spirit of God calls Jesus execrable, and what they do
less that vilify and slight his Word and Ordinances, and upon a Spirit which
crosses and contradicts Christ, and his Word and Ordinances; but I weary you
too much, I shall leave this Quaking Religion to its tottering, until it fall
to its utter Ruin, which will be in Gods due time accomplished, only one word
more, my Dearly Boloved, as I earnestly desire you to take heed of this Quaking
Religion, so also of all other Sects and Schisms, Errors, and Heresies,
whatsoever, and to settle your selves in the Faith and holy Order of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ; to worship and serve him according to his appointment, but
what that is I determine not, but whether Presbyterian or Independent, as many
use terms which are better forborne, as God shall guide your Judgments, so walk
in holiness of life, and beware of corrupt conversation; I have heard of too
much that way, sundry, if not many, given up to lasciviviousness, Covetousness,
Drunkenness, Drinkings, Tiplings daily, to the wasting of their Estates, and
Ruin of their own souls: Take heed, take heed, O beloved take heed; I shall
not need I hope to oppress you with many words, you have the LAW of GOD
engraven upon your hearts, which convinces your Consciences here, and will
Judge you at the last Day, if Repentance prevent not; But I shall say no more,
but commend you to GOD and to the WORD of his GRACE, which is able to build you
up further, and to give you an inheritance among them that are sanctified. The
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, and always: Amen.

Your old Friend, and Brother in the Lord Jesus, Edward Breck.
Dor chester, in New England, Aug. 17. 1655.
AN ANSWER TO A SCANDALOUS PAPER, Wherein were some QUERIES Given to be
answered, etc.
APAPER we have received, in which we find much Confusion, Lies and Slanders,
and false Accusations, which has come from the dark carnal mind, which is
enmity with God, which knows not the living God (who is a God of Truth.)
Therefore for the simple ones sake, which maybe deceived by believing such Lies
and Slanders which is cast upon the Truth by the Enemies of God; and for the
clearing of the pure Truth of God, we, who are witnesses for the living, and
true God, against all the deceit and powers of hell and death, are made free to
answer this Paper, according to the Eternal Truth, as it is in Jesus.

And first, Thou Writes to the Church of Christ (as thou calls it) in
Rainsorth, and thou confesses thy own Rudeness, and weakness, and other
Obstacles, etc. We answer, That thou who art in Rudeness, and weakness art not
fit to communicate any thing to the Church of Christ; For the Church of Christ
is pure, without spot or wrinckle, and will receive nothing from thy rudeness
and weakness, and so thou might have spared thy breath and thy pen. And whereas
thou says, that age and weakness is coming upon thee, putting thee in mind of
thy end: Here thou may be a Witness against thy self, that thou art not fit to
communicate to the Church of Christ, when as thou do no better consider in
this thy old age, thy own account that thou art to give at the Throne of Grace,
where thou must give an account for evere idle word, and every lie, and every
stander and false accusation which thou have cast upon the innocent in this thy
Paper, for which the Lord God will plead with thee, for all thy hard speeches,
which thou have spoken against the harmless and innocent people, which thou
knows nothing by, nor of, but what thou have from lying Reports: therefore
under the woe thou have brought thy self, which Jude speaks of, who speaks evil
of the things which thou knows not, and therefore has in these things
corrupted thy self: And this (thou says) is the Testimony of thy love, which
thou will do at the last for the Church of Christ; and now here thou have
treasured up Wrath against the day of Wrath, which thou shall find recorded,
never to be forgotten, when thou comes to reckon with the just and righteous
God, who can by no means clear the guilty.

And whereas thou exhorts them to continue in the faith, etc. I ask thee what
faith that is that thou would have them to continue in? if it be thy faith, it
is to believe lies, (as thou confesses in thy Paper) which is come so far as
London and Bristol to thee to New England, which is a public and general
Faith, such a Faith as never any suffered for in the Marian-times (which thou
speaks of:) Therefore thy Faith, which is founded upon such a foundation, (as a
refuge of Lies) is not fit to exhort the Church of Christ, neither will the
Church of Christ receive thy Exhortation, but turn it back upon thee from
whence it came; and the Church of Christ exhorts thee to beware of believing
lies, and casting Reproaches upon the Truth of God, which went ever under
Reproach and Scandal, which Christ Jesus, who is the Captain of our salvation,
gave the blessing to those that were reproached, whom all men spoke evil of,
and persecuted, which now we, (who are the Church of Christ) witness fulfilled
at this day; but Reproaches is our Riches, and all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution by this Generation which thou art of, who
are given up to believe lies: And herein we follow him who is gone before us,
who was hated and rejected of men, a Man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief;
this is he whose steps we follow, who is made perfect through sufferings, and
therefore are we willing to give our backs to the Smiter, and our cheeks to
them that pulls off the hairs; and to him that smites us on the one cheek,
to turn the other; and he that takes away our cloak, to let him have our coat
also: and this is thank-worthy, to suffer for righteousness sake, for it is
better (if the will of God be) that we suffer for well doing, then for evil
doing; for Jesus Christ has suffered the just for the unjust, that he might
bring us unto God: And for this Faith do we contend which was once delivered to
the Saints, and are willing to lay down our lives, and to seal the testimony of
our Consciences with our blood: and this our faith is not to believe lies, as
thou does, (which is manifested in thy Paper sufficiently) and this is that
faith which overcomes, and gives victory over the world, and believes in the
Truth as it is in Jesus.

And thou begins and reckons from the Maryan-times, the Generations of men
famous, (as thou says) who stood for Faith and Holiness, and the profession of
true Religion.

I answer, Thou may see what thy profession of true Religion ends in, who art
now in thy old age believing lies and false accusations, which thou have no
true ground for, and are accusing and slandering the pure innocent Truth of
God, which is clear in the sight of God of these slanders which thou have cast
upon it, for which the Just God will plead with thee, when thy talking of a
Faith will not serve thee, nor thy profession of a true Religion, when thou art
persecuting and detaining the pure Religion, and undefiled before God and the
Father; this is to visit the Father less and the Widow in their affliction, and
to keep himself unspotted of the world: But thou art found in the desilement,
and casting thy filth of lies and slanders upon Religion, and therefore art
thou found in the world, one of them. Therefore now repent of the evil of thy
doings while thou have time, and turn thy mind to that measure of God in thee,
which tells thee thou should not lie nor slander, nor accuse falsely; there is
something in thee that tells thee these things ought not to be; there is that
of God in thy conscience which tells thee thou ought not to believe lies, nor
to take reports from the mouths of slanderers, and to cast them upon the
innocent (who was ever reproached and slandered by the world) and so in this
thou art become one with the persecutors that ever persecuted the appearance of
God, where ever it was made manifest. So let that of God in thy conscience now
examine and search what thou art doing, who art slandering those whom thou
knows not, nor has nothing to lay to their charge, but what thou has by
hearsay, and consider whether this be as thou would be done by. But in this
thou have manifested thy ignorance of God, and of his pure Truth, which leads
to do unto all men, as they would have men to do unto them; and here thou art
found out of the Truth, and out of the Life that gave forth the Scriptures, who
takes the Scriptures but for a cloak to cover thy nakedness withal, but art
ignorant of that spirit that spoke them forth, as thou makes it manifest in thy
next words, where thou says, Those men gave not their minds with Balaam, to
look out for visions to curse Gods people. Here thou have manifested thy
ignorance of the Scriptures, for when Balaam looked out at the temptation of
Baalack, he would have cursed them; but he did not look then to the vision of
God, which said he should not curse them. And so all who will but read that
Scripture, may see thy confusion and ignorance, for in that Vision and
Prophecy, Balaam did see and know the people of God, and could not curse them
while he kept to it, until he did hearken and look out at the temptation of
Balaack: And so here read thy ignorance in Scripture: Besides in this thou
speaks against all the Holy-Men of God, as Moses, Samuel, Nathan; Daniel,
Isaiah, Paul, Peter, John, etc. and all that ever was taught by the immediate
Spirit of the living God, was taught by Vision and Revelation; and this thou
exhorts those, whom thou calls the Church of Christ, from. Therefore let all
that reads thy words, mark thy Blasphemy and ignorance of God, and of his
eternal living Truth, as it is in Jesus the only begotten Son, which now the
Father is revealing in this his day; and the Son likewise is revealing the
Father; Glory and Praises be to the living powerful God for ever. And thou
speaks of railing against Magistrates and Ministers, which is a false
accusation, for railing we do deny; but we speak the Truth in Christ, and lie
not, our consciences also bearing us witness in the sight of God: And the
Ministers of Christ we own, who are Ministers of the Spirit, and not of the
Letter, for the Letter kills, but the Spirit makes alive; and those who have
the Ministration of the Spirit, which quickens, we own, and have unity with
them, who is made not by the will of man, nor the will of the flesh, but by the
will of God, according to the Promise of life which is in Christ Jesus; who have
not received their Gospel by man, but by the Revelation of Jesus; this Ministry
we own, and this Ministry we witness. But that Ministry which is received from
man, who teaches for Doctrine the Precepts and Commandments of men, which are
found in the steps of the Scribes and Pharisees, which Christ cried woe against,
who sit in Moses seat, who are sayers, but not doers; who binds heavy burdens
grievous to be born, but will not themselves move them with one of their
fingers, but all their works they do to be seen of men, love the uppermost
rooms at Feasts, the chief seats in the Synagogues, are called of men Master,
who devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long Prayers; who are blind
guides, such as Christ Jesus cried woe against, who is our Lord and Master, and
Shepherd of our souls; but who are found acting in those things which he cried
woe against we do deny, and turn from them, for Christ Jesus has left us a Rule
to know them by their fruits, which makes them manifest to be the ravening
wolves inwardly, which Christ Jesus speaks of, who have the Sheeps clothing,
(the Saints words and profession) but their ravening wolvish nature appears by
their persecution and tyranny, which they exercise in this Nation of England,
as most Goals in this Nation can witness, who have many of the innocent
harmless people of God shut up in Dungeons and Holes, for no other cause but
for bearing witness for the living God against the deceit, by which they keep
poor people in blindness and ignorance of God, who are the same as ever the
Lord sent his true Prophets to cry against, who bear rule by their means, and
commit the horrible and filthy thing, which the Lord sent Jeremiah to cry
against: And, who seek for their Gain from their quarter, and preaches for
Hire, which the Lord sent Isaiah to cry against; who feed with the sat, and
clothe with the wool, which the Lord sent Ezekiel to cry against: And, such as
make the people to err, that bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace, Peace, and
he that puts not into their mouth, they even prepare war against them; which
the Lord sent Micah to cry against: And those that seduce the people, saying,
Peace, and there is no peace; and one builds a wall, and another daubs with
untempered mortar, those whom the Lord declared against by Ezekiel: And those
whom the Lord says he is against, who prophecy false Dreams, and cause the
people to err by their lies and by their lightness, and say the Lord says it,
when, says the Lord, I never spoke to them. These are they whom we testify
against, which all the true Prophets of the Lord were sent to bear witness
against, and therefore by them did they suffer, and were called before
Magistrates and Rulers, and persecuted and hated of all men, and made as the
offscouring of the world, and accounted not worthy to live. The same
Testimony, and the same Effects and Fruits of it in this Generation (we, who
are of the world in scorn called Quakers) do witness at this day in these
Nations, as many prisons and stockings, and scourgings, and whippings we have
suffered, which is our joy and riches, which suffering is not worthy to be
compared to the glory which is to be revealed: And blessed be our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has found us worthy, and given us power, not only to believe on
him, but also to suffer for his sake; and the Scriptures of everlasting truth
is fulfilled, which has said, He was numbered among the transgressors, and
counted as Sheep for the slaughter, and killed all the day long; and this we
witness to be out portion from this generation, which goes by the name of
Ministers; and for no other cause that they have against us, but for bearing
witness for the living God and his Truth, as it is made manifest in us by the
same Spirit, and Life and Power as all the Holy Men of God were sent, Prophets
and Apostles, who were made Ministers of the Eternal Spirit; these were
always sent to speak against those who had the form of Scriptures, and the
profession, but always persecuted the Life and Power that spoke them forth;
and as he that was born after the flesh, ever persecuted him that was born
after the spirit, even so it is now: And by this Generation of Priests, and
Elders, and Highpriests, was Christ and his Apostles persecuted, and accused,
and hailed, and arraigned before Magistrates, as ye may read throughout the
Scriptures; and all the righteous blood that has been shed since Abel, has
been shed by this Generation, and so the Scripture is fulfilled which says, As
a Troop of Robbers waits for a man, so does a company of Priests murder in the
way by consent. And for Magistrates we own, such as Rule for the Lord, who are
a terror to the evil doers, and lay the Law upon the Transgressors, who bears
not the Sword in vain; such as are for the praise of them that do well, such we
own and honor in our souls, and are subject to for conscience sake; but all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, we bear witness against, in
Magistrates, Priests and people, which act contrary to that of God in the
Conscience, for God is no respector of persons, but of all sorts of people, he
that fears God and works righteousness is accepted with him; and we honor
all men in the Lord, and he that rules well is worthy of double Honor, and
this we stand for, and bear witness to, and this Testimony we are willing (if
we be called to it) to seal with our blood, as many who have gone before us
have done. And so here thou may see and read thy Accusation to be false, who
says we rail against MAGISTRATES and MINISTERS.

And whereas thou says, Truth is, Beloved, and that which is my grief, that I
have been informed (and I dare not but believe it) that there are men among you
who have departed from the Faith and Purity of the Gospel, to depend upon
Iesuitical and Satanicall delusions, I mean such as go under the name of
quakers, who depend not upon the Scriptures for Light, but on what they receive
from a Spirit which casts them into a Trance, what these Trances are, let men
of understanding judge, for I am weak, etc.

Answer, Let all who reads thy words, try thy beloved Truth (as thou calls it)
which is, that thou dare not believe lies; that which many hundreds can witness
to the contrary of this, that thou have spoken, which though thou says there
is men among us, whom thou says goes under the name of quakers, that depends
upon Jesuiticall and Satanicall Delusions, this we utterly deny, and a Cloud of
Witnesses we have, which will stand against thee in this thing, and witness it
to be an untruth (which thou confesses thy faith dare not but believe) and
among many thousands which is convinced of the everlasting Truch of the
everlasting God, we do not know one Priest, or Jesuit, or Papist, that owns us,
or joins with us: And so let all that reads thy Truth, and thy Faith (as thou
call it) see how far thou art from the Truth; neither is there any among us
that is brought into the Ministry to Preach the everlasting Gospel, that ever
did profess that Faith of the Romish Church. And so, whether thou be not found
here in a Satanicall Delusion, who is thus bclying, and slandering, and
accusing falsely the innocent, contrary to all Truth? whether lies and
slanders, and false accusations, be not of of the Devil; let all honest hearts
judge? And now let any, who has the least measure of God in them to guide
their minds unto Justice and Equity, judge what Faith this is that thou art
exhorting to, who art found in such delusions of believing lies thy self, how
thou can exhort to the Truth who art found quite contrary, accucusing,
reproaching, scandalizing and defiling the Truth, thy faith which does not
purify thy heart from this uncleanness, we do deny; and thy Hope which does
not purify from these filthy accusasations, we do deny; and the Church of
Christ will deny it where ever it is, and does know and see that no lie is of
the Truth: And so this thy Faith which thou art exhorting to, when the just and
rightcous God comes to plead with all flesh, by Sword and by Fire, thou and
thy Faith (which dare not but believe lies) will perish; and the hope of the
Hypocrite does perish, when the over slowing scourge comes. Therefore take
warning, and now thou have time prize it, for the Judge stands at the door,
who lays Judgment to the line, and rightcousness to the Plummet; and thy
refuge of lies will be swept away, and thy Covenant with Hell and Death will be
broken: For the tried Stone is risen, the sure Foundation, who judges with
righteousness, and reproves with equity. Therefore turn thy mind to that which
is just, and equal, and righteous, that is of God, which tells thee thou ought
not to do wrong, nor to accuse falsely; this will show thee the deceit of thy
heart, and let thee fee thy vain thoughts that lodges within thee, and the
darkness of thy mind, which thou have made manifest by thy words, who faith,
They depend not upon the Scriptures for a Light: Here let the Scriptures try
thee and judge thee, who says the Scriptures is the Light, when the Scriptures
says, Christ is the Light which lights every man that comes into the world;
and every one that loves this Light, walks in this Light, and brings his
deeds to this Light to be proved and tried by the Light; and he that does evil
hates the Light, and turns from the Light, least his deeds should be reproved.
And here let the Scripture judge and try thee, whether thou does not deny
Christ Jesus, who says, I am the Light of the world, whenas thou says the
Scripture is the Light; here thou denies him, who is a Light to lighten the
Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel. Now let all see what thou have to
see or to judge with, who denies the light of the body, which is the eye, for
when the eye is single, the whole body is full of Light; but when the eye is
evil, the whole body is full of darkness. And here thou art found now, who art
looking at the Letter without thee, but thy body is full of darkness,
confusion, and enmity against the Truth of God, as thou has manifested in this
thy Paper. And Christ Jesus said unto his Disciples, Ye are the light of the
world; a city that is set on a hill cannot be bid: Let your Light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in heaven. But thy works and thy Light is made manifest by thy envy that
thou have uttered forth against the harmless, which thou knows nothing by. But
thou that has no other Light to judge with but the Scriptures without thee,
which was spoken forth from another spirit then thou speaks from; now thou
that takes these words, and speaks them forth from a lying spirit, which was
spoken forth from the Light, and Life, and Power of God; from the just and the
living Truth was the Scriptures spoken forth from: But thou who has no Light
to walk or speak by, but what thy dark spirit gathers out of the words without
thee, were not like to speak truth; for they that spoke forth; the Scriptures,
the Truth was made manifest in them, they did not speak from another, or by
hearsay, as thou does; thy spoke what they knew, and what they witnessed, and
bare testimony to the Truth; and all who comes into the same Truth, bears
witness unto them, and knows the same Truth as they did: But this thou art
ignorant of, who has nothing but the Husk and the outside, the Kernal and the
Substance thou knows nothing of; but blessed be the Lord God for evermore,
the same Life and Power as they spoke from is witnessed, and they that spoke
forth the Scriptures are witnessed to be true, by the same life; and all such
as thou who has nothing but the Declaration of that life, are seen and known,
and weighed, and all your profession which is without the life and profession
denied; and here is the Lambs war betwixt you and us, you have the words and
Declaration which the life sple, we have the Life and Substance which spoke
these words, and so you have the outside, who are born after the flesh,
persecutes us who are born after the spirit: And so now read where thou, and
you all are, who are found in this persecuting nature; for I am sure, if you
will be tried by the Scriptures, you cannot find that ever any of the Saints
of God persecuted any, but were ever persecuted, and ever suffered persecution
by those who had a profession; as Christ Jesus was crucified by the chief
Priests, and the Elders, Scribes, and Pharisees, who were the strictest
professors of the Scriptures, which spoke of him, and prophesied of him, which
that age, and that Generation had; besides, all the Saints, Servants, Prophets,
and Apostles that ever suffered, did suffer by a people professing Religion. So
let the Scriptures be judge between you and us, and if you will come to be tried
by the Scriptures, you will be found of the same generation of Persecutors as
ever was before you.

And whereas thou says, We depend not upon the Scriptures for Light, hut from
what we receive from a Spirit which casts us into a Trance, and what this
Spirit is, thou confesses thou knows not, and yet thou lakes upon thee to
judge of this Spirit, though thou confesses thou art weak, etc. but thou says
thou tells what thou thinks.

Now here thou have uttered forth thy weakness, and thy nakedness appears in
these words, and thy bitter spirit, in slandering that which thou knows not,
for that which tries the Spirits is Truth, and Eternal and Infallible, and
speaks that is knows, and believes not every spirit, but tries the Spirits
whether they be of God. And from this Spirit thou heart shut thy self, and by
this Spirit do we try thy Spirit to be a Spirit of Error and Delusion, a Spirit
of Darkness, which has no light in it; but thy Light is without thee that thou
judges by, and thou judges by thinking, and this is for judgment: Christ
Jesus said, Take heed that the Light which is in thee be not darkness; he does
not say, take heed that the Letter without thee be not darkness; and he says
again, If thy Light be darkness, how great is that darkness? and so here thou
art in the darkness, and yet judges of the Light; but thy spirit is a fallibe
Spirit, and so cannot give true judgment upon that which is infallible and
eternal: But that Spirit which is infallible and eternal, gives true
judgment on thee, and knows thee, and tries thee and thy Light, which is thee
Letter without thee, which is none of thine, but another; and with the same
spirit as spoke forth the Scriptures thou art judged, and thy spirit to be a
fallible lying spirit; and the same good spirit of God as spoke in the Holy
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, which is not divided, but is one and the
same for evermore; the same spirit do we witness, not another, but the same as
was before ever the Scripture was written, and by this Spirit which was before
Scripture was written, do we judge thee and thy Light which thou has from the
Declaration: Here thou confesses that if thou had had no Scripture, thou had
had no Light; but God is Light, and all who knows him, knows him in the Light;
and all who sees him, sees him in the Light, for the immortallity dwols in the
Light, but this thou knows nothing of; and we do accord with, and own, and
witness, and have unitywith the same Spirit, with all that spoke forth the
Scriptures, the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, and all the Holy men of
God, that ever was taught by the Spirit of God; all that is guided by that one,
and the same spirit we do witness and own, and all that have that same spirit
to lead and guide them to the living God (who is a Spirit) will own and witness
us to be of God, and our Testimony to be true; and this shall be answered by
that of God in all consciences.

And whereas thou speaks several times of the Institutions and Ordinances of
Christ, answer, The Ordinances and Institutions of Christ we own, and witness
and honor, and his Commands arc not grievons, but joyous: but thou that speaks
these words, has made thy self manifest to deny the Ordinances of Christ, and
his Institutions, and art ignorant of them what they are, when thou comes to
name them, thou names Sabboths, and Sacraments; and for the Ministry and
Magistracy (which thou speaks of) we have answered that before; yet this I say
to thee more, That those Ministers which were ordained by Christ did not preach
for Hire, Christ Jesus bare witness against the Hireling, and called him a
Thief and a Robber; now see if thy Ministers which thou speaks for be not such,
and then see if thou do not blaspheme Christ, in saying that he ordained such
as he called Thieves and Robbers, which are Hirelings, which flies because they
are Hirelings; those whom he ordained and sent forth, were sent forth freely,
who had received freely of him, and freely they did give; they did not go in
the way of Cain, to envy nor run greedily after the error of Balaam, for gifts
and rewards. Now see if those Ministers which thou speaks of be not such; where
did ever Christ ordain them? or when did they receive a Commission? but whom he
ordained did preach the Gospel freely to every creature, and had a Commission
from him to baptize all Nations, in the Nome of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, does thy Ministers, that thou speak of, so? Read the
Scriptures honestly, and see whether Christ ordained any but such as had an
immediate command and Revelation from him, and such received power from above
to go teach all Nations: Now see whether these Ministers thou speaks of will
own this commission, or witness it, and if they cannot, then thou art he that
blasphemeth Chritt, and defames his Truth, which is pure, which will not admit
of any decit nor guile. And for that thou speaks of Sabboths, here thou art
denying Christ, for where he is known and witnessed to be come, he is the end
of the Sabbath, and the rest of his people: and what Scripture have thou which
says that Christ ordained a day to be kept as a Sabbath? will thou belie
Christ Jesus, to say he has ordained a Sabbath Day, which he puts an end
to. Here let all read the Scriptures and try thee and thy Ordinances that thou
pleads so for, the Son of man is the Lord of the Sabbath: If thou have an ear,
thou may hear; or an eye, thou may see: but thou art blind, and yet has eyes;
and deaf, and yet has ears. And for thy Sacraments, which thou calls an
Ordinance of Christ, this is an Ordinance of thy own making, which thou has no
Scripture for at all; will thou say that Christ ordained a Sacrament, when
there is no Scripture for it? Oh that thou should be so blind, and yet will
take upon the to exhort (as thou says) the Church of Christ! but surely the
Church of Christ knows the Ordinances of God better then thou do, for thy
Ordinances is beggarly Rudiments, which are but commandments and doctrines of
men, but it is little with thee to call them the Ordinances of God, who art so
far by the Truth, as thou art in all thy Paper throughout: But those who are
dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the world, cannot be subject to thy
Ordinances, for the Apostle exhorts from them, and says, Touch not; taste not,
handle not, which are all to perish with the using of them; and his exhortation
we own and cleave to, and keep his Ordinances as he delivered them to us, and
thine we do deny; but the Ordinances of Christ Jesus we live in, according to
the Scrptures, and all the Saints in Light that ever went before us; for heis
our peace who has made both one, and broken down the partition Wall betwixt
us, and has abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the Law of Commandments
contained in Ordinances, for to make himself of twain one New Man, so making
peace, and that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the Cross,
having slain the enmity thereby; but where this enmity stand unslain, which is
far off, and not washed and made nigh by his blood, here the Ordinances of men
is set up, and called the Ordinances of God, who are without Christ, being
aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers from the Covenant of
Promise, not being washed, and cleansed, and purged by his blood, which makes
nigh, and takes away the Partition Wall, and makes of twain one New Man. Now
if thou, or any of you, do witness this condition, then do you know and live in
the Ordinances of Christ; but if you be dead in your fins, and the
uncircumcision of your flesh, then has he not blotted out the handwriting of
Ordinances, and has not taken it away, nailing it to his Cross. Now see
whether ye be here or no, or else ever talk of the Ordinances of God, but let
them be, as indeed and in truth they are, the Ordinances of men; and in the
mean time so long as thou art ignorant of these things, and of the workings and
operation of the living Spirit, and power of the living God; so long as thou
knows nothing but what thou knows naturally, beware how thou speaks of
trances, and quakings, and such expressions, least thou blaspheme against God;
for the living God, nor his power, nor working thou knows not, therefore be
silent, and beware how thou judges with evil thoughts that which thou knows
not, for in that thou corrupts thy self, and art found to be one of those
filthy dreamers which defiles the flesh, despiss dominivn, and speak evil of
dignities, and so, as I said before, bring thy self under the woe. And so
beware, and fear and dread the living God, who is a consuming fire to his
Enemies, and before him thou cannot stand with thy filthy stuff, which thou
have raked together, his jelousie burns like fire, and this will be as stubble
before him: Therefore see what thou have that will abide the fire, for nothing
will stand in his presence but what will answer to the fire; and this thou
shall eternally witness to be truth, and love to thy soul. And the spirit which
speakcth in us is one, and the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; and that
spirit which does not speak the same we do deny; and the judgment which thou
judges we do deny, and by the eternal infallible spirit, we ijudge it to be
false judgment, and of the living God of heaven and carth shall thou be judged
for thy false judgment, which thou have given of the Spirit of Truth, and this
thou shall eternally witness one day, when thou art arraigned at the bar of
Justice, as thou says; and we judge and bids stand off all unclean spirits,
all lying, dark, Satanicall Spirits, which knows not the living God, nor
joins not to the living God, for who is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, and
this is that Spirit which we speak from, which leads and guides up to God. And
thou that speaks of trances and quakings, and humbling, and confessing, and
Original Sin, and vileness, and casting down, and such like, which thou have
gathered out from the Letter, and speaks them with another spirit then spoke
them in the Scriptures; thou that has not the same Spirit as spoke these words
in the Scriptures, we deny thy spirit, and judge it to be the Spirit of Error:
by the same spirit as spoke forth the Scriptures, we do try thee and know thee;
and we deny all false Doctrine, and contradictions, and rediculous and foolish
things, which thou mentions, and all thy confusion which thou haft uttered
forth in thy Paper, (not worthy mentioning) and the Spirit that spoke it, we do
utterly deny; and the Spirit of the living God we own, and witness, and cleave
to, which proceeds from the Father and the Son, which is the judge of all
unclean, dark, fallible, lying Spirits; this is our Leader, and Teacher, and
Guider, Judge, and Lawgiver, and King: Glory and Praises be to our living and
powerful God for ever. And after that thou have judged the Spirit of God to be
the Spirit of the Devil; thou confesses that thou have not waded very deep
into the matter: Here thou have made manifest thy shallowness and sinfulness of
Truth indeed, and uttering forth thy folly and ignorance of God. But thou art
comprehended, and the depth of thy deceit is known and seen, and the bottom and
foundation on which thou stands is sandy, and the words thou hears, but does
them not; and therefore art thou likened unto the foolish man, that has built
thy house upon the Sand, for when the wind blows and beats upon thy house, it
will fall, and great will be the fall of it.

And thou speaks of Jesuits, which was known in London to quake, and to speak
in the Congregations, and thou says, These men no doubt might make a Covenant
with the Devil, and by the finest way of witchcraft and sorcery convey it unto
others by an implicit Covenant, seducing men thinking no such thing, but rather
as though God had more abundantly declared his love to them, then to any people
in the world, when as the matter is nothing else, but Satan transformed into an
Angel of Light; and so then thou goes on to tell thy story.

Answer: Here let all who reads thy words, and has any measure of Justice,
Equity, or Honesty in them, behold thy blindness and ignorance of God, and of
his Truth, who has given such a manifest lie as this is under thy hand, and
yet has the boldness to judge the Spirit of Truth to be the Spirit of Satan,
at that very instant when thou art found in the Devils work, venting and
vomiting lies and slanders upon the pure Truth of the living God, which shall
be found clear, and pure, and innocent, and guiltless of all these false
slanders which thou have cast upon it; God and his Truth shall be found true,
and all such men as thou found liars, as hundreds in London (from whence thou
fetches this lie) shall witness, that this which thou have spoken to be a lie
and slander, and all lies is of the Devil, and he is the Father of all liars:
and I do believe that thou will not find one in London (of so many thousands
as there is in the same nature as thou art in) that will say they saw Jesuits
quake there; but I am sure that hundreds there are that are convinced of the
living Truth of God, which will testify against thy lies, and bear witness for
the Truth against thy false slanders, And those men which thou says are
seduced by witchcraft, and sorcerie, and an implicit Covenant. Answer; but
those men whom thou speaks, as being contemptible, will quickly see thee to be
a poor deceived, seduced creature, who utters forth thy confusion, and
darkness, and ignorance, and makes thy folly manifest: And thousands there are
at this day, who have not come so far up to the Truth of God, as to own us, yet
will see thee to be a dark, ignorant, deluded, besotted spirit, who knows
nothing at all of God, but what thou knows it is naturally, as a bruit beast,
which Jude speaks of. And thou that does ground and raise such scandals, as
thou has done in thy Paper, upon such lies and untruths as these that thou
tells, let all honest hearted judge what spirit it is that guides and leads
thee; for I am sure that hundreds will set to their hands and seals, that this
which thou speaks is false; and yet from this ground do thou raise thy
Exhortation (thou says) to the Church of Christ: so now whether any Church,
which has but the name and profession of Christ, will receive such reports,
and lies, and slanders, and give it under their hands as thou have done; let
all the professed Churches, though there be many that can talk of Christ, and
God, as thou does, and serve the Devil, as thou has done here; I say, Let all
the professed Churchches (as thou calls them) both in New England, and
elsewhere, blush, and be ashamed of thee, who have given such manifest lies,
and slanders, and scandals of the pure Truth (for a testimony of thy Faith)
which thou confesses thou has but by report: But thou have made thy self
manifest to be a defamer of the Truth of God, who says, Report, and we will
report it: And so thou goes on with thy Report and Story, which thou says is
credibly reported to be in, or about Bristol.

There was a man's wife that desired to go to one of the Quakers Meetings, her
husband was unwilling, but after importunity he gave her leave; but she was so
wrought upon in that Meeting, that when she came home again she was filled with
Revelations, and spoke as though she had spoken with the tongue of Angels, to
admiration far above her self; her husband told her she was bewitched, but she
was far enough from believing that; but he could not satisfy himself, but
would search her body, to see what tokens he could find, and about her arm he
found a silk thread, he inquired how that came there, she serious professed she
knew nothing of it; well, says he, this shall not remain here; and he took it
away, and then she returned to the same woman that she was before she went to
the quakers Meeting: (and says thou) if this be a true Story, as I credibly
believe, tell me if there was not witchcraft used in this quakers Meeting, yea
or nay?

Now let all honest hearts, who reads this thy Story, read thy Spirit and thy
envy, who hatcheth Cockatrice-Eggs, and weaves Spiders-webs, and he that eats
of these Eggs dies, and that which is crushed breaks into a Viper: Now if
thou be not blind thou may read thy Spirit in this Scripture, but for this
cause God has sent thee strong delusions, that thou should believe lies; and I
know assuredly that thousands there is about Bristol, from whence thou fetches
this lie, that will witness and testify that this is a gross lie also, and
that there was never any such thing done or acted there by those people called
quakers: And therefore let all who have but any moderation, or dram of honesty
in them, judge thy boldness and impudence in lying, who should send such a
lying pamphlet as this is into another Nation, which thou professes love to;
but thy hands is defiled with blood, and thy fingers with iniquity; thy lips
has spoke lies, and thy tongue has utterd perverseness, and thy trust is in
vanity and lies; thou have conceived mischief, and brought forth iniquity; and
this is the fruits of thy Profession, which thou tells such a story of in the
beginning of thy Paper, and of so many Generations which thou calls Churches of
Christ; but there was never any Generation but might have such a Church as this
is, whereof thou art a Member, which is grounded upon lies, and reports, and
stories; the Pope and Jesuits (which thou speaks of) can have no worse
Foundation then thou have: Therefore let all that profess this Faith, that thou
art of, be ashamed of thee, and the fruits that thou brings forth, who has
made lies thy refuge, and with falsehood have thou covered thy self as with a
garment. And thou goes on, and says, no doubt the devil can very well paint
men to come to the Lords table and to preach Christ, for thou says, he has
sometime been a Preacher of Christ himself.

Answer: At that Table where thou sits the Devil may paint men to come to; and
the Devil may preach Christ, as he does in thee, talk of a Christ, and yet the
Doctrine, and Foundation, and Ground from whence thou speaks, is lies and
untruths; and all lying comes from the Devil: And so let all, who have any
thing of God in them to guide their minds, judge and try thy Spirit, and what
Scripture thou has to prove thy words, or when it was that the Devil preached
Christ: but though in words he might speak of him, as thou do, and thy
preachers that thou speaks of; but the Apostle says, that there is none can
preach except they be sent, and will thou say that God sent the Devil to
preach Christ? or thou will deny the Apostles words and Doctrine; or thou will
blaspheme God; choose which of these thou will taste: And the Apostle said,
they could not sit at the Lords table and the table of Devil: And thou says,
the Deville an paint men to come to the Lords table: Now will thou deny the
Apostles Doctrine there? or will thou confess thy self be at the Table of the
Devil, feeding among liars and envious persons, which holds the Truth in
unrighteousness? Therefore expect the wrath of God to be revealed from Heaven
upon thee, which is against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who are
back-biters, haters of God, despitefull, proud boasters, inventers of evil,
who have changed the truth of God into a lie. Here read thy self, and thy
spirit, and thy practice, and thy portion, for God is the same, he changes
not, and according to thy works shall thy reward be. So thou goes on in thy
accusing, and backbiting, and slandering: and thou brings up Grimdleton, whom
thou says came up to Trances and Revelations, which thou says fell at last to
Popery and profaneness. But this which we have only from thy own mouth, which
is so stuffed with lies and slanders, who is set on backbiting, and slandering,
and accusing, and thy ground is but by hearsay, we shall give little credit to
what thou speaks, either of Grimdleton, or any else, for we know thy ground is
falsity and lies, and so there can no truth spring from that Root: But I do
believe that thou does accuse Grimdleton falsely, and belie them, in that thou
says they are turned to Popery; but thy throat is grown so wide, that thou
can swallow any thing; and thou never heeds who thy Informers are, so that it
feed that Root which grows in thee, which brings forth bitter fruit.

And thou says, It is the main thing that the Devil drives at now' because
Jesuits have been the chief Fomentrrs of this quaking Religion.

Let all behold and see now thy gross ignorance, and emptiness and shallowness,
that thou should speak things that thou have no president, not ground of truth
for; where can thou say, or where have thou heard that ever the Jesuits quaked?
Oh that thou should not be ashamed of such idle, groundless untruths, that all
who reads thy words may read thee to be a liar and slanderer! Thou cannot
produce any that ever knew a jesuit quake; and so let all who reads thy words,
read thy gross error and ignotance of Scriptures, who talks of Jesuits quaking
(which they never did) and art so blind that thou cannot see who they were in
Scripture that quaked. Was Moses a Jesuit, who said, I exceedingly fear and
quake? And was the people of Israel Jesuits, who came in the morning to the
Mount, where there was thunders, and ligntnings, and thick Clouds upon the
Mount, and the voice of the Trumpet exceeding loud, so that all the people that
was in the camp exceedingly trembled; was this Trumpet sounded among the
Jesuits? Oh thou miserable creature! who art thou contending against? And was
Ezekiel a Jesuit, to whom the Word of the Lord came, saying, Son of man, eat
thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with trembling and carefulness? And
was Daniel a Jesuit, upon whom fell great quakings and tremblings? Now see and
read thy ignorance of the Scriptures, which thou says is thy Light: Now see if
thou be not blind, who yet knows not that which thou looks upon to be thy
guide, who casts a Reproach upon that which thou never came to know, nor never
was made partaker of: But to an account and reckoning thou shall come for all
thy hard speeches.

And whereas thou says, That thy hearts desire is, that they may be
established in the Faith of Gods Elect.

Thy heart is deceitful, and desperately-wicked, nor the Faith of Gods Elect,
thou, nor them that thou writes to, never know, for the Elect of God is pure,
and none can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect: So concerning that
Faith be thou silent, for thou art here charged with many lies, and slanders,
and false accusations, which Gods Elect was never found guilty of: But it was
always the portion of the Elect of God to receive from by generation such
slanders and accusations as thou have here vented in thy Paper, which has made
thee manifest to be none of Gods Elect, nor none of that Faith; neither can
they abide in that which they never came in: So thou do but utter forth thy
folly in thy Exhortation. And thou goes on in thy confusion and vanity, and
thou ask three questions, and thou answerest two of them thy self, according
to thy folly, emptiness, and shallowness, and in the third thou have set thy
self fast, and knows not how to get out, and so thou leaves us to answer it;
and so it is like we shall answer a fool according to his folly.

First, Thou ask by whom do we hope to besaved?

We deny the ground of thy Answer, and we answer from another ground and
principle, which thou art ignorant of, and art an enemy to, We hope to be
saved by CHRIST JESUS, who is the Light of the world, and has lighted every
man but comes into the world; and this Light is thy condemnation, who says
the Leeter is the Light: and so the same CHRIST JESUS which dyed at Jerusalem,
which witnessed a good Confestion before Pontius Pilate, who is the way to the
Father, the Light has leads to life; this is our Savior; and the same that
saves us, condemns thee who loves darkness rather then Light, because thy
deeds are evil.

Secondly, Thou ask how we came to know there was ever such a man in the
world.

And this thou answers according to thy public faith, from a Testimony without
thee; but we deny thy Answer; and our answer is, That we know that the Son of
God is come, who has given us an understanding, and we know him that is true:
And hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us
of his Spivit; and we have seen, and do testify that the Father sent the Son
to be the Savior of the world: And we know that we are of God, and the whole
world lies in wickedness, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son,
Jesus Christ; this is the true God, and eternal life; He that has an car, let
him hear; but thy car, which should hear, is deaf.

Thirdly, thou says, If Christ be the Savior, and that the light and
knowledge of him does spring from Holy Scripture, thou asks whether the
Scriptures be any Rule of Faith and Life in these days, or are they ahorgated
and put an end to by Christ? And has he appointed another way for bringing his
Elect to eternal salvation? This quaery (thou says) thou must leave to your
selves to answer, only (say thou) for my part I know no other way to come to
Christ my Savior, then the Holy Scriptures, which he has commanded me to
search, and in which he promises life eternal; and wherein he curses all men
that adds to, or detracteth from them: what you have to say to these things I
know not, but this I know, that no man speaking by the Spirit of God, calls
Jesus execrable; and what do they else that-vilifie and slight his word and
Ordinances, and depends upon a Spirit which crosses and contradicts Christ,
and his word and Ordinances.

Answer: In this quaery thou have given a Testimony of thy Light, and of thy
Spirit, and of thy Way, and of thy Faith, and of thy God; for thou have taken
Christ Jesus among the rest, and has belyed him in plain words, now in the
latter end of thy Paper: And thou art so blind, led with the God of the world,
which has so blinded thy eye; sure thou thinks all looks with that blind eye
as thou does: Thou confesses that thou have none other Light but the
Scriptures, and yet thou art run away from it, and art now adding to it, and
thou says thy self, he curses all men that adds to it: therefore own thy
portion now when thou sees thy self there, for thou art now so blind thou
sees not where thou art, but when thou comes to a search thou will find thy
self there: Where is it that Christ promises thee eternal life in searching
the Scriptures? Does not Christ say in the verse before, Ye have not his word
abiding in you, for whom he has sent, him ye believe not? Thou have made it
manifest what life thou have; but it is no wonder, seeing thou have no other
Light, nor no other Way to come to Salvation, nor no other life, but what thou
have out of Scriptures. Thou art dead in sin, but it is no wonder: Oh that thou
dare so belie Christ Jesus! Does not that Scripture say, on which thou builds
these words, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life;
and they are they which testify of me, but ye will not come unto me that ye
may have life. Does he say here that life is in the Scriptures? or does he say
that he is the Scriptures, when he says, ye will not come to me that ye may
have life? And art not thou here found thinking to have eternal life in the
Scriptures, and wilt not come to Christ that thou may have life? and this he
spoke to the Scribes and Pharisees, who were in the same life that thou art in,
to whom he said, they had neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his
shape; but this is all the life that thou knows. And thou speaks of god walking
in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks; but he does not walk in the
midst of the midst of thy Candlesticks, who has no Light but the Scriptures;
and before thou see the seven Golden Candlesticks, and he that walks in the
midst of them, thou must be turned from where thou art: if thou have an ear,
thou may hear what the Spirit says. And thou says, this is thy light and thy
way to salvation, and thou confesses thou knows none other: Answer, This has
all drunkards, and all profane persons that has the Scriptures, has that
which thou has; and if it brings salvation to thee, then it brings salvation
to them; and so see what a public faith thou art of: Now see whether thou be
not in the broad way that leads to destruction; and now this is thy
Testimony, and this is thy Light (that we are speaking of all this while) and
this is thy way; but this way we do deny; for thou, and all who are where thou
art, are gone out of the way, and there is none of you that does good, no not
one: And Christ Jesus (who was before Abraham, and before the Scripture was
written) is our Light, and our Way, and our Rule, and our Truth, and our Life;
and this is life eternal to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he
has sent; and this life is in his Son: and he that believes on the Son of
God, has the witness in himself; and he that believes not God, has made him
a liar, because he believed not the Record that God gave of his Son; and this
is the Record, that God has given unto us eternal life: And thou that has no
life but what is in the Scriptures, has not the Record of God, for the Record
of God is eternal life; and he that has the Son, has life; and he that has
not the Son, has not life; and this we witness fulfilled and manifested in us.
And so now read, and see where thou art, who knows no life but the Scriptures,
and says that Christ has promised eternal life in the Scriptures; and here
thou have manifested thy self not to believe the Record that God has given of
his Son, and so makes God a liar. And Christ Jesus is the Light, and Way, and
Life, and ever was, of all his children: But thou, and all who looks upon the
Scriptures to be the Way, and Light, and Life, has found out another Way, and
has wrested the Scriptures to your own destruction, and abrogated them (as
thou speaks) and denies the end for which they were given forth, which is, for
the perfecting of the Man of God; and so here thou art found preaching another
Gospel then Christ Jesus and the Apostles did, and art to be holden accursed.
And here thou art found tottering upon a sandy Foundation, whereon thou cannot
stand; but the Rock on which the whole Church is built, Christ Jesus, of whom
all the Prophets bears witness, and on whom all the Prophets and Apostles is
built, do we stand unmovable. And he who was the faithful and true VVitness,
who was dead, is alive, whose Name is called, the Word of God, which Word was
in the beginning, by which Word the worlds were made; and without him nothing
was made that was made; he is rison, who teaches his people himself, who is
the Shepherd of his sheep, who has given his life for his sheep, who does give
unto his sheep eternal life: But thou art none of his sheep, who faith eternal
life is in the Scriptures. And upon this Rock of Ages does the quakers stand,
which thou have uttered forth and vented so much envy and reproach upon: Upon
this Rock on which they stand, shall thou, and all such Profeslion as thou
lives in, and all your feigned Humiliation, and feigned Faith, and perishing
Hope; upon this Rock shall you all be dashed to pieces. And though thou makes a
scorn and a scoff of quaking and trembling, yet before him shall all Nations
tremble, and the Rocks rend, and the Mountains melt, and the Hills be removed,
for he is risen that shakes terribly the earth; but this thou art ignorant of,
who art not yet come so far as the Devils, who do believe and tremble; and
before ever thou do know the living God, and Jesus Christ to be thy Savior,
thou shall witness quaking, and shaking down thy unclean nature, which is now
head in thee; and if ever thou come to hear, the dreadful voice of the
Almighty, it will make thy filthy, lying, deceitful Spirit (that speaks in
the) to shake and quake, for dreadful is the Lord to the wicked; and all that
can be shaken must be done away, that, that which cannot be shaken may remain.
But though thou talk and professes the Scripture in words, yet thou art
utterly ignorant of them, and the plain words that they speak; and this that
thou calls thy light, and thy Life, and thy Rule, thou shall find will come to
utter ruin (when Christ Jesus, who is the Cornerstone which all ye builders
refuses and disallows) shall stand and endure for ever, though he be for a
Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offense to such as thee; but he is become the
head of our corner, on whom was are built, and founded, rooted, and grounded
unmovable for evermore: Glory and Praises be to the living powerful God for
evermore. And thou exhorts them in the latter end of thy Paper, to be set in
the Faith and Worship of God; but hou confesses thou knows not, nor does not
determine what it is, whether it be the Presbyterian way, or the Independent
way, and so thou have left them tottering indeed, (as thou art thy self) and
thou and thy Religion is sure to come to utter ruin, that has no better
foundation, for thou sets them to two ways, to take whether they will, which
makes thee clearly manisest that thou knows not the truth at all; for the truth
is but one, and the way to it is but one; and thou who art exhorting them, has
thy way to seek yet: and thou who out of the way (which is but one) must needs
be in the erros, among the Sects and Opinions, which is the broad way; but in
the way of truth there is no division, for the light is one, and the way one,
and the life one, and the faith one, and the baptism one, and one Spirit, and
one Lord: but this thou art ignorant of, who knows nothing but the Letter
without thee. But in the very close of thy Paper, thou tells them of the Law of
God engraven upon their hearts: Thou might do well to look into that Law in thy
own particular, and search and examine there in thy own conscience, and see
whether thou hve given thy Paper forth from that which God has written there,
or thou has had it from other Records without thee: (it may be in other
Nations.) Alack for thee, thou art rude indeed, for thou have compassed sea and
land for these Stories that thou have told in this Paper; and if thou could but
get one Proselyte made by these lies and slanders, they might very well be
seven fold more the child of the Devil. But now thou have rambled up and down
far distant, and from various Reports, it is well thou art come home now in the
latter end: Now thou art come to the Law written in the heart; stay here a
while, and turn thy mind to that of God in thy conscience (which he has
written in thy heart) and that will teach thee another lesson then to lie and
slander, and falsely accuse, back-bite, reproach, and scandal; this Teacher
will teach thee none of this; but this will reprove thee, and show thee the
evil of thy doings, and the deceit of thy heart, and the enmity and envy that
lodges there, against those which never did thee wrong: To this Teacher thou
must come, and to this thou must stand or fall, for he will be no more removed
into a corner: He is the swift Witness which comes near to Judgment, and
bears witness against the Sorcerer, and against the Adulterer and false
Swearer, and against them that turn aside the stranger from his right, and
fears not the Lord of Hosts. Therefore consider what thou have been doing all
this while, and fear the Lord God, and hearken to the voice that calls behind
thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it; and send not thine ear to the
wicked, and so come to partake of their sins, and then thou will be sure to
partake of their plagues. And so in love to thy soul we have answered this thy
Paper and quaeries, and for the clearing of the Truth of God, which is innocent
and clear of thy scandalls and lies, and slanders, the Lord God is our Witness,
who will plead our cause with our enemies, and clear the innocence of those
that suffer for him; to whom alone we commit our cause, and to him alone return
to be judged and tried, who alone judges the secrets of all hearts, who judges
righteous Judgment, and gives unto every one according to their deeds; to him
alone we commit our cause, for whom we stand witnesses, in sufferings, in
trials, in buffetings, in scourgings, in whippings, to whom we owe our lives,
and whose Testimony we are willing to seal with our blood, if we be called to
it. To him who is our Strength and Rock, our Preserver and Deliverer, be all
Glory and Dominion over all, to Reign and Rule, and have Dominion, who is King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Blessed for evermore.

So now to thee, who has confessed thou has none other Light, nor knows none
other way to Christ thy Savior, then the holy Scriptures, a few Quaeries to
thee, and all those thou calls Minister, in New England and elsewhere.
Quaery 1. WHether God was not the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob, yea or nay?

2. If so, How they did know him to be their God, seeing there was no
Scriptures written then?

3. How Moses knew God, and what God had wrought in so many Generations before
him, seeing there was no Scripture before Moses writ?

4. Whether did the Prophets of the Lord speak from a Scripture without them,
(seeing that they said, thus says the Lord) or what they spoke they received
immediately from the Lord, yea or nay?

5. And whether Christ Jesus, who is the Savior of his people, was before
Abraham, yea or nay?

6. Whether the Apostles had their Testimony and assurance of salvation from
the Scriptures without them, or from Christ Jesus, whom the Apostle said was
within them the hope of glory, yea or nay?

7. And if so, what ground or testimony have you, that the Scriptures without
you is the Light, and the way to Salvation, seeing that those who spoke forth
the Scripture had a witness and a testimony within them?

8. What assurance or certain testimony have thou, or you, that Christ that was
crucified at Jerusalem so many hundred years ago, how do you know him to be
your Savior, since that you have no testimony but the writings without you?

9. And whether he be not the Savior of his people from their sins? and what
sins ye are saved from who knows him not but as you have writings and records
of him, that he was crucified so many hundred years since at Jerusalem; and how
you would have known him if you had not had the Declaration of the Scriptures?

10. And whether you do not lay wast Scriptures, and deny Christ, who says
they are the Way and Rule of life, whenas the Scripture says, Christ is the
way, the truth, and the life, and that there is none that comes to the Father
but by him, yea or nay?

11. And whether you do not deny Christ Jesus, and the Scriptures also, who
says the Scriptures is the Light, and that you know none other way to
salvation; whenas Christ Jesus says, I am the Light that lights every man
that comes into the world, and he that walks in this Light, shall have the
Light of life; and whether you do not deny Christ, and the Scriptures, in this,
yea or nay; seeing the Scriptures says the same?

12. And whether God in the Scriptures has not promised a new Covenant, which
he will make with his people, that he will write it in their hearts, and put it
in their inward parts; and whether ye do not cross this Covenant who looks for
salvation in outward writings, yea, or nay?

13. Whether God has not promised that he will teach his people himself, and
that they shall not need to say, know the Lord, but they shall all know me from
the least to the greatest, yea or nay?

14. And whether the Teacher (which the Lord has said shall be no more removed
into a Corner) by which the Lord teaches his people, whether this be the
Letter of Scripture, yea or nay? And whether the Scripture may not be removed
into a corner, yea or nay?

15. What voice that is which calls behind, saying, This is the way, walk in
it; and whether the Scriptures be this voice, yea, or nay?

16. And what way that is which shall be called the way of holiness, which the
unclean shall not pass over, but it shall be for the waysaring man, though
fools shall not err therein; and whether this way be the Scriptures, yea, or
nay?

17. And whether there may not be errage where there is no way known but the
Scriptures, yea or nay?

18. And whether the Apostle did not speak truth, when he said to the Romans,
That which may he known of God, is manifest in them, for he has showed it unto
them; and whether that which God did show to them was Scripture without, yea or
nay.

19. And whether the Scriptures without be the Word of God, which was in the
beginning, yea or nay?

20. And whether that Word which Moses taught Israel, and that which the
Apostle speaks of to the Romans, which is nigh in the heart, be not the same
Word by which the Lord, teaches his people, yea, or nay?

21. And whether that Word which was in the beginning, and was with God, and
which Word was God, by which all things were made, and without him was not any
thing made that was made: and whether this be the Scripture without, yea or nay?

23. And whether this be not him in whom is life, and the life is the light of
men; and whether thou and you do not deny the Scriptures, and Christ Jesus, who
is the word and the light, and the life and the way, who says that the
Scriptures is the light and eternal life, and the way to come to salvation, yea
or nay.

24. What right, or title, or interest have thou or you to the Epistles which
the Apostles writ to the Saints who received his Ministry, and followed, and
was begotten by him, who was a Minister of the Spirit which quickneth and
makes alive.

25. And what is this to you who knows not the ministration of the Spirit, but
all that you know is from the letter without you, whenas the Apostle says, The
Letter kills, but the Spirit gives life, and the ministration of the Spirit
turns from the darkness to the light, and from the power of Satan unto God:
and what light are you turned to, who know no other light but the Scriptures
without you, which a great part of the world has, and yet lives in darkness,
and under the power of Satan.

26. Whether you do not deceive your own souls, who takes these words which the
Apostle spoke to a people which was made partaker of the same spirit which he
spoke from, and was gathered into the light which he spoke from: And these
words which he spoke to a people in another condition, ye take to your selves,
who knows no light (as you confess your selves) but the Scriptures without you;
and what this will avail you to take these words which was spoken to another
seed, whenas the Apostle says, The promise is not to seeds, as to many, but
unto one seed, which is Christ, who is the light, and the way, and the Savior
of his people; and what is this to you, who have the Scriptures without you for
your way, your light and eternal life.

27. Whether the prophesyings in the Churches of Christ, which, we read on in
the Scripture, was from the Letter without, or from the Spirit within; and
whether you can judge of their conditions then, or now, who are come to the
Spirit of Prophecy, who have no testimony of Christ but from the Letter
without.

The End.

