AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST Some Principal Errors OF THE Predestinarians. A Work
designed for the Information of the Common People.

Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are of
God; for many false Prophets are gone out into the World,

1 John 4.1. LONDON, Printed for Richard Cumberland at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1696.

An ANTIDOTE against some Principal Errors, etc.
TO convince those of their Mistake who err in Matters of Religion, is an Act
of the greatest Kindness and Friendship that one Man can do unto another: being
therefore fully satisfied in my self, that some of the Predestinarian
Principles are contrary to Truth. I thought it my Duty to endeavor all that in
me lies, to convince them thereof, who so believe, by showing that they do not
srightly understand the true Intent and Meaning of the Word of God; or, that
they err, not knowing the Scriptures, Mat. 22.29. that is to say, not knowing
them rightly: for they rely only upon here and there a Place that seems to make
for them; and in the mean time overlook a far greater Number of Scriptures that
very plainly and clearly do testify against them.

Now it is evident that where one Part of Scripture seems to declare one thing,
and another part seems to declare quite the contrary; it is evident, I say, that
there the true sense of one Part is not that which the literal Import of the
Words does express: for it is certain that two Senses which do oppose each
other, cannot both be true; in such Cases then it must be that the literal
Sense of one part is the true Sense, and then the literal Sense of the other
part must be mystical, figurative or allusive, or such as does seem to speak
one thing, but does really mean and intend another. Now it is not possible for
any Opinion to be true, that is built on the literal Sense of such Scriptures
as these, whose right meaning is not that which the Words do at first sight
seem to express.

Wherefore before we presume to make any Text the Foundation of our Faith, we
must be sure that the Sense which we take that Text of Scripture in, is its
true and right Sense. And the way to know this, is to consider first, whether
it be agreeable to that Sense which is found to be the Common Drift and Scope
of the Bible: for we must not understand any one Scripture in such a Sense as
is contrary to a far greater Number of Places. The general Sense of the
Scriptures is rather to be relied on, than a particular Sense of only three or
four Places. Again, we must consider whether the Sense a Scripture is taken in
be agreeable to Reason; for no Sense of Scripture can be true that is contrary
to the common and natural Notions of our Minds: for the Law of Nature is as
much from God as the Laws of Revelation are; and it is absurd to think that one
part of God's Law can contradict another. Again, no Sense of Scripture can be
the true Sense, if it any ways naturally tend to take Men off from the Care of
holy Living, by nourishing in them foolish Presumption, or else driving of them
into miserable and deep Despair.

Now if these few Particulars be well considered, they cannot but direct us to
the Knowledge of the true and right Sense of the Scripture: for if any Sense be
the true Sense, it must be that which is agreeable to the greatest Number
Seripture-Testimonies, which we have no reason to disbelieve, and which has no
Tendency in it to favor Wickedness, but is every way proper to urge and press
Mankind to a Life of Piety and Virtue. Now it is evident that the
Predestinarians do build many of their Notions on Scriptures taken in that
Sense, which is opposite to the Sense of a far greater Number of Testimonies
which declare the contrary; and they are also taken in such a Sense as is
contrary to all other Evidences of Truth deducible from humane Understanding,
and which makes many Men falsely conceit themselves to be the Beloved of God,
and his Elect, even in the midst of their Wickedness: and that has driven
others into Despair upon a Supposition that they are of that Number whom God,
as they think, has eternally reprobated. All which clearly prove that the Sense
they take these Scriptures in, is a Sense that is not the right and true Sense;
and therefore that Faith is an erroneous Faith which they do build upon it. And
this by the Divine Assistance I will make evident in several Particulars: And
first,

Of REPROBATION.
The true Substance of the Calvinist Notion concerning Reprobation is, that God
has decreed from Eternity to reprobate or torment some Men in Hell for ever,
that thereby he may make manifest the Glory of his Justice in punishing some,
as well as his Goodness in making others happy: and they say, that the Number
of those who are thus foreordained to everlasting death, is so certain, and
their Fate is so unchangeable upon the Account of this his unalterable Decree,
that they can neither be increased nor diminished. But this Notion is contrary
both to Scripture and Reason, and is therefore both a false and an impious
Opinion.

First, It Is contrary to Scripture, I mean such Scriptures as are much more
numerous, and more plain and easy to be understood, than those are upon which
this fictionary Faith is founded. God is Love, 1 John 4.8. And in this was his
Love manifested, in that he sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we
might live through him, ver. 9. Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord God, I
have no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his
Way and live: turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die, O House of Israel? Ezekiel.
33.11. Have I any Pleasure at all that the Wicked should die, says the Lord
God, and not that he should turn from his Ways and live? Ezekiel. 18.23. I have no
Pleasure in the Death of him that dies, says the Lord God; wherefore turn
your selves, and live ye, Ezekiel. 18.32. Now what can be more absurd and contrary
to Scripture than to assert, that he who takes no Pleasure in the Death of
Sinners, should for his own mere Will and Pleasure, only to show his Power,
decree to torment and damn the greatest part of Mankind? If he swears that he
delights not in their Death, we may depend upon his Word notwithstanding all
the Arguments which the Predestinarians can urge to the contrary.

It Is likewise recorded for a Truth, that the Lord is good to all, and that his
tender Mercies are over all his Works, Psalm. 145.9. That he is long-suffering
to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. That his Will is, that Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all Men -- for this is good and
acceptable in the Sight of God, who will have all Men to be saved, and to come
to the Knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.1, 4. And that the Grace of God that
brings Salvation, has appeared unto all Men, Tit. 2.11. That Christ is a
Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2.2. That he gave himself
a Ranson for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. That he tasted Death for every Man, Heb. 2.9. And
that as by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation; even
so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all Men to
Justification of Life, Romans 5.18.

Now from these plain Scriptures it is evident, that no particular Man's
Damnation is unavoidably decreed by Go: If Men die the Death eternal, their
Destruction is from themselves, and not from him. When he made the Generations
of Men to dwell upon the Face of the Earth, he made them free Agents, that is
to say, he gave them a Power either to do, or not to do, what he did intend to
command them: but withal he let them know, that if they did disobey, they
should be punished for their so doing; and that if they did obey, they should
for ever be blessed. It was not his purpose therefore to damn any Man
absolutely, but conditionally, in case he should so far abuse the Powers he had
given him, as wilfully to commit Sin when he might as well have forborne it. Now
the Truth of this is evident from many plain and undeniable Testimonies.

For eternal Punishments are only denounced against Men in Case of Wickedness.
God's Decrees are, that the Soul that sins shall die, Ezekiel. 18.4. And that all
should be damned who believe not the Truth, but had Pleasure in
Unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. And that if Men live after the Flesh. they
shall die; but if on the contrary they through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds
of the Body, they shall live, Romans 8.13. And therefore he faith, Whosoever
sins against me, him will I blot out of my Book, Exodus 32.33. By the Sins
and Wickednesses then which Men commit, they make themselves Reprobates; it is
because of these things, says S. Paul, that the Wrath of God comes upon the
Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 5.3, 6. God hathsworn that some shall notenter
into his Rest: But to whom swear he that they should not enter into his Rest,
but to them that believe not? Heb. 3.18. All which shows that God reprobates
none but suh as by Sin are the Authors of their own Damnation; and therefore
it is said of the wicked Jews, O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, Hos.
13.9. To say therefore that God is the chief, and principal or main Cause of
Man's eternal Destruction, is a Notion you see which is contrary to Scripture,
and is therefore an Error.

It Is also an Error, because it is built upon such a Sense of Scripture as we
have all the reason in the World to disbelieve: for that can never be the true
Sense of God's Word, which naturally tends to debase the Glory of the Justice
and Righteousness of God; but this those Notions do which these Men do build on
these mistaken Senses of Scripture: for they tell us, that as God has decreed
the End of those whom he has resolved to reprobate, so he has also decreed the
Means which shall bring them to that End, that is to say, he has decreed that
they shall unavoidably be Sinners, that so he may manifest the Rigor of his
Justice in punishing them for being wicked. But were this true, it would be so
far from exalting, that it would plainly debase the Glory of the Justice of God
among Men: for according to all the Notions which we have of Justice, nothing
can be more unjust and cruel than first to lay an unavoidable Necessity upon a
Man to do ill, that so with a seeming Justice he may be tormented for being
wicked. Should one Man do so to another, we should count him unjust in the
highest; and shall Man be more just than God? Job 4.17. Then, and then only is
the Justice of God glorious, when he punishes Men for wilfully refusing to do
that which he has made them sufficiently able by one means or other to perform.

This Reprobating Notion of theirs, does make the Gospel a mere piece of
Nonsense: for the Gospel tells us, that Repentance and Remission of Sins should
be preached in Christ's Name to all Nations, Luke 24.47. And that God does
command all Men every where to repent, Acts 17.30. But all this the
Predestinarian Doctrine opposes as an impossible Thing, a useless Precept: for
it declares that none of them whom God has decreed to reprobate, can repent,
and become good Men; for he has decreed, they say, that those Men shall be
Sinners, that so he may bring on them in a way of Justice, that eternal Death
to which he has foreappointed and designed them: all which, say they, no
Endeavors sof theirs can prevent; for the most profound Repentance which they
can perform, will never reverse what God has thus doomed them to by an eternal
and irreversible Decree. Which Doctrines are a plain Contradiction to that
express Command of God that all should repent.

They have been also the dreadful Occasion of all that Horror and Despair which
has been found in a great Number of men who have been afflicted with doubting
and troubled Minds, and has occasioned others to entertain in themselves very
hard Thoughts of God: for such Notions as these do make God seem worse to some
Men than the Devil; for the Devil they know can force no Man to sin, he can
only tempt, and endeavor to persuade: but God, according to these Notions of
the Predestinarians, does force and compel Men to sin by an absolute Decree,
that so the Damnation he has designed them to, may appear more Just. All which
are the occasion of very hard and evil Thoughts concerning God in those, who
under Despair are apt to think themselves of the Number of those whom he thus
has reprobated: which evil and wicked Surmises concerning God had for ever been
prevented, had not these Doctrines been taught in the World.

On the contrary it is evident beyond Contradiction, that the opposite Doctrine
does much more advance God's Honor, because it teaches that it is possible for
all Men to repent and become good Men: and herein, says Christ, is my Father
glorified, that ye bear much Fruit, John 15.8. It likewise tends more to
advance the Interest of Religion, which consists in every Man's being persuaded
to live a sober, righteous and godly Life; and it is also a Doctrine which is
every way more truly conducive to the good of Souls, because it declares that
all Men may be happy if they will but diligently improve that Talent of Grace
that God has given them, in order to the working out of their own Salvation,
and the making their own Calling and Election sure.

It Is plain to every common Man's Understanding, that those Doctrines which
teach according to the Scriptures, that God is not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. That he would have
all Men to be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. That
the Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal, 1 Cor.
12.7. And that by the Improvement of this their Talent they may make themselves
fit to enter into their Master's Joy: it is evident, I say, that such Doctrines
as these do noways, tend to God's Dishonor, nor are they injurious to the true
Interest of Religion, nor do they any ways endanger the Good of Souls. Nor can
any thing be more certain than this, that these, and none but these Doctrines,
can yield true Comfort to them, that on the account of Sin are in
Disconsolation, because they everywhere and always declare it to be the Will of
God, that if the Wicked will turn away from hsi Wickedness that he has
committed: and do that which is lawful and right, he shall save his Soul alive:
all his Transgressions tha he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto
him, in his Righteousness that he has done he shall live, Ezekiel. 18.21 to 28.

Were the Reprobatarian Doctrine true, then all that profess it are bound to
live up to those Payticulars that are naturally consequent thereupon; and then
it must sollow of course, that if all the Actions of Men are fore-determined by
God's Decree, and Sin be necessitated in some, as well as Virtue is in others,
that then Wickedness ought not to be looked upon as more criminal in a
Reprobate than Thirst or Hunger: for what is unavoidable, may be a Man's
Infelicity in some Cases, but not his Sin; for can it be a Crime in any one to
do that which it is the Will of God he shall do? If God have decreed from
Eternity that some Men shall sin unavoidably, that so his Design of reprobating
them may not prove uneffectual; then those that act evil things, are not to be
charged with Disobedience, because they act, some say, as God designs they
should act, and by consequence, according to these Notions, they are entirely
obedient to the Will of their Maker. Wherefore those that pretend to believe
these Doctrines, ought not to blame and censure, and punish them for
Wickedness, but say rather, that since God has decreed from Eternity whatsoever
shall come to pass in time, that these cannot avoid so doing; and therefore
it is the Duty of all to rest satisfied under the unavoidable Execution of the
Divine Decrees of God. Now thus to do would be for Men to live up to the Tenure
of those Reprobatarian Doctrines of eternal Predestination which they profess
to believe: but yet we don't see this done, which shows that these Dictates of
the Spirit of Error are overpowered by those natural Notions of Truth
implanted in the Minds of the Predestinarians. Experience shows that they all
daily cry out against the Wickedness of Mankind as a thing unsufferable among
humane Beings, and they do all that lies in their Power to bring those to
Punishment who do such things as are destructive to the general or common Good
of Men; which sufficiently demonstrates, that the Predestinarian Faith which
they outwardly profess, is undoubtedly contrary to that Divine Law which God by
Nature has written in the Heart of Man, and for this reason these Men by their
Actions do plainly confute the Faith which they profess; for by this they
declare unto the World, that they do not believe that Men are wicked by
necessity from God, for then 'twould be inhumane to punish them: but this no
Man believes, for they as well as we are verily persuaded that the Punishment
of the Wicked is just and necessary, that so by their Example others may be
deterred from committing the like Crimes; which shows that all Men do naturally
believe that Sin may be avoided; and if Sin, which is the Cause of Damnation,
may be avoided, then Damnation, which is only the Effect of Sin, may be avoided
too: which proves that the Predestinarian Notion of Reprobation is contrary to
the natural, as well as to the revealed Law of God, and for that reason ought
to be rejected by all Man, especially by them whose Business it is to persuade
all Men to be reconciled unto God, which they can never do, unless htey declare
that it is possible for all to repent.

Of ELECTION.
The Predestinarians tell us, that God by an eternal Decree has elected or
chosen to make some particular Persons happy in a Life eternal, and that none
shall be saved but those whom he has thus predestined unto Glory; in which
Predestination, they say no respect was had to any Act of Obedience to be
performed on Man's Part; for according to these Men, Obedience is only the
fruit of their Election, or what necessarily does follow thereupon, and not the
Means which makes Men fit for Election or Choice of God. But this is an Error,
because contrary to plain Scripture, or the revealed Law of our Maker.

For God has therein fully assured us, that our being in favor with him
depends upon our doing well, (see Genesis 4.7.) that is to say, upon our well
using those Talents he has entrusted us with, or upon our doing those things
that his Word and Law have commanded: and therefore it is that we are bid to
work out our own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, for it is God that works
in us to will and to do, Phil. 2.12. The meaning is, that God has made us
capable of doing his Will, in order to make us fit Objects for his Love and
Favor; and that therefore we ought to work according as he has enabled us,
that by so doing we may make our Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10, which
will not be, unless our own diligent Endeavors do concur with the Assistance
of God: and therefore it is that Men are exhorted not to receive the Grace of
God in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1.

It Is plain that God is no Respecter of Persons, but that in every Nation he
that fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted with him, Acts 10.35.
And accordingly a good and virtuous Life is every where made the necessary
Condition of Salvation: Obey my Voice, says God, and then I will be your God,
and ye shall be my People, Jer. 7.23. If thou will enter into Life, says
Christ, keep the Commandments, Mat. 19.17. For as the Psalmist has declared, He
(that is God) has set apart the Man that is godly for himself, Psalm. 4.3. In
which Words a plain Reason is given why God makes one Man happy, and not
another, it is the Man that is godly that he sets apart for this Purpose. Hence
Christ is said to be the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him,
Heb. 5.9. It Is only by Obedience that we obtain an Interest in the saving
Redemption of Christ; and accordingly his Gospel does declare, that if through
the Spirit (which is given to every Man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7.) we do
mortify the Deeds of the Body, we shall live, Romans 8.13. If a Man purge himself
from these, he shall be a Vessel unto Honor, sanctified and meet for the
Master's use, 2 Timothy 2.21.

Thus it is evident, that in God's Choosing or Electing he only has respect to
them, who by the due Use and Improvement of their common Talent, have made
themselves fit for those Joys which he has promised to them that will heartily
and sincerely serve him; the Favors of Election or Choosing to the Happiness
of Salvation, are conferred on none but those that have a Right to the Tree of
Life, Rev. 22.14. by Virtue of those Conditional Promises which God out of his
free Grace and Mercy has made to Men. His Mercy is only on them that fear him
throughout all Generations, Luke 1.50. If we confess our Sins (so as to forsake
them) he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, (according to his
Promise) and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. Hence it is
plain that all the well-grounded Hope that Men can have in God's Mercy, does
wholly depend upon the Assurance of their having to the utmost of their Power
performed those Conditions, upon the Performance of which God has promised to
be merciful to Mankind.

It plainly appears from the most general Scope of the Scriptures, that God in
his Electing and Choosing is no Respecter of Persons, but of Qualifications:
neither does he reprobate any Man merely because he will do so, but because
they do wilfully commit Sin and Wickedness. That God decrees to elect some, and
reprobate others, is a most undoubted Truth; and these his Decrees are
unalterable in themselves, but yet conditional in respect of them on whom they
take place, it being the standing Law of Heaven, that if Men live after the
Felsh, they shall die, or that Damnation shall be inflicted in case Men will
commit Sin; but if through the Spirit they mortify the Deeds of the Body, they
shall live, Romans 8.13. Here the Terms and Conditions of Happiness or Misery are
plainly expressed; these are the Reasons of God's different way of dealing with
Mankind; it is for this Reason that he loves one Man, and hates another, that is
to say, he always loves good Men, and hates the Wicked, If thou do well,
says he to Cain, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well, Sin
lies at thy Door, Genesis 4.7. These things well considered, are a clear Proof
that the Calvinist Notion concerning Election is an Error, and that the
contrary Doctrine is the undoubted Truth of God.

For certain I am, that no Man can prove it a Dishonor to God, to say, that in
his Electing or Choosing he does not respect the mere Person of any Man, but
the fitness or meetness of Men for the Master's Use; and that in every Nation
he that fears God and works Righteousness, is accepted with him: or that he
sets apart the Man that is Godly for himself. Neither is the Advancement of
Religion any ways hindered by declaring, that God would have all Men to be
saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth; and that all Men may be saved, if
they will but give diligence to make their own Calling and Election sure, and
be careful not to grieve the Holy Spirit; or in other Words, not to receive the
Grace of God in vain. Nor can it be any ways injurious to the Good of Souls to
tell Men, as Christ has done, that if they will enter into Life, they must
keep the Commandments: and that God commands all Men every where to repent; and
having repented, to be steadfast and unmovable in their Resolutions of keeping
God's Commands for the future; and that they study how to abound more and more
in the Work of the Lord, forasmuch as they know that their Labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.

This Doctrine is much more suitable to the great End and Design of the Gospel
(which was to advance among Men the Practice of true Piety and Godliness) than
the contrary Doctrine, which teaches that Virtue and Piety do not recommend us
to God, who it is said does first decree to save, and then does irresistibly
sanctify; Righteousness not being, as the Predestinarians say, the Means of
Men's being elected or chosen, but that Election is the Means or Cause of their
being made righteous by God. If Men are elected, say they, God will then
sanctify them without their own Endeavors, that so the Glory thereof may
redound wholly to himself; which they think could not be, should God make Men
capable of doing any thing toward the saving of themselves.

So that the Result of this Opinion is, tht if God have elected any Man, he
shall (but not by any Endeavor of his own) be made a good Man before he dies;
and that if he be not elected, all the Endeavors he can use shall never
reverse that Decree, to the saving of his Soul: which plainly is no other than
a Doctrine proper to encourage a licentious Carelessness in great numbers of
unthinking Men, and take others off from that holy Care and Caution which is
absolutely necessary to the Attainment of Life eternal: and doubtless this is
that which encourages the looser Sort who are of this Persuasion, to do many
unjustifiable things, upon Presumption that no Sin can damn the Elect. And it is
worth observing here, that all do think themselves among the Number of the
Elect, that do believe this Doctrine; and this makes great Numbers of them so
remiss and careless as they are, for they are persuaded that before they die
God will some way or other without their own Endeavors irresistibly sanctify
them: hence it is that so many of them go on with so much Confidence and
Comfort in a Course of Wickedness, than which nothing can be more unsafe and
unsecure.

Of Universal Redemption.
The Predestinarians teach, that as God did not intend the Salvation of all
Men, so neither did Christ die for all, so as to put all Men into a Capacity of
obtaining Life eternal: but this Notion is contrary to Scripture, and for that
Reason is undoubtedly false.

The Scripture tells us plainly that the Redemption by Jesus Christ was
universal, that he gave his Life a Ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. that by the
Grace of God he tasted Death for every Man, Heb. 2.9. that he is the
Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2.2. that as in Adam all
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.22. that as by the
Offense of one Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation, so by the
Righteousness of one the free Gift came upon all Men to Justification of Life,
Romans 5.18. And it is evident that the Design of God in his sending of Christ was
the Salvation of all; for God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him, should not perish but have
everlasting Life, Joh. 3.16. and therefore it is said that to every one is given
Grace, according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4.7. and that the
Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared unto all Men, Tit. 2.11. that
he is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. that he would have all Men to be saved, and come to the
Knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4.

Besides all this we find the Angel thus speaking to the Shepherds, Fear not,
says he, for behold I bring you good Tidings of great Joy, which shall be unto
all People; for unto you is born this Day in the City of David, a Savior,
which is Christ the Lord, Luke 2.10, 11. And the Psalmist tells us, that the
Lord is good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his Works, psalm.
145.9. For which Reason he proclaims himself to be the Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth, Exodus 34.6. Which
universal Declarations of his Goodness do make it most evident, that the saving
Intentions of God in Jesus Christ were extended to the whole World, God having
thereby put all Men into a Capacity of being made Happy, if they will but do on
their Part what he has commanded, and what he for the Sake of Christ has made
them able to perform; and none can miss of Salvation but by their own wilful
Neglect: If they will not come to Christ that they may have Life, the Fault is
their own: How shall we escape, says the Apostle, if we neglect so great
Salvation? Heb. 2.3.

Some I know are so senseless as to imagine that their Notion of particular Grace
does magnify, and more exalt the Glory of God's free Grace, than it would be
exalted, were the free Grace of God universally extended to all Men. But the
Reason of every common Man will serve to confute this; for every one knows that
he who contributes toward the making a thousand Persons happy, is much more
good and gracious than he who is kind only to two or three: the Grace of God is
never a whit the less free for its being extended unto all; but as for the
Riches of the free Grace of God there is no Comparison to be made between that
which is general and which is particular; for the more universally the Grace is
extended, the more rich in all Respects it is: which shows that the
Predestinarian Notion of God's intending to be gracious, through Jesus Christ,
but to a few Men, to the utter Exclusion of all the rest, does but tend to
eclipse the Glory of the free and undeserved Grace of God; and that which does
so, must needs be an Error.

It Is evident likewise that this Doctrine is an Error, from the Practice of
those Preachers that profess it; for they often declare that God has committed
unto them the Word of Reconciliation, and therefore as Ambassadors for Christ
they pray the People in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God, that so their
former Trespasses may not be imputed unto them, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. For, say
they, as God has commanded all Men every where to repent, Acts 17.30. so we
have a Commission to preach Repentance and Remission of Sins to all Nations in
the Name of Christ, Luke 24.47. but at the same time you never hear them say,
Beloved, don't think that by this we preach that cursed Doctrine of Universal
Redemption by Christ, as if by what he has done for Mankind all were put into a
new Capacity of obtaining Life eternal: no, we declare the contrary, that tho
by us God does command all Men every where to repent, yet by his eternal Decree
he has made it impossible for all those to repent which are not first elected:
we may exhort you all to repent indeed, because we don't know who are elected,
and who are not; but if there be none of the Elect among you, our Exhortations
will all be in vain; for the Non-elect cannot come to Christ, that they may
have Life, tho he bids all come that are weary and heavy-laden, that they may
find Rest to their Souls, Mat. 11.29. No Man, I say, ever heard a
Predestinarian Preacher speak thus; but thus they ought to speak, were their
Practice answerable to the Principles which they hold: but their not doing so
evidently shows that this Doctrine is repugnant to the true Office and Duty of
a Minister, and for that very Reason ought by all Men to be rejected as an
Error.

Of FREE WILL.
The Predestinarians teach that God has not given unto Man such a Freedom and
Power of Will, as does enable him either to do or not to do what he requires of
him: for they say, that as one part of Men are reprobated, and the other are
elected, so he will unavoidably make them righteous whom he decrees to save,
and as unavoidably make them wicked whom he decrees to damn; for as God has
decreed the End of Men, whether it be Salvation or Damnation, so he has decreed
the Means that shall bring them thereunto: these things, say they, are not left
to their own Choice, neither is it in their own Power to be that which God has
not absolutely determined them to. But this Notion is contrary also to
Scripture and Reason, and is therefore an Error.

The general Importance of the Scriptures does make it evident, that Man is a
Being to whom God has given such Powers as do sufficiently enable him either to
do the Will of God, or else to disobey it: and therefore we are exhorted to
give all Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. and to
work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. and to labor to
enter into that Rest, Heb. 4.11. and to cleanse our selves from all Filthiness
of Flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. and to cast away from us all our
Transgressions, and make us new Hearts and new Spirits, Ezekiel. 18.31. And to the
same purpose St. James presses those to whom he wrote, saying, Cleanse your
Hands ye Sinners, and purify your Hearts ye double-minded, Jam. 4.8. All which
do clearly imply that God has given Men a Power to do his Will, else he would
not exhort them to do it as we see he has done; and if he exhorts all Men to do
this, and yet they all do not do it, as we see they do not, this is a plain
Proof on the other hand, that they have a Power to disobey.

And indeed the Divine Law of God is a clear and demonstrative Proof that the
Will of Man is free; for it would be in vain to oblige Men by a Law to do one
thing, and not to do another, if there were a natural Necessity that Men must
do these things. As there is no place then, so neither is there any need of an
Obligation, where there is no Liberty nor Power of Choice; but where Beings
have a Power to act two different ways, in such a Case it is proper to give
such Beings a Law to tie them up, or oblige them to act only one way: and for
this Reason it is that among all the Creatures found in this lower World, Men
alone are bound to the Observation of Laws, because no Creature beside is
endowed with Freedom of Will, and Liberty of Choice.

Nothing doubtless can be more unreasonable than to believe that God should
give a Law to Mankind, and expressly promise Rewards to them that will obey on
the one hand, and on the other hand threaten Punishments to them that disobey,
and yet believe withal, that he has eternally decreed whatsoever shall come to
pass, so that it is not in the Power either of the Righteous or the Wicked to
do otherwise than we see they do; or in other Words, that it is not in the
Power of some to disobey so far as to damn themselves, nor in the Power of
others to obey so far as is effectual for Salvation: for were it so that Men
had no liberty or freedom of Choice in these Matters, there then would need no
Law to forbid Men to do what is impossible they should do, or command the doing
of that, which they unavoidably must do. Wherefore God's giving unto Man a Law,
is a plain Demonstration that there is in him a Freedom of Will.

Hence the Lord God thus speaks unto Israel, See, I have set before thee Life
and Death, Good and Evil. In that I command thee this Day to love the Lord thy
God, to walk in his Ways, and to keep his Commandments, and his Statutes, and
his Judgments, that thou may live -- but if thine Heart turn away, so that
thou will not bear -- I do denounce unto you this Day, that ye shall surely
perish. And he adds -- I have set before you Life and Death, Blessing and
Cursing; therefore choose Life, that both thou and thy Seed may live, Deuteronomy.
30.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. From which Words we may infer safely, that God has laid
upon Man no absolute Necessity of being either happy or miserable, but he deals
with them as with Persons who have from him a Power to obey or disobey, as
themselves (by the Power of those Faculties they have from him) do best please:
only he tells them what the Consequences either of Obedience or Disobedience
will be, that Life shall be the Reward of the one, and Death of the other; and
withal, that his Desire and Will is that they should choose Life, and not
Death. The Words of David unto Solomon do also plainly imply this free Agency
of Man; And thou Solomon my Son, says he, know thou the God of thy Father, and
serve him with a perfect Heart, and willing Mind -- If thou seek him, he will
be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. as do likewise the Words of the Prophet Azariah unto Asa; And he
said unto him, Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin, The Lord is with
you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if
ye forsake him, he will forsake you, 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

And we find accordingly that the Scriptures do most abundantly declare that
both Virtue and Vice are the Effect of our own free Choice: and for this Reason
we are commanded not to envy the Oppressor, and that we should choose none of
his ways, Prove. 3.31. And therefore Mary is said to have chosen the good Part,
which should never be taken from her, Luke 10.42. And it is also written, Thus
says the Lord unto the Eunuchs, that -- choose the things that please me -- I
will give them an everlasting Name, Isa. 56.4, 5. On the other hand it is said,
They did Evil before mine Eyes, and chose that wherein I delighted not, Isa.
65.12. They have chosen their own Ways, and their Soul delights in their
Abominations, Isa. 66.3. Ye will not come to me, that ye might have Life, Joh.
5.40. My People would not hearken unto my Voice, and Israel would none of me;
so I gave them up to their own Hearts Lust, Psalm. 81.11, 12. They would none of
my Counsel, they despised all my Reproof, Prove. 1.30. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
how often would I have gathered thee as an Hen gathers her Chickens, and ye
would not? Mat. 23.37. All which wholly lays the Guilt. of Sin upon the
Sinner's Wilfulness; they chose to do ill, when they might have chosen to do
well, as others did by virtue of those Powers which God had given them.

Hence it is said that to whom ye yield your selves Servants to obey, his
Servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be of Sin unto Death, or of
Obedience unto Righteousness, Romans 6.16. Which plainly implies that it is our
own voluntary Act that makes us Servants either to God or the Devil: as for God
it is plain that he necessitates no Man to serve him; he gives to all Men a
Power to obey his Will, but he will not force them to obey whether they will or
no; he could force them to do so if he pleased, but his infinite Wisdom does
not think it fit: yea, should he do so, he would then deprive them of the
Advantage of those Rewards which his Goodness has been pleased to promise to
that true Love, which only can be manifested by a free and unconstrained
Obedience. But as for the Devil, his Power does not extend so far as to force
any Man to do wickedly; he can tempt indeed, but he cannot necessitate: for God
is faithful, and will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able, 1
Cor. 10.13. Do but resist him with that Ability that God has given thee, and he
will fly from thee, Jam. 4.7. Men do not sin for want of Power to do otherwise,
but because they will not use the Power that God has given them. If God will
not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, then it is our willingly
yielding to the Devil when we had Power to resist, that makes us the Subjects
and Slaves of Sin.

It Is manifest that every Man has a Power to do that which God has made him
able to do; and God does not require more of any Man. If there be a willing
Mind, says the Scripture, it is accepted according to what a Man has, and not
according to what he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. He that improved his two Talents
was kindly accepted, as well as he that did improve his five Talents; see Mat.
25. Be sure to make the best Use that thou can of the Powers that thou have;
and then if thy present Powers are not sufficient to enable thee to make thy
own Calling and Election sure, God will not sail at last to give thee that
Power that is sufficient: for he has made a Promise unto Men by the Mouth of
our Blessed Lord, that more Grace shall be given to them that make a good Use
of the Grace they have; Unto every one that has shall be given, says he, and
he shall have abundance; but from him that has not, shall be taken away even
that which he has: See Mat. 25.29.

If the general Current of the Scriptures be considered, it will appear
evident, that if Men make that use they ought of the Talent of Common Grace, or
those general Indowments of Reason and Humanity, which all but Idiots do
receive in some Measure from the Bounty and Goodness of God to them, he will be
merciful in a greater Measure, by giving them such other Graces as shall fully
enable them to work out their own Salvation: but from them that will not make
that use they ought of Common Grace, he will withhold his Special Grace, or
that Grace that is saving. And in so doing God is not to be blamed: For why
should the true Riches be committed to his Trust, that already has made a wrong
Use of the unrighteous Mammon? Hence then it is evident, that by nature, which
is from God, Men are able to do that, which God has promised to bless with
saving or supernatural Grace or Power.

There is, I know, a great Outcry made against the Doctrine of Free Will, as
if the Doctrine which asserts that Men have a Power from God, either to do or
disobey his Will, were dishonorable to God, and did make Man's Strength
greater than that of his Maker. But why should it be dishonorable to God to
make Man a free Agent? All confess he made Adam so, and why should it be a
Dishonor to him to say he has made us so too? As he certainly has, for we have
as full a Power now to obey or not obey the Law of the second Covenant, which
requires only Sincerity, as Adam had to obey or disobey the first Covenant,
which did require sinless Obedience: and as for the Dishonor which some think
is reflected on God, by saying that his Creatures have an Ability to disobey
his Will, it will all vanish, if we consider that he may suffer this if he
pleases, since he has a Right to do what he will with his own; and besides, the
Superiority of his Power above Man's Power will sufficiently appear at length
in that everlasting Punishment which he will eternally inflict on them that
disobey. He may suffer Men to walk in their own Ways, Acts 14.16. that he may
prove them, as he did Israel, to know what is in their Heart; that he may do
them good at their latter End: see Deuteronomy. 8.2, 16. But they will have but little
Cause to brag of their being able to resist him in this the time of their
Probation, when for their so doing they shall be condemned to dwell in
everlasting Burnings.

From what has been said hitherto, I think it is evident, that it is in every
Man's Power to be as good, as the Use of those Natural Endowments which God has
bestowed on every reasonable Man will admit of: for by the Use of the natural
Endowment of five Talents, he may attain to eminent Degrees of Virtue and
Perfection; and by the Use of the natural Endowment of two Talents, he may so
far express Eaithfulness in the Trust committed to him, as to obtain the Favor
of a saving Reward from his Lord, tho in an inferior Degreee: for as the
common Gifts of Men differ, so will the Rewards promised be Proportional only
to the Improvement, which the Gift they have does enable them to make: He that
well improved his five Talents, was made Ruler over five Cities; and he that
improved the two that were given him, was made Ruler over two Cities; and he
that had one Talent given him, would have been made Ruler over one City, had he
improved it as the others did. Hence the Reason of the different Degrees of
Virtue among very good Men is evident. Who makes thee to differ? is a
Scripture-question. I answer, it is God that makes Men to differ, since that by
Nature he endows one Man with better Abilities than another: but no Man has
reason to complain of this, so long as he gives to every Man as much as will
entitle him to an Interest in his saving Grace, if he improve it, as the Gift
it self does enable him to do.

It is likewise evident from what has been said, that it is in every Man's Power
to be wicked so far as to be worthy of Damnation, tho some have not abilities
sufficient to be as wicked as others are: for as the Degrees of Virtue in Men
are limited by the preventing Grace of God, so also the Degrees of Vice in Men
are limited by his restraining Grace; and as a Man cannot be better than the
utmost Improvement of that Talent will admit of which is given him, so neither
can he be more wicked than the restraining Grace of God will permit or suffer.
But yet after all there is no necessity laid upon Man by God to be as bad as he
can be; neither has he laid upon Man a Necessity of being as good as he may be:
these are referred to his own Choice, and that Freedom of Will with which his
most wise Creator has endowed him. And of the Truth of this almost every one's
Experience and Conscience may fully convince him: for I believe there are very
few who will be so disingenuous as to affirm, that it was not any-ways possible
for them to have lived better and more holily than they have done, nor that it
was impossible for them to have forborne any of those evil things which they
know they have committed.

I will conclude this Head, by only asking the Predestinarians this Question;
Suppose all Men should believe (as they may do if they will) that God has given
them a Power to work out their own Salvation, provided they do work while an
Opportunity to work is given them, that is to say in the present time, or to
Day, for to Morrow their Lives may be taken away, and then all Opportunity is
for ever at an end: should all, I say, believe this, and should all according
to the Importance of this their Belief repent truly of their Sins, and by God's
Grace become holy, just and sober Men; what hurt would accrue hereby either to
the Glory of God, the Interest of Religion, or the Good of Souls? yea, they
themselves cannot press Men to the Duties of Repentance and Holiness, without
teaching the very Principles of them that do believe that the Will is free.

Of Falling from Grace.
The Predestinarian Doctrine in this Point is, that a Man who is once in a
State of saving Grace, can never fall from it, or can never be in danger of
Damnation by any Act of Sin which he shall afterward commit: but this is an
Error, because it is contrary to Scripture, which not only forewarns Men of the
Danger, but declares expressly, that righteous Men may become wicked, and die in
Sin; and it is also a Doctrine proper to give Men Peace and Comfort in a Course
of Wickedness, and for that Reason ought to be rejected by all good Men.

In the first place then, the Scripture plainly forewarns good Men of the
Danger; which shows that it is possible for good Men to fall from a State of
saving Grace. Beware, says the Scripture, lest ye also being led away with the
Error of the Wicked, fall from your own Stedfastness, 2 Pet. 3.17. Let us not
be weary in well-doing; for in due time we shall reap if we faint not, Gal.
6.9. And you that were alienated, and Enemies in your Minds by wicked Works,
yet now has he reconciled -- to present you blameless, if ye continue in the
Faith, grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the Hope of the Gospel,
Col. 1.21, 22, 23. If a Man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a Branch, and
is withered, Joh. 15.6. Now the Just shall live by Faith; but if any Man draw
back, my Soul shall have no Pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. Let him therefore that
thinks he stands (so fast as that no Sin shall move him) take heed lest he
fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. Ye did run well, says St. Paul to the Galatians, who did
hinder you that ye should not obey the Truth? Gal. 5.7.

Secondly, the Scripture expressly declares, that righteous Men may become
wicked, and die in their Sins: for it is said thus, that when the Righteous
turns away from his Righteousness, and commits Iniquity -- shall he live?
all the Righteousness he has done, shall not be mentioned; in his Trespass
that he has trespassed, and in his Sin that he has sinned, in them he shall
die, Ezekiel. 18.24. When a righteous Man turns away from his Righteousness, and
commits Iniquity, and dies in them, for his Iniquity that he has done he
shall die, Ezekiel. 18.26. And agreeable hereunto are the Words of David to his
Son Solomon; And thou Solomon my Son, says he, know thou the God of thy
Father, and serve him with a perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind: if thou
seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee
off for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. It is impossible, says the Author to the Hebrews,
for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and
were made Partakers of the holy Ghost, and the Powers of the World to come, if
they shall fall away, to renew them again to Repentance, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. Hence
it is said of the younger Widows that were wanton, that they have Damnation,
because they have cast off their first Faith, 1 Timothy 5.12.

Now these and suchlike Scripture-Evidences are a plain and undeniable Proof
that righteous Men may fall from a State of Salvation, and die in their Sins;
and therefore the Doctrine which asserts the contrary, is certainly an Error.

Yea, it is a foul Error, because it gives Encouragement to Sin and Wickedness,
since it asserts that no Sin can provoke God to withdraw his saving Grace from
them that are once Saints: but such Presumption has doubtless ruined more Souls
than deep Despair; for how are bad Men (as there are many of this Persuasion as
well as of others) hereby encouraged to do ill things, when they shall be
persuaded that no Sin can deprive them of God's Favor who are once enrolled in
the Book of Life? And it is evident that the Generality of both Good and Bad who
believe this Doctrine, are so foolish as to think that they are all certainly
of this Number, merely because they profess themselves Predestinarians; and
therefore they comfort up themselves with this Consideration, that tho they are
guilty of some gross Sins, yet their Salvation is still safe, because their
Names are written, as they think, in the Book of Life: than which no Doctrine
in the World can be more proper to encourage Wickedness, nor can any thing be
more contrary to Scripture, which expressly affirms thus, Whosoever sins
against me, him will I blot out of my Book, Exodus 32.33. Which shows that a Man
may be in God's Book, and yet he may afterward commit such Sins as shall blot
him out of it.

It Is not to be supposed that Men will much boggle at any Matter of worldly
Advantage, when they are really persuaded that good Works are not concerned in
Justification: for they think that Justification is only the Fruit of Election,
and not the Fruit of Obedience to God's Law; and that being elected, they are
by Consequence justified before they are sanctified, or in a State of Grace
before they are converted unto God; none being converted, they say, but those
who are before in God's Love, by virtue of his Decree of eternal Election; and
that after Conversion, which does only manifest their being elected, if they do
happen to sin, and fall very foully, as David did, yet God still loves them as
much under this their Relapse as he did before their first Conversion: and tho
such Sins may bring upon them temporal Miseries, yet they shall never deprive
them of eternal Glory; for they shall not die, till by an unresistible Power
God has raised them up again by Repentance. They confess they may fall for a
time, but their Fall shall not be final, nor end in Death eternal.

Men, I say, that believe all this, and believe withal that they themselves are
of the Number of these elected Ones, as great Numbers do who have no other
ground for their so doing but Self-confidence, and an erroneous Persuasion that
so it is; these, I say, have a great deal of Encouragement not to boggle at
such Opportunities and Actions, as others who really believe the contrary, dare
not either take or do, for fear lest God should cut them off in their Sins, and
damn their Souls; it is plain that such have not those Advantages of doing ill
afforded them from their Faith as the others have, because they dare not do an
ill thing, lest they should lose the Favor of God: they may sin by surprise,
but they dare not sin presumptuously. But the other believes that there is no
eternal Danger in it, because those whom God once loves, he loves to the end;
and he will not so see Sin in his Elect as to damn them for it: and this they
call a Doctrine full of Comfort and Consolation; and indeed it does in this
respect equal that of the Papist; for as a Papist's Sins do not much terrify
him, because he believes the Priest can forgive him upon Confession, so neither
can the other's, because he believes God will not take away his Life till he
has brought him to Repentance.

That there are wicked Men among those who believe contrary to these
Predestinarian Doctrines, I readily grant: but they have no Encouragement to be
wicked from any natural Consequences that may be drawn from the Doctrines they
believe; they are plainly self-condemned by their own Principles in all the
Evils which they do allow themselves in Some, I know, endeavor to persuade the
World that the Doctrine of Free Will does encourage Men to Wickedness, because
they say it makes many think that if God has given Men a Power to repent when
they will, that therefore they may sin as long as they please, and repent at
last: but in this they are strangely mistaken; for tho we teach that Men who
have not hardened their own Hearts by many repeated Acts of wilful and malicious
sins against God, may repent if they please at any time, yet we don't teach
that Men can live as long as they please; and we know that when Life ceases,
then the Opportunity. of Repentance ceases also. God that promises Pardon
whenever we sincerely repent, has not promised us a To morrow to repent in; and
no Man who rightly believes that there is in Man a Free Will, will be so mad to
say, I will yet sin on one Week longer, and then repent, when for ought he
knows his Death may come this very Day, and prevent his so repenting.

Thus it is plain that no Free-willer, who truly understands the Nature of the
Doctrine which he professes, can sin without being sensible of the Danger of
Damnation; whereas the opposite Persuasion plainly infers, that Disobedience
can never make void the Decree of God to save them that are elect, or in a
State of Salvation, even in spite of their own resistance: so that it is evident
a Predestinarian may sin with some Confidence and Comfort, but the Free-willer
always sins under great Discouragement from his own Principles, there being in
his Faith nothing that can yield him any Security in his so doing. I will
conclude this Point by asking the Predestinarians this one Question, as I
before have done under some of the other Heads; Suppose all Mankind that
believe the Gospel, and endeavor to live up to it, should be persuaded that
it is possible for those that are in a State of saving Grace to fall from it,
and should they by virtue of this Persuasion be careful, through the Divine
Assistance, not to fall from their own Stedfastness, 2 Pet. 3. 17. nor fail of
the Grace of God, Heb. 12.15. and so live good and pious Lives; what hurt would
this do either to the Interest of Religion, or the Good of Souls? Where is the
Impiety or Perniciousness of such a Faith and Practice, that the
Predestinarians should so long and so loudly exclaim against it? I am sure it is
a Faith that all truly good Men practice, and which he Adversaries do
themselves teach in all their Exhortations to a virtuous and godly Way of
living.

Of the Period of Humane Life.
The Predestinarians teach likewise, that the Period of humane Life is
unchangeably fixed by God, so that no Man can either live longer, or die sooner
than he does: but this is also an Unscriptural Doctrine, as well as
unreasonable, and therefore an Error.

The Scriptures do plainly imply that by Wickedness Men may cut their Lives
short, and that by Righteousness Men's Lives may be prolonged. Thus it is said,
The Fear of the Lord prolongeth Days; but the Years of the Wicked shall be
shortened, Prove. 10.27. Again, as Righteousness tends to Life, so he that
pursues Evil, pursues it to his own Death, Prove. 11.19. Again, it is said,
Evil Doers shall be cut off; but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall
inherit the Earth, Psalm. 37.9. Besides these Testimonies, it is evident, that in
many Places of Scripture Wickedness is threatened with a short Life: thus it is
said, Bloody and deceitful Men shall not live out half their Days, Psalm. 55.28.
Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish; for why should thou die
before thy time? Eccles. 7.17. LOng Life is also promised to Goodness and
Virtue, as thus: My Son, forget nto my Law, but let thine Heart keep my
Commandments: for length of Days and long Life and Peace shall they add unto
thee, Prove. 3.1, 2. Because he has set his Love upon me, therefore I will
deliver him -- with long Life will I satisfy him, and show him my Salvation,
Psalm. 91.14, 16. Happy is the Man that finds Wisdom, and the Man that gets
Understanding -- she is more precious than Rubies; and all things that thou
can desire are not to be compared unto her: length of Days is in her right
Hand, and in her left Hand Riches and Honor, Prove. 3.13, 15, 16. Hear, O my
Son, and receive my Sayings, and the Years of thy Life shall be many, Prove.
4.10. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy Days may be long in the Land,
Exodus 20.12. Thus you see the Scriptures do plainly confute this foolish Notion.

And as the Scriptures confute it, so the universal Voice of Nature is against
it, or that which we call the Law of Self-preservation; and indeed 'twould be
utterly in vain to make Laws to punish common Murders, yea and King-killers
too, with Death, if 'twere not possible for those that are so killed to live
any longer: and to say that a Man that is executed upon a Gibbet for any Crime,
should have died that very Moment, had he not done those things that brought
him to the Gallows, is perfect Nonsense; and yet this must have been, if the
Period of every Man's Life were so irrevocably fixed, that he could neither
live longer nor die sooner than he does. Besides, this Doctrine has been of
pernicious Consequence to many, who in Sickness out of a false Persuasion that
they should not die before their time, as they call it, have neglected to seek
the Means which by God are appointed to heal the destructive Infirmities of
Nature; and so they have died before they attained to that extent of Days which
God has allowed unto Mankind, even that Period which ends with old Age, in
which through a natural Decay of Strength we are rendered unable any longer to
subsist.

And thus having gone through what I did intend to say on these several Heads,
I shall conclude by only adding, that the Reason of my making this public to
the World is not out of ill will to any Man's Person who does profess these
Doctrines, but out of a Desire to convince them all of their Error: and that I
may express that sincere Love and just Esteem which I bear to many of this
Persuasion, who in the Belief of so ill a Faith do yet live a sober good Life;
hoping that hereby I may do some good to them for whom I have so great a
Kindness, by thus endeavoring to persuade them not to trust on such an
unsecure Foundation as is that of the Doctrine herein confuted. Besides all
which it may possibly be that hereby diverse contending Parties may be induced
to a more easy Reconciliation as to the Matters in difference between them; by
which means the Peace and Unity of this Church may be advanced, which at this
time is so necessary in order to the making us better able to resist both the
public and private Enemies of this protestant Church and Nation.

FINIS.
Books printed for Richard Cumberland, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1696.
THe Government of the Thoughts, a presatory Discourse to the Government of the
Tongue. In Octavo. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Reformed Devotions, in Meditations, Hymns, and Petitions, for every Day in the
Week, and every Holiday in the Year. Divided into two Parts. The fourth
Edition. Price 2 s. 6 d.

A brief and plain Exposition of the Church-Catechism, composed for the Use of
a Private Shool; Erected and maintained at the Cost and Charges of several
Charitable Persons belonging to the New Church in Westminster. By Thomas
Jekyll, D. D. The second Edition. Price 9 d.

An Essay concerning friendly Reproof: explaining clearly the Nature,
Excellency, and Usefulness of it. Proving both from Reason and Revelation, that
it is an indispensable Duty: And laying down very plain Rules concerning the
properest Methods, both of giving and receiving it, etc. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Serious Reflections on Time and Eternity; with some other Subjects moral and
divine. To which is annexed an Appendix concerning the first Day of the Year,
how observed by the Jews, and may best be employed by a serious Christian. With
an Exhortation to Youth to prepare for Judgment. The third Edition certected
and very much enlarged. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Sacramental Discourses on several Texts, before and after the Lord's Supper;
with a Paraphrase upon the Lord's Prayer. The second Edition. Boty by Mr. John
Shower. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Batchelor's Directory: Being a Treatise of the Excellence of Marriage. Of
its Necessity, and the Means to live happy in it. Together with an Apology for
the Women against the Calumnies of the Men. The second Edition. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Horological Disquisitions concerning the Nature of Time, and the Reasons why
all Days, from Noon to Noon, are not alike twenty four Hours long. In which
appears the Impossibility of a Clock's being always kept exactly true to the
Sun. With Tables of Equation, and newer and better Rules than any yet extant;
how thereby precisely to adjust Royal Pendulums, and keep them afterward, as
near as possible to the apparent Time. With a Table of Pendulums, showing the
Beats that any Length makes in an Hour. A Work very necessary for all that
would understand the true Way of rightly managing Clocks and Watches. By John
Smith, C. M. To which are added, The best Rules for the Ordering and Use both
of the Quicksilver and Spirit Weather-glasses: And Mr. S. Watson's Rules for
adjusting a Clock by the Fixed Stars. Price 1 s.

An Essay, for Regulating of the Coin: Wherein also is set forth, first, How we
have lost that Import of Plate and Bullion we formerly had. Secondly, What is
become of the great Quantities of Money coined in the Reign of King Charles II.
and the preceding Reigns. Thirdly, The necessity there is at this Time for to
rectify the present Coin of the Kingdom. Fourthly, By what Methods the Church
of calling in the present Money, and bringing it to a designed Standard, may be
accomplished. Fifthly, Whether the Method proposed for the advancing of our
Money (and the Bullion of which it is made) be convenient or inconvenient for
the Trade of the Nation. The second Edition, with an additional Proposition. By
A.V. Price 6 d.

The Proposal for the Raising of the Silver Coin of England, from 60 Pence in
the Ounce to 75 Pence, considered; with the Consequences thereof. Price 3 d.

Lately Published,
A Scriptural Catechism: Or, The whole Duty of Man laid down in express Words
of Scripture, chiefly intended for the Benefit of the younger Sort. Divided
into two Parts: The first containing the chief Principles of our Christian
Belief. The second instructing us in our Duty to God and Man, according to the
Method observed in the Excellent Book, entitled, The whole Duty of Man. To
which is added, some private Devotions in express Words of Scripture: With
devour Collects for several Occasions. Recommended by the Right Reverend Father
in God, Edward Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

An Account of one Ann Jefferies, now Living in the County of Cornwall, who was
fed for six Months by a small sort of Airy People called Fairies. And of the
strange and wonderful Cures she performed with Salves and Medicines she
received from them, for which she never took one Penny of her Patients. In a
Letter from Moses Pit to the Right Reverend Father in God Dr. Edward Fowler,
Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

An Antidote against some Principal Errors of the Predestinarians. A Work
designed for the Information of the Common People.


