An ANSWER to the most Material Objections again the Bill for Restraining the
East India Wrought Silks, etc. Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Lords.
Obj. THAT Trade is in its Nature free, finds its own Channel, and best direct
its own Course.

Ans. All trading Nations have, and do at this Day put a restraint upon Trade
according as their Circumstances require: The French have many Years since, by
extraordinary Impositions, prohibited all our Woollen Manufactures, and by that
means have set them up in their own Country, to their great Advantage. The
Dutch, who are little more than Carriers of Goods from one Country to another,
yet do often prohibit, and for Instance, have by great Impositions prohibited
our Dyed Woollen Manufactures, by which means they have gained that profitable
Employment. The Venetians have prohibited our Cloth: The Sweeds and Danes the
like. The French have by severe Edicts prohibited all Indian Silks, Bengalls,
and Painted Calicoes; and a Multitude of Instances might be given of this
Nature. Our own Statute-Books are full of them; the Act of Navigation, and the
Act for Preventing the (...) of Wool have been, and are of infinite Benefit to
this Kingdom.

Obj. That the East India Trade is greatly beneficial to England.

Ans. If what the Writers for the East India Company have asserted be true,
That Three Parts of Four of the whole imported have been again exported to
Foreign Parts, or if what the late Author of the Essay on the East India Trade
asserts be true, That one half has been exported and has brought in 600000 l.
more than the prime Cost in India, then this Trade, in that Respect, may well
be accounted a profitable Trade to this Nation: But this, though often
asserted, has not been made appear in such manner as a Business of so great a
concern to the East India Company ought, or might have been; and we have great
Reason to believe that no such Quantities are, or ever were exported; But
supposing that great Quantities were exported, this Bill does not extend to
hinder that Trade.

Obj. That it must be granted that the East-India-Trade in General is
prejudicial to Europe, and if all by common Consent would agree to deal no more
with them, it would save the Expense of a great Treasure; but since that cannot
be done, it would be Egregious Folly in us to quit it.

Ans. The Reason why the East India Trade is prejudicial, is, because we draw
from thence nothing of solid use, Materials to support Luxury, Perishable
Commodities, and send thither Gold and Silver, which is there buried and never
returns, and the Burden of this bears hard only on the Countries which consume
them, as the Author of the Essay has very well observed, and from thence
inferred, That the French did wisely to prohibit. Now if this be true, as
undoubtedly it is, there cannot be greater or more cogent Arguments for the
passing this Bill, which is not to destroy the whole Trade, but only part of
that which their own Advocate acknowledge is very hard upon us, who are the
Consumers.

Obj. The Bill now proposed will be absolutely destructive to the East India
Trade, and should we quit the Hold we have in India, the Dutch will undoubtedly
ingrose the whole, which will be of dangerous Consequence.

Ans. That what by this Bill is to be restrained cannot be computed to above
one half of the home Consumption, and the whole is accounted, by the Author of
the Essay, but one half of the Trade; so that at most it will be lessened but
one Fourth Part, which by the Addition that may be made by bringing home
Raw-Silks, Cotton Yarn, etc. may in a great measure be made good; And why Three
Parts and more should not be carried on without the remainder, is very hard for
us to imagine. The French have prohibited all Wrought Silks, Bengalls and
Printed Callicoes; and yet they carry on their East India Trade: and in case
the East India Company, either through Poverty or any other Reasons, should not
be able or willing to carry it on, there are Merchants enough in England to
take it up: But if we cannot trade there without the Consent of the Dutch, who
are now very powerful and can bring together 40 strong Frigates (as the Author
of the Essay tells us) which is much more than we are able or can pretend to
do, they may as easily beat us out of the whole as of what will be still left.
Therefore the best way as we humbly conceive to secure us from those Fears, is,
to keep our Treasure to employ our own people, and increase our strength at
home.

Obj. The Company send great quantities of our Manufactures, and have in return
Wrought Silks.

Ans. The Company are obliged to send 100000 l. worth of our Manufactures, but
have not done it; for by Accounts taken out of the Custom-house Books, there
cannot be found 100000 l. worth in Two years last past, and not 20000 l. worth
last year, and how much of this has been really Exported and sent to India we
know not, but have great reason to believe that great Quantities were either
not shipped off, or not sent thither, but to Spain or other Parts where they take
in Bullion; for this is most certain that the Indians wear none, or so little
of our Manufactures as is not worth mentioning: It Is true that since the
Company have been obliged they have sent some Cloth, which they have sold in
the Gulf of Persia, and brought in returns Raw Silk, which have been wrought
up by the Indians in the Bay of Bengall into silks commonly called Persian
Taffeties, and the like, and from thence brought to England, whereas formerly
the Turkey Merchants used to supply the Persians with cloth, and brought in
Return Raw Silk, and might do so again if the Trade were turned into its old
Channel.

Obj. That no Country Manufactures are made so dear as the English, and if we
would have a Trade we must make our Manufactures cheaper.

Ans. To this we think we cannot give a better Answer than what Sir Jos. Child
gave in the like Case, which we find in the Preface of his Book called A
Discourse on Trade, his Words are these, I affirm and can prove be's mistaken
in Fact; for the Dutch, with whom we principally contend in Trade, give
generally more Wages for all their Manufactures, by at least Two Pence in the
Shilling, than the English. And adds farther, That wheresoever Wages are high
universally throughout the whole World, it is an infallible Evidence of the
Riches of that Country: and wherever Wages for Labor runs low, its a Proof of
the Poverty of that Place. That it is multitude of People and good Laws, such
as cause an increase of People, that principally enrich any Country: And if we
retrench (by Law) the Labor of our People, we drive them from us to other
Countries that give better Rates, and so the Dutch have dreined us of our
Seamen and Woollen Manufacturers: And we the the French of their Artificers and
Silk Manufacturers. And in Page 175. discoursing of the ways of enlarging our
Trade, among many others, he gives this Advice, That it is our Interest by
Example, and otherwise not distastful, above all kinds of Commodities to
prevent as much as may be the Importation of Foreign Manufactures, and to
encourage those Trades most that vend most of our Manufactures, and supply us
with Materials to be further Manufactured.

Obj. That we want Hands, not Manufactures in England, and Laws to compel the
Poor to work and therefore want more an Act to set up public Work houses to
force them that are not willing.

Answ. as the Case now slands, we have Hands more than sufficient to carry on
the Manufactures which the East India Trade leaves us; but if this Bill pass we
have great Reason to believe that in a very short time, Employment will be
found for a great number of those now out of work, and for some of the 1200000
which the Author of the Essay says, he thinks there are now receiving Alms in
this Kingdom. It were to be wished that there were Public Workhouses for the
Employment of the unwilling Poor; but before they can be employed in such
Places it will be necessary to know how the Manufactures can be disposed: And
with Submission, we humbly conceive there can be no better way found for their
vent than by restraining the Expense of these Foreign Commodities, and that
this will be greatly for the Interest of this Kingdom. To confirm us in this
Opinion, we have the Judgment of Sir Jos. Child, that great Champion for the
India Cause, who in the Preface of his Book of Trade says, That the Expense of
Foreign Commodities, especially Foreign Manufactures, is the worst Expense a
Nation can be inclinable to, and therefore ought to be prevented as much as
possible.

Obj. That it is the Interest of this Nation to have our own Wool cheap, and
cheaply manufactured, whereby we may be enabled to under-sell all Nations, and
discourage all People to set it up.

Ans. To do this we must bring down the Price of Wool and Workmanship
considerably, and then Provisions must fall in Proportion to answer the Wages,
or else the Poor cannot purchase them; and if so, Rents must abate, and when
this is done, other Nations who contend with us in our Manufactures must do
likewise, and after all this, the Indian that works for a Penny a Day, will be
able to undersell us all; so that after all our reducing, we are not like to
undersell all Nations, unless we should send our Wool to India to be
manufactur'd.

Obj. That the home Consumption is no Advantage to the Nation.

Ans. If a Penny saved be the surest Penny got, then the saving our Pence by
the Home Consumption of our own, instead of expending them for Foreign
Manufactures, must certainly be greatly for the Advantage of this Kingdom.

Obj. It Is the Interest of this Nation to wear East India Goods?, which are
very Cheap, and to Export our own which are much dearer.

Answ. If we could find a Foreign Market for our own Manufactures, this
Objection would be of force, but (with submission we say) that this is
impossible; for it is very well known, that all Foreign Markets have been
plentifully supplied with as much of our Woollen Manufactures as could be
vended, and generally over-stocked; and yet notwithstanding our Exporters do
not carry off above one third part, (as the Persons concerned in the Aulnage,
who best know how much is made, have oft-times asserted) and in case a stop be
not put to the East India Trade, our Export must be less; for by reason of the
great ware of Muslings and Callicoes, we have already lost the greatest part of
our Trade for Woollen Clothes, etc. to Germany, Silesia, etc. from whence we had
formerly great quantities of Linnens, but when we could no longer take their
Linnens, they were forced to set up a Manufacture of Woollen, by which we have
almost wholly lost that profitable Trade. We have now a Trade with Spain,
Italy, and Turkey, from whence we Import great quantities of Wool, Raw Silk, and
Grogern-yarn, but if we must wear East India Manufactures, we cannot use their
Silk; and if so, it is reasonable to conclude, that they must shortly follow the
example of the Germans. As to our Plantations and Ireland, to which we send
great quantities of our Manufactures, if the East India Silks, etc. are the
Mode here, they will be so there, the orders that are sent from thence, being
to send over such Manufactures, as are most Fashionable in England; so that
instead of a greater Exportation, we shall almost wholly lose what we now have.
But in case it were possible to vend more, we could make much greater
quantities, as we did last year, when there was a considerable demand for them.

Obj. That if we do not use these India Goods, they will be carried to other
places, where we now send our Manufactures, and be there used instead of them.

Answ. If this be true, then the East India Trade will not receive so great
Prejudice as is pretended; but this is fallacious, for the Exporters always
send to furnish all foreign Markets with what they want; and we are very
sensible, that they have and will be sufficiently supplied with these India
Manufactures, which will very much obstruct our Trade, and therefore we humbly
conceive its highly Reasonable this Bill should pass, that seeing the Mischief
they will do us in foreign Markets cannot be prevented, we may in some measure
be helped, by preventing our falling into the same Mischief at home.

Obj. That these India Manufactures do not much hinder the Consumption of our
own Manufactures, but chiefly those of Italy, France, and Holland.

Answ. They do directly hinder the Consumption of vast Quantities of our own
Manufactures, as the Norwich, London, Canterbury Antherines, and other sorts of
Stuffs; as also the Manufactures made in Bristol, Ketering, Sudbury,
Stowmarket, Kendal, and diverse other places in this Kingdom; and they do and
will in a great Measure, destroy all our Silk Manufactures, which of late are
brought to such perfection, as better Silks are not made in any part of the
World, and are cheaper to us than any can come from the forementioned
Countries, and have almost wholly beat them out of use. So that of late Years
there has been no considerable Quantities Imported, except black Lutestrings,
Alamodes, and Velvets, for which Use the India Silks will not serve; so that
the India Manufactures are directly opposite and destructive to our own.

Obj. That Silk is a Manufacture of foreign Extract, and if the Wearing of Silk
could be Abolished, is would be Beneficial to the Kingdom.

Answ. That the Abolishing of all foreign wrought Silks, that are the Returns
of our Money, would undoubtedly be Beneficial to the Kingdom; and it is that we
now only Contend for. But we do assert, and plainly demonstrate, That the
wearing of Silks, which are Manufactured here of such Raw Silk as are the
Returns of our Woollen, and other Manufactures Exported (as the Italian and
Turkey Silks are) is much more Beneficial to this Kingdom, then if we wear them
not, for by this means we employ double the number of People we should do, if
we were Clad in our own Manufactures.

Obj. That if we take not these Goods, the Indians will let us have no
Saltpeter, Muslins, White Calicoes, Pepper, Drugs, Raw Silks, and other Goods
we want.

Answ. This is such an Objection as scarce ever was made before by Mankind;
it is just as if we should say, we will not let the Venetians and other Nations
we Trade with, have our Lead, Tynn, etc. because they will not take our Cloth.
The French have Prohibited all their Silks and Painted Calicoes above ten Years
past, yet have ever since Traded with the Indians for these Commodities, and we
believe never yet wanted Saltpeter, etc. and why they should refuse us these
Goods is hard to imagine.

Obj. If this Bill pass, it will be to the Advantage of the Scotch and Dutch,
who will bring in these India Goods among us at a much dearer Rate.

Answ. One would think in common Reason, there cannot be a more effectual
Course taken to hinder that, than by Prohibiting the wearing of them: For if
they may be freely worn, the Scotch and Dutch will have a great Advantage,
because they pay little or no Duty to what our East India Merchants must pay;
and the very hopes, that the Persons who were concerned in promoting the Scotch
Company, had of vending the Wrought Manufactures in England, was, as we have
good Reasons to believe, one great cause for the setting-up that Trade. For
this is certain, that some of the most zealous Promoters of that Company, are
the greatest Sticklers against this Bill.

Obj. That the Passing this Bill will discourage Navigation.

Answ. This is a very strange Objection, For one Ship of 500 Tons Freighted
with these Goods will bring in above 1,000,000, l. worth, at but 20 s. per
pound, which is a moderate Value; many of these Silks being worth 3 and 4 l.
per pound, so that if this single Freight were worn here, it will ruin above
twenty times as much Shipping, which is employed in the Coasting Trade, to
furnish the English Manufacturers, and their dependence with Coals, Corn,
Butter, Cheese, and other Necessaries, as is easy to be more fully
demonstrated.

Obj. If there be a multitude of Hands want Work, the Herring Fishery would
employ them.

Answ. The Men, Women, and Children, that are employed in the Woollen and Silk
Manufactures, are very unfit to catch Fish: But since it is objected, That if
this Bill pass it will discourage Navigation, here is a proper Salvo for that
Sore, let the Merchants employ their Stock, and the Seamen their time, to catch
these Herrings, and then we are very sure they would be much better employed
for the Advantage of the Nation than they now are.

Obj. That if the East India Manufactures did greatly prejudice our own, it is
not advisable they should be Prohibited in this time of War, because of the
Companies great Losses and Misfortunes, and their want of Money.

Answ. That the Company have met with great Losses must needs be grant^^, and
that so great a Treasure fell into the Enemies hands, has been of very Ill
Consequence to the Nation, and none knows but such Misfortunes may again attend
them, and therefore the less Trade of this kind in so dangerous a time, the
better for the Nation; If they want Money so do the English Manufacturers, and
whether the Money we now have to Trade with shall be sent out to purchase Goods
fully Manufactured for our own Consumption, which may fall into the Enemies
Hands, or employed to carry on our own Manufactures, we think, with humble
Submission, is no hard question to be resolved; for nothing is more visible,
than that the East India Manufactures that have been lately Imported, takes
away great quantities of our Money, which would otherwise be employed in the
purchasing of our own Silks and Stuffs, and thereby give Employment and
Encouragement to many Thousand Families, who are now in a starving condition.

Obj. The Clause in the Bill which lays the Proof on the Retailers is very
unreasonable.

Answ. Without this the whole Bill will be rendered ineffectual, and therefore
the like Clauses has been incerted in all Acts of this Nature (as in our
Prohibition of French Silks, etc.)

Obj. That if this Bill pass, it will destroy the Credit of the Nation, and
greatly Injure those who have lent Money upon the Customs of the East India
Goods.

Answ. The Customs that are given for the Security of Moneys lent by the
persons complaining (which for the most part are Linen Drapers and East India
men) consists not only of East India Goods, but also of Wines, Vinegar, Brandy,
Tobacco, all Linnens, Wood, Iron, Oil, Flax, Hemp, Paper, and abundance of
other Commodities, too numerous to be here incerted; and the whole East India
Trade has hitherto raised but a very inconsiderable part of the said Customs,
yet the Security has been well answered. Now in case the Customs should be
increased by a greater quantity of East India wrought Silks, which must be worn
here, they will destroy our own Manufactures, and thereby Impoverish not only
our Manufacturers, and their dependants, but the Nation in general, by which
means they will be disabled from consuming the Wines, Brandy, Tobacco, and
other Merchandise, which will, (as we have great reason to believe) much more
weaken the same Security, then this Bill can do; And not only so, but much
lessen the Excise of Beer and Ale, and other the Revenues and Taxes which are
given to support a Just and Necessary War, for the preservation of our Lives,
Liberties, and Properties.

AN ANSWER to the most Material Objections against the BILL For Restraining
East India Wrought Silk, etc.


