THE Anti-Levellers Antidote AGAINST The most venomous of the Serpents, THE
Subtillest Monopolizers.
Collected by diverse Officers and Soldiers of the Army, and other honest People
of this Nation.
Having in our Conferences in and about the Cities of London and Westminster,
and as we have traveled and stayed in diverse places of this Nation, where we
have heard diverse honest People complain of many Grievances (which we conceive
deserve Reformation;) For the just Desires of whom, we have employed our best
Studies and Endevors in searching out what has been proposed by others for
Redress of those Grievances, which, as we have heard and conceive, have undone
many people, and much impoverished diverse, and put others to excessive and
great charge and trouble (who have been true and faithful Members of this
Commonweal;) Out of which we have drawn this Antidote, being an Abstract, etc.
which we tender to the Consideration of all the People of this Nation to write
against, or for Support or Amendment of the same, or any part thereof, in
convenient time. To the end and intent that any who please may join in Petition
to the Supreme Authority of this Nation to have the same Enacted, being (as we
conceive) matters of great Concernment.

AN Abstract of the principal matter (as near as we can gather) of several
Propositions and Proposals, which we have found published, and written ready to
be published, and most material, concerning the extraordinary chargeableness
and unnecessary proceedings in the Law, and the inconveniences which have
happened thereby, so far as yet we can hear of to be amiss, after our several
and respective Conferences about the same (not only in London and Westminster,
but in our several and respective Travels about this Nation since these Wars
began) with diverse ancient Counsel, Clerks and Attorneys, having given over
their practices, and others; whom by their discourses we conceive and hold to
be just in their professions, and to have abhorred the unconscionable dealings
of the corrupt Lawyers, and Monopolizing Officers depending upon the Law, in
their contrivances of diverse inconveniences and mischiefs, by which we have
heard many in Countries, Cities and Towns say, that they have been much
grieved, and desired redress: All which at large we have ready with a short
Collection and Observation after the first fourteen thereof, and so
consequently in order after the other following the same respectively; whereby
any man (as we conceive) though but of mean capacity and judgment, may well
understand how the several millions of Money, which formerly yearly have been
exacted from the honest people of this Nation (by corrupt and unjust Lawyers,
and Monopolizing Officers depending upon the Law) will be every year hereafter
saved to them; if those Propositions and Proposals, with these herein last
mentioned, were enacted.

1. That men not able to pay may not be arrested upon feigned great Actions
(and thereby many undone) before summons, according to the ancient Laws of this
Nation; which undue courses, and unlawful practices, have been too often acted
in these latter times.

2. That if Sheriffs, or Bailiffs, or such like Officers, do not execute the
first Writ (to them delivered) to arrest, but delude parties, and take Money or
Rewards on both sides, as they have frequently used for many years together,
the second may be directed and made to, and executed by persons especially to
be elected by Suitors in such Writs for such purpose.

3. And the like for not serving of Executions.

4. And that any who shall claim the property of goods in the possession of any
other (against whom there shall be Writs of Execution to seize and sell the
same, or to levy the same for any debt or demand) may be examined upon Oath of
the truth of the matter; And that the Sheriff shall make enquiry by Jury of the
truth thereof.

5. And that they who of such goods shall make such claim, and the same shall
be proved false, shall forfeit the value thereof.

6. And that no Officer shall be subject or liable to any action for viewing or
seizing or staying (till such enquiry be made) of any goods which were or shall
be in the possession of the party Defendant, his Executors or Administrators,
or reputed his.

7. That no poundage Fee may be taken for serving of any Elegit or Extent, the
Officer being at no danger in executing the same; Or that to avoid charge and
trouble, any who have such Elegit or Extent, may make his Entry and Claim upon
any Lands or Tenements liable to the same, and then bring his Action of
Ejectment or real Action, as the cause shall require, which he usually is
driven to after such charge and trouble.

8. That every one committing any rescuss, or hindering of any Arrest, or
Execution, or Distress, shall be liable to the debt or demand concerning the
same.

9. And that every one compellable and using to stay Felons, shall be subject
and compelled to stay such party so doing.

10. And that Hue and Cry shall issue, and go after every one of them; Or that
the Inhabitants of the place where such offense be committed to make
satisfaction.

11. And that if the Hue and Cry go out and stay any where before it come to
the Sea, the Inhabitants there to pay half, and where the Rescussers or
Rescussed escape, the other.

12. That every one who shall hold any other out of the possession of any Lands
or Tenements, by the space mentioned in the Proposal at large, next after the
time in which shall be showed to him a Writ for possession or seizin for the
same under seal, to forfeit the value.

13. That every one who shall have an Execution against the goods of any other,
and show it to any having such goods, and he hindering or forbidding the party
having such Execution from taking thereof, or claiming the same, to forfeit the
value: And that party having such Execution, to be empowered to take the same,
if not interrupted or forbidden.

14. That Plaintiffs in Outlaries may have the benefit of them, and not be
baffled out of possession, after they have been at great charge in suing them
out, and procuring special Writs thereupon to be executed, returned and
transcribed into the Exchequer, and Leases thereupon made, which has been too
frequent; and most Outlaries have appeared only mere Terrors or Bugbears.

If these fourteen (that is to say) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
and 14. were Enacted, then would the occasion of the Exactions by arresting men
upon feigned great Actions yearly be avoided, the number of such so yearly
being estimated to above one thousand in England, who one with another of them
by the same occasion have been yearly put to the charges, and damages, and
defrauded of 20 l. apiece, which amounts to yearly in England twenty thousand
pounds.

And thereby besides would be prevented the extraordinary charges of the
unlawful Exactions and Extortions and fraudulent dealings of Under-Seriffs,
Deputies, Bailiffs, Sergeants at Mace, and their hangers or Dependants on them,
and such like; whereby very many of the honest people of this Nation have had
exacted and extorted from them yearly one hundred and twenty thousand pounds;
and besides, by the same means aforesaid, have been defrauded of, and lost so
much more (that is to say) one hundred and twenty thousand pounds, which may
easily be known by computing the Parishes in England, and the number of such
like Officers; for every hundred of Parishes, and every of them one with
another yearly, usually so exact, and extort, and defraud, and be the occasion
of the loss of as much more.

There is above eight thousand Parishes in England, and for every hundred of
Parishes one with another ten Hundreds, Liberties, or Bayliwicks, or such like
places of a Bailiff or such like Officer for every one of them; and besides, a
Hanger or Dependant on every one of them one with another (some of them having
two such, and some above,) upon which account it appears that for every
hundred of Parishes there be estimated to be at least ten Bailiffs, which for
eight thousand Parishes amount to eight hundred Bailiffs, every one of which
usually have yearly exacted and extorted one with another one hundred and fifty
pounds [150 l.] otherwise they could not spend so liberally, and they and their
families fare and live so deliciously, as it is commonly known they have done,
and do; and some of them being srugal, gain thereby great Estates,
notwithstanding the great Rewards, Gifts or (as they may more fitly be called)
Bribes, which usually they have given yearly for such their Offices to the
respective Undersheriffs, and such like Officers of Shires and Counties, which
amounts to yearly one hundred and twenty thousand pounds [120000 l.] and
their said Hangers and Dependers on them besides yearly have, and usually do so
exact and extort the third part, so much which comes to forty thousand pounds
[40000 l.] yearly.

And there be also estimated to be two hundred Corporation Towns in England,
and every one of them to have four Sergeants at the Mace, and as many Yeomen
(as they call them) or Assistants (some of them having many more, as namely in
London 36 such Sergeants, besides so many of such Assistants or Yeomen) every
one of which one with another, have usually so extorted and exacted yearly
above two hundred pounds [200 l.] (many Sergeants and Yeomen paying great sums
of Money for their places, and yet spending much and living at high Rates, and
some of them gaining great Estates, as aforesaid) which (accounting four
Sergeants for every Corporation of those two hundred Corporations) amount to
eight hundred such Sergeants, every one of which yearly so exacting and
extorting Two hundred pounds (200 l.) such exactions and extortions come to One
hundred sixty thousand pounds, [160000 l.] besides such exactions and
extortions by such Yeomen or Assistants to the third part as much yearly Fifty
three thousand three hundred thirty three pounds, [53333 l.] and odd money; and
Creditors and Suitors Plaintiffs have been usually put to further charges,
besides neglect of their businesses in waiting on such Officers, and procuring
Setters or their servants to attend on them, there being in two hundred
Corporations, and in forty Counties, which there be in England, above One
hundred thousand Arrests done (in which there have been such waiting and
attending,) in every of which such Creditor, Suitor or Plaintiff has been at
the charge of 20 s. at the least, and in some 2 l. 5 l. 10 l. or 20 l. (though
in some less,) and therefore accounting 20 s. in every one of them one with
another, then it amounts to yearly One hundred thousand pounds, [100000 l.]
besides much more (that is to say) half as much at the least has been so
exacted and extorted in waiting and setting for many, against whom process have
been, and no arrest done, which amounts every year to fifty thousand pounds,
[50000 l.]

And over and above all these vast sums of money the Under Sheriffs and
Deputies within the forty Shires, and of as many Counties of Cities as make the
number of fifty Sheriffs of Counties (which there be in England) usually have
yearly so extorted and exacted every one of them one with another eight hundred
pounds, [800. li.] otherwise they could not afford to pay so liberally for
their places, and spend so much, and live in such height in clothes and diet
with the best sort as usually they have done, and gain such great Estates as
diverse of the thrifty of them have done, besides notwithstanding their
squeezings -- in the Exchequer by others as bad as they themselves be and have
been, which yearly fifty times eight hundred pounds [800 l.] amount to every
year forty thousand pounds, [40000. l.]

The total of which several sums being cast up together amounts to five
hundred eighty three thousand three hundred thirty three pounds, [583333 l.]
and odd money.

And these sums concerning England only.

Concerning Wales and Ireland almost half as much (which have been and may be
again so extorted and exacted when matters shall be at quiet there if not
prevented) but reckoned only at two hundred ninety thousand pounds, [290000 l.]

The whole is nine hundred seventy three thousand three hundred thirty three
pounds, [973333 l.]

For saving to the Commonweal of four parts to be divided into five of the
sums before mentioned, these Propositions and Proposals be drawn, and some of
them published at large, One hundred ninety four thousand six hundred sixty
four pounds, being the fifth part of the said Nine hundred seventy three
thousand three hundred thirty three pounds, [973333 l.] and deducted out of the
same, there then will remain Seven hundred seventy three thousand six hundred
sixty nine pounds, [773669 l.] being four parts thereof saved to the honest
people of this Nation.

And besides, by the means aforesaid, and the subtle devices, and crasty
inventions and practices of such extorting Officers, the honest people of this
Nation have been desrauded of, and lost double so much, being One Million five
hundred fifty seven thousand three hundred thirty and eight pounds. [1557338 l.]

Which sums being cast up together amount to Two Millions three hundred thirty
six thousand and seven pounds, [2236007 l.]

The subtle devices and crafty inventions of such Officers are more
particularly expressed in other Propositions, following next after some of the
latter Propositions herein mentioned.

15. That any of the Counselors, Clerks or Attorneys (who have practiced or
studied in the superior Courts at Westminster, and there approved of for their
Honesties, Judgments and Experience in their respective Practices and Studies)
as the Law is, may plead, act or do any thing according to their respective
Callings, and not be hindered by Monopolizers, as has been too often used of
late years.

16. That Copies of Bills, Plaints, Declarations, Answers, Replications,
Rejoynders, and Proceedings to issue after the same, may be delivered by the
one party in the Suit to the other, or their respective Agents, therein to save
charges, and the Monopolizers deserted.

And if these 15th and sixteenth Proposals were enacted, then would the
exactions and extortions,
by compelling the people to buy Law and Justice, in paying for Copies of
Bills, Answers, Replications, Rejoynders, and other proceeding thereupon, be
quite abrogated, and the Drones so exacting and extorting them (that is to say)
the six Clerks, and such like vermin, left and deserted as useless, and by the
same means saved to and for the honest people of this Nation yearly Two hundred
and sixteen thousand pounds, (216000 l.)

The manner how the last mentioned sums have been so yearly exacted and
extorted, and how the same may be saved to and for the honest people of this
Nation, hereafter follows, for the perfect understanding of the common
people, how the six Clerks so extort and exact yearly Twelve thousand pounds,
(12000 l.) and their under Clerks above treble as much, being Thirty six
thousand pounds, (36000 l.) the whole whereof is Forty eight thousand pounds,
(48000 l.)

The Offices of these six Clerks being accounted yearly to be worth Two
thousand pounds (2000 l.) and more apiece; and it is commonly knonw, that their
Under Clerks usually have taken and take after the rate of eight pence for
every sheet, which they have copyed for above four times more then they have
accounted for to such vermin their Masters (which by them has been connived at
in some of such their Under Clerks, of their favorites and creatures, partakers
and helpers of them in such their wicked practices, though not in others of
them, whom they have kept under like Spaniels:) And moreover, the enacting of
the same fifteenth and sixteenth Proposals, if done, will extend to all other
English Courts, or formerly or now so called, which have been or may be
hereafter created to or for the same, or such, or the like effect or purpose
(there having been eight or nine more of such in England,) and thereby save
further to the same people of this Nation yearly so much more, being Forty
eight thousand pounds, (48000 l.)

The total of which amounts to Ninety six thousand pounds, (96000 l.)

And the same Exactions and Extortions by the same occasion would be removed
out of the Courts of the Common Law, (wherein although Declarations and
Pleadings be nothing near so long, yet in the number thereof far exceed those
in such formerly or now called English Courts, or Courts of Equity,) and
thereby and by shortening Declarations, etc. in the recitals of Writs, and
taking away of unnecessary imparlances, saved for the same purpose as much or
more then before is mentioned, being Ninety six thousand pounds, (96000 l.)

The total of all which sums concerning these two Propositions for England
only, amounts to One hundred ninety two thousand pounds, (192000 l.)

In Wales and Ireland, besides which have been and may be hereafter, if not
prevented, half as much, being Ninety six thousand pounds, [96000 l.]

The total of all which sums for all those places amounts to the Two hundred
and sixteen thousand pounds [216000 l.] before mentioned.

17. That no motion or Petition shall be made and delivered against any until a
Copy thereof be first delivered to him: Then may the savorite Lawyers hang up
their Gowns in the Hangmans Wardrobe.
And that if he do not consent to the desire in such Copy (he being thereby
directed to a leading precedent in such case,) then he to forfeit the parties
charges and damages of delay in moving: And that if he shall consent thereunto,
and not gainsay the same within a convenient time, that then he shall be
compelled to perform the same as if the same should be ordered.

18. That no Prohibition or Consultation be moved for, unless such Notes or
Writings be delivered or left in such manner and form as is mentioned in the
Propositions concerning Motions and Orders.

19. That a penalty of one hundred pounds be imposed upon every Master of the
Chancery, and other Referree, for reporting contrary to any Book or Writing
showed to him, which by his order he may view; or for not reporting so much (as
he should) within the Books or Writings, being showed where to find the matter.

And likewise if the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth Proposals last
mentioned were enacted, then would the extorting and exacting of Registers, and
Enterers up, and Drawers of Orders, and Rules, and Copies thereof, be for ever
buried in Oblivion, and thereby yearly saved to the honest people of this
Nation the extraordinary charges which formerly they have been unnecessarily
put to, amounting to, as hereafter is particularly calculated or cast up, to
Six hundred forty eight thousand pounds, [648000 l.]

How the last mentioned exaxtions and extortions have been drawn from the
honest people before mentioned, and they constrained to buy Justice, as
hereafter is expressed for the perfect understanding of the common people
thereof: In every leaf of every of the two Books for a year of the Registers in
Chancery, there usually be entered ten ordinary Orders made upon motions there;
in both those Books for one year there most commonly have been for many years
past, and be, three thousand leaves or more for every year; every of which
Orders one with another has been and is an occasion of expenses extraordinary
to both parties therein concerned, five pounds by drawing and making several
Copies of Breviates, and seeing of one Counselor to begin, and another, or
others, and sometimes many, to second such motion, and drawing and copying
Affedavits and Orders several times, and entering the same, and by seeing
Solicitors to attend such Court about the same.

And many times when there has been counsel on both sides, it has cost the
other party answering such Motion, as much as the party moving the same: And in
many Orders longer then those ordinary, there usually is and has been expended
in counsel and attendance, and other charges thereabouts, in some 10 l. some 20
l. others 40 l. and diverse more.

And at hearings as much or more; so that by entering of long Orders in these
Books there will be no less charges in the Orders of every leaf of those Books,
by reason of the great charges of those long Orders.

At which rate the charges of the Orders in every of those leaves one with
another, will amount to 40 l. at the least, and so of every one hundred of
leaves to four thousand pounds, [4000 l.]

And there being in those Books of the Registers, as before is mentioned, three
thousand leaves, it will be found by multiplying forty by three thousand, that
the total will amount to One hundred twenty thousand.

And also in other Courts, now or late called English Courts, or Courts of
Equity, and such like, wherein Secretary hand been used in England, without
Wales and Ireland to as much, amount unto One hundred and twenty thousand
pounds, [120000 l.]

Besides the charges about diverse motions which dye in the breeding, and
therefore no Orders made upon the same, which mounteth this last mentioned sum
much higher; but in regard we can come to no certain knowledge thereof, we
forbear to make any further calculation about the same.

Both which sums being added together, amount to Two hundred and forty thousand
pounds, [240000 l.]

In Wales and Ireland, besides which have been and may be hereafter, if not
prevented, half as much, being One hundred and twenty thousand pounds, [120000
l.]

The total in England, Wales and Ireland Three hundred and sixty thousand
pounds, [360000 l.]

In Courts at Law, or Courts which have been called Latin Courts, Rules or
Orders, which have been and are above four times the number more then the
former, accounting so much only as by them has been so extorted and exacted,
as before is mentioned in the other Courts, called English Courts, or Courts of
Equity, (because there is not so much charge in soliciting, breviating, or
entering Rules or Orders, as in the former, nor altogether in counsel, yet too
much) being Three hundred sixty thousand pounds [360000 l.]

The Total concerning Motions, Orders, and Rules, etc. amount to seven hundred
twenty thousand pounds [720000 l.]

Out of which deduct the tenth part, being seventy two thousand pounds [72000
l.] (which will be sufficient for the performance of such businesses) then will
remain saved to those honest people yearly hereafter six hundred forty eight
thousand pounds [648000 l.]

20. That Witnesses may be examined in all Courts by Commissioners, mutually to
be chosen; But with this, That any concerned in any Suit (who will, may at his
own charge) have any of such witnesses examined at any Trial, hearing or
inquest, taking or making.

21. That all Commissioners may be to hear and determine, or to certify the
doubt; and that if the parties to the Suit shall not agree of the truth of that
which any witnesss shall depose, then may the Commissioners compel the Sheriff
to summon a Jury to try the same, and the Jury to be chosen as in the general
Title of Juries, and the matter to be determined above upon reading the
Certificate.

22. That no matter in Arrest of Judgment shall be moved or assigned to be
Error in any Declaration, Complaint, Bill, etc. or Plea etc. unless such matter
be first showed where the mistake is, and how the same should be amended, as
certain as if the same were amended, the Declaration, Complaint, Bill, Plea,
and other things before therewith mentioned, were or should be good in Law.

23. And the like concerning Demurrers, etc.

24. That if any witness be sick and weak, or traveling beyond the Sea, or
there, the party concerned may deliver to the contrary party a Bill, and
require his Answer to the same, and he to answer within the time mentioned in
the Proposals at large, and swear to it before the next Justice of the Peace;
and after, or for default of An^wer, the party to examine for the perpetual
remembrance of men of the matter.

25. That publication may be in every Cause immediately, or some short time
after witnesses examined, in such manner and form as is mentioned in the
Proposals at large.

26. That the first witness, coming at the time and place of the Execution of
every Commission, may be first examined.

27. That no stay of Suit may be by reason of any witnesses going beyond the
Sea, unless sufficient matter be made appear upon Oath what such witness can
say.

28. That tender of emends may be for walking with feet and upon a Replevyn
after the Cattle in Pownd, with damages and costs to that time.

29. That Distresses after Apprizement by Jury, if the owner of it does not
make satisfaction, or replevyn the same (within convenient time) the same may
be sold, etc.

30. For retorning of the names of the Bayl and Caption with it upon the
removal in to the Superior Court, and none other to be there put in.

31. That no Writ of Error be brought till after Error showed and allowed by
some Judge.

32. For retorning of impartial Jurors to try Causes, and for avoiding of
Imbracery.

33. And a Remedy for giving too little Damages.

34. And against finding false Inquests, and chargeableness of serving
Execution.

35. That if any person shall be summoned by Writ, or Warrant, to appear in
Chancery, or such like Court, and shall not, then he shall be arrested, and
detained not only until he shall appear, but also to stand to the order of the
Court: And that if the Plaintiff shall give security to make restitution after
the Defendant shall appear, and obey the Order of the Court, and a hearing be,
then the Court may proceed to decree and sentence, and issue out Execution.

36. That such Actions, as usually upon motions have been drawn from Trial at
London and Westminster into proper Counties, may be there laid at first,
without troubling of poor men to come to London, some from the furthest parts
from thence, to make oath to alter the Visne, begging to and going from the
City, and there during their stay; during which times the Countries and Cities
have been filled with Beggars, and their Countries Businesses left undone.

37. That no Beggarly Fellows or Shurks may make Executions against goods.

Nor Writs for outing men of possession of Houses, Lands or Tenements.

Nor delivering men out of prison for Debts or Duties, until they have
satisfied the same.

By permission of which, diverse just Debts have been lost, and many thereby
undance, and others thereby sustained great loss.

38. That no Beggarly Fellows may be permitted to plead false Pleas, unless
they have or shall first put in sufficient Bayl for payment of the Debt or
Demand in question, or yielding himself to prison, or make or cause Oath to be
made of the truth of such Plea, or of his ability to satisfy.

39. That Costs may be for the Defendants in Demurrers, after they have been
perplexed, troubled, and put to great charges, and the Causes adjudged or
considered of for them.

40. And the like in Prohibitions.

41. And upon issues of a Record or no Record.

And furthermore, if the said 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31,
32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, and 41. Proposals and Propositions were
Enacted, extraordinary charges by multitude of Trials, Non-suits, Hearing, Fees
of over numerous Counsel, Motions, Arrests of Judgments by Motions, and
Reversals of the same by Writs of Error, and bringing Witnesses many times to
Trials from far remore places from thence, and there staying long in expectance
of such Trials, sometimes by the space of two, three, four, or five days, to
the great charge and trouble of the party bringing them, in their maintenance
and keeping them together, the same Witnesses having been sometime brought from
the one of the Corners of this Nation to another farthest remote from thence,
will be so abated and brought to that low ebb, that thereby will be yearly
saved to such honest people much Money, which formerly every year by such means
they have been unnecessarily put to in coming, as hereafter (for the plain
understanding of the common people thereof) is expressed, and cast up to six
hundred seven thousand nine hundred ninety and eight pounds [607998 l.]

It has been observed by us, and those from whom we have received
intelligence, that it is very certain that there be above eight hundred
Parishes in England, besides Wales, the County of Middlesex, and the Cities of
London and Westminster.

And that there has been usually tried for every hundred of Parishes twenty
Causes or Trials at every Assizes both Winter and Summer, being forty Trials
for every hundred of Parishes one year with another; and in troublesome Champion
or open places and Counties many more, and in some of them double so many, as
diverse have said, and in very few or none less (though in enclosed and quiet
places and Counties,) which amounts to four hundred Trials for every thousand
of Parishes, which comes to three thousand and two hundred Trials in a year in
the said eight hundred Parishes; twenty pound expense in every of which
amounts yearly to sixty four thousand pounds [64000 l.] besides the trials at
london and Westminster, which yearly comes to the sixth part of so much, being
ten thousand six hundred sixty and six pounds [10666 l.] and odd money.

And in those places every year, Summer and Winter Assizes, as many and more
causes have been taken out to be tried, but compounded before trial (the
charges of every one of those tried amounting to 20 l. as before is mentioned,
comes to the said sixty four housand pounds [64000 l.] And those not tried,
being as many in number and many more, counsel being retained in most of them
before they be stayed, come to as much, being sixty four thousand pounds [64000
l. more.

And in other Courts (which have been Latin Courts, or so called) there has
been usually so exacted and extorted as much or more then in all the other
Courts before mentioned, as hereafter is particularly expressed for the clear
understanding of all the people of this Nation, which amounts to Two hundred
two thousand six hundred sixty six pounds [202666 l.] odd money.

All which for England only Four hundred five thousand three hundred thirty two
pounds [405332 l.]

And half as much in Wales and Ireland, besides all the Exactions and
Extortions before mentioned, as there have been, and as it is feared will be
again, if not prevented, being Two hundred two thousand six hundred sixty and
six pounds (202666 l.) pa The Total of all which amounts to six hundred seven
thousand nine hundred ninety and eight pounds [607998 l.]

Some more to be saved may be gathered out of the said last mentioned
Propositions and Proposals, but most of it is cast up in the bottom of those
concerning Registers, etc.

The Charges particular of every Trial one with another on both sides,
calculated for the clear understanding of the common People, of the before
mentioned Account, as follows, (that is to say;)
1. In every one of those Trials one with another usually has been expended by
the Plaintiffs (besides the Defendants charge) three pounds. [3 l.]

And by the Defendants one pound. [1 li.]

2. For Counsel at the Assizes the one with the other, on the one part 2 l. as
much on the other, 2 l. (few or none under; some so expending for Counsel 20 l.
30 l. or 40 l.) So that such expenses in Counsel in every Cause one with the
other may very well be accounted to amount to Ten pounds. [10. l.]

3. For Witnesses, to the number sometimes of thirty, at other times twenty,
ten, or five, and seldom under, staying at the Assizes some of them four, five,
or six days, and seldom under two days: So accounting in one of them with
another to be ten in number, and to stay three days at an Assize, etc. each of
them one with another to spend ten shillings in those three days, and so much
in going to and retorning home from such Assizes, some of them going from one
of the corners of this Nation to another farthest distant or remote from
thence, and very many going from their home to such Assizes thirty or forty
miles, with hindering their businesses, which amounts to 20 s. apiece one with
another, some of such witnesses being of great quality or Trading: The Total,
Ten pounds. [10 l.]

4. In Fees in Court one with another, one pound ten shillings. [1 l. 10 s.]

5. For making Breviats and Copies in such Causes, one with another, one pound.
[1 l.]

The Total of the charges in every Cause tried, twenty six Pounds and ten
shillings. [26 l. 10 s.]

And the charges extraordinary in Causes made ready for Trial, and Records
thereof taken out and sealed (but not tried) amount to as much or more then of
those tried, being many more in number, deducting the Court Fee in some not
tried, being 30 s. apiece in every of such Cause; and 5 l. being half the
charge of the witnesses in every of those Causes in their stay at the Assizes,
in Causes there taken up by advice of Counsel, after they have had their Fees
in the same: which account of these particulars made good, which is spent
unnecessarily in such Causes tried, and made ready for Trial in the Superior
Courts: All which, amounting to thirteen pounds five shillings, being half the
before mentioned sum of the said twenty six pounds ten shillings, if the said
Proposals last mentioned were Enacted, would clearly be saved to the honest
people of this Nation.

And concerning County, Corporation, Hundred, and three weeken Courts, the
Calculation following of the charges extraordinary of Trials there will clearly
evidence in the two hundred Corporations before mentioned, no less can be
esteemed; in some of the Courts, there being three or four, and in diverse more,
(though in some few of them some Courts may have discontinued, or seldom been
held.)

And in every of them Ten Courts in every year (very many of them having more,
some one or two or more almost in every week of the year) which amount to two
thousand Courts in a year by this account one with another; many thinking many
more such be.

And also in every of those Courts one with another in every Court day may be
accounted four Trials, and dbouble so many put off by such fraud and practices
as be at large mentioned in the Preamble of the Proposals, (there being ten
Trials or more on such day in many of these Courts) which amount to sixteen
thousand.

And in every of those sixteen thousand one with another there is caused
expense extraordinary by such Monopolizers, and exacted and extorted from both
parties to every such Suit, the one of them with the other, from the beginning
to the end thereof, occasioned by practices and plots, in the said Preamble
expressed, ten pounds; in some of them there being much more so exacted and
extorted, and in diverse so much or more then have been in any of the Superior
Courts.

And in the eight thousand Parishes, there is in every of them a Hunred Court,
or Three-Weeken Court, held every three weeks in the year for every ten of
those Parishes, which amount to eight hundred three Weeken or Hundred Courts in
those eight thousand Parishes; besides a County Court for every of the forty
Counties, held every Month for every of such Counties yeatly: In every of which
Courts have been very few or none regarded by the Judges, Stewards, or Sheriffs
there, or suffered quietly to practice as Counsel or Attorneys in such Courts,
but such as are, or usually have been, were, or usually be, Under-Sheriffs,
Deputy-Sheriffs, Bailiffs, or such like, (who usually side with, or are linked
or allied to such Under-Sheriffs, Deputies, or persons, and partake with them
in their Exactions and Extortions before mentioned;) and in some of such Courts
they Monopolize as much, as in the Corporation, and other Courts before
mentioned; by which means seldom any other, but such persons before mentioned,
come to, or practice in such Courts; and thereby those Monopolizing and siding
persons do what they please in Suits in such Courts, and usually cause the
Suitors in those Suits to pay what they lust; or otherwise to betray their
Causes, and so defraud them, and by those means cause as much or more expenses
and charges, and exact and extort in those Courts last mentioned more then in
the Corporation and other Courts therewith before mentioned, which is cast up
but only to as much.

In the like Courts (which have been and are like to be again in wales and
Ireland, if not prevented) there has been such yearly Expenses, Trouble and
Charges, Exactions and Extortions occasioned, to half as much as last before
mentioned.

Twenty Trials for every hundred of Parishes, at 20 l. apiece, come to four
hundred pounds. 400 li.

Double for Winter and Summer, eight hundred pounds. 800 li.

For eight thousand Parishes, besides London and Middlesex, eight times 8000 l.
is sixty four thousand pounds. 64000 l.

A sixth part so much more for Trials in London and Middlesex, ten thousand six
hundred sixty six pounds, thirteen shillings and four pence. 10666 l. 13 s. 4 d.

Total, eighty three thousand eight hundred sixty six pounds, thireen shillings
and four pence. 83866 l. 13 s. 4 d.

Half-as much in those taken up after Counsel retained, Forty one thousand
nine hundred thirty three pounds, six shillings and eight pence. 41933 l. 6 s.
8 d. pa For the Superior Courts the Total of all these, One hundred twenty five
thousand and eight hundred pounds. 125800 l.

Half as much for Ireland and Wales, Sixty two thousand and nine hundred
pounds. 62900 l. pa The Total of England, Wales and Ireland, One hundred eighty
eight thousand and seven hundred pounds. 188700 l.

Two hundred Courts in a year in every Corporation, eight Trials in every of
them one with another sixteen thousand, ten pounds expense in every of them
comes to One hundred sixty thousand pounds. 160000 l.

As much in County, Hundred, and three Weeken Courts, One hundred and sixty
thousand pounds. 160000 l.

Total, Three hundred and twenty thousand pounds. 320000 l.

Half as much in Ireland and Wales, One hundred and sixty thousand pounds.
160000 l.

Total in all Courts, Six hundred forty eight thousand and seven hundred
pounds. 648700 l.

42. For recording of Conveyances to preserve Purchasers from being defrauded
of their Estates (purchased for money) by former Sales of the same, or Statutes
and Judgments, or such like Encumbrances upon the same.

43. And for prevention of Executors and Administrators from being put to pay
Debts out of their own Estates, to their undoing, after they have paid as much
as the Testators or Intestates Estates have amounted unto.

44. And for saving of many Debts, which Creditors, Devisees, nd Legatees have
lost, and like to lose.

45. For Preservation of many Ships, which have been fraudulently overcharged
with Engagements upon the same (called Bottomre) by wicked and unconscionable
Persons sailing in the same, and after by them wilfully run a-ground, and
thereby (besides the loss of the Ships) the Creditors defrauded above the value
thereof.

If these 42, 43, 44, and 45, were Ordained, there would be no less then one
million [1000000 l.] besides twenty thousand pounds [20000 l.] in the abatement
of the charge of Conveyances, yearly saved to the honest people of this Nation,
(as we are informed by most with whom we have conferred about the same,) for
then could no man be so defrauded as formerly; but such things would be
prevented in manner and form as is mentioned in the several Propositions and
Proposals at large published concerning the same: for now of late few can rely
upon the Oath of any, to a Bill exhibited against him in Chancery, for
discovery of Encumbrances (which has been formerly accounted a good course
before diverse unconscionable people have grown too crafty,) many false Oaths of
late having been made to such Bills, and the parties thereupon relying,
defrauded of many great sums of Money: And diverse people (who have continued in
Debt several years together, and some of them borrowed Money (upon Lands and
Tenements of griping Usurers) for far less then the value thereof) have been
constrained to forgo the same for so much only, by reason such needy persons
use to incumber such Tenements with Bargains, Sales, Leases, Annuities,
Statutes and Judgments, and other Encumbrances; that few dare meddle with the
same, but at an under-value, sometime at half, and at other times at less then
the value thereof: and diverse (who have dealt with merciless Creditors) have had
their Woods cut down, and sold at a very small value, and their houses
demolished, and their Lands and Tenements extended at small rates; and thereby
many others of the Creditors have either lost, or come short of their Debts;
and such poor people, their wives and children, utterly undone: All which the
Enacting of those Propositions would prevent; and save many ships from
perishing, and preserve many Executors and Administrators from undoing (by
paying Debts out of their own Estates, after they have formerly paid as much as
the Estates, which have been of such Testators and Intestates at the time of
their deceases, came to;) And many Creditors of other such Testators and
Intestates from losing their Debts.

46. That poor Prisoners, not able to pay, may be let out, till they shall
become of ability.

47. That the Estates of Prisoners of ability may be sold to satisfy their
Debts, notwithstanding their lying in Prison.

48. And that those lying in Prison, and fraudulently concealing their Estates;
or which wilfully shall consume the Estates (which they shall get into their
hands) of others may be strictly held to work for the benefit of their
Creditors, till satisfaction given, or agreement made with them.

If these 46, 47, and 48, Propositions and Proposals were Enacted, then would
be saved to the honest people of this Nation to the value of three hundred
thousand pounds [300000 l.] at least, yearly hereafter; besides yearly saving
of Debts (which formerly every year have been lost) to as much, as we are
informed by most, and by others to as much more, and by others to double so
much; there being, or usually having been, as we are informed by those (who
speak to the least) the number of twelve thousand Prisoners yearly; every of
which Prisoner one with another wastes and consumes yearly above 30 l. which
amounts to three hundred and sixty thousand pounds [360000 l.] of which will
be saved to the honest people of this Nation above three hundred thousand
pounds [300000 l.] Besides the prevention of Frands (which usually have been
hatched in Prisons, by long Liers there) whereby diverse have been utterly
defrauded of their just Debts, Duties, Demands and Damages, amounting, as is
esteemed by some, to so much, by others to double so much; All which, and the
Remedy thereof, more plainly and at large are printed and published.

By these, as they who guess lowest esteem, saved yearly, Three hundred
thousand pounds. 300000 l.

Besides loss of Debts and Damages to as much, Three hundred thousand pounds.
300000 l.

By the mean as much more, Six hundred thousand pounds, besides etc. 600000 l.

By the highest to treble, Nine hundred thousand pounds, besides etc. 900000 l.

49. That a Demand in writing (and no Denial to that by the party sent to) may
continue an Action without speciality, and may be sufficient for that purpose,
as well as to commense chargeable Actions to Infinites, to the utter undoing of
many; very many, by the nicety of the exposition of the Statute in such case
provided, having lost the greatest part of their Estates.

If this in the said 49th were Enacted, we conceive, and are credibly informed,
would be saved (besides in unnecessary Expenses in Suits) by the preservation
of many from the losing of many just Debts, Duties and Demands, to the value of
many thousands of pounds yearly, as we conceive, Two hundred thousand pounds,
[200000 l.]

50. For the Enlargement and Explanation of the Statute against Bankrupts, and
that it may be, that after the appearance of the Bankrupt before the
Commissioners, he may nominate and have an equal number of Commissioners for
him to be joined with the other to speed on the business, and save charges, and
see fair carriage,
that the Bankrupts Estate may go and be employed to and for the satisfaction
of the Creditors, and not wasted by Commissioners in feasting and wine, and the
Creditors little the better, as often has happened.

If this Fiftieth were Enacted, it would save half of that, which usually is
spent in the Execution of Commissions upon such Statutes, and more, (many
having been undone thereby, both Bankrupts (or so supposed) and Creditors)
which amount to many thousand of pounds yearly; besides the prevention of
diverse Injuries and Wrongs, which have been done by many insolent and wicked
People of mean and beggarly condition (some of them having been Cutpurses and
Thieves) by breaking into Houses, and carrying away the Goods of diverse quiet
People, wounding and maiming diverse of them, and offering great violence to,
and affrighting others of them, by color of authority of such Commissioners;
whereby many such quiet People have sustained loss to great value, which we are
informed, and do believe, with the other Expenses which hereby may be
prevented: But the Proposition for Foreign Attachments in the former Proposals
mentioned, and that for Writs of Justice after recited, together with some
other of the Propositions and Proposals, will render most Commissions going out
upon those Statutes unnecessary, and thereby the greatest part of the excessive
charges exacted, amounting to many thousand of pounds yearly, reserved for the
benefit of the Honest: wherefore we forbear to make further inquiry of the
certainty to be saved by the residue of such Commissions as hereafter may be
useful, if, this Proposition should be Enacted, though we are informed that so
to be saved will amount to many thousand of pounds more; the Sum to be saved by
the residue amounting to so much, and rising so high, as before is mentioned.

51. That Judgments and Statutes may take hold on Copy or Customary Lands, and
be liable to and for the satisfaction of Debts, as far as they are by the
Statute of Bankrupt.

52. And also of Debts and things in Action.

If this in these 51, and 52, were Ordained (we are informed, and do conceive)
would thereby much more be saved over and above that which would be saved by
the former: But there being so much to be saved by those (as in our thoughts is
high time to remedy) we forbear to cast up what may be saved by these.

53. That Parliaments, or Representatives, may be chosen by the love and
affection of the honest People of this Nation, capable for such choice, without
trouble or charge to those to be chosen, and very little to those to choose.

If this were so, then would not any be at such charges about their Elections,
as many have been, some having been at the charges of 400 l. 500 l. and some
1000 l. or more, about their Elections to such employment; which, as many
conjecture, in the choice of the whole number for one Parliament, has amounted
to one hundred thousand pounds [100000 l.] being diverse (who have been at such
expense) have been laid aside, and others chosen for such employment.

54. That no Felons may hereafter be put to death for petty Felonies (the same
having been more frequent in latter times then in ancient,) and being not so
rigorous in other places, but that for such petty things they may be compelled
to give to, and work for competent satisfaction for the parties to be grieved
in the first place, and after for the benefit of the State; which will more
benefit the Commonweal then taking away their lives, and prevent more such
Felonies.

55. That Taxations of Parishes may go equally upon Estates, both Real and
Personal, of every one alive respectively, according to such Respective Estates
and Debts owing to or by any, that the poorer sort, or strangers, may not be
oppressed, as has been too frequent.

56. That Tithes may no more be paid or exacted out of errable Lands, nor in
any unreasonable manner.

All which Propositions and Proposals, not yet published, are ready to be
printed and published in convenient time.

The Sums of Money which may be saved to the Honest of this Nation every year
hereafter, as formerly yearly have been exacted and extorted from them; And of
yearly Losses of Estates prevented hereafter (which in those former times
annually have been,) as they are respectively cast up in several Places before
mentioned.
LOSSES in Estates prevented By the Propositions and Proposals respectively
hereafter recited Money exacted and extorted, Saved. 1557338 li. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 778669 li. 15, 16. 216000 li. 17, 18, 19.
648000 li. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36,
37, 38, 39, 40, 41. 648700 1000000 42, 43, 44, and 45. 020000 0300000 46, 47,
and 48. 300000 0200000 49, 50, 51, 52. 0100000 53. Tot. 3157338 l. The Total of
Money saved, and Losses in Estates prevented 5768707. l. Tot. 2611369 l. Three
millions one hundred fifty seven thousand three hundred thirty and eight
pounds. Five millions seven hundred sixty and eight thousand seven hundred and
seven pounds. Two millions six hundred and eleven thousand three hundred sixty
and nine pounds.

Here follow Ten Additional Propositions (in supply of the former) with our
Observations upon the same.
1. THat no Monopolizer, but any (who have practiced or shall practice as Clerk
by the space of seven years or more in any of the Superior Courts, and no
Exception sufficient to disable him in that behalf) or other (who have
practiced or shall practice in such Court a less time, and be accounted an able
Clerk in such Court for drawing and contriving any thing in or concerning the
same Court, and to be honest in his dealings) may draw, or contrive, or act any
thing properly to be done in such Court by any Clerk; and that if any
Monopolizer take upon him to exact any thing for acting in that behalf, and to
exclude any from having any other but himself for his Clerk or Attorney, such
Monopolizer to forfeit to the party grieved the value of the just Debt or Duty,
for which he shall go about to prosecute.

By this, if the same were Enacted, the Offices for making Writs under pains,
and Affidavit Offices, and diverse other unnecessary Offices, would be rendered
vain and useless, and proceeding in Suits gone through with more ease and less
charge, and understood by many more then can be now; the Monopolizing Officers
in such Offices having contrived such contrarieties of proceeding in them, that
few or none can or could understand the same, without the assistance of such
Monopolizers, which they have usually kept secret from all, except their
associates, or creatures in whom they use to put confidence, and from whom they
use to receive Rewards, or as they more fitly may be called, Bribes, without
discovery thereof to any; and these and those know the meaning of each the
other, (that is to say) the one of them by the looks and countenance of the
other of them: And such Officers, or Jacks in Office, have been very insolently
proud, and accounted ignorant in any thing, but contriving of means for support
of their Exactions and Extortions; And when they have overthrown many good
Causes by their own neglect, or wilfully for their own gains, they have laid
the fault upon the Prosecutors of such Causes, who have been honest and careful
therein; and who by the favor, which such Officers have gained of their
Superiors, have been kept so under, that seldom they durst complain in that
behalf; and when they have complained, have been seldom heard, relieved, or
believed, though they have made the matter never so apparent and clear.

2. That the matter to be answered unto, of all special Writs, may be put into
Bills, Plaints, Declarations, Counts, or Informations, as large as such Bills
have formerly been used to be made, and that to be and stand for all Bills,
Declarations, Counts, and Informations, (which shall be in the same till the
matter of the same be or shall be tried,) and that the Writs (which be or shall
be made concerning any such matter) shall be made against the parties (against
whom the same be or shall be sued out) to appear to and answer the matter of
such Bill, or other thing therewith before mentioned, or to do or perform as by
Law ought to be done concerning the same; and that every Sheriff (to whom the
same be or shall be directed) shall do as he be or shall be commanded by such
Writ, and retorn the same into such Court, from whence the same shall issue
with such Bill, Declaration, Count, or Information therewith sent or to be sent.

Then would all the Cursitors be rendered unnecessary, most of them (as is
generally reported) not knowing how to do any thing but what is contained in
the Book called The Register of Writs, which every Clerk of ability knows how
to do, as well or better then any of such Cursitors, who have lately gained
much for doing little, they being formerly only servants to the ancient learned
Master Clerks, who themselves in their times lived only upon small Pensions or
Salary allowed them out of the Public Treasure, and had nothing else for
doing business in their Offices, their Means being so small, that in a dear
year they were constrained to Petition to the King for a penny in a day
allowance more, and having obtained the same, and the dearth expiring and
plenty following, they became to be so negligent and lascivious, that Suitors
could not have their businesses dispatched as formerly they had, whereby the
people petitioned unto the King to have that superfluous allowance taken away;
but they being part of the Clergy held as a Maxim to hold that which was given
to the Church, and not to depart from it, whereby Address and Complaint was
made to the Pope, who decreed, That if they did not follow their duties as
formerly they had done, they should have corporal punishment by Gelding;
and this has been always the fruit of superfluous allowance to Officers: for
since the Expiration of those ancient learned Master Clerks, when any special
Writ has been to be made in the Office of or by such Cursitors, if the
Prosecutor thereof has not procured the same to be drawn by learned Counsel or
Clerks, they seldom or never could have any of the same done by any of such
Cursitors, and few or none of such Cursitors have been heard of to be of
ability to do any such thing, since the Successors of Master Clerks, now called
the Masters of the Chancery, have been taken up in matters of Accounts and
References of great benefit, and yet one part of those who formerly were their
puples or servants (now called the Six Clerks) have far out stripped them in
wealth, by doing nothing beneficial to the Public, but mischievous.

And now such Masters of the Chancery are become so unfit for the Employment,
as the ancient Master Clerks have done, that they are altogether ignorant in
performance of the same, and useless as to that; and so consequently all the
Cursitors, Philazors, Exigenters, and Clerks, and office of Utlaries, rendered
totally needless, and therefore such Offices may well go to better Employment.

3. That all Writs Judicial hereafter may be made out of every Court by some of
the Judges there, his or their Clerk of the Court, proper for making or issuing
forth of such Writs, or at least by one of them, if ready written, examined,
and rejected if ill done, and approved of and signed if well done, without
taking any thing for so doing.

And this may such Judges very well afford to do out of the large Salary
allowed to them, and live civilly as their Predecessors did, when they rode
from the Sergeants Innes to Westminster Hall and back again upon Asses, To show
they ought to be humble.
and not to vaunt as some have done, nor to hoard up much as others have done,
who with their Favorites and Creatures have gained excessively by the Law
before, and grew mighty in riches, as did the Papal Priests before their fall,
(who in their times gained a great part of the best Lands and Scituations of
this Nation by Combination, Craft and Subtilty, by lulling the people asleep in
ignorance and blindness in their vain Superstition, pronouncing Hell and
Damnation with Bell, Book and Candle to all who did not observe the same, and
thereby brought the people into a sond belief of them,) for since that fall,
those (that is to say) the Judges and their favorites, have far outrun these
Priests, in gaining riches in an excessive manner by griping of very many men,
(diverse of whom having been very indigent persons,) and have climbed up and
leaped into most of the Lordly Titles and gainful places and offices in this
Nation, and therein and thereby have domineered, tyrannized over, and oppressed
the honest people, and gained the favor of fawning, flattering, and lascivious
Courtiers by rewards, which they have given upon their entrance into and upon
the extorting, exacting, innovate, unnecessary Offices in this Nation, to such
lascivious and fawning Courtiers and Sycophants, who, notwithstanding that
which they had of them at the first, have caused such Officers, and great
persons, and inferior innovated Officers under them, to bleed every year,
and vomit up part of their Extortions and Exactions, to continue them in such
their pride and lust; and in those ancient times the Sergeants, or Servants at
Law, though they were very learned, and far excelled many which have been
since, and took great pains and care, received very reasonable for the same,
and yet were glad when Clients retained them, and used them mildly, Their Fee
in ancient times but ten groats for a Term.
and had great care of their businesses, seldom times any Lawyer taking above
one Fee in one Cause in a Term, notwithstanding such care and pains; for then
they did not cause men to stand Cap in hand, and scrape legs, and beseech them
to take their money, and then to take large Fees of them; most commonly twenty
shillings, and many times more, and diverse times many pounds, and diverse and
sundry times have done little, and sometimes nothing at all for the same, nor
came at the Bars at all at the times and places where and when they were to
speak according to their Retainers; and yet when some few of them have been
required to restore the money which they so have taken, they have been so
impudent as to refuse, and have denied to restore the same, saying to the
Clients,
it was enough for them that he were not against them, and chid them away, who
have not dared to complain against such Lawyers by reason of the favor which
they have had with great Parsonages, to whom properly such Clients should
complain in that behalf, being in great places, and having acted such things
before they had climbed thither, by which means many have been ruined, out of
whose decays such Sergeants and Lawyers of late have made, at their entrances
into their offices or places, princely Feasts, at which they entertained many
Sycophant lascivious Courtiers, and thereby so ingratiated themselves with
those and the lordly persons of this Nation, that they have come to such
powerful and gainful places as is before mentioned, and as is reported were the
chief Procurers of a Law to be made, whereby they be styled the honest
Sergeants, etc. and that nothing shall be allowed to any Attorney for any thing
given to any Lawyer, unless he has a Ticket or Note under the hand of such
Lawyer to show for the same, which whether any, or any considerable number, did
or would give any such thing of late, any reasonable man may judge; for it is
doubted they are ashamed to give any such Note, their Fees having been of late
so large; but by these means the poor Attorney is kept in a slavish condition,
that he dares not speak what he knows, for fear that if his Clients (who
will not willingly pay for what he paid to such Sergeants and Lawyers) but he
be constrained to sue for the same, and cannot fright his Clients into payment,
he shall surely lose his money before he can obtain such Note from any such
Lawyer: And now of late the Attorneys are not permitted (as anciently has been
used) to read Records at Assizes, when there have been very few Records
Nisiprizes tried in some Counties (where many of late use to be tried) not
above one or two in two or three years, it having been a wonder to the people
in diverse Counties to hear of such a thing tried there, and in those ancient
times there seldom or never was any Counsel on either side at such Trial, but
the Judges (being then very learned) caused the Attorneys to call their Clients
Witnesses, and he diligently examined them in the presence of the Jury, and
after sull evidence heard, informed the Jury what he conceived they were to do,
according to his duty, in which such Judges in those days were very diligent,
and did not sit sleeping while the Evidence were giving, and leave the Debate
of the business to many Counsel on both sides to wrangle and scold out the
matter, which often has been done in such manner, as the Juries have found
against the right, as has appeared afterward.

4. That all Records, which shall be needful to be made and bound up into Books
or Bundles, shall be written by the Clerk or Clerks of some of the Judges of
such Court, or Examined and Signed, and done within such manner and form, as is
mentioned in the said third Proposition, without taking any thing for the same.

And this may such Judges very well afford to do, or cause to be done, out of
their great Allowances or Salaries which now are given and allowed unto them,
as well as the former; for in ancient times when the former Judges had but
small Salaries (in respect of that which is now allowed to these Judges of
late) the Records for a Term in one of the superior Courts might be put and
carried in a man's pocket, being but one single bundle of Rolls, containing
about twenty or thirty Rolls, and yet some of them fraught with many
Continuances, (most of which long since have been rendered useless by the
Statute of Jeofailes;) But now there be thousands of Rolls in some one or more
of the Terms in the year in some of such superior Courts, containing three
great Bundles of Rolls, so much as two or three Porters can conveniently carry
on their shoulders, the most part of which containing vain Entries,
Imparlances, and Continuances thereof, and of Process of Philazers, and
Exigenters, and Continuances thereof, and Counts, and Declarations, and other
Pleadings upon the same, which after have been again recorded in a superfluous
manner, and other things which might very well have been forborne, being only
contrived for the only gain or Exactions of Prothonatories, Philazers, and
Exigenters, their Clerks, and other Clerks; which Records (without the
expectance of further gain of such Officers) in every Court might be contrived
to be so short as formerly they have been: For now in Criminal Causes against
Felons (who be to lose their lives) the Clerks (who draw and record the Process
against them) have done and can do and contrive all the matter against such a
Felon so short, that about eight or ten of the same usually have been written
in one hour; but if any Criminal Cause have come in question not touching the
life of man, such an one has been put to excessive charges, especially when
the Cause has been removed into the Capital Office (formerly called the Crown
Office) where they have been squeezed to the purpose by being compelled to pay
for writing of Records several times over more then necessary, and to pay
sometimes double, and at other times treble so much, as for Records are usually
paid.

5. That there may be a Seal (as anciently there has been) in some peculiar
place, to be for every of the Courts before mentioned, to be come to at all
times of every working day, by any Clerk of every such particular Court so to
be approved of, or allowed, as before is mentioned, there to seal with the same
any Writ of course, without paying or giving any thing for so doing.

If this were done and Enacted, then need not any man stay so many weeks for a
General Seal, and sometimes pay 5 s. 10 s. 20 s. 30 s. or more, for a private
Seal, as too often has been used, and the Monopoly of the Green Seal Offices
and Officers thereof abolished, and the Great Seal to be only for such things
as shall go or pass through the hands of the Attorney General, or Soliciter
General, and approved by the State.

That such Attorney and Soliciter might only attend their places for their
Salaries or Pensions as formerly, and now in some other Nations, and not
intermeddle with any other thing, in putting poor men to excessive charges in
retaining them for their counsel with extraordinary large Fees or rewards or
others powerful with such Fees or rewards to balance them, or otherwise such
poor people have been utterly crushed, though their Causes have been never so
just, and many such poor people (who have made very hard shift to procure money
to retain such counsel) have thereby been much impoverished, and never
recovered it during their lives.

And if these things were observed (as anciently) by the Attorney General, and
Sergeants, Solicitors, etc. of this Republique, then would they attend the
public business of this Nation only, and not be entangled with any other, and
grow expert in State business, as well as those in such like Employment in
other Nations: And then if this were performed, and other the best learned of
this Nation put to their Salaries only, and held strictly to their duties, in a
short time this Nation would exceedingly flourish, and (all self-end-gain being
laid aside) would be a means to bring the most wise and judicious of this
Nation to become honest, or at least to join with such as be or shall be so;
and then if the Advice and Directions of such be observed, there can be no
doubt but this Nation may be as happy, or more then any other, and be a pattern
for them.

6. That after any Writ of Justice, with such Count, Declaration, or other
thing therewith, before mentioned, be or shall be delivered to any Sheriff or
Sheriffs, his or their Deputy or Deputies, he or they shall or may be
Authorized to seize and take the Cattle, Goods or Chattels of any against whom
the same be or shall be awarded, and keep the same until Judgment and Execution
be or shall be upon the same, or sufficient Sureties or Manucaptors found by
the Defendant or Defendants in the same, to satisfy the Debt or Demand which
shall be recovered upon the same, and that such Sureties or Manucaptors shall
be liable so to do, or attach or stay any Debt, Duty or Demand owing or due to
the Defendant in such cause by any other or others, and that recovery upon such
Writ of Justice, if the same be not satisfied by such Defendant, such person
from whom such Debt or Duty shall be due, shall satisfy the same, and that the
same course may be taken and the same proceedings in any of the superior Courts
usually held at Westminster.

By this, if the same were Enacted, may be gained in many sums of money very
cheap with ease and speed, and many chargeable Trials abated or taken away, and
many such like Debts and Duties saved, which formerly have been lost by reason
of many wilful delays and fraudulent practices of Sheriffs and their Deputies.

7. That in all such Causes (wherein Rule or Orders of course have been usually
given) a general Rule or Order (as anciently hath-been) may be made in all
Causes of the same nature in every Court. If this were Enacted, the Monopoly of
offices of Registers, and Drawers and Enterers of Rules and Orders, and the
Officers thereof, would fall, and thereby many intricacies and doubts in
proceedings taken away, whereby the people may the better understand the
prosecution in their Causes or Suits; and they, or their Attorneys, or
Solicitors, boldly ask or demand their Rights, without fear of them, or their
Superiors, and go cheerfully and with ease about their business, and have the
better knowledge of the proceedings thereof, and not to be troubled to wait or
attend* or be checked or contradicted by the cheating proud Officers in such
Offices, as they have been too often many times in diverse Causes and Suits,
their Attorneys or Solicitors having been checked and taunted at, and made (as
if it were) slaves by such, for matters of Proceedings and Entries in such
Offices happening amiss, which have been occasioned sometimes by the
negligence, at other times by the wilful mistake of such Officers, for their
own Exactions; whereby diverse proceedings in such Causes and Suits, after much
charges and trouble in the same, have been avoided, and the parties to such
Causes and Suits put to new trouble and charges about the same; and yet, by
reason of the powerfulness of such Officers in such Courts, no remedy has been
had against them, but such poor Clerks, Attorneys or Solicitors checked by
some, and jeered at by others of the Associates and Confederates of such
Exacting Officers, for the knavery and neglect of the same Officers.

8. That a certainty in general of Costs after every Judgment of every
respective nature given or pronounced in every Court may be, and that the
Judgment may be entered accordingly (as anciently has been, before useless
innovations crept in) without waiting on Prothonatories, or their Deputies,
unless in some extraordinary Causes, and then if the same be not, nor shall be
agreed upon by parties on both sides after Notes delivered each to other, in
manner and form as is before mentioned in some of the former Proposals or
Propositions, then, and not before, the same to be ascertained by such
Prothonatory or Deputy, or moved for, to such Court, and thereby done and
perfected; or that four or more of the ancient Clerks of every Court, to be
esteemed of most ability and honest, may sit every Term for every of the
Superior or such like Courts termly held in Office of the same, and there two
or more of them sit two or three hours in every Juridical day in the afternoon,
and hear and determine (if they can) the doubts of and in every Cause which
shall be brought before them, in which never a one of them shall have any
interest (as in diverse Courts have been anciently) or otherwise to certify
their Opinious thereof to such COurt: but this to be only for such Causes in
which the Suitors and their Agents be so ignorant, that they be not able to
draw or procure the drawing of their Causes into writing, according to the
before mentioned Propositions.

If this wre Enacted, then need not Suitors in such Courts, or their Attorneys,
wait so long upon Prothonatories, or their Deputies, to have or procure Costs
after Verdicts or Inquests to be signed, very many times such Attorneys waiting
long upon such Officers bareheaded in the cold, like Slaves or Vassals, as
Counsel use to do, to be heard to move at the Bars: And then also may Suitors
have Attorneys or Clerks, who never use to give, but abhor giving gratuities or
new years gifts (or as they may more properly be called, Bribes) to any of such
Prothonatories or their Deputies, cheerfully, without trouble or slavish fear,
procure Judgments after such Verdicts and Inquests to be entered or signed,
without giving to such Attorneys or Solicitors, who have used and do use to
give such rewards, gratuities or gifts, and to give unto them excessive Fees
and other great rewards, to have great and extraordinary Costs taxed, which by
such means usually have been accomplished by such like Attorney or Clerk, who
for the most part have been of the more ignorant sort in Clerkship, they only
having betaken themselves to, and studied to perform such things, and neglected
Clerkship; and for such knavery, and knavish intentions, have been had in
higher esteen, then any houest and learned Attorney or Clerk, which has
brought an Odium up the Law, Clerkship and honest Lawyers and Clerks of this
Nation, who have detested such unlawful actions and inventions, and gone on in
their business in an honest and ordinary way, and not (as such knavish and
dishonest Attorneys and Clerks have done) learned, or gone about to leam, the
meaning of the Takers or Receivers of such rewards, gratuities or gifts by
their looks, in such manner as Solicitors have done of Masters of the Chancery,
and other Referrees and Favorite Counself of those beofre whom they have moved,
and used to give such Rewards, Gratuities or Gifts.

And besides, Judges may very well, out of such their large Salaries, provide
such Prothonatories and pay them; for now they have and hold their place under
the chief of such Judges, who formerly had a larger Salary then any of the
other, sufficient to pay for writing; all which then in such Courts was
necessary to be written, of which there is no other doubt to be made but it was
that ways employed, and then would all references be speedily ended at every
particular time appointed, and none to stay or wait long the one after the
other, as has been usual for several days the one after the other, and then
there would not be so much weight laid upon one man's back, being almost enough
to break the back of a Miller Load-horse; but this to be for such Causes only
in which the Suitors and their Agents be so ignorant, that they be not able to
have the doubt in their Suit to be drawn into writing in the nature of a Case,
in such manner and form as is mentioned in the before mentioned Propositions or
Proposals for that purpose: And this course will encourage many ancient Clerks
to be and endevor to be learned and expert, as they have been in ancient times,
when they have instructed the Judges when they have been mistaken, and have
spoken to the Judges in those times with boldness, and by them have been
patiently heard, and their Instructions observed by the ancient Judges in those
times, who were mild and meek, as formerly has been mentioned, and used not
to check, munt, snarl at, and dash Practizers and Clerks before them out of
countenance, as has been used of late, and by some who have been negligent
enough at some times, and have at the Trials in some Causes, and having been
overcharged with -- uttered up that -- in an unseemly manner, and at other
times have jeered honest men out of their just Causes, and have daunted their
Witnesses by jeering and otherwise. And also, if this oighth Proposition were
Enacted, then would the common uses of Attorneys, and especially of those
coming from places far distant from Westminster, be prevented, which have been
as follows, (that is to say) in their Travels to and from Westminster they
have (as it were) hanged and drawn among themselves; for when they have met at
their usual Inns, Thieves dividing the spoil.
they have agreed to go to Trials and enter Judgments in as many Causes only
asby Information of one another they have thought would be searched for or
after, (having not been above the tenth part of their Causes,) and yet they
have caused their Clyents to pay for all the other, as if Trials and Judgments
respectively have been in the same, and as if they had paid unto the
Monopolizing Officers to the most, according to their Extortions: One cheat
dcceiving another.
and by such means they who could keep themselves from being questioned by such
Monopolizers for taking that which they clairned to belong to them by giving
Rewards to the Favotites of their Superiors to work them off, such
Reward-givers have grown great in Riches, unto which such (who have not been
skilled in such subtilties, or have been learned) have never attained.

9. That any such Clerk before mentioned may write the whole Record, which any
person shall have to be tried at any Assizes, upon any Issue or Issues joined
or to be joined in any such Superior Court; and that the same may be examined
as before is mentioned, and signed, if well done, in such manner as before is
mentioned; and that he or they so examining, or signing, shall take nothing for
doing the same; and that a common form shall be contrived for Writs in every
such case, to be affixed to every of such Records, Authorizing and Commanding
the Judges of such Assizes to Try or hear the Trial of such Issues, and to do
all things for a Judge necessary to be done about the Trial of the same.

For this may the chief Judge or Justice, or any other Judge, do, if they will:
for in the Statute, whereby such Trials were created, it is Enacted, That such
Records to be tried should be sent to the Justices of Assize, to be tried by
the Court or chief Justice thereof, where the Cause to be tried is depending,
and no Fees set what, they should take for the same: whereby it may be clearly
gathered, that the intent of that Law was, that such Records should be sent
down into the Countries to be tried (without such charge as now, by making new
Records thereof, for which there is no mention made in the Statute) and after
returned thither for Judgments to be entered upon the same, which may very well
and easily be done, if the particular Records of every Cause might be
distinctly kept by themselves, and Filed together, and not to be bound up in
Books or bundles, till after final Judgment or sentence: and why may not any
man have his Judgment entered upon the same Record, to be kept and filed, and
not to be at the charge against his Will to have them written again, most of
them being either satisfied or paid shortly after Judgment entered? But if any
new precedent happen, then it is and will be convenient that all the
proceedings thereupon should be entered at large, and bound up into books or
bundles, but at the public charge only; and then care will be taken that no
such books or bundles shall be stuffed with superfluous matter, and thereby
made long, and the State be put to unnecessary charges by such Entries, and the
People to much trouble in searching for Records in such Court; and as
concerning the Examination of such Records. and Proceedings, there will be
little need, if the Propositions or Proposals for Amendment of Proceedings in
Law do take effect.

10. That if any Sheriff, Bailiff, or Sergeant at the Mace, shall require,
exact, or take any excessive sum of Money of any (who shall desire or require
him to execute any Writ or Warrant, according to his duty, when he may attend
the same; and go about it without danger) then shall such Sheriff, Bailiff, and
Sergeant, forfeit and lose to the party grieved thereby, the value of his just
Debt r Duty, for recovery of which by such Writ he prosecuteth.

And that if any such Officer shall take or exact any excessive Money of any
Debtor or Defendant (by color of staying or waiting, or for Lodging or Diet)
whereby such Debtor or Defendant is disabled to satisfy the Creditor or
Demandant his Debt or Demand, then such Officer to forfeit to such Creditor or
Demandant ten times the value of that which the said Officer shall so exact or
take.

If this were Enacted, then neither would nor could such Officers afford to buy
their Offices at such dear Rates as they have used of latter years, for making
up of which they have used great and grievous Extortions, whereby many poor
people have been utterly ruined, and others much impoverished, and diverse
others put to excessive charges and trouble, to as much or more then the value
of that which they sued for; such Officers most commonly, when they have had
Executions to serve, having exacted of the Prosecutor sometimes half, at other
times a third, and most commonly a fourth part of the Debt or Demand, before
they have or would serve such Execution against the goods or body of any; and
when they have had Writs to deliver to any, possession of Messuages or
Tenements, they have usually taken and exacted of the Prosecutor one years Rent
thereof, or security for the same, before they would go about it; and besides,
if the Prosecutors have not by themselves or Solicitors danced attendance, and
waited on such Officers, they neither have nor would serve such Executions,
until toward the end of the year of their remaining in Office, taking Bribes
in the mean time of the Defendant for forbearing such Execution; and those, who
have made it (as it were) a Trade to be such Officer or Deputy from year to
year in onc County or other for many years together, and having by their secret
Combination, Practices and Confederacies with their Agents or Brethren in
Iniquity, have by themselves, their Alies, Servants, or private Creatures, took
the benefit of the most part, or a great part of the benefit of such Offices
for diverse years, and have grown so cunning and subtle in the same, that they
have so seeretly extorted and exacted great sums of Money by color of such
Offices, which none but such as they, could discover; whereby they have given,
and could afford to give for such Offices, more then any honest man, whereby
seldom or never any honest have meddled, or would meddle with any such Office,
and therefore such Officers (so commonly continuing in Office) have taken as it
were a yearly Rent of many Out-liers and Fugitives in their Counties, skulking
and lurking there, and never would arrrest nor have arrested them, unless the
Prosecutors or their Agents have been at their heels; and by these means many
just Debts have been lost by delay, and the parties so lurking, and skulking,
and bribing, spent as much or more then would satisfy the Creditor, and
utterly undone themselves, their wives and children, in so living in expense
and idleness for many years together.

And then also would be prevented the occasion of such Sheriffs, and other
Officers before with them mentioned, exacting and extorting such great Sums of
Money out of many poor Defendants (who have not so bribed such Officers, and
against whom such Officers have had Executions) A Sherift lately seized in
Execution a Barn of Corn worth 40 l. he set one man to thresh it, and two
Bailiffs to oversee the work, who sold the Corn to maintain themselves with
good drink and victuals; so that the Barn of Corn paid but about forty
shillings of the Debt.

The said Sherist lately seized upon a Defendants Cows, Horses and Sheep; the
Cows brought in daily profit by their Milk, the Horses by their daily working,
(so long as they were able to go on their lege,) the Sheep by being folded:
every night and kept in the common field, where the Sherift had no right of
common,) yet the Defendant, when he redeemed his Cattle, was compelled to pay
for all their keepings, as if they had done nothing but gone in Pasture-ground.


by selling the Cattle and Goods and Chattals at under-rates, some to half, at
other times to less, of the true value thereof, to some of their Agents, with
whom (by secret combination and practice between them, which neither has nor
could be discovered) they have shared and divided the spoil, and at other times
by working and laboring Cattle, and using and employing the Goods and Chattals
of such Defendants to and for the use of them and their Associates, whereby the
Cattle, Goods and Chattals have been much impaired, and some of them spoiled or
quite worn out; and yet many times such extorting Officers have been so
impudent, and void of all conscience or honesty, that (if the business be
compounded, so that such Defendant were to have such Goods, Chattals and Cattle
again) they have caused such poor Defendants to pay great Sums of Money for the
keeping and Stoage of such Goods and Chattals, and feeding of such Cattle.

And then such extorting Officers would be prevented of their continual usage
of defrauding many poor people (who have come to them for Writs, and others to
whom they have offered themselves to sue out Writs for) by going to ignorant
Attorneys or Officers (who know the course of Actions as little as themselves)
to take out such Writs in Trespass, when the Causes have been for great Debts
or Demands, who sometimes have made forth such Writs, and thereby such Officers
have Arrested diverse Defendants (of whom, or their Sureties, they have taken
good security for the appearance of such Defendants) but after (by reason of
Bribes given to such Officers by such Defendants) such Officers have sometimes
forborne to tell such simple people (who have so first gone to such Officers for
such Writs, before they have advised with, or acquainted any honest and learned
Counsel Clerk or Attorney in their Causes) of such Arrest done, till after such
Defendants have appeared at the day of their appearance, and either foysted in
common Bayl, for want of marking the Rolls, or calling for good Bayl, or
otherwise: in some Courts have nonsuited the Cause, and obtained Costs against
such simple people, both which have usually been done and allowed by the course
and practice of the Superior Courts, or otherwise (when such appearance and
good Bayl has been called for) such Officers have forborne the return of such
Writs and Warrants thereupon, and Bonds many times half, at other times a whole
year, and diverse times several years, and some of them after the return of such
Writs have stood out Amerciaments for as long a time, and diverse times till
many Debts have been lost, and such Amerciaments have not redounded to the
benefit of the Suitors, but to the King, or etc. and after such Officers have
stood out so long after appearance, they have got off such Amerciaments for
very little.

And some of them have bragged and boasted, that they have obtained Patents for
the benefit of Amerciaments within their Jurisdictions to their own uses, and
that therefore they have not cared how many Amerciaments have been imposed
upon, estreated or extracted out against them (saying, the more, the better for
their advantage,) and have jeered the Suitors, and said, that if they did not
comply with them the said Sheriffs or Officers, to their liking, by giving of
them such high Rewards as they have demanded, or retained some Attorney of
their Associates or Servants (who use to squeeze and wring much Money out of
their Clyents in an excessive manner, and with whom such Sheriffs or Officers
use to share) then such Suitors should have little benefit of their businesses;
some of such Officers (who have gained peculiar liberties therein) often
reporting, that they can do what they please in most Causes within their
liberties.

And many times such Officers and Clyents have gone to such Attorneys or
Solicitors as have been Associates of such Officers, who have made out Warrants
without Writs, or otherwise such Officers have Arested the Defendants without
Writs, and then took Rewards, or (as they may more fitly be called) Bribes, of
both Plaintiffs and Defendants, in endevoring to end their business; and
threatening Plaintiffs, that if they would not stand to their award, they should
have little good success in their businesses; and by using the Defendants
(being simple) ruggedly, and terrifying them, they have wrought them into
Commpositions, and shared in the Debts and Demands, and in many that have not
been, they have gained a fourth, third, and sometimes half of such Debts and
Demands, and by such means have caused themselves to be made both Judges,
Attorneys, or Solicitors, and Bailiffs, in such Causes: And in many Causes
(wherein they have grasped into their hands the suing out of such Writs) and in
such Causes (wherein they could not procure Compositions or References) they
have caused the Defendants to retain Attorneys being Associates of such
Officers, with whom they have shared in their Fees; and in neither of both
these cases last mentioned any Writs at all have been sued out, and yet the
Clyents have paid for Writs; by which menas Money has been extorred and exacted
out of Clyents for more Writs then have issued out of the Superior Court, by
which means the honest people of this Nation have been much defrauded for many
years together.

And many such Officers (that is to say) Undersheriffs, Bailiffs, and
Sergeants, when they have Arrested honest meaning men, had them to Tippling
houses, or houses of them and their Associates, have extorted and exacted much
Money out of them, by threatening of them to carry them to prison; and those
(who have not rewarded them to their liking, or could not) they have dragged nd
hurryed to prison, hunching and kicking them, though they have never resisted
nor offered to resist such Officers, nor given them any ill words: And when
such Officers have been employed only to take appearance upon Arrest, they have
constrained the persons Arrested to pay down the Attorneys Fees, and money by
them to be laid out in appearances, into the hands of Officers; and then would
they seldom or never pay the same to such Officers, if the business proceeded,
or restore the same to the Defendants, if the same were ended; and when some
few have gotten some part of such money out of such Hucksters hands, they have
spent as much, and sometimes more, then the value thereof, besides the
sustaining of great trouble in moving Courts by Counsel, and complaining to
Judges and Justices, by which means such Officers have kept to their own uses
such money, and the poor parties so Arrested constrained to procure so much more
for their appearances.

And further, if all the Propositions or Proposals before mentioned were
Enacted, besides the benefit which thereby would accrue to the honest people of
this Nation, as before is mentioned; these benefits and advantages hereafter
following would redound to the Public Advantage; and the ensuing
Inconveniences and Mischiefs (which have much injured and prejudiced the
honest people of this Nation) be prevented and taken away.

For then it would be again as in ancient times, when Parliaments have been
once every year, and more often when occasion in those times have happened,
being when Kings were virtuous, and abhorred vice, and had care of the then
honest people of this Nation (according as to their then light they were) as of
themselves, when the people had Justice equally, and without delay, done by
their Equals, and thereby continued in great quiet, but that they were besotted
and beguiled by the Priest, as before is mentioned, who for such their actings
deservedly fell; and it is thought others (who have done as bad or worse then
they on a sudden) will do the like, if they do not timely repent and amend.

And then would again the Members of Parliaments, or Representatives, be only
of the most honest and discreet of the people of this Nation, and no other,
equally and impartially Elected without trouble or charge to any, as formerly
has been, and dispatch all business coming before them speedily, (the one of
them seldom contradicting the other,) as has been in those ancient times,
without sitting of full Parliament or Representative any extraordinary long
time together, but conclude all business for them necessary to be done (which
no other Courts could remedy) within a Month, six weeks, or two Months time at
the most (unless upon extraordinary occasions) before Adjournment, Prorogation
or Ending, which caused the English Laws to be accounted the best in
Christendom (and deservedly, before Innovations crept in,) and then were few
Motions in respect of the extraordinary multitudes which have been of late made
by Favorite Counsel, or any other Motions by any other the Attorneys or Clerks,
unless it were in cases extraordinary by honest and learned Counsel, and not by
Favorites to begin a Cause, and have a large Fee for so doing, usually only
saying, such an one is Plaintiff, and such an one is Defendant, and then an
honest learned Lawyer have usually gone on with the same thoroughly, or
otherwise such Favorites have or could say little more, and some of them have
not been of ability, or capable to say any more, though they have received
extraordinary large Fees double, treble, sometimes fourfold of that which such
honest Lawyers have had; which Favorites the Suitors have been constrained to
retain, or otherwise such learned and honest Lawyers have several days the one
after the other waited, till some of them have been wearyed out, and given the
business over, and others, who have attended to be heard, have took as much
pains as a Porter has in going of errands, and earning as much money in such
time: and besides, such honest Lawyers, when they have long waited and have
been heard, they have had little or no fruit of their Motions, but have been
flammed off, baffled, and girt up, and checked, before they have been half
heard out their Motion, and have been sent home with a sleeveless errand, and
been discouraged.

And thereby the Favorites, by Alliances or yearly presents, gratuities or
new years gifts, learning the meaning of their Superiors by their looks, have
engrossed up all or the most part of the gains in every Cause, and thereby they
and their Superiors have climbed to a great height in few years; and many times
when one Suitor having retained one, two, or three Counsel, to plead his Cause
at the Assizes and other places, where several Counsel have used to attend, to
the number of twenty or thirty, or sometimes more at several Bars, such Suitor
has been baffled out, and lost his Cause, unless he had retained half such
Counsel, by reason some crafty person have caused the Record of such Cause to
be carried to another Bar, where such Suitor nor his Counsel have expected the
Cause should be tried; and many times the principal Counsel of such Suitor
being called to, and attending another Cause at another Bar, and from the Bar
where such Suitors Cause was expected to be tried; and then when the Cause of
such Suitor has been called, and he desiring the Judge to stay until his
Counsel came, or that the Cause might be tried where they were to attend other
Trials, the Judges, before whom such Causes have been to be tried, have denied
to admit the same, casting an angry look upon such Suitor, saying, there were
other Counsel enough whom they might retain (nodding toward Favorite Dunces
standing in sight,)
and thereupon such poor Suitors have been constrained to retain Lawyers of
mean Judgment on a sudden, who could not understand their Causes soon enough,
and some not at all, nor capable thereof; and such Causes, having been tried in
the absence of such honest and learned Counsel retained and instructed at the
first, have gone and passed against such Suitors, having had the best and most
right to recover in such Cause: And when any of such Favorite Lawyers have
failed in such their presents or gifts, at the usual time of the presenting of
the same, have grown out of favor; and after they so failing, have had a grin
or a wry face from some of such Superiors; they have not come into favor again
a long time, and some of them never, which has caused most of them constantly
to continue the same, and by those means grow the more expert in such their
Combinations (the more to keep others, who do not use such dealing, ignorant
thereof) and be suffered to foam out nonsense, and lie, bark, brawl, and
wrangle as they have pleased (when others of ability have not been suffered
scarce to speak three or four words in a cause) and thereby to gain the
affection of Suitors in such Causes: and sometimes such Favorites, though they
have been many on a side, have not dared to speak a word more in any Cause
after they have received a private look from some Superior, which none other
but themselves have understood, which is thought has been when some such
Superior, or some of his Alies or Private Creatures, have grasped and hooked in
more then such Favorites have received for their Fees, Coventry, and Manchester
wherein Coventry and Queen Besse have been accounted very expert.

And by such means other under or petty Officers to Inferiors under the high
Superiors (who have learned the skill to give Rewards or Bribes to those
Superiors, to keep them from questioning by such Inferiors) when they have done
amiss, have gained much.

And then would Suitors know what evidence they were to produce at Trials, and
not to be triced or nonsuited on a sudden, many times the one after the other,
as many times has fallen out, to the infinite gains of such ignorant Favorite
Lawyers, and great damage to the honest people; neither would Juries be pusled
with multitudes of Issues at a time, but all Causes tried in an easy way, as
has been in the best time.

And then could not such Inferior and the greater Monopolizing Officers before
mentioned, by the favor which they have gained of their Superiors, by
contributing to them part of the gains of such innovated and extorting Offices
before mentioned, take such occasion, as they have done, to increase their
Exactions by color of such Offices, to cause Orders to be made, whereby many
Mischiefs and Inconveniences have fallen upon Suitors in Causes; and when
complaint has been thereof, they have caused the poor Prosecutors thereof to
be blamed and checked for the faults or neglects of such Officers and their
Superiors, and still kept such Prosecutors under, that they have not dared to
complain, or so much as publicly reveal what has beendone amiss by such
Monopolizing Officers, or their Superiors.

And then would the Vagrant Favorite Counsel forbear wandering abroad into
several Counties, and extorting upon the people there, and putting them to
great trouble, as they have too often used.

And further, and lastly, (upon observation and serious consideration of the
whole matter before expressed) We conceive, and are informed by others (with
whom we have conferred) that by the Ten last Propositions (if the same were
Enacted) would yearly be saved to the honest People of this Nation above fifty
thousand pounds [50000 l.] (which annually formerly have been exacted from them
by undeserving corrupt Officers, over and above the before mentioned Sums) by
rendering of some of the Offices and Officers, by and in those Ten Propositions
mentioned (who formerly have unlawfully exacted yearly diverse thousands of
pounds) merely useless, and to have been inconvenient and mischievous; and
reducing others of them useful, from diverse thousands of pounds, to four
hundred pounds, and others to a competent gain, according to their deserts, as
anciently has been, before Innovations and Exactions crept in (being contrived
and obtained by Monopolists, and Buyers and Sellers of Offices and Justice)
without Parliament-Authority, contrary to the Law.

See the Table or the Particulars of the Five millions seven hundred sixty
eight thousand seven hundred and seven pounds [5768707 l.] formerly yearly
Exacted and Extorted, and Losses in Estates every year heretofore, annually
hereafter saved and prevented, cast up together in Page 21. of this Book.

Postscript.
WE desire all the honest People of this Nation further to take notice, that we
conceive our selves bound to publish our Observations upon what we have with
deliberation plainly seen to be intolerable Abuses and Oppressions laid upon
the People of this Commonwealth. It is no small grief unto us, to mind what
little Justice we have seen and heard of, exercised (in this our age) in Courts
of Judicature; What is it but the want of reforming what is amiss and unjust,
which has made our Troubles last so long in this our Native Country? Was it
not the cause of the beginning and long continuing of Wars in Scotland? and
has it not been a means to continue Troubles in Ireland? and is it not a great
Encouragement now to Foreign People to make War against us, they understanding
how many discontents are amongst our selves? If Justice were but equally
distributed to all, who then would not advance the Republique with their
Ingenuities, Purses and Persons? and would it not make our Enemies at home to
be at peace with us, and set to their helping hand to carry on just Designs? We
cannot but call to remembrance, how (at the beginning of our Troubles) many
thousands were not backward to adventure their lives, and others caused their
Money, Plate, and Gold-rings to be freely made use of upon a Public Account;
and not all out of a religious principle only, but merely for common Justice
betwixt man and man, which being now not to be found, makes most of them repent
of what they have done, saying, That if they had thought pulling down Kingly
Government would have advantaged them no more, they would have been contented
to be tyrannized over by a King still; and the fault of all, we find to be put
upon those who are good for nothing but to set People together by the ears, and
find out tricks to continue Lawsuits, even betwixt Father and Son, Husband and
Wife, Brother and Brother, etc. so long as they have any feathers upon their
backs; and when they are made Beggars, by having their Suits span out to the
end of Suitors Purses, with a Bottom of non-satisfaction woond up to the
grieved party, let them go where they will. We cannot but observe, how almost
all men are procuring large possessions to themselves, and serving their own
ends, and neglecting the Public, for which, at the first, Lives and Estates
were not too much to adventure: many are apt to say, that they fear, Gold,
Silver, or some rich Pad-locks are hung upon the mouths of diverse persons, who
were wont to stand and speak for righteous and just things to be done, but now
of late have been silent and idle; who but the other day (as it were) were
mighty stirring men, and nothing should satisfy them until a Reformation of
palpable Abuses. We also note, how many hard words our Rulers have abroad by
reason of the slow proceedings in Regulations; and it is thought the Favorite
Lawyers and Monopolists are the Obstructors. It is very sad to consider how
many Complaints are heard abroad every day, we can hardly have the sound of
them out of our ears, nor our eyes long from beholding one or other, not only
beggered, but also deprived of part or all their Senses by Oppression, so that
they are in no little better condition then mad, as is too apparent in these
days. Why do we behold fawning, flattering, and dissembling persons (who were
and still are common Enemies to the Government of this Commonwealth) speed
better, then honest, godly, and conscientious Christians? Why is it that by
favor so many Drunkards, Swearers, Diverse Officers have been so impudent, that
they have not blushed to say, they could not be half content with their Salary,
without taking Gratuities.
notorious Liars, etc. are preferred to places of Trust and great concernment,
without any desert at all; unto which persons, industrious, honest and
religious people are made a prey, and by whom they are perplexed intolerably,
unless Bribes be put into the Oppressors hands? As for prosecuting persons for
any misdemeanor, it is neither safe nor profitable for any that are plain,
down-right-dealing, conscientious, and honest men; for an Offender shall have
favor enough for his money: and unless the Prosecutor be as free as the
Deliquent, he is like to come off with a Scratcht face, and after the expense
of much money be liable to be sued for what he has done: So that we conceive
Penal Statutes to be but of little use, except to get money to Informers (who
are accounted to be a Pack of Knaves living upon other men's labors) for there
is scarce one to be found who will not take Bribes, and rest contented, without
caring to see the Justice of the Law executed, which encourages notorious
Offenders much, knowing they can buy their peace with a small sum of money when
they please: But diverse that are honest are so perplexed with the said
Informers (who usually take rugged courses with them, to fright them to give
money) that their lives are made burdensome to them, and their Estates not at
their own, but unreasonable creatures disposing, who exact what they please, or
else the Defendant shall be put to excessive charge and trouble, although his
offense be but feigned, or not worth the naming. All these foregoing Grievances
we conceive are occasioned by reason of the want of honest, just, impartial,
and able persons to hear and determine Controversies and Differences, whose
place it is to inquire out the truth, and make a speedy determination, without
suffering the Prosecutor, or the prosecuted, or both, to be undone by the
invented tricks and devices of those who mind nothing but their own excessive
gain, and the Peoples ruin; we see it apparent daily, that a man had better
lose his Right, then contend for it with wilful, malicious, powerful, and rich
Adversaries; nay, if Equals go to Law (there being so many intricacies in
proceedings) both parties are at as much doubt which way the Cause will be
carried, as if they should throw a Cast at Dice for it. We cannot but stand
amazed when we seriously consider what grievous corruption there is almost in
all places, where abused, afflicted and grieved parties should make their
conditions known with expectation of Redress; and with what difficuly, charge
and adventure Justice is procured! If that Officers abuses Suitors (by
exacting or extorting money, or by delay of such business which their duty binds
them to see performed, or otherwise) the grieved party cannot tell where to
complain, but to those from whom little Redress can be expected; so that he is
constrained to be contented to be a slave to those that are but Servants. All
these before mentioned Oppressions, we are persuaded, God will find out some
way or other of deliverance from; but who it is that will be so far honored
with the promoting of such a glorious Work, we are not yet able to discern. Can
we expect it from any but those that are honest and godly? Whosoever they be
that have opportunities put into their hands, and makes not use of them, He
that knows all things will lay such persons aside, and make use of others
that shall make a better improvement of their Talents which they are betrusted
with. These things being upon our hearts, we thought good to publish at the
present, (reserving diverse other until hereafter some convenient opportunity
presents) being confident that most that are of public spirits, unbiassed,
honest and conscientious, will (as we conceive they are bound) endevor the
promoting of them, by using what lawful means the Lord shall direct them unto.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed by John Macock, and are to be sold by Francis Tyton at the
three Daggers in Fleetstreet, and Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhill.
1652.


