AN ANSWER TO A Speech without Doors: OR, ANIMADVERSIONS Upon an unsafe and
dangerous Answer to the Scotch-Papers, printed under the name of Mr. Challener
his Speech, which while it offers to reach a blow at the Scotch-Papers, does
indeed strike at the honor of the PARLIAMENT, and interest of the Kingdom of
ENGLAND.
PROVE. 28. 2. For the transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof. IF
any shall ask, Who art thou and what meanest thou? I shall not make my Answer
so wide as Di^g^nes did; I am not only (...) but (...), yea, I will yet take
me to a narrower compass. I am one who have adhered to the Parliament all
along from the very beginning of the war, and I have served them faithfully in
their lowest condition, resolving still to be for them, in that which is just
and right, against any person or Nation in the world: And as to my meaning in
this particular, it is not to write in defense of the Scotch Papers (let their
Papers speak for themselves) if they can; and if they cannot, I have nothing
to say for them, and however I will not ju^dre in illorum verb^, but I write in
defense of the Honor of the Parliament, and of the Interest of England, which
have received a dangerous wound by this printed Paper, which comes abroad as a
Speech spoken by Mr Challenor in the House of Commons. I do not presume to
examine or at all to intermeddle in any thing spoken within those walls, I
speak to the printed Paper, which for any thing I know may be supposititious,
or at least different from the Original. Sure (if I mis-heard not) it is not
printed as it was spoken in the House, (which yet is pretended in the Title
Page) else what is become of the Dog that is not worth the whistling after? and
what is become of that other passage concerning the debate at a Comedy in
Oxford, concerning the fittest place for erecting the Kings Throne? the
determination whereof was so difficult, that some thought it best, not to erect
it at all. Whatever was spoken in the House, I suppose it is no Privilege of a
Member of Parliament to print what he list against the Honor of the Parliament
and Interest of the Kingdom: neither can it be a breach of the Privilege of a
Member, and much less the breach of a Privilege of Parliament, to vindicate
the Honor and Interest of Parliament, which is my present work, and so I come
to it, without further prefacing.

My Animadversions upon the Paper are these. first of all it presents to the
view of the world, a champion coming forth Goliah-like for the Parliament; but
stumbling woefully in the very beginning of his dispute. It draws together
three large sheets of the Scotch Papers into this syllogism.

Wheresoever the Kingdom of Scotland has an interest in their King, there
they may dispose of him.

But the Kingdom of Scotland has an interest in their King he being in
England.

Therefore in England they may dispose of him.

The Paper runs along in answer to this Syllogism, and here is a man of
straw set up to be buffeted. I will concur with Mr Challenor to deny this
Argument, but all this while the Scotch Paper escapes scot-free; there is no
such Argument in their Paper, neither for matter nor form: they do not say
that either this Kingdom or their own may dispose of the King, but that it
belongs to both Kingdoms to dispose of him. And if there must needs be a
Syllogisticall arguing and answering, their Argument ought to have been stated
thus.

Whatsoever is by Covenant, Treaty, and the very Law of Nations of joint
interest and common concernment to both Kingdoms, ought not to be disposed of
but by the mutual advice and consent of both Kingdoms for the good of both.

But the person of the King, whether in England or Scotland, is by Covenant,
Treaty, and the very Law of Nations, of joint interest, and common concernment
to both Kingdoms.

Therefore the Person of the King, whether in England or Scotland, ought not to
be disposed of, but by the mutual advice and consent of both Kingdoms, for
the good of both.

This is the sum of what the Scotch Papers say, as to this point which is
there prosecuted and endeavored, to be proved by parts: but whether it was for
the Honor of the Parliament, that one of their Members should Answer what the
Scotch say not, and not Answer what they say, let rational men judge.

To no better purpose is that distinction, Page 4. 5. of the King in Abstracto,
and the King in Concreto: which (beside that it makes Persona to be Concretum,
I know not by what rule of Logic) does plainly beg from the Scotch what is
in question. For the Scotch Papers do state the question (as the Vote of the
honorable Houses, September 24. had done before them) not upon the Authority,
Power, and Office of the King, but upon the Person of the King: and to this
very purpose are all their Arguments brought, to prove a joint and equal
interest of both Kingdoms in the Person of the King, which by Covenant they
and we both are bound to defend and preserve, as well as his Authority and just
Power. But this pretended Answer, in stead of answering or confuting their
Arguments, denies their Conclusion. Was this now for the Honor of the
Parliament? Was it not?

I, but says the Paper, Person^ sequitur locum, and his Person must be
disposed of by the supreme Power of that Country, wheresoever he shall happen
to abide. By this Principle forsooth the Person of the King of England, if he
were in Scotland, must be disposed of by the supreme Power of that Country,
without the advice and consent of the Parliament of England: And was not this
well pleaded for the interest of the Parliament and Kingdom of England? I
think not.

Within a few lines after I find it said, That the Kingdom of England, is as
distinct in interests from Scotland, as Spain: And is all our conjunction of
interests in one Religion, one Covenant, one King, one Cause, one War, turned
in end to no more but this? Then may Scotland make a Peace without the advice
and consent of the Kingdom of England, as well as Spain may. Then also may
Scotland enter into a Confederacy with a Forain Kingdom, without asking advice
or consent from this Kingdom, as well as Spain may. And was not this well
provided for the interest of England? was it? or was it not?

I turn over to Page 6. where I read thus, I shall take this as granted for
good Law, that let the Person of any Nation (that were I confess Persona
Concreta) under the sun, which is in amity with England, happen to come into
England, that person is forthwith a Subject of England: For he being protected
by the Laws of England, he becomes thereby subject to those Laws, etc. Then
must any Ambassador coming from another Kingdom or State, expect no
sufficient protection in England by the Law of Nations, but by the Laws of
England, without which protection (as this Paper says) every man may kill him
and destroy him, nor can he have such protection except he become withal a
Subject of England. And was not the Honor of the Parliament and Kingdom of
England in this well preserved? Sure Foraine Nations will not think so.

It cannot be denied (says the Paper) but there is a twofold subjection,
Legal and Local: -- And this though it be only, pro tempore, and the other
during life; yet it does for the time totally obstruct the operation of the
other subjection: so that no King can command any Subject of his living out of
his Kingdom, but such Subject of his, is to be disposed of by the sole
Authority of that supreme Power where he makes his residence. By which rule,
(being at least equally applicable to any that are subject to the Parliament)
when both Houses send Commissioners into Scotland; these Commissioners must not
be subject to the Orders and Commands of the Houses of Parliament, but must be
disposed of by the sole Authority of the supreme Power in that Kingdom. And is
not this fine for the Honor of the Parliament? He that will make it stand with
their Honor, Magnus mihi erit Apollo.

But come on Page 7. I do affirm, that if a King of Scotland should have come
into England, before the union of both these Kingdoms, he had been instantly a
Subject of England, and his person to be disposed of by the sole Authority of
the Laws of England. By which Principle, the Prince of Wales now in France, is
become a Subject of France, and his Person to be disposed of by the sole
Authority of the Laws of France; so that the King and Parliament have not
Authority to recall him. And is not this a good salve for the Honor of the
Parliament? O brave!

Page 8. W^ cannot admit of any regal^ty in the Person of a King of Scotland
coming into England. -- No man can be said to be Rex but in Regno. And by just
Analogy the Parliament of England, cannot be acknowledged a Parliament but in
England only; neither can their Commissioners in any other Kingdom or State,
be admitted to propound, declare, treat, or conclude in name of both Houses.
And is not this well looked unto for the Honor of the Parliament? Is it not?

Page 9. If they (the Scotch) be our fellows, why come they not to our
Parliament? Therefore if it can be made to appear that they are our fellows,
equals, and brethren, they may come to our Parliaments. Lo here, how well the
Privilege of Parliament is preserved?

Here follows also a Story of John King of England, cited as Duke of Normandy
to appear at Paris: Whereunto the English replied; That if the Duke of
Normandy did go, the King of England must go; and if the Duke of Normandy
were beheaded, they knew well enough what would become of the King of England.
It was resolved by the Lawyers, that if John had been in Normandy at the time
of his summons, he ought to have appeared, but not so, being in England. Where
beside the vast disproportion of comparing the case of one who was King of one
Kingdom and Subject of another, with his case who is a free Monarch of two
free Kingdoms; the Narration does also extremely strengthen the Scotch Paper,
which it pretends to oppose; for they answer the English now, just as the
English did then answer the French; that is, If this present King of England
must be disposed of by the sole Authority of both Houses of Parliament, what
shall then become of the Person of the King of Scotland? where is then the
Scotch King in Concreto? If the notion of a King in Abstracto be sufficient
against the Scotch in this debate; sure it was as strong against the English
then. Behold, what a rational account is here given for the single and sole
Authority of the Parliament of England, to dispose of the King of both
Kingdoms! If this be well pleaded, I confess I have lost my judgment.

Page 12. tells us the Kingdoms are now contending about the Kings Person, not
who should have it, but who should not have it: Which reflecteth strongly upon
the Parliament, and will infer that forasmuch as they decline or shun to
have the Kings Person, either they did not wisely, or not uprightly, when they
Voted that his Person is to be disposed of as both Houses shall think fit. And
is not this much for the Honor of Parliament? Is it not?

Page 14. It Is desired to be considered, whether (as the case now stands) The
Kings safety be not incompatible with the safety of the Commonwealth? I will
not here relate what is vox populi concerning that Gentleman's old discontents
at the King; but I bless my self to think where we now are, when after so
many Oaths, Protestations, Declarations, and Covenants, as for other ends, so
for the safety of the Kings Person, it is notwithstanding endeavored to make
the world believe, that there is a great doubt made in Parliament, whether the
Kings safety is not incompatible with the safety of the Commonwealth. And is
this now compatible with the Honor of Parliament?

In fine, I do not know, whether the Scotch may like this Speech of Mr
Challenor, for the matter of it, as being a malleable Answer; yea, such as in
the opinion of Intelligent Readers, fortifieth their Papers not a little. But I
much mistake, if it have a favorable aspect from the Parliament; either for
the matter, or for diverse acrimonious expressions in it, which as I cannot
easily believe to have been spoken in that honorable Senate: so none (I
think) will like well provoking Language, but those who desire to put the
Kingdoms by the ears: from which misery, and from all the Plots both of
Sectaries and Malignants, Good Lord deliver us, Amen.

FINIS.

