An Answer
To His Majesty's Speech, by the Gentry of the County of York, attending His
Majesty at the City of York on Thursday the 12 of May, 1642.
May it please Your Most Excellent Majesty.
YOur Propositions delivered to Us yesterday from your Majesty, are of so high
concernment to the Weal and peace of the whole Kingdom, and do so nerely
touch upon the affection and fidelity of all your Subjects in General, and we
being but a part of one County only, do not conceive it safe for Us to advise
therein, but rather humbly to beseech Your Majesty to impart the grounds of
Your Majesty's fears and jealousies, to Your high Court of Parliament, (of
Whose most loyal care and affection to your Majesty's honor and safety, and
the prosperity of Your Subjects and dominions, we are most confident) and
whatsoever shall be advised by Your Great Council, therein we shall most
willingly embrace, and give our concurrence and assistance to it as shall be
come us; In whose fidelititie Your Maje stie: Has often declared especial
trust, and albeit we do not presume to advise Your Majesty to that
particular, it being of transcendent consequence.

Nevertheless, in the behalf of those Members of Parliament, lately employed
to attend Your Majesty, from both Houses being all of them Gentlemen of
quality and estate in this County and trusted to serve in that Most Honorable
Assembly, we humbly crave Your Majesty's leave to express our confidence in
their unstained loyalty and affection to Your Majesty to be such as Your
Majesty may securely admit their attendance to negotiat their employments
until they be recalled by the Parliament, and for their fidelity we do all
engage our selves to Your Majesty, and we are most assured that Your Royal
Person shall be secured in the real fidelity of Your subjects of this County
without any extraordinary guard.

London Printed for Richard Lowndes, at his shop next without Ludgate, 1642.


