AN ANSWER TO DOCTOR CHAMBERLAINES SCANDALOVS AND FASLSE PAPERS.

Philalethes K.



June.28.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1649.

An answer to Doctor Chamberlaines Scandalous and false Papers.
SOme men have such an itch to quarrel, that rather then want enemies, they
will fight with their own shadow; or make them of straw, tear them in pieces,
and glory in the conquest: amongst all, that have disturbed our peace, none
have troubled themselves more to less purpose, then that learned Gentleman,
Doctor Peter Chamberlain, who to his great renown, as he supposes, has given
ample testimony of his wit and learning in diverse famous two penny volumes, to
all posterity I have not so much leisure as to take a particular survay of him,
nor his works, nor indeed will it be worth my labor, nor any man's time to
read, only a touch of both, as they come in my way, and conduce to what I have
in design,

This Doctor Peter was born and bred amongst us in Blackfriers, as he tells us
in print in one of his papers, extracted from the Ioines of I know not what
great French Mounsier, as he proclaims to the world in another, with
Glendours in the welsh Chronicle boasting of strange meteors and constellation
at his nativity, none of all which makes him the wiser man, or better
Physician; his Father, for ought I ever heard, was a good honest
Barber-surgeon, and by his knack in midwifery got a plentiful estate, which
with his art he left to this young gentlman, who slipped out of his
swadlin-clowts into the Doctors chair, by a strange impuls devouring all the
arts in an instant, got his degree, before the world was aware on it, and at
Nineteen was made a very reverend Doctor. I will not uncover his nakedness,
nor give you any particulars of the vain profuseness of his younger years,
whereby he spent and trifl'd away a considerable estate left him, and lost a
very fair way of practice, his present condition sufficiently evidencing it,
and seals the truth of that divine saying, he that troubles his own house,
shall inherit the wind; at last finding by sad experience, that his fathers
coffers had a bottom, which could not be beaten in time into his belief, he
cast about, and falls upon several projects and devices, for the support of
his present garb and greatness, and the first, if I mistake not, was that same
trick of Physical Simony, to share in his Apothecarie gains, but scorning the
poor pedling way of justice Long in the law, or his Brother Fludd in his own
art, he makes him allow him the one half of all he takes, yet bars all the
charge and trouble, as was proved at the bar of the house of Commons, in the
beginning of the Parliament, as good be a knave for a pound, as a penny; but
this devise took not, he got a great deal of shame, and this trick furthered
not his already decreasing practice, his next was to get himself created vicar
general of the Midwives in city and suburbs, and for the maintaining a garb,
fitting the greatness of this place, he would have a groate for every child
borne within his jurisdiction, for which he would have kept good orders and
rules amongst them, set up a lecture, and himself a been reader, unfolded the
hard places and passages, Aretine and Aristotle's Problems, and in all things
that concerned women's business, have been a very ready necessary young man; but
the midwives (as most women are) being wise enough already, scorned to learn
from a man, that had no more beard then themselves, refused subjection to him,
and set up some other hand-some-handed young physikers in the same trade, by
which means the Doctor his practice more and more declined, the fool, the
porter and some coach-horses are fain to go to grass, and himself brought to
such straights, that invention must to work for some other device for a
subsistence, which was to go into the Low Countries, and teach them the art of
draining, of caching, salting, conditing stock fish, new stores for young Fry,
the rare trick of dancing on the high rope, and shooting water in a
Crosse-bowe, but for all this nothing comes, the butter-boxes liked not his
physiognomie, and held fast their money, and the Doctor is fain to return to
his old quarters; whereat his first coming allarms the whole kingdom, with his
lamentable cry from Ramah: children brought to the birth, and none to deliver;
complains of want of self love, showing how many infants are lost, for want of
his knack, that he will do it upon lower terms then formerly without any grief
or pain; tells us he is in great want, brought to his first principle, and nine
children in the bargain, but all this does nothing neither, in the sixth
therefore he turns independent, joins with Doctor Homes, and for a little while
walks very soberly, but finding the old blade his Rival in woman's matters, he
conspires against him, endeavors to throw him out and puts himself in the
saddle, what end was made of that business I know not, but the Doctor has
quitted those quarters, and now turned Anabaptist; and as Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram will be famous in some congregation, to make way for his advance, like
the fencers of old, he resolves to challenge the most famous Master of the
Science, beaten or not, it skild not, he will bring such judges as shall
certainly give sentence for him, or in case of extremity, make such tumults as
shall turn to his advantage, but to be serious a little, he pitches upon old
Doctor Gouge, and in a letter of January 27. desires leave to preach in his
pulpit, which he calls speaking in public, or to dispute this question in
public, whether is the sprinkling of infants, an ordinance of God or Man.
Doctor Gouge returns him answer that admitting private men to vent heterodox
opinions was not hastily to be yielded unto, but he would advise of it, and
give an answer in convenient time: upon this, this pamphleter thinks he has
got the advantage desired, and sends amongst us in print a most vain
unchristian like lying letter, in which he begins thus; being converted, I
thought it my duty to strengthen my brethren, truly Sir your carriage in this
business, gives no testimony at all of any true real conversion, there is that
notorious pride, imprudent undiscret boasting, palpable falsehood, which some
men even in a natural condition, would not express, and a man converted would
not dare to be guilty of, but he goes on tells us, he had an impulse of the
Spirit, which he at first strugled with, and so forth; certainly* Sir this
could not possibly be from the spirit of God: the fruit of which is love, joy,
peace, long suffering, gentleness, but the manifest works of the flesh, which
are, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, sedition, heresy, desirous of
vain glory, provoking one another; had you been guided in this act by the
Spirit of God, how could that false assertion pass from you in print, that to
your desire of resolution of the sprinkling of infants: Doctor Gouge should
return answer, the question was weighty, he would take advise in it, when your
own letter, ready to be shown to any that desires it, has not one tittle that
can possibly bear any such sense, but plainly required leave to speak to us in
public, or that it might be a question between him and you, in a full
auditory; whether the sprinkling of infants were of God or man? and to this; to
the business of disputation, he returned that answer, knowing how little such
disputes has profited, how much the Church of God has been torn by them; how
express the spirit of God is, not to trouble the weak with vain disputes; what
became of the late dispute betwixt Mr. Goodwin and Mr. Simpson, or what one
single person of either of both opinions, was brought, to the knowledge of the
truth, though managed by men of far greater abilities, then Dr. Chamberlain?
it is certain, many men's spirits are more imbittred by it, and greater distance
between them and their members, then before, to take no notice of the nonsense
in the rest of the letter, what a strange pride of heart (if it be not a fault
in his head, does that challenge show, when Dr. Gouge, Mr. Case, Mr. Calamy,
Mr. Marshal, Mr. Goodwin, nay, and the whole assembly are foolishly or
childishly dared into the contest, all serious men and sober Christians must
pity you, as a man distemperd in mind, or laugh at you for your vanity: there is
good counsel in the proverbs, which I believe these wise, Godly, learned men,
will make use of in this case; but all this while, why come you not to D. Gouge
with a friend, as you are offered, when certainly you may have full satisfaction
in that or any other thing you desire; we cannot but believe, that's not
desired, otherwise you would have come to him at first before you troubled your
self in Print, or at least you would have come, now invited, it is possibly you
may believe amiss in what you hold about sprinkling infants (very wise godly
men have, and you your self in other things, even in your own profession, as I
may have occasion to show, if ye continue troublesome:) and then a private sair
debate were best to your self, you know what the wise man says, Prove. 14. and
33 13. 16. and in your own art, he that should set forth himself with such high
flown bragging language, proclaming to the world what knowledge, rare secrets
he has got, strange cures he can do, would be counted an Empyrick, a
mountebanke, an impostor, and few wise men would have to do with such a one, me
thinks the respect due to Dr. Gouges years, his piety, his learning, might have
kept you from these uncivil, unchristian declamations, vain, idle suggestions;
weak and foolish insinuations; what is the 21. and 25. of Matthew pertinent in
this case, or to your purpose, the priests there came to ensnare our Savior
Christ, with this question, by what authority do thou these things? who
knowing their hearts, and their wicked design; interrogates them thus, the
baptism of John, whether was it of heaven, or of men?

Dr. Chamberlain Craves leave to vent his unsound opinion concerning Baptism,
in Dr. Gouge his congregation, in one paper, and a resolution to this question,
whether is the sprinkling of infants an ordinance of God or Man, in another;
Dr. Gouge returns answer to the first, that he will advise on it, to the
second, that if he please to come to him, he will endeavor to give him
satisfaction, what can that text make for you, unless you think the Doctor
fears you, as the text says, the Priests did the multitude, certainly Sir you
are not so terrible yet, and I believe you will not be much higher neither, but
because I believe you will hardly find leisure to come to Dr. Gouge, knowing
that tumults and branglings must be your best weapons, which you will want if
you come single, or accompanied with a few, consider seriously of these
following arguments for baptizing infants, letting sprinkling alone till I have
more leisure.

Whomsoever Jesus Christ wills to be brought to himself, must not be kept
from Baptism, but Jesus Christ wills little children to be brought to
himself, therefore little children must not be kept from Baptism.

The Major is undeniable, the Minor is clear from Matt. 19. 14. Mark 10. 14.
Luke 18. 15. 16.

To whomsoever the kingdom of heaven, and the covenant of grace belongs, to
them the seals of the Covenant belonged, but the kingdom of heaven and Covenant
of grace belong unto infants, Ergo.

The Major is not to be denied, the Minor is proved Genesis 17. 7 Acts. 2. 39.
These good old arguments I could never see solidly confuted yet.

But I will end all with a word or two of advise, to entreat you to reflect
seriously upon your own heart, and consider whether some corrupt interest have
not steered you in the business, whether the Scripture gives any allowance, for
such a kind of deportment for a man in your station, toward such an ancient,
reverend, Pious Minister, whether your misimploying so many for the spreading
your pamphlets on the Sabbath day, be according to the rule of Gods word,
whether your disturbing us attending the ordinances of Jesus Christ, your
imprudence following us to the very Sacrament, can at all suite with the
profession of a Christian, or a sober man; if they do not, as certainly you
must needs judge, if you be true to your self, take shame to your self, and
give God the glory, in an humble Christian confession, of, and repentance for,
this your foul offense, and lastly think sadly upon the heavy judgments God
has very lately laid upon some of your predecessors; to instance but in two,
for I will not stir in the puddle of the anabaptists of Munster, the, til then,
unheard of impieties of whom, much troubled those parts of Germany, and
interrupted the reformation begun by Luther; to look no further then yesterday,
upon some that very lately trod your steps: the first shall be Mr. Cops, a man
that for a long time pretended both to learning, reason, and Religion, and for
some time, as I am from very good hands informed, walked very strictly, til he
first fell off from submitting to Church Government, after which he suddenly
passd through all the forms now in fashion, to yours, to the holding those
Anabaptistical opinions, wherewith you and your predecessors have wherever you
have had power, never been quiet till you turned both Church and State into a
flame, if not into ashes, but he stayed not long with you neither, but the next
step brought him into that deep Abyss, from whence he vomits out in print to
the world, those horrid blasphemies and impieties, then which the world never
saw more desperate, maintainning swearing, uncleanness in terminis to be
lawful, besides other positions, which no modest Christian care can without
astonishment hear or read.

The other is the late matron of the Savoy, whom the hand of justice in some
measure met with lately, she likewise not long since walked under the same
dispensation with you, the Spirit of giddiness possessing her, she as
suddenly as the former ran greedily into all manner of uncleanness, and
became hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin, never rested till she became a
hissing and a byword even to the meanest of the people. Certainly Sir you have
no promise of support longer, then you walk in Gods way, which as certainly you
are out of at present, if you and your actions be brought to the balance of
the sanctuary, how sad your condition will be, if it should please God, to
leave you to your self the former presidents with many more then I have leisure
or desire to instance in, may in some measure make evident; it concerns you,
as much as your eternal welfare is worth, to be true to your own heart, not to
trifle away your precious time in vain wrangling, and disputations, but to make
appear to the world, the hope that is in you, by a sober godly life and
conversation, to direct to you which, you have a sure word of prophecy, to
which, you will do well, if you take heed.

Philalethes.

FINIS.

