THE DECLARATION OF THE Hungarians War, Newly published by the Most Illustrious
Michael Apafi, Prince of Transylvania, against his Imperial Majesty, 1682.
To the Kings, Princes, Commonwealths of Christendom; to all States and Ranks
of the Sacred Roman Empire, and lastly to the People of the unfortunate
Pononian, or Hungarian Nation, groaning under the burden of oppression, to
everlasting memory.
Michael Apafi, by the Grace of God, Prince of Transylvania, Lord of part of
the Kingdom of Hungary, Count of Sic: do manifest and bear testimony in
simplicity and purity of Faith and Truth.
AFter that by frowning destinies, and destructive idleness of Nobles
discording among themselves, the ensigns of regal dignity were devolved from
Princes of Hungarion Blood, to persons of the Austriack Family, (whence sprang
the Fountain of our wounds and miseries) they did endeavor by counsels
connected and circling in themselves, to procure and establish to themselves
absolute and hereditary dominion over Hungary, destroying and trampling
liberty, continued inviolate for several Ages before.

Who though they were oblidged by the sanctity and Religion of a solemn Oath,
according to the Foundation of free Election, (which, from the very rise of the
Kingdom, was the first and fundamental Law amongst the Hungarians) to presume
nothing in prejudice of the Nations Laws and privileges, did notwithstanding
seek out various Pretexts, that by Liberties destruction, the Spirits of the
Nations Inhabitants should be made bitter; they did esteem sowing and fomenting
matter of Dissension, for engaging more capacious Souls inclined to Liberty,
(dissatisfactory and repugnant to them) against each other, to facilitate their
overthrow and suppression, a mystery of domineering effectual and suitable to
their purpose.

Nor did the preposterous Lust of Dominion contain it self in those Limits, but
persons of all Ranks were Vehemently pillaged and oppressed by excessive
Calamities and intolerable rigor, the Bars of Faith and Solemn Oaths being
broak asunder. The design and determinate purpose of their intentions was, to
evert the Fortresses of the Nations Laws and privileges, by gradual and
ingeneous machinations, and those not succeeding, by open force, the secret
Providence of a displeased. God permitting the same; Whither because a fatal
period was approaching a most Flourishing Kingdom, or because the refusers of
due obedience to a Lawful Prince of their own Blood, were to feel the weight of
a Strangers Domineering.

These miseries received increment by the contempt and dishonor of the Nations
Peers and Nobles, who contrary to the strength of Law, were gradually excluded
or removed from Dignities and public Functions, and subjected to insolent
Government, and Dominion of Strangers; so by daily growth of injuries, and
prevalancy of force, the state of Hungary was so far precipatate, that scarce a
shadow or vestage of Ancient Liberty could be perceived: whatsomever once
appeared high and glorious, was now neglected and trod under Foot, ruin and
overthrow was prepared for all suspect Virtue.

Petitions and Complaints were no way prevailent, Appeals to Regal fidelity
were in vain; will Occupied the Chair of Reason, whatsomever they pleased, or
seemed to them expedient, was practiced: Complaints were sometimes received in
show and appearance, but in Conformity to the rule of extravagant Authority;
and for further Torment, returned with vain and irrit Words, and often eluded
by Ludibri and upbrading reproach.

The Ambition of Governors and Kings Officials, their insatiable avarice and
Bloody practices of Cruelty did accrue to such a hight, that Men were rendered
suspect against the King, and Noxious to the public because of their Riches,
hence were they Robbed by most wicked pretexts, their Goods divided and dragged
from them, either that the Blood-suckers might satiate their voracious
Appetites or the Exchequer a place for pillaging the Poor, and most infamous
receptickle of Horrid Rapines might be crammed. Now the congruous and true names
of things were banished; to conferr other men's Goods in reward of Treachery was
called Clemency; to destribute the fortunes of the wandering and illegally
exiled amongst Bastards, Liberality, pardoning of Innocents colored with the
name of Mercy; in short, all things Divine and human was at the disposal of the
Germans: In the Kingdom was Want Damage, Dishonor and a most Abominable
Scheme of affairs.

When Souls vigorous and impatient of Servitude, were burdened above measure,
with those and innumerable injuries, at length the excess of Patience inclining
to revenge, did betake them selves to just and allowed Remedies; calling to
mind they had chosen a King by free suffrages, not a Master they endeavored to
reduce the extravagent and indirect manner of Governing to its ordinary Channel.

A Remedy by War is concluded upon; immediately sudden meetings, a Soul uniting
society arising from common hazard and loss of Liberty, together with the
justness of their Cause, did animate that most Noble Nation to lay hold on
necessary and just Arms, and endeavor restitution of now buried Liberty to
former splendour and integrity, without the stain of Rebellion or infidelity,
according to the tenor of the Decree of King Andrew the 2d. surnamed of
Jerusalem.

The magnanimous Hero, Stephen Bocskai, a man of excellent Ingene, famous for
Warlike Virtue and sagacity, repute more than a private person while private,
did first assault this luxureant force, who iritate with excessive injuries,
with a small number of Assistants, but great and undaunted resolution of Soul,
opposed himself to rageing violence, with a high and Heroic spirit, assaulted
a part of the Emperial Army, with happy success did rout and chase the same,
and persuing, his first victory did fill the Kingdom and the World with
admirable progress, having gained the Honor to be by common consent of the
people of Hungary, declared Prince of Transylvania, and Hungaria, and Patron of
Liberty, which he did not only revive from the dust of Death, but did also
prescribe due measures to the King then Reigning, viz. Rodulphus the second and
his successors, Circumscribing their Power according to the Laws Limitations.

Now there appeared most excellent and conducible provision for peace and
public tranquillity, most ample conditions were ratified in a Treatise by
which, safety, integrity, and security of Liberty Civil and Ecclesiastic, were
assured to the Subjects by Regal Faith, and Letters Patents: But not long
after, the Inhabitants experienced Hope to be salacious, and humane expectation
to be founded upon an unstable bottom; for not long after the Peace, the most
illustrious Bocskai paying his last debt by his untimely death, did afford
sorrow to the Hungarians, and a new occasion for ambition, while almost they by
the same Burial performed Funeral Solemnity to the Memory of the great Patron
of their Liberties, and their decaying Liberty; a passage to be memorate to all
posterity, that as it were by a new Funeral, their lately regenit Liberties
were overwhelmed immediately, contrary to Faith and conditions of Peace,
occasions were catched for breaking the late compacts, as if they they had been
extorted by force of Arms; which were, notwithstanding, of free choice and
voluntary consent.

Which unbridled License, breach of Faith and solemn Oath, the discreetly
intelligent Freemen of the Nation, sustaining with indignation and displeasure,
that they might apply new and effectual Medicaments to reiterate Maladies, did
betake themselves to their Ancient Privilege of resisting their oppressing
Kings, and directed their eyes toward the protection of my Ancestors.

The Atrosity of most exquisite oppressions, and eversion of Privileges Divine
and Humane, did promove the zeal of those pious purposes, by which also my
Ancestors Gabriel Betlen and George Rakoci the first, a Prince of glorious
memory (here I conclude double injuries, and a twofold War in one compend, to
evit the recital of particulars) did employ all endeavors to suffocate an
approaching mischief in its birth, reverberate the vehement pressure of
incumbent violence, and esteeming the afflictions of a dejected Nation their
own, either to mitigate or remove the same, with design always to compress
insolent and extravagant dominion within the boundaries of Laws and
Privileges, least Liberty and Religions final overthrow should tend to a most
flourishing Kingdoms total eversion, and damnifying prejudice of all
Christendom.

Arms are again Levied for the Defense of that most righteous Cause, so
countenanced with Blessings from Heaven, the Austriack Kings frighted with
increment of Arms and unexpected success, of their own accord proposed, and did
conclude a Peace, ratifying the same by Faith and public Chartour; but this
Peace, confirmed and registrate in the houdge bulk of Two Treatises, afforded
not to Hungary expected tranquillity, or continuing Peace: The Kings in such
respits did rather lay hold on all occasions, that in a state of imaginary and
fraudulent Peace, they might, by their accustamary infatuating Machinations,
infect and divide the minds of Peers and Nobles, which they could not infringe
by force and War.

It were tedious, and more than necessary to memorate in a prolix gradation
calamities of former times, which, since comprehended in the monuments of
Histories, I shall not recapitulate; laying aside therefore the precedent, I
shall shortly relate the grievousness of the present, that the whole world may
judge and cognoss the Hungarians, who have sustained violence and injuries, are
stripped of their whole liberties contrary to Regal Obligation and Faith, the
contents of Charter and public Laws, have taken up just, warrantable and
allowed Arms.

It must of necessity be granted, and ought not to be reflected upon without
intimate and hearty sense of grief, that his now Sacred Imperial Kingly
Majesty, immediately after his being installed in the Government by free
suffrage, according to the ancient use and custom, treading the footsteps of
his Predecessors, did decline from legal procedure in Government, to burthensom
and absolute domineering: In the whole Tract of his Government, he remitted
nothing of the customary inveterate endeavors of prejudging Liberty, and
nothing but what pleased was granted to Addressers and Supplicants according to
public Law. An Umbrage of Liberty, and ostentation of Regal Clemency,
portended Slavery to the Malcontents.

In this state of expiring and vehemently depressed Liberty, there wanted not
highly generous Spirits among the Hungarians, thoroughly grieved with the
fraudulent machinations and counsels practiced to the overthrow of the public,
who modestly represented the violence and breach of public Faith, but with
more zeal than success; for as his Majesty had received the supreme Honor of
Government, impared and deflowred by others, and ought according to Faith and
Obligation to have restored the same to former Luster and Integrity, so managed
he the same according to Lust and Illimited Dominion.

Hence from respect and obedience due to Regal Majesty (of which the people of
Hungary have still been most observant) mitigation of rigourous Master-ship,
was first essayed by Addresses and Supplications; but while neither complaints,
nor volumes of grievances, often composed and rejected, could put any stop to
the current of inordinate Power, a plaster for Wounds was to be found out by
the Sword, which a public Law does pronounce Lawful and Just; and to be laid
hold on when any of the Kings, not observing the true Balance of Ordinary
Power, do proceed to a prepostrous Licentiousness of domineering, contrary to
the Nations manifest Laws and privileges, and the interest of the Inhabitants.

And I heartily wish the Arms once taken up in defense of Liberties, had been
continued in better Order, and with more vigorous endeavors; it had been more
Glorious, more Virtuous, to have recovered the over-clouded splendour of
Liberty, by constant and generous Achievements, than be subjugate to most
reproachful Slavery by too much Credulity and fatal discord.

But an Inclination to Dissension, natural to the Hungarian Nation, together
with the Word and Promises of His Sacred Imperial Kingly Majesty, which most
effectualy bewitched them, did suddenly put a stop to so considerable
Commencements.

So soon as it was notified to the Court at Vienna, that thirteen Counties had
Levied Arms for recovering their Liberties, immediately by an exquisite
artifice, for renting their minds, Letters were directed to the foresaid
Counties, in which Pardon was granted to all, repenting their defection, should
desert the Racocian party, in due obedience to their King: Moreover it was
added, that already committed delinquencies should be liable to no punishment
by Law or Judicatory whatsomever; that all should be continued without hurt or
Damage in Life, Liberty and Fortune, in possession of movables and
immoveables; at the report of this immunity publicly ratified by Regal Faith,
their minds were rent affunder to the loss of vigor and motion, and laying
down their Arms with indiscretion, they again betook themselves to Peace of too
short continuance, esteeming a spacious door of superaboundant benignity,
opened to all who pleased to enter, who indeed were preserved for a more secure
Vengeance for the future; for some forfeited their Lives, others their
Fortunes, and some were punished by perpetual Imprisonment; this never enough
to be lamented inconstancy, did open a Gate; and furnish the Imperialists with
sufficient occasions to effectuate all their purposes; who liberate from fear,
under the conduct of General Sporkius invaded Hungary, and rushing into the
Heart of the Nation without loss of Blood or Man, did seize Towns, Castles, and
Fortresses; neither were there any to resist, the people being scornfully
cheated with the promised benignity.

By these means they did proceed to all manner of afflictions, rapines and
Libidinous baseness, which the unbridled Soldiers committed every where,
contrary to the tenor of the foresaid Letters, and Regal security; Churches
were abused and pulled down, Castles demolished, Noble-mens Courts everted, and
the Nobillity, who inconsiderately confided in promised Oblivion, dragged to
Judgment at Posonia; yet many of the more discreet forseeing fraudulant
machinations couched under the mask of Kingly Clemency and Grace, did evit
prepared shares, betaking themselves to my protection in this Province.

The report of so lamentable calamity and unexpected alteration, struck me with
grievous and unspeakable astonishment; and because I understood this storm
would break out in tempests most dangerous and prejudicial to the Christian
World, immediately, from an upright and sincere intention, I sent my Ambassador
to his Sacred Imperial Majesty, representing the hazard which might follow the
Application of too corrosive Medicaments to this Malady, and that remiss and
mollifying Plasters were conducible, that Souls might be engaged to hope and
confide in Regal Clemency, least driven to despair, they be prompted to
extremities of dangerous consequence, to Hungary and all Christendom: But this
my proposal again and again reiterate, and sincerely upright endeavors for
public advantage were heard, but with difficulty, and returned without a
suitable or desired answer; the lust of absolute dominion had taken deeper
roots than could be plucked up by words and persuasions.

The complete progress, and all the actings in the Kingdom did savor violence,
not Kingly Government; nothing required according to Law procured, no man's
state secure, delinquency attended Riches: Neither now was the proceedure
gradual, but with precepitate rage to all manner of affliction. It evidently
appeared an occasion of converting a free Kingdom to a hereditary, long sought
after, was now voraciously snatched. Immediately Violence is practiced, the
glory of liberty undone, the Peers and Patriots of Law trod under foot, the
Nobility banished their predecessors habitations, their goods confiscate;
dignities, honors, and places of public trust conferred on Strangers in
prejudice of the Kingdoms constitutions; moreover a Council of rigorous
inquisition institute against liberties assertors, or any suspect opposite to
their illegal endeavors; three Counts judged by a most illegal Process, and
murdered by the hands of bloody Executioners, a memorable instance to the World
of their savage cruelty; but all this was defective to satiate revenge, for the
misery of Orphants was augmented, by redacting the Children of the slain and
banished to Beggary.

Their seasing the Churches of the reformed was an accessory of this Tragedy,
in which Fury and excessive madness did rage so impetuously, that men might
have imagined they waged War against houses set apart for pious uses, and the
Walls had been Guilty of Rebellion; suddenly the Ministers were thrust out from
their Congregations and expelled their native Land, others forced by the terror
of threats to give security no more to Preach, did obtain their Lives and
Liberties to depart the Nation, and many, as piacular Sacrifices, were
condemned to the Galleys (a horrid and ever to be abominate presedent, that
their leading an anxious and miserable Life, they might be consumed with grief,
want of cleanly accommodation, hard Labors and Hunger.

A violent Torrent of Persecution, and cursed Tyrannizing over Consciences went
on a pace, no Marriage to be solemnized, nor Baptism administered, but by Roman
Ministers; men dragged by Force and Arms to Masses and Processions every where,
endeavourers to draw back, were affected with excessive penalties and pecuniary
Mulcts.

Neither were women exempt from danger, who not chargeable with lose Majesty,
were accused for tears; it was a trespass, and of dangerous consequence to sigh
under misery, and weeping over the Sentenced by Death, a thing discharged.

Money was extorted privately and publicly from the misrable Commons, by
various Stratagems, and feigned Names, Garrisons removed and settled, Laws
irrogate at pleasure, Rapines, Plunderings, and innumerable Oppressions over
all.

The Exiled Lords, provoked by these and other Inexplicable Injuries, brought
to the Precipise of final overthrow of Life and Fortune; destitute of all help
from Christians, and perceiving no hope of mitigating His Majesty, did resolve
in this extreme necessity to betake themselves to the benignity of the
Illustrious Ottoman, Soveraignity, and implore his Protection against most
unjust violence, for the relief of the Kingdom, and safety of many Innocents.
Neither was their resolutions in vain; their requests ware admitted with small
difficulty; and whom a hard Lot, and extreme Rigor, had rendered Exiles, the
Generosity and Condescension of the Ottoman Soveraignity did furnish with
refuge, security and means for Sustenance. Often are the works of the Divine
Sovereign so ordered, that sudden punishment overtaketh rageing cruelty, when
secure in success it self; least straying should at any time be removed from
the wicked, or hope utterly detained from afflicted virtue.

I know many do misconstruct this Act of Extreme Necessity, and prepostrously
slander the Hungarian Nation, as degenerate, and making defection from
Christians; but such are either ignorant of the Hungarian Liberty, according to
fundamental constitution, or too active promoters of the Austriack interest.

It aught to be considered, the Austriack Kings were advanced to Crown and
Scepter by the suffrages of a free Election, (the most ancient and righteous
form of Government amongst the Hungarians) and obleadged by Faith, and solemn
Oath (which solemnity, according to custom was performed under the open
Heavens) to maintain the Nations Liberties; from this Faith and Solemn Oath
arises a formal and true obligation, not only necessary for exercing
Government-according to the prescript of Laws, and tenor of Regal Charter, but
does authorize the Palatinate of the Kingdom, as the Guardian of Liberty, with
the Inhabitants, to contradict and resist the King, degenerating from ordinary
and allowed power, to savageness and unjust License of domineering; therefore
in case of despairing reduction to due measures, Liberty was not annihilate,
nor the privilege of procuring protection from whomsoever, even from the
Ottoman, as a neighboring Monarch.

Many years are now past since this unfortunate Kingdom, placed betwixt two
Potentates, cut short by the one, and trod under foot by the other, has
exhibit a most lamentable Tragedy to the World, the first never levied War
against it, nor laid aside Arms without increment to his Empire, and the
diminition of this counter-mure, whence it has been almost equally subjected
to its most potent Neighbor. Seeing then this Kingdom bordering on either side
with a most potent Monarch is necessitate to sustain their first assault and
Force, and that the House of Austria has hitherto sought or intended nothing
by Governing, but the depression of Hungary, and the eversion of its Liberties,
especially his now Imperial Majesty has redacted a free People of themselves
liberally moderate; to dishonorable pusillanimity and most miserable
condition, whom desparation, efficacious in straits and intricacies, did Arm,
and since for the time of Eleven years Banishment, they could see no relaxation
or hope for removing oppression, it did seem more conducing in the case of
extreme and inevitable necessity, to betake themselves to the protection of a
most potent Prince, and make use of his help, than inevitably precepitate the
remainder of the Kingdom.

Neither are the Hungarians the first who have implored Ottoman assistance in
their defense: Henry and Fredirick, Brethren to the King of Castil, in the time
of Pope Clement the 4th, when associate with the Sons of Conradus, did call the
Saracens by Sea and Land, not to defend their Country, but to expel the French
from Italy. Maximillian of Austria, that he might repel Force carried on
against him, but especially that he might destroy the Venecian Commonwealth,
was active to procure the Turks assistance; Francis the first of France, when
he perceived the ambition and dangerous Power of Charles the fifth, did not
question the accepting help from the Turk; neither was it unglorious in our
time, for the famous State of Polonia to call the Tartars to their defense
against Christians.

Let therefore the Christian World judge by the foresaid Reasons, whether the
Hungarian Nation, of a most free constitution, privileged by their fundamental
Laws, with a share of Supreme Power, reserving, in conferring Government,
natural Liberty, exempt from Regal Authority ( viz. to resist the King in a
case) has acted iniquiously in submitting themselves to the illustrious
Ottoman Sovereignty, engadging by Imperial Faith, the restoration of Liberty,
the security of Religion, Life and Honor, and maintenance of all Privileges.

As for my self who am by offspring and descent a Hungarian, originally the
same with that Nation, and do acknowledge my self to be erected to a Princely
Throne of an Hungarian Dominion, by God the founder of Kingdoms, and placed as
it were on a Watchtower, to manage the defense of Civil and Religious
Priviviledges, and repel, according to my Power, Injuries inferred against a
most free people, without evidence of any just Cause.

These causes and respects prompted me to lay hold on Righteous and Necessary
Arms, to restore Liberty, and reduce oppressed exiles: Therefore let no
discreet and sober person admire my undertaking the Righteous cause of a most
renowned Nation, especially of my own Blood. My scope is, that an once most
Flourishing Kingdom may be by the help of divine Benignity restored to desired
Tranquillity, and a most free Nation to the immortal Liberty of their
Ancestors; it is most Righteous and Conform to Reason, to defend Liberty
violate against Faith, right being granted by express Laws, It is just to
undertake a defensive War for Friends and Relations violently afflicted, the
Universal relation of Mankind were a reason of it self sufficient for granting
assistance; neither is the right of Humane Society suffocate, when Kings exerce
injuries approveable by no Righteous and Discreet person, against free Subjects.

Moreover I admonish and exhort, yea, I beseech and obtest all Ranks in Hungary
to join with me in Righteous and Pious Arms, for endeavoring the reduction of
Liberties, Glory to former splendour, by Glorious Achievements, and concording
Unity: Let the virtue of our Predecessors possess our Souls, who with their
Blood, who with their Lives did defend their Liberties. There is need of
constant and vigorous resolution in affairs of such consequence, and what is
remaining must be committed to Divine disposal, which has Crowned bypast
undertakings and exploits for recovering Liberty with most Blessed events.

Here is no private controversy nor question about Romish Religion which has
the advantage of the same Privilege with the Evangelick or reformed, our
dispute is for our Country, our Lives, our Fortunes, our Honors, and the whole
Nations Glory. They are Hunting unjust Dominion, your Blood and Fortunes;
pursue your Liberty, which no good man, no virtuous man, no noble or generous
man will lose but with his Life.

For my part, I am conscious of Human frailty, nor am I without consideration
of Fortunes force, I acknowledge all my undertakings subject to a Thousand
various incidents, but having satisfaction and security of Conscience in
serenity and composure of Spirit, by Gods assistance I undertake your defense,
proposing nothing to my self but intrest of public safety; without hesitation
I expect prosperous progress, and a Blessed period.

But if any shall betake themselves to the adverse party, to advance their
Countries overthrow, their own temerity, trespass and error shall be liable,
not I, to any censure, if deserved punishment shall accompany their contumacy:
But I hope, and am confident, all ranks and conditions shall direct their
counsels, thoughts and undertakings, to the safety, enlargement and intrest of
their Country. By Blood our Ancestors at first did come to peaceable possession
of their Liberties, which since by blood has been secured and maintained, and
now remains its vindication and recovery from oppression and eversion, to be
attained and effectuated by Blood.

I shall be sufficiently remunerate, abundantly honored, if in enjoying
Liberty, I shall see my Countries relief; or in case of overthrow, my right
hand patronizing Liberty, shall fall among the Carcasses of my Countrymen, and
my Soul freed from guilt, be removed to a better Country.

The Lord God of Hosts, the Just and Omnipotent God, Bless from the Highest our
sincere and lawful endeavors; be the orderer of all our actings and counsels,
dispose and engadge minds alienate and dissentient to sincere concord; confirm
the strong, encourage the fainthearted, effectuate the undertaking and
terminating of all may tend to the everlasting Glory of his Name, the
restitution of overturned Liberties, the peace and tranquillity of an afflicted
People, to the private and public felicity of all and every one. Amen.

A true Copy of the Compact and Conditions, betwixt the Emperor of the Turks,
and the Hungarian Male-coontents.
THe great Emperor of the Turks, upon the following conditions constitute, and
to be performed on both Parts, has received in protection, the Hungarians, who
have suffered extreme violence.

If the Kingdom of Hungary, rent from the House of Austria, shall become
Tributary, shall yearly pay the same too, and ever continue in Faith and
Obedience toward the Ottoman Port (or Court) which the Hungarians oblidge
themselves to perform, Hostages being yearly to be sent to the foresaid Port,
for the ratification of the same.

The Emperor of the Turks has bound himself by Oath, to restore the Hungarians
to former Liberty by strong Hands, to repel all violence which may be carried
on against them by others, and to protect them.

Above all, that he shall exact no tribute from the Hungarians, until the
affairs of Hungary be reduced to good condition, all Tumults being appeased

That he shall draw to himself no Town or Fortress of the Hungarians; that he
shall disturb none in their Liberty Ecclesiastic nor Pollitick; that he shall
allow unto all, the free Exercise of their Religion; that he shall give Power
to erect and repair Churches, Schools, and Parioches; and to choose a Prince of
their own Nation, whom they shall judge sufficient, the suffrages of the
Nations Inhabitants agreeing thereto, no Foreign, beings to be forcibly
obtruded.

All this is contained in the Ach-nam of the great Emperor of the Turks, that
is: in the Obligatory Letters given to the Hungarians, corroborate by his own
Hand and the Authentic Seal Imperial, which the present Prince of Transylvania
has with himself, as to whom, the whole affair of the Kingdom of Hungary is
committed, to be decided, by open War, or pacification with the Emperor of the
Romans.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by J. Grantham. 1682.


