AN ANSWER TO THE OBJECTIONS OF THE Citizens of YORK, AGAINST The Bill for
making Navigable the Rivers Air and Calder.
IT is objected, That if these Rivers (or either of them) be made Navigable, it
will so drain and lessen the Tide of Ouze, as to render that River Vnnavigable
for the future, to the great Damage of the City of York.

In answer thereto, It is humbly conceived, that it can have no such Effect for
the following Reasons: 1st, The Objection does not reach the River Calder, for
that River empties it self into Air, many Miles above the Flowing of the Tide;
so that whatsoever is done upon that River cannot affects the Tides, and
therefore is out of the Question. 2ly, Nor has the Objection any greater force
against making the River Air Navigable; For though the Cause of the Ebbing and
Flowing of the Sea is not yet discovered, yet it must be granted, That the
Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea is the only Cause of the Tide in all Rivers where
it is; And that the Effect necessarily attends this Cause is Matter of Fact and
Daily Observation, the Tides being always greater or less, as the Waters rise
more or less at Sea; And the greatest Rivers are filled as high (viz.) as near
to a Level with the Swelling of the Sea, as the least are, every Tide, though
they contain a hundred times as much Water; and consequently, though the whole
County of York were dug into a Pond, or Receptacle for Water, it could not
lessen the Tide in any other proportion than the Water contained in that
Receptacle would bear to the neighboring Seas, from whence it was supplied;
and that quantity of Water would be but a small part of the whole, and could
not abate the Surface of the Tide-Water a quarter of an Inch: For Water acts
mechanically and necessarily, as a heavy fluid Body, and will flow naturally to
all Places where the Surface is lower than the Place it flows from, and fill
them all (though never so large) till all the Surface is at equal distance from
the Center, and then it becomes its own poise and is at rest: From whence it
plainly follows, That nothing can be done upon the River Air, to lessen
sensibly the Tide of Ouze. There might be given many Instances to confirm this
Argument, (were it needful) As when the Banks break in Holland and Zealand,
(which often happens) whereby the Receptacle for the Tide-Water is much more
enlarged than can be pretended in the present Case, and yet the Tide in the
next Rivers not lessened (to sense). Likewise, since the breaking of the Banks
upon the River Thames (in Essex) whereby the Outlet for the Water has been
greater than is feared in this Case, the Tides have not been less at
London Bridge.

3ly, But admitting there were any force in this Objection, it makes for the
Navigation of Air, and not against it; For, if the making the Receptacle for
Water in the River Air greater, will lessen the Tide in the River Ouze (as
objected) -- Then the making the Receptacle in the River Air less, will
increase the Tide in the River Ouze.


And that is what the Undertakers for Air will do, (if they alter the River at
all) for they will make the Course or Channel of the River straiter, and then
the Water taking this new Course, the old crooked Channel will soon fill up,
and consequently the River Air contain less Water than before, being made much
shorter and narrower than it was. But if they do not alter or meddle with the
River Air within the flowing of the Tide, (as is most likely) Then this
Objection reaches the Navigation of Air no more than Calder, but answers it
self.


