A PROPOSAL to supply the Defect of Money, and Relief to the Poor.
To His Grace, JAMES Duke of Queensberry, His Majesty's High Commissioner; And
to the most Honorable, the Three Estates of Parliament.
MOST NOBLE PATRIOTS,
THE Sounding of Your Zeal, in standing up for the Honor, Privilege, and
Trade of the Nation, with a Virtuous Disposition to Encourage all Improvements
of Industry, does engage Your Addresser, to lay before this most Honorable
House, the following Proposal of a National Bank; being Calculate for the
Honor and Wealth of the Nation, and to remove all these Vilipending Reproaches
of Poverty thrown upon Us: So that in a few Years, (with the Blessing of GOD)
the most Reputed Nations in Europe, will seek after Our Friendship. And I being
touched with the Sense and Duty that lays upon all good Christians, as well as
Subjects, obliges me to tender my Mite, for promoting the Interest and
Advancement of my Native Country, moves me to give in this Proposal; and shall
only crave Leave to tell this Honorable House, That all Political Nations and
States, makes it their Work to Advance the same; and how much this Kingdom does
want a Supply to Raise it, is no less obvious. It is therefore hoped, that an
Overture for that End, will be no less acceptable to this Nation; especially
when the Want of it is so Great, and the Benefit of it so Clear and Safe.

First, The Parliament agreeing for establishing a National Bank, for Twenty
Seven Years at 4 per Cent. Interest; by the Payment of which Interest, the
Bills shall all be exhausted at the limited time, sufficient Security is laid
down for the Performance of the same.

Secondly, For raising a Stock in Cash, for answering the Credit of the Bills
during the Twenty Seven Years, every Twelve Hundred Pounds Scots of their Bills
given out, the Receiver is to bring a Fourth part of the Sum he is to receive
of the current specie of the Nation; which will be a Honorable and Sufficient
Stock of Cash to answer the Credit of the Bills, and is a greater Stock in Cash
than will be found in any Bank in Europe; besides the Projector his several
Native and Political Rules to give the Bills a Currency. It is to be observed,
that the Cash that is to be brought in by every Receiver of Bills* is
immediately to be paid in Bills; so that the Cash is not Debtor to any, and
remains a Treasure to answer the Bills for the Twenty Seven Years; and this
Treasure of Money to be disposed of, as the Wisdom of the Nation shall think
fit, when the said Years are completed.

The Method of Distributing the National Bills, in a most Equal and Just way,
to the Three Estates of the Nation.
There is given to every Shire and Burgh Royal in the Kingdom, according to the
old Extent of Six Hundred Pounds Valuation for each Twenty Shilling thereof,
Twelve Thousand Pounds Scots of their Bills, they giving sufficient Security for
the payment of Four per Cent. Interest for Twenty Seven Years; by the payment
of which Interest, the Principal Stock is discharged. It is always to be
observed, That this Interest must be paid yearly in the National Bills. The
Advantage of this, is left to the serious Consideration of the Noble Patrons of
the Kingdom.

It is hoped, there will be no need to Illustrate much the following Proposal
relating to Trade, being a Matter no less to be considered than the former: And
it is well known to the Honorable Members of Parliament, that Trade, by all
Wise and well Governed Kingdoms and States, is that which they most
industriously take Care, not only to Preserve, but Nourish, being the Life and
Strength of all Kingdoms. How much would their National Bills Advance the Trade
of this Kingdom, and Relieve it out of its Decays and scarcity of Money, making
it plenty to Improve the Product of the Nation? for the want of which, is now
Trasported into other Kingdom, to our great Loss, which may be Improven at Home
into several Fabrics of Commodities serviceable to ourselves, and profitable
Abroad; by which the Poor would be well employed: So that, by this we may be
capable to carry on Trade with our Neighbors, and to increase our Wealth and
Honor in Europe; especially considering how many Ingenious Spirits there are
in the Nation, capable to erect Manufactories and carry on Trade through the
World, only they want Stocks to put foreward their Genius to the same; and they
being a part of the Body Politic, and the only Men to lay out their Stocks to
the Nation's greatest Advantage, it is highly reasonable that sufficient
Provision be made for them.

The Proposal for Stocks to Manufactories and Merchant-Companies, and their
Securities.
Manufactories and Merchant-Companies, though not of visible Estates, yet
according to their Reputation and Credit, may have of this Stock, they giving
sufficient Security to pay the yearly Interest.

It is necessar there be a Proposal laid down, for the Encouragement of all
Incorporate Callings* and Ingenious Artificers.

All Incorporate Callings that will undertake particular Improvements of their
Callings, to what other Nations have Improven themselves to, ought to have what
Stock shall be thought reasonable, they giving the like Security

This way of Security, though not frequent, may be as good Security as that of
Land; the Policy of the Security being only to secure the Interest for the said
Twenty seven Years.

It is humbly conceived, if the Nation can agree to settle this National Bank,
that a great Advantage will arise as well to the King's Majesty, as to the
Kingdom, considering the Increase of Trade advancing the King's Revenue; so
that both King and People have an equal Advantage by the same. It is not
needful here, to lay out the Advantages of this Bank, being so plainly laid
down to the Kingdom and the Benefit of Trade. It is likewise to be observed,
that all Trades, Huswifery, and Manual Labors, will be greatly advanced: And
it may be boldly asserted, if this be embraced by the Nation, will make it a
Flourishing Kingdom: And there is nothing known reasonably that can mar this
Proposal, but a Pusilanimous Fear, which the Projector takes off, by erecting
in Edinburgh, the Capital City of the Nation, an Exchange-Office, to pay all
the National Bills that shall come in, free of any Charge, in the current Money
of the Kingdom, which makes the Bills the same with Money, and to be of better,
or as good use to serve the Nation, than if they were all Silver Money: As
also, considering the Benefit that almost every Man in the Nation have by them,
and the End the Bank is erected for, and that it does not Diminish the Silver
Money of the Nation, but greatly Increase it; especially considering what
Credit Bills are in the World, being esteemed more valuable than either Silver
or Gold: And if we stand on this Point, our Nation may remain in this
languishing condition while the World endures, and we must remain Underlings,
to be Despised by all our Neighbors: But it is hoped it will take better
effect, at least to examine the Veracity thereof; and it is not doubted, but
there will be given the Nation that satisfaction they can readily wish for.

There are two Years Interest of this National Bank, reserved for all
Contingencies that may be necessary for this Erection.

This National Bank will greatly strengthen and support the carrying on of
Foreign Colonies, as CALEDONIA, and others, filling the Nation and Company's
hands with Money, enabling them to give these necessary and frequent Supplies
as may be needful.

There are several Heads in this National Bank, that the Projector forbears to
make publiek; as the manner of erecting the Bills for duration, and a Method to
prevent Counterfits to be imposed upon us, for which the Projector has a
peculiar way, which is both safe and easy, unknown to any; which makes this
Proposal more acceptable to this Nation, than is proposed to any other, they
not having the like Security offered them: All which the Projector shall be
ready, in its proper Time, and to proper Persons, to give account of.

There are Three principal Objections natively falls in to be obviat; and
craves the Courteous Reader's Patience to answer: and shall be as brief as I
can.

First, The Unprecedentialness of this Bank. Secondly, Its Currency for the
Service of the Nation. Thirdly, Its Exhaust and Safety. And, Lastly, My
Animadversions upon the whole: And, as I have said, my Care is to be as short
as I can; for my purpose is not to write a Volume, but a Sheet.

For the First, the Unprecedentialness of this Bank. I Answer, If other Nations
and People had opponed this Argument, what had become of the most Famous
Discoveries and Advantageous Effects that are so profitable and useful to the
World, as Columbus New Worlds Discovery, which was more an Impulse, than
Demonstratical Reason; if that famous Queen of Portugal had not encouraged,
might have been dead to us, as well as to the known World upward of Five
Thousand Years, which is now become the Magazine and Treasure of Europe? And
not to pass by our Famous Merchistoun, justly deserving to be noted; for his
Lograthims become so useful, that it has made Coasters, Sailers through the
most spacious Seas: As also many others that have made their Country Famous, as
well as themselves, for their Discoveries of laudable Practices and Sciences,
so profitable and useful to Mankind, which I may say is like a new Creation
inspired by the Great GOD in the Hearts and Understandings of Men. All these,
and other profitable Discoveries so advantageous, that a great part of the
World are Maintained by, as well as made Rich, putting Employments and
Negotiations in the hands of Mankind, that they may not Eat the Bread of
Idleness and Sloth, which brings on Poverty, examplified in our selves,
compared with our Neighboring Nations, by their painful Practices and virtuous
Improvements of Art and Industry, are become Rich; and we, for the slighting
and despising of such Methods, remain Poor: So that, through our Idleness, the
one half of the Nation, by a sensible Waste and Decay, are eating up the other,
that we have Death going about our Doors and Streets, portrait in the Visages
of Mankind, should extort Pity, and quicken the Spirits of all Tender
Christians, and put the Nation to Examine all Overtures and Proposals offered
for the Relieving of it, and Raising it in its Wealth and Honor. And I may
safely say, that this is not amongst the least, but the greatest that ever was
offered; and shall close the Answer of this Objection with these few given, it
being my care not to weary the Reader with the Reasonableness thereof, though
not Precedential.

The Second Objection, Its Currency for the Service of the Nation. A Proposal
so advantageously laid down, cannot fail in its Currency, considering the great
Stock in Cash, treasured up in an Office to answer the Credit of the Bills,
will give a very honorable Reputation to the National Bank; and there are
several Branches to strengthen the Bank, and to enlarge the Cash, by receiving
all Money into the Office upon a Months certain, at half Use, and to be drawn
out after at pleasure, every Man will come quickly to see his Advantage, and
bring in all his idle Money, and he will see it safer in the Office, than in his
own Custody, as well as advantageous to him,

On the other hand, if one wants a Sum of Money on present occasion, he can be
supplied at the Office upon a certain Use, for a Month or two, giving in his
Bill indorsed: So that the Bank is made an Exchange to give to him that wants,
and is profitable to him that has it idle. It is easy demonstrable and made
appear, that this Bank is more honorable and profitable, than any Bank in
Europe: All the Banks in Europe, the Company is liable for all the Bills
^mitted by them; but here the Interest is made liable, and does effectively do
it. And further, the longer the Banks in Europe continue, they are the more
indebted; and the longer this Bank continues, the less indebted, by destroying
the yearly Interest, till it self eats up it self, that the payment of the
Twenty Seven Years Interest takes in the whole Bills: So that there is none to
pay, and the Cash does remain a good Legaey to the next Age to erect a new one.

The Third Objection, Its Exhaust and Safety. My last Paragraph gives a Videmus
to this, by the payment of the Twenty Seven Years Interest exhausts the whole.
I shall endeavor to make it appear by plain Demonstration. I have a Thousand
Pounds Scots I lock up in my Cabin, I take yearly out of it Fifty Pounds Scots
for Twenty Years, then my Bag is empty: Even so the Four per Cent. Interest for
Twenty Seven Years* returns them from whence they came; so that no Man can be a
loser by them: Only with this difference of my Thousand Pounds exhaust, That
the Nation has this vast Stock to occupy in all manner of Payments,
Improvements, and Business, for Twenty Seven Years. And if the Loan of Money in
the Estimate of the Nation, be at Seventeen Years use, and the Principal to
pay; how much more advantageous is the Loan for Twenty Seven Years, and no
Principal to pay? I shall leave this to the judicious Observer, and proceed to
my Animadversions.

It is hoped that the Honor of the Nation is not degenerat from their
Ancestors, that did acquit themselves nothing inferior to their Neighbors,
that now they should not see such a great Advantage as this Offer makes unto
them, when their need does so much require it, but that they will, like the
noble Bereans in another case, search whether these things be so, or no; and
not let such an Advantageous Opportunity slip, when our need of it is so great,
and do by This as we did by that noble Undertaking of the Earl of Stirling, who
did expose his own Fortune to the raising of ours, which if happily had been
followed, our Improvements in America might have been as Advantageous as our
Neighbors, which now all our Endeavors cannot recover. But to pass by that is
not now to be remedied, and to this in hand, and to tell you, That it is
Greater than ever any was offered: For all these were Foreign, and at a
distance; but this is a Circulation of Treasure within our selves, which runs
no Hazards, if duly Managed: And although we may be Envyed by our Neighbors,
yet they cannot Rob us of it.

We have had Dr. Chamberland's Persuasive of it: And truly that Gentleman has
merited the Good Will and Favor of all True-hearted Scots-Men, for the Tender
of his Service therein; though it is with many Disadvantages that this is offered:
As First, His Hundred Years continuance, may be of fatal Consequences to the
Land Estates that engages in this National Bank, and their Successors: And it
were better that many Possessors of Lands were Interdicted, than to be
Transactors for so many Ages, to fix such a long continued yearly Debt, to
entail on their Posterity. If it be Answered, That the Incomes of a Joint Stock
of Trade will sufficiently make it up; we have too sad Experience of our
National Joint Stock of Trade, our African and Indian Company's Management, a
plain Demonstration of a Joint-national-stock: But this is given to every Man,
to make the best of it he can, and not to be confined to the Management of
others. Besides, this Bank is agreeable to this present Age, that the most of
the Transactors may be Witnesses to the Exhaust of it: So that their Successors
can noways suffer by their Mis-management.

And the Last is the worst, To settle his Bank upon the public Faith of the
Nation; which will be of little Reputation at Home, and of far less Abroad;
though it must be confessed, our Necessity does call for a speedy Supply: But
it is always to be adverted, that it be both Safe and Honorable; on the other
hand, if we have not, we are like to fall despicable, which I pray GOD to
prevent.

I would humbly lay before this Honorable Parliament, the Consideration of
Foreign Trade with Luxurious and Superfluous Commodities; especially with those
Nations that deny Trade with us, and s^rve us with no other Commodities, than
to waste our Bodies and Estates, and increasing our Poverty, by draining the
Money out of the Nation: For if our Import be greater than our Export, what
shall be the End thereof but Misery?

I would have given some Preliminary Positions, but Dr. Chamberland preventing
me in his Proposal of the highest Concern to the Kingdom of Scotland: I do
agree with the Doctor's Title, if the Nation desires to be Rich and Honorable;
and do tell them, It is a Treasure opened up within our selves, to Improve all
our Product, and Employ all our Hands; so that in a few Years, by the Export of
our Manufactories, we'll bring in the Treasure and Wealth of our Neighbors.
This does not only employ our idle Hands, and make us Rich; but the greatest
Nations in Europe will then court our Favor, and take off that Ignominy of
Despicableness we are lying under. If this be not of the Nations Concern, I
know not what they will make their Concern. And if there be any, as it cannot
otherwise be expected but there may be some, as there is against the best of
Undertakings, that may have an evil Design against this Bank, as self-seeking
People, having no regard to the Common Good of the Nation; the Parliament may
find out Ways and Methods to prevent their ill Designs, so that they cannot
hurt it. Besides, the Discovery of this laudable Practice, and the Nation
engaging therein, will make us Famous to all Generations.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I could not be answerable to my Country, to my Self,
and to GOD, the Inspirer of every Good and Perfect Gift, to Conceal such a
Common Good to this Nation: And shall shut up all with my hearty Prayer, That
GOD may give to this most Honorable Parliament, all Wisdom and Grace to do
every Good and Acceptable Service, for the Glory of GOD, the Wealth,
Prosperity, and Honor of the Nation.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your Honors most Obedient, and most Humble Servant,
J. A.


