ARISTOTLE's Masterpiece COMPLETED, In Two PARTS: The First Containing the
Secrets of Generation, In all the PARTS thereof.

TREATING, Of the Benefit of Marriage, and the Prejudice of Unequal Matches,
Signs of Insufficiency in Men or Women; Of the Infusion of the SOUL; Of the
Likeness of Children to Parents; Of Monstrous Births; The Cause and Cure of the
Green Sickness: A Discourse of Virginity. Directions and Cautions for
Mid-wives: Of the Organs of Generation in women, and the Fabric of the Womb.
The Use and Action of the Genitals. Signs of Conception, and whether of a Male
or Female. With a Word of Advice to both Sexes in the Act of Copulation. And
the Pictures of several Monstrous Births, etc.

The Second PART, being A Private Looking-Glass for the Female Sex.

Treating of the various Maladies of the Womb; and of all other Distempers
incident to Women of all Ages, with proper Remedies for the Cure of each.

The whole being more Correct, than any thing of this Kind hitherto Published.

LONDON, Printed by B. H. and are to be Sold by most Booksellers. 1697.

The Effigies of a Maid all Hairy, and an Infant that was ^orn Black by the
Imagination of theIr Parents, etc.




IV'e Read this Useful Tract, and therein find
The lively Strokes of Aristotle's Mind:
And they that do with Understanding Read,
Will find it is a Masterpiece indeed:
For on this Subject there is none can Write,
(At least so well) as that Great Stagyrite.
He Natures Cabinet has open laid,
And her Abstrusest Secrets here displayed:
Here modest Maids and Women, being Ill,
Have got a Doctor to advise with still:
Where they may not only their Distempers see,
But find a Sure, and Proper Remedy
For each Disease, and every Condition;
And have no other Need of a Physician:
For which Good End I Am sure it was designed;
And may the Reader the Advantage find.
W. Salmun.


The Introduction.
IF one of the meanest Capacity were asked, What was the Wonder of the World? I
think the most proper Answer would be, MAN: He being the (...), or Little
World; to whom all things are Subordinate: Agreeing in the Genus, with things
Sensitive; all being Animal; but differing in the Species, for Man alone is
endew'd with Reason. And therefore the Deity, at Man's Creations, (as the
Inspired Penman tells us) said, Let us make Man in our own Image, after our
Likeness. The Words in the Hebrew are, Tselem and Demuth, which are Translated
Image and Likeness, they have August. Lib. de Genesis imperf. cap. 16. Omnis Imago
s^milis est ei cujus imago est, nec t^menomne quod simile est alicui, etiam
imago ejus est. Expositio ergo fortasse est cum additum sit, ad imaginem.
Calvin in Genesis 1.26.
but one meaning, and signify one thing, as if the Lord had said, Let us make
Man in our Image, that he may be (as a Creature may be) like us; and the same
his Likeness may be our Image. Some of the Fathers do distinguish, Ambros, Lib.
de Dig^. Hom. Cap. 2, and 3. Lombard. lib. 2. Did. 16. d.
as if by Image, the Lord had meant the Reasonable Powers of the Soul, Reason,
Will, and Memory; and by Likeness, the Qualities of the Mind, Charity, Justice,
Patience, etc. But Moses himself Confounds this Distinction (if you compare
these Scriptures, Genesis 1 27. and 5.1. Coloss. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24.) And the
Apostle, where he says, He was Created after the Image of GOD in Knowledge,
and the same in Righteousness and Holiness. Wherefore of the Greeks he is
called, (...), of turning his Eyes upwards toward him, whose Image and
Superscription he bears. Whence the Poet Writes,

See how the Heavens high Architect,
has framed Man in this Wise,
To Stand, to God, to Look Erect,
with Body, Face and Eyes.
And Cicero says all Creatures were made like Moles to root upon the Earth,
except Man, to whom was given an Upright Frame to Contemplate his Maker; and
behold that Mansion prepared for him above.

Now to the end that so Noble and Glorious a Creature as Man, might not quite
Perish, it seemed Good to the Almighty Creator, to give unto Woman the Field of
Generation, for a Receptacle of Human Seed; whereby that Natural and Vegetable
Soul which lies Potentially in the Seed, may by the Vis Plastica, or Plastic
Power, be reduced into Act; that Man, who is a mortal Creature, by leaving his
Offspring behind him, may become, as it were Immortal, and Survive in his
Posterity.

And because this Field of Generation, the Womb, is the place where this
Excellent and Noble Creature is formed, and that in so Wonderful a manner, that
the Royal Psalmist, (having meditated thereon) Cries out, as one in an Ecstasy,
I am fearfully and wonderfully made! It will be highly necessary to Treat
largely thereon in this Book, which to that end is divided into Two Parts: The
first whereof Treats of the manner and parts of Generation in both Sexes: (For
from the mutual Desire they have to each other, which Nature has implanted in
them to that end, (and that Delight which they take in the act of Copulation)
does the whole Race of Mankind proceed:) And a particular account of what
things are Previous to that Act, and also what are Consequential of it; and how
each Member concerned in it, is Adapted and fitted for that Work to which
Nature has designed it: And though in uttering of these things something may be
said, which those that are Filthy and Unclean may make a bad use of, and wrest
it to an occasion of stirring up their Bestial Appetites, yet such may know
this was never intended for them; nor do I know any Reason that those Sober
Persons, for whose Use this was meant, should want the Help hereby designed
them, because Vain and Loose Persons will be ready to abuse it.

The second Part of this Treatise is peculiarly designed for the Female Sex;
and does largely not only Treat of the Distempers of the Womb, and their
various Causes, but also give you proper. Remedies for the Cure of them: For
such is the Ignorance of most Women, that when by any Distemper those Parts are
affected, they neither know from whence it proceeds, nor how to apply a Remedy;
and such is their Modesty also, that they are unwilling to ask, that they may
be informed: And for the help of such is this designed; for having my Being
from a Woman, I thought none had more Right to the Grapes, than she which
Planted the Vine. And therefore observing that among all Diseases incident to
the Body, there are none more Frequent, and none more Perilous, than those
which arise from the ill State of the Womb, for through the evil Quality
thereof, the Heart, the Liver, and the Bra^n are Affected, from whence the
Actions Vital, Natural and Animal are Hurt, and the Virtues Concoctive,
Sanguificative, Distributive, Attractive, Expulsive, Retentive, with the rest,
are all Weakened; so that from the Womb comes Convulsions, Epilepsies,
Appoplexies, Palseys, Hectic Fevers, Dropsies, Malignant Ulcers, etc. And to
be short, there is no Disease so bad, but may proceed from the evil Quality of
it. How necessary therefore the Knowledge of these things are, let every
Vnprejud^ced Reader Judge: For, that many Women labor under them, through their
own Ignorance and Modesty, (as I said before) woeful Experience makes manifest.
Here therefore, as in a Mirror, they may be acquainted with their own
Distempers, and have suitable Remedies, without applying themselves to a
Physician, against which they have so great a Reluctance.

ARISTOTLE's MASTERPIECE COMPLETED:
PART I. OF THE Secrets of Generation, In all the PARTS thereof.
CHAP. I. Of Marriage, and at what Age Young Men and Virgins are capable of the
Marriage Bed, and why they so much desire it: Also how long Men and Women are
capable of having Children.
THERE are very few (except some professed Debauchees) but what will readily
agree, That Marriage is Honorable, being Ordained by Heaven in Paradise; and
without which no Man or Woman can be in a Capacity honestly to yield obedience
to the first Law of the Creation, Increase and multiply. And since it is
Natural in young People to desire those mutual Embraces proper to the
Marriage Bed, it behooves Parents to look after their Children; and when they
find them inclinable to Marriage, not violently to restrain their Affections,
and oppose their Inclinations, (which instead of allaying them, makes 'em but
the more impetuous) but rather provide such suitable Matches for them as may
make their Lives comfortable: Lest the crossing of their Inclinations should
precipitate them to commit those Follies that may bring an indelible stain upon
their Families.

The Inclination of Maids to Marriage, is to be known by many Symptoms: For
when they arrive to Puberty, (which is about the Fourteenth or Fifteenth year
of their Age) then their Natural Purgations begin to flow: And the Blood, which
is no longer taken to augment their Bodies, abounding, stirs up their Minds to
Venery. External Causes also may incite them to it; for the Spirits being brisk
and inflamed when they arrive at this Age, if they eat sharp salt things and
Spices, the Body becomes more and more heated, whereby the Desire to Venereal
Embraces is very great, and at some times almost insuperable: And the use of
these so much desired Enjoyments being denied to Virgins, is many times
followed by dismal Consequents, as a green Weasel-colour, short Breathings,
Trembling of the Heart, etc. But when they are married, and their Venereal
Desires satisfied by the Enjoyment of their Husbands, those Distempers vanish,
and their former Beauty returns, more gay and lively than before. Also their
eager gazing at Men, and affecting their company; sufficiently demonstrates
that Nature prompts them to desire Coition; which their Parents often
neglecting or refusing to provide, by procuring them Husbands, they break the
Bounds of Modesty, and satisfy themselves in unlawful Embraces. The same may
be observed in young brisk Widows, who cannot be satified without that Due
Benevolence which they were wont to receive from their Husbands.

At Fourteen Years of Age, commonly the Menses in Virgins begin to flow, at
which time they are capable of Conceiving, and so continue generally to
Forty-four; at which time for the most part they cease bearing, unless they be
very healthful and strong of Body, and have always been addicted to Temperance;
such indeed have born Children till Fifty-five years; but this rarely happens,
although the Menses flow a longer time in some Women than in others; but many
times such Efflux proceeds not from a natural Cause, but by reason of some
violence offered to Nature, or some other Morbifick matter, which often proves
of fatal consequence to the Party: And therefore those Men that are desirous of
Isue, must marry Women within the Age aforesaid, or blame themselves if they
meet with disappointments: Though if an old Man, not worn out by Diseases and
Incontinency, marry a brisk lively Lass, there is hopes of his having Children
to Threescore and Ten; nay, if extraordinary lusty, even till Fourscore.

Hipocrates is of Opinion that a Youth, at Sixteen years, or between that and
Seventeen having much vital strength, may be capable of getting Chi'dren; and
also that the Force and Heat of Procreating Matter constantly increases till
Forty-five, Fifty, and Sixty-five, and then begins to flag, the Seed by degrees
becoming unfruitful; the natural Spirits being extinguished, and the Humors
dried up: Thus it is in general; but as to particulars, as I have before
mentioned, it often happens otherwise: Nay, it is reported by a credible
Author, That in Sweedland a Man was married at a hundred years old to a Bride
of Thirty, and had many Children by^^r, but looked so fresh, that such as knew
him not, took him not to exceed half that Age.

I Campania, where the air is clear and temperate, men of Fourscore years old
usually marry young Virgins, and have Children by them; which shows that age in
men hinders not Procreation, unless they be exhausted in their Youth, and their
Yard shrivel'd up. If any would know why a Woman is sooner Barren than a Man,
they may understand that the natural Heat, which is the Cause of Generation, is
more predominant in the latter than in the former: For since a Woman is more
moist than a Man, as her Monthly Purgations demonstrate. as also the softness
of her Body; it is also apparent, that he does exceed her in her Native Heat,
which is the chief thing that concocts the Humors into proper Aliment; which
the Woman wanting grows fat, when a Man through his Native Heat melts his fat
by degrees, and his Humors are dissolved, and by the benefit thereof they are
elaborated into Seed: And this may be also added, That Women generally are not
so strong as Men, nor so wise and prudent, nor have so much Reason and
Ingenuity in ordering of Affairs; which shows that thereby the Faculties are
hindered in their operation.

CHAP. II. How to get a Male or Female Child, and of the Embryo and Perfect
Birth, with the fittest time for Copulation.
WHEN a young Couple are married, they naturally desire Children; and therefore
make use of those means that Nature has appointed to that end; But
notwithstanding their Endeavors, they must know the Success of all depends on
a Blessing from on high, for Children are the Blessing of the Lord; and not
only so, but the Sex, whether Male or Female, is from his disposal also; though
it cannot be denied but secondary Causes have an influence therein, especially
two: First, The Genital Humor, which is brought by the Arteriae Preparantes to
the Testes in the form of Blood, and there Elaborated into Seed by the
Seminifical Faculty resident in them: To which may be added, the desire to
Coition, which fires the Imagination with unusual Fancies; and by the sight of
a brisk charming Beauty may much inflame the Appetite. But if Nature be
enfeebled, there are fit Artificial Remedies to restore it, viz. Those Meats
that most conduce to the affording such Aliment as makes Seed abound, and
restores the Decays of Nature, that the Fac^lties may freely operate: For as
Dung and good manuring restores Ground that is worn out, and heartless, even so
proper Diet operates to the restoring the Coldness and Dryness of the Genital
Parts, and reduces the weakness of the Nerves to their Temperament, and
removes Impediments obstructing the Procreation of Children.

Then since Diet alters the evil state of the Body to a better, it is necessary
that such (...) are subject to Barrenness should eat such Meats only as may
render them fruitful; and such ar^ all meats of good Juice, that nourish well,
a^^ make the Body lively, and full of Sap, of which faculty are all hot moist
Meats: for according to Galen, Seed is made of the pure concocted and windy
superfluity of Blood; whence we may conclude there is in many things a power to
accumulate Seed, as also to augment it, and other things of force to cause
Erection; as Hen-Eggs, Pheasants, Woodcocks, Gnat-sappers, ^hrushes,
Black-Birds, young Pigeons, Sparrows, Partridges, Capons, Almonds, Pine-Nuts,
Raisins, Currants, all strong Wines taken sparingly especially those made of
the Grapes of Italy; but Erection is chiefly caused by Styrium, Ering^es,
Cresses, Erysimum, Parsnips, Artichoaks, Turnips, Rapes, Asparagus, Candied
Ginger, Gallinga, Acorns bruised to Powder, and drank in Muscadels, Scallions,
Sea-Shell-Fish, etc. But these must have time to perform their Operation, and
you must use them for a considerable time, or you will reap little benefit by
them. The Act of Coition being over, let the Woman repose her self on her Right
Side, with her Head lying low, and her Body declining, that by sleeping in that
posture, the Cell on the Right Side of the Matrix many prove the Place of
Conception, for therein is the greatest Generative Heat, which is the chief
procuring cause of Male Children, and rarely fails to answer the expectation of
those that experience it, especially if they do but keep warm, and without much
motion, leaning to the right, and drinking a little Spirit of Saffron, and
Juice of Hysop in a Glass of Mallago or Alligant, when they lie down and rise,
for the space of a Week. Now the fittest time for the Procreation of Male
Children is when the Sun is in Leo, and the Moon in Virgo, Scorpio, or
Sagitarius.

But for a female Child, the woman must lie on the left Side, strongly fancying
a Female in the time of Procreation, especially if she drink the Decoction of
Female Mercury, four days from the first day of Purgation; the Male Mercury
(both Herbs so called) having the like Operation in case of a Male Child; for
the Decoction of these Simples do purge the one the right, and the other the
left side of the Womb, and thereby both open the Receptacles, and make a way
for the Seminary of Generation: And the best time to beget a Female is, when
the Moon is in wane, in Libra or Aquarius, for then they will be of a gentle
affable temper, very fa^r, and perfect in all their Members. Avicenna describes
the time of Procreation thus; When the Menses are spent, and the Womb is
cleansed, which is commonly in five days, or seven at most, if a Man lie with
his Wife from the first day she is purged, to the fifth, she will conceive a
Male; but from the fifth to the 8th, a Female; and from the 8th to the 12th, a
male again But after that Number of Days, peradventure neither distinctly, but
both in an Hermaphrodite.

In a word, They that would be happy in the fruit of their Labor, must observe
to use Copulation at a due distance of time; not too often, nor yet too seldom;
for both these are alike hurtful; and to use it immoderately, weakens a Man,
wastes his Spirits, and debilitates the Seed. And thus much for the first
particular: I shall now proceed to the second; which is to let the Reader
understand how the Child is formed in the Womb, what accidents it is liable to
there, how nourished, and when brought forth.

There are various Opinions concerning this matter; therefore I shall for the
satisfaction of the Curious, show what the Learned say about it: Man consists
of an Ovum; or Egg, which is impregnated in the Ovaria, or Testicles of the
Woman, by the more subtle part of Man's Seed; but the forming Faculty and
Virtue in the Seed in from a Divine and Heavenly Gift, it being abundantly
endued with a Vital Spirit, which gives shape and form to the Embryo; so that
all the parts and bulk of the Body which is made up in the space of many
months, and is by degrees formed into the comely Figure of a man, do consist in
that, and are adumbrated thereby: Which is incomparably expressed by the Royal
Psalmist, in Psalm. 138. I will praise thee, O Lord, because I am wonderfully
made Thou know all my Bones when I was fashioned in the secret place, and
when I was wonderfully formed in my mothers Womb. Thy Eyes beheld me yet
unmade, and in thy Book were all my Members written, which day by day were
fashioned. And the Physicians have assigned four different times, wherein this
Microsm, or little world, is framed and perfected in the womb.

The first is presently after Coition, being perfected in the first Week, if no
Efflux happen, which sometimes fall out through the ^^^ippe^^ness of the
Matrix, or the head thereof, that shifts over like a Rose-bud, and opens on a
sudden by reason of Cold, or over-hard Labor.

The second time of forming is assigned to be, when Nature makes a manifest
mutation in the Conception, so that all the substance seems Congealed Flesh and
Blood, which happens about 12 or 14 days after Copulation; and though this
Concretion or Fleshy Mass abound with hot fiery Blood, yet it remains
undistinguishable, having no form or figure, and may be termed an Embrio, and
compared to Seed which is sown in the Ground, which through kindly Heat and
Moisture grows up by degrees into a perfect form, either in Plant or Grain; or
as when a Potter fashions a Vessel out of a rude lump of Clay.

The third time assigned to make up this Fabric, is when the principal Parts
show themselves so as to be discerned; as the Heart, from whence proceeds the
Arteries; the Brain, from which the Nerve, like many small Threads, ru^ through
the whole Body; and the Liver, whose office it is to separate the Chile from
the Blood brought to it by the Vena Portae. The two first are the Fountains of
Life, that Nourish every part of the Body; in framing which, the Faculty of the
Wo^b is busied from the time of Conception to the Eighteenth Day of the first
Month

But Lastly, About the 28 or 30th day, the outward parts are seen exquisitely
elaborated and distinguished by Joints, and then the Child begins to grow, from
which time, by reason the Limbs are divided, and the whole frame is perfect, it
is no longer held and Embrio, that is, a Conception that springs forth, but a
perfect and absolute Child. Males for the most part are perfect by the 30th
day, but Females seldom, till the 42 or 45 day; and the reason is, That the
heat of the Womb is greater in producing the Male than the Female: And for the
same reason a woman going with a Male Child, quickens in 3 Months; but going
with a Female, rarely under 4: at which time also its Hair and Nails come
forth, and the Child begins to stir kick, and tumble in the Womb; so that the
motion is plainly perceived, and then the Women are troubled with Nauseating
and Loathing of their Meat, and oftentimes greedily long for things contrary to
Nutriment; as Coals, Rubbish, Chalk, Lime, Starch, Oat-meal, raw Flesh and
Fish, etc. which Desire proceeds from a former contraction of evil Humors,
occasioning impure Blood in their contained Vessel within, and oftentimes
Abortion and Miscarriages; some Women have been so extravagant that have Longed
for Hob. Nails, Leathen, Man's-Flesh, Horseflesh, and other unnatural (as well
as unwholesome) Foods, for want of which they have Miscarried, or the Child has
continued dead in the Womb for many days, to the eminent hazard of their Lives.
But I shall now proceed to show by what means the Infant is sustainld in the
Womb, and what posture it there remains in.

There have been various Opinions about the way by which in the Womb the Foetus
is nourished, some affirming, by Blood only from the Vmbilical Vein; others by
Chyle, received in by the Mouth; but the Truth is, it is nourished diversely;
according to the different degrees of Perfection that an Egg passes from a
Concep^ion to a Foetus, ready for the Birth.

But before we proceed, we will explain what we mean by this Ovum, or Egg. You
must know then, that there are in the Generation of the Foetus two Principles,
Active and Passive: The active, is the Man's Seed, elaborated in the Testicles
out of the Arterial Blood, and Animal Spirits. The Passive Principle is a Ovum
or Egg, impregnated by the Man's Seed. For to say that Woman has true Seed, is
erroneous. But the manner of Conception is thus: The most Spirituous part of
Man's Seed in the Act of Generation, reaching up to the Ovarium or Testicles of
the Woman (which contain diverse Eggs, sometime more, sometimes fewer)
impregnates one of them, which being conveyed by the Ovi-ducts to the bottom of
the Womb, presently begins to swell bigger and bigger, and drinks in the
moisture that is plentifully sent th^ther, after the same manner that Seeds in
the Ground suck the fertile moisture thereof to make them sprout.

When the parts of the Embryo begin to be a little more perfect, and the
Chorion is so very thick that the Liquor cannot soak through it, the Vmbilical
Vessels begin to the formed, and to extend the side of the Amn^os, which they
pass through, and also through the Allanteides and Chorion, and are implanted
in the Placenta, which gathering upon the Chorion, joins it to the Vterus. And
now the Arteries that before sent out the Nourishment into the Cavity of the
Womb, open by the Orifices in to the Placentae, where they deposite the said
Juice, which is drunk up by the Vmbilical Vein, and conveyed by it, first to
the Liver of the Foetus, and then to the Heart, where its more thin and
Spirituous part is turned into Blood, whilst the grosser part of it descending
by the Aorta, enters the Vmbilical Arteries, and is discharged into its Cavity,
by those Branches of them that run through the Amnios.

As Soon as the Mouth, Stomach, and Gullet, etc. are formed so perfectly that
the Foetus can swallow, it sucks in some of the grosser Nutritious Juice that
is deposited in the Amnios, by the Vmbilical Arteries, which descending into
the Stomach and Intestines, is received by the Lacteal Veins, as in Adust
Persons.

The Foetus being perfected at the times before specified in all its parts, it
lies equally balanced in the Womb; as in the Center, all on a Head, and being
something long, is turned round, so that the Head a little inclines, and it
lays his Chin on its Breast, his Heels and Ancles upon its ^uttocks, its Hands
on its Cheeks, and its Thumbs to its Eyes; but its Legs and Thighs are carried
upwards, with its Ha^s bending, so that they touch the bottom of its Belly; the
former, and that part of the Body which is over against us, as the Forehead,
Nose, Face, are turned toward the Mothers Back, and the Head incl^ning
downwards toward the Co^yx or Rump-bone, that joins to the Os Sacrum, which
Bone, t^gether with Os Pubis, in the time of the ^i^th part, and is loosned;
whence it is, that Male Children commonly come with their Faces downwards, or
with their Heads turned somewhat Oblique, that their Faces may be seen; but the
Female Children, with their Faces upwards, though sometimes it happens that
Births follow not according to Natures Order, but Children comes forth with
their Feet stradling, their Necks bowed, and their Heads lying Oblique with
their Hands stretched out, which greatly endangers themselves and the Mother,
giving the Midwife great trouble to bring them into the World; but when all
things proceed in Natures Order, the Child, when the time of Birth is
accomplished, is desirous to come forth of the Womb; and by inclining himself,
he roles downward; for he can no more he obscured in those hiding places, and
the heat of the Heart cannot subsist without external respiration; wherefore
being grown great, he is more and more desirous of Nutriment and Light; when
coveting the Etherial Air, he by struggling to obtain it, breaks the Membranes
and Coverings, whereby he was restrained and fenced against attrition; and for
the most part, with bitter pangs of the Mother issues forth into the World,
commonly in the ninth Month; for then the Matrix being divided, and the Os
Pudis being loosned, the Woman strives to cast forth her Burden, and the Child
does the like to get forth, by the help of its inbred strength, and so the
Birth comes to be perfect; but if the Child be dead, the more dangerous is the
Delivery, though Nature, as a kind Commiserator, often helps the Women's
Weakness herein: But the Child that is quick and lively, labors no less than
the Woman.

Now there are Births at Seven or Eight Months, and some Women go to the Tenth
Month. But of these, and the reason of them, I shall speak more largely in
another place.

CHAP. III. The Reason why Children are like their Parents, and what the
Mothers Imagination contributes thereto; and whether the Man or Woman be the
Cause of the Male or Female Child, etc.
LActantius is of Opinion, That when a Man's Seed falls on the left side of the
Womb, it may produce a Male Child; but because it is the proper place for a
Female, there will be something in it that resembles a Woman; that is, it will
be fairer, whiter and smoother, not very subject to have Hair on the Body or
Chin; it will have long lank Hair on the Head, the Voice small and sharp, and
the Courage feeble: And on the contrary, That a Female may perchance be gotten
if the Seed fall on the Right Side; but then through the abundance of Heat she
will be big bon'd, full of Courage, having a Masculine Voice, and her Chin and
Bosom hairy, not being so clear as others of that Sex, and subject to quarrel
with her Husband for Superiority, etc.

In case of Similitude, nothing is more powerful than the Imagination of the
Mother, for if she fasten her Eyes upon any Object, and imprint it in her Mind,
it often times so happens, that the Child in some part or other of its Body has a
representation thereof: And if in the Act of Copulation the Woman earnestly
look upon the Man, and fix her Mind upon him, the Child will resemble its
Father: Nay, though a Woman be in unlawful Copulation, yet if she fix her Mind
upon her Husband, the Child will resemble him, though he never got it. The same
effect of the Imagination is the cause of Warts, Stains, Moldspots, Dashes;
though indeed they sometimes happen through frights or extravagant Longing: Many
Women big with Child, seeing a Hare cross them, will through the strength of
Imagination bring forth a Child with a hairy Lip. Some Children are born with
flat Noses, wry Mouths, great blubber Lips, and ill-shap'd Bodies; and most
ascribe the reason to the Imagination of the Mother, who has cast her Eyes and
Mind upon some ill-shap'd and distorted Creatures: Therefore it behooves all
Women with Child to avoid such sights, if possible, or at least, not to regard
'em. But though the Mothers Imagination may contribute much to the Features of
the Child; yet in Manners, Wit, and Propension of the Mind, Experience tells
us, That Children are commonly of the same condition with their Parents, and of
the same Tempers. But the Vigor or Debility of Persons in the Act of
Copulation, many times causes it to be otherwise: For Children got with heat
and strength of desire, must needs partake more of the Nature and Inclinations
of their Parents, than those that are begotten when their Desires are more weak
and feeble; and therefore the Children that are begotten by Men in their old
Age, are generally less strong and vigorous, than those begotten by them in
their Youth.

As to that share which each of the Parents have in begetting the Child, we
will give the Opinion of the Ancients about it.

Though it is apparent (say they) that the Seed of Man is the chief Efficient
and beginning of Action, Motion, and Generation, yet the Woman affords Seed,
and effectually contributes in that particular to the Procreation of the Child,
is evinced by strong Reasons. In the first place Seminary Vessels had been
given her in vain, and Genital Testicles inverted, if the Woman wanted Seminal
Excressence; for Nature does nothing in vain: therefore it must be granted they
were made for the use of Seed and Procreation, and fixed in their proper
Places, both the Testicles and Receptacles of Seed, whose Nature is to operate,
and afford Virtue to the Seed. And to prove this, there needs no stronger
Argument (say they) than that if a Woman do not use Copulation, to eject her
Seed, she often times falls into strange Diseases, as appears by young Women
and Virgins. A second reason they urge, is, That although the Society of a lawful
Bed does not consist altogether in these things, yet it is apparent that the
Female Sex is never better pleased, nor appear more blithe and jocund, than
when they are often satisfied this way, which is an inducement to believe that
they have greater Pleasure and Titilation therein, than a Man; for since Nature
causes much Delight to accompany Ejection, by the breaking forth of the
swelling Spirit, and the stiffness of the Nerves, in which case the Operation
on the Woman's part is double, she having an enjoyment both by Ejection and
Reception, by which she is more delighted in the Venerial Act.

Hence it is (say they) that the Child more frequently resembles the Mother
than the Father, because the Mother contributes most toward it: And they think
it may be further instanced from the endeared Affection they bear them; for
that besides their contributing Seminal matter, they feed and nourish the Child
with the purest Fountain of Blood, until its Birth, which Opinion Gallen
confirms, by allowing Children to participate most of the Mother, and ascribes
the difference of Sex to the Operation of the Menstrual Blood; but the reason
of the Likeness he refers to the power of the Seed; for as Plants receive more
nourishment from fruitful Ground, than from the Industry of the Husbandman, so
the Infant receives in more abundance from the Mother than the Father: for
first, the Seed of both is cherished in the Womb, and there grows to
perfection, being nourished with Blood. and for this reason it ^s (say they)
that Children for the most part love their Mothers best, because they receive
most of their substance from their Mother; for about nine Months, and sometimes
ten, she nourishes the Child in the Womb with her purest Blood; then her love
toward it newly born, and its likeness, do clearly show that the Woman
affords Seed, and contributes more toward the making of the Child than Man.

But in all this the Ancients were very Erroneous; for the Testicles (so
called) in Women do not afford any Seed, but are two Eggs, like those of Fowls,
and other Creatures; neither have they any such Office as those of M^n, but are
indeed Ovarium, wherein these Eggs are nourished by the Sanguinary Vessels
dispersed through them, and from thence one or more (as they are fecundated by
the Man's Seed) separated, and are conveyed into the Womb by the Ovi duces. The
truth of this is plain; for if you boil them, their Liquor will have the same
Color, Taste and Consistency, with the Taste of Birds Eggs: If any object they
have no Shells, that signifies nothing, for the Eggs of Fowls, while they are
in the Ovary, nay, after they are fallen into the Vterus, have no Shell: And
though when they are laid, they have one, yet that is no more than a Fence which
Nature has provided them against outward Injuries, while they are hatched
without the Body; whereas those of Women being hatched within the Body, need no
other Fence than the Womb, by which they are sufficiently enough secured.

And this is enough, I hope, for the clearing of this point. As to the third
thing proposed, viz. Whence grows the kind, and whether the Man or the Woman is
the Cause of the Male or Female Infant?

The primary cause we must ascribe to God, (as is most justly his due) who is
the Ruler and Disposer of all things, yet does He suffer many things to proceed
according to the Rules of Nature, which are carried by their inbred motion,
according to usual and natural Course, without Variation. Though indeed by Favor
from on high, Sarah conceived Isaac; Hannah, Samuel; and Elizabeth, John the
Baptist: But these were extraordinary things, brought to pass by a Divine
Power, above the Course of Nature, nor have such instances been wanting in
latter Days: And therefore passing over such Supernatural Causes, that have
their peculiar Effects, I shall proceed to speak of things natural. The Ancient
Physicians and Philosophers say, That since there are two Principles, out of
which the Body of Man is made, and which render the Child like the Parents, and
to be of one or the other Sex, viz. Seed, common to both Sexes, and Menstrual
Blood, proper to the Woman only: The Similitude (say they) must needs consist
in the force and virtue of the Male or Female Seed, so that it proves like one
or other, according to the plenty afforded by either; but that the difference
of Sex is not referred to the Seed, but to the Menstrual Blood, which is proper
to the Woman, is apparent; for were that force altogether retained in the Seed,
the Male Seed being of the hottest quality, Male Children would abound, and few
of the Female would be propagated: Wherefore the Sex is attributed to the
Temperament of the Active Qualities, which consist in Heat and Cold, and to the
Nature of the matter under them, that is, to the flowings of the Menstrual
Blood: Now the Seed (say they) affords both force to procreate and form the
Child, and matter for its Generation, and in the Menstrual Blood there is both
matter and force; for as the Seed most helps the material Principles, so also
does the Menstrual Blood the potential Seed, which is (says Galen) Blood well
concocted by (...) Vessels that contain it; so that Blood is not only the
matter of generating the Child, but also Seed, in possibility that Menstrual
Blood has both Principles.

The Ancients further say, That the Seed is the strongest Efficient, the matter
of it being very little in quantity, but the potential quality of it is very
strong: Wherefore if the Principle of Generation, according to which the Sex is
made, were only (say they) in the Menstrual Blood, then would the Children be
all, or mostly, Females; as, if the efficient force was in the Seed, they would
be all Males: But that since both have operation, in Menstrual Blood, Matter
predominates in quantity; and in the Seed, Force and Virtue. And therefore
Galen thinks the Child receives its Sex rather from the Mother, than from the
Father, for although his Seed contribute something to the material Principle, yet
it is more weakly. But as for Likeness, it is referred rather to the Father
than the Mother: Yet the Woman's Seed receiving strength from the Menstrual
Blood, for the space of Nine Months, over-powers the Man's, as to that
particu'ar; for the Menstrual Blood howing into the Vessels, rather cherishes
the one than the other; from which it is plain, the Woman affords both matter
to make, and force and virtue to ^^^fect the Conception, though the Female's
(...) fit Nutriment for the Male's, by reason of the thinness of it, being more
adapted to make up Conception thereby; for as of soft Wax and moist Clay the
Workman can frame what he intends, so (say they) the Man's Seed mixing with the
Woman's, and also with the menstrual Blood, helps to make the form and perfect
part of Man.

But, with all imaginable Deference to the Wisdom of the Ancients, give me
leave to say, That their Ignorance in the Anatomy of Man's Body, has bewildered
'em in the Paths of Error, and led them into great mistakes: For their
Hypothesis of the Formation of the Embryo from a Commixture of Seeds, and the
Nourishment of it from the menstruous Blood, being wholly false, their Opinion
in this case must needs be so also.

I shall therefore conclude this Chapter, and only say, That although a strong
Imagination of the Mother may sometimes determine the Sex, yet the main Agent
in this case is the Plastic or Formative Principle, which is the Efficient in
giving Form to the Child, that gives it this or that Sex, according to those
Laws and Rules that are given to it by the wise Creator of all things, who both
makes and fashioneth it, and therein determines the Sex according to the
Counsel of his own Will.

CHAP. IV. A Discourse of the Soul of Man, That it is not Propogated from the
Parents, but is Infused by it is Creator; and can neither Die nor Corrupt; and
at what time it is Infused. Of the Immortality thereof, and certainty of the
Resurrection.
MAN's Soul is of so Divine a Nature and Excellency, that Man himself cannot in
any wise comprehend it, it being the infused Breath of the Almighty, of an
Immortal Nature; and not to be comprehended, but by him that gave it. For
Moses, by Holy Inspiration, relating the Original of Man, tells us, That God
breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life, and he became a living Soul.
Now, as for all other Creatures, at his Word they were made, and had Life; but
the Creature that God has appointed to set over his Works, was the peculiar
Workmanship of the Almighty, Forming him out of the Dust of the Earth, and
condescending to breathe into his Nostrils the Breath of Life; which seems to
Denote, more Care, and (if we may so term it) Labor used about Man, than about
all other Creatures, he only partaking and participating with the Divine
Nature, bearing the Image of God, in Innocence and Purity, whilst he stood
firm; and when by his Fall, that lively Image was defaced, yet such was the
Love of his Creator toward him, that he found out a way to Restore him; the
only begotten Son of the Eternal Father coming into the World to destroy the
works of the Devil; and to raise up Man from that low Condition to which his
Sin and Fall had reduced him, to a State above that of the Angels.

If therefore Man would understand the Excellency of his Soul, let him turn his
Eyes inward, and look into himself, and search diligently his own Mind, and
there he shall find so many admirable Gifts, and excellent Ornaments, that it
must needs strike him with Wonder and Amazement, as Reason, Understanding,
Freedom of Will, Memory, and diverse other Faculties, that plainly show the Soul
to be descended from an Heavenly Original; and that therefore it is of an
infinite Duration, and not subject to Annihilation. Yet by reason of its many
Offices and Operations, whilst in the Body, it goes under sundry Denominations.
For when it enlivens the Body, it is called the Soul; when it gives it
Knowledge, the Judgment or the Mind; when it recalls things past, the Memory;
whilst it discourses and discerns, Reason; whilst it contemplates, the
Spirit; whilst it is in the Sensitive parts, the Senses: And these are the
princip^^ Offices, whereby the Soul declares its. Pow^^ and performs its
Actions. For, being placed in the highest part of the Body, it diffuseth its
Force into every Member; not propagated from the Parents, nor mixed with gross
Matter, but the infused ^reath of the Al^ighty, immediately proceeding from
him; not passing from one to another, as we the Opinion of Pythagoras, who held
a Transmigration of the Soul: But that the Soul is given to every Infant by
Infusion, is the most generally received and Orthodox Opinion; and the Learned
do likewise agree that this is done, when the Infant is perfected in the Womb,
which happens about the 45th day after Conception, especially for Males, that
are generally born at the end of Nine Months, but in Females (who are not so
soon formed and perfected through the defect of heat) not till the 50th day.

And although this day in all cases cannot be perfectly set down, yet Hipocrates
has given his Opinion, when the Child has its perfect form, when it begins to
move, and when born, if in due season: for in his Book of the Nature of
Infants, he affirms, That if it be a Male, and he be perfect on the 30th day,
and move at the 60th, he will be Born at the seventh Month; but if he be
perfectly formed on the 35th day, he will move one 70th, and be born in the 8th
Month. Again, if he be perfectly formed on the 45th day, he will move on the
90th, and be born in the Ninth Month. Now, from these passing of Days and
Months, it plainly appears, That the day of Forming being doubled, makes up the
day of moving; and that day three times reckoned, makes up the day of Birth.

As for Example, where 35 perfect, the Form, if you double it, it makes 70, the
day of motion; and three times 70 amounts to 210 Days, which, allowing 30 Days
to a Month, makes seven Months; and so you must consider the rest. But as to a
Female, the Case is different, for it is longer perfecting in the Womb, the
Mother ever goes longer with a Boy than a Girl, so that the Account differs;
for a Female formed in 30 Days, moves not till the 70th day, and is born in the
7th Month; when she is formed in the 40th day, she moves not till the 80th day,
and is born in the 8th Month; but if she be perfectly formed on the 55th day,
she moves on the 90th, and is born on the 9th Month; but she that is formed on
the 50th day, moves on the 100th day, and then will she be born in the 10th
Month. And I have more largely treated hereof, that the Reader may know the
reasonable Soul is not Propagated by the Parents, but is Infused by the
Almighty, when the Child has its perfect Form, and is exactly distinguished in
its Lineaments.

Now, as the life of every other Creature, as Moses shows, is in the Blood, so
the life of Man consists in the Soul; which, although subject to Passion, by
reason of the gross (...) posure of the Body, in which it has a (...) ^^^^rary
Confinement, yet it is immortal, and cannot in it self corrupt or suffer
change, it being a spark of the Divine Mind, and renders him Immortal; and that
every Man's has a peculiar Soul, plainly appears by the vast difference between
the Wit, Judgment, Opinion, Manners, Affections, etc. in men. And this David
observes, when he says, God has fashioned the Hearts and minds of all men, and
has given to every one its own Being, and a Soul of its own Nature. Hence
Solomon rejoiced, that God had given him a happy Soul, and a Body agreeable to
it. It has been disputed amongst the Learned, especially Philosophers, in what
part of the Body the Soul resides: and some are of Opinion, that its residence
is in the middle of the Heart, and from thence communicates its self to every
part; which Solomon in the fourth of his Proverbs seems to assert, when he
says, Keep thy Heart with all Diligence, because Life proceeds therefrom But
many curious Physicians, searching the works of Nature in Man's Anatomy, etc.
do affirm, That it is chief Seat is in the Brain, from whence proceeds the
Senses, Faculties and Actions, diffusing the operation of the Soul through all
parts of the Body, whereby it is enlivened with Heat and Force; but it does
communicate particular force to the Heart by Arteries, Carotides, or sleepy
Arteries, that part upon the Throat; the which, if they happen to be (...) ^^e,
or cut, cause Barrenness, and if stopped, an Apoplexey: for there must
necessarily be some ways, through which, the Spirits Animal and Vital, may have
intercourse, and convey Native Heat from the Soul. For though the Soul has its
chief seat in one place, it operates in every part, exercising every Member,
which are the Soul's Instruments, by which she shows her power: but if it
happen that any of the Organical parts are out of Tune, the work is confused,
as appears in Idiots, Madmen, etc. Though in some of them, the Soul by a
vigorous erecting of it is Power, recover its innate Strength, and they become
right, after a long dispondency of Mind: But in others, it is not recovered
again in this Life. For as Fire under Ashes, or the Sun obscured from our sight
by thick Clouds, afford not their full Luster, so the Soul overwhelmed in
moist or morbifick matter, is darkened, and Reason thereby overclouded; and
although Reason shines less in Children, than in such as are arrived to maturity,
yet no man must imagine that the Soul is an Infant, and grows up with the
Child; for then would it again decay; but it suits it self to the weakness of
Nature, and the imbecility of the Body wherein it is placed, that it may better
operate. And as the Body is more and more capable of receiving it is influence,
so the Soul does more and more exert its faculties; having force and endowments
at the time it enters the form of the Child in the Womb, for the substance of
it can receive nothing less. and thus much to prove that the Soul comes not
from the Parents, but is infused by God. I shall next prove its Immortality,
and thereby de^on^^rate the certainty of its Resurrection

That the Soul of Man is a Divine Ray, infused by the Sovereign Creator, I have
already proved, and now come to show, That whatever immediately proceeds from
him, and participates of his Nature, must be as immortal as its Original; for
although all other Cretures are indewed with Life and Motion, yet want they a
reasonable Soul; and from thence it is concluded, That their Life is in their
Blood, and that being Corruptible, they Perish, and are no more. But Man being
indewed with a reasonable Soul, and stamped with the Divine Image, is of a
different nature; and though his Body be Corruptible, yet his Soul, being of an
immortal Nature, cannot Perish, but must, at the dissolution of its Body,
return to God that gave it, either to receive Reward or Punishment: Now that
the Body can sin of it self, it is impossible, because wanting the Soul (which
is the Principle of Life) it cannot act nor proceed to any thing, either Good
or Evil; for could it do so, it might sin, even in the Grave: but it is plain,
that after Death there is a cessation, For as Death leaves us, so Judgment
finds us.

Now Reason having evidently demonstrated the Souls Immortality, the Holy
Scriptures do abundantly give Testimony to the Truth of the Resurrection; as
the Reader may see by perusing the 14th and 19th Chapters of Job in the Old
Testament, and the 5th of St. John's Gospel, in the New Testament. I shall
therefore leave the further discussing of this matter to Divines (whose proper
Province it is) and return again to treat of the Works of Nature.

CHAP. V. Of Monsters, and monstrous Births, and the reason thereof, according
to the Opinions of the Ancients; also, whether Monsters are endewed with
reasonable Souls, and whether Devils can Engender, is briefly here discussed.
BY the Ancients Monsters are ascribed to depraved Conceptions, and are defined
to be Excursions of Nature, which are vicious one of these four ways, viz. In
Figure, Situation, Magnitude, or Number.

In Figure, when a Man bears the Character of a Beast, as did the Monster in
Saxonia, which was born about the time of Luther's Preaching.

monstrous birth

In Magnitude, when one part does not equalize with another, as when one part
is too big, or too little for the other parts of the body; and this is so
common amongst us, that I need not produce a Testimony for it.

In Situation, as if the Ears were on the Face and the Eyes on the Breast or
Legs, of this kind was the Monster born at Ravenna in Italy, in the Year 1512.

monstrous birth

In Number, when a Man has two Heads, or four Hands: Of this kind was the
monster born at Zarzara, in the Year 1540.

monstrous birth

I proceed to the Cause of their Generation, which is either Divine or Natural.
The Divine cause proceeds from the permissive will of God; suffering Parents to
bring forth such abominations, for their filthy and corrupt Affections, which
are let loose unto Wickedness, like brute Beasts that have no Understanding.
Wherefore it was Enacted amongst the Ancient Romans, That those which were any
ways deformed, should not be admitted into Religious Houses. And St. Hierom in
his time was Grieved to see the Deformed and Lame offered up to God in
Religious Houses. And Kekerman, by way of inference, Excludes all that are
misshapen, from the Presbyterial Function in the Church: And that which is of
more force than all, God himself Commanded Moses not to receive such to offer
Sacrifice amongst his People; and he renders the Reason, Lev. 21.18. Lest he
Pollute my Sanctuaries: Because the outward Deformity of the Body is often a
sign of the pollution of the Heart, as a Curse laid upon the Child for the
Parents Incontinency. Yet there are many born depraved, which ought not to be
ascribed unto the infirmity of the Parents. Let us therefore search out the
Natural Cause of their Generation: which (according to the Ancients, who have
dived into the Secrets of Nature) is either in the Matter, or in the Agent, in
the Seed, or in the Womb.

The matter may be in fault two ways, by Defect, or by Excess. By Defect, when
as the Child has but one Arm. As in the following Figure.

monstrous birth

By Excess, when it has three Hands or two Heads. Some monsters also are
begotten by VVomens unnatural lying with Beasts, as in the Year 1393, there was
a monster begotten by a Woman's Generating with a Dog: which monster from the
Navel upwards had the perfect Resemblance of its Mother, but from the Navel
downwards, it resembled a Dog. As you may here see.

monstrous birth

The Agent, or Womb, may be in fault three ways. First, in the Formative
Faculty, which may be too strong, or too weak, by which is procured a depraved
Figure. Secondly, in the Instrument or place of Conception, the evil
conformation or evil disposition whereof, will cause a monstrous Birth.
Thirdly, in the imaginative power at the time of Conception, which is of such
force that it stamps the Character of the thing imagined upon the Child: So
that the Children of an Adultress may be like unto her own Husband, though
begotten by another man; which is caused through the force of the Imagination
which the Woman has of her own Husband in the Act of Coition. And I have heard
of a Woman, who at the time of Conception beholding the Picture of a
Black-more, conceived and brought forth an Ethiopian. I will not trouble you
with any more humane Testimonies, but I will conclude with a stronger Warrant.
We read in Genesis 30.31. how Jacob having agreed with Laban to have all the
spotted Sheep for keeping of his Flocks, To augment his Wages took Hasel-rods,
and pilled white Strakes in them, and laid them before the Sheep when they came
to Drink, and they coupling there together, whilst they beheld the rods,
Conceived and brought forth spotted Young.

The Imagination also works on the Child after Conception: For which we have a
pregnant Example of a worthy Gentlewoman in The Effigies of a Maid all Hairy,
and an Infant that was born Black by the Imagination of their Parents, etc.
Suffolk, who being with Child, and passing by her Butcher killing of Meat, a
drop of blood sprung on her face, whereupon she said, That her Child would have
some Blemish on the Face, and at the birth it was found marked with a red Spot.

And certain it is, That oftentimes monstrous Births happens by means of undue
Copulation: For some Men and Women there are, That having been long absent
from each other, and having an eager desire to enjoy one another, consider not
(as they ought to do) what their Circumstances are; and if it happen that they
come together at the time when the ^Vomens Menstrues are flowing, will
notwithstanding proceed to the Act of Copulation, which is both Unclean and
Unnatural; and the issue of such Copulation does oftentimes prove monstrous, as
a just Punishment for their lying together, when Nature bids they should
forbear: And therefore, though the men should be never so eager for it, yet
Women knowing their own Condition, should at such times refuse their Company.
And though such Copulations do not always produce monstrous Births, yet the
Children then gotten are generally Heavy, Dull and Sluggish, and defective in
their Understandings, wanting the Vivacity and Liveliness which Children gotten
in proper Seasons are blessed withal.

It Remains that I now make some Enquiry whether those that are born monsters
have reasonable Souls; and are capable of a Resurrection: And here both Divines
and Physicians are generally of Opinion, That those who accordig to the Orders
of Generation, deduced from our first Parents, and proceeded by natural means
from either Sex, though their outward Shape may be deformed and monstrous, have
notwithstanding a reasonable Soul, and consequently their Bodies are capable of
a Resurrection, as other Men's and VVomens are: But those monsters that are not
begotten by men, but are the product of a woman's Unnatural Lust, in copulating
with other Creatures, shall Perish as the brute beasts, by whom they were
begotten, not having a reasonable Soul, or any breath of the Almighty infused
^^to it. And such can never be capable of a Resurrection: And the same is also
true of Imperfect and Abortive births.

Some are of Opinion, That monsters may be engendered by some Infernal Spirit.
Of this ^ind was Egidius Facius, speaking of a deformed monster born at
Cracovia. And Hieroni^us Cardanus, writes of a maid which was ^ot with Child
by a Devil, she thinking it ^ad been a fair young man. The like also is
^ecorded by Vincentius, of the Prophet Mer^^n, that he was begotten by an evil
Spirit.

But what a Repugnancy would it be both to ^eligion and Nature, if the Devils
could be^et men, when we are taught to believe, That ^ot any was ever begotten
without humane Seed, except the Son of God. The Devil then being a Spirit,
having no Corporeal Substance, has therefore no Seed of Generation: To say that
he can use the Act of Generation effectually, is to affirm that he can make
Something of Nothing; and consequently to affirm the Devil to be God, for
Creation solely belongs to God alone.

Again, If the Devil could assume to himself a dead Body, and enliven the
faculties of it, and make it able to generate, and some affirm he can, yet this
Body must bear the Image of the Devil; and it borders upon Blasphemy, to think
that God should so far give leave to the Devil, as out of Gods Image to raise
up his own Diabolick Offspring. In the School of Nature we are taught the
contrary, viz. That Like begets like; therefore of a Devil cannot Man be born.
Yet it is not denied but that Devils transforming themselves into humane
shapes, may abuse both men and women, and with wicked People use carnal
Copulation. But that any such Unnatural Conjunction can bring forth a humane
Creature, is contrary both to Nature and Religion.

CHAP. VI. A Discourse of the happy State of Matrimony, as it is appointed by
God; and the true Felicity that redounds thereby to either Sex; and to what End
it was Ordained.
WIthout doubt, the uniting of Hearts in holy Wedlock, is of all conditions the
happiest; for then a Man has a second self to whom he can unravel his Thoughts,
as well as a sweet Companion in his Labor; he has one in whose Breast, as in a
safe Cabinet, he may repose his inmost Secrets, especially where Reciprocal
Love, and inviolate Faith is centered; for there no cares, fears, jealousies,
mistrust or hatred, can ever interpose; for what Man, ever hated his own Flesh?
And indeed a Wife is no less, if rightly considered; for as our grand Father
Adam well observed, she is, or ought to be esteemed of every honest Man, Bone
of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh, etc. Nor was it the least care of the
Almighty, to ordain so near a Union, and that for two causes, the first for
increase of Posterity, the second to bridle and bound Man's wandering Desires
and Affections; nay, that they might be yet happier, when God had joined them
together, he blessed them, as it is in the 2d. of Genesi^, Columela,
contemplating on this happy State, tells us out of the Economy of Xenophon,
That the Marriage Bed is not only the most pleasant, but profitable course of
Life, that may be entered on, for the preservation and increase of Posterity:
Wherefore, since Marriage is the most safe, sure and delightful station of
Mankind, who is exceeding prone, by the dictates of Nature, to propagate his
like, he does in no wise provide amiss for his own Tranquillity, who enters into
it, especially when he comes to maturity of Years, for there are many abuses in
Marriage, contrary to what is ordained; the which, in the ensuing Chapter, I
shall expose to view; but to proceed.

Seeing our blessed Savior and his holy Apostles, detested unlawful Lusts, and
pronounced those to be excluded the Kingdom of Heaven, that polluted themselves
with Adultery and whoring, I cannot conceive what face Persons can have to
color their impieties, who hating Matrimony, make it their study how they may
live licentiously; but in so doing, they rather seek to themselves torment,
anxiety and disquietude, than certain pleasure, besides the hazard of their
Immortal Souls; for certain it is, that mercenary Love, or as the wise Man
calls them, Harlot's Smiles, cannot be true and sincere, and therefore not
pleasant, but rather a Net laid, to betray such as trust them, into all
mischief, as Solomon observes by the Young man, void of Understanding, who
turned aside to the Harlot's House, As a Bird to the Snare of the Fo^ler, or as
an Ox to the Slaughter, till a Dart be struck through the Liver. Nor in this case
can they have Children, those indearing Pledges of Conjugal affection; or if
they have, they will rather redound to their shame than comfort; bearing the
odious Brand of Bastards; Harlots likewise are like Swallows, singing in the
Summer Season of Prosperity, but the black stormy Winter of Adve^sity coming,
they take wing, and fly into other Regions, that is, seek themselves other
Lovers; but a virtuous chaste wife, fixing her entire Love upon her Husband,
and submitting to him, as her Head, and him, by whose direction she ought to
steer in all lawful courses, will, like a faithful Companion, share patiently
with him in adversities, run with cheerfulness through all Difficulties and
Dangers, though never so hazardous, to preserve or assist him in Poverty,
Sickness, or whatever other misfortune may befall him, acting according to her
Duty in all things. But a proud imperious Harlot, will do no more than she
list, even in the Sunshine of Prosperity: And is like a Horse-^each, ever
craving, and never satisfied, still seeming displeased, if all her Extravagant
cravings be not answered, not regarding the Ruin and Misery she brings upon him
by that means: though she seems to dote upon him, using to confirm her
Hypocrisy, with Crocodile's Tears, Vows and Swoonings, when her Cully is to
depart for a while, or seems bu^ to deny her immoderate Desires; yet th^s lasts
no longer than she can gratify her Appetite, and prey upon his Fortunes.
Remarkable is the Story that Conradus Gessner tells us of a young Man
traveling from Athens to Thebes, who met by the way a beautiful Lady, as to
his Appearance she seemed, adorned with all perfections of Beauty, glittering
with Gold and precious Stones, this seeming Fair One Saluted him, and invited
him to her House not far off, pretending to be exceedingly enamoured of him;
and declared she had a long time waited for an opportunity to find him alone,
that so she might reveal her Passion to him. The young Spark went with her, and
when he came to her House, he found it, to appearance, built very stately, and
very well furnished, which so far wrought upon his covetous Inclination, that
he resolved to put off his intended Journey, and yield to her Inticements: but
whilst she was leading him to see the pleasant Places adjoining to the House,
came by a Holy Pilgrim; who seeing in what danger the Youth was, resolved to
set him in his right Senses, and show him what he imagined real, was quite
otherwise; so that, by powerful Prayer, the mist was taken from before the
Youth's Eyes, who then beheld his Lady Ugly Deformed, and Monstrous, and that
whatever had appeared glorious and beautiful, was only trash. Then he made her
confess what she was, and her design upon the young Man, which she did, saying,
She was a Lamiae, or Fairy, and that she had thus enchanted him, on purpose, to
get him into her power, that she might devour him. This passage (whether true
or not) may be fitly alluded to Harlots, who draw those that follow their
misguiding Lights, into places of danger, till they have caused them to
shipwreck their Fortunes, and then leave them to struggle with those storm of
Adversity that they have raised. Now on the contrary, a Loving, Chaste, and
even-tempered Wife, seeks what she may, to prevent such danger, and in every
condition strives to make him easy. And in a word, as there is no content in
the Embraces of a Harlot, so there is no joy greater than in the reciprocal
affection, and indearing Embraces of a loving, Obedient, and Chaste Wife; nor
is that the principal end for which Matrimouy was Ordained, but further, that
Man might follow the Great Law of his Creation, by the increase of his Kind,
and replenishing the Earth: For this was an Injunction laid upon him even in
Paradise before his Fall. To conclude, a virtuous Wife is a Crown and Ornament
to her Husband, and her price is above Rubies; but the ways of an Harlot are
Deceitful.

CHAP. VII. Of Errors in Marriage, what they are, and the Prejudice of them.
BY Errors in Marriage, I mean the Unfitness of the Persons Marrying, to enter
into that state; and that both with respect to their years, and the
Constitution of their Bodies; and therefore those that design to enter into
that Condition, ought to observe their Ability, and not run themselves upon
Inconveniences; for those who marry too young, may rightly be termed to marry
unseasonably; not considering their Inability, nor examining the force of
Nature: For diverse there are, before they are ripe for the Consummation of so
weighty a matter, who either rashly of their own accords, or by the instigation
of Procurers and Marriage-brokers, or else forced thereto by their Parents, who
covet a large Dowry, take upon them this Yoke, to their great prejudice; by
which means some before the expiration of a year, have been thereby so
enfeebled, that all their vital moisture was exhausted, and who have not been
restored again without great trouble, and the use of Medicines. Wherefore my
Advice is, That it is no way convenient to suffer Children, or such as are not
of age, to marry or get Children: But whosoever proposes to ma^ry, must chiefly
observe this, that he choose one for h s Wife that is of an honest Stoc^, and
descended from temperate Parents, though her Dowry be not so large as he might
expect; that he observe her Conversation, and find that she is chaste, well
bred, and of good manners. For if a Woman has good Conditions, she has
Port^on enough. That of Alcamena in Plautus is much to the purpose, where a
young Woman is brought in, saying, I take not that to be my Dowry, which is
called so; but Chastity, Modesty, and a settled Desire to fear GOD, to love my
Parents, and agree with my Kindred; to obey my Husband, be bountiful, and to do
good to such as are Virtuous and Honest: And I think she was in the right on it;
for such a Wife is more precious than Rubies.

It Is certainly the Duty of Parents to be careful in bringing up their Children
in the ways of Virtue; and to have regard to their Honor and Reputation, and
especially of Virg^ns, when grown up to be marriageable: For, as has been
before noted, if through the too much severity of Parents, they be crossed in
their love, many of them throw themselves into the unchaste arms of the next
alluring Tempter that comes in their way; being through the softness and
flexibility of their Natures, and the strong Desires they have to pursue what
Nature powerfully incites them to, easily induced to believe men's feigned vows
of promised marriage, to cover their shame; and then too late their Parents
repent of that severity which has brought an indelible stain upon their
Families.

Another Error in Marriage is the Inequality of years in the Parties married;
such as for a young man, who to advance his Fortune, marries a Woman old enough
to be his Grandmother, between whom, for the most part, Strifes, Jealousies,
and Discontents, are all the Blessings crown the Genial Bed, it being
impossible for such to have any Children. The like may be said, though with a
little more excuse, when an old doting Fellow marries a young Virgin, in the
prime of her youth and vigor, who whilst he vainly strains to please her, is
thereby wedded to his Grave. For as in green Youth it is unfit and unseasonable
to think of Marriage, so to marry in Old Age is altogether the same: For they
that enter upon it too soon, are soon exhausted, and fall into Consumptions,
and diverse other Diseases; and those that procrastinate, and marry unseemly,
fall into the like ill conveniences on the other side, having only this
Honor, of old Men they become young Cuckolds; especially if their Wives have
not been trained up in the Paths of Virtue, and lie too much open to the
Importunity and temptation of lewd and debauched men. And thus much for the
Errors of rash, inconsiderate and unseasonable Marriages.

CHAP. VIII. The Opinions of the Learned concerning Children conceived and born
within Seven Months, with Arguments upon the Subject, to prevent Suspicions of
Incontinency, and the bitter Contests that may arise between Man and Wife, on
that Account. To which is added Rules for knowing the Disposition of Man's Body
by the Genital Parts.
MAny bitter Quarrels happen between Men and their Wives, upon the Man's
suspicion that his wife comes too soon; and by Consequence that he could not be
the Father, whereas it was only want of Understanding the secrets of Nature
that brought the Man into that Error; and which had he known, might have cured
him of his Jealousy and suspicion. To remove which, I shall endeavor to
prove, that it is possible, and has been frequently known, that Children have
been born at Seven months. The Cases of this nature that have happened, have
made work for the Lawyers; and they have left it to the Physicians to Judge, by
viewing the Child, whether it be a Child of 7, 8, 9, or 10 months. Paul the
Counselor has this Passage in his nineteenth Book of Pleadings, viz. It is
now a received truth, that a perfec^ Child may be born in the seventh Month, by
the Authority of the learned Hipocrates. And therefore we must believe, that a
Child born at the end of the seventh month, in lawful matrimony, may be
lawfully begotten. Galen, in Chap. 6. of his third Book, is of Opinion, that
there is no certain time set for bearing Children; and that from the Authority
of Pliny, who makes mention of a Woman that went thirteen Months with Child:
But as to what concerns the 7th month, a Learned Author says, I know several
married People in Holland that had Twins, born in the 7th month, who lived to
old Age, having lusty Bodies, and lively minds; wherefore their Opinion is
foolish, and of no moment, who assert That at seven months a Child cannot be
perfect and long lived, and that he cannot in all parts be perfect till the 9th
month: and thereupon this Author proceeds to tell a passage from his own
knowledge, as follows: Of late, says he, there happened a great diverse
disturbance amongst us, which ended not without Bloodshed: and was occasioned
by a Virgin, whose Chastity had been violated, descending of a Noble Family, of
unspotted Fame: Now several there were who charged the Fact upon a Judge who
was President of a City in Flanders, who strongly denied the Fact, saying, that
he was ready to swear that he never had Carnal Copulation with her, and that he
would not father a Child that was none of his: and further alleged that he
verily believed that it was a Child born in seven months, himself being many
miles distance from the mother of it when it was Conceived, whereupon the
Judges before whom the hearing was, decreed, That the Child should be viewed by
able Physicians, and Experienced Women, and that they should make their report;
who having made diligent inquiry, all of them with one accord, concluded the
Child (without respecting who was the Father) was a Child Born within the space
of seven months, that it was carried in the mothers Womb but 27 weeks, and odd
Days, but if she would have gone full 9 Months, the Child's Parts and Limbs
would have been more firm and strong, and the Structure of the Body more
compact, for the Skin was very loose, and the B^e^st-bone that defends the
Heart, and the Gristle that lies over the Stomach, were higher than naturally
they should be, not plain but crooked, and sharp ridged, or pointed, like those
of young Chickens hatched at the beginning of the Spring. And being a Female
Infant, it wanted its Nails upon her Fingers, and the outmost Joints of her
Fingers, upon which from the Musculous or Cartilaginous matter of the Skin,
Nails that are very smooth do come, and by degrees harden, she had instead of
Nails a thin Skin or Film: as for her Toes, there was no appearance of Nails
about them, for they wanted the heat that was communicated to the Fingers from
the nearness of the Heart. These things being considered, and above all, one
Gentlewoman of Quality that assisted, affirming that she had been the Mother of
19 Children, and that diverse of them had been born and lived at 7 months, they
without favor to any party made their report that the Infant was a Child of 7
months, though born within the seventh Month, for in such cases the revolution of
the Moon ought to be observed, which perfects it self in 4 bare weeks, or
somewhat less than 28 Days; in which space of her revolution, the Blood being
agitated by the force of the Moon, the Courses of the Women flow from them,
which being spent, and the Matrix cleansed from the Menstrual Blood which
happens on the 5th Day, then if on the 7th Day a Man lie with his Wife, the
Copulation is the most natural, and then is the Conception best, and a Child
then gotten may be born in the 7th Month, and prove very healthful: So that
upon this report, the supposed Father was pronounced Innocent, upon Proof that
he was 100 miles distance all that month in which the Child was begot: And as
for the mother, she strongly denied that she knew the Father, being forced in
the dark, and so through fear and surprise was left in Ignorance.

As for Coition, it ought not to be had unless the Parties be in Health, lest
it turn to the disadvantage of the Children so be gotten, creating in them,
through the abundant ill Humors, diverse languishing Diseases; wherefore Health
is no where better to be discerned than by the Genitals of the Man, for which
reason Midwives, and other skilful Women, were formerly wont to see the
Testicles of Children, thereby to conjecture at their temperature and state of
Body, and Young Men may know thereby the signs or symptoms of Life and Death:
for if the Cases of the Testicles be loose and feeble, and the Cods fall do ^n,
it denotes that the vital Spirits, which are the props of Life, are fallen: But
if the secret Part be wrinkled and raised up, it is a Sign all is well: But
that the Event may exactly answer the Prediction, it is necessary to consider
what part of the Body the Disease possesses: for if it chance to be the upper
part that is afflicted, as the Head or Stomach, then will it not so well appear
by the Members, which are unconcerned with such Grievances; but the lower part
of the Body exactly sympathizing with them, their Liveliness on the contrary,
makes it apparent; for Natures force, and the Spirits that have their
intercourse, first manifest themselves therein, which occasions Midwifes to
feel the Genitals of Children, to know in what part the grief is resident, and
whether life or death be portended thereby, the Symptom being strongly
communicated by the Vessels that have their intercourse with the principal
seats of life.

CHAP. IX. Of the Green Sickness in Virgins, with its Causes, Prognostics, and
cure: Together with the chiefest occasion of Barrenness in Women, and by what
means to remove the Cause, and render them fruitful.
THe Green Sickness is so common a Distemper in Virgins, especially such as are
of a Phlegmatic Complexion, that it is easily discerned, showing it self by
discoloring the Face, making it look green, pale, and of a dusky yellow, which
p^oceeds from raw undigested Humors; nor only does it appear to the Eye, but
sensibly afflicts such as it possesses, with difficulty of breathing, pains in
the Head, Palpitation of the Heart, unusual beatings and small throbings of the
Arteries in the Temples, Neck and Back, many times casting them into Fevers, if
the Humor be very vicious, also loathing of Meat, and the distension of the
Hypocondriack part, by reason of the Inordinate Efflux of menstruous Blood to
the greater Vessels, and of the abundance of Humors; the whole Body is often
troubled with Swelling, or if not, at least the Th^ghs, Legs, and Anckles, all
above the Heels: And also there is a Weariness of the whole Body, without any
reason for it.

The Galennical Physicians affirm, that this Distemper proceeds chiefly from
the Obstruction of those Vessels that are about the Womb, occasioned by the
abundance of gross, viscous and and crude Humors, arising from several inward
causes; but there are also outward causes, which have a share in the Production
of it, as taking cold on the Feet, drinking of Water, intemperance in Diet, and
also the eating of things contrary to Nature, viz. raw, or burnt Flesh, Ashes,
Coals, Old shoes, Chalk, Wax, Nut-shels, Mortar, Lime, Oat-meal, Tobacco Pipes,
etc. which occasion not only a Suppression of the Menses, but likewise
obstructions through the whole Body. Therefore the first thing necessary to
eradicate the Cause, is, Matrimonial Conjunction, and such Copulation that may
prove to the satisfaction of her that is afflicted; for by that means the
menses will begin to flow according to their natural and due course; and the
Humors, being dispersed, will soon waste themselves, and then no more matter
being administered to increase them, they will vanish, and a good temperament of
Body will return: But in case this best Remedy cannot be had so soon as
necessity requries, then let her be let Blood in the Ankle and if she be about
16, you may likewise do it in the Arm, but let her bleed but sparingly,
especially if the Blood be good. If the Disease be of any continuance then is
it to be eradicated by Purging, Preparation of the humor being first
considered, which may be done by the Virgins drinking Decoction of Guaicum,
with Dittany of Creet, But the best Purge in this case ought to be made of
Aloes, Agarick, Senna, Rhubarb: And for strengthing the Bowels, and opening
Obstructions, Chalibiat, Medicines are chiefly to be used. The Diet must be
moderate, and sharp things be by all means avoided. And for the freeing of the
Humor take Prepared Steel, Bezoar Stone, the Root of Scorzonera, Oil of
Crystal in small Wine, and let the Diet be moderate, but in no wise let
Vinegar be used therewith, nor upon any other occasion. And in so observing,
the Humors will be dilated and dissipated, by which Means the Complexion will
return, and the Body be lively and full of Vigor.

And now since Barrenness daily occasions discontent, and that Discontent
creates Difference between Man and Wife, or by immoderate Grief frequently
casts the Woman into one or other violent Distemper; I shall in the next place
treat thereof.

Of Barrenness.
In times past, before Women came to the marriage Bed, they were first searched
by the Midwife; and those only which she allowed of as fruitful, were admitted.
I hope therefore it will be thought a needless labor, to show how they may
prove themselves, and turn the stony ground into a fruitful soil.

Barrenness is a deprivation of life and power which ought to be in the seed,
to procreate and propagate; for which end both man and woman were made.

Causes of Barrenness.
It is caused by overmuch heat or cold; that drying up the seed, and making it
corrupt; this, extinguishing the life of the seed, making it watrish and unfit
for Generation. It may be caused also by the not flowing or overflowing of the
Courses, by Swellings, Ulcers and Inflammations of the Womb; by an excrescence
of flesh growing about the mouth of the Matrix: by the mouth of the Womb being
turned unto the back, or side: by the grossness and fatness of the body,
whereby the mouth of the matrix is closed up, by being pressed with the Omentum
or Caul; and the matter of the seed is converted into fatness. Or if she be of
a lean and exhaust body, to the World she proves Barren, because though she
does conceive, yet the fruit of the Womb will wither before it comes to
perfection for want of nourishment. Aetius and Sylvius, ascribe one main cause
of Barrenness to compelled copulation; as when parents enforce their daughters
to have Husbands contrary to their liking, therein marrying their Bodies, but
not their Hearts, and where there is a want of Love, there for the most part is
no Conception; as appears in Women which are deflowred against their will.
Another main cause of Barrenness, is attributed to the want of a convenient
moderating quality, which the Woman ought to have with the Man, as if he be
hot, she must be cold: If he be dry, she must be moist: But if they be both
dry, or both moist of constitution, they cannot propagate; and yet simply
considered, of themselves they are not Barren; for he or she which before was
as the Barren fig tree, being now joined with an apt constitution, becomes as
the fruitful Vine. And that Man and Woman being every way of a like
constitution, cannot Procreate, I will bring Nature it self for a testimony,
who has made Man of a hotter Constitution than Woman, that the quality of the
one may moderate the quality of the other.

Signs of Barrenness.
If Barrenness does proceed from overmuch heat, she is of a dry body, subject
to anger, she has black Hair, quick pulse; her purgations flow but little, and
that with pain; she Loves to play in the courts of Venus. But if it comes by
cold, then are the signs contrary to those even now recited. If through an evil
quality in the Womb: Make a suffumigation of red Storax, Myrrh, Cassia wood,
Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and let her receive the fume of it into the Womb, covering
her very close; and if the odor so received passes through the Body up into
the Mouth and Nostrils; of her self she is fruitful: But if she feels not the
fume in her Mouth and Nose, it argues Barrenness one of these ways; that the
Spirit of the seed is either through cold extinguished, or through heat
dissipated. If any Woman be suspected to be unfruitful, cast natural Brimstone,
such as is dug out of the Mine, into her Urin, and ^f Worms breed therein,
of herself she is not barren.

Prognostics.
Barrenness makes Women look young, because they are free from those pains and
sorrows, which other Women are accustomed to bring forth withal. Yet they have
not that full perfection of health which fruitful Women do enjoy, because they
are not rightly p^rged of the menstruous blood and superfluous seed, the
retaining of which two, are the principal cause of most Uterine Diseases.

Cure.
First the cause must be removed, and then the Womb strengthened, and the
Spirits of the seed enlived

If the Womb be over-hot; Take Syrrup of Succory with Rhubarb, Syrrup of
Violets, Endive, Roses, Cassia, Purslain. Take of Endive, water Lillies, Borage
flowers, of each a handful Rhubarb, Myrobolans, of each 3 Drams; with water
make a Decoction, add to the straning of the Syrup Laxative of Violets one
ounce, Syrup of Cassia half an Ounce, Manna 3 drams, make a potion. Take of the
Syrup of Mugwort one ounce, Syrup of Maiden hair 2 ounces, water of Succory,
Borage, Fennel, of each 3 ounces: Pulv. Elect. Triasand. one dram, make a
Julep. Take Pru. Solut. Elect. Ros. Mesuae, of each 3 drams Rhubarb one
Scruple, and make a Bolus. Apply to the reins and privities, fomentations of
the juice of Lettice, Violets, Roses, Mallows, Vineleaves, and Nightshade.
Anoint the secret parts with the cooling unguent of Galen.

If the power of the seed be extinguished by cold: Take every Morning two
spoonfuls of Cinnamon water, with one Scruple of Mahridate. Take Syrup of
Calamint, Mugwort, Bettony, of each one ounce; water of Pennyroyal, Feverfew,
Hysop, Sage, of each 2 ounces; make a Julep. Take Oil of Anniseed one Scruple
and half, Diacymini, Diacalaminthe, Diamosci, Diagalangae, of each one dram;
Sugar, 4 ounces, with water of Cinnamon make Lozenges; take of them a dram and
half twice a Day, two hours before Meals. Fasten cupping-glasses to the hipps
and belly. Take of Stirax, Calamint, one ounce, Mastick, Cloves, Cinnamon,
Nutmeg, Lig. Aloes, Frankincense, of each half an ounce; Musk 10 Grains,
Amber-greese half a Scruple, with Rose Water make a Confection: Divide it into
four equal parts: Of one part make a Pomum Odoratum to smell on, if she be not
hysterical. Of the second, make a Mass of Pills, and let her take three every
night. Of the third, make a Pessary, dip it in Oil of Spikenard and put it up.
Of the fourth, make a suffumigation for the Womb.

If the Faculties of the Womb be weakened, and the life of the Seed suffocated
by overmuch humidity, ^^owing to those parts; Take of Betony, Marjorum,
Mugwort, Pennyroyal, Balm, of each one handful; Roots of Asrum, Fenel,
Ellecampane, of each two drams; Anniseed, Cummin, of each one dram; with Sugar
and Water a sufficient quantity; of which make a Syrup, and take three ounces
every other morning.

Purge with these Pills following: Take of Digridion, two grains; Specierum de
Castorei, one scruple; Pil Foetid. two scruples, with Syrup of Mugwort make six
Pills; Take Spec. Diagemmae, Diamosci, D^ambrae, of each one dram; Cinnamon,
one dram an half; Mace, Cloves, Nutmeg, of each half a dram; Sugar six ounces;
with Water of Feverfew make Lozenges, to be taken every morning. Take of the
Decoction of Sarsaparilla, and Virga Aurea, not forgeting Sage; which Agrippa,
wondering at the operation of, has honored with the Name of Sacra Herba, a
holy Herb: And it is recorded by Dodonaeus in his History of Plants, Lib. 2.
Cap. 77. That after so many Egyptians were dead, the surviving Women, that they
might multiply the faster, were commanded to drink the Juice of Sage. Anoint
the Genitals with Oil of Anniseed and Spikenard. Take Mace, Nutmeg, Cinnamon,
Styrax, Amber, of each one dram; Cloves, Laudani, of each half a dram;
Turpentine a sufficient quantity, make Trochisks to smother the Womb. Take the
Roots of Valerian and Ellecampane, of each one pound, of Galangale two ounces,
Origan, Lavender, Marjoram, Betony, Mugwort, Bay leaves, Calamint, of each
three handfuls; with Wat^r make an incession, in which let her sit after she
has had her Courses.

If Barrenness proceeds from Dryness consuming the matter of the Seed; Take
every day Almond-milk and Goats-milk extracted with Honey. Eat often of the
Root Satyrion condited, and of the Electuary of Diasatyrion. Take three
Weathers Heads, boil them until all the flesh comes from the bones, then take
of Mellilot, Violets, Cammomile, Mercury, Orchis, with their Roots, of each an
handful; Fenugreek, Linseed, Valerian Roots, of each one pound: Let all these
be decocted in the aforesaid Broth, and let the Woman sit in the Decoction up
to her Navel. Also take of Deers Suet half an ounce, Cows Marrow, Styracis
liquideae, of each two drams, Oil of sweet Almonds two ounces; with Silk Cotton
make a Pessary. Make Injections only of fresh Butter, and Oil of sweet Almond.

If Barrenness be caused by any proper affect of the Womb, the Cure is set down
in the Second Part.

Sometimes the Woman proves barren when there is no Impediment on either side,
except only in the manner of the Act: As when in the Emission of the Seed, the
Man is quick, and the Woman too slow; whereby there is not an Emission of both
Seeds at the same instant, as the Rules of Conception require, (according to
the opinion of the Ancients.) Wherefore to take away this Inconvenience, Mulier
preparari ac disponi debet molli complexu, lascivis verbis oscula lasciviora
miscenda. If this does not suffice; before the Act of Coition, foment the
private parts with the Decoction of Betony, Sage, Hysop, and Calamint; and
anoint the Mouth and Neck of the Womb with Musk and Civet.

The Cause of Barrenness being removed, let the Womb be corroborated as follows.

Take of Bay Berries, Mastick, Nutmeg, Frankincense, Cypress Nuts, Laudani,
Galbani, of each one dram, Styracis liquid, two Scruples, Cloves half a
Scruple, Ambergreece two grains, Musk six grains, then with Oil of Spikenard
make a Pessary.

Take red Roses, Lapidis Haematitis, White Frankincense, of each half an ounce;
Sanguis Draconis, fine Bole, Mastick, of each two drams; Nutmeg, Cloves, of
each one dram; Spikenard half a scruple: With Oil of Wormwood make a Plaster
for the lower part of the Belly. Let her eat often of Eringo Roots condited;
and Make an Injection only of the Juice of the Roots of Satyrion.

The aptest time for Conception is instantly after the Menses are ceased,
because then the Womb is thirsty and dry, apt both to draw the Seed, and to
retain it, by the roughness of the inward superficies. And besides, in some,
the mouth of the Womb is turned unto the back or side, and is not placed right,
until the last day of the Courses.

Excess in all things is to be avoided: Lay aside all Passions of the Mind:
Shun Study and Care, as things that are Enemies to Conception; for if a Woman
conceives under such circumstances, how wise soever the Parents are, the
Children at the best will be but foolish, because the animal Faculties of the
Parents, viz. the Understanding and the rest (from whence the Child derives its
Reason) are, as it were confused, through the multiplicity of Cares and
Cogitations. Examples hereof we have in learned Men, who after great study and
care instantly accompanying with their Wives, often beget very foolish
Children. A hot and moist Air is most convenient, as appears by the Women in
Egypt, which usually bring forth three or four Children at one time.

CHAP. X. Virginity what it is, in what it consists, and how violated; together
with the Opinions of the Learned about the mutation of Sexes in the Womb,
during the Operation of Nature, i^ framing the Body.
THere are many ignorant People, that boa^^ of their Skill in the knowledge of
Virginity, and some Virgins have undergone har^ Censures through their ignorant
Determinations: And therefore I thought it highly necessary to clear this
Point, that the towering Imaginations of conceited Ignorance may be brought
down, and that the Fair Sex (whose Virtues are so illustriously bright, that
they both excite our Wonder, and command our Imitation) may be freed from the
Calumnies and Detractions of Ignorance and Envy, that so their Honors may
continue as Unspotted, as they have kept their Persons Uncontaminated, and free
from Defilement.

Virginity, in a strict sense, does signify the Prime, the Chief, the Best of
any thing, which makes men so desirous of marrying Virgins; imagining some
greater pleasure to be enjoyed in their Embraces, than in those of Widows, or
such as have before been lain withal: Though not many years ago, a very great
Person was of another mind, and thought (to use his own expression) that the
getting of a Maidenhead was such a piece of Drudgery, as was more proper for a
Porter than a Prince; but this was only his Opinion, for most Men, I am sure,
have other Sentiments. But to our purpose,

The curious Enquirers into Natures Secrets, have observed that in young Maids,
in the Sinus Pudoris, or in that place that is called the Neck of the Womb, is
that pendulous production vulgarly called the Hymen, but more rightly the
Claustrum Virginale, and in French the Button de Rose, or Roses Bud; because it
resembles the Bud of a Rose expanded, or a Clove-gilliflower, from whence it
derived the word Defloro, to Deflower; and hence taking away of Virginity, is
called Deflowering a Virgin; most being of opinion, that the Virginity is
altogether lost, when this Duplication is fractured and dissipated by violence;
and when it is found perfect and entire, no penetration has been made. And it
is the opinion of some learned Physicians, that there is not either Hymen or
Skin expanded containing Blood in it, which diverse imagine in the first
Copulation flows from the fractured Expanse.

Now this Claustrum Virginale, or Flower, is composed of four Caruncles, or
little Buds like Myrtle-berries, which is Virgins are full and plump, but in
Women flag and hang loose; and these are placed in the four Angles of the Sinus
Pudoris, joined together by little Membranes, and Ligatures like Fibers, each
of them situate in the Intesticles or spaces between each Caruncle, with which
in a manner they are proportionably distended, which Membranes being once
defacerated, denote Devirgination; and many inquisitive and yet ignorant
Persons, finding their wives defective herein the first Night of their
Marriage, have thereupon suspected their Chastity, concluding another had been
there before 'em. Now to undeceive such, I do affirm, That such Fracture may
happen diverse accidental ways, as well as by Copulation with Man, viz. By
violent, straining, coughing, or sneezing, stopping of Urine, and violent
motion of the vessels, in forcibly sending down the Humors, which pressing for
Passage, break the Ligatures or Membrane, so that the intireness or fracture of
that which is commonly taken for the Virginity or Maidenhead, is no absolute
sign of Dishonesty; though certain it is, that it is more frequently broke in
Copulation, than by any other means.

I have heard that at an Assize held in Rutland, a young Man was tried for a
Rape, in forcing a Virgin, when after diverse questions asked, and the Maid
swearing positively to the matter, naming the time, place, and manner of the
action, it was upon mature deliberation resolved that she should be searched by
a skilful Chyrurgeon, and two Midwives, who were to make their Report upon
their Oaths, which after due Examination they accordingly did, affirming that
the Membranes were entire, and not dilacerated, and that it was their Opinion
for that Reason, that her Body had not been penetrated, which so far wrought
with the Jury, that the Prisoner was acquitted; and the Maid afterward
confessed she swore against him out of Revenge, he having promised to marry
her, and afterward declined it: And thus much shall suffice to be spoken
concerning Virginity.

I shall now p^^^^ to say something of Natures Operation, (...) ^he Mutation of
Sexes in the Womb.

This point is of much necessity, by reason of the different Opinions of Men
relating to it. Therefore before any thing positive can be asserted, it will be
altogether convenient to recite what has been delivered, as well in the
negative, as the affirmative. And first, Severus Plineus, who argues for the
negative, writes thus: The Genital parts of both Sexes, are so unlike other, in
Substance, Composition, Situation, Figure, Action and Use, that nothing is more
unlike; and by how much all other parts of the Body, (the Breasts excepted,
which in Women swell more, because Nature ordained 'em for suckling the Infant)
have an exact resemblance, so much the more do the Genital parts of one Sex,
compared with the other differ; and if their Figure be thus different, much
more is their use. The Venereal Appetite also proceeds from different causes;
for in Men it proceeds from a desire of Emission, and in Women, from a desire
of Reception, in Women also the chiefest of those parts are concave, and apt to
receive, but in Men they are only porous

These things considered, I cannot but wonder (added he) how any one can
imagine that the Genital Member of Female Births should be changed into those
that belong to Males) since by those parts only the distinction of Sexes is
made, nor can I well impute the reason of this vulgar Error to any thing but
the mistake of unexpert Midwifes, who have been deceived by the evil
conformation of the parts which in some Male Births may have happened to have
had some small protrusion, not to have been discerned, as appeared by the
example of a Child Christened at Paris, by the Name of Joan, as a Girl, which
afterward proved a Boy; and on the contrary, the over-far extension of the
Clytoris in Female Births may have occasioned the like mistakes Thus far Pliny
proceeds in the Negative, and yet notwithstanding what he has said, there are
diverse learned Physicians that have asserted the affirmative, of which number
Galen is one, A Man (says he) is different from a Woman in nothing else, but
having his Genital Members without his Body, whereas a Woman has 'em within:
And this is certain, That if Nature having formed a Man, would convert him into
a Woman, she has no other Task to perform, but to turn his Genital Member
inward; and so to turn a Woman into a Man by the contrary Operation. But this
is to be understood of the Child, when it is in the Womb, and not perfectly
formed; for diverse times Nature has made a Female Child, and it has so
remained in the Womb of the Mother for a Month or two, and afterward plenty of
Heat increasing in the Genital Members, they have issued forth, and the Child
has become a Male, yet retaining some certain Gestures, unbefitting the
Masculine Sex, as Female Actions, a shrill Voice, and a more Effeminate temper
than ordinary. Contrariwise, Nature having often made a Male, and cold Humors
flowing to it, the Genitals have been inverted, yet still retaining a Masculine
Air, both in voice and gesture.

Now though both these Opinions are supported by several Reasons, yet I esteem
the latter more agreeable to Truth: For there is not that vast difference
between the Genitals of the two Sexes, as Pliny would have us believe there is,
for the Woman has in a manner the same Members with the Man, though they appear
not outwardly, but are inverted for the convenience of Generation, the chief
difference being, that one is solid, and the other porous; and that the
principal Reason of changing Sexes is, and must be, attributed to heat or cold,
suddenly, or slowly contracted, which operates according to its greater or
lesser force.

CHAP. XI. Directions and Cautions for Midwives, and first, How a Midwife ought
to be qualified.
A Midwife that would acquit her self well in her Employment, ought by no means
to enter upon it rashly or unadvisedly, but with all imaginable caution,
considering that she is accountable for all the mischief that befalls through her
wilful ignorance or neglect; therefore let none take upon them this Office,
barely upon pretense of their maturity of Years and Childbearing; for in such,
for the most part, there are diverse things wanting that ought to be observed,
which is the occasion so many Women and Children are lost: Now as for a
Midwife, in relation to her Person, these things ought to be observed, viz. She
must neither be too old nor too young, neither extraordinary fat, nor weakened
by leanness, but in a good habit of Body, not subject to Diseases, Fears, nor
sudden Frights; her Body well shaped, and neat in her Attire, her Hands smooth
and small, her Nails ever pared short, not suffering any Rings to be upon her
Fingers during the time she is doing her Office, nor any thing upon her Wrists
that may obstruct; and to these ought to be added Activity, and a convenient
Strength, with much caution and diligence; not subject to Drowsiness nor apt to
be Impatient.

As for her Manners, she ought to be courteous, affable, sober, chaste, and not
subject to passion; bountiful and compassionate to the Poor, and not covetous
when she attends upon the Rich.

Her Temper cheerful and pleasant, that she may the better comfort her patients
in their dolorous Labor; nor must she at any time make overmuch haste, though
her Business should require her in another place, lest she do thereby endanger
the Mother or the Child.

Of Spirit she ought to be wary, prudent, and cunning: But above all, the fear
of God ought to have the Ascendant in her Soul, which will give her both
Knowledge and Discretion, as the wise man tells us.

CHAP. XII. Further Directions to Midwives, teaching them what they ought to
do, and what to avoid.
SInce the Office of a Midwife has so great an influence upon the well or ill
doing of Women and Children, In the first place let her be diligent to acquire
whatever Knowledge may be advantageous to her Practice, never thinking herself
so perfect, but that she may add to her Knowledge by Study and Experience, yet
never let her make any Experiments at her Patients cost, nor apply any Remedies
in that case, unless she has either tried them, or knows that they will do no
harm, practicing neither upon Poor nor Rich, but speaking freely what she
knows; and by no means prescribing such Medicines as will cause Abortion, though
desired, which is a high degree of wickedness, and may be termed Murder. If she
be sent for by them she knows not, let her be very cautious ere she goes, lest
by laying an Infectious Woman, she endanger the spoiling of others, as
sometimes happens. Neither must she make her House a Receptacle for great
bellied Women to discharge their Burdens in, lest her House get an ill Name,
and she thereby lose her Practice.

In laying of Women, if the Birth happen to be hard and difficult, she must not
seem to be concerned, but must cheer up the Woman, and do what she can to make
the labor easy, for which she may find Directions in the Second Part of this
Book.

She must never think of any thing but doing well, causing all things to be in
a readiness, that are proper for the Work, and the strengthening of the Woman,
and receiving of the Child. And above all, let her take care to keep the woman
from being unruly when her throes are coming upon her, lest she thereby
endanger her own Life and the Child's.

She must also take care she be not too hasty in her business, but wait Gods
leisure for the Birth: And by no means let her suffer herself to be disordered
by fear, though things should not go well, lest it should make her incapable of
giving that assistance which the laboring woman stands in need of; for when we
are most at a loss, then there is most need of prudence to set things right.

And now because she can never be a skilful Midwife, that knows nothing but
what is to be seen outwardly, I shall not think it amiss, but on the contrary
highly necessary, with modesty to describe the Generative Parts of Woman, as
they have been Anatomized by the Learned, and show the use of such Vessels as
are contributing to Generation.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Genitals of Woman, External and Internal, to the Vessels of
the Womb.
IF it were not for Public Benefit, especially of the Practitioners and
Professors of the Art of Midwifery, I should forbear to treat of these Secrets
of Nature, because they may be turned by some lascivious and lewd Persons into
Ridicule, but they being absolutely necessary to be known, in order to a
public Good, I will not omit them, because some may make a wrong use of them.

Those parts that offer themselves to view at the bottom of the Belly, are the
Fissura Magna, or the Great Chink, with its Labia, or Lips, the Mons Veneris,
and the Hair. These are called by the general Name of Pudenda, from
Shamefacedness, because when they are bared, they bring Pudor, or shame, upon a
woman. The Fissura magna reaches from the lower part of the Os Pubis, to within
an Inch of the Anus: But it is less and closer in Maids, than in those that
have born Children; and has two Lips, which toward the Pubes, grow thicker and
more full, and meeting upon the middle of the Os Pubis, make that rising Hill,
that is called Mons Veneris, or the Hill of Venus.

The next thing that offers are the Nymphae and Clytoris, the former of which
is of a membrany and filmy Substance, spongy, soft, and partly fleshy, of a red
color, in the shape of wings, two in number, though from their rise they are
joined in an acute Angle, producing there a fleshy Substance, which clothes the
Clytoris, and sometimes they spread so far, that Incision is required to make
way for the Man's Instrument of Generation.

The Clytoris is a substance in the upper part of the Division, where the two
wings concur, and is the Seat of Venereal Pleasure, being like a Yard in
Situation, Substance, Composition and Erection, growing sometimes out of the
Body two inches, but that never happens, unless through extreme lust, or
extraordinary accident. This Clytoris consists of two spongy and skinny Bodies,
containing a distinct Original from the Os Pubis, the Head of it being covered
with a tender skin, having a hole or passage like the Penis, or Yard of a Man,
though not quite through, in which and the bigness, it only differs from it.

The next thing in course are the fleshy Knobs, and the great Neck of the Womb:
And these Knobs are behind the Wings, being four in Number, and resemble
Myrtle-Berries, being placed Quadrangular, one against the other, and in this
place is inserted to the Orifice of the Bladder, which opens it self into the
Fissures to evacuate the Urine, for securing of which from Cold, or the like
Inconveniency, one of these Knobs are placed before it, and shuts up the
Passage.

The Lips of the Womb that next appear, being separated, disclose the Neck
thereof, and in them two things are to be observed, which is, The Neck it self,
and the Hymen, but more properly the Claustrum Virginale, of which I have
before discoursed. By the Neck of the Womb is to be understood the Channel that
is between the aforesaid Knobs, and the inner Bone of the Womb, which receives
the Penis like a Sheath; and that it may the better be dilated for the pleasure
of Procreation, the substance of it is sinewy, and a little spongy, and in this
Concavity are diverse Folds, or Orbicular Plights, made by Tunicles, wrinkled
like an expanded Rose; in Virgins they plainly appear, but in women that have
often used copulation they are extinguished; so that the inner side of the
Womb's Neck appears smooth, and in old women it becomes more hard and grisly:
But though this Channel be at sometimes writhed and crooked, sinking down, yet in
the time of Copulation, Labor, or the Monthly Purgations, it is erected and
extended, which over-extention occasioneth the pains in Childbirth.

The Hymen or Claustrum Virginale, is that which closes the Neck of the Womb;
being (as I have before cited in the Chapter relating to Virginity) broken in
the first Copulation, its use being rather to stay the untimely Courses in
Virgins, than to any other end; and commonly when it is broke in Copulation, or
by any other Accident, a small quantity of Blood flows from it, attended wi^h
some little pain. From whence some observe, that between the duplicity of the
two Tunicles which constitute the Neck of the Womb, there are many Veins and
Arteries running along, and arising from the vessels on both sides the Thighs,
and so passing into the Neck of the Womb, being very large, and the reason
thereof is, for that the Neck of the Bladder requires to be filled with
abundance of Spirits, thereby to be dilated for its better taking hold of the
Penis, there being great heat required in such motions, which becoming more
intense by the Act of Frication, consumes a considerable quantity of moisture,
in the supplying of which, large vessels are altogether necessary.

Another cause of the longness of these vessels is, by reason the Menses make
their way through them, which often occasions Women with Child to continue
their Purgations; for though the Womb be shut up, yet the passage in the Neck of
the Womb, through which these Vessels pass, are open: In this case there is
further to be observed, that as soon as you penetrate the Pudendum, there
appears two little Pits or Holes, wherein is contained an Humor, which by
being expunged in time of Copulation, greatly delights the Woman.

CHAP. XIV. A Description of the Wombs Fabric, the preparing Vessels, and
Testicles in Women, as also of the Different, or Ejaculatory Vessels.
IN the lower part of the Hypogastrion, where the Hips are widest and broadest,
(they being greater and broader thereabouts than those of Men, for which reason
they have likewise broader Buttocks than Men) is the Womb joined to its Neck,
and is placed between the Bladder and strait Gut, which keeps it from swaying
or rolling, yet gives it liberty to stretch and dilate it self, and again to
contract, as nature in that case disposes it: Its figure is in a manner round,
and not unlike a Gourd, lessening a little, and growing more acute toward one
end, being knit together by its proper Ligaments, its Neck likewise is joined
by its own substance, and certain Membranes that fasten it to Os Sacrum, and
the Share-Bone. As to its largeness, that much differs in Women, especially the
difference is great between such as have born Children, and those that have
born none: In substance it is so thick, that it exceeds a Thumbs breath, which
after Conception it is so far from decreasing that it augments to a greater
proportion, and the more to strengthen it, it is interwoven with Fibers
overthwart, which are both strait, and winding, and its proper Vessels are
Veins, Arteries and Nerves; and amongst these there are two little Veins, which
pass from the Spermatick Vessels to the bottom of the Womb, and two larger from
the Hypogastricks, which touch both the bottom and the Neck; the mouth of these
Veins piercing as far as the inward concavity.

The Womb has also two Arteries on both sides, the Spermatick Vessels and the
Hypogastricks, which still accompany the Veins, and besides these there are
diverse little Nerves that are knit and intwined in the form of a Net, which are
also extended throughout, even from the bottom to the Pudenda themselves, being
chiefly place^ for sense and pleasure, moving in Sympa^^y between the Head and
Womb.

Now it is to be farther noted, that by reason, of the two Ligaments that hang
on either side the womb, from the Share-bone, pierceing through the
Peritonaeum, and joined to the Bone it self, the Womb is moveable upon sundry
occasions, often falling low, or rising high. As for the Neck of the Womb, it
is of an exquisite feeling, so that if it be at any time out of order by being
troubled with a schirrosity, over-fatness, moisture, or relaxation, the Womb
is subjected thereby to Barrenness: In those that are with Child, there
frequently stays a moist glutinous Matter in the entrance to facilitate the
Birth; for at the time of delivery the Mouth of the Womb is opened to such a
wideness, as is conformable to the bigness of the Child, suffering an equal
dilation from the bottom to the top.

As for the Preparatory or Spermatick Vessels in Women, they consist of two
Veins and two Arteries, not differing from those in a Man, but only in their
largeness and manner of insertion; for the number of Veins and Arteries are
both the same as in Men, the right Vein issuing from the trunk of the hollow
Vein descending, and the left from the Emulgent Vein; and on the side of them
are two Arteries, which grows from the Aorta.

As to the length and breadth of these Vessels, they are narrow, and shorter in
Women than in Men; only observe they are more wreathed and contorted than in
Men, as shrinking together, by reason of their shortness, that they may by
their looseness be the better stretched out, when occasion requires it. And
these Vessels in Women are carried with an indirect course through the lesser
Guts, to the Testicles but are in the midway divided into two Branches, the
greater going ^o the Stones, constituting the various or winding Body, and
wonderfully Inoculating; the lesser Branch ending in the Womb, in the side of
which it disperseth it self, and especially at the higher part of the bottom of
the Womb, for its nourishment, and that part of the Courses may purge through
these Vessels; and seeing the Testicles in Women are seated near the Womb, for
that cause these Vessels fall not from the Peritonaeum, neither make they much
Passages as in Men, not extending themselves to the share-bone.

The Stones in Women, commonly called the Testicles, perform not the same
Action as in Men; they are also different in their location, bigness,
temperament, substance, form and covering. As for the place of their seat, it
is in the hollowness of the Abdomen, neither are they pendulous, but rest upon
the Muscles of the Loins, that so they may, by contracting the greater heat, be
more fruitful, their Office being to contain the Ova or Egg, which being
impregnated by the Man's Seed, ingenders Man; yet they differ from those of Men
in figure, by reason of their lessness or flatness at each end, not being so
round or oval. The external Superficies being likewise more unequal, appearing
like the composition of a great many knots and kernels mixed together; there is
difference also in their substance, they being much more soft and pliable,
loose, and not so well compacted

Their bigness and temperament being likewise different, for they are much
colder and lesser than those in Men; as for their covering or enclosure, it
differs extremely; for as Men's are wrapped in diverse Tunicles, by reason they
are externally Pendulous, and subject to diverse injuries, unless so fenced by
Nature, so Women's Stones being internal, and less subject to casualty, are
covered with one Tunicle or Membrane, which though it closely cleave to them,
yet are they likewise half covered with the Peritonaeum.

The Ejaculatory Vessels are two obscure Passages, one on either side, nothing
differing from the Spermatick Veins in substance; rise they do, on one part
from the bottom of the Womb, not reaching from their other extremity, either to
the Stones, or any other part, but shut up and unpassable, adhering to the Womb
as the Colon does to the blind Gut, and winding half way about; though the
Testicles are remote to them, and touch them not, yet they are tied to them by
certain Membranes, resembling the Wings of a Batt, through which certain Veins
and Arteries passing from the end of the Testicles, may be termed here to have
their Passages: proceeding from the corners of the Womb to the Testicles, and
are accounted the proper Ligaments by which the Testicles and Womb are united,
and strongly knit together, and these Ligaments in Women, are the Cremasters
in Men; of which I shall speak more largely, when I come to describe the
Masculine parts conducing to Generation.

CHAP. XV. A Discourse of the Use and Action of the several Parts in Women,
appropriated to Generation, etc.
THe Externals, commonly called the Pudenda, are designed to cover the great
Orifice, and that to receive the Penis, or Yard in the act of Coition, and give
passage to the Birth and Urine. The use of the Wings and Knobs like
Mirtle-berries, are for the security of the Internal parts, shutting the
Orifice and Neck of the Bladder, and by their swelling up cause Titulation and
delight in those parts, and also to obstruct the unvoluntary passage of the
Urine.

The Action of the Clytoris in Women, is like that of the Penis in Men, viz.
Erection: And its outer end is like the Glans of the Penis, and has the same
Name. And as the Glans in Man is the Seat of the greatest pleasure in
Copulation, so is this in Women, whence it is called Amoris dulcedo, and Aestrum
Veneris.

The Action and Use of the Neck of the Womb is equal with that of the Penis,
viz. Erection, occasioned diverse ways. For First, In Copulation* it is erected
and made strait for the passage of the Penis to the Womb. Secondly, Whilst the
passage is repleated with Spirit and Vital Blood, it becomes more strait for
embracing the Penis: And as for the convenience of Erection it is twofold.
First, because if the Neck of the Womb was not erected, the Yard could have no
convenient passage to the Womb. Secondly, it hinders any hurt or damage that
might ensue^ ^^^ough the violent Concussion of the Yard, during the time of
Copulation.

As for the Vessels that pass through the Neck of the Womb, their Office is to
replenish it with Blood and Spirit, that still as the moisture consumes by the
heat contracted in Copulation, it may by those Vessels be renewed. But their
chief business is, to convey Nutriment to the Womb.

The Womb has many Properties attributed to it, as First, Retention of the
fecundated Egg, and this is properly called Conception.

Secondly, To cherish and nourish it, till Nature has framed the Child, and
brought it to perfection. And then it strongly operates in sending forth the
Birth when the time of its remaining there is expired, dilating it self in a
wonderful manner: And so aptly removed from the Senses, that nothing of Injury
can proceed from thence, retaining in it self a power and strength to operate
and cast forth the Birth, unless by accident it be rendered deficient; and then
to strengthen and enable it, Remedies must be applied by skilful Hands;
Directions for the applying of which, shall be given in the Second Part.

The use of the Preparing vessels is this: The Arteries convey the Blood to the
Testicles, part whereof is spent in the nourishment of them, and the Production
of those little Bladders (in all things resembling Eggs) through which the Vasa
Praeparantia run, and are obi^t^rated in them. And as for the Ve^^^ th^^t
Office is to bring back what ^^ood ^^m^^ns from the uses aforesaid.

The vessels of this kind are much ^^^^ter in Women than in Men, by reason of
(...) ^earness to the Stones, which defect (...) made good by the many
intricate w^ndings to which those vessels are subject, for in the middle way
they divide themselves into two branches, though different in magnitude, for one
being greater than the other, passes to the Stones.

The Stones in women are very useful, for where they are defective,
Generation-work is at an end; for although those little Bladders which are on
their outward superficies contain nothing of Seed, as the followers of Galen
and Hippocrates did erroniously imagine, yet they contain several Eggs
(generally to the number of twenty in each Testicle) one of which being
impregnated by the most spirituous part of the Man's Seed, in the act of
Coition, descends through the Ovi-ducts into the womb, and from ^^ence in
process of time becomes a living Child.

Their figure is not altogether round, but flat and depressed on the sides; in
their lower part Oval, but in their upper, where the Blood Vessels enter them,
more plain; and have only one Membrane about them, that the heat may have the
easier access.

CHAP. XVI. ^f the Organs of Generation in Man.
H^^^^g given you a description of the Organs of Generation in Woman, with the
Anatomy of the Fabric of the Womb, I shall now (to complete the first part of
this Treatise) give you also the Anatomy of the Organs of Generation in Man,
and how they are fitted to the use for which Nature designed 'em.

The Instrument of Generation in Man, (commonly called The Yard, and in the
Latin Penis, a pedendo, because it hangs without the Belly) is an Organical
Part, which consists of Skin, Tendons, Veins, Arteries, Sinews, and great
Ligaments; and is long and round, and on the upper side flattish, seated under
the Oss^ Pubis, and ordained by Nature partly for Evacuation of Urine, and
partly for conveying the Seed into the Matrix. For which end it is full of
small Pores, through which the Seed passes into ^t from the V^siculae
Seminalis, and also the Neck of the Vesica Vrinaria, which pours out ^he Urine
when they make Water. Besides the common parts, as the Cuticle, the Skin, and
^he Membrana Carnosa, it has these proper ^r internal parts, viz. the two
Nervous Bodies, ^he Septum, the Vrethra, the Glans, Four Mus^es, and the
Vessels. The Nervous Body (so ^^lled) are surrounded with a thick white ner^ous
Membrane, but their inmost substance is ^ongy, consisting chiefly of Veins,
Arteries, and nervous Fibers, interwoven together like a ^et: And when the
Nerves are fille^^ ^^th ^nimal Spirits, and the Arteries with hot and ^irituous
Blood, then the Penis is distended, ^^d becomes Erect; but when the Influx of
the ^^irits ceases, then the Blood and remaining ^^irits are absorded by the
Veins, and so the ^^nis becomes Limber and flaggy. Below these ^ervous Bodies
is the Vrethra, and whenever ^^e Nervous Bodies swell, it swells also. The
Muscles of the Penis are four; two shorter, arising from the Coxendix, and
serving its Erection, and for that reason are called Erectores; two larger,
proceeding from the Spincter of the Anus, and serve to dilate the Vrethra for
Ejaculation of the Seed, and are called Dilatantes, or Wideness. At the end of
the Penis is the Glans, covered with a very thin Membrane, by means of which,
and its Nervous Substance, it becomes most exquisitely sensible, and is the
principal Seat of Pleasure in Copulation. The outmost Covering of the Glans is
called Praeputium, a praeputando, from being cut off, it being that which the
Jews cut off in Circumcision; and it is tied in the lower part of it to the
Glans by the Froenum or Bridle. The Penis is also stocked with Veins, Arteries,
and Nerves.

The Testiculi, or Stones, (so called, because testifying one to be a Man)
elaborate the Blood brought to them by the Spermatick Arteries into Seed: They
have Coats of two sorts, proper and common; the common are two, and invest both
the Testes. The outermost of the common Coats consists of the Cuticula, or tru^
Skin, and is called the Scrotum, hanging out o^ the Abdomen, like a Purse. The
innermos^ is the Membrana Carnosa. The proper Coat^ are also two, the outer,
called Eliotroides, o^ Viginales, the inner Albuginea, into the oute^ are
inserted the Cremasters; to the upper part of the Testes are fixed the
Epididymedes, o^ Pastata, from whence arise the vasa Differentia, or
Ejaculatoria; which, when they come near the neck of the Bladder, deposite the
Seed into the vesiculae Seminales. These vesiculae Seminales are two, each like
a bunch of Grapes, and emit the Seed into the Vrethra, in the act of Copulation.

Near them are the Prostatae, about the bigness of a Wallnut, and joins to the
neck of the Bladder: Authors cannot agree about the use of them, but most are
of opinion that they afford an oily slippery and fat humor, to besmear the
Vrethra, whereby to defend the same from the Acrimony of the Seed and Urine.
But the vessels which convey the Blood to the Testes, out of which the Seed is
made, are the Arteriae Spermaticae, and are also two. The veins which carry out
the remaining Blood, are two, and have the name of venae Spermaticae.

CHAP. XVII. A Word of Advice to both Sexes; being several Directions
respecting the Act of Copulation.
SINCE Nature has implanted in every Creature a natural Desire of Copulation,
or the increase and propagation of its kind; and more especially in Man, the
Lord of the Creation, and Masterpiece of Nature, that so noble a Piece of the
Divine Workmanship might not perish; something ought to be said concerning
that, it being the Foundation of al^ that we have hitherto been treating of;
sin^^ without Compulation there can be no Generation. Seeing therefore there
depends so much upon it, I thought it necessary (before I concluded this first
Part) to give such Direction^ to both Sexes for the performing of that Act^ as
may make it efficacious to the end for which Nature designed it. But it shall
be done with that caution, as not to offend the chastest Ear^ nor put the Fair
Sex to the trouble of a Blush^ in reading it.

First therefore, when a married Couple, from a desire of having Children, are
about to make use of those means that Nature has o^dain'd to that purpose, it
would be very proper to cherish the Body with Generous Restoratives, that so it
may be brisk and vigorous^ And if their Imaginations were charmed wit^ sweet
and melodious Airs, and all Cares and Thoughts of Business drowned in a Glass
of ra^cy Wine, that their Spirits might be raised t^ the highest pitch of
Ardour and Joy, it would not be amiss: For any thing of Sadness, Trouble and
Sorrow, are Enemies to the Delights o^^ Venus; and if at such times of Coition
ther^ should be Conception, it would have a malevolent effect upon the
Children. But though Generous Restoratives may be used for the invigorating
Nature, yet all Excess is carefully to be avoided; for it will allay the
briskness of the Spirits, and render 'em dull and languid, and also hinders
digestion, and so must needs be an Enemy to Copulation: For it is Food
moderately taken that is well digested, and what is well digested creates good
Blood, and good Blood makes good Spirits, and enables a Man without vigor and
activity to perform the Dictates of Nature. It is also highly necessary that in
their mutual Embraces they meet each other with an equal Ardour: For if their
Spirits flag on either part, they will fall short of what Nature requires; and
the Woman either miss of Conception, or else the Children prove weak in their
Bodies, or defective in their Understandings. And therefore I do advise 'em,
before they begin their Conjugal Embraces, to invogorate their mutual Desires,
and make their Flames burn with a fiercer Ardour, by those endearing ways that
Love can better teach, than I can write.

And when they have done what Nature does require, the Man must have a Care he
does not part too soon from the Embraces of his Wife, lest some sudden
interposing Cold should strike into the Womb, and occasion a Miscarriage, and
thereby deprive them of the Fruit of their Labors.

And when after some small convenient time the Man has withdrawn himself, let
the Woman gently betake her self to Rest, with all imaginable serenity and
composure of Mind, free from all anxious and disturbing Thoughts, or any other
kind of Perturbation whatsoever: And let her, as much as she can, forbear
turning herself from that side on which she first reposes: And by all means let
her avoid Coughing and Sneezing, which by its violent concussion of the Body,
is a great Enemy to Conception, if it happen soon after the Act of Coition.

And thus I have finished the first Part of this Treatise; which I hope will be
to the honest and sober Readers Satisfaction.

The End of the First Part.
ARISTOTLE's MASTERPIECE COMPLETED.
PART II. BEING A Private Looking-Glass FOR THE FEMALE SEX. TREATING Of the
several Maladies incident to the WOMB, with proper Remedies for the Cure of
Each.
CHAP. I. Of the WOMB, in General.
ALTHOUGH in the first Part I have spoken something of the Fabric of the Womb,
yet being in this Second Part to Treat more Particularly thereof, and of the
various Distempers and Maladies it is subject to, I shall not think it a
Tautology to give you by way of Introduction a general Description both of its
Situation and Parts, but rather think this Second Part would be imperfect
without it, so that it can by no means be Omitted; especially since in it I am
to speak of the Quality of the Menstruous Blood.

First, Touching the Womb: Of the Graecians it is called METRA, the Mother; or
DELPHOVS, says Priscian, because it makes us all Brothers.

It is placed in the Hypogastrium, or lower part of the Belly, in the Cavity
called Pelvis, having the straight Gut on one side to keep it from the hardness
of the Backbone; and the Bladder on the other side, to defend it from Blows.
The form or figure of it is like a Viril Member, only this excepted, the
Manhood is outward, and the Womanhood within.

It is divided into the Neck and the Body. The Neck consists of a hard fleshy
Substance, much like a Cartilage; at the end whereof there is a Membrane
transversly placed, called Hymen, or Eugion. Near also unto the neck, there is
a prominent Panicle, which is called of Montanus, the Door of the Womb, because
it preserves the Matrix from Cold and Dust. Of the Graecians it is called
KLYTORIS; of the Latins, Praeutium Muliebre, because the Jewish Women did
abuse this part to their own mutual Lust, as St. Paul speaks, Romans 1.26.

The Body of the Womb is that wherein the Child is Conceived; and this is not
altogether round, but dilates it self into two Angles, the outward part of it
is Nervous, and full of Sinews, which are the cause of its motion; but inwardly
it is Fleshy.

It is fabulously Reported, That in the cavity of the Womb there are seven
divided Cells or Receptacles for Humane Seed. But those that have seen
Anatomies, do know there are but two, and likewise, that those two are not
divided by a Partition, but only by a Line, or Suture running through the midst
of it. In the right side of the Cavity, by reason of the heat of the Liver,
Males are conceived. In the left side, by the coldness of the Spleen, Females
are begotten. And this do most of our Moderns hold for an infallible Truth; yet
Hypocrates holds it but in the General: For in whom (says he) the Spermatick
Vessel of the right side comes from the Reins, and the Spermatical Vessel of
the left side from the hollow Vein; in them Males are conceived in the left
Side, and Females in the right. Well therefore may I conclude with the saying
of Empedocles, Such sometimes is the power of the Seed, that a Male may be
conceived in the left Side, as well as in the right. In the bottom of the
Cavity there are little holes, called the Cotyledones, which are the ends of
certain Veins and Arteries, serving in breeding women, to convey Sustenance to
the Child, which is received by the Umbilical Vein; and others to carry the
Courses into the Matrix.

Now, touching the Menstruals, they are Defined to be a Monthly flux of
Excrementitious and Unprofitable Blood.

In which we are to Note, That the matter flowing forth is Excrementitious;
which is to be understood of the Superplus or Redundancy of it: For it is an
Excrement in quantity, in quality being pure and incorrupt, like unto the Blood
in the Veins.

And that the menstrous Blood is pure, and simply of it self, all one in
quality with that in the veins, is proved two ways: First, from the final Cause
of this Blood, which is the propagation and conservation of Mankind; that Man
might be conceived; and being begotten, he might be Comforted and Preserved,
both in the Womb, and out of the Womb. And all will grant it for a Truth, That
the Child, while it is in the Matrix, is nourished with this Blood; and it is
as true, That being out of the Womb, it is still nourished with the same; for
the Milk is nothing but the menstruous Blood made white in the Breasts; and I
am sure Woman's Milk is not thought to be venomous, but of a nutritive quality,
answerable to the tender nature of an Infant. Secondly, It is proved to be Pure
from the Generation of it, it being the Superfluity of the last Aliment of the
fleshy parts*

It may be Objected, If the Blood be not of a hurtful Quality, How can it cause
such venomous Effects; as if the same fall upon Trees and Herbs, it makes the
one barren, and mortifies the other? And Averroes writes, That if a man
accompany with a Menstruous woman, if she Conceive, she shall bring forth a
Leaper. I answer, this Malignity is contracted in the Womb, for the woman
wanting native heat to digest this Superfluity, sends it to the Matrix, where
seating it self until the mouth of the Womb be dilated, it becomes corrupt and
venomous, which may easily be, considering the heat and moistness of the place.
This Blood therefore being out of his vessels, offends in quality: In this
Sense let us understand Pliny, Fernelius, Florus, and the rest of that Torrent.
But if Frigi^ity be the cause why women cannot digest all their last
Nourishment, and consequently that they have these Purgations; it remains to
give a reason why they are of so cold a Constitution more than Men; which is
this:

The natural end of men and women's being, is to Propagate, and this Injunction
was imposed upon them by God at their first Creation, and again after the
Deluge. Now in the act of Conception, there must be an Agent and a Patient, for
if they be both every way of one Constitution, they cannot Propagate: Man
therefore is Hot and Dry, Woman Cold and Moist; he is the Agent, she the
Patient, or weaker Vessel, that she should be Subject unto the Office of the
Man. It is necessary that woman should be of a cold Constitution, because in
her is required a Redundancy of matter for the Infant depending on her: For
otherwise, if there were not a Superplus of Nourishment for the Child, more
than is convenient for the Mother, then would the Infant Detract and weaken the
principal parts of the Mother; and like unto the Viper, the Generation of the
Infant would be the Destruction of the Parent.

These Monthly Purgations continue from the 15th Year to the 46th or 50th. Yet
often there happens a suppression, which is either Natural, or Morbifical. They
are naturally suppressed in breeding women, and such as give suck. The Morbifical
suppression falls now into our Method to be spoken of.

CHAP. II. Of the Retention of the M^nses.
THe suppression of the Terms is an intercaption of that accustomary Evacuation
of Blood, which every Month should come from the Matrix, proceeding from the
Instrument or matter vitiated. The part affected is the Womb, and that of it
self, or by Consent.

Cause. The Cause of this Suppression is either External or Internal. The
External Cause may be heat or dryness of the Air, immoderate watching, great
labor, vehement motion, etc. whereby the matter is so consumed, and the body
so exhausted, that there is not a Superplus remaining to be expelled; as is
Recorded of the Amazones, who being active, and always in motion, had their
Fluxions very little, or not at all. Or it may be caused by Cold, which is most
frequent, making the Blood Viscous and Gross, condensing and binding up the
Passages, that it cannot flow forth.

The Internal Cause is either Instrumental or Material, in the womb or in the
blood.

In the womb it may be diverse ways; by Aposthumes Tumors, Ulcers, by the
narrowness of the veins and passages, or by the Omentum or Kell in fat Bodies,
pressing the neck of the Matrix, but then they must have Hernia Zirbalis: for
in mankind the Kell reaches not so low. By over much Cold or Heat, the one
vitiating the action, and the other consuming the matter. By an evil
Composition of the Uterine parts, by the neck of the womb being turned aside,
and sometimes, though rarely, by a membrane or excressence of flesh growing about
the mouth or neck of the womb. The blood may be in fault two ways, in quantity
or in quality: In quantity, when it is so consumed, that there Is not a
Superplus left, as in Viragoes and vi^^ women, who through their heat and
strength of Nature, digest and consume all their last Nourishment; as
Hippocrates writes of Phaetusa, who being exiled by her Husband Pythea, her
Terms were suppressed, her voice changed, and had a Beard with a Countenance like
a man. But these I judge rather to be Anthropophagae, women-eaters, than
women-breeders, because they consume one of the principles of Generation, which
gives a Being to the World, viz. the Menstruous blood. The blood likewise may
be consumed, and consequently the Terms stayed, by bleeding of the Nose, by a
flux of the Emerhoids, by a Dysenteria, commonly called the bloody flux; by
many other evacuations, and continual and chronical Diseases. Secondly, the
matter may be vicious in quality; as suppose it be Sanguineous, Phlegmatical,
Byleous, or Melancholious, every one of these, if they offend in Grosness, will
cause an Obstruction in the veins.

Signs. Signs manifesting the Disease, are pains in the head, neck, back and
loins; weariness of the whole body, but especially of the hips and legs, by
reason of a Confinity which the Matrix has with these parts; trembling of the
heart. Particular signs are these; if the Suppression proceeds of cold, she is
heavy, sluggish, of a pale Color, and has a slow Pulse, Venus combats are
neglected, the Urin is crude, waterish, and much in quantity; the excrements of
the Guts usually are retained. If of heat, the signs are contrary to those but
now recited. If the retention be natural, and come of Conception, this may be
known by drinking of Hydromel, that is, water and honey, after Supper going to
bed, and by the effect which it works; for, after the taking of it, if she
feels a beating pain about the Navel and lower parts of the Belly, it is a sign
she has Conceived, and that the Suppression is Natural: if not, then is it
vicious, and ought Medicinally to be taken away.

Prognostics. With the evil quality of the Womb the whole body stands charged;
but especially the Heart, the Liver, and the Brain; and betwixt the Womb and
these three principal parts, there is a singular Consent. First, the Womb
communicates to the Heart by the mediation of those Arteries which come from
Aorta: Hence the Terms being suppressed, will ensue Faintings, Swoonings,
intermission of Pulse, cessation of Breath. Secondly, It communicates to the
Liver by the veins derived from the hollow vein: Hence will follow Obbructions,
Cachexies, Jaundice, Dropsies, hardness of the Spleen. Thirdly, It communicates
unto the Brain, by the nerves and membranes of the back: Hence will arise
Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Frenzies, melancholy Passions, pain in the after-parts
of the Head, fearfulness in ability of speaking. Well therefore may I conclude
with Hippocrates, If the Months be suppressed, many dangerous Diseases will
follow.

Cure. In the Cure of this, and of all the other following Affects, I will
observe this order. The Cure shall be taken from Chirurgical, Pharmaceutical,
and Diaeretical means. This Suppression is a Plethorick Affect, and must be
taken away by Evacuation: And therefore first we will begin with Phlebotomy. In
the midst of the menstrual period, open the Liver vein; and for the reversion
of the Humor, two days before the wonted evacuation, open the Saphena on both
feet. I^ the repletion be not great, apply Cupping-glasses to the legs and
thighs. And although there be no hope to remove the Suppression (as in some the
Cotyl^dones are so closed up, that nothing but Copulation will open them) yet
it will be convenient, as much as may be, to ease Nature of her burden, by
opening the Emerhoid veins with a Leach. After Phlebotomy, let the Humors be
prepared and made Fluxile with Syrup of Staechas, Calamint, Betony, Hysop,
Mugwort, Hore-hound, Fumetary, Maidenhair. Bathe with Camomile, Pennyroyal,
Savin, Bay Leaves, Janiper-berries, Rue, Marj^ram, Feverfew. Take of the leaves
of Nep, Maidenhair, Succory, Betony, of each one handful, make a Decoction;
take thereof three Ounces; Syrup of Maidenhair, Mugw^rt, Succory, mix of each
half an Ounce. After she comes out of the Bath, let her drink it off. Purge
with Pil. de Agaric. Elephang. Coch. Foetid. Galen in this Case commends Pilula
de Hiera cum Colocyntida, for as they be proper to purge the humor offending,
so also they do open the passages of the Womb, and strengthen the faculty by
their Aromatical quality.

If the stomach be overcharged, let her take a vomit; yet such a one as may
work both ways, lest working only upward, it should too much turn back the
humor. Take Trochisks of Agarick 2 drams; infuse them in 3 Ounces of Oximel,
in which dissolve of the Electuary Diasarum One Scruple and half, Benedic.
Laxat, half an Ounce: Take this after the manner of a Purge.

After the humor has been purged, proceed to more proper and forceable
Remedies. Take Trochisks of Myrrh, one dram and half: Parsley-seed, Castor,
Rindes of Cassia, of each one Scruple; and of the Extract of Mugwort, one
Scruple and half; Musk ten Grains; with the juice of Smalledge make twelve
Pills, take 2 every Morning, or after supper going to Bed. Take of Cinnamon,
half an Ounce, Roots of Smirnium, Valerian, Aristolochia, of each 2 drams.
Roots of Asrum one dram, Castor, Saffron, of each 2 Scruples, Specdiambrae 2
drams, Trochisks of Myrrh, 4 Scruples, Tartari Vitrolati, 2 Scruples; make all
into a powder; with Mugwort, water and Sugar a sufficient quantity. Make
Lozenges, take one dram of them every Morning. Or mingle one dram of the powder
with one dram of Sugar, and take it in White Wind. Take of prepared Steel,
Specierum Hierae of each 2 drams, Borass, Species of Myrrh, of each one
Scruple, with the juice of Savine make it up into 38 Lozenges; and take 3 every
other day, before dinner. Take of Castor one Scruple, Wild-Carrot-seed half a
dram, with Syrup of Mugwort, and make 4 pills, take them in the Morning
fasting, and so for three days together before the wonted time of the
Purgations. Take of Agarick, Aristolochia, juice of Horehound, of each 5 drams;
Rhubarb, Spikenard, Anni-seed, Galbanum, Assafoetida, Smalledge Roots, Gentian,
of the three Peppers, laccae, of each 6 drams; with Honey make an Electuary:
Take of it 3 drams for a Dose. In Flegmatical Bodies nothing better can be
given then the Decoction of the wood Guaiacum, with a little Dictam, taken in
the Morning fasting, and so for 12 days together, without Provoking of sweat.

Administer to the lower parts by Suffumigations, Pessaries, Unctions,
Injections, Insessions. Make Suffumigations of Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Cloves,
Bay Berries, Mugwort, Galbanum, Melanthium, Amber, etc. Make Pessaries of
Figgs, and the leaves of Mercury bruised and rolled up with Lint. If you desire
a stronger, make one of Myrrh, Bde^um, Opopanax, Ammoniacum, Galbanum,
Sagapenum, Mithridate, Agarick, Coloquintida, etc. Make Injections of the
decoction of Origane, Mugwort, Mercury, Bettony and Figs, inject it into the
Womb by an instrument fit for that purpose. Take Oil of Almonds, Lillies,
capers, Camomile, of each half an Ounce; Ladani, Oil of Myrrh, of each 2
drams; with wax make an Unguent, with which let the places be anointed. Make
Insessions of Faenugreek, Camomile, Melilote, Dill, Marjoram, Pennyroyal,
Feverfew, Juniper Berries, and Calamin^. But if the suppression comes by a
defect of matter, then ought not the Courses to be provoked, until the Spirits
be animated and the Blood again increased. Or if by proper affects of the Womb,
as Dropsies, inflammations, etc. then must a particular cure be used, the which
I will not insist upon here, but speak of them as they lie in order.

If the retention comes from repletion or fullness; let the air be hot and dry;
use Moderate exercise before Meals; Let your sleep be shorter then ordinary;
and your Meat and Drink attenuating. Sees with your Meat, Garden-Savoury,
Time, Origan and Cyche Peason. If of emptiness or defect of matter; let the air
be moist and moderately hot. Shun exercise and watchings, let your Meat be
nourishing, and of a light digestion; as rare Eggs, Lamb, Chickens, Almond
Milk, and the like.

CHAP. III. Of the overflowing of the Courses.
THe Schoolmen say, By comparing of Contraries, Truth is made manifest. Having
therefore spoken of the suppression of the terms; order requires now, that I
should insist upon the overflowing of them, an effect no less dangerous then
the former. And this immoderate flux of the Months is defined to be a
Sanguineous excrement proceeding from the Womb, exceeding both in quantity and
time. First it is said to be Sanguineous, the matter of the flux being only
Blood; wherein it differs from that which is commonly called the false courses,
or whites; of which I will speak hereafter. Secondly it is said to proceed from
the Womb: for there are two ways by which the Blood flows forth. The one s^by
the internal Veins in the Body of ^^e Womb* and this is properly called the
M^^^^ ^^ux. The other is by those Veins which are terminated in the Neck of the
Matrix and this is called of Aetius, the Hemorrhoides of the Womb. Lastly it is
said to exceed both in quantity and time. In quantity says Hippocrates, when
they flow above 18 Ounces. In time, when they flow above three days. But we
take this for a certain character of their inordinate flowing, when the
faculties of the Body thereby are weakened. In Bodies abounding with Gross
Humors, this immoderate flux sometimes unburdens Nature of her Load, and ought
not to be stayed without the counsel of a Physician.

Cause. The cause of this affect is internal or External; The internal cause is
threefold; in the matter, instrument, or faculty. The matter, which is the
Blood, may be vicious two ways. First, in quantity, it being so great that the
Veins are not able to contain it. Secondly, in quality, it being adust, sharp,
watrish or unconcocted. The instrument, viz. the Veins are faulty by the
dilatation of the Orifice; which may be caused two ways: first, by the heat of
the constitution, climate or season, heating the Blood, whereby the passages
are dilated, and the faculty weakened that it cannot retain the Blood. Secondly,
by falls, Blows, violent motion, breaking of a Vein, etc.

The external cause may be calidity of the air, lifting, carrying of heavy
burdens, unnatural Childbirth, falls, etc.

Signs. In this inordinate flux the appetite is decayed, the concoctions
depraved, and all the actions weakened, the feet are swelled, the color of the
Face is changed, and a general feebleness possesses the whole Body. If the
flux comes by the breaking of a vein, the Body is something Cold, the Blood
flows forth on heaps, and that suddenly, with great pain. If it comes through
heat, the Orifice of the veins being dilated, then is there little or no pain,
yet the Blood flows faster then it does in an Erosion; and not so fast as it
does in a Rupture. If by Erosion, or sharpness of Blood, she feels a great heat
scalding the passage; It differs from the other two, in that it flows not so
suddenly nor so copiously as they do. If by weakness of the Womb, she abhors
the use of Venus. Lastly if it proceeds from an evil quality in the Blood; drop
some of it on a Cloth, and when it is dry, you may judge of the quality by the
Color. If it be Choleric, it will be Yellow; If Melancholy, Black; If
Flegmatical, watrish and whitish.

Prognostics. If with the flux be joined a convulsion, it is dangerous,
because it intimates the more noble parts are vitiated; and a convulsion caused
by emptiness is deadly. If it continues long it will be cured with great
difficulty: for it was one of the miracles which our Savior Christ wrought to
cure this disease when it had continued 12 Years. To conclude, if the flux be
inordinate, many diseases will ensue; and without remedy, the Blood together
with the native heat being consumed, either cachectical Hydropical, or
paralitical diseases will follow.

Cure. The cure consists in three particulars. First, in repelling and
carrying back of the Blood. Secondly, in correcting and taking away the
fluxibility of the matter. Thirdly, in corroborating the veins and faculties.
For the first; To cause a regression of the Blood, open a vein in the Arm, and
draw out so much blood as the strength of the Patient will permit; and that not
together, but at several times; for hereby the spirits are the less weakened,
and the retraction so much the greater.

Apply cupping-glasses to the Breasts, and also to the Liver, that the reversion
may be in the Fountain.

To correct the fluxibility of the matter, Cathartical means, moderated with
Astrictories, must be used.

If it be caused by Erosion, or sharpness of blood; consider whether the
Erosion be by salt Phlegm, or adust Color. If by salt Phlegm, Prepare with syrup
of violet? Wormwood, Roses, Citron pills, Succory, etc. Then take this
purgation following. Take Myrobolans, Chebul, half an Ounce, Trochisks of
Agarick one dram, with Plantain water make a decoction: add thereunto sir.
rosat. lax. 3 Ounces, and make a potion.

If by adust Choler, prepare the Body with Syrrup of Roses, Myrtles, Sorrel,
Purslain, commixt with water of Plantain, Knotgrass, and Endive: Then purge
with this potion: Take Rinds of Myrobolans, Rhubarb, of each one dram; Cinnamon
15 Grains; infuse them one night in Endive water: Add to the straining pulp of
Tamarind, Cassia, of each half an Ounce, Syrup of Roses one Ounce, make a
potion.

If the blood be watrish and unconcoct, as it is in Hydropical Bodies, and
flows forth by reason of the tenuity and thinness, to draw off the Water will
be profitable. Purge with Agarick, Elaterium, and Coloquintida. Sweating is
proper in this cause, for by it the matter offending is taken away, and the
motion of the blood is carried to, the outward parts. To procure sweat, use
Carduus water with Mithridate, or the decoction of Guaiacum Sassafras, and
Sarsa-parilla; the Gum of Guaiacum also does greatly provoke sweat, Pills of
Sarsa-parilla taken every night going to bed, are worthily commended. If the
blood flows forth from the opening or breaking of a vein, without any evil
quality in its self, then ought only Corroboratives to be applied; which is the
last thing to be done in the cure of this inordinate flux.

Take of Bole- Ammoniac one Scruple; London Treacle one dram, old conserve of
Roses half an Ounce; with syrup of Myrtles make an Electuary. Or if the flux
has continued long, Take of Mastick 2 drams, Olibani, Troch. de Carabe of each
one dram; Balaustiorum, one Scruple, make a powder; with Syrup of Quinces make
it into Pills; take one always before Meals. Take Lapidis Haematitis Triti, of
each 2 Scruples; Specierum Triasantali one Ounce; Troch. de Carabe, de scoria
ferri, Coral, Frankincense, of each one Scruple; fine Bole, one Scruple: bea^
these to fine Powder; and with Sugar and Plantain water, a sufficient quantity,
make Lozenges. Asses Dung is well approved of, whether taken inwardly with
Syr^p of Quinces, or applied outwardly with Steeled water.

Galen by co^ve^ing the juice of it through a Metrenchit^ into the Womb four
days together, cured this immoderate Flux, which no ways else could be
restrain^d. Going to bed let her take one Scruple and a half of Phi^onii Romani
in a wafer, make Suffumigations for the Matrix, of Maststick, Frankincense,
burnt Frogs, not forgetting the hoof of a Mule. Take of the juice of Knot
grass, Comfr^, Quinces, of each one Ounce; Camphire one Dram; dip silk Cotion
therein, and apply it to the plac^s. Take of Oil of Mastick, M^r^les, Quinces,
of each half an Ounce; fine Bole, Troch. de Carabe, Sanguinis Draconis, of each
^ne Dr^m; Wax and Vinegar, a sufficient Quantity, make an Unguent, apply it
both before and behind. Take of Plantain, Shepherds Purse, red Rose leaves, of
each one Handful: of Goats and Asses Dung dried, of each one Ounce and a half:
Acatiae, Hypocistidos, of ^ach one Ounce and a half: dried M^nt one Ounce:
Bean-Meal three Ounces: boil all ^hese in Plantain water, and ma^e of it two
^laisters: apply one before and the other behind. If the blood flows from those
vein^ which are terminated in the neck of the Matrix, then it is not called the
overflowing (...) the Terms, but the Emerhoids of the Womb (...) Yet the same
Cure will serve them both; onl^ the instrumental Cure will a little differ; for
in the Uterine Emorhoids, the ends of the veins hang over like little Teats or
Pushe^ which must be taken away by incision, and the^ the veins closed up with
Aloes, fine Bol^ burnt Allom, Troch. de Terra sigil. Myrrh^ Mastick, with the
juice of Comfrey and Kno^^grass, laid Plaister-wise thereto.

The Air must be cold and dry: all motion of the body is forbidden. Let her
Meat (...) Pheasant, Patridge, Mountain-Birds, Coney (...) Calf's- Feet, etc.
And let her Beer be mi^^ with the juice of Pomgranates and Quinces.

CHAP. IV. Of the Weeping of the Womb.
THe weeping of the Womb is an unnatu^^ flux of blood coming from the Wom^ by
drops, or after the manner of Tears, caus^^ violent Pains in the same, keeping
neither ^^riod nor time. By some it is referred un^^ the immoderate Evacuation
of the Cours^ yet they are distinguished in the quantity a^ manner of their
flowing; in that they flow copiously and freely: In this continually, though by
little and little, and that with great Pain and Difficulty: wherefore it is
likened unto the Strangury.

The Cause is in the faculty, instrument, or matter. In the faculty, by being
enfeebled, that it cannot expel the blood; and the blood resting there, makes
the parts of the Womb grow hard, and stretches the vessels, from whence
proceeds the pain in the Womb. In the instrument, by the narrowness of the
Passages. Lastly, It may be in the matter of the blood, which may offend in too
great a quantity, or in an evil-quality, it being gross and thick that it
cannot flow forth as it ought to do, but by drops.

The Signs will best appear by the Relation of the Patient.

Hereupon will ensue pains in the head, stomach and back, with inflammations,
suffoca^ions, and excoriations of the Matrix.

If the strengeh of the Patient will permit, first open a vein in the Arm, rub
the upper ^arts, and let her Arms be corded, that the ^orce of the blood may be
carried backward.

Then apply such things as may laxate and ^olify the stretching of the Womb,
and as^wage the sharpness of the Blood, as Cataplasms ^ade of Bran, Linseed,
Fenugreek, Meli^ote, Mallows, Mercury, and Atriplex. If the blood be viscous
and gross, add thereto Mugwort, Calamint, Dictam, and Betony: And let her take
of Venice-Treacle the quantity of a Nutmeg, with Syrup of Mugwort every
morning. Anoint the places with Oil of Lilies, Roses, ^inseed, sweet Almonds,
and Calf's, Marrow. Make injections of the Decoctions of Mallows, Mercury,
Linseed Groundsel, Mugwort, Fenugreek, with Oil of sweet Almonds*

Sometimes it is caused by a wind, and then Phlebotomy is to be omitted; and in
the stead thereof take Syrup of Feverfew, one Ounce; Honey of Roses, Syrup of
Staechas, of each half an Ounce; water of Calamint, Mugwort, Betony, Hysop, of
each one Onnce, make a Julep. If the pain continues, take this Purgation, Take
Specierum H^erae, 1 Dram, Diacatholicon half an ounce, Syrup of Roses laxative,
1 ounces; with the Decoction of Mugwort, and the four Cordial Flowers, make a
Potion. If it come through weakness of the Faculty, let that be Corroborated. If
through grosness or sharpness of the Blood, let the quality of it be altered, as
I have shown in the foregoing Chapter. Lastly, If the excrements of the Gut be
re^ained, provoke them by a Clyster, of the Decoction of Camomile, Betony,
Feverfew, Mallows, Linseed, Juniper Berries, Cu^^in-seed, Anniseed, Melilot,
adding thereto of Diacatholicon half an Ounces; Hiera Picra, two Drams: Honey,
Oil, of each one Ounce* Salniter a Dram and a half. The Patient mus^ abstain
from salt, sharp, and windy Meats.

CHAP. V. Of the false Courses, or Whites.
FRom the Womb proceeds not only the menstruous blood, but accidentally, many
other Excrements, which by the Ancients are comprehended under the Title of
RHOVS GVNAIK AIOS, which is a distillation of variety of corrupt Humors
through the womb, flowing from the whole Body, or part of the same, keeping
neither course nor color, but varying in both.

Cause. The Cause is either promiscuously in the whole body, by Cacochymia, or
weakness of the same; or in some of the parts: as in the Liver, which by by the
inability of the Sanguifficative faculty, causes a generation of corrupt
blood; and then the matter is reddish; sometimes in the Gall, being sluggish in
its Office, not drawing away those choleric Superfluities, which are engendered
in the Liver, and the matter is Yellowish. So^etimes in the Spleen, not
defecating and cleansing the blood of the dregs and excrementitious parts; and
then the matter flowing forth, is blackish. It may also come from Catarrhs in
the Head: or from any other putrified or corrupted Member. But if the matter of
the Flux be white, the cause is either in the Stomach, or Reins. In the Stomach
by a Phlegmatical and Crude matter there contracted, and vitiated through
Grief, Melancholy, and other Distempers: For otherwise, if the matter were
only Pituita, crude Phlegm, and no ways corrupt or vitiated, being taken into
the Liver it might be converted into blood: for Phlegm in the Ventricle is
called Nourishment half digested: But being corrupt, though sent unto the Liver,
yet it cannot be turned into Nutriment; for the second Concoction cannot
correct that which the first has corrupted; and therefore the Liver sends it
to the Womb, which can neither digest it, nor repel it, and so it is voided
out, still keeping the Color which it had in the Ventricle. The cause also may
be in the Reins being overheat, whereby the Spermatical matter, by reason of
its thinness flows forth. The external cause may be moystness of the Air,
eating of corrupt Meats, Anger, Grief, Slothfulness, immoderate Sleeping,
Costiveness of body.

The Signs are extenuation of the body, shortness and stinking of breath,
loathing of meat, pain in the head, swelling of the eyes and feet, melancholy,
humidity flows from the Womb of diverse, colors, as reddish, black, green,
yellow, white. It differs from the flowing and overflowing of the Courses, in
that it keeps no certain periods, and is of many Colors, all which do
degenerate from blood.

Prognostics. If the Flux be Phlegmatical it will continue long and be
difficult to Cure, yet if vomiting, or the flux Diarrhaea happens, diverting
the humor, it cures the Disease. If it be Choleric, it is not so permanent,
yet more perilous, for it will cause clifts in the neck of the Womb, and
sometimes make an excoriation in the Matrix. If Melancholic it is most
Dangerous and Contumacious; yet the flux of the Emerhoids administers Cure.

If the matter flowing forth, be reddish; open a vein on the Arm; if not, apply
Ligatures to the Arms and Shoulders. Galen glories of himself how he cured the
wife of Boctus laboring of this Disease, by rubbing the upper parts with Crude
Honey.

If it be caused by a distillation from the brain, take Syrup of Betony,
Staechas, and Marjoram. Purge with Pil. coch. sine quibus de Agarico: make
Nasalia of the juice or Sage, Hysop, Betony, Nigella, with one drop of Oy1 of
Cloves and a little silk Cotton. Take Elect. Dianth. aromat. rosat. diambre,
diamosci dulcis, of each one Dram: Nutmeg half a Dram, with Sugar and Betony
water; make Lozenges, to be taken every Morning and Evening. Take Auriae
Alexandrinae, half a Dram, at Night going to Bed. If these things help not, use
the Suffumigation and Plaster as they are prescribed.

If it proceeds from Crudities in the Stomach, or from a cold distempered
Liver, take every morning of the Decoction of Lignum Sanctum. Purge with Pil.
de Agarico, de Hermodact. de Hiera Diacolocynthid. Foetida, Agrigative. Take of
Elect. Aromat. Ros. two Drams; Cytron-peels dried, Nutmeg, long Pepper, of each
one Scruple; Diagalanga, one Dram; Santali Albi, Ligni Aloes, of each half a
Scruple; Sugar six Ounces; with Mint-water, and make Lozenges of it: Take of
them before Meals. If with Frigidity of the Liver, there be joined a repletion
of the Stoma^h, Purging by Vomit is commendable: For which take three Drams of
the Electuary Diasaru. Galen allows of Diuretical means; as of Apium,
Petrosilinum, etc.

If the matter of the Flux be Choleric, prepare the Humor with Syrup of
Roses, Violets, Endive, Succory. Purge with Myrabolanes, Manna, Rhubarb,
Cassia. Take of Rhubarb two Drams; Anniseed, one Dram, Cinnamon, a Scruple and
a half; infuse them in six Ounces ^f Prune-broth. Add to the s^raining, of
Manna, one Ounce; and take it in the Morning according to Art. Take Sp^cierum
Diatrionsantalon, Diatragacant. Frig. Di^rrhod. Abbatis Diacydonit. of each one
Dram; Sugar four Ounces, with Plantain-water make Lozenges. If the Clyster of
the Gall be sluggish and do not stir up the Faculty of the Guts, give hot
Glisters of the Decoction of the four mollifying Herbs with Hon^y of Roses and
Aloes.

If the Flux be Melancholious, prepare with Syrup of Maidenhair, Epithimum,
Polypody, Burrage, Bugloss, Fumetary, Hart's-Tongue, and Syrupus Bysantinus,
which must be made without Vinegar; otherwise it will rather animate the
Disease than Nature; for Melancholy by the use of Vinegar is increased; and
both by Hippocrates, Sylvius, and Avenzoar it is disallowed of, as an Enemy to
the Womb, and therefore not to be used inwardly in Uterine Diseases. Purgers of
Melancholy are Pilulae Fumariae, Pilulae Indae, Pil. de Lapide Lazuli, Diasena
and Confectio Hamech. Take of stamped Prunes, 2 Ounces; Senna, 1 Dram;
Opithi^um, Polipody, Fumetary, of each a Dram and a half, sour Dates 1 Ounce;
with Endive water, make Decoction, take of it 4 Ounces; add unto it
Confectionis Hamech three Drams; Manna three Drams. Or take Pil. Indarum, Pil.
Foetidarum, Agarici Trochiscati, of each one Scruple; Pills of Rhubarb one
Scruple; Lapidis Lazuli, six Grains; with Syrup of Epithimum make Pills, and
take them once every Week. Take Elect. Laetificantis Galeni, three Drams;
Diamargaritti Calidi, one Dram; Diamosci Dulcis, Conserves of Burrage, Violets,
Bugloss; of each half a Dram; Citron-peels condited one Dram; Sugar seven
Ounces; with Rose Water make Lozenges.

Lastly, Let the Womb be cleansed from the corrupt Matter, and then
Corroborated: For the purifying thereof, make Injections of the Decoction of
Bettony, Feverfew, Mugwort, Spikenard, Bistort, Mercury, Sage; adding thereto
Sugar, Oil of sweet Almonds, of each two Ounces: Pessaries also may be made of
silk Cotton, madified in the juice of the aforenamed Herbs. To Corroborate the
Womb, you may thus prepare Trochisks, Take of Mugwort, Feverfew, Myrrh, Amber,
Mace, Nutmeg, Stirax, Ligni Aloes, red Roses, of each one Ounce; with the
Mucilage of Tragacanth make Trochisks; cast some of them on the Coals, and
smother the Womb therewith. Make Fomentations for the Womb of red Wine, in
which has been decocted Mastrick, fine Bole, Balaustia, and red Roses: Anoint
the Matrix with Oil of Quinces and Myrtles; and apply thereto Emplastrum pro
Matrix; and let her take of Diamoscum Dulce, and Elect. Aromaticum every
Morning.

A drying Diet is commended to be best, because in this Affect the Body moll
commonly abounds with Phlegmatical and Crude Humors. For this cause
Hippocrates counsels the Patient to go to Bed Supperless. Let her Meat be
Partridge, Pheasant, Mountain-Birds, rather roasted than boiled. Immoderate
Sleep is Forbidden, Moderate Exercise is Commended.

CHAP. VI. Of the Suffocation of the Mother.
THis Affect, (which simply Considered is none, but the cause of an Affect) is
called in English, the Suffocation of the Mother, not because the Womb is
Strangled, but for that it causes the Wo^an to be choked. It is a retraction
of the Womb toward the Midriff and Stomach, which presses and crusheth up the
same, that the instrumental cause of respiration, the Midriff, is Suffocated;
which consenting with the Brain, causes the Animal Faculty, the efficient
cause of Respiration also, to be intercepted; whereby the Body being
Refrigerated, and the Actions depraved, she falls to the Ground, as one being
Dead.

In these Histerical Passions some continue longer, some shorter. Rabby Moses
writes of some, which lay in the Paroxisme of the Fit two days. Ruffius makes
mention of one, which continued in the same Passion three days and three
nights; and at the three days and revived. That we may learn by other men's
harms to beware, I will give you one Example more. Paraeus writes of a Woman
in Spain, which sudenly fell into a Uterine Suffocation, and appeared to the
Judgment of Man as dead: her Friends wondering at this her sudden Change, for
their better Satisfaction, sent to the Chyrurgeon to have her Dissected; who
beginning to make an Incision, the Woman began to move, and with a great
Clamor returned to her self again, to the Horror and Ad^iration of all the
Spectators.

To the end therefore, you may distinguish the Living from the Dead, the
Ancients prescribe three Experiments. The first, is to lay a light Feather to
the Mouth, and by the motion of it you may judge, whether the Patient be Living
or Dead. The second, is to place a Glass of Water on the Breast, and if you
perceive it to move, it betokens Life. The Third is to hold a pure
Looking-glass to the Mouth and Nose; and if the Glass appear thick with a
little Dew upon it, it betokens Life. And these three Experiments are good,
yet with this Caution, that you ought not to depend on them too much; for,
though the Feather and the Water do not move, and the Glass continue pure and
clear, yet it is not a necessary Consequence that she is destitute of Life: For
the motion of the Lungs, by which the Respiration is made, may be taken away
that she cannot Breathe, yet the Internal Transpiration of the Heat may remain,
which is not manifested by the motion of the Breast, or Lungs, but lies Occult
in the Heart and inward Arteries. Examples hereof we may have in the Fly and
Swallow, which in the Cold of Winter, to the Ocular Aspect, seem Dead,
Inanimate, and Breathe not at all; yet they Live by the Transpiration of that
Heat which is reserved in the Heart and inward Arteries: therefore when the
Summer approaches, the internal Heat being Revocated to the outward parts,
they are then again revived out of their Sleepy Ecstasy.

Those Women therefore that seem to dye suddenly, and upon no evident Cause,
let them not be committed unto the Earth until the end of three days, lest the
Living be Buried for the Dead.

Cure. The part affected is the Womb; of which there is a twofold Motion,
Natural and Symptomatical. The Natural Motion, is when the Womb attracteth the
Humane Seed, or excludes the Infant or Secundine. The Symptomatical Motion, of
which we are here to speak, is a Convulsive drawing upward of the Womb.

The Cause usually is in the Retention of the Seed, or in the Suppression of
the Months, causing a Repletion of corrupt Humors in the Womb; from whence
proceeds a Flatulent Refrigeration, causing a Convulsion of the Ligaments of
the Womb. And as it may come from Humidity or Repletion, being a Convulsion, it
may be caused by Emptyness or Dryness. And lastly, By Abortion, or difficult
Childbirth.

Signs. At the approaching of the suffocation there is a paleness of the face,
weakness of the legs, shortness of breath, frigidity of the whole body, with a
working up into the throat, and then she falls down as one void both of sense
and motion. The mouth of the Womb is closed up, and being touched with the
finger feels hard. The pa^oxism of the fit once past, she opens her eyes, and
feeling her stomach oppressed, she offers to vomit. And least that any should be
deceived in taking one disease for anoth^r, I will show how it may be
distinguished from those diseases which have the nearest affinity with its self.
It differs from the Appoplexy, being it comes without shreeking out; also in
the Hysterical passion, the sense of feeling is not altogether so destroyed and
lost, as it is in the Appoplectical disease. It differs from the Epilepsie, in
that the eyes are not wrested, neither does any spumy froth come from the
mouth; and that convulsive motion which sometime is joined to suffocations, is
not so Universal, as it is in the Epilepsie, only this or that member is
convulst, and that without any vehement agitation. In the Sincope, both
respiration and pulse is taken away; the Counten^nce waxes pal^, and she
swoons a^ay sudddenly; but in the Hysterical passion, commonly there is ^^th
respiration and pulse, though it cann^t we^^ be perceived, her face looks red,
and she has a forewarning of her fit. Yet it is not denied but that a Sincope
may be joined with this suffocation. Lastly, it is distinguished from the
Lethargy by the pulse, which in the one is great, and in the other little.

Prognostics, If the disease has its being from the corruption of the seed,
it foretells more danger then if it proceeded from the suppression of the
courses; because the seed is concocted, and of a purer quality, than the
menstruous blood; and the more pure being corrupted, becomes the more foul and
filthy; as appears in Eggs, the purest nourishment, which vitiated, yield the
noisomest savor. If it be accompained with a Sincope, it shows nature is but
weak, and that the spirits are almost exhaust. But if sneezing follows, it
shows that the heat which was almost extinct, does now begin to return, and
that Nature will subdue the disease.

Cure. In the Cure of this Affect, two things must be observed. First, That
during the time of the Pararoxism, Nature be provoked to expel those malignant
Vapors which binds up the Senses, that she may be recalled out of that Sleepy
Ecstasy. Secondly, That in the the intermission of the Fit, proper Medicines be
applied to take away the Cause.

To stir up Nature, fasten Cupping-glasses to the Hips and Navel: apply
Ligatures to the Thighs: rub the Extreme parts with Salt, Vinegar, and Mustard.
Cause loud Clamours and Thundrings in her Ears. Apply to the Nose Assa-foetida,
Castor and Saga-penum steeped in Vinegar. Provoke her to Sneeze by blowing up
into her Nose the powder of Castor, white Pepper, Pellitory of Spain, and white
Hellebore. Hold under her N^se Partridge Feathers, Hair, and Old Shoes burnt,
and all other stinking things: for evil Odours are an Enemy to Nature: Hence
the Animal Spirits do so contest and strive against them, that the Natural Heat
is thereby restored. The Brain is so oppressed sometimes, that we are compelled to
burn the outward skin of the Head, with hot Oil, or with a hot Iron. Sharp
Clysters and Suppositories are available. Take of Sage, Calamint, Hore-hound,
Feverfew, Marjoram, Bettony, Hysop, of each one Handful; Anniseed half an
Ounce; Coloquintida, white Hellebore, Sal. Gemmae, of each two Drams; boil
these in two Pound of Water to the half: And to the straining, Oil of Castor,
two Ounces; Hierae Picrae, two drams; and make a Clyster of it. Or, take of
Honey boiled, two Ounces; Euphorbij half a Scruple; Coloquintida four Grains,
white Hellebore two Grains; Salt one Dram; make a Suppository. Hippocrates
writes of a Hysterical Woman which could not be freed from the Paroxism, but
by pouring cold water on her: Yet this Cure is Particular, and ought to be
administered in the midst of Summer, when the Sun is in the Tropic of Cancer.

If it be caused by the r^tention and corruption of the Seed, at the instant of
the Paroxism, let the Midwife take Oil of Lillies, Marjoram, and Bays,
dissolving in the same two grains of Civit, and as much Musk; let her dip her
Finger therein, and put it up into the Neck of the Womb, tickling and rubbing
the same.

The Fit being over, proceed to the curing of the Cause. If it arise from the
suppression of the Menses, look the Cure in page 105. If from the retention of
the Seed, a good Husband will administer Cure: But those which cannot honestly
purchase that Cure, must use such things as will dry up and diminish the Seed,
as Diacyminum, Diacalaminthes, etc. Amongst Botanicks, the Seed of Agnus Castus
is well esteemed of, whether taken inwardly, applied outwardly, or received as
a Suffumigation: It was held in great honor amongst the Athenians, for by it
they did remain as pure Vestals, and preserved their Chastity only by strowing
it on the Bed whereon they lay; and hence it had the Name of Agnus Castus given
to it, as denoting its effects. Make an issue on the inside of each leg, a
handful breadth below the knee. Make Trochisks of Agarick, two scruples; wild
Carrot-seed, Ligni Aloes, of each half a scruple; washed Turpentine, three
drams; with Conserve of Anthos make a Bolus. Castor is of excellent use in this
case, one dram of it being taken in White Wind; or you may make Pills of it,
with Mithridate, and take 'em going to Bed. Take of white Briony Root dried and
cut after the manner of Carrots, one ounce; put it into a draught of Wine,
placing it by the Fire, and when it is warm drinking it. Take Myrrh, Castor,
Assafoetida, of each one scruple; Saffron and Rue-seed, of each four grains;
make eight Pills, and take every Night two, at your entrance into Bed.

Galen by his own Example Commends unto us Agarick pulverized, of which he
frequently gave one scruple in White Wind. Lay to the Navel at bedtime, a head
of Garlic bruised, fastening it with a Swathing-Band. Make a Girdle of
Galbanum for the Waste, and also a Plaster for the Belly; placing in one part
of it both Civet and Musk, which must be laid upon the Navel. Take Pulveris
Benedict. Trochisks of Agarick, of each two drams; Mithridate a sufficient
quantity, and so make a Pessary, and it will purge the Matrix of Wind and
Phlegm. Foment the Natural parts with Sallet Oil, in which has been boiled Rue,
Feverfew, and Camomile. Take of Rose-leaves one handful, Cloves two scruples,
quilt them up in a little Cloth, and boil them in Malmsie, the eighth part of
an hour, and apply 'em to the mouth of the Womb as hot as may be endured; but
let not the smell come to her Nose. A drying Diet must be observed, the
moderate use of Venus is commended. Let her Bread be Anniseed Brisket, her
Flesh-Meat rather roasted than boiled.

CHAP. VII. Of the Descending of falling down of the Mother.
THe falling down of the womb is a relaxation of the Ligatures, whereby the
Matrix is carried backward, and in some hangs out in the bigness of an Egg: Of
this there be two kinds, distinguished by a Descending and a Precipitation. The
descending of the womb is, when it sinketh down to the entrance of the
Privities, and appears to the Eye either not at all, or very little. The
precipitation is, when the womb like a Purse is turned the inside outward, and
hangs betwixt the Thighs in the bigness of a Cupping-glass.

Cause. The Cause is external or internal: The external cause is difficult
Childbirth, violent pulling away of the Secondine, rashness and inexperience
in drawing away of the Child, violent coughing, sneezing, falls, blows,
carrying heavy burdens. The internal Cause in general is overmuch humidity
flowing unto those parts, hindering the operations of the womb, whereby the
ligaments by which the womb is supported, are relaxed. The Cause in particular
is referred to be in the retention of the Seed, or in the suppression of their
Monthly Courses.

Signs. The Arse-gut and the Bladder oftentimes are so crushed, that the
passage of both the Excrements is hindered. If the Urine does flow forth, it is
white and thick; and the Midriff is molested, the loins are grieved, the
Privities pained, the Womb sinks down to the entrance of the private parts, or
else comes clean out.

Prognostics. This Grief possessing an old Woman, is cared with great
difficulty, because it weakens the Faculties of the Womb, and therefore though it
be reduced into his proper place, yet upon every little illness, or
indisposition, it is subject to return; and so it is with the younger sort, if
the Disease be inveterate. If it be caused by putrefaction in the Nerves, it is
incurable.

Cure. The Womb naturally being placed between the strait Gut and the Bladder,
and now fallen down, ought not to be put up again, until the faculty both of
the Guts and Bladder be stirred up.

Nature being unloaded of her Burden, let the Woman be placed on her back, in
such sort that her legs may be higher than her head; let her feet be drawn up
to her hinder parts, with her knees spread abroad: The mollify the Swelling
with Oil of Lillies and sweet Almonds, or with the decoction of Mallows, Beets,
Fenugreek, and Linseed. When the Inflation is dissipated, let the Midwife
anoint her hand with Oil of Mastick, and reduce the Womb into its place. The
Matrix being put up, the situation of the Patient must be changed; let ^er legs
be out at length, and laid together; set Cupping-glasses to the breasts and
navel: Boil Mugwort, Feverfew, red Roses, and Comfery, in red Wine, and foment
the places therewith. Make a Suffumigation for the Matrix of Castor,
Assafoetida, Frankincense, and Mastick: Take Sandarache Olibani, Cypress Nuts,
of each three drams; Mastick, Styrax, Frankincense, of each an ounce; fine
Bole, one dram, with Oil of Myrtles and Wax make two Plasters, apply one
before, and the other behind. Take of red Roses, Pomegranate Pills, Acorn-cups,
Myrtle-berries, of each two ounces, Medlar-leaves, Sage, Rue, Origan, Comfery,
Wormwood, of each a handful and a half, boil all these in water, and make an
Insession. Move sweet Odours to the Nose, and at her coming out of the Bath
give her of Syrup of Feverfew one ounce, with one dram of Mithridate. Take
Ladam, Mastick, of each three drams, Galbani half an ounce, Styracis two drams,
make therewith a Plaster for the Navel. Then make Pessaries of Assafoetida
Saffron, Comfrey, Mastick, adding thereto a little Castor.

The practice of Pareus in this case, was to make them only of Cork, in figure
like a little Egg, covering them over with Wax and Mastick dissolved together,
fastening to it a thr^d, and so to put it up into the Womb.

The present danger being now taken away, and the Matrix seated in its natural
abode, the remote cause must be removed. If the Body be Plethorick, open a
Vein; Prepare with Syrup of Betony, Calamint, Hysop, and Feverfew. Purge with
Pil. de Hiera cum Agaric. Pil. de Colocyn. If the Stomach be oppressed by
Crudities, unburden it by vomiting. Sudorifical Decoctions of Lignum sanctum
and Sassifras, taken twenty days together, dries up the superfluous moisture,
and consequently suppresseth the cause of the Disease.

Let the Air be hot and dry, and your Diet hot and attenuating: Abstain from
Dancing, Leaping, Sneezing, and from all motion both of body and mind: Eat
sparingly, drink not much, sleep moderately.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Inflammation of the Womb.
THe Phlegmon, or Inflammation of the Matrix, is a Tumor possessing the whole
Womb, accompanied with unnatural heat, by obstructions and gathering together
of corrupt Blood.

Cause. The Cause of this Affect is suppression of the Months, repletion of the
whole Body, immoderate use of Venus, often handling of the Genitals, difficult
Childbirth, vehement agitation of the Body, falls, blows; to which also may be
added the use of sharp Pessaries, whereby not seldom the Womb is inflamed.
Cupping-glasses also fastened to the Pubes and Hypogastrium draw the Humors to
the Womb.

Signs. The Signs are Aguish humors, pains in the head and stomach, vomiting,
coldness of the knees, convulsions of the neck, doting, trembling of the heart;
sometimes there is a straitness of breath, by reason of the heat which is
communicated to the Diaphragma, or Midriff; the Breasts sympathizing with the
Womb, are pained and swelled. Particular Signs. If the forepart of the Matrix
be inflamed, the Privities are grieved, the Urine is suppressed, or flows forth
with difficulty: If the after part, the loins and back suffer, the Excrements
are retained: If the right side, the right hip suffers, the right leg is heavy,
slow to motion, in so much that sometimes she seems to hault. And so if the
left side of the Womb be inflamed, the left hip is pained, and the left leg is
weaker than the right: If the Neck of the Womb be affected, the Midwife putting
up her Finger, shall feel the mouth, of it retracted and closed up, with a
hardness about it.

Prognostics. All Inflammations of the Womb are dangerous, if not deadly; and
especially if the total substance of the Matrix be inflamed. Yet they are less
perilous, if they be in the Neck of the Womb. A f^ux of the Belly foretells
Health if it be natural, for Nature works best by the use of her own
Instruments.

Cure. In the Cure, first, let the humors flowing to the Womb be repelled; for
effecting of which, after the Belly has been loosened by cooling Clysters,
Phlebotomy will be needful; Open therefore a Vein in the Arm, and (if she be
not with Child) the day after strike the Saphena on both Feet: Fasten Ligatures
and Cupping-glasses to the Arms; and rub the upper Parts.

Purge lightly with Cassia, Rhubarb, Sena, Myrobolans. Take of Sena two drams,
Anniseed on scruple, Myrobalans half an ounce, Ba^ley-water a sufficient
quantity; make a Decoction; dissolve it in Syrup of Succory, with Rhubarb two
ounces, Pulp of Cassia half an ounce, Oil of Anniseed two drops, and make a
Potion. At the beginning of the Disease anoint the Privities and Reins with Oil
of Roses and Quinces. Make Plasters of Plaintain, Linseed, Barley-meal,
Mellilot, Fenugreek, Whites of Eggs; and if the pain be vehement, add a little
Opium. Foment the Genitals with the Decoction of Poppy-heads, Purslain,
Knot-grass and Water Lillies. Make Injections of Goats-Milk, Rose Water,
clarified Whey, with Honey of Roses. In the declining of the Disease, use
Insessions of Sage, Linseed, Mugwort, Pennyroyal, Horehound, Fenugreek. Anoint
the lower parts of the Belly, with Oil of Camomile and Violets.

Take Lilly Roots and Mallow Roots, of each four ounces; Mercury one handful,
Mugwort, Feverfew, Camomile-flowers, Melilot, of (...) half a handful; bruise
the Herbs and the ^^^ots, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of Milk; then
add fresh Butter, Oil of Camomile, Lillies, of each two ounces; Bea^-meal, a
sufficient quantity; make two Plasters, apply one before, and the other behind.

If the Tumor cannot be removed, but ^ends to suppuration, Take of Fenugreek,
Mal^ow-Roots, decocted Figs, Linseed, Barley-Meal, Doves-dung, Turpentine, of
each three ^rams; Deers Suet half a dram, Opium half (...) scruple, with Wax
make a Plaster.

Take of Bay Leaves, Sage, Hyssop, Camomile, Mugwort, and with Water make an
In^ession.

Take Wormwood, Betony, of each half a ^andful, White Wind, Milk, of each half
a ^ound, boil them until one part be consumed; ^hen take of this Decoction four
ounces, Honey ^f Roses two ounces, and make an Injection. ^et beware the
Humors be not brought down unto the Womb.

Take roasted Figs, Mercury bruised, of each ^hree drams, Turpentine,
Ducks-grease, of ^ach one dram; Opium two grains; with Wax ^ake a Pessary.

The Air must be cold: All motion of the Body, especially of the lower parts,
is forbidden: Vigilance is commended, for by sleep the humors are carried
inward, whereby the Inflammation is increased; eat sparingly. Let your Drink be
Barley-water, or clarified Whey, and your Meat be Chickens and Chicken Broth,
boiled with Endive, Succory, Sorrel, Bugloss, and Mallows.

CHAP. IX. Of the Schirrosity or Hardness of the Womb.
OF a Phlegmon neglected, or not perfectl^ cured, is generated a Schirrus of
the Matrix, which is a hard unnatural swelling insensible, hindering the
operations of the Womb and disposing of the whole Body to slothfu^ness.

Cause. One Cause of this Disease may b^ ascribed to want of Judgment in the
Phys^tian; as many Empericks administering to a^ Inflammation of the Womb, do
overmuch refrigerate and astringe the humor, that it ca^ neither pass forward
nor backward; hence the matter being condensed, degenerates as it were into a
lapidious or hard substance. Other Causes may be suppression of the Menstrues;
retention of the Lochia, commonly called the after-purgings; eating of corrupt
meats, as i^ the disordinate longing called Pica, unto which breeding Women are
often subject. If may proceed also from Obstructions and Ulcers in the Matrix;
or from evil Affects in the Liver and Spleen.

Sign^ If the bottom of the Womb be affected, ^he feels, as it were, a heavy
burden representing (...) Mole; yet differing in that the Breasts are
attenuated, an^ the whole Body wa^^^^ ^^ss. If the Neck of the Womb be hardened,
no^ outward humor will appear; the Mouth of it is retracted, and being touched
with the Finger feels hard; nor can she have the company of a Man, without
great pain and prickings.

Prognostics. A Schirrus confirmed is incurable, and will turn into a Cancer
or a Dropsy; and ending in a Cancer proves deadly, because the native heat in
those parts being almost smothered, can hardly again be restored.

Cure. Where there is a repletion, Phlebotomy is advisable; wherefore open the
Mediana on both Arms, and then the Saphena on both Feet, more especially if the
Menses be suppressed.

Prepare the humor with Syrup of Borage, Succory, Epithimum, and clarified
Whey. Then take of these Pills following, according to the strength of the
Patient.

Take Hierae Picrae six drams, black Hellebore, Polipody, of each two drams and
an half Agarick, Lapidis Lazuli abluti, Salis Indi, Coloquintida, of each one
dram and a half; mix them, and make Pills. The Body being purged, proceed to
mollify the hardness, as follows: Anoint the Privites and the Neck of the
Womb with Vnguentum Dalthea and Agrippae. Or take Opopanax, Bdellium,
Ammoniacum, Myrrh, of each two drams, Saffron half a dram; Dissolve the Gums in
Oil of Lillies and sweet Almonds, with Wax and Turpentine make an Unguent.
Apply bellow the Navel Diachylon-Fernelii. Make Insessions of Figgs, Mugwort,
Mallows, Pennyroyal, Althea, Fennel-Roots, Mellilot, Fenugreek, Linseed, boiled
in water. Make Injections of Calamint, Linseed, Mellilot, Fenugreek, and the
four mollifying Herbs, with Oil of Dill, Camomile, and Lillies, dissolving in
the same three drams of the Gum Bdellium. Cast the stone Pyrites on the Coals,
and let her receive the fume of it into her Womb. Foment the Secret Parts with
the Decoction of the Leaves and Roots of Danewort.

Take of the Gum Galbanum, Opopanax, of each one dram, Juice of Danewort,
Mucillage of Fenugreek, of each half an ounce; Calves marrow one ounce, Wax a
sufficient quantity, make a Pessary. Or make a Pesaary only of Lead, dipping it
in the aforesaid things, and so put it up.

The Air must be temperate: Gross, viscous, and salt meats are forbidden; as
Pork, Bulls-^^ef, Fish, old Cheese, etc.

CHAP. X. Of the Dropsy of the Womb.
THe Uterine Dropsy is an unnatural swelling ellevated by the gathering
together of wind or phlegm in the cavity, membranes, or substance of the Womb,
by reason of the debility of the native heat, not digesting the Aliment
received, and so it turns into an Excrement.

The Causes are overmuch cold and moistness of the Milt and Liver, immoderate
drinking, eating of crude meats; all which causing a repletion do suffocate the
native heat: It may be caused likewise by the overflowing of the Courses, or
by any other immoderate Evacuaation. To these may be added Abortions, Ulcers,
Phlegmons, and Schirrosities of the Womb.

Signs. The Signs of this Affect are these: The lower parts of the Belly, with
the Genitals, are puffed up and payned, the feet sweell; the natural color of
the Face decays, the Appetite is depraved, and the heaviness of the whole Body
concurs: If she turns her self in the Bed from one side to the other, a noise
like flowing of water is heard. Water sometimes comes from the Matrix. If the
swelling be caused by wind, the Belly being hit by the hand sounds like a Drum;
the Guts rumble, and the wind breaks through the neck of the womb with a
murmouring noise. This Affect may be distinguished from a true Conception many
ways, as will appear by the Chapter of Conception. It is distinguished from the
general Dropsy, in that the lower parts of the Belly a^e most swelled. Again,
in this the sanguificative faculty appears not so hurtful, nor the Urine so
pale, nor the Countenance so soon changed; neither are the superior parts so
extenuated as in the general Dropsy.

Prognostics. This Affect foretells the total ruin of the natural functions,
by that singular consent the womb has with the liver; and therefore that a
Cachexia, or a general Dropsy will follow.

Cure. In the Cure of this Disease, imitate the practice of Hippocrates; First
mitigate the pain with Fomentations of Mellilot, Mercury, Mallows, Linseed,
Camomile, Althea. Then let the humor be prepared with Syrup of Staechas,
Hyssop, Calamint, Mugwort, of both sorts. With the distilled waters or
decoctions of Dodder, Marjoram, Sage, Origan, Sperage, Pennyroyal, Betony.
Purge with Sena, Agarick, Rhubarb, Elaterium.

Take Speci^rum Hierae, Rhubarb, Trochisks of Agarick, of each one Scruple;
with the Juice of Ireos make Pills.

Or Take Pill de Rhubarbaro half an Ounce Pill de Mezereo one Scruple, with
Mugwort water make Pills. In diseases which have their being from moistness,
purge with Pills: and in those affects which are caused by emptiness or
dryness, purge with potions. Fasten a cupping-glass to the belly with a great
flame, and also to the navel, especially if the swelling be flatulent. Make an
issue on the inside of each leg a handful breadth below the knee. Take Specierum
Diambrae, Diamosci Dulcis, Diacalamenti, Diacinnamomi, Diacimini, Troch. de
Myrrha, of each 2 drams; Sugar one Pound, with Bettony water make Lozenges:
Take of them two hours before Meals. Apply to the bottom of the belly, as hot
as may be endured, a little bag of Camomile, Cummin, and Melilote, boiled in
Oil of Rue. Anoint the belly and secret parts with Vnguentum Agrippae, and
Vnguentum AREGON, mingling therewith Oil of Ireos. Cover the lower parts of the
belly with the plaster of Bay Berries; or with a Cataplasm made of Cummin,
Camomile, Briony Roots, adding thereto Cows and Goats dung. Our Moderns ascribe
a great virtue to Tobacco water distilled and poured into the Womb by a
Metrenchyta, Take of Baum, Southern wood, Organ, Wormwood, Calamint,
Bay Leaves, Marjoram, of each one handful; Juniper Berries 4 drams, with water
make a Decoction: Of this may be made Fomentations, Injections and Insessions.
Make Pessaries of Styrax, Aloes, with the Roots of Dictam, Aristolochia, and
Gentian. Instead of this you may use the Pessary prescribed page 130. Let her
take of Electuarium Aromaticum, Diasatyrion, and Eringo Roots condited, every
Morning.

The air must be hot and dry; Moderate exercise is allowed. Much sleep is
forbidden. She may eat the flesh of Partridges, Larks, Chickens,
Mountain-birds, Hares, Conies, etc. Let her drink be thin Wine.

CHAP. XI. Of the Mola, or False Conception.
THis disease, is called of the Greeks MVLE, and the cause of this denomination
is taken from the load or heavy weight of it, it being a Mole, or great lump of
hard flesh burdening the Womb.

It is defined to be an inarticulate piece of flesh without form, begotten in
the Matrix, as it were a true Conception: In which definition we are to note
two things. First, in that a Mole is said to be inarticulate, and without form,
it differs from Monsters, which are both Formata and Articulata. Secondly, it
is said to be, as it were, a true Conception, which puts a difference between a
true Conception and a Mole; which difference holds good three ways. First, in
the Genus, in that a Mole cannot be said to be animal. S^condly, in the
Species, because it has no humane figure, and bears not the Character of a
man. Thirdly, in the Individuum, for it has no affinity with the Parent,
either in the whole Body, or any Particle of the same

Cause. About the cause of this affect, amongst learned Authors I find variety
of Judgments. Some are of opinion, that if the Woman's seed goes into the Womb
and not the Man's, thereof is the Mole produced. Others there be that affirm it
is engendered of the menstruous Blood: But if these two were granted, then Maids
by having their Courses, or through nocturnal polutions might be subject unto
the same, which never any yet were. The true cause of this fleshy Mole proceeds
both from the Man, and from the Woman, from corrupt or Barren Seed in the Man,
and from the menstruous Blood in the Woman both mixed together in the Cavity of
the Womb; where Nature finding her self weak (yet desiring to maintain the
perpetuity of her Spe^ies) labors to bring forth a vicious Conception rather
than non^. And so instead of a living Creature, generates a lump of ^lesh.

Signs. The signs of a Mole are these. The Months are suppressed, the appetite is
depraved, the breasts swell, and the Belly is puffed up and waxes hard. Thus
far the signs of a breeding Woman, and of one that bears a Mole, are all one;
I will now show you how they differ.

The first sign of difference is taken from the motion of a Mole; it may be
felt to move in the Womb before the third Month, which the Infant cannot: Yet
that motion cannot be understood of any intelligent power in the Mole, but of
the faculty of the Womb, and of the seminal Spirits diffused through the
substance of the Mole; for it lives not a life animal, but vegitative in the
manner of a Plant. Secondly, in a Mole, the belly is suddenly puffed up; but in a
true Conception the belly is first retracted, and then rises again by degrees.
Thirdly, the belly being pressed with the hand, the Mole gives way; and the hand
being taken away, it returns to the place again: But a Child in the Womb,
though pressed with the hand, moves not presently; and being removed, returns
slowly, or not at all. Lastly, the Child continues in the Womb not above Eleven
Months; but a Mole continues some times four or five Years, more or less,
according as it is fastened in the Matrix. I have known when a Mole has fallen
away in four or five Months.

If it remains until the Eleventh Month, the legs wax feeble, and the whole
body consumes; only the swelling of the belly still increases, which makes
some think they are Hydropical, though there be little reason for it; for in
the Dropsy le^s swell and grow big, but in a Mole they consume, and wither.

Prognostics. If at the delivery of a Mole the Flux of Blood be great, it
shows the more danger; because the parts of nutrition having been vitiated by
the flowing back of the superfluous humors, whereby the natural heat is
consumed, and then parting with so much blood, the Woman thereby is so weakened
in all her facult^es, that she can hardly subsist.

Cure. We are taught in the School of Hippocrates, that Phlebotomy causes
abortion, by taking away that nourishment, which should sustain the life of the
Child. Wherefore, that this vicious Conception may be deprived of that
vegetative sap by which it lives; open the liver vein, and then the Saphena on
both feet. Fasten Cupping glasses to the loins and sides of the belly: which
done, let the Uterine parts be first Mollified, and then the expulsive faculty
provoked to expel the burden.

To laxate the Ligatures of the Male; Take Mallows with the roots, 3 handfuls;
Camomile, Melilote, Pellitory of the wall, Violet leaves, Mercury, Roots of
Fennel, Parsley, of each 2 handfuls, Line-seed, Fenugreek, of each one pound,
boil them in water and let her sit therein up to the Navel. At the going out of
the Bath, Anoint the Privities and Reins with this Unguent following. Take oil
of Camomile, Lillies, and sweet Almonds, of each one Ounce; fresh Butter,
Labdani, Ammoniaci, of each half an Ounce; with the Oil of Lineseed, make an
Unguent. Or instead of this, may be used Unguentum Agrippae, or Dialthaea. Take
of Mercury, Roots of Althea, of each half a handful; Fol. Branchae Ursinae,
half a handful; Lineseed, Barley-meal, of each 6 ounces; boil all these with
Water and Honey, and make a Plaster. Make Pessaries of the Gum Galbanum,
Bdelium, Ammoniacum, Figs, Hogssuet, and Honey.

After the ligaments of the Mole are loosed; let the expulsive faculty be
stirred up to expel the Mole; for effecting of which, all Medicaments may be
used which are proper to bring down the Courses. Take Troch de Myrrha one
Ounce, Castor, Aristolochia, Gentians, Dictam, of each half an ounce; make a
Powder, take one dram in 4 ounces of Mugwort water. Take of Hypericon,
Calamint, Pennyroyal, Bettony, Hyssop, Sage, Horehound, Valerian, Madder,
Savine, with water make a decoction, take 3 ounces of it, with one ounce and
half of Syrup of Feverfew. Take of Mugwort, Myrrh, Gentian, Pil. Coch. of each
4 Scruples; Rue, Pennyroyal, Saggapenum, Opopanax, of each half a dram;
Assafoetida, Cinnamon, Juniper Berries, Borage, of each one dra^, with the
juice of Savine make Pills to be taken of every Morning. Make Insessions of
Hyssop, Bay Leaves, Assrum, Calamint, Bay Berries, Camomile, Mugwort, Savine.
Take of Sagapenum, Marjoram, Gentian, Savine, Cloves, Nutmeg, Bay Berries, of
each 2 Scruples; Galbanum one dram, Hierae Picrae, Black Hellebore, of each one
Scruple; with Turpentine make a Pessary. But if these things prove not
available; then must the Mole be drawn away with an instrument put up into the
Womb, called a Pes Griphius; which may be done with no great danger, if it be
performed by a skilful Surgeon.

After the delivery of the Mole (by reason that the Woman has parted with much
blood already) let the flux of blood be stayed as soon as may be.

Fasten Cupping-glasses to the shoulder, and ligatures to the arms. If these
help not; open the Liver-vein on, the right arm.

The air shall be moderately hot and dry; and her diet such as does molify and
attenuate, she may drink White Wind.

CHAP. XII. Of the Signs of Conception.
IGnorance makes Women become Murderers to the Fruit of their own Bodies; many
having Conceived, and thereupon finding their Bodies to be out of Order, and
not knowing rightly the Cause, do either run to the Shop of their own Conceit,
and take what they think fit; or else (as the Custom is) they send to the
Physician for Cure; and he perceiving not the Cause of their Grief, (seeing
that no certain Judgment can be given by the Urine) prescribes what he thinks
best, perhaps some strong Diuretical, or Cathartical Potion, whereby the
Conception is destroyed. Wherefore Hippocrates says, There is a Necessity that
Women should be instructed in the Knowledge of Conception, that the Parent, as
well as the Child, might be saved from Danger. I will therefore give you some
Instructions by which every one may know whether she be with Child or not. The
signs of Conception shall be taken from the Woman, from the Urine, from the
Infant, and from Experiment.

Signs collected from the Woman are these; The first day after Conception, she
feels a light Quivering or Chilness running through the Whole Body; a tickling
in the Womb, and a little Pain in the lower parts of the Belly. Ten or twelve
Days after, the Head is affected with Giddiness, the Eyes with a Dimnes of
Sight: Then follows Red Pimples in the Face, with a Blue Circle about the Eyes;
the Breasts swell and grow hard with some pain and pricking in them: The Belly
suddenly sinketh and rises again by Degrees, with a hardness about the Navel.
The Nipples af the Brest's wax Red; the Heart beats inordinately, the Natural
appetite is Dejected, yet die has a longing Desire after strange Meats. The
neck of the Womb is retraced, that it can hardly be felt with the Finger being
put up; and this is an infallible Sign. She is suddenly Merry, and as soon
Melancholy; her Monthly Courses are stayed without any Evident Cause: The
Excrements of the Guts are unaccustomedly retained by the Womb pressing the
great Gut; and her Desire to Venus is abated.

The surest Sign is taken from the Infant, which begins to move in, the Womb
the third or fourth Month; and that not in the manner of a Mole, from one side
to another, Rushing like a Stone; but mildly, as may be perceived by applying
the Hand hot on the Belly.

Signs taken from the Urine. The best Clerks do affirm that the Urine of a
Woman with Child is white, and has little Motes, like those in the Sunbeams,
ascending and descending in it, and a Cloud swimming aloft of an Opal Color;
the Sediment being divided by shaking of the Urine, appears like carded Wool.
In the middle of her time, the Urine turns Yellow, next Red, and lastly
Black, with a Red Cloud. Signs taken from Experiment: At Night going to Bed,
let her drink Water and Honey; afterward if she feels a beating pain in her
Belly, and about her Navel, she has Conceived. Or let her take the juice of
Carduus, and if she Vomiteth it up, it is a sign of Conception? cast a clean
Needle into Woman's Urine, put into a Basin, let it stand all Night, and in the
Morning if it be colored with red Spots, she has Conceived; but if it be
blacker, or rusty, she has not.

Signs taken from the Sex to show whether it be Male or Female. Being with
Child of a Male, the right Breast swells first; the right Eye is more lively
than the left; her Face Well colored; because such as the Blood is, such is
the Color; and the Male is conceived of purer Blood, and of more perfect Seed
than the Female. Red Motes in the Urine, settling down to the Sediment,
foretells that a Male is conceived; but if they be white, a Female. Put the
Woman's Urine which is with Child, into a Glass Bottle, let it stand close stopped
three days; then strain it through a fine Cloth, and you shall find littte
living Creatures; if they be Red, it is a Male, if White a Female. To conclude
the mod certain Sign to give Credit unto is the motion of the Infant: For the
Male moves in the third Month, ad the Famale in the fourth,

CHAP XIII. Of Untimely Birth.
WHen the Fruit of the Womb comes forth before the Seventh Month (that is
before it comes to Maturity) it is said to be Abortive: And in effect the Child
proves Abortive (I mean not to Live) if it be Born in the eighth Month. And why
Children born in the seventh, and ninth Month, may Live, and not in the eighth
Month, may seem strange yet it is true: The cause hereof by some, is ascribed
unto the Planet, under which the Child is born; for every Month, from the
Conception to the Birth, is Governed by his proper Planet: And in the Eighth
Month Saturn does Predominate, which is cold and dry, and coldness being an
Enemy unto Life destroys the Nature of the Child. Hippocrates gives a better
Reason; The Infant being every way perfect, and complete in the Seventh Month,
desires more Air and Nutriment than it had before, which because he cannot
obtain, he labors for a Passage to go out; and if his Spirits be weak and
faint, and have not Strength sufficient to break the Membranes and come forth,
it is decreed by Nature that he should continue in the Womb until the 9th
Month, that, in that time his wearied Spirits might be again Strengthened and
Refreshed; but if he returns to strive again in the eighth Month, and be born,
he cannot Live, because the day of his Birth is either past, or to come; for in
the eighth Month, says Avicen, he is Weak and Infirm, and therefore being then
cast into cold Air, his Spirits cannot but sink.

Cause. Untimely Birth may be caused by Cold; for as it makes the Fruit of the
Tree to wither and fall down before it be Ripe, so does it Nip the Fruit of the
Womb before it comes to full Perfection, and make it to be Abortive. Sometimes
by Humidity, weakening the Faculty that the Fruit cannot be restrained until
the due time; by Dryness or Emptiness, defrauding the Child of his Nourishment;
by one of the three Alvine Fluxes; by Phlebotomy and other Evacuations; by
Inflammations of the Womb, and by other sharp Diseases. Sometimes it is caused
by Joy, Laughter, Anger, and especially by Fear; for in all, but in that
especially, the Heat forsakes the Womb, and runs to the Heart, to help there,
and so the Cold strikes into the Matrix, whereby the Ligaments are Relaxt, and
so Abortion follows. Wherefore Plato in his time, Commanded that the Women
should shun all Temptations of great Joy and Pleasure, and likewise avoid all
Occasions of Fear and Grief. Abortion also may be caused by the Corruption of
the Air; by filthy Odours, and especially by the smell of the Snuff of a
Candle; also by Falls, Blows, violent Exercise, Leaping, Dancing, etc.

Signs. Signs of future Abortion, are Extenuation of the Breasts, with a Flux of
watrish milk; pain in the Womb, heaviness in the Head, unaccustomed Weariness
in the Hips, and Thighs, flowing of the Courses. Signs foretelling the Fruit to
be dead in the Womb, are hollowness of the Eyes, grief in the Head, anguish,
horrors, paleness of the Face and Lips, gnawing of the Stomach, no motion of
the Infant, coldness and looseness of the mouth of the Womb; the thickness of
the Belly? which was above, is fallen down; watrish and bloody Excrements comes
from the Matrix.

CHAP. XIV. Direction for Breeding Women.
THe prevention of Untimely Birth consists in the taking away of the
aforementioned Causes, which must be effected both before and after Conception.

Before Conception, If the Body be over hot, Cold, Dry or Moist, correct it
with the Contraries; if Cacochimical, Purge it; if Plethorical, open the Liver
Vein; if too Gross, Extenuate it; if too Lean, Corroborate and Nourish it; all
Diseases of the Womb must be removed, as I have showed.

After Conception, let the Air be Temperate, Sleep not overmuch; avoid
Watching, Exercise of Body, Passions of the Mind, loud Clamours and filthy
Smells: Sweet Odours also are to be rejected of those that are Hysterical.
Abstain from all things which provoke either the Urine or Courses, also from
Salt, sharp and windy Meats; a moderate Diet shall be observed.

If the Excrements of the Guts be retained, Lenifie the Belly with Clysters
made of the Decoction of Mallows, Violets, with Sugar, and common Oil: Or make
Broth with Borrage, Bugloss, Beets, Mallows, taking in the same a little
Manna. On the Contrary; if she be troubled with Looseness of the Belly, let it
not be frayed without the Judgment of a Physician: for all Uterine Fluxes have
a malign Quality in them, which must be Evacuated before the Flux be stayed.

The Cough is another Accident which accompanies breeding Women, and puts them
into great danger of Miscarrying, so by continual Distillation falling from the
Brain; to prevent which, shave away the Hair on the Coronal, and Sagittal
Commissure, and apply thereon this Plaster: Take Resinae, half an Ounce;
Ladani one Dram; Citron-peels, Ligni Aloes Olibani, of each one Scruple;
Stirachis Liquidae, et Siccae, a sufficient Quantity: dissolve the Gums in
Vinegar, and make a Plaster. At night going to Bed, let her take the Fume of
these* Trochisks cast upon the Coals. Take of Frankincense, Stirax, powder of
Red Roses, of each one dram and a half, Sandarachae, 3 Drams; Mastick,
Benjamin, Amber, of each one Dram, with Turpentine make Trochisks. Apply a
Cautery to the Nape of the Neck; and every Night let her take of these Pills
following. Take Hypocistidis, Terrae Sigillatae, fine Bole, of each half an
Ounce; Bistort, Acatiae, Stinacis Calamitae, of each two drams; Cloves one
Dram; with Syrup of Mirtles make Pills.

In breeding Women there is a corrupted matter generated, which flowing to the
ventricle dejecteth the appetite and causes vomitting: and the stomach being
weak, not able to digest this matter, so^etime sends it unto the guts, whereby
is caused a flux of the belly, which greatly stirs up the faculty of the
Womb. For the eschewing therefore of all these dangers, the stomach shall be
corroborated as follows.

Take Ligni Aloes, Nutmeg, of each one dram, Mace, Cloves, Mastick, ^adanum, of
each 2 Scruples; Oil of Spike, one Ounce; Musk 2 grains, Oil of Mastick,
Quinces, Wormwood, of each half an Ounce; make an Unguent for the stomach, to
be applied before Meals. Instead hereof may be used Cerotum Stomachale Galeni.
Take of conserve of Borage, Bugloss, Anthos, of each half an Ounce; Confect. de
Hyacintho, Lemon Pills condited, Specierum Diamarg. Pulv. de Gemmis, of each 2
drams; Nutmeg, Diambrae, of each 2 Scruples; Peony-Roots, D^acoralli, of each
one dram; with Syrup of Roses make an Electuary of which she shall take twice a
day, two hours before Meals. Another accident which perplexeth Women with
Child, is swelling of the legs, which happens the first three Months, by
superfluous humors falling down from the stomach and liver; for the cure
whereof, Take of Oil of Roses 2 drams, Salt, Vinegar of each a dram; shake them
altogether until the salt be dissolved, and anoint the legs hot therewith,
chafing it in with the hand. But purging is more proper, if it may be done
without danger, as it may in the fourth, 5th and 6th Month of pregnation: for a
Child in the Womb is compared to an Apple on the tree. The first three months
it is weak and tender, subject with the Apple to fall away: but afterward the
Membranes being strengthened, the fruit remains firmly fattened in the Womb,
not apt to mischances; and so it continues, until the seventh month; then
growing near the time of maturity, the ligaments are again relaxt (like unto
the Apple that is almost ripe) and grow looser every day until the time of
delivery. If therefore her Body has need of purging, she way purge without
danger in the 4th, 5th, or 6th month; but not before, nor after, unless in some
sharp disease, in which the Mother and Child both are like to perish. Apply
Plasters and Unguents to the reins, to strengthen the fruit of the Womb. Take
of Gum Arabic, Galangale, Bistort, Hypocistid, Storax, of each one dram; Fine
bole, Nutmeg, Mastick, Belaust, Sang, Draconis, Myrtle-berries one dram and
half; Wax and Turpentine, a sufficient quantity. Make a Plaster: Apply it to
the reins in the Winter time; and remove it every 14 days, lest the reins be
over hot therewith. In the interim anoint the privities and reins with
Vnguentum Comitissae. But if it be summer time, and the reins hot, this
plaster following is more proper. Take of red Roses one pound, Mastick, red
Sanders, of each 2 drams, Bole-armeny, red Coral, Bistort, of each one dram:
Pomgranate Pills, prepared Coriander, of each 2 drams and half; Barberries two
Scruples, Oil of Mastick and Quinces, of each one Ounce; juice of Plantain 2
drams: with Pitch make a Plaster, anoint the reins also with Vnguentum
Sandalinum. Once every week wash the reins with two parts of Rose water and one
part of White Wind, mingled together and warmed at the fire: this will assuage
the heat of the reins, and disperse the Oil of the Plaster out of the pores of
the skin, and cause the Ointment or Plaster, the sooner to penetrate and,
strengthen the Womb. Some are of opinion on that as long as the Loadstone is
laid to the navel, it keeps the Woman from abortion. The like also is
recorded of the stone Aetites being hanged about the Neck. The same virtue has
the stone Samius.

CHAP. XV. Directions to be observed by Women at the time of their falling in
Labor, in order to their safe Delivery; with Directions for Midwifes.
ANd thus having given necessary Directions to Childbearing Women how to
govern themselves during the time of their Pregnancy, I shall now add what is
necessary for them to observe in order to their Delivery.

The time of Birth drawing near, let the woman send for a skilful Midwife, and
that rather too soon than too late; against which time let her prepare a
Pallet-Bed or Couch, and place it near the fire, that the Midwife and her
Assistants may pass round, and help on every side, as occasion requires, having
change of Linen ready, and a small Cricket or little Log to rest her feet
against, she having more force when they are bowed, than when they are
otherwise.

Having thus provided, when the woman feels her pains come, if the weather be
not very cold, let her walk leisurely about the room, resting her self by turns
upon the Bed, and so expect the coming down of her water, which is a Humor
contracted in one of the outward Membranes, and flows thence when it is broke
by the struggling of the Child, there being no direct time affixed for its
Efflux, though generally it flows not above two hours before the Birth. Motion
likewise will cause the Womb to open and dilate it self, when lying long in Bed
will be uneasy; yet if she be very weak, she may take some gentle Cordial to
refresh her self, if ^er pains will permit.

If her Travel be tedious, she may revive her Spirits with taking Broth or
Chickens, or Mut^on, or she may take a poach'd Egg; but must ^ake heed of
taking any thing to excess.

As for the posture women are delivere'd in, ^hey are diverse; some lying in
their Beds, there is sitting in a Chair, supported and held ^y others, or resting
upon the side of the Bed ^r Chair; some again upon their Knees, be^^g;
supported under their Arms; but the most ^^fe and commodious way is in the Bed;
and ^^en the Midwife ought to observe these follow^^g Rules: Let her lay the
woman upon her ^ack, her Head a little raised by the help of a ^^llow, having
the like help to support her ^^eins and Buttocks, and that her Rump lie ^^gh;
for if she lie low, she cannot be well ^livered: Then let her keep her Knees
and ^highs as far asunder as she can, her legs bow^^ together; her Buttocks,
the Soles of her Feet, and Heels, being fixed upon a little Log of Timber
placed for that purpose, that she may the better strain: And in case her Back
be very weak, a Swathing-band may be cast under it, the band being four double,
and about twelve Inches broad, and this must be held by two Persons, who with
steady hands and equal motion must raise her up at the time her pains happen;
but if they be not exact in their motion, it is better let alone; and at the
same time let two women hold her Shoulders, that she may then strain out the
birth with more advantage; and then to facilitate it, let a woman stroke or
press the upper part of her Belly gently, and by degrees. Nor must the woman
her self be faint-hearted, but of a good Courage, forcing her self, by
straining and stopping her breath.

In case of Delivery, the Midwife must wait with Patience, till the Child's
Head, or other Members, burst the Membrane; for if through ignorance, or haste
to be gone to other Women, as some have done, the Midwife tear the Membrane
with her Nails, she endangers both the Woman and the Child; for it lying dry,
and wanting that slipperiness that should make it easy, it comes forth with
greater pain.

When the Head appears, the Midwife must gently hold it between her two hands,
and draw the Child at such times as the Woman's pangs are upon her, and at no
other, slipping by degrees her four fingers under its Armpits, not using a
rough hand in drawing it forth, lest by that means the tender Infant receive
any Deformity of Body.

As soon as the Child is taken forth, which is for the most part with its Face
downwards, let it be laid upon its back, that it may more freely receive
external Respiration; then cut the Navel-string about three Inches from the
body, tying that end which adheres to the belly, with a silken string, as near
as you can, then cover the Head and Stomach of the Child well, suffering
nothing to come upon the Face.

The Child being thus drawn forth, and in health, lay it aside, and let the
Midwife regard the Patient, in drawing forth the Secundine: And this she may do
by wagging and stirring them up and down, and afterward with a gentle hand
drawing them forth; and if the work be difficult let the Woman hold Salt in her
hands, shut them close, and breathe hard into them, and thereby she shall know
whether the Membranes be broken or not: It may be also known by causing her to
strain or vomit, by putting one Finger down her Throat, or by straining or
moving her lower parts, but let all be done out of hand. If this fail, let her
take a draught of raw Elder-water, or the Yolk of a new-laid Egg, or smell to a
piece of Assafoetida, especially if she be troubled with the Wind-Cholick. If
she happen to take cold, it is a great Obstruction to the coming down of she
Secundines, and in such cases the Midwife ought to chafe the woman's belly
gently, which breaks not only the Wind, but obliges the Secundines to come
down,; but these proving ineffectual, the Midwife must dilate with her Hand the
exterior Orifice of the Womb, and gently draw it forth.

Having now discoursed of common Births, or such as for the most part are
easy, I shall now give Directions in case of Extremity.

CHAP. XVI. In Case of Extremity, what ought to be Observed, especially to
Women, who in their Travel are accompanied with an Efflux of Blood, Convulsion,
or Fits of the Wind.
IF the VVomans Labor be hard and difficult, greater Regard must be had then
at other times: And first of all, the situation of the Womb, and her posture
of lying, must be cross the Bed, being held by those that are Strong, to
prevent her slipping down, or moving her self in the operation of the
Man-midwife, or Chyrurgeon; her Thighs must be put asunder as wide as may be,
and so held, whilst her Legs bends backward toward her Hips; her Head leaning
upon a Bolster, and the Reins of her Back supported after the same manner; her
Rump and Buttocks being lifted up, observing to cover her Stomach, Belly and
Thighs, with warm Linen, to keep them from the Cold.

The Woman being in this posture, let the Operator put up his Hand, if he finds
the neck of the Womb dilated, and remove the contracted Blood that obstructs
the passage of the Birth; and having by degrees gently made way, let him
tenderly move the Infant, his hand being first anointed with sweet Butter, or a
harmless Pomatum; and if the Waters are not come down, then without any
difficulty may they be let forth, when if the Infant should attempt to break
forth with the head foremost o^ cross, he may gently turn it to find the Feet,
which having done, let him draw forth one, and fasten it to a Ribbon, then put
it up again, and by degrees find the other, when bringing them as close and
even as may be, and between whiles, letting the Woman breathe, urging her to
strain in helping Nature to perfect the Birth, that he may draw it forth; and
the better to do it, and that his hold may be surer, he must fasten or wrap a
Linen Cloth about the Child's Thighs, observing to bring it into the World with
it is Face downward.

In case of a Flux of Blood, if the ne^^ of the Womb be open, it must be
considered, whether the Infant or the Secundi^^s come first, which the latter
sometimes happening to do, stops the Mouth of the Womb, and hinders the Birth,
to the endangering both the Woman and Child; but in this case the Secundine
must be removed by a swift turn, and indeed they have by their so coming down,
deceived many, who feeling their softness, supposed the Womb was not dilated,
and by this means the Woman and Child, or at least the latter, has been lost:
The Secundines removed, the Child must be sought for, and drawn forth, as has
been directed: And if in such a Case the Woman or Child dye, the Midwife or
Chyrurgeon is blameless, because they did their true endeavor.

If it appear upon enquiry, that the Secundine comes first, let the Woman be
delivered with all convenient Expedition, because a great flux of Blood will
follow, for then the Veins are opened, and upon this account two things are to
be considered;

First, The manner of the Secundines advancing, whether it be much or little;
if the former, and the head of the Child appear first, it must be guided and
directed toward the neck of the Womb, as in case of Natural Births; but if
there appear any diff^culty in the Delivery, the best way is to search for the
Fe^^ and thereby draw it forth; but if the latter, the Secundines may be put
back with a gentle hand, and the Child first taken forth.

But if the Secundine be far advanced, so that it cannot be put back, and the
Child follow it close, then are the Secundines to be taken forth with much
care, as swift as may be, and laid aside without cutting the Entrail that is
fastened to them, for thereby you may be guided to the Infant, which, whether
alive or dead, must be drawn forth by the Feet, with all Celerity, though it is
not to be acted, unless in Case of great Necessity, for in other Cases the
Secundine ought to come last.

And in drawing forth a dead Child, let these Directions be carefully heeded by
the Chyrurgeon, viz. If the Child be found dead with its Head foremost, the
Delivery w^ll be the more difficult; for it is an apparent Sign the Woman's
Strength begins to fall h^^ and that the Child being Dead, and wanting its
Natural Force, can be no ways assisting to its Delivery; wherefore the most
certain and safe way is, tor the Chyrurgeon to put up his left Hand, sliding it
as hollow in the Palm as he can, into the Neck of the Womb, and into the lower
part thereof, toward the Feet, and that between the Head of the Infant, and
the Neck of the Matrix; when having a Hook in the right Hand, couch it close,
and slit it up above the left Hand, between the Head of the Child, and the flat
of his Hand, fixing it in the Bone of the Temple toward the Eye; or for want
of convenient coming at these, in the oceipital Bone; observe still to keep the
left hand in its place; and with it gently moving and stirring the Head; and so
with the right Hand and Hook, draw the Child forward Admonishing the Woman to
put forth her utmost Strength, still drawing when the Woman's pangs are upon
her. The Head being drawn forth, he must with all speed slip his hand under the
Armholes of the Child, and take it quite forth, giving these things to the
Woman, viz. A Toast of fine Wheat Bread, in a Quarter of a Pint of Hippocrass
Wine.

Now the former Application and Endeavor failing, when the Woman is in her
Bed, let her receive the ensuing Portion hot, and rest till she feel the
Operation, which is this,

Take blue Figs, to the number of Seven, cut them in pieces, adding to them
Fenugreek, Mother-wort, and Seeds of Rue, of each five Drams; water of
Pennyroyal, and Motherwort, of each six Ounces; boil them till one half be
consumed, and having strained them again, add Trochisks of Myrrh a Dram, and
of Saffron three Grains; sweetning the Liquor with Loaf-Sugar, and spicing it
with Cinnamon.

Having rested upon this, let her Labor again as much as may be, and if she be
not yet successful, make a Suffumation of Castor, Opo^anax, Sulphur, and
Assafoetida, of each half a Dram, beating them into Ponder, and wetting them
with the Juice of Rue until they become stiff, then hum them upon Coals, so
that the Smoke, or the Fume, may only come to the Matrix, and no further.

If these effect not your Desire, then this Emplaister is very fitly to be
apylied, viz. Take of Galbanum an Ounce and a half, Colocynthis without Grains
Two Drams, the Juice of Motherwort and Rue, of each Half an Ounce, and two
ounces of Virgins Bees wax, bruise and melt them together, spreading them as a
Sear-Cloth, to reach from the Navel to Os Pubis, spreading likewise to the
Flanks at the same time, making a convenient Pessary of Wool, closing it in a
Bag of Silk, and dipping it in a Concoction of round Birthwort, Savin,
Colocynthis with Grains, Stavesaker, Black Hellebore, of each a dram, and of
Rue a little ^sprig or two.

But these things not having the desired success, and the Woman's danger
increasing, let the Chyrurgeon use his instruments to dilate and widen the
Womb, to which end the Woman must be set in Chair, so that she may turn her
Crupper as much from its Back as is convenient, drawing up her Legs as close as
she can, but spreading her Thighs as wide as may be, or if she he very weak, it
may be more convenient, that she be laid upon the Bed, with her Head downwards,
her Buttocks raised, and her Legs drawn up as much as can be; at what time the
Chyrurgeon with his Speculum Matricis or his Apertory, may dilate the Womb, and
draw out the Child and Secundines together, if it be possible; which being
done, the Womb must be well washed and anointed, and the Woman laid in her Bed,
and comforted with Spices, and Cordials: This course must be taken in the
delivery of all dead Children, likewise with Moles, Secundines, and false
Births, that will not of themselves come forth in due season; or if the
instruments aforesaid, will not sufficiently widen the Womb, then other
instruments, as the Drakes Bill, and long Pincers, ought to be used.

If it so happen that any Inflammation, Swelling, or congealed Blood, be
contracted in the Matrix, under the Film of those Tumors, either before or
after the Birth, where the matter appears thinner, then let the Midwife with a
Penknife or incision instrument, Launch it; and press out the corruption,
healing it with a Pessary dipped in Oil of Red Roses.

If at any time through cold or some violence, the Child happen to be swelled
in any part, or have contracted a watery Tumor, if it remain alive, such means
must be used as are least injurious to the Child or Mother; but if it be dead,
that Tumor must be let out by incision to facilitate the Birth.

If (as it often happens) that the Child comes with its Feet foremost, and the
Hands, dilating themselves from the Hips, in such case the Midwife must be
provided of necessary Ointments to stroke and anoint the Infant with, to help
its coming forth, lest it return again into the Womb, holding at the same time,
both the Arms of the Infant, close to the Hips, that so it may issue forth
after its manner, but if it prove too big, the Womb must be well anointed. The
Woman may also take sneezing Powder, to make her strain; those that attend, may
gently stroke down her Belly, to make the Birth descend, and keep the Child
from retiring back.

Sometimes it falls out that the Child coming with its Feet foremost, has its
Arms extended above its Head, but the Midwife must not receive it so, but put
it back into the Womb, unless the Passage be extraordinary wide, and then she
must anoint both the Child and the Womb; nor is it safe to draw it forth before
it is put into due form, which must be done after this manner: The Woman must
be laid upon her Back, with her Head depressed, and her Buttocks raised, and
then the Midwife with a gentle hand, must compress the Belly of the Woman,
toward the Midrif, by that means to put back the Infant, observing to turn the
Face, of the Child toward the back of the Mother, raising up its Thighs and
Buttocks toward her Navel, that so the Birth may be more natural.

If a Child happen to come forth with one Foot, the Arm being extended along
the side, and the other Foot turned backward, then must the Woman be instantly
brought to her Bed, and laid in the posture above described, at what time the
Midwife must caresully put back the Foot so appearing, and the Woman rocking
her self from one side to the other, till she find the Child is turned; but she
must not alter her posture, nor turn upon her Face, after which she may expect
her pains, and must have great assistance, and Cordials, to revive and support
her Spirits.

At other times it happens that the Child ^les cross in the Womb, and falls
upon its side; in this case, the Woman must not be urged in her Labor, neither
can any expect the Birth in that manner: Therefore the Midwife, when she finds
it so, she must use great diligence to reduce it to its right form, or at least
to such a form in the Womb, as may make the delivery possible, and most Easy,
by moving the Buttocks, and guiding the Head to the Passage, and if she be
successful herein, let her again try by rocking her self to and fro, and wait
with patience till it change its manner of lying.

Sometimes the Child hastens the Birth, with its Legs and Arms expanded, in
which, as in the former, the Woman must rock her self, but not with violence,
till she find those parts fall to their proper stations, or it may be done by a
gentle compression of the Womb: but if neither of them prevail, the Midwife
with her Hand must close the Legs of the Infant, and if she can come at them,
do the like to the Arms, and so draw it forth; but if it can be reduced of it
self to the posture of a natural Birth, it is better.

If the Infant come forward with both Knees foremost, and the Hands hanging
down upon the Thighs, then must the Midwife put both Knees upward, till the
Feet appear, taking hold of which with her Left Hand, let her keep her Right
Hand on the side of the Child, and in that posture endeavor to bring it forth;
but if she cannot, then must the Woman rock her self till the Child is in a
more convenient posture for Delivery.

Sometimes it happens that the Child presses forward with one arm stretched
upon its thighs, and the other raised over its head, and the feet likewise
stretched out at length in the Womb; in such a case the Midwife must not
attempt to receive the Child in that posture, but must lay the Woman upon the
Bed in the manner before recited, making a soft and gentle Compression upon her
belly, to oblige the Infant to retire; which if it do not, then must the
Midwise thrust it back by the shoulders, and bring the arm that was stretched
above the head to its right place, for certain it is, there is most danger in
these Extremities; and therefore the Midwife must observe to anoint her hands
first, and the womb of the woman, with sweet Butter, or some convenient
Pomatum, thrusting up her hand as near as she can to the arm of the Infant, and
reduce it to the side; but if that cannot so be done, let the woman be laid on
her Bed, there to rest for a while, in which time perhaps the Child may be
reduced to a better posture, which the Midwife finding, she must draw the arms
clos^ to the hips, and so receive it.

If an Infant come with its Buttocks foremost, and almost double, then the
Midwife anointing her hand, must thrust it up, and gently heaving up the
buttocks and the back, strive to turn the head to the passage, but not too
hastily, lest the Infant retiring should shape it worse; and therefore if it
cannot be turned with the hand, the woman must rock her self upon her Bed,
taking such comfortable things as may support her Spirits till she perceive the
Child to turn.

If a Child's neck be bowed, and it comes forward with its shoulders, as it
sometimes happens, and with its hands and feet str^tch'd upwards: Then the
Midwife must gently move the shoulders, that she may direct the head to the
passage; and the better to effect it, the woman must rock her self, as before
directed. These and other the like methods are to be observed in all single
Births: And the same may be observed in case a woman have Twins, or three
Children at a birth, as sometimes happens: For as the single Birth has but one
Natural way, and many Unnatural Forms, even so it may be in double or treble
births: Wherefore in such cases the Midwife must take care to receive that
first, which is nearest the passage, but not letting the other go, lest by
retiring it should change the Form; and when one is born, she must be speedy in
bringing forth the other; and this Birth, if it be in the natural way, is more
easy; because the Children are commonly less than those of a single birth, and
so require a lesser passage; but if this birth comes unnaturally, it is more
dangerous than the other.

In the birth of Twins, let the Midwife be very careful that the Secundines be
naturally brought forth, lest the Womb being delivered of its burden, fall;
and so the Secundine continues there longer than is consistent with the woman's
safety.

But if one of the Twins happen to come with the head, the other with the feet
foremost, then let the Midwife deliver the natural birth first, and then if she
cannot turn the other, draw it out in the posture it presses forward; but if
that with its feet downward be before the other, she may deliver that first,
turning the other aside.

But in this case the Midwife must carfully see that it be not a Monstrous
Birth instead of Twins; as a body with two heads, or two bodies joined
together, which she may soon know, if both the heads come foremost, by putting
up her hand between them, as high as she can; and then if she find they are
Twins, she must gent^y put one of them aside, to make, way for the other;
taking that first which is most advanced, having regard to the other, that she
do not change its situation.

And for the safety of the first Child, as soon as it comes forth out of the
Womb, the Midwife must tie the Navel-Sring, as has been before directed; and
also bind with a large and long Fillet that part of the Navel that is fastened
to the Secundines, the more readily to find them.

The second Infant being born, let the Midwife carefully examine whether there
be not two Secundines, for it sometimes falls out that by the shortness of the
Ligament it retires back, to the prejudice of the woman: Wherefore left the
Womb should close, it is most expedient to hasten them forth with all
convenient speed.

If two Infants are joined together by the Body, as sometimes Monstrously falls
out, then although the Heads should come foremost, yet it is convenient, if
possible, to turn them, and draw them forth by the Feet, observing when they
come to the Hips, to draw them forth as soon as may be: And here great Care
ought to be used in anointing and widening the Passage. But this sort of Births
rarely happening, I shall need to say the less of them: And therefore shall
next show how Women should be Ordered after Delivery.

CHAP. XVII. How Childbearing Women ought to be Ordered after their Delivery.
IF a Woman has had very hard Labor, then after Delivery it is convenient to
wrap her in the Skin of a Sheep taken off before it is cold, putting the fleshy
side to her Reins and Belly, or for want of this, the Skin of a Hare or Coney,
being ^layed off as soon as killed, may be applied to the same Parts; and in so
doing the Dilation made in the Birth will be closed up, and the Melancholy
Blood expelled from those parts: And these may be continued the space of an
hour or two; after which let the Woman be swathed with a fine Linen Cloth,
about a quarter of a Yard in length, chasing her belly before it be Swathed,
with Oil of St. Johnswort, after that raise up the Matrix with a linen Cloth
many times folded, then with a little Pillow or Quilt cover her Flanks, then
place the Swathe somewhat above the Hanches, winding it pretty stiff, applying
at the same time a warm Cloth to her Nipples, and not presently applying
Remedies, to keep back the Milk, by reason the body at such a time is out of
Frame, for there is neither Vein nor Artery which does not strongly beat, and
Remedies to drive back the Milk being of a dissolving Nature, it is improper to
apply them to the Breast during such Disorder, lest by so doing, evil humors be
contracted in the Breast, wherefore twelve hours ought to be at the least
allowed for the Circulation and settlement of the Blood, and what was cast upon
the Lungs by the vehement Agitation during the Labor, to retire to its proper
Receptacles.

A while after Delivery you may make a restrictive of the Yolk of two Eggs and
a quarter of a pint of White Wind, Oil of S. John's Wort, Oil of Roses,
Plantain and Rose Water, of each one Ounce; mix them together, fold a Linen
Cloth, and dip therein, warm it before a gentle Fire, and apply it to the
Breast, and the Pains of those parts will be greatly eased.

She must by no means Sleep presently after Delivery; but about four hours
aften she may take Broth, Caudle, or what other liquid matter is nourishing,
and then if she be disposed to Sleep, it may be safely permitted. And this is
as much, in case of a Natural Birth, as ought immediately to be done.

But in case of Extremity, or an Unnatural Birth, these Rules ought to be
observed. In the first place, let the Woman keep a Temperate Diet, by no means
over-charging her self after such an excessive Evacuation; not being ruled or
giving Credit to unskilful Nurses, who admonish them to feed heartily, the
better to repair the loss of Blood; for that Blood is not for the most part,
pure, but such as has been detained in the Vessels or Membranes, better avoided
for the health of the Woman than kept, unless there happens an extraordinary
Flux of Blood: for if her Nourishment be too much, it may make her liable to a
Fever, and increase the Milk to superfluity, which Curdling, often turns to
Aposthumes.

Wherefore it is requisite, for the first five days especially, that she take
moderately Ponado, broth, Poach'd Eggs, Jelly of Chickens, or Calves Feet,
French Barley-broth, each day some what increasing the quantity; and if she
intend to be Nurse to her Child, she may take a little more than ordinary to
increase the Milk by degrees, which must be of no continuance, but drawn off,
either by the Child or otherwise. In this case likewise, let her have Coriander
or Fennel-seed, boiled in her Barley-broth; but by any means, for the time
specified, let her abstain from Meat: If no Fever trouble her, she may drink
now and then a small quantity of White Wind, or Claret, as also Syrup of
Maidenhair, or any other Syrup that is of an Astringent quality, taking it in
a little water well boiled: And after the fear of a Fever, or contraction of
Humors in the Breast is over, she may be nourished more plentifully with the
broth of Pullets, Capons, Pigeons, Mutton, Veal, etc. Which must not be till
after eight days, from the time of her delivery, at what time the Womb, unless
some accident hinder, has purged it self; it will be then likewise expedient to
give her cold Meats, but let it be sparingly, that so she may the better gather
strength; and let her during the time rest quietly and free from disturbance,
not sleeping in the day time if she can avoid it If there happen any
obstruction in the Evacuation of her Excrement, the following Glister may be
administered.

Take of both the Mallows and Pelletory of the Wall, a handful; Camomile and
Mellilote Flowers, of each a handful; Anniseeds and Fennel Seeds, of each two
Ounces; boil them in the Decoction of a Sheeps-Hea^, and take of this three
Quarters, dissolving in them of common Honey, and Course Sugar, and of New
fresh Butter, two Ounces; strain it well, and Administer it Glisterwise: But if
it does not operate to your mind, then you may take an Ounce of Catholicon.

CHAP. XVIII. How to expel the Cholick from Women in Childbirth, etc.
THese pains frequently afflict the Woman, no less than the pangs of her
Labor, and are by the Ignorant, taken ^any times the one for the other, and
sometimes ^hey both happen at the same instant, which is ^ccasioned by raw,
crude, and watery matter ^n the Stomach, contracted through ill digesti^n; and
while such a pain lasts, the woman's Travel is retarded: Therefore to expel the
^its of the Cholick, Take two Ounces of Oil ^f sweet Almonds, and an ounce of
Cinnamon Water, with three or four drops of Spirit of Ginger, and let the Woman
drink it off; and (...) this do not abate the pains, make a Clyster ^f
Camomile, Baum Leaves, Oil Olive, and ^ew Milk, boiling the former in the
latter; and having strained it very well, administer it ^s it is usual in such
cases; and then Fomenta^ons proper for dispelling of Wind would not ^e amiss.

If the pain prove the Griping of the Guts, and long after Delivery, Then take
of the Root ^f great Comfry a dram, Nutmeg and Peach ^ernels, of each two
scruples; yellow Amber ^ne dram, Ambergreece one scruple; bruise ^em together,
and give them the Woman as ^on as She is laid down, in two or three ^poonfuls
of White Wind, but if it so hap^en that She be Feverish, then let it be (...)
as much warm Broth, etc.

The Conclusion.
AND thus, Courteous Reaeder, we are come to the Conclusion of our Work, having
fully Unravelled the Secrets of Nature in the Generation of Man; which (however
it may be Ridiculed by the profane Wits of the Age) has been the Work and
Study of very Great and Wise, both Philosophers and Physicians in all Ages; as
appears by the Indefatigable Labors of the Great Aristotle, (out of whose
Learned Works we have Extracted this Book) a Man of that Profound Learning and
Science, that Alexander the Great was not Ashamed to own, That he owed more to
him for his Education, than to his Father Philip for his Kingdom: But a Greater
than Aristotle (or Alexander either) has made the Secrets of Nature in the
Wonderful framing of Man in the Womb, the Subject of his Divine Meditations;
even the Royal Prophet David, Psalm 139. -- Thou have possessed my Reins; thou
have covered me in my Mothers Womb, etc.

And now, Reader, you have seen herein that there is not any Malady attends
either the Child in the Womb, or the Mother during her Pregnancy; but Nature
and Art has provided a Remedy, which that they may prove Successful, is the
Design and End of the Compiler.

FINIS.

