ARGVMENTS, Proving that we ought not to part with the MILITIA, TO THE KING,
Nor indeed to any other, but the Honorable House of COMMONS.
1. WE conceive it is Treason to our selves and ours, to put the lives of
Millions, so their estates and liberties, into the power of one man, their
servant, so that the murders, rapes, rapines or abuses, he shall commit, by
himself, or his, are unavoidable, we are also guilty of them, for it is to
sell our Birthrights, (that is the power of our lives, estates and liberties,
which is ours by nature) for a mess of Pottage, or rather for nothing. Esau
was well paid for his, in comparison of our selves, for necessitated to a
famishing, he had sustenance for support. Yet what is his Birthright of
Elder-ship, to what we part with, it was but a point of Opinion, not of Power,
as ours is? But to part with the Militia, is to inslave our selves, and ours,
to the Will of the Wilful, so it is the height of profaneness.

2. It is against the law of Nature, reason, and humane justice, for that he
having such power in his hand, may overthrow us all, ad placitum.

3. It is against the law and will of God, so divine Ordination, that millions
should be at the mercy of one man, their servant, in their lives estates and
liberties; and therefore God excepts against it, and warnes the People against
it, telling them how their king might abuse them, by reason of his too large
betrusted power. vide, 1. Sam. 8. Repented for as a great six, 1. Sam. 12.

4. All our laws then are of no use, and all the blood shed, is as water spilt
upon the ground, lost to no purpose.

5. Quere, If it ought not to be made treason, to bring it in question? For it
is conceived, if delivered in right words, it is an absolute betraying of us,
quite contrary to betrust, and the end of government.

6. Should we connive or consent at the disposure of it to him it were a
treacherous, unnatural, unjust and profane act in us, and we conceive it the
same in them that shall confer it on him, so in him to desire it.

7. Now because we must bestow it somewhere, we cannot conceive where it can be
better or safer bestowed, then where it is, many in likelihood not so soon
agreeing to abuse us, as one, we further conceiving, the careful choice, and
large betrust of the People, will be a strong tie on them etc. Therefore we
entreat the honorable House of Commons, to confine it within the Confines of
their own jurisdiction; and to bestow it in faithful hands, not factious, such
as will not subdue all but themselves, nor indeed any at all, but be in a
readynesse to support all such, (though of different judgments and opinions in
Religion) in their rights and privileges.

8. Had we bestowed it on him by Law, that Law were lawless, because
destructive, and quite contrary to the end of government, that law then were
justly breakable, he resistable, and our safety revocable. It is a breach of
the 6th. Commandment, and selfe-murther, to give power to any to murder us.

9. Yea more, had he bought the power with millions to each individual, it was
an unlawful contract, for defense of life is inst, and justly irrecoverable,
we conclude then as at 7th.

10. That to give [or debate upon giving] the Militia to the King at the end of
twenty years, is very dangerous, and apt to beget an opinion in the people,
that he has some right to it, and that at present it is only kept from him,
for his abusing it, when as in deed and in truth he has no right at all in the
least unto it; neither is it just, or reasonable to betrust him, or any one
single man in the Kingdom with it, Salus populi having already run such
hazards of an utter ruining, by the Militia's being in his single hand, for
which he ought, according to Protestations, Oaths, and Covenants, to be brought
to exemplary, and condign punishment, he being the greatest and most notorious
Delinquent in the whole Kingdom, yea, the original fountain and Wel-Spring of
all the Delinquents in the Kingdom, giving Commissions to all the rest, to
kill, murder and stay the innocent People, whom by oath, duty and office, he
ought to have protected; and therefore his sin and offense more heinous and
capital then any others, yea indeed, then all others that have joined with him.

11. Quere, Whether or no, if the King should have the Militia again, then
whether indeed, have not the Scots the power of it under his name, which only
is used to color the design, that so they may not be seen in it, to desire and
endeavor to be Kings and Lords over England? But the project portends nolesse.

London, June 1646.
FINIS

