A REMONSTRANCE OF THE FIGHT IN LEGORN-ROAD Between the English and the Dutch,
With all the Passages of the Treaty held by the Great Duke of FLORENCE before
the same.

Also many other Particulars, as they were presented to his Excellency the Lord
General CROMWELL, And the Right Honorable The Council of State.

LONDON, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England, 1653.

To his Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL, and the Right Honorable the
Council of State,
Thc humble Remonstrance of Henry Appleton, appointed by the State of England
to Command the Leopard, as also the Bonaventure and Constant Warwick, for the
Convoy of several Merchantmen through the Streights.

Having lost my Journal, it is not possible that I should give your Honors so
particular an Account as I should else have done, however, I shall not omit any
material Passage.

IN the beginning of my Voyage, Captain Cox in the Constant Warwick, contrary
to Order, left my Fleet; arriving at Cales, I found him with three French
Prizes, where he had discharged the Prisoners, sending them to St. Mary Port,
to the end I might not examine them: the Duke of Medina-Coeli hearing of them,
orders, they should be put into the Galleys. The Prisoners petitioned me, that
they might be free from Slavery: I sent my Lieutenant and Minister to the Duke,
who, next day, sent a Colonel of his unto me, and granted me the Prisoners;
whom I dispersed amongst our ships, and afterward discharged at Genoa.

Standing for Genoa, I discovered a great ship near the Shore, and to wind-ward
of me, that chased the Warwick, who was ahead and to wind-ward of him; I tacked
and stood with him, fired a gun to give the Warwick notice, but he would not
hear: it proved a Frenchman, who putting out his Colors at the
main-top-masthead, tacked and weathered me; I fired many guns at him, several
of the shot took place, but she our-sailed me, not answering with one gun.
Standing in afterward for the Port, the Warwick meets me with a Letter from
our Merchants, which advised me of a Frenchman of War of Thirty six guns, that
did much hurt upon the Coast, and then was as they supposed in Savona Bay: But
wheresoever, he was within their Territories, and had no rope made fast to the
Shore; the Republique would be very glad if I could destroy him. This was that
very ship I chased, and had the Warwick but assisted me, through the blessing
of the Lord I should undoubtedly have carried him.

Arriving at Legorn, the Warwick discovered a Sail, weighs anchor without my
order, and takes a French Sattee coming into the Road. The great Duke demands
restitution of this Sattee, as being taken in his Port: I called a Consultation
hereupon, but Captain Wetheridge and Captain Cox would by no means agree to it,
giving me under their hands, that they would answer it to your Honors. I then
returned this Answer to his Highness, That as the Vessel was not taken by my
Order, so I could not restore it of my self. Amongst other Wine the Sattee had
in her several chests of Frontignac, and other Presents for his Highness, of
which Captain Cox sent me a couple; but I immediately sent them ashore to Mr.
Longland for the Governor, advising Captain Cox, that he should upon no terms
keep away any thing that belonged to the great Dukc. He said, That there was
all, and so I answered the Messenger. The Duke finding himself affronted in his
Port, and thus abused in the detaining of his Goods, falls into choler with me
for the same, and charges his Resident in England to lament of me unto your
Honors. And I found afterward, that he had reason to be angry, though not with
me; for Captain Cox kept several of those Presents which were sent the great
Duke, and did dispose of them, as he confessed to Colonel Thompson here in
London.

At Naples I made Provision for my Squadron, and passing thence through the
Vare of Messina, I left the Bonaventure to bring the ship Agreement within
sight of Zant, and to meet me with the Mary-Rose at Cyprus.

Betwixt Cerigo and Candy, the Warwick takes a French Sattee, and after four or
five hours, when he had ransackt her enough, he lay by the Lee to stay for me.
In her there was a Chouse or Messenger sent from the Grand Seignior to the King
of Tunice, who had a Pass from Sir Thomas Bendish, the which when I read, I
used what means I could for the restoring of his Goods and Clothes; used him
with all civility, landed him, as he desired, on the Island of Candy: all which
he thankfully acknowledged in his Certificate which I sent to Sir Thomas
Bendish.

Captain Witheridge going into Zant contrary to Order, the Mary-Rose plies her
Voyage for Cyprus alone, so I sent the Warwick with her; and the Richard and
William for Scandaroon, ordering him to come to Smirna: upon my arrival at
Smirna, I found the Bonaventure in the Port: so soon as I had got provision for
my Fleet, and the Merchants ships were ready, I set sail.

Being at Jackamoes Point, the Consuls man brings me a Letter from Sir Thomas
Bendish; wherein, in compliance with the Viziers solicitation to him, he did
desire I would convoy their Fleet for Candy, an Officer of the Viziers being
come down on purpose, and did expect my answer. I wrote a Letter to Sir Thomas
Bendish in excuse, telling him how much time I had already lost in waiting for
Provisions in their Port, and what necessity there lay upon me to be gone; and
withal, how ready I should have been to have done the Grand Seignior service,
as being a Prince in Amity with our Commonwealth, wherein his Desires and your
Honors Commands were not inconsistent, but then immediately set sail, not
waiting a reply.

Off Cerigo the Warwick takes a French Sattee, but comes not near me till the
next day, when asking for her, he told me she had nothing in her, but a little
Money (bringing almost Two hundred Chickeens of Gold) and empty Cask, so of
himself he gave her to the French again.

At Zant I met with Captain Badily going for Scanderoone, I left the Warwick to
convoy the ships that were almost laden in that Port, to Melsina, whether they
came as I was going out of the Vare, they and the Phoenix in their company,
never acquainting me with their intentions or bidding me farewell, stood away
for England.

Having received several Letters from the Merchants at Naples, that a great
quantity of Silk lay ready, waiting for our coming, sending the Benaventure
with the Mary to Legorn, to the end that she, the Victory at Genoa, and any
other ships bound homewards, might be in a readiness when I should call, I went
into Naples.

Between this place and Legorn a Messenger from Mr. Longland brings a Letter to
me, wherein was intimated the Hostility the Dutch had offered to our Ships in
our own Seas, whilst their Ambassadors were in treaty with us.

Coming to Legorn he brought me your Honors Letter, wherein you Ordered me to
consult with him what was best to do; Accordingly I did, and he then gave it me
under his hand, That it was safest to stay in that Port till the next Post
came: Before that time Fourteen Sail of the Dutch came into the Road; so soon
as I espied them, I put to Sea with the Bonaventure and the four Merchants
ships, and towed the Leopard through the Fleet, there being no Wind at all,
expecting the Engaging; but seeing they came to Anchor in a friendly manner, I
towed a second time amongst them, and then anchored betwixt them and the Shore,
our Merchants ships being betwixt me and the Shore: while they were under sail
and I close by, their Admiral fired Nine Guns without shot, being persuaded by
my Officers, it was a Salute to me, I answered him with Nine shotted, not
having any drawn; but afterward he made that pass for a Salute to the Port.
Understanding that the Difference grew higher, it was agreed on by the
Commanders and the Merchants, to unlade all fine Goods; but this the Dutch
forbad, however through the assistance of the Governor, we landed what we
pleased.

The Warwick having carreen'd at Genoa, I sent her by the advice of Mr.
Longland, to find out Captain Badily, and to acquaint him with the Breach with
Holland; the Dutch saying, That at that time they had received Order to fight
us.

The Dutch had sent several times to Florence, to solicit the Duke to deny
Protection to our ships, and gave high words, That they had Orders from their
Masters to sink or burn us in the Road; Hereupon the Governors sent to Mr.
Longland to acquaint me, That if I expected Protection from the Duke, I must
come into the Mould, or else they would not fire a Gun in my favor; so Mr.
Longland being aboard at a Consultation, it was agreed we should come into the
Mould, and so we did.

Some few days after, the Colonel of the Town sent Mr. Longland to acquaint me
with these Propositions the Dutch had made unto his Highness; viz.

That no Man of War having an opportunity to depart, ought by a most ancient
Law, to stay in any Port beyond such a time. That they, to that end the English
might go to Sea, had staid out several days: That they would give the Merchants
ships leave to relade their Goods, give them free liberty to depart; nor would
they stir till they had been departed five days, the which if not accepted,
they would forbear endeavoring to ruin them no longer. To these I was
immediately to give my Answer: The opinion of our Factory then present, was,
That whereas the Dutch had waited several times upon the Duke, and did solicit
daily that he would deny Protection to the English, and all this while the
English never owned him, nor went to give him thanks (as I indeed desired, but
Mr. Longland opposed me in it.) The Duke now seemed to spoil the virtue of our
Gratitude, by his necessitating us unto it; so Mr. Longland did desire me to
send one to treat with the Duke accordingly: That himself with other Merchants
would go to thank him for his Protection of their Goods, and that the Masters
would do the same for the protection of their ships, and jointly to beseech him
the continuance of his Favors; Hereupon Mr. Longland and my self, with several
of the Merchants, desired Mr. Nathaniel Reading to undertake the Business, the
which he did at our entreaty; and at that time engaged himself on my behalf,
That I should not disturb his Highness Port, except I were commanded to the
contrary; How he managed the same, and effected the continuance of our
Protection, your Honors have understood by his own Relation; the Lord having at
that time visited me with a violent and tedious Sickness, so that I could not
write; during the time of my sickness, there came News to Legorn of Captain
Badileys being engaged with the Dutch of Monte Christo; hereupon, although I
was not able to walk alone, and Captain Wetheridge was just dead, I resolved to
go to help him, notwithstanding there lay six Dutch Men of War in the Road; but
as I was got aboard and ready to go out, I received a Letter from Captain
Badiley of his being in Porta Longone, and desiring me not to think of stirring
till he was fit to put to sea.

I sent for Captain Cox to command the Bonaventure, and when he came, the
Phoenix which was taken by the Dutch, was brought into the Mould, and he was
always talking of burning her; I sent him in particular that Order which your
Honors sent me for not disturbing the Great Duke's Port, told him the
Engagement I had lately made to the contrary, and the great danger all our
ships were in, if he should burn the Phoenix, not only for the incensing of the
Duke and Dutch against us, but also of the firing of our own ships too; however
he persisted in his actings, contrary to your Honors and my Order, chasing
their Boats, and occasioning many complaints of the Dutch unto the Governor: I
told him how much I had suffered for his former Insolences in this place, how
what he did might tend to the ruin of us all; but yet he would not hear me,
acting several times against my Order, stirring up his men by many seditious
speeches against me, and never owning me at all, notwithstanding the Commission
I had from your Honors, and the many respects and continual courtesies which I
had always shown him, so that I was necessitated to bid him return to his
former command, least he should make a Mutiny amongst our ships; In the interim
Captain Badiley arrives and brings me Order for his Commanding in Chief, the
which I readily obeyed.

Captain Badiley now places Captain Cox in the Bonaventure: and I being freed
of the Engagement which I had made unto the Duke, it was agreed on to surprise
the Phoenix then in the Road, riding the outermost ship, with the English
Colors under theirs.

The Attempt was thus:

Captain Cox in the Elizabeth's Shallop with nine Oars and four Sitters, my
Lieutenant Young in the Sampson's Pinnace, with thirty four men, and Lieutenant
Symmes in the Bonaventure's Pinnace with thirty four more.

Having lost one another several times, at last toward morning they all met,
and coming up in the Phoenix stern, Captain Cox ordered them to board the ship
on both sides, whilst he went forward with his Shallop to cut the Cabel; the
Lieutenants and their crew entered, and after some dispute, in which Lieutenant
Young and two more were slain, they took the ship; Young Tromp and some of his
Officers escaped in their own Boat; the ship being under sail, and the Fight
over, up comes Captain Cox, drives the men out of the Cabin which had done the
service, and after found the Money, saying, The Cabin belonged unto him; and
notwithstanding the Promise made before the Enterprise, to share the Booty
equally, he kept it to his private use; all which, several of the men are ready
to make good by Oath.

In the morning I sent Mr. Longland an account of the particulars, to the end
your Honors might have notice quickly of the same; and he immediately sends his
servant with the news, not giving me the liberty of sending by him.

About this time a Dutch man came aboard my ship, whom I suspected for a Spy,
with Mr. Longland's advice I clapped him in the Bilboes; having leave to ease
himself in the ships-head, he leaps into the water, and swimming to the Moulde,
two of my men being a shore, I bad them stop him; but he promising the Sentinel
money to rescue him, got to his house. I went ashore, desiring the Sentinel to
deliver me my Prisoner, promising, I would carry him to the Governor. This he
granted, and carrying him aboard, there came a Sergeant and two Soldiers,
demanding of the Prisoner, threatening to fire at me else: The Prisoner leaps
out of my Boat, and went ashore. I sent my Minister to Mr. Longland, to let him
know punctually what had past, to the end, he might acquaint the Governor
therewith; but Mr. Longland would not take the pains, whereby the Duke and his
Ministers, through misinformation from the Dutch, were much incensed against me.

And these, I do assure your Honors, are all the Circumstances of that
Business, as many now in Town are ready to depose.

Two days after, Mr. Longland comes aboard me with one of the Dukes Captains,
telling me, the Duke would speak with me at Pisa; I asked him, what he thought
it was about, he answered, that he could not tell, but he would go along with
me. Being upon the way, he asked me what I would say to the Duke, in case he
should ask me about the taking of the Phoenix? I said, That I could easily clear
my self of the former Engagement I had made unto him, for it was conditional,
if I were not commanded to the contrary, as here I was by Captain Badily, who
positively did command, to retake or destroy the Frigot; and to that end, sent
several men from Port-Langone, promising to each of them a good sum of money.
Mr. Longland perceiving that I could clear my self from breaking my Engagement
with the Duke, and that the Dukes displeasure must light on Captain Badily and
himself, upon our arrival at Pisa, goes to Signior Pandolfino, the Dukes
Secretary of War, and having had private conference with him, I then was sent
for to the Palace; but Pandolfino would not suffer me to see the Duke,
commanding the Governor of the Castle to put me in a coach and carry me away to
the Castle; Mr. Longland and Captain Wood (of whom I never did deserve but
well) publicly triumphed, that they had brought me into that condition. And
notwithstanding they pretended kindness in their going with me, it seemed, it
only was to work their ends upon me; for during my four days imprisonment in
the Castle, they, not only came not near me themselves, but none else were
suffered to come that would; denying to let my men know what became of me, or
where I was, that they might send me Clothes. At last, an Answer being come
from Captain Badily, That he would do Justice upon any under his command, that
should commit so high Offenses against the Duke, as was pretended I had done; I
was conveyed by a party of his Horse, through woods and by ways, Forty miles,
unto St. Vincents, where for three nights together I lay upon the stones; and
thence being carried by a Faluca to Port Ferara, there I remained till Captain
Badily did send to fetch me.

Nor did Mr. Longland think he had yet triumphed enough over me, till as he had
made me suffer much in my Person abroad, so I should more in my Reputation at
home; and therefore he continues to have a Currier sent on purpose, to complain
unto your Honors of my violating our Nations Faith, and the Dukes Port, in
surprising of the Frigot, and affronting of his Sentinel: whereas Mr. Longland
well knew, as God and the world does, Captain Badily commanded the taking of
the Frigot, and takes it upon himself, and that I never touched the Sentinel or
gave him an ill word; and could I have obtained the liberty of speaking unto
the Duke, as afterward he told me, all this had been prevented.

The Dukes Currier returning, your Honors sent me an Order to command me home,
and that I should make all the haste as possibly I could over land; I obeyed it
with all readiness, and to that end, coming to Legorn, where the Dukes
Secretary, Captain Badily, and the Dutch, were in a Treaty; and having there
concluded to fight the Dutch, it was ordered by a Council of War, That I should
stay to command the Leopard till the Fight was over, Provided I would give six
hundred Crowns to have leave from the Duke; and Captain Badily would then
Answer to your Honors for my not coming home by Land, according to your Order.

I answered him, That though no man on earth should be more ready to serve his
Country then my self, that yet to buy the hazard of my Life at such a price,
were to invite a Curse from my Wife and Children, whom I have too much wronged
already by my serving of the State; that therefore, though I would serve them,
though I got no money by it, yet I would not give money for to serve them.

And truly when I considered it, I found it a bad bargain, for if through that
Composition I should be admitted to venture my Life, and through the Mercy of
the Lord I should out live the Fight, that yet I must when all was done, hold
on my journey over Land.

While this was in dispute, there came an Express from his Highness to his
Secretary, signifying, That he was not only contented, but much desired I
should be admitted to my former Command.

So I was settled in the Leopard, and Captain Badily having sent several
Expresses to Captain Cox, to come with the other ships he then commanded, from
Naples to Port Longone: He contrary to all Order goes to the Vare of Mesina,
but after more then Twenty days expecting him, at last he comes, leaving the
Henry Bonaventure behind him. Whereupon, Captain Badily seeing Captain Cox had
acted so much against his Orders also, and that he had occasioned the omission
of so many opportunities to get out and join, the Enemy not being sometimes but
Five, other times Two, and after none at all in Port Longone, their Admiral
being cast away, and another of their ships fast upon the Rocks; and lastly,
having come away without the Henry Bonaventure, which Vessel might have done
good service in the Engagement, and could do none in waiting where he was, his
Prize being in a safe Port, he told me, That the State had better to have given
Twenty thousand pounds, rather then Captain Cox should have carried himself in
that manner; and since we hear, the Dutch have taken her.

Captain Badily departs for the fitting his Eight ships and a Fire ship at Port
Ferara, and being under sail, sends me Orders to haste to him, so soon as the
Dutch weighed Anchor to go toward him; and to the end he might not be
overpowered by the Dutch before I could assist, commands me for to haste upon
my Life, and that with all the sail that I could make.

Captain Badily plying near the Malhora, sends his Lieutenant to me in the
night, to know our readiness, and to advise, that the Warrick should be ready
near the Mould-head by break of day, to keep off the Enemies Fire ship, which,
with Twenty five more, lay ready with their Topsails loose in the tops, and
their Anchors apeek, ready to wait our motion. I called a Consultation upon his
coming, and at that time there springing a small Gale, had some thoughts of
getting out; but Mr. Longland not being there, without whom we durst not act,
and Captain Badily's Order being to the contrary; and during this Consultation
the Gale ended, and there was no Wind stirring, it was agreed on not to stir
till morning.

In the morning Mr. Longland comes aboard, and then I told him what we resolved
upon in the night, he much approved thereof, for had we stirred, it falling
calm, we had in probability been ruined. Captain Badily keeps still near the
Malhora, the Phoenix Warwick, and another of our ships come to the southward of
the Lanthorn, and Captain Badily stood after them, hereupon the Dutch weighed.

Mr. Longland and the Commissioners being all aboard me, concluded we should
make all possible haste, the Wind being Easterly off Shore, my Orders being to
hasten as for Life, Mr. Longland and all the Commanders agreeing we should
loose no more time, we slipped our Cables, and made all the sail we could. The
Dutch were now in the middle betwixt Captain Badily and our ships. By that time
our stermost ship was well cleared off the Mould, the Dutch tacked upon us, we
stood with them resolving to break through, they fired at us; (the wind now
changes to Southeast) so that Captain Badily and his Fleet could have come
quarter-wind up to us.

The Bonaventure had not fired twenty Guns, when within three of her lengths
from the Leopard, she blew up in the Air; while I was clearing my self off the
wrack, the Sun of forty Guns, and the Julius Caesar of thirty eight, boarded me
both of the Lard-board side.

Captain Seaman in the Sampson coming to my Assistance, as was agreed, was
boarded by young Tromp in a ship of forty two Guns; Tromp seeing himself worsted
by him, calls to the Fire ship, who boarded the Sampson on the other side, and
fired her immediately.

Captain Marsh in the Levant-Merchant was boarded by a ship of thirty six Guns.

Captain Wood in the Peregrine also by another, but Captain Fisher in the Mary
made his way through the Fleet, and joined with Captain Badily.

This was the condition of my Squadron all of us, especially my self having the
several Broad*sides from the Enemies other ships passed upon us, whilst we
were disputing with these that boarded us.

All this while Captain Badily and his Fleet lay awether of us, making several
shot, though at too great a distance, notwithstanding the Wind was very good
for his coming up.

Captain Cox runs the Phoenix aground the Main, and there lies for half an hour.

Captain Ell in the Lewis comes up to my Assistance, firing at them that poured
their Broad-sides on me, as also on them that boarded me.

Captain Fisher in the Mary making his way through the Enemy a second time, did
very good service.

Captain Badily at last comes within half shot of me, betwixt the Leopard and
the shore, and he with others of his Fleet did make some shot.

Captain Wood not being relieved in so long time, surrenders.

Captain Marsh having sunk the great ship that boarded him, immediately was
boarded by another, and being over-powred by the Enemy, much torn, many of his
men slain, and none of our friends coming to relieve him, was taken.

The Warwick coming up the second time, and giving several Broad-sides to them
that boarded me, my self, the Master, and the Corporal called to him to forbear
firing at those two that boarded me, they having called for Quarter, and to
engage with them that plied their Broad-sides on me.

Captain Badily orders Captain Whiteing in our Fire-ship to board the Dutch
Admiral, promising that himself would engage him, till he had made his
Graplings fast; accordingly he makes toward him, but Captain Badily not coming
up as he expected, by which means the Dutch Admiral played all his Guns upon
him, was sunk just at his stern.

I still expecting that Captain Badily and the Frigots would engage those five
ships that gauled me in that manner, to the end I might have taken possession of
those two ships which had so long boarded me, and called for Quarter, and for a
good while forbeared firing; but the Lord of Heaven having otherwise determined
it, they not only refused to help me themselves, but would not let others do
it that would; for Captain Ell who lay near me, and did great Execution on the
Enemy, coming to lie at my Starboard-bowe for my Assistance, was called away by
Captain Badily, who without any more ado set his Main-sayl, and made way from
me with all speed he could; so Captain Ell and Captain Fisher, who once more
was coming up for to help me, and was the innermost and northermost ship of
all, seeing Captain Badily to leave me thus, were necessitated for their own
safety to follow after.

The Dutch seeing Captain Badily thus gone, chased his nine Sail with eight, of
which, the Admiral, the Redhare, and the Half Moon, all disabled ships, were
three: And seeing I was thus abandoned, up comes the Vice Admiral of the Dutch
with five ships more, and fires at me with more violence; and those two ships
that had cried Quarrer seeing me left alone, began again to fire: And after two
hours dispute, their Vice Admiral laid me cross the stern, raking me fore and
after: our stern being beaten in, and Tiller shot in pieces, fourteen Guns made
unserviceable, the ship every way pitifully torn, almost half of our men
disabled, and my self, Lieutenant, and many Officers wounded, and the Enemy
increased; but most of all, my men being discouraged by their friends forsaking
of them, they resolved to fight no longer; I forced them several times into
their Quarters, and trying fair means as well as fowl, proffered a hundred
Crowns for every shot that they would make out of a Demy-canon in the Gun room:
The Gunner and one of the Masters mates made two shots, and were making more,
but presently I understood how some did call for Quarter, saying, the Enemy was
on the Poope; hereupon I called the Gunner, and privately bade him blow the
Poope up, as he was going to blow it up, and assisted by the Master and
Corporal therein, the men perceived it, and laid hands on him, I came straight
to rescue him, but then they seized on me, putting my shoulder out of joint, by
wresting my weapons from me, and held me, whilst some of them called for
Quarter, until I was delivered into the Enemies hands, who, had not my men
entreated for me, had resolved to kill me, for I denied Quarter.

Being thus their Prisoner, I was conveyed aboard their Vice Admiral, and after
their heat was over, they used me civilly and dressed my wounds; confessing to
me several times, That if Captain Badily had assisted me with his Fleet, they
should not have been able to withstand us.

The next day after the Fight they cleared all the Prisoners, except Captain
Seaman, Captain Marsh and my self.

Mr. Longland sends those that would go upon his terms to Venice, but he not
giving them but two Dollars and a half to carry them so many days Journey
through a strange Country, many refused to go, knowing that twice as much could
not defray their charges: Some that undertook to go, dyed by the way of Famine;
and they that did arrive were almost naked, having sold their clothes for
victuals.

And during our nine weeks Imprisonment, although we always were within a mile
of the Town, Mr. Longland never was the man that owned us, or sent to help us
in our wants; of which the Dutch themselves complained.

Upon our several Securities to appear in Holland, they gave us leave to go,
and being come ashore, the Great Duke sent to speak with me; accordingly I
waited on him, and there he pleased to tell me, That he was sorry for my
sufferings, but knew no way to make me amends but by his Letter to the
Parliament.

What else his Highness and several about him, what Mr. Longlands own people,
and the Italians which were Spectators said of this Engagement, I shall forbear
to mention as I do many other things; the concealing whereof, should not more
prejudice your Honors or my self, then the relating them can possibly reflect
on them whom they concern.

This I shall only say, That whereas Mr. Longland charge me with breaking
Orders in coming out to soon, I shall refer your Honors to the Premises; to
Captain Badily's Letters, which I have to show, and to the Oaths now ready to
be made herein, to judge, assuring you, That when he and the Commanders had
unanimously agreed to our going out, and himself had taken his leave and was
going in his Boat ashore, he returned, and prayed us to haste for fear that
Captain Badily should be oppressed before we came.

The several Accounts of moneys I received, disbursed or charged upon the State
through the Voyage, are all in readiness whenever that your Honors shall
appoint to Audit them.

To give your Honors no further trouble, This is the sum of what has happened
since my going out, the truth whereof, as in his presence who is Searcher of
all hearts, I do aver; nor has my naming any particular in this Narative
proceeded from spleen to him, but love to truth, to the end your Honors might
be impartially informed how your Affairs were managed, rendering most humble
thanks for my Exchange: I submit my self to your consideration, as of what I
have done, so of what I have suffered for you.

Henry Appleton.


The Sampson was fired after an hour and a halfs dispute.

The Peregrine was surrendered within three hours.

The Levant Merchant held out four.

And the Leopard, in all, above six hours.

In Legorn we received as much respect and civility from his Highness The great
Duke, as from any Prince into whose Port we came: And as to my own particular,
notwithstanding the means used to to incense him against me, yet he commanded,
while I was in his hands, that I should want for nothing; so that both in the
Castle of Pisa and Porta Ferara, also I was treated with all kindness.

I Edmond Seaman Captain of the Sampson, having been with Captain Appleton,
From his coming into Smyrna till his return into England (except the time of
his first Imprisonment) and having perused the Narrative he has made;
forasmuch as I was present at, and privy to most of the Transactions therein,
do aver the truth thereof, and am ready to maintain the same by Oath, when ever
I shall be called thereunto: And in testimony thereof, do hereto set my Hand.

Edmond Seaman.


I Stephen Marsh, Captain of the Levant Merchant, having perused this
Narration, do find it, for so much as I was capable of knowing in the whole
Voyage, especially in the Engagement (being in my own Vessel) to be true; The
Premises I am ready to make good upon Oath, whenever called: And in testimony
thereof, do hereto set my hand.

Stephen Marsh.


I William Ell Captain of the Lewis, do certify, That as I was going to
relieve Captain Appleton, being fully resolved either to lay him aboard, or
else the Enemies that lay on board him; my men cried out, They would lose their
lives rather then let their Vice Admiral be ruined: Captain Badily with his own
mouth calls me away, told me I must stand after him; and though he had fair
opportunity to Engage the Enemies Admiral single, yet did he not do the same:
And having perused this Narration of Captain Appletons, comparing it with my
own Journal, I find it (for so much as I was capable of knowing in my own
Vessel) to be true; The Premises I am ready to make good upon Oath, when ever
called: In testimony thereof, I do set to my hand.

William Ell.


We whose Names are here underwritten, do testify, That Captain Peter
Whiteing Commander of the Fire-ship, after the sinking of his ship, and his
coming aboard Captain Badily, did in our hearing several times say, That
Captain Badily, having left Captain Appleton in the middle of his Enemies, two
hours after seeing from his Poop, that the Leopards Colors were still in the
Fore-top, and the Guns firing, fell, as he had good reason, into passion,
saying, He was an undone man for ever.

Robert Daines. Samuel Wily.


We whose Names are hereunto written, do testify, That the Italians and French
in Legorn seeing how Captain Appleton behaved himself toward the Dutch, and
how Captain Badily behaved himself toward Captain Appleton, and the other
ships, protested, They would tear Captain Badily in pieces for a coward as he
was, if ever he should come on shore.

Robert Daines. Samuel Wily.


If your Excellency shall not conceive these Testimonies enough to make out the
truth of my Remonstrance, I shall, when ever called unto it, produce very many
more: as also shall readily Answer to any thing thing that can be objected
against me.

Hen: Appilton.


The Declaration of Edmund Seaman Commander of the Samson
Humbly shows,
THat being at Smirna, Captain Appleton came into the Port, where I shall
briefly give you an account of our Proceedings. Off of Livorn some five or six
Leagues, we had a Filvea met us, and gave us notice of the Affront the Dutch
gave our Nation, whereupon, we much desired to be gone for England, but Mr.
Longland desired Captain Appleton to stay till the next Post; and in the
interim, Four sail of the Dutch ships of War came in upon us, but before they
came into the Road, we all weighed and stood to them, so we and they anchored;
we anchored between them and the shore, and there were blockt up by them. Soon
after, Mr. Longland came aboard, and told us, That he was sent by the Governor
and Colonel of the Town, that we must come into the Mould, for where we rid we
could not be secure from our Enemy; so that night we got all our ships into the
Mould, but were forced first to lighten them: so there we were in safety, we
having the Grand Dukes Protection. So within two days of our being in the
Mould, it was agreed upon by Mr. Longland and Captain Appleton, and the rest of
the Nation, That some should go up to Florence, to give the Grand Duke Thanks
for his protecting of us; whereupon it was agreed, That Mr. Longland, Mr.
Boneile, Captain Roop, Captain Wood and my self, in the behalf of the
Merchants, and Mr. Reading at the request of the Nation, for Captain Appleton
being very sick at that time. We no sooner were arrived at Florence, but we
were presently sent for to come to the Grand Duke, which we did; and as soon as
we had given him Thanks for his protecting of us, he asked us, If we thought
our selves secure from the Dutch? I answered him, That the Dutch we did not
fear so long as he was our friend. Soon after we had news, that Captain Badily
was engaged with the Dutch, and then there lay in the Road four of their men of
War, and two that they had taken up in their service, so that there were never
less then six of them in the Road of Livorn. Captain Badily being come safe to
Porta Longona, sent Captain Cox to see what condition the ships were in at
Livorn, and to have the Merchant ships go out to engage with the Dutch; I
answered him, I would not act any thing without a Warrant, either from the
States or from my Owners: which soon after, Captain Badily or Mr. Longland sent
to the States for Commissions, to take up our ships, which, as soon as we
received the said Commissions, obeyed them, and fitted our ships for men of
War. Captain Badily being at Livorn, coming aboard the Leopard in the
afternoon, calling a Council of War; and when we were all together, he was
pleased to tell us, That we must deliver the Phoenix or the Bonaventure, or be
gone out of the Mould: Notwithstanding, how much it concerned us to know what
was treated on by the Dukes Orders, he to that end sending his Secretary from
Florence, to accommodate the Difference between the Dutch and us: Captain
Badily never acquainted us with any thing but a necessity of delivering up the
Bonaventure or Phoenix, or else be gone in Fifteen days. Whether we might not
have stayed upon other Terms, I cannot speak to, Captain Badily and Mr.
Longland doing all without acquainting us further. This only I am sure that
the Secretary said, That if Fifteen days were not enough, we might have Ten,
and after that Ten days more: whereupon Mr. Longland said, That the Grand Duke
carried himself with as much respect to our Nation as can be, not forcing us
out of his Port, but endeavoring what he could to compose our stay; and
notwithstanding we might have had so much time, whereby we might have been in a
better condition to fight, or else might have received Orders from the State,
what to have done therein. But after some dispute we agreed, That he should get
the rest of the ships ready that were in Porta Longona, and then see what might
be done: when we were all ready, having fitted our ships for sailing and
fighting, we looked every hour for Captain Badily, which on the second of
March, we espied our Fleet at the going down of the Sun, which was a great
encouraging of our men; that night Captain Cox came aboard the Leopard, and
from Captain Badily, to desire us to be ready at an hours warning, which we
obeyed. On Thursday night Captain Upcher and Captain Whiting came and told us,
that they were close by the Lanthorn, but as soon as it was day, we found no
such thing, but were altogether, three or four Leagues off by judgment. After
that they were gone, Captain Badily sent his Lieutenant to us, that if in case
the wind should come off shore, that we should come out upon our lives, before
he was too much engaged; which he, for his part, as far as I could see, did
never intend to do: And on Friday morning we received order to come out with
all speed, and that morning, Mr. Longland with the rest of the Captains
resolved to go with one general consent; the Dutch being all weighed and stood
to Captain Badily, so that it was Mr. Longland's desire, that we should make
all the haste that possible we could, before our Admiral was too much engaged,
and so took his leave and went ashore from us; and we having a fine Brease off
the shore, immediately set sail, the Bonaventure first, the Leopard next, and
after all the rest. But we no sooner were all clear of the Mould-head, but
Captain Badily stood off; the Dutch seeing that, bore in upon us, and in less
then half an hour that we were come out, we were engaged; and in the interim,
of a sudden, the Wind shifted to the South-East and South-East by South.
Captain Badily and his Fleet, if he had pleased, might have been as near the
Dutch as we were. The Bonaventure in a short time blew up; and then we looking
for Captain Badily and his Fleet to have fallen on, could have no Relief of
him: but instead of coming to relieve us, chased one of the ships belonging to
Livorn, though he saw the Dukes Colors flying; and as soon as Captain Cox made
him coming back, ran his Frigot aground upon the Weather shore, so that we had
but little Relief all this time. At length I was boarded by a ship of 20 Guns
for above an hour and a half, and at last boarded on the other side by a
Fire-ship, and so we were destroyed; all this time no Relief from Captain
Badily, nor none of his squadron, though he might, if he had pleased, have been
in the midst of us, had he not stood off when we came first out of the Mould,
and so he saw us destroyed one after another. And at last bore up and let fall
his main Sail, and fired a Gun to Lee-ward, to call off all his Fleet, which
was done, and away they went with nine Sail, and were chased but with eight
Sail of the Dutch. All this time the Leopard had her Colors flying, but they
seeing no hopes of any Relief, were forced to yield up their ship, being
overpowered by the enemy. All this I shall be ready to witness upon Oath,
whenever I shall be called thereunto. And to conclude, if Captain Badily had
been a Pentioner to the Sates of Holland, he he could not have done them better
Service.

I William Ell have perused this Narration, concerning the Fight he was in at
Linorno with the Dutch the Fourth of March, 1652. and do testify, and shall be
ready to make good upon Oath, that this is truth which is here specified.

First, That soon after Captain Appleton was clear of the Mould-head with his
Squadron, the wind Southwards, and the Dutch tacked upon them, and that then
all Captain Badily's Squadron might have come to them.

Secondly, As soon as we came to know the Ships, after the blowing up of the
Bonaventure, and that fierce Encounter, We found two great Ships of the Enemies
on board of the lar-board side of the Leopard, and all three lay driving with
their Heads of to the Westward.

The Sampson astern and to lee-ward of them in a flame, and the Levant Merchant
boarded by another great Ship of the Hollanders. Now Captain Badily and all of
his Squadron was to windward of them, and of all the Enemies Fleet, and shot,
as Captain Appleton says, but at to great a distance, but some went nearer;
and for my own part, being Commander of the Lewis, I went within Pistol-shot of
the Leopard, and spent several Broad-sides on those Ships that lay on Board
her, and on others, and was resolved to be on Board those two Ships to relieve
the Leopard; but the first time going up to her, the Constant Warwick puts us
astays, so was forced to tack, and we tacked twice to recover the wind again of
the Leopard to get aboard of her (or them) to relieve her, and brought all our
best Guns over on that side that bore of them, and double shotted them for that
purpose; and though I had one man's head shot off, and another shot through the
back (from side to side) with great shot, and several men wounded, yet were the
rest desirous to go aboard to relieve our Vice Admiral: But Captain Badiley
seeing me lean to lee-ward, he being on the other tack with his Ships head to
the Westward, bore toward me, and called to me to tack and stand away after
him; so finding my self the leewardmost Ship of that Squadron, and seeing they
were not intended to Engage, I tacked and stood after them.

Concerning Captain Whiting in the Fire-ship, he kept near to Captain Badiley,
and at our first coming up, after these sad accidents, Captain Badiley and he
was the weathermost Ships; and then likewise was the Dutch Admiral singled out,
and to the weatherward (which was occasioned by loss of her Stearidge, having
her Rudder shot, as I heard) I thought then Captain Badiley would taken the
opportunity and engaged him, or at least led up the Fireship to him, but the
Fire-ship went alone, and ere could come up with the Dutch Admiral, he sunk her.

We had the wind at S. S. E. or thereabouts, when Captain Badiley with the rest
of his Squadron, with the Mary, which made nine in number, stood away, there
was eight of the Dutch stood after us till night; we all went better then they,
and had the wind of them, yet durst we not face them though none of us had very
great damage, my self the most, yet wished we had tacked upon them after they
were come to Sea (for the rest of their Fleet, as the wind was, would not have
gotten out of Port after them) if we had but tacked, I believe they would have
stood back again, which would have given a good wipe, though not a clean one to
our Cowardizm.

For what was done after we ran away, I can say no more, but that I see several
of the said Dutch Ships that staid in Port pass their Broad-sides into the
Leopard, that I thought it not possible for any man in her to maintain a
Quarter, yet I see her fire several times, and to my judgment kept up her Flag
about four hours after we began to run.

The wind continued at S. S. E. all that day, and our Admiral kept close upon a
wind, and kept ahead, so that we could not with all our Sail get up that night
to speak with him: This I have collected out of my own Journal, and am ready to
justify it to be truth,

Witness my hand.
I Benjamin Fisher, was desired to declare the truth of what I was an
eyewitness concerning our Engagement at Legorn the fourth of March, 1652.

First, That Captain Richard Badily sent that very Morning we set Sail out the
Mould, to Captain Henry Appleton not to come forth the Mould in case the Dutch
weighed not; for Word was brought from Captain Badily, That he did intend to
stand in fair aboard the Lanthorn by Morning, and salute the Town.

Secondly, That Captain Richard Badily sent in two Messengers after that to
hasten our coming out, though expressly commanded by the former Messenger from
Captain Badily not to budge; whereupon seeing that he was so wavering in his
Resolution, Captain Appleton, with the rest of the other Commanders, did argue
upon it not to Sail, but to follow his first Order, which was to lie still in
case the Dutch weighed not; which said Dutch lay in a half Moon, within Musket
shot of the Mould-head, with their Topsail-sheets haled home, and their
Fore-sails of the most part of them was in the Brails.

But we expecting to see Captain Badily flet fair by the Lanthorn, when day
came on, they were as far distant from us as they were over night; for by their
own Squadrons relation, they lay mousel four Glasses, which if they had not,
they might have very well been in with the shore by morning; and by the help of
the Almighty, they might have been a means to saved our Squadron, and no doubt
we had worsted the Dutch Boats. In the morning the Dutch weighed, and as soon
as they were to the Southward of the Mould, there was no time neglected in
getting out, according to Captain Badily's Order. But we were no sooner clear
of the Mould-head, but the Dutch tackt and stood with us, and by that sudden
accident which befell the Bonaventure, separated our Squadron; for some of us
was forced to bear to Lee-ward, and some kept to Windward, and for my own part,
went with our ship through part of the wrack, and within short space after, the
Wind Southward on us; but what with the smoke of our own Guns and the Enemies,
I could not discern one ship hardly from the other; but standing through the
Dutch Fleet, having discharged diverse broad-sides at the Enemy, I came within a
Cable-length of Captain Badily, and bore away thwart his fore-foot, and brought
our ship to the other tack, and went firing into the Fleet before him, and past
our broadside at the two ships that was aboard the Leopard on her
Larboard-side, and supposing Captain Badily to have stood along to the relief
of our Squadron; when we had past the Enemy, that we were got to the Northward
of them, so that there was none fired at us, we saw Captain Badily standing
away with all sail he could make, topgalant-sail and all, we put our ship
astays, having much ado to get her about, by reason all our Braces, and Bolens,
and Sheets, and Tacks were shot; when we had got our ship about, we let her
fall off round, and fired our broadside at the two ships that was aboard the
Leopard, and then we set our main-sail and all the sail we could, for Captain
Badily was got some half a League from us, with the rest of his Squadron
following him. The Leopard all this while firing at the two ships that was
aboard her, and at others that past by her. We were the Lee-ward-most ship of
all and the Northermost, yet we had never less then five Fathom water; we had
nine sail of the Dutch following us, yet our Ambral never so much as did
shorten sail for any of our Fleet that was astern, the which made me think he
had been killed, he leaving the Leopard, and the Levant, and the Peregrine in
that sad condition: But my opinion is, that if Captain Badily with all our nine
sail had stood in once more, we had saved the Leopard, if not the Levant, and
had gone near to have chased some of the Dutch ashore; for all Captain Badily's
Squadron had little damage, for we might have stood in, had Captain Badily been
so minded, and rescued Captain Appleton, for he was not taken a large hour
after we left him in distress; for as far as we could discern, we could see his
Flag flying, and after we could not discern the Flag, we could hear the Guns go
off very fast. Our Ambral all this time never shortened sail whereby we might
come to speak with him till the Monday, following, to declare to him how our
ship was torn. And what I have here declared, is nothing but the Truth, and
shall make Oath, if called to it.

Benjamin Fisher.

A Relation of Signior Montemagni, one of the Secretaries of State to the Great
Duke of Toscany, concerning his Negotiation between the English and the Dutch,
upon the re-taking of the Phoenix Frigot.
UPon my arrival at Legorn, I did with all the earnestness I could, endeavor to
persuade Signior Van Gale^ the Dutch Admiral, to be contented with that Answer
the Parliament of England had sent his Highness, which was, That Captain
Appleton was sent for home, to give account thereof. But finding that this
would not do, I asked him what kind of Satisfaction he would pretend unto; he
answered, He did expect the restitution of the Frigot, or else in stead of
that, that all the English Vessels in the Mould should resign their Rudders and
their Sails. At last, after a long dispute, he said it should suffice, if two
of their men of War should resign their Rudders and their Sails into his
Highness hand, until the Phoenix was restored unto them; although the Difference
was great between the value of the Vessel at that time they took her, and the
condition she should be in when she were returned.

Hereupon I acquainted Captain Badily with what had past, laying before him the
necessity of finding out some way for to adjust this business; but it was all
in vain, for he denied to yield to any thing, saying, That rather then he would
yield the least unto his His Highness or the Dutch, in case he might have time
to fit himself, he would go out to Sea with all his Fleet. After my having
waited for a better Answer, giving him time to think the badness of the
consequences of such a Resolution, I told him, in case he would deliver one of
his Ships into my Masters hand, I would endeavor that should pass for
satisfaction: but this he slighted too.

At last I told him, if he would give it under his hand, that he would return
the Frigot, that that should pass for satisfaction, and that his Highness would
continue still his best Protection to him. But such was the perverseness and
obstinacy of Captain Badily, that he not only refused to hearken to any of
those reasonable motions, but in stead thereof, writes a Letter to his
Highness, the Copy whereof follows; wherein he declares, That he will no
longer bear any respect unto his Highness Port, but will fall upon his Enemies
where he finds them.

His Highness perceiving that the services he had lately done Captain Badily
were forgot, and that the further need he might have of him was not at all
considered, and seeing he would neither except any propositions made to him,
nor make any himself whereby his Highness might give any color of Answer to
the Dutch; but that in stead thereof declares, That he is so far from giving
satisfaction for the former wrong done to his Highness, that he protests he
will commit new ones; My Master commanded me to let him know, that seeing none
of the forementioned means will be accepted of, and forasmuch as it was Captain
Badily's own proposition that he might go out of his Port, that he would give
him twelve days time to fit himself for his departure, though he again desired
him rather to think of staying.

This Captain Badily assented to, and notwithstanding that he had revoked his
promise not to disturb the Port, saying, He would assault the Dutch;
nevertheless his Highness continued his protection to him, commanding that the
Dutch should not assault the English.

Upon this I acquainted Van Galen with Captain Badily's Resolution, but found
him unwilling to accept those terms, some of his biggest ships being then
away, and news being brought of some supplies that were coming to the English;
but then I told him his Highness neither could do more, nor was it reason that
they should expect it.

Van Galen then demanded to know the time precisely when the English would
depart; but as I had commission from my Master, I then told, That to reveal the
secrets of one Enemy unto another, would manifestly be derogatory to his
Highness honor. Being offended at this Answer, Van Galen sends his
Vice Admiral and three other Captains to me, to protest, That since they might
not know what time the English would depart, they would omit no longer setting
on them in the Mould.

His Highness being incensed at this their rashness, commanded that the Consul,
Captains and Seamen of the Dutch that were ashore, should all be seized upon,
the which accordingly was done to the number of seven Captains, and one hundred
Seamen; withal, commanding the Governor of Legorn to consult with the English
the best way for their security. In the mean time Captain Badily writes a
second Letter to his Highness, which with its Answer follows, wherein his
Highness gives him longer time, and promises yet more in case he should require
it.

Van Galen seeing the Duke resolved to protect the English, promised to bear
respect unto his Port, whereupon the Duke understanding that the English had
set sail from Porto Ferara, he released the Dutch; and seeing all the means he
used to reconcile them was without effect, according to Captain Badily's
request, he gave them leave to try it out at Sea.

The English departed four days before their time expired, and might have had
what longer time they would; whence it is supposed that Captain Badily going
out to fight by his own election, not at all compelled, did think he had
advantage over his Enemy, and surely so he had, if the Battle had been better
managed.

To the Great Duke of Toscany.
May it please your Highness,
SInce you are pleased to honor me with a Credential Letter of the 18 curant,
four days since I received the same by the hands of the highly deserving and
much honored Person, the Secretary of State, who informed me of what your
Highness did demand, and to whom I gave an Answer so modest and humble, that I
hope it will be satisfactory. Amongst other Commands the Council of State,
established by the Authority of the Parliament of England, ordered me, as for
the respect, which as I should however have born to your Highness, so upon
other considerations also, that I should in no manner assail the Dutch in your
Highness Port, except they first assailed the English, the which according to
my duty I have still obeyed; But since the Dutch do carry no respect unto your
Highness, but lord it over every Nation, chasing not only others, but also
your Highnesses Subjects vessels at the Mould head,

I therefore humbly release my self of that Engagement, which I formerly had
made unto your Highness, hoping you will not take it ill, if I take the same
advantage against the Dutch as they do against the English; so wishing your
Highness all splendour and felicity, I subscribe my self,

Your Highness humble Servant, RICH: BADILY.
From Legorn 14 of February, 1653.
To his Highness the Great Duke of FLORENCE.
ON Saturday last I received those lines with which your Highness was pleased
to honor me, bearing date the 28 of the last Month, and although that I
desired with all my heart, that this Dispute about the Phoenix Frigot might be
finished at this Treaty; nevertheless having recovered the said Vessel by so
notable a stratagem, I rest not any way satisfied how I can answer it to them
that employ me, if I should deprive my self voluntarily of her again, or of any
other Vessel in her place. And lastly, when I shall intend your Highness will
about that time limited for my going out, I shall immediately apply my self to
comply therewith, and that most joyfully, hoping it will so succeed: I only
beg, that in case our Vessels are not gone out of the Mould at Legorn before
the last day, and that the Wind should be contrary, this should be interpreted
(as really it is) a just Impediment; I only fear, that being we cannot stay
one day in the Road for the providing of Ballast without being molested, lest
that some of out Vessels should perish in case that any strong Wind should
arise before the Dispute were ended. Your Highness pleases also to remember,
that since by my former Letter, I released my self of my Engagement which I had
first made concerning the Hollanders and their confederates, I assure your
Highness upon my honor, that this was occasioned by the Insolency of our
Enemies, to the end that when they knew it, they might rest mortified and in
some measure humbled, and consequently reduced by the Treaty, to accept that
which should be judged reasonable; because, being there was no other means
probable to prevail, I did believe that by this they would be seized upon with
some fear, thinking that we were provided with a greater strength then they
knew of.

I was always of opinion, That if a body entered into another man's house to
refresh himself, although a private person, he should carry himself humbly, and
much more in the Chamber of a Prince; and therefore, according to the commands I
have received from my lords and masters in english, I shall render your
Highness all due respect, and shall not molest his Ports, particularly the Road
of Legorn, while the Hollanders shall do the same. And supposing all within the
Malory to be the Port and Chamber of your Highness, so neither shall I directly
nor indirectly molest the Enemies of our Nation, or any that belong to them;
and moreover, neither my self nor any under me, shall weigh Anchor to chase any
one coming in or going out, and shall be obedient to any just Commands your
Highness shall give us, as well in our going away with all our Fleet within
three or four days more or less, or to any other else: And I really believe,
that the Parliament of England will order the same respect to your Highness
from all others that shall succeed me in these parts, to the end the most
flourishing trade of Legorn, which has been eminent for so many years, should
not meet with any impediment from the English.

The Dutch now will not give the same respect, because they believe themselves
strong enough to ruin us; but indeed they may be deceived for all that: we
have eight Men of War in this place and Port Langone, and six in Legorn, which
is not much disproportionable to the strength which they had yesterday in
Legorn: and if your Highnest shall please to send once more another Messenger
to the Dutch Admiral, to know if they will render to his Highness Port the same
respect was promised by the English, to give them encouragement for the better
encouragement of the Dutch: and to the end your Highness should be no longer
troubled with us, I have made certain Propositions which shall be by me
punctually observed, as also, all that is contained in this Letter; and for the
Execution hereof, I believe that Mr. Longland the Public Minister of the
Commonwealth of England, will oblige himself, together with me, as on the other
side I do desire that Vander Straten will oblige himself, together with Van
Galen, in the presence of some Public Minister of your Highness: So leaving
all this to the Consideration and Discretion of your Highness, I say no more.

Your Highness humble Servant, RICH: BADILY.
From Porta Feraro the 6 of March, 1653.
The PROPOSITIONS.
I. IF the Dutch Admiral will oblige himself, That without being molested I
shall come into the Road of Legorn with my eight ships and Fly-boat which are
here, and shall within forty eight hours be ready to set sail, and that we may
stay without fighting till the other ships can come out of the Mould and
provide themselves with Ballast, then on the other side will I oblige my self
not to molest the Dutch while they are there, and that I will go without the
Malora when he shall appoint, and being without the Malora, I shall there
freely wait until his ships shall come within Musket shot, there to dispute it
fighting like men, and not to molest and dishonor the Port of that Prince, who
has refreshed both of us with the fruit of his Country.

II. Having understood that the Dutch the other day bragged, That they would
fight with the English seven to seven: to the end they should not make this
Objection, I say, That I shall grant them for every seven ships of ours, one,
so that if we are fourteen in number, they shall be sixteen: And to the end
they should not say, that our Vessels are bigger then theirs, I shall give
them, when I make a List of the men, in every seven one.

III. When the Fight shall be over, in case the English prove Conquerors, and
return into the Road with all their Fleet, and there find four or five
Merchantmen, or perhaps some of their Men of War, which may be soundly torn, I
do promise not to shoot or fight with them within the Malora, provided the
Dutch will do the same with us.

RICHARD BADILY.

The Great Dukes Answer to Captain Badily, March 9. 1653.
SIR,
IT being agreed upon at the Treaty concerning the departure of the Squadron
out of Legorn, the desire I have to serve the Commonwealth of England, induces
me to gratify your Request, in the prolonging of the term of the departure
until the Eighteenth Current; and in case you cannot conveniently depart, I
shall be very ready for to grant you further time; as to the Challenge which
you send the Dutch, it is a business which concerns me not: I approve well of
the respect you promise to my Port, and question not the Hollanders will do the
same.

Captain Appletons Letter to the Council of State.
Right Honorable,
THe second instant, the Colonel of this Town by the great Dukes Order, sent
Mr. Longland and the Consul to acquaint me with these Propositions the Dutch
had made him; viz.

That no Man of War, having an opportunity to depart, ought by a most ancient
Law to stay in any Port beyond such a time.

That they, to that end the English might go to sea, had staid out several days.

That they would give the Merchants Ships leave to relade their Goods, give
them free liberty to depart, nor would they stir till they had departed five
days.

In case these Propositions were refused, they could not justify their not
acting their Commands they had received touching the the English, in whatsoever
place they met them.

To these I was immediately to give my Answer: The general Opinion of the Nation
then present was, That whereas the Dutch had waited several times upon the
Duke, and did solicit daily that he would deny protection to the English; and
all this while the English never owned him, nor went to give him thanks (as I
indeed had ordered it, but Mr. Longland opposed me in it:) The Duke now seemed
to spoil the virtue of our gratitude, by his necessitating us unto it: So Mr.
Longland did desire me before the Nation, to send one to treat with the Duke
accordingly, That himself, with other Merchants, would go to thank him for the
protection of their Goods, and that the Masters would do the same for the
protection of their Ships, and jointly to beseech him the continuance of his
favor.

Hereupon my self, and many others, earnestly desired Mr. Nathanael Reading to
undertake that business on my behalf, the which he pleased to do; with what
discretion he managed the whole business, with how great acceptance to his
Highness, your Honors will understand from his public Minister with you.

With what success to us, your Honors may please to judge of by his effecting
the continuance of our protection; the Particulars whereof, are in his own
enclosed to you.

Legorn, August 8. 1653.
Mr. Nathanael Readings Letter to the Council of State.
Right Honorable,
UPon several Solicitations that in Captain Appletons name I should wait upon
the great Duke, in answer to the Propositions the Dutch had made him the third
instant, in company with Mr. Charles Longland, Mr. Samuel Boneil, and the
Captains of the Sampson, Mary and Perigrine, I set out for Florence, and
through Gods assistance came thither the fourth at Evening; so soon as we
arrived, I acquainted them how that the Duke had sent three times to see if we
were come, that it concerned us therefore quickly to consider the quality of
the Personage that we came to, and of the business that we came about: To this
end, I desired Mr. Longland what his errand was, he told me, It was to thank
his Highness, in the name of the Merchants, for the protection of their Goods:
I demanded if he came as Agent for the State, he told me, Not, that he had no
Commission for such Employment, and that the Duke well knew, that beside, his
education had not been to understand how to treat with Princes: That he knew
not how to speak unto a Duke, and therefore did desire Mr. Boneil, who had been
with him often, to do it for him; asking the Captains then what they came for,
they said, to thank him for the protecting of their Ships; hereupon I showed
them my Commission from Captain Appleton, and because I had to join, as I then
thought, with such Statesmen, and so earnestly desired the business might be
carried handsomely, told them what I would say unto the Duke, asking withal
their Judgment, if they did think of any thing to add or alter, and I should
hear them readily: They saying it was very well, departed, each of us fitting
of himself for Court: Mr. Longland, while altering his clothes changed his
mind, and when the Messenger came for us, told me, That Captain Appleton had
no power to send unto the Duke, that he would protest against him there, and
write against him unto your Honors, although he was the person that first
desired him to send. With all the meekness man could use, I did beseech him by
the affection which he had for the Honor of the State of England; I did conjure
him to remember what he was about, that as to his power over Captain Appleton,
he would dispute it afterward, and for the present, what notion soever he
would act in, I should not disturb him, but that when he and every body else
had done, I might be heard for Captain Appleton; he told me positively, he
would neither own nor join with me in any thing concerned him; so carrying the
other company along with him, he goes to the Court.

Hereupon, I acquainted Sir Bernard Gascone with the Business I came on, and
what had passed betwixt Mr. Longland and my self; that I would wait till he had
Audience, and see what Answer he could give the Duke, when he demanded where he
was that Captain Appleton had sent, for so his Secretary had advised him by the
account the Consul of Legorn had given him of our coming. After that they had
made an end, his Highness asked them whether Captain Appleton had not sent a
Gentleman unto him in Answer of those Propositions he advised the Colonel of
Legorn to acquaint him with? Mr. Longland answered, There was no such person
come: so he dismissed them. So soon as they were gone, immediately Sir Bernard
goes in, and tells the Duke, how that I was without, shows my Commission, and
brings me to his Highness, to whom as follows;

That Captain Appleton humbly kissed his Highness hand, in the acknowledgement
of those Favors he had been pleased to show him; the which, according to his
duty, he should have done both earlier and oftener, but that he waited he might
have from his Masters hand, to whom he had sent on purpose to enform them of
the same.

That at his coming out, he was commanded by the States of England to attend
the security of their Ships from the Piracies of the French, and them to convoy
to all the Ports that they were bound to touch at.

That upon that account he came into Legorn, and since his being there, the
Dutch forgetting those good Offices they had received at the hands of England,
and insolently committing several things tending to the violation of its Peace,
he had received Orders from the State to stay in Legorn till their further
pleasure.

That upon any apprehension of Violence from the ungrateful Dutch, in case he
were not able to defend himself, he should make use of his Masters Interest for
his Protection, the which they did assure themselves would be sufficient, his
Highness being so very careful of his Port, and willingly granted, he being so
courteous a Prince, and no less careful of his friends.

That upon the Threats of Fourteen sails of Dutch that came into the Road, he
was by the Commanders of the Port desired to come into the Mould, not having
promise of Protection while without: his men of War being but two, and the
Merchants ships so considerably rich, he embraced their counsel.

As to the Enemies Plea, That no man of War, by a most ancient Law, should stay
in any Port beyond such a time; they have as little Logic in their Argument,
as they have Wisdom in beginning War with their best friends. For neither the
Rhodian Law, the first that ever were observed in the Mediterranean Sea, the
which the Romans with their Empire did enlarge, and every of the Ports therein,
upon the ruin of that Empire did admit. Nor yet the Rule of Oleron, by which
the Ocean was originally, and is this day governed, in any way deny the same;
besides, themselves remember well, and of necessity must grant, we know a
multitude of Modern Presidents to the contrary.

As to the re-lading of the Goods, and their offer to remain behind, till the
English were five days out at Sea, he would not capitulate with them for his
departure, but humbly beseeched his Highness leave to stay, not daring to stir
without their Order who put him there.

And lastly, as to the Hostility they so much threatened, whatever the English
suffers in his Highness Port, the State would strickly require at his Highness
hands; but that I was well assured he was so noble and so wise a Prince, as
that he would not give any occasion to distaste the English, or so undervalute
them, as to put the Friendship of Holland in competition with that of England.

His Highness was pleased to tell me, That he highly honored the State of
England; that he desired nothing more then a fair Correspondence with them:
That he rested abundantly satisfied in the Account I had given him on Captain
Appleton's behalf, desiring me to rest fully satisfied on his, That if all the
Forces in his Dominions could protect the English, it should be done, and that
so long as they should need the same.

He then demanded why Mr. Longland should tell him so gross a lie, being it was
his motion I should come, and that he came in company with me, and brought
himself that Letter which betrayed him, saying, He was not used to be so dealt
withal. I humbly told him, that what reason Mr, Longland had, his Highness
would best know from himself, but that for my part, I knew none he had; so
sending for him presently, he prayed me to return in the morning. Accordingly I
came, and then he pleased to tell me, that Mr. Longland pretended a Commission
beyond Captain Appleton's, but that he was persuaded there was no such matter.
I humbly beseeched his leave for my departure, adding, That what his Highness
was pleased to require further, I was there ready to obey him in: He
answered, That he knew I could not stir in the heats, but that he would not
fail to dispatch me that night, and that he would give order for the Gates to
be open, and Horses to be ready for me.

Coming at night, his Highness told me, how that he did expect, that Captain
Appleton should bear all fair respect unto his Port, without disturbance to the
Trade. I then engaged my Parole unto him, That the Comportment of the English
to his Highness should always be like themselves; but that in case the Dutch
likewise should not observe the same, it could not be supposed we should be
civil to our prejudice, nor that other of our Commanders, though Captain
Appleton should, would not take the same advantage against the Dutch.

I then desired his Highness Order, That the Colonel of Legorn should use some
extraordinary care, fearing the sick condition that Captain Appleton was in
might animate the Dutch in their attempts against him; he presently commands
his Secretary to write accordingly, and told me, how Sir Bernard had informed
him of my being a Slave to the Turk; and therefore while the Letter was in
writing, prayed me, to give himself and his brother Cardinal, whom he then sent
for, an account of Candy, of the last years fight at Sea, of the discipline of
the Turks, and the manner of the Captain Basha's usage of me, which he
understood was extraordinary; I obeyed his commands in each.

His Secretary having done, his Highness read the Letter to me, asking me, if
it were to my mind, commands him to give me a Copy of the same: I in all
humility returning many thanks for his Civilities to our Nation, and promising
to let their Honors know, the care he took for the Protection of your Ships,
and my endeavoring to perpetuate that Amity which has so long continued
betwixt his Highness and our Nation; I kissed his Hand, and so took leave.

At my arrival at Legorn. I found the Colonel punctual in the performance of
what the Letter did command him, and ready upon all occasions to serve the
English.

This is the shortest account I could give your Honors of the Endeavors I had
to serve you, wherein, if you can conceive I have done any thing for which to
beg your pardon, be pleased, that the reality of the Soul I acted in, may
obtain it from you.

Thus praying the Lord of Hosts to be your Champion, and him that is the Wisdom
of his Father to be your Councellor, I humbly commit you to his Protection.

The Great Dukes Resident his Letter to the Council of State.
Right Honorable,
HAving on Thursday last forgotten to tell your Honors, That when I first
acquainted the last Right Honorable Council of State of the Engagement that
Admiral Appleton had made to the Great Duke of Tuscany my Master not to molest
his Highness Port of Legorn directly or indirectly; I should (by his
commandment) have also added, how Mr. Nath: Reading waited then on the Great
Duke several times about that Business, and did then engage his Parole for
Captain Appleton, that he should punctually observe the Orders he received from
the Right Honorable, the Council of England, not to disturb any manner of way
his Highness Port of Legorn.

This Mr. Reading being now in London, can give your Honors full relation of
each particular until surprisal of the Phoenix. Thus much, I say, I was
commanded by my Master to enform the said Council of State, as I do now your
Honors, That the said Mr. Reading did manage that whole Negotiation with such a
discretion, that his Highness was exceedingly pleased at him, and did judge him
a person very capable to do his Country much good service. I humbly entreat
your Honors to accept now, what then I forgot, to participate unto your Honors
from his Highness, and me, for

Your Honors most obliged and most devout Servant, Amerigo Salvetty.
June 11. 1653.
THE END.

